A REPLY TO M. CALFHILLS BLASPHEMOVS ANSWER MADE AGAINST THE TREATISE OF THE
CROSS; BY JOHN MARTIAL, BACHILER of Law, and studient in Divinity.

READ AND REGARD.

If any man teach otherwise, and does not incline to the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlynes, he
is proud, and one that knows nothing, but beating his brains about
questo^is, and strife of words. 1. Timoth. 6. Jesus

Imprinted at Louaine by John Bogard at the Golden Bible with the Kings
Majesty's privilege. 1566.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Ioanni Martiali in LL. Baccalaureo
and sacrae Theologiae Candidato, vt per aliquem Typographorum admissorum impune
ei liceat imprimi curare, and per omnes has suae ditionis regiones distrahere
librum inscriptu^, A reply to M. Calfhills blasphemous answer made against the
treatise of the Cross, and omnibus aliis inhibitum ne eundem absque eiusdem
Ioannis consensu imprimant vel alibi impressum distrahant, sub poena in
priuilegio contenta.

Datum Bruxel. 12. Iunij. Subsig. Prars.
TO M. CALFHILL.
Non contradicas verbo veritatis vllo modo and de mendacio ineruditionis tuae
confundere, Ecclesiastici 4.

Speak in no wise against the word of truth, but be ashamed of thine own
ignorance.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Contradicunt linguae multae: diuersae hereses, diuersa schismata sonant: Multa
linguae contradicunt veraci doctrinae (...) curre ad tabernaculu^ Dei:
Ecclesia^ Catholicam tene, and protegeris^^ tabernaculo a contradictione
linguarum: August. in Psalm. 30.

Many tongues do gain say: diverse heresies, diverse schisms do sound every
where. Many tongues speak against the true doctrine. Run thou to the
tabernacle of God. Keep the Catholic church, and thou shall be defended in
the tabernacle from contradiction of tongues.

A REQVEST TO MASTER GRINDAL AND OTHER SVPERINTENDENTS OF THE NEVVE CHVRCHE OF
ENGLAND.
AMONGST other godly counsels of the wiseman this being one, Eccle. 19.
that we should not believe all that is said, I thought it not convenient to
believe the public fame that reported unto us, that you M. Grindal did peruse
the answer made to the Treatise of the Cross, and allow all the doctrine
contained in it, and privilege it to the printe, lest for my light beleauing
you might with the same wise man acco^pte me light of heart. VVherfor as every
one that is desirous to learn the truth, when rumors are spread inquireth of the
author as occasion serves for further trial and better creditte of the
thing: Even so I longing to hear whether the doctrine vttred in the said
book, be the doctrine of all your church of England, or the fancy only of one
idle brain, make this request to you and the rest of your brethren, for
further certificate, and surer knowledge of this. For albeit the wynki^g at the
setting forth of it, the permitting it to be sold, the suffering the author to
triu^phe of it at the Cross, and the not forewarning the people to be ware of
it, and long silence to master Dormans request, M. Dorma in the preface.
have ministered vehement presumptio^s both of liking and allowing, yet have I
not adiuged it reason, to chardge the whole congregation with it, unless I
have some further notice and certificate from you. As you therefore tender the
honor of God, truth of the Gospel, and wealth of their souls, whom you
pretend to bring to Christ: So let us be advertised whether you will justify
all the doctrine vttred in that book, as the received and approved doctrine of
all your new church of England or no. The request is reasonable: if you refuse
it, we shall judge of your silence accordingly.

Lest you should hafte in this cause, and find some frivolous excuse, as
distemperature at the full of the moon, business in ministering of oaths, care
in sending promoters to the havens, aegernesse in searching after books, and
trouble in seeking after non communicants, and zeal to apease the conte^tions
amongst the brotherhoode for the weighty matters lately in hand, and pretend
that you have no leisure to take a new view of that old work, I have drawn
out certain of his positions, and quoted the places in the margent, where you
shall find them. And as I truly in effect repete them: So do I most earnestly
require and challenge you and all the rest of the superintendents (that must be
ready to give an account of their doctrine to all that ask) to give notice and
signification by some pamphlet in print, whether it be the received and
approved doctrine of all the new church of England able to be justified by the
plain and undoubted word of God, M. Calfhills positions.
and by the true and godly fathers of the church, and general counsels within
six hundred years after Christ, or when the Gospel was most sincerely preched.

Fol. 3. a
That strange attire, difference of meat, refusal of marriadge, rising at
midnight, making of vows, shutting up in cloister, and most wilful beggary,
be ordinances of the devil.

Fol. 32. b
That faith forces sin upon us.

Fol. 35. a
That a naked faith is able to teach him that neither did nor ever could hear,
without any further information that a God there is.

Fol. 124. b
That Latin service, vowing of chastity, communicating under one kind, are
direct contrary to the word.

Fol. 135. ^
That God commanded Christ only, no church, no council, no man to be heard.

That they made a good excuse that denying the body of Polycarpe to the
Christians that sued for it, Fol. 147. b
said it should not be delivered, lest they would forsake Christ, and begin
to woorship him.

That God said of Behemoth and Leuiathan, Fol. 27. a
none dare come near them, none can resist them.

That never God, nor good man devised a cross. Fol. 170. a


That we having the material cross can not come to the knowledge of the
crucified. Fol. 18. b


That crossing bread such inconuenie^ce that the external actio^ had still in
reverence, the inward faith has been untaught. Fol. 26. a


That whersoeuer a sign of the cross was, Fol. 25. b
we should not think that there was a zeal of true devotion, but as well, or
rather an heathenish obserua^ce, and superstition of them that never thought
upon Christ.

That the sign of the cross was made a magical inchaunteme^t and cause of
conquest against the Christians. Ibidem. b.


That the cross was never received upon good occasion. Fol. 26. a


That the cross is not the sign peculiar to Christians. Fol. 51. b.


That the cross is likened to the helmet of hell and coniurers mace. Fol. 29. b


That the devil seems to tremble at the sign of the cross for no other
purpose, Fol. 29. a.
but that we should leave our confidence in Christ, and only repose it in a
piece of wood.

That the devil delited in the sign of the cross. Fol. 117. a.


That more witchcraft, and sorcery, Fol. 90. b
was done by the sign of the cross, than with any thing in the world beside.

That prayer for the dead is a thing of naught. Fol. 36. b


That suffrages, intercessions to Saints, Fol. 94. a.
and Masses are helps to hell.

That it is a general precept, all men to judge, al men to try, Fol. 23. b
what doctrine ethey receive.

That Saints honored with the honor of invocation, Fol. 26. a
are devils.

That no spirit can be worse, than he, that has no faith. Fol. 36. a.


Fol. 52. a
That to dedicate a church in the honor of a saint, is a derogation to Gods
honor, and contrary to the use of the primitive church.

Fol. 53. b
That it is a point most strange and dissonant from al godly lerning to say,
that Mary mother of Christ did make a vow of chastity.

Fol. 103. b
That there be not seven graces of the holy Ghost, mentioned in the 11. of Esai:
or that to gather a seue^fold grace out of that chapter, is to absurd.

Ibidem b.
That the Papists saying there be seven graces of the holy Ghost, be falsifiers
of the scriptures.

Fol. 106. a
That the Mass is nothing else but the sacrifice of the devil.

Fol. 113. b.
That anointing mentioned by S. James was temporal, and only touched the present
state.

Fol. 107. a
That to bless and give thanks is all one.

Fol. 105. b
That neither scripture nor any learned father commends any blessing, but of
prayer unto us.

Fol. 86. a
That Helena for going to Jerusalem and seeking the cross, was superstitious.
Fol. 132. a


Fol. 101. b
That S. Dionise and Fabian (both holy martyrs) were, the on suspected, the
other infamous.

Fol. 103. a
That S. Cyprians saying, vngi necesse est eum qui baptisatus sit, etc. It is
necessary for him that is baptized to be anointed, was proud and blasphemous.

Fol. 36. a
That it was blasphemy for S. Gregory to report how a Jew was preserved from
sprites by the sign of the cross.

Fol. 68. a
That the seventh general council, was a doltish and proud Synod, Fol. 160. b
an insolent and doltish conspiracy: A Nice council, and the fathers a mad
company, Ibidem a
reverend asses, Synodical men, Fol. 17. a
Nice masters, and their decrees idolatrous deeds and doctrines, and impudent
vanities.

Fol. 141. b
That the council of Elibery or Granata in Spain was a general council.

Fol. 145. b
That we making our prayers to saints retain the memory of the dead, and
call upon the dead.

Fol. 3 a
That the Papists have the decrees and decretalls in as sovereign a price as
the Bible.

That the blood of Christ amongst the catholics (whom he calls a rabble of
Romish heretics) is a thing of a thousand lest accounted of. Fol. 94. a


That ceremonies were used in dedication of churches, Fol. 95. a
to bring in the devil.

That within twoe hundred years after Christ the simplicity of Gods ordinances
was refused. Fol. 96. a


That the fathers in obseruances and ceremonies scant agreing with them selves,
Fol 2. 3. a
declined all from the simplicity of the Ghospel.

That since Siluesters time (which was in the year of our lord 309. Fol. 85. b
) such filth of idolatry and superstition flowed into the most parts of all
Christendom, out of the synck of Rome, that he needed as many eyes as Argus,
that should have espied any piece of sincerity until the miscreants, and
heretics, to wit Luther and Crammer, began to restore the decayed state.
Fol. 85. b


That Rome is the synagog of Satan, synke of idolatry, Fol. 121. b
and no membre of the church. Fol, 152. a


That the Pope is the great Antichrist of Rome. Fol. 87. b


That Popery is worse idolatry than the Jews. Fol. 133. a.


That if we light tapers in the day for the use and service of God, it is
blasphemous. Fol. 142. b.


That there is no lauful president of any miracle done by the sign of the
cross. Fol. 151. a


That every city, every monastery, Fol. 153. b
every private parish church in Christendom, has some piece of the holy cross.

That king Solomon was abused by images. Fol. 165. a.


That these words, Jacob summitatem virgae Joseph adorauit, Fol. 70. a
Jacob woorshipped the top of Joseph's rod, was coined of a father in the
counsel of Nice, and not to be found in scripture.

That this word, Crux, signifies a cross pillar, a candelstick, Fol. 79. a
a staffetorche, or a pole that carries the cresset. Fol. 139. b.


That the ordering of ministres is a sacrament, Fol. 104. b.
and yet no sacrament of the church.

Fol. 99. a.
That Imposition of hands (which he calls a sign) should not remain.

Fol. 111. b.
That it is blasphemous and abominable to call penance the second table or
board after shipwreck.

Ibidem b.
That it is an horrible law not only impious to God, but also injurious to man,
that he that diuorceth an adulterous person, may not marry another.

Ibidem b.
That it is an horrible law not only impious to God, but also injurious to man,
that youngefolke wilfully contracting them selves without their parents
consent, may marry well enough.

Fol. 51. b.
That it accords not with the doctrine of Christ, to say: Virtutu^ opes habere
non possunt qui voluerint diuitias habere terrenas, they can not have the
substance of virtues, that will have the substance of the earth.

Fol. 120. a.
Or that the thing (which was the holy Ghost) given by imposition of hands in
the Apostles time, is now abolished.

Fol. 99. a.
Or that Chat Christ is not Legislator a lawemaker, and not catholic to call
him so.

These with diverse other which I omit to repete, are his positions and
paradoxes, these are his resolutions and sayings, as you may see in the places
quoted in the margent. Now if you have privileged and allowed them as the
received and approved doctrine of all the new church of England, for them and
every one of them we require proof out of the plain and undoubted word of
God, out of the true and godly fathers of the church, within six hundred years
after Christ, and out of lauful counsels, within the said term, or within
these xiiij. hundred years. And that the world may see your plain dealing in
this behalf, Ley down the scriptures plainly without corruption, ley down the
fathers words truly without falsifying. Ley down the canons of the counsels
simply without all clipping, changing and inuerting their words. Or if you
have neither scriptures, nor fathers, nor counsels for proof of them,
condemn them as blasphemous, wicked, and ungodly, able to be mayntayned
neither by scripture, council, nor any godly fathers of the church. If you
suffer this doctrine to proceed and have increase, as it is sowed, we may say
unto you, as the virtuous emperor Co^sta^tine said to the Arria^s assembled
at a Synod in Tyrus: Lib. 3. cap. 7. histor. Tripart.
Vos autem qui sancta mysteria eius clementiae proferre videmini, non dicam
custodire, vos inquam nihil agitis nisi quae ad contentionem noscuutur and odia
pertinere, and vt absolute dicam, quae ad humani generis tendere videntur
interitum. You who seem to bring forth, I will not say keep the mysteries of
his mercy, you I say, do nothing but that which is known to pertayne to
contention and debate, and seem to tend, (that I may speak fully and wholly as
it is) to the destruction of all man kind. Or if you fancy not Constantines
saying, I will say unto you as that valiant Emperor Charles the fyft said of
Luther in his edicte set forth at Worms in this sort: Lutherus scribit nihil
fere aliud, nisi quod ad seditionem, schisma, bellum, caedes, rapinas,
incendia, and ad defectionem vniuersalem Christiana fidei tendit atque
subseruit: Luther writes almost nothing else, but that which tends and
serves to sedition, schism, batail, slaughter, robberies, burnings, and to
the general revolt and defection of the Christiann faith. Or if that like you
not, we will say of you as our noble king, Henry of famous memory spoke of the
same friars faction. Nulla vnquam factio fuit ita seditiosa, Pestilens,
nepharia, Epist. ad duces Saxo.
quae sic religionem omnem tollere, leges omnes ob^ilere, mores omnes bonos
corrumpere, res publicas omnes euertere, machinata fit, vt nunc ista coniuratio
Lutherana. There was never faction so seditious, so pestilent, so wicked, which
so endeavored to take away all religion, to oppress all Laws, to corrupt all
good manners as this conspiracy of the Lutherans does now. The counsels of
Christ in his Ghospel, to be called ordinances of the devil, suffrages helps
to hell, The law of God and his church forbidding him that diuorceth an
adulterous person to marry another whiles the party lives, horrible and
impious, the prayers of Christians a sacrifice of the devil, Christ no law
maker, and his Ghospel no Law, what is to endeavor to bring a general revolt
and defection from all Christian religion and faith, if this be not Grindall?
Consider it, you were best. The matter is weighty, and the time perilous. And
whereby a figure called praeoccupatio, you chardge us that our books are
seditious, if it may please you to examine them indifferently, it will easily
be espied whether your divines books breathe sedition, or ours. Let the learned
judge: praised be God, There is no blast blown against the monstrous regiment
of women. There is no libel set forth for order of succession: there is no
word vttred against dew obedience to the sovereign.

As for corrupt gaynes which is another foul fault that you chardge us
withal, we are thanks be to God so far from all just reproufe in this
behalf, that ever more we were content to give the copies of our books and
gaynes whatsoever it were, to him that would bare the chardges of the print,
and convey them into the realm. And as yet, if it will please you either to
send us money to bare such necessary charges, or apoynt some friend of yours
that will faithfully print and truly set them forth to the sight of the
world, you and your factour shall have all the gaynes, that may be made. At
this present I have gathered together master Calfhils lies, contradictions,
false translations, falsifying the scriptures, corrupting the doctors, which
will make a pretty volume, and because I could not conveniently set them forth
together with this reply, I have reserved them to another time. Now if it will
please you to try whether I will stand to the performance of my promise, send
your factour with your lettre and he shall be heard with the conditions before
mentioned. S. Augustine declaring certain properties of the hearts in the
forest, In Psa. 41
says: They ru^ne very swift to the fou^taynes and ryuers, they kill serpe^ts,
and after the killing of the^ are very thyrstie, and when they will swymme over
into any other cuntrie, they ley their horns one upon another: and applying
that to us, he says: Sic nos Christiani debemus velociter currere ad fontes
aquarum, and vitia, serpents iniquitatis nostrae interimere, vt amplius
desideremus fontes veritatis: Debemus inuicem onera portare and sic adimplere
legem Christi. So we Christen men ought to run swiftely to the fountaynes of
water, and kill sins, the serpents of our iniquity, that we may the more
desire the fountaynes of truth, we ought to bear one another burden, and so
fulfill the law of Christ. Now if your zeal be such as you pretend to the
Christen religion, and furderance of truth give us leave to run to the
fountaynes of water, to kill the serpents of iniquity, to impugn your
heresies, to detect your ministers lies, keep not our books from them, that
would come to the fountaynes of truth, but as you love the truth, so bear
part of the burden with us, and fulfill the law of Christ. God send you his
grace, and spirit of truth.

TO THE NEVVE CLERGY.
Deponentes mendacium loquimini veritatem vnusquisque cum proximo suo, quia
sumus inuicem membra, Ephesians. 4.

Leying away all lying speak the truth, every man to his neighbor, for as
much as we are members one of another.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Having read and regarded the answer to the treatise of the cross, and
finding the scriptures falsified, the counsels disauthorised, the fathers
corrupted, the doctors misco^strued, the sacraments prophanelye reported, the
church discredited, the virtuous sclaundered, S. Cyprian rejected as Fol. 103 a
blasphemous, 101 b
Fabianus an holy martyr refused as infamous, S. Dionyse Paul's scholar
condemned as suspicious, 132 a
Helena a blessed saint neglected as superstitious. S. Gregory as fabulous,
6. b
Paulinus as zealous without knowledge, the fathers of the Nicene council
called 68. a
Asses, Nice 68. a
masters, and 70. a
Sinodicall men, their assemble an 182. a.
insole^t, doltishe co^spiracie, dissembling at Nice, their decrees impudent
Fol. 163. b
Fol. 17. a.
vanities and idolatrous deeds and doctrines, the doctors vnworthied of
authority, as me^ that had Fol. 120. b
errors, men that thought Fol. 29. b.
better than they wrote, me^ that Ibidem.
borrowed of the common custom impropre phrases, such as seem to maintain an
error, men that were not so well affectioned as they Fol. 89. a
ought, me^ that in terms Fol. 175. b
over shot them selves, men that declined all, from the Fol. 23. a
simplicity of the Gospel, To be short finding the cross, which in the holy
scriptures and ancient fathers is called, Apoca. 7.
Signum Dei, Signum Matthew. 24
filij hominis, Signum Cassio. in Psalm. 4.
coelestis Imperatoris, Theod. ca. 1. li 6. Trip.
figura dominici trophaei, Chrisost. in demo^st. cont. gent.
Argumentum multae benedictionis, Aug. ca 3. de visit. in.
venerabile monumentum, Salutare, Cyril. li. 6. co^t. Iulia. and Lactantius de
passio.
preciosum, venerabile lignum, Ephre^ de poenit.
viuificum signum, Cano. 73. Council. Co^sta^. in Trull.
victoriae trophaeum, Lacta^. li 4 c. 27. de vera sapi. c. 26.
coelestis nota, maximum sublime and immortale signum, Aug ser. de cruce and
lat.
res honoris, mortis deuictae Cyril. hie ros. epist. ad Co^st Impe.
trophaeum, Lacta^. ca. 27. lib. 4 de vera sapie^t. and Aug. c 20 de cathe. ru.
Signum passionis, Chris. ho. 55. 116. Mat. and Iusti. Tit. de Monac. Nouel col
1
Signum salutis nostrae, Chris ho 55. in 16. Mat.
Signum communis libertatis, signum mansuetudinis and humilitatis domini, Amb
li. 6 c. 4. de Sacr.
Signum virtutis, and Paulinus epi. 11 ad Sever.
pignus aeternae salutis, the sign of God, the sign of the son of man, the
sign of the heavenly Emperor, the figure of our lords triumph, a token of
much blessing, an honorable monument, an healthful, precious, and reverend
wood, a lively sign, a triumphant banner of victory, an heavenly mark, a
most great, high and immortal sign, a pearl of price, a sign of the
conquest over death, a sign of Christ's passion, a sign of our salvation, a
sign of the delyueraunce of all mankind, a sign of the meekenes, and
humility of Christ, a sign of virtue and pledge of eternal salvation, to be
likened to Fol. 44. b.
gallows, to the helmet 29. b.
of hell, to the coniurers mace, and called a magical 25. b.
inchaunteme^t, an heathenish 117. a.
observance, a stumbling 176. b
stock, a 128 a.
stone of offense, a 25. b.
cause of sickness, a 106. a.
dumb God, a 94 a.
dead devil, a 3. a
counterfeict of Serapis, and 120 a.
conquest against the Christians, and prayers of the church a sacrifice of the
devil, suffrages helps to hell, our saviors counsels ordinances of the devil,
Christ no lawemaker and his Gospel by consequent no law I thought it good to
contemn it, as a famous libel, full of lies, M. dorma^ in his preface.
sclaunders, and blasphemies, and let it lie obscure with the author,
especially seeing the superintendents, being demanded, whether they would
justify the said book, and all the doctrine contained in it, have given no
signification nor notice of their liking, lest if upon their general lyking,
it should be confuted, the ignominy should redounde unto them, whereas now
the whole shame lies but in one prati^g Parrat, Prouer. 26
more worthy to be contemned than answered.

But when I considered that saying of Salomo^, Answer a fool according to his
foolishnes that he may not seem wise unto him self, I thought it good to
examine the forsaid answer, and discover the folly of it, that both the
author seeing his vanities laid before his eyes, might be asshamed of his
arrogancy, and with the proud peacocke, looki^g upon his foul feet, cast
down his braggi^g tail and abhor his serpe^tine voice, and also the simple
reader poisoned with the venomous drugges, of his gay colored, and sweet
sugered words, might have a remedy to expel that infectio^, and preseruatyue
to beware of the like. Wherefore al his superfluities cast aside, and
impertine^ts loted out, I will bring the chiefest and most principalst
matters, that he treats in his answer, to this examination. And that you may
the better understand which are the words that M. Calfhill uses either of
scripture, Doctor, Council, or his own, I have set them in a distinct
letter, and noted the place in the Margent where you shall find them in his
book, as they are in effect.

And to begin with the preface, his long discourse there, M. Calf^ intent in
his preface. Fol 9. a
te^deth chiefly to prove that there should be no images in churches. And for
proof of that, he bri^geth certain places of scripture, as the 20. Exodus,
where it is said: Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Thou shall make
unto thy self no graven image, nor any similitude that is in heaven above, or
in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. Thou shall not adore
them, nor woorshippe them, And the 19. of Leuiticus, where it is said. Nolite
conuerti ad idola, turn not to Idols, nor make unto yower selfs, Gods of
metal, What is forbidden by this commandment.
and such like. Which precepts of God do only inhibite the idols of the
gentiles to be used among the Jews who were so prone unto the idolatry, of
the Gentills that they woorshipped caul^es, stocks, stones, catts, apes, brute
beasts, and the sun, moon, and stars, for God. Wherefore God being a
jealous God, a god that would have the glory of his name given to no creature
on earth, did forbid them, to make any graven idol, or likeness of any
thing, because they should not adore it, Exodus 32.
and worship it for God, as the children of Israel did, when they said of the
golden Caulfe, Hi sunt dij tui Israel, These are thy Gods o Israel. If it had
been his holy will, to have forbidden absolutely all kind of images, Exodus 25.
the images of Angels made and set in the mercy seat by the apoyntme^t of God.
3 Reg 7. Images of oxen and Lions in Salomons temple.
he would never have willed Moses to make the twoe Cherubins upon the mercy
seat, in the Tabernacle. For he should have given a precept contrary to his
first commandment. Neither would Solomon being in hye favor with God at
that time, have made, and engraued the images of oxen, lions, and Cherubins in
the temple which he made, to the honor and glory of God. For in so doing he
should have greuouslye transgressed that law. For the Cherubins that Moses
made, were scuptile, a graven image, the images of a certain order of Angels:
the oxen and Lions had Similitudinem, the likeness of a thing in earth. But
let us not err. There is no alteration, no change, nor contradictio^ in God:
he is always one. Wherefore when he did forbid the Israelites, to make any
graven image, he did forbid them to make it, because they should not take
them to be Gods, nor adore them and woorshippe them for Gods. When he willed
Moses to make the tabernacle, he willed those Cherubi^s to be made, Paralip. 22
for a beauty and furniture of his house, which that precepte did not inhibite:
which Solomon understanding caused those oxen, The jews stamped Caesar's image
in his coin.
Lions, and Angels, to be engraued, and portraicted in his temple. And seeing
he making that temple by the providence and commandment of God, willed those
images to be made in his temple, it is evident that the forsaide commandment
of God, did not inhibite all kind of images, to be made, no not in the temple.

Besides this, the Jews them selves, being very skillfull in their law, and
scrupulouse in observing it, according to the lettre, stamped the image of
Caesar in their coins. And our Savior Christ seeing it, did never reprehend
them for it, which he would have done, had it ben against the law. But when
he saw the Coin with the image of Caesar, he said no more, but Give unto
Caesar, Matt. 22.
those things which are Caesar's and to God those things that are Gods.
Furdermore all Christian Emperors, princes, and gentle men would never have
engraued, nor set in their ensigns, and Arms, Egles, Lions, Lylies,
Greyhoundes, Draggons, Faukons, horses, gotes, bulls, bears, Apes, and such
like. For sculptile, is a graven thing. And if all graven things had been by
that precepte inhibited, they would never so generally have practiced it, nor
with out fear of Gods indignation, hitherto have co^tynued it. Over and above
all this, Christ gave an image of his countenance to Veronica, and sent an other
to Abgarus, Damasce. lib 4 cap. 17 de orthod. side. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 14.
histor.
king of the Edissens. The Christians eue^ from the beginning payncted both his
images and the Apostles also, which were sculptile and similitudo, a graue^
image, and the lykenes of a thing. Wherefore seeing Moses at the commandment
of God, made the twoe Cherubins in the tabernacle, seeing Solomon engraued in
his temple, oxen, lions, and Cherubins, seeing the Jews stamped the image of
Caesar in their Coins, and were not reproved of Christ for them, seeing
Christen Emperors, princes, and gentle men set Egles, Lions, Lilies, dragons,
greyhoundes, and such like in their arms, and were never controlled for yt,
Seeing the Christians, even from the Apostles time, have made the images of
Christ and his Apostles, and thought to honor Christ and his Apostles by it,
yt must needs follow, that the precepte of God, What images the L we does
forbid.
Non facies tibi sculptile, Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven
image, does not absolutely forbid all kind of images, but only such as were
adored and worshipped, and that not simplye neither, but such as were adored
and worshipped for gods: such the law does inhibite, such does God forbid. And
al such do we Catholics detest, accurse, and abhor: and ever did.

We know our images to be but the work of man: we do not worship, nor
adore, nor honor the matter, whereof they are made. That which we adore and
worship, is the thing represented by the image, which is either Christ him
self, or some of his saynctes. And in honoring them as the friends of God, we
honor God, as the prince that honors an others prince his Ambassador
honors the prince in his Ambassador. Heretics calling the Christians
images Idols, or deny Christ to be come, or discredit the prophets. Sopho. 2.
Al idols destroyed by Christ's coming.
And if our new Masters will needs have the Christians images to be idols,
than either they must deny Christ with the Jews to be come, or contemn the
prophetts with the Samaritanes. For if Christ has be^ incarnate and redeemed
the world, then has he according to the predictions of the prophetts
destroyed all Idols, and delivered his church from them. For Sophonias said of
Christ, He shall destroy all the godds of the earth. Zachary says, I will
destroy the names of Idols out of the earth, and they shall be remembered no
more. By the name of Idols he vndersta^dethe here honor and worship done to
Idols. Now if Christ according to this prophecy, by his cumning destroyed all
Idols, and worshipps done unto them, then will it follow, that the images of
the Christians, are not Idols, nor the honor and reverence done unto them, an
honor and reverence done unto Idols. Or if it be, that either Christ by his
cumming, did not destroy the idols of the Gentiles, or that the prophetts were
not true, in their prophecies. And one of these twoe they must grant, spite
of their beardes, unless they will be worse tha^ Julian the apostata. For he
being otherwise an enemy of Christ, and of all Christians seeing the deameanour
of the faithful beleauers, Lib. 6 co^t. Iulia.
was forced to confess that cessabant idola adorare, and colere as Cyrillus
says: They ceased to adore and worship idols. But because he despited their
religion, and knew not the secret mysteries of it, he laid to their chardge,
(as these men do to ours) that they adored the wood of the Cross. But how
fondly it was done, Cyrill shows at lardge, as the learned know, and he that
is desirous to see and able to read and understand, may turn the book, and
find. For the simple, it may suffice them to know, how that Christ, by his
cumming destroyed al wicked idols, and gross idolatry of the Gentills, and
taught us a true way to worship God in spirit and truth, and that, the
catholic church, has evermore observed that manner of worshipping of God,
and ever taught that images, be deuoyd of all sense of them selves, and
therefore worthy of no honor in respect of them selves, but in consideration
that they represent unto us Christ, and his saints.

Out of the new Testament he quoteth these places: Fol 9. a Acto. 7.48.
But the highest dwells not in temples made of hands, heaven is my seat,
and the earth is my foot stool, Acto. 15 28.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us, to put no burdeyne upon you
besides these necessaries, that ye absteyne from things offered up to false
images, and blood and strangled meat, and fornication. Romans 1
And they changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into the likeness of an
image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four footed, and creeping
beasts.

I wrote unto you in an epistle that ye should not company with fornicatours of
this world, nor with the couetouse, 1 Cor. 5.10.
nor with the extorcioners, nor with them that serve idols. For the^ must ye
needs have gone out of this world, but now I write unto you that you company
not together. If he that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous,
Idolis seruiens. 1 Cor. 10 1 Cor. 14 Idolorum cultura 2 Cor. 6 14. Co^sensus
te^plo Dei cu^ idolis Galat. 5.20. 1. Joan 21. Simula chris. Acto. 7.48.
or a worshipper of idols or a rayler, or a drunckarde, or an extorcioner,
with him that is such a one, see that ye do not eat. Flee from the
woorshpping of idols.

Draw not the yoke with infidells, and a little after that, what agreement has
a temple of God with idols? Be not druncke with wine in which is ryott, but be
filled with the holy Ghost, speaking unto yower selves in hymns and Psalms
and spiritual songs, singinge and making melody to God in yower hearts,
giving thanckes always for all, to God the father in the name of our lord
Jesus Christ. Little children keep yower selves from false and feigned images.

And all these places make not one jot against images. For albeit God dwells
not so in temples made with hands, Acto. 15.28.
but that his power also is every where without scripture, yet has he been
worshipped, adored and honored in temples made with hands. And as in the old
Testament he commanded the tabernacle to be made, and images of Cherubins in
it, and Salomons temple, where both the Cherubins, and images of oxen lio^s and
such like were painted: So has he in the time of grace, by secret
inspirations, and visions, commanded churches to be builded, that the
faithful might resort unto them, to honor praise, and serve him. And in those
he has willed the sign of our redemption, and cross of Christ and images of
saints to be erected and set up. And if you ask me where this will, and
commandment of God is to be seen, I answer, it is to be seen in the decrees
of the catholic church which is one body with Christ, directed and taught
by the holy Ghost. It is to be seen in the holy fathers, by whom God speaks
unto us, In Psalm. 46
as S. Augustine declares, saying: God has spoken many ways, he has spoken
by Angels, by prophetis, by his own mouth, by his Apostles, by his faithful
servants, he speaks: by so mean a man as I am he speaks, when I speak
any thing that is true. Ipse sonat vbique tangendo, modificando, inspirando, he
sowndeth every where, by touching, governing, and inspiring the heart.

Furthermore albeit God has forbidden us to eat of things offered to idols,
yet has he not forbidden us to eat that which is offered upon the altar. 1.
Cor. 9.
But provided that he that serves the altar, shall take part of the altar.
Or if he had not, what reason has this our protestants argument? We must not
eat things offered to idols, ergo we must have no images? Consider it by a
like. We must abstain from fornication, ergo we must not have the sounday
kept holyday. As for the antecedent, it is a commandment of God as well as
the abstaining from things offered to idols, and the consequent follows as
well as the first. Concerning the thing it self, as the church,
notwithstanding God gave a special precept to keep holy the sabbath day,
adue^tred to turn it into the sunday, because they would have nothing common
with the Jews: So the same church, seeing no precepte of God forbidding the
image of Christ and his Saints, to be had amongst Christen men, has not
only permitted, but also commanded the said images, to be had in churches, and
oratories. And seeing it is so, we are as much bound to obey the church in one,
as in the other. To proceed, what argument will he make, against images, of the
words of S. Paul, either to the Romans, Corinthians, or Galathians? If he
say: Rom, 1. 1. Cor. 5. Galat. 6. M. Calves arguments.
Some changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of an
image, of a corruptible man, ergo all men did: we must not company with
idolatours, ergo we must have no images: we must flee from the woorshipping of
Idols: ergo we must worship no images, The temple of God has no agreement with
idols, ergo the church has no agreement with images: we must not be drunck
with wine, in which there is riot, ergo we must not have any images of
saints, Keep your selfs, from counterfettes: ergo have no images, We will
send him to schole to learn Logic again: For this is stark naught, as
every you^ge puine that has read his first principles may see.

But peradventure M. Calf. trusting to the English doctors translation, who
where he found the word Idolum in Latin, 1. Cor. 5. idolis seruiens. False
translation.
translated it image, in English, as where the Latin and Greek both say: I
wrote unto you that you should not company with him that is a worshipper of
idols, he said: I wrote unto you, that you should not company with him that
is a woorshipper of images, And where the Apostle said: Fugite ab idolorum
cultura, Flee from the worshipping of idols, and again: Quis consensus templo
Dei cum idolis? What agreement has the church of God with idols, he said,
how agrees the temple of God with images, M. Calf. I say, thought he might be
bold to bring the said places against images: but that warrant is
insufficient, and authority unworthy so famous a reader: and argues that he
passes not how shamefully he corrupts the scripture to deceive the simple
people. Wherefore to make him understand his folly, The difference between an
Idol and an image.
I will declare for his further instruction, what difference there is between an
idol, and an image. The word idol is deryued of the Greek nowne (...) species,
Cice. libr. 15. epist. Fa. Cassia.
because it shows and pretends a bare shape and void figure of a thing,
whereas in deed there is no such thing at all. Whereupon that which the Greeks
called (...) idol, the Latins called, Spectrum, and it is taken for those
pillars, counterfeicts and images, which were erected to represent that which
is falsely beleaued to be a God. Lib. 7. quest. super Iudic. ca. 41. Idolum. 1.
Cor. 8. Sonnius Demonst. lib. 2. ca. 5.
Wherefore S. August calls, idolum falsi Dei simulachrum, an idol the forged
image of a false and feigned God. In which there is no power, no virtue, nor any
thing but mere vanity, as apeareth by S. Paul, where he says: Idolum nihil
est, the idol is nothing. That is to say: Nihil habet in se eius quod creditur
numinis et veritatis. It has nothing in it of the power and truth which it is
beleaued to be. And in this sense, it is taken in the scriptures, that M. Calf.
alleges, and in all the fathers which write against the gross superstition,
and wicked impiety of the Gentills for worshipping of idols.

The Christians images ca^ not be called idols.
As for our images they can neither be called Simulachra, feyned counterfeites,
nor idols. For first they are not erected to represent unto us any thing, as
God, nor beleaued to have any virtue or power in them as God. Thirdly they
represent, no false nor lying thing, but that which they represent unto us is
true. As the image of Christ upon the cross in the form of man, represents
unto us, that he was a mortal man, and put to death for our redemption. The
image of our lady represents unto us the mother of Christ, in whom he was
incarnate, and made man. And so likewise of other saints, whereupon an image
either paincted or engraued in wood, Vide Qui^tinu^ Heduu^ in Synod. Gang
impressam Paris. 1560. Imago. Actio. 4. 2. Nicae.
stone, or metal, is a true representation of a thing: or a figure,
likeness, and shape of him that is portraicted either in the picture, or in
the engraued work. It is as Germanus an holy patriarch of Constantinople
declares, a description of the stoutenes of holy men, who resisted sin unto
death. It is a representation of holy virtue, and dispensation of grace, given
unto them. It is an admonition and instruction to glorify God, whom they
served in this life. And this has nothing that resembles the nature of the
Jews idols, or gentills counterfeites, as is declared before.

We Christen men call not ower images Gods, we give the^ no divine honor, we
thinck no power, nor heavenly thing to consist in them. We have no hope, nor
affiance of help and succor from them, as the Jews had of their golden
Calfe, and gentills of the Counterfeictes of Iuppiter, Mars, Apollo, Venus, and
such like. Our trust is in God, and hope in the mightines of his power, who
made both heaven and earth. Psalm. 95.
Hi^ we acknowledge to be our lord and God, and none but him. Oe^s dii gentiu^,
daemonia, All the Gods of the ge^tils are devils. Wherefore to all that think
other wise of the catholics and take their images to be Idols, we will cry
Anathema, with the fathers of Nice. Act. 6. Nicae. 2.
And to all that thi^cke we worship the^ as God, or give honor unto the^, due
only to god, we will say with the good father Epiphanius, O insaniente^ lingua^.
O mad and raging tongue, edged like a sharp sword full of poison. It is but a
fable of the ge^tils, and invention of the devil, and work of Satan. No
Christen man gives Latriam, Acto. 6. Nicae. 2.
divine honor and service to any creature on earth. Latria nostra est in
spiritu and veritate. Our honor and service dew unto God, is in spirit, and
truth. What adoration and worship is given to images Genes. 23. Genes. 33.
Genes. 42.43. Exodus 18 2. Reg ca. vlti.
The adoration, worship and honor, that we give unto images is but aulia, that
is a service, which one creature owes unto an other, and is expressed by doing
reverence and honor unto a man, or some other earthly thing, either by
putting of the cappe, bowinge the knee, humbling the body, kissing the hand,
or such like. In this sort Abraham adored the people of Heth, Jacob adored his
brother Esawe, Joseph's brothers adored hi^, lying flat on the ground. Moses
adored Iethro his father i^ law. Areuma Iebu seus adored David with his face
flatt upon the ground, Jacob adored the top of Joseph's rod. And after like
sort do we Christen men, reverence, honor, and woorship one other.

When we meet together we put of the cap, we bow the knee, we humble the
body, we offer to kiss the hand. In like manner when we receive the kings
letters, we put of our capps. When we come into the chamber of presence, and
see the cloth of estate, we show a kind of reverence and honor unto it, not
respecting the paper and wax, nor silken clothe, or golden chair, but the
prince that wrote it, and king that sat under that cloth of estate. Right so
when we see the image of Christ, or any Sayncte, we put of our cappes, Haeb.
11.
we make courtesy, we bow, Why we bow to the cross and image of Christ
we cappe, we kneel, and show such external reverence, and honor, not
because it is made of silver and gold, or curiouslye wroughte, or set with
pearl, or fynely painted, but because it represents unto me Christ and his
passion, his saints and their patience, constancy and martyrdom. And if it
be idolatry for me or any Christian man, to do this, the^ it is idolatry to
reverence my princes image, to veil my bonnet when I receive her lettre, to
show reverence when I come in sight of her clothe of estate. For both have
one respect. The one to the first Sampler represented by the image, the other
to the prince that occupies that seat, and gave out that seal. And if
heretics do not understand this to be the doctrine of the Catholic church,
they show them selves very ignoraunte and unskillful in the Counsels. For the
fathers have approved it. And of many to recite a few,

Images made in remembrance of Saints.
Stephanus B. Bostro writes thus. God has cast away and condemned the
idolatry of the Gentills, because they were counterfeictes of of devils, we
make images in remembrance of Saynctes. Of whom you say? Forsooth of Abraham,
Moses, Elias, Esaias, Zachary, and other prophets, Apostles, and holy Martirs,
who were persequuted for christ's sake, that every man that beholds them in
the image may remember them, and glorify God, who honored them. For honor
and worship is sitting for them, for their righteousness, that every one, who
sees them, may be drawn to an imitatio^, of their good works. But what
honor of adoration is this? Images paincted and worshipped. Lib. 5. Apolo pro
Christia. cont Iudeos habet. act. 4 Nicae. 2. Ezech. 40 and 41. 3. Reg. 6. and
7.
verily no other the^ such as we use, amongst our selves, saluting one an
other for honor and love. And a little after, reasonni^g the matter he
concludes and says. By this it is very manifest, that the images of sai^tes
who are the servants of God, are payncted, worshipped and adored.

Leontins bishop of Neapolis in Cypres, proving out of the old Testament, that
God commanded images to be made, as the Cherubins, which were images of
Angels, Lions oxen, palm trees, men, and such like, says unto the Jew: If
thou do reprove me for images, reprove God him self, who commanded these to
be made, in remembrance of those things which we have. And when the Jew
replied and said. The similitudes or images were not adored as God, The
Christian awnswered. You say well, for with us the images, figures, and
pictures of Saynctes are not worshipped as Gods. For if they worshipped Gods in
the wood of the images, they would not burn the image, when the form, and
printe of it were gone. For my part (saietn he) as twoe pieces of wood having
the figure of the cross are joined together, I adore the figure for christ's
sake: The figure of the cross worshipped for Christ's sake, and not the vvood
nor metal
when those pieces are separated, I cast them away and burn them. And as he
that receaueth a commission or placket from the Emperor, by kissing the seal
worshippeth not the wax, letters, or lead, but gives that honor and
reverence to the Emperor: So we that are children of christen men, adoring the
figure of the cross, do not not adore the nature of the wood, but we looking
upon the seal, ringe, figure, and Christ him self, salute and adore him by
this figure, who was crucified upon it. Thus much Leontins, and much more in
the same sense worthy of all men to be noted and read. Libr. 7. epist. 53.
S. Gregory wrting to Secundinus who desired to have the images of Christ, S.
Peter, and S. Paul, sent him, says: I know, you desire not the image of our
Savior for that intent, that you will woorship it as a God, but that by
remembrance of it, you may be fervent in the love of God. And we do not fall
down before it, as before God, but we adore him, whom by the image we
remember either borne, either to have suffered, or sitting in his throne. Lib. 4
ca. 12. de orthod fide.
Damascene says, we adore the figure of the pretiouse and lively cross,
albeit it be made of an other matter, not worshipping the matter (for God
forbid that). But the figure, as the sign of Christ. To be short, to declare
the doctrine of the church in this point, Gratian, (whom you so much spite
and malice) recites this Canon out of the syxt Synod. The Christians call not
the reverend images Gods, De co^sec. did. 3. cap. venerabiles.

The sixth Synod. The 7 general counsel.

Actio. 7. Images commanded to be set in churches.


nor serve them as God, nor put hope of salvation in them, nor look for the
judgment that is to come of them, but they worship and adore them, for the
memory and reverence of the originals and first samplers, but they serve them
not with divine honor, nor any other creature. The seventh geneall council
says. We conclude that images be had and set up in churches etc. that by
this beholding and seeing of images, all that look upon them may come to the
memory, remembrance, and desire of the first samplers, and give unto them a
gentle salutation and courtiouse kind of adoration, not adoration dew unto
God, according to our faith, but such as we give to the figure of the reverend
and lively cross, and Ghospells of Christ etc. for the honor of the image
redoundeth to the first sampler, and he that adoreth an image, adoreth the
thing described in the image.

Wherefore seeing it is so? what honesty is in this man, that brings the
places of scriptures and fathers, that speak against the idols which the
seduced Jews and Gentills worshipped and adored as Gods, and took for Gods,
against the images of the Christians which we profess to be no Gods, nor of
any divine and heavenly power? Yea what Christian charity is in his heart
that cease not to vpbraie us with gross idolatry that are redeemed with the
death of Christ, and brought out of thraldom of the devil, and such
abomination, as the gentills use, by his passion, and have learned to adore
him in spirit and truth, and defye all idols, and accursed idolatours? The
devil hi^ self could say no more. But let it be their Evangelical charity,
what reason is there in this saying?

Fol. 15. b Calf.
An image can not be made of Christ except it be a lying image: for Christ is
god and man. And since of the Godhead which is the most excellent part, no
image can be made, it is falsely called the image of Christ: and they that do
any honor unto it, are mere Idolatours, making Christ thereby inferior to his
father, cleaui^g only to his humanity, whereas we should so honor the son as
they honor the father? Joan. 5. Mart.
Would any be sides a scourer of old errors, and reuyuer of canckred heresies
have made the like? This was one of the greatest reasons, that the image
breakers made in their conuenticle and conspiracy of Constantinople. And seeing
M. Calf. boroweth it of them, I might condemn him as an heretic with them.
But that the world may see, what foolish fancies they have that impugn
images, Actio 6 Nicae. 2. The heretics objections
I will lay forth the answers that Epiphanius made for whole council of Nice
to like objections, and then frame one to this. The heretics objected this in
effect as M. Calf. does, and said: Christ is God and man: Therefore if you
make an image of Christ, it must be an image of God and man. And if that be
true, then must either his deity be circumscribed, or his unity be
confounded. Epiphanius answered.

This word Christ does signify the deity and humanity (that is) both the
perfect natures of Christ. Epiphanius answer.
According to that nature in which he was seen, Christen men have learned to
paincte his image, and not according to that nature in which he was invisible:
for that can not be described. For we have heard out of the Gospel, that no
man ever saw God. Joan 1. 1. Joan. 4.
Therefore when Christ is paincted in his human nature, as the truth of the
thing shows, Christen men profess and acknowledge that they shape the image
that they see, to the first sampler according to the name, and not according to
essence, or substance, The image of Christ paincted as he was man.
that is (to make it playner) they profess to payncte Christ, as man only, and
not as God and man. These light losells teach that there is no difference
between the image, and the first sampler, that is between the bare image, and
the thing represented by the image, et in diuersis substa^tijs ide^titate^
substa^tiae indica^t and in diverse substances, show an idenditie of
substance. Again he says: No man is so mad that saying the human nature
may be circumscribed goethe about by that, to circumscribe the nature which can
by no means be circumscribed. Christ as he was man, was in Jury, and Galile.
As he was God, he is in every place, and contynueth, not able by any means to
be circumscribed. If when he lay wrapte in swadeling clothes in the manger, his
divinity was enwrapped by the nature of his humanity, then shall his
divinity, that is vncircumscriptible, be circumscribed in a colored image,
but if his divinity was not enwrapped there, in the clothes, nor can his
divinity be circumscribed here in the image. I would they would acknowledge and
call to rememaraunce that saying of holy S. Dionyse, in his Hierarcihe. Where
he says: S. Dyonise.
Non est exacta similitudo causatis and causis, habent enim causata causarum
contingentes imagines. Ipsae vero causae secundu^ proprij principij ratione^
exemptae sunt and superemine^t. There is no exact or perfect likeness between
things that are caused, and the causes them selves. For the things caused
have the accident images or likeness of the causes. The causes them selves,
are exempte and do ouerpasse all, according to the nature of their own first
beginning. And by this we may see, that Christ being God and man, may be
payncted, as man, albeit he ca^ not be payncted as God, because every image is
made to the imitation of the name, and not according to the nature and
substance of the represented.

Another objection of theirs with which M. Calfhill also chardgeth the
catholics was this: To make an image af Christ in his human nature, as he
walked here in earth etc. is wicked and savoring of the heresy of Nestorius.
Epiphanius answered: The Christians knowing Christ to be God, paynte him as he
was made man, and besides reiecte and cast from them all idle fancies. And
receiving plainly, and simply, all things that are delivered of the church,
and beholding pictures or images, they conceive nothing in their mind, but
that which is signified by them. For when they behold in the picture that the
virgin has brought forth a son, The meditations of true Christians when
they see the image of Christ.
and the angel and sheapeardes standing by, they think with them selves,
that God is made man, and borne for our salvation. And that they acknowledge
saying: He that is without flesh, is now incarnate and borne in flesh, he
that is unable to be touched, is now touched and felt. And so they acknowledge
and confess him to be one, perfect in his humanity and deity. As for
Nestorius, Nestorius heresy.
he made two sons, vnum verbum patris, alterum Filium virginis. One the word
of the father, an other the son of the virgin. But true Christians confess
Christ their lord, They do well that pay act the image of Christ.
and God, to be but one son. And when they paynte his image as he was
incarnate and made man, they are knowne^ to do very well and godly. For God
the son bing made man, was conversant with us in fleeshe. The deity is not
considered payncted: for no man ever saw God. For he can not be paincted,
seen, or comprised, but only his humanity. For we know Christ to be of twoe
natures, and in twoe natures, that is of human and divine, jointly without
division. One of them is unable to be payncted, the other able to be payncted,
is considered in one Christ. In what an image must be like the first sampler.

The soul of a man not of any sought in his image


And the image is not like the first sampler according to his substance, but
only in respect of name and disposition of lyneaments expressed by the parts
of the body. For when a paynter, paynteth the image of a man, no man requires
or seeks the soul in the image. And verily the difference of the soul of
man, and the divine nature is severed. The divine nature is uncreated, and
without all time. The soul of man is created, made in time, and framed by the
divine nature. Further: No man that is wise, seeing the image of man, ever
thought that the man was severed from his soul by the paincter. For the image
is not only deprived of the soul, but of the substance of the body, as
fleeshe, musculles, synowes, bones, blood, fleame, choler, and humors, the
mixture whereof can not be seen in the image. For if it could be seen in the
image, we would call it a man, and not an image.

As for the deniyng or co^founding of both natures, by paynting Christ as man,
he says thus in effect. The talk which they have of denying and co^sounding
the divine and humayne nature, has no truth. For the image is one thing, and
the proportion and original another. What is to be looked for in an image.
Nor any man that wise is, will seek the properties of the original in the
image. For true reason seeks nothing else in an image, but a community of
the name, whose image it is. It knows not the substance of the original. Thus
much Epiphanius. Now to come to M. Calfhills reason. We deny his principle,
and require him to prove, according to his promise, by scripture, council,
and ancient father, that because Christ is both God and man, Fol. 1^. b
an image can not be made of him, except it be a lying image. For Christ may be
payncted in the form and shape of a man, as he walked here in earth, and died
on the cross, albeit his godhead which is the most excellent part, can not be
comprised in any image. Neither are they liars, that call any such picture the
image of Christ, Fol 15. b They are not liere nor idolaters that call the
image made to represent christ, the image of Christ.
neither they mere idolaters that woorship it. For it is not necessary in an
image, that there be an exact similitude in all proportions. Nor it is
required, that the image be like the original and first sampler, according to
the substance, but only in respect of name and disposition of the parts of
the body. VVherfor if Christ be payncted in the habit of man, either as he
waulked here on earth, or as he died on the cross, or as be roose from the
dead and ascended to heaven, it may welbe said this is the image of Christ,
although the true form and proportion of his body be not known to us.

As for his sentence adiudging them mere idolaters, that honor that image, it
is but rash, foolish, and ignorant, and argues that he knows not, who be
idolaters. Who are idolaters. Lib. 10. ca. 6. de Trin.
Therefore for his further instruction, I will tell him. S. Augustine says:
Idololatrae dicuntur qui simulachris eam seruitutem exhibent quae debetur Deo.
They are called idolaters, who give that service to false images which is dew
to God. (...).
The service dew to God (called of the Grecia^s (...)) consists principally
in three things, to wit, in acknowledging him to be lord of all lords, maker
and creator of all things, and geuer of all goodness to man. Next in loving
him with all our hearts with all our souls, and with all our power. Then in
offeri^g unto him sacrifice of prayer, tha^ckes giving, and the precious body,
and blood of his son, Jesus Christ. This honor and service was never given
by Christen man to images. The honor and worship which the church allows to
images, is no other, but a reverent putting of the cap, bowing, kneeling,
kissing, or such like, which, seeing it has been done, and may be done to
creatures, we are no more idolaters, for using the like to any image, than you
are for kneeling to the prince, for putting of yower cap to the cloth of
estate, for kissing the Queen's seal, or bowing to yower friend when you meet
him.

Fol 15. b Fol. 16. a A sclau^deraus cauil Christ not made inferior to his
father by any Paynting of images
Where he says: that we by making an image of Christ, make him inferior to
his father, and cleave only to his humanity, it is but a mere sclanderouse
cavil. For the making of an image, is the work of ma^s hand, and by such
work Christ can not be made inferior to his father. When Christ walked here
on earth, the disciples honored him, and waited upon him, and served him as
man, his mother attended upon him, the Mary's and other holy women followed
him as man. Mathaeus and Zachaeus received him into their houses as man: and
because they did serve him, honor him, and follow him as man, did they
therefore deny him to be God? and make him inferior to the father, or cleave
only to his humanity? No sir: In like manner when we payncte him as man,
engraue his image as man, or portraicte him upon the cross crucified as man,
do we deny him to be God, or make him inferior, to the father or cleave only
to his humanity? What extreme folly is in this follishe fantasy? A question
to M. Calf.
Let me ask M. Calf. this question. When you made and penned yower last
sermon, did you write the name of Christ in it or no? If you did, you did it
in paper and yncke, and because paper and yncke can not conteyne the power of
God, Whether he that vvriteth the name of Jesus in ynck paper makes him
inferior to his father.
nor divinity of Christ, did you deny Christ to be God, or make him inferior
to his father, and cleave only to his humanity? Answer M. Calf. And if you by
writing his name in yncke and paper, do not deny him to be God, nor make him
inferior to his father, no cleave only to his humanity, no more do we by
making his image in colors, or in any ki^de of metal. But as you by writi^g
his name in yncke, and paper, do by reading or pronou^cing of it tra^smitte
him by the ear into the mind, and there conceive him to be both God ad man:
Eue^ so we by payncting him as man, do by the eye transmitte him into the
heart, and there adore and worship him as God, and man, of equal substance
with the father, and never separate his divine and human nature.

But put case in paynting Christ as man, we did make him inferior to the
father? Are we therefore idolaters M. Calf? Did not Christ say, Pater mayor me
est? My father is greter than I am? Does not the Catholic church sing in the
creed made by Athanasius, Joan. 14.
Minor patre secundum humanitatem? In Symbolo Athanasij.
Christ is lesser than the father according to his humanity? And if Christ be
inferior to his father as he was man, is it not lawful for us to think so
of him? And if it be lawful to think so of him, is it not laufull to paynte
him so, and set him forth in a picture as man and yet commit no idolatry?
Answer directly sir. Unless you quitte your self the better, either you must
recant with great shame, or deny the gospel of Christ, and doctrine of the
church with impudent arrogancy. For they manifestly teach that Christ
according to his humanity is inferior to his father. And that being true, it
is no idolatry nor to think him nor make him in that sense inferior to his
father.

Thus for that objection, wherein if I have been somewhat long, pardon me
(gentle reader). It is all to make the matter plain to thy capacity. If I had
to do with M. Calf. alone in the schools, I would have denied his argument,
and required his ministershippe to have made these conseque^ts good. Christ is
God, and man, ergo there can be no image made of him as man. There can be no
image of the godhead, ergo there can be true image of Christ, as man, ergo they
that honor it, are mere idolatours, making Christ thereby inferior to his
father, and cleaving only to his humanity. And when he had justified them by
scripture, council, or ancient father, or any good reason, I would have given
him the victory, and so will I yet, unless I convince and impugn his reason
with better. In the mean time we will beleaue the ordinances of the
Catholic church, and boldly affirm that as man consisting of body and soul,
An image of man may be painted although the soul ca^ not be expressed. Fol.
16. a
may be payncted, albeit the soul which is the chifest part can by no art be
expressed: Even so our Savior Christ may be painted, engraued, and represented
by an image in the form and shape of man, albeit the divinity which is the
chiefest part be vncircumscriptible, indivisible, incomprehe^sible and unable
by any means to be expressed. But the reason is nothing like, quoth M. Calf.
For the soul may be severed from the body as daily by death we see by
experience. Nor is it impiety to think upon, or behold the shape of a man
without a soul, but the divinity of Christ can not be separated from his
humanitye. Nether is it lawful to imagine an humanitye without a divinity
lest we fall into the heresy of Nestorius. To reprove that he varieth far
from all good reason, ask him first (good readers) whether our savior Christ
died not for us, as man, and whether he gave not up the ghost, and lay in the
gave as man? The soul of Christ severed from his body at his death.
and if he confess it, (as he must) if he be a Christen man, then ask him
whether the soul of Christ was not severed at that time from the body, and if
he acknowledge it, then ask him whether it be impiety for us to think that
the soul of Christ was severed from his body? If he account it none, then
must he seek for a new reason to prove, that albeit man consisting of body
and soul may painted, yet Christ consisting of his humane and divine nature,
can not be painted as man, for this will not serve.

Again whereas we talk of paynting, ask him why he changes the state of
question, M Calf flees from the question.
and runs to thincki^ge, and where we speak of engrauing, why does he run
to ymagining, and from the hand why does he flee to the heart? ower
controversy is not whether the mind may think, or the heart imagine the
humanitye of Christ, without the diuinitye, but whether the hand may paynte
him, as man, not withstanding it is not able to paynt his divinity. And to
this he says nothing, worthy the hearing, nor can if he would. For look how
lawful it is for him to have his wives image or cou^terfeicte of his friend, in
his house: So lawful it is for us, to have the image of our savior Christ in
the shape of man, both in the church and house. Nor do we Christen men,
Christen me^ never separate the divinity of Christ from his humanity.
when we behold that image separate in heart and thought, the divinity, from
the humanity, nor think of Christ as only man, but we beleaue him, we
acknowledge him, we confess him to be God and man, equal with his father in
substance, and everlasting in divine Majesty with him. This with heart we
beleaue, and this with mouth we confess, and worship him in spirit, and
truth, whom we know to be represented by that image. Nor was there ever
Christen man, allowed of the church, that thought contrary. Wherefore M. Calf.
may seek other, whom he may vpbraide with the heresy Nestorius, for paynting
the image of Christ as man. For that sclaunder can not light upon the
Catholics.

His other twoe reasons that follow are witless. Fol. 16 a M. Calves reasons.
For who would say as he does, Christ carried his flesh up unto heaven with
him, no more to be known according to flesh, ergo we fleashly creatures do
fall from his will, when we make a counterfeict of his mortal flesh, whereas
his is glorified? Again unknown it is what was the form and countenance of
Christ. Therefore as soon as an image of Christ is pai^ted by and by a lie is
made? I assure you no simple logisoner, The properties of the original not to
be sought in an image. The properties of the example not to besought in the
image
much less a solemn reader of Poules owght to use such baggage for very
shame. It is but paultry. For it is not necessary (as I said before out of
Epiphanius) that the image be like the original, and first sampler in
substance: nor any man that wise is, will seek the properties of the
original, in the image. For true reason seekethe nothing in an image, but the
community of the name, and disposition of lyneamentes expressed by the parts
of the body. If it should have all the properties and qualities of the
original, then should it be no image, but the thing it self. As if the
picture which the payncter draws, should have fleash, blood musculls,
synowes, life and other properties, and qualities that rest in the original,
we would no longer account it an image but a man. VVherefor we tell M. Calf.
that in this case he is lurdely deceived, and that unless he prove by
scriptures, councels and fathers, that all the properties of Christ and his
blessed fleashe, must be expressed in his image, he shall be a liar for saying,
It is a lying image, and not the image of Christ.

Now touching his authorities brought out of Epiphanius, Irenaeus, and S.
Augustine, ye shall understand that he belyeth Epiphanius and Irenaeus, and
falsifieth S. Augustine. For neither did Epiphanius rent a painted clothe
wherein was the picture of Christ or some saint, Fol. 141. b
as shall apeare hereafter, in the 5. Article: Neither did Irenaeus reprove the
heretics called Gnostici, for that they carried about the image of Christ.
Irenaeus writes thus of those accursed heretics. Irenaeus lib. 1. c. 14. The
Gnostics.
They call themselves Gnostickes, they have also certain payncted images, and
certain made of other matter, sayi^g that it was the shape and proportion of
Christ made of Pilat, at what time Jesus was co^uersant here with me^, and
those images they crowned with garla^des, and set the^ forth with the images
of the Heathen Philosophers (that is to say with the image of Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle, and others) and did other solemnities about them as the
Gentills do. Thus much Irenaeus of that matter. And where is there in all
this, any one word which reproves the Gnostics, for that they carried about
the image of Christ? Irenaeus does but only declare the fact, and adds no
words of reproufe, nor can it be gathered of his words or any circumstances
that he reproved them for that. The cause why he reproved them, What Irenaeus
reproved in those heretics.
was because they placed the image of Christ with the image of Pithagoras,
Plato, Aristotle and other heathen Philosophers, and used such solemnities and
obseruatio^s about them as the Gentills did. And this was the thing that
Irenaeus reproved, and not the having and carrying about the image of Christ.

S. August. falsified.
Where he says, that S. Augustine allows M. Varro, affirming that relligion
is most pure without images, and cites for his credit in the margent, De
ciuitate Dei lib. 4. cap. 3, Ye shall understand that in all that chapter S.
Augustine does no so much as mention M. Varro. That which he means is in the
31. chapter of the said book. There he talks of M. Varro, and commends
him for a wise man, but these very words, that religion is most pure without
images, Words attributed to S. Augustine not sou^de in him.
are not to be found in the whole chapter: he says: The Romans continued
more then an hundred and seventy years, s^ne simulachro, without an idol,
without a false and feigned images and if that had continued, he says: Castius
dij obserua^^^. The Gods had be^ better honored. Again he thought, castius
obseruari sine simulachris religione^, that religion would have been more
reverently and better observed without idols, or feigned images. That is to
say, he thought that if they had had no idols, nor false images of Gods, they
would have thought better of God, and not have beleaued their idols, their
stocks, and stones to have been Gods. But what is this to that which M. Calf.
makes S. Augustine father upon M. Varro, that religion is most pure without
images? Can the having of images make religion worse, and the not having of
them make it better? That were worthy the learning of so fine a fansier. Wise
me^ think that religion, which (as S. Augustine says) is cultus diuinitati,
Religion. Lib. 10. ca. 1. de ciuit. Dei.
vel deitati debitus, a worship dew unto the divinity, or godhead, contynueth
always one, and as the logisioners say, non suscipit magis and minus, is no
more a worship this day, then it was yesterday, no more purer this day, then it
was yesterday. And whether we have images, or no images, religion shall be most
pure always.

All that M. Varro said, and S. Augustine reported in the forsaide place is,
The effect of M varro his saying.
that if the Romans had had no idols nor feigned images, men would have
thought better of God, and have served him better, men would have kept religion
better. Men that knew not God, nor could lift up their eyes to heaven, and
conceive that there was a God, would have quickly learned that there had been a
God, if they had had no earthly idols, which they might have honored, and
worshipped as God. But what is this to us, that know God, worship God, and are
delivered from such ignorance, superstition, and idolatry by our savior
Christ through the great mercy of God? how dare you crake M. Calfhil that
our religion is corrupted with them which we use not? The Christians when the
Jews would not give them the body of S. Polycarpe, thinking they would forsake
Christ and worship him, said: Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15.
The miserable wretches know not, that we can not forsake Christ that suffered
death for the salvation of the world, nor worship any other, because we know
the true God that must be worshipped. So say we to these protestants that
think we commit idolatry, forsake Christ, and corrupt his religion with
images. And in deed they show them selves very wretches, that have so vile
imaginations of any Christen man.

There is none unless he be mad, but ca^ tell a difference between a dead
and senseless thing, and that which has both life and soul. Every child
yea every beast knows, that it is not God, whom they see, as M. Calf.
alleges out of S. Augustine: In Psalm. 36 and 113.
which words although in part they be true, yet are they not all S.
Augustines words, nor these that follow, neither in such sort as they be
alleged. Mark and you shall se. M. Calf. puts them down thus. Every
child, yea every beast knows that it is not God that they see. Fol. 15. a
Wherefore then does the holy Ghost so often warn us of that which all men
know? he answers thus. For when the images, are placed in temples in
honorable sublimitie, and begin once to be worshipped, forth with breadeth
the most vile affection of error. S. Augustine talking there of the Gentills
idols, and declaring, that the God which they worshipped, was blind, deaf,
dumb, immovable, insensible, dead, and worse than the dead, says: O my
dearly beloved brethren, what is more manifest than this? what is more evident?
what child being asked, is not able to answer, that it is certain that the
images of the Gentills have mouths, and will not speak, eyes and will not
see, and the rest which the word of God has adjoined? Why then does the holy
Ghost so earnestly provide to insinuate and inculcate those things, as it were
to ignorants? as though they were not most open and well known to men, but
because he signifies by the shape and proportion of the members, which we have
been accustomed naturally to see in other, and see in our selves. Albeit as
they affirm in some sign made cunningly, and set up in an hye place, when it
begins to be adored and honored of the multitude, it breadeth the most
filthiest affection of error, that because he finds not in the feigned image,
a lively moving, he believes that there is some divine power in it, yet for all
that being deceived with the shape, and moved with the authority of wise
masters, and obedient people, he thincketh the image, that is like a live
body, is not without some lively inhabitour: upon this, such like affection of
men inuiteth wicked devils to possess the Gentills idols, by whose manifest
deceites resting there, diverse manifest errors are sowed and multiplied.

Therefore in other places also the holy scripture does watch diligently
against these idols, nor let any man say, The scripture against idols.
when these forged images are irrided, I woorship not this visible thing that
we see, but the power that lies secret within. But those powers the scriptures
condemn: Quoniam dij gentium, daemonia, because the Gods of the Gentills are
devils. And a little after he says: They seem unto them selves to be of a
more purer religion, which say, I worship not the image, nor the devil, but by
the bodily shape, I see the sign of that thing which I must worship. What the
Ge^tils understood by their idols.
So in good soothe they take and understand their images, that by one they
say, the earth is signified, whereupon they are wont to call the temple of the
earth, by an other they signify the sea, as by the image of Neptune, by
another the fire, as by the image of Vulcane, by another the day star, as by
the image of Venus, by another the sun, by another the moon, to whose images
they give names, as they did to the image of the earth. By another they
signify this star, and that star, this creature, and that creature, for we
are not able to express all. Words not in S. Augustine.
Thus far S. Augustine touching that which master Calf. alleges. And in
all this, where are those words. For when images are placed in temples, which
he fathereth upon S. Augustine? They are not there, nor any one word against
the images of the Christians.

All his discourse in that place is against the false images of Neptune,
Vulcane, Juno, Venus, and the creatures which they did worship as gods, as the
sun, the moon, the stars, the earth the sea, and such like. Which being
so, what honesty is there in this minister to falsify S. Augustine, and turn
that to the Christians, which he spoke of the Gentiles, and to allege that
against their images which was spoken against idols? S. Augustine him self,
best interpreter of his own words, gives us to understand, in that place
rehearsed, that the present Psalm which he handled, and other places of
scripture spoke against those feigned and forged counterfeites of the Gentills,
and idols, which they worshipped. Yet notwithstanding he is so impudent, that
he says: Fol. 15. a An impudent lie.
Thus all the doctors have thought the commandment to extend to us, and
that ower images are forbidden by it. And of all the doctors, in this place,
he has recited, but three, and those three make nothing for him, as in part you
see, and shall see further hereafter. But to oppose him a little better, The
doctors allow images.
tell us sir, were not Paulinus, Gregorius, Damascenus, Euthymius, Athanasius,
Ambrosius, Isidorus, Hieronymus, Gregorius Nissenus, and S. Basile, doctors of
the church? And have you not read that Paulinus painted images in his church,
that S. Gregory rebuked him that broke them, that Damascene made a book of
them, that Athanasius accounted them amongst things appartayning to the
church, and the adourning and setting forth of our faith, that Euthymius told
the Emperor, that our savior Christ ever since his incarnation have been
woorshipped in images? Have you not read, that S. Ambrose thought it lawful
to worship an image, that Hierome had the cross in Bethlem, and licked it, and
kissed it? Have you not read that Saint Gregory liked the image of Abraham
sleying his son Isaac? that S. Basil counted it Apostolicum, a commandment
or tradition of the Apostles to set up images in the churches?

If you have, then can you not say, all the doctors have thought the
commandment to extend to us, and that our images are forbidden by it. For all
these doctors, and the whole Catholic church besides have always allowed
images, and never thought this commandment to inhibite our images. If you
have not read so far in the said fathers, but have trusted youer english
doctors, youer Magdeburgenses, youer M. Calvin, and such Apostatats, begin
now to take them in hand. And if it be too combrouse or longue to ouerrunne
them all, then read the discourse of the seventh general Council kept at
Nice: or if that be lothesome and tediouse, read the fourth and fifth dialogue
of M. Alane Cope lately set forth, and this reply of mine. There and here
shall you see that it was never inhibited Christian me^ by any commau^deme^t of
God, in the whole scriptures, to make images and worship them, in such sotte as
I declared before. (...). Fol. 15. a


Nor think M. Calfhill, that you have any advantage by the Jews, to whom the
law was first given, and who of congruence should have the true sense and
meaning of it, because they had no images publicly in their temples. M.
Calves running to the Jews and Turks helps him not.
It furdereth yower cause nothing. They had the law, the prophetts, and Christ
him self among the^: Yet did not al their skill in the law, and prophetts,
and miracles of Christ, persuade the^ that he was the Messiah that was the
expectation of the gentills, and redemer of the world. They did not thinck
that he was king of the Jews, and savior of Israel. They did not beleaue
that a virgin should bring forth a son with out breach of her virginity.
They did not understand the mysteries of our faith, their minds were so
addicted to the bare and literal sense of the law. What co^sequution is this
M. Calf.

The jews and Turks have no images i^ their temple, ergo Christen men should
have none their churches


Likewise the Turks until this day do not beleaue that the Messiah is come.
they beleaue not that Christ has died for the redemption of many: They have no
faith in his passion, no trust in his resurrection, nor hope of his mercy. They
have no sacrament, no baptism, no supper of our lord, nor gospel, nor
Christ. And because they have none, shall we have none? what a sleight of
Satan is this? To bring in more absurdititie, see how madlie this minister
reasons. The Jews and turks have no images in their temples, ergo Christen
men should have none in their churches? If he might win so much of him, as
to think, that a sufficient and good argument, then would he have other in
store, as for example. The Jews and Turks do not beleaue that the Messiah is
come, ergo the Christians should not. The Jews and Turks have no baptism,
ergo the Christians should have none. The Jews and Turks have no Sacraments
ergo the Christians should have none. The Jews keep not holy the sundaye,
ergo the Christians should not. The Jews and Turks have no Gospel nor
Christ, ergo the Christians should have nor Gospel nor Christ. By like
reason as M. Calf. concludes negatiuely, that we must have no images in our
churches, because the Turks and Jews had none in their temples, he will
negatyuely conclude all the other, and upon the granting of of the first infer
the rest, and so bring his disciples a little and little to Atheism.

VVherfor I much marvel that M. Calf. would use that reason of the Jews, and
allege that of the Turks. It conuinceth him of inexcusable follye, and
declares that he, and his fellow protestants, in this point resemble the
Jews and Turks, as nigh as can be. For as the Jews and Turks detested and
abhorred images, Heretics resemble the Jews and Turks.
so do they. As the Jews and turks counted images to be idols, so do they.
As the Jews and Turks called the christians idolaters, for having and
worshipping of images, so do they. As the Jews and Turks think it laufull
to put away their wives in case of fornication, and marry another. So would M.
Calf. and the protesta^tes have it laufull for them. The Jews and Turks marry
according to Moses law in the degrees of affinity. Melanch. in locis com 52.
So M. Calf. and his fellows think it good that Christians should marry, for
he finds fault with the order of the church prohibiting marriage within the
degrees of affinity. The Jews and Turks have their Canon of scripture,
Melanch. Ibidem.
diverse from the Christians, and reiecte diverse parts of the old testament,
so have M. Calf. and his fellows one diverse from the catholic church, and
reiecte the Machabees, Ecclesiast. and other parts. The Jews and Turks do
no penance, nor use any confession of their sins, no more does M. Calf. nor
his. The Jews and Turks detest the cross as a sign of maledictio^. M. Calf.
abhors it as a magical inchaunteme^t, as a sorcerous mace, and as a sign
of conquest against the Christians. And unless God of his goodness, stay the
rage of heresy, they will agree in the other points. As David George began,
Trinitaries.
and the Trinitaries, Anabaptists, and such as circumcide them selves
practisse apace in Polonia. Wherefore seeing the commandment of God in Exodus,
and other places of scriptures make nothing against images amongst Christen
men, seeing the doctors teach that the precept of God does not inhibite our
images, but declare the contrary, seeing the reason that M. Calf. boroweth of
the Jews and Turks, is but Jewish and Turkish, and as meat to infringe all
the mysteries of our faith and redemption, as to convince that there should be
no images in churches, it is evident that all his babbling proves nothing
against the use of images.

His other position that images do not teach, is a thing more boldly
avouched, than wisely proved. To every good Christian, Li. 9 epist. 9, ad Sere.
Actio. 4 Nicae. 2. Oration. in lauds Theodo. martyr. Ser. de 40. mart.
the authority of the church shall be a sufficient warrant. And seeing S. Gregory
calls them: Lay men's books which serve the ignorant in stead of writings,
And Germanus takes them to be a representation of the stoutnesse of saints,
and an instruction to teach us to glorify God. And Gregorius Nissenus says:
Solet etiam pictura tacens in pariete loqui, maximeque prodesse. A still
picture also in the wall is wounte to speak, and profitte very much: and S.
Basile terms them a still poetry, and affirms, the profitte of pictures
and writing to be one, and says: That drawing of things lively in a table
has stirred many to valiant courage, I trust with all indifferent men. S.
Gregory, Germanus, Gregorius Nissenus, and S. Basil shall more prevail than
the fancy of this protestant, who as he ran to the Jews and Turks even
now to prove that we should have no images in churches: So for proof of this,
Fol. 11. b Amadys.
he flees to one Amadys a gold smithe of London, lying in his bed, at the
point of death, when co^monlye men's senses and wits fail them, to prove
that images can not teach. And because he tormented with the agonies and
panges of death, having the cross presented unto him to put him in
remembrance of his maker, asked what is the price of an ounce, This wise
marchaunte shuts up the matter, as though it could not put other in
remembrance of Christ, and says.

Fol. 12. a
Such is the fruicte that the unlearned receive by images, yea though they be
of the best sort. But that you may better understand the weakness of his
reason, consider his argument: thus in effect, he says, or must say if he
will prove that images do not teach. M. Calves argument that images do not
teach.
Amadys lying at the point of death, when men's wits and senses commonly fail
them, was not put in remembrance of Christ by the cross presented unto him by
his person, ergo men that are whole, and in no such extremity, can not be put
in remembrance by it. And if this be not, in the judgment of some whote
protestant, a doltishe kind of reasoning, let him consider it by the like.
Some that are almost dead in the lewd lusts of sin, take no commodity by
the word of God preached by their person: Ergo no man does. The scholar who
has neither wit nor capacity, takes no profitte by his masters lessons.
Ergo none of the rest can. The man that is desperately sick of a frenzy can
have no help by physic, Ergo no other may. And if these be vain, and fond,
so think of his. For as diverse take commodity by the word of God when it
is preached, albeit every sinful man whose heart is obdurated, does not, and
diverse scholars receive, profitte of their masters lessons, albeit the
dullard can not, and many have help by physic allthough the prontike fool
has not: So albeit Amadys the gold smithe lying at the point of death was not
put in remembrance of Christ, by the cross, yet diverse other are, and
stirred to devotion, and contemplation of the merittes of his passion. For if
Gregorius Nissenus a famous doctor, Lib 22. ca. 73 contra Faust. Manich.
Actio. 4 Nicae 2.
and learned bisshope seeing the image of Abraham and his son Isaac, tot locis
pictu^, payncted in so many places, as S. Augustine says, wept when he saw
it, and never passed by it, without tears, how much more will the whole
discourse of our savior Christ's life here incarnate upon earth being seen of
us, move all that behold it, to tears, and other further commodity? Certes,
now where charity is cold, and faith not fervent, although me^ seeing the
cross and image of Christ crucified, do not weep, as Gregorius Nissenus did,
when he saw the image of Abraham, offering his son, yet no doubt, every well
disposed man has some good motion and meditation of the mercy of our savior
Christ, by the sight of it.

As for that which he obiecteth, against Stephen Gardener, Fol. 11. b Stephen
Gardener.
that he was fowly abused by an image, and found S. George on horseback in the
kings broad seal, where the king him self was set on both sides, it is but
a mere cauil. The wisdom, learning, gravity, and experience of that reverend
father and honorable counselor was not to seek, to know S. George on horse
back in battle, from king Henry in peace. But of that hereafter, when I
talk of his sclaunderous lies. In the mean time consider good readers upon
what grounds this man builds his new doctrine, and as you find them weak,
so imagine of all that is builded. Fol. 19. b
To draw toward an end of this preface, where he says: that if the
Louanistes had but a ma^gled piece of such a president for the Pope, as they
have for every prince, found in the ancient records of London, remaining in
the Guild hall, lord how would they triumph? they would desiphire, Fol. 20. a
and by Rhethorique resolve every letter of it, I beseeke you that have
experience of his fine wit, examine the words, which he cites out of an
epistle of ^le^therius the Pope sent to ^ucius king of England. The words
that he builds upon, are these. Fol. 19. b A sentence forte out of the Guild
hall in London.
You have both testaments in youer realm. Take out of them by the grace of God
and advise of youer subjects, a law, and by that law through Gods
sufferance, rule youer realm, but be you Gods vicar in that kingdom. Here
because Eleutherius Pope of Rome willed Lucius king of England (that sent unto
him for laws to govern his people) to take laws out of the old and new
Testament, and appointed him to be the vicar of God in that realm, M. Calf.
thincketh his own desperate cause, to be greatly aduauntaged against the Pope.
But I pray you, ask his wisdom, who is of greater authority, The man that
apoynteth the law, or he that receaueth the law? The commissioner, or he that
gives the commission? The Lieutenant, or the prince that apoynteth the
Lieutenante? The Viceroye, or the king that makes the viceroy? If he
acknowledge him that apoynteth the law to be of greater authority, than the
man that receaueth the law, and the prince that gives a commission, to be of
higher dignity, M. Calf. conde^ne^d by his own sentence brought out of Guild
hall in London.
then the commissioner that receaueth the commission, then must he needs
condemn him self. For by the ancient records, remaining in Guild hall in
London, it is evident that Eleutherius pope of Rome, appointed laws for Lucius
king of England, and gave him authority, and commission to be Vicarium Dei,
Gods vicar, in that land. And look how hier in dignity he is, that apoynteth
the law, than he is that receaueth the law, he that gives the commission,
than he that receaueth the commission, so higher was Eleutherius then Lucius,
and the pope the^ the prince. Which being so, Lord how has M. Calf.
deceived him self, with a piece of a sentence, brought out of the ancient
records of London, remaining in the Guild hall? how has he opened his own
ignorance, and resolved a great piece of his folly? Is it not great pity for
so learned a reader to be so grossly deceived in so plai^e a matter? Lord
what ouersighte was this of those that had the ouersighte and view of his
book before it came to printe with out privilege? Must all syphre, and none
disiphre, nor by rhetorique resolve every lettre o^ ^his, and by logike prove,
that it would make against him? Lord what a escape was that?

Any of those whom it pleases his worship to call the famous writers of
Louayne, Fol. 19. b
could have better advised his clarkship in this cause, if he had but once
mentioned the matter unto them: yea the meanest of them all, (that as he says
be great Clearkes, Fol. 19. b
bachilers of diuinitye, and students of the same, as soon as they taste the
good lyquor of Louayne, could have signified that the sentence borrowed out of
the Guild hal of London would make against him. And (be it spoken with out
pride,) the meanest of them all could teach him, and al his moore true
diuinitye in one day, than he or his have taught the people in sundry
points, these seven years. And albeit amongst them, we be no more known
than contemned, yet shall our doings not lack estimation with the wise, nor
intent leese his reward with the highest, when he and his shall be unknown, and
contemned with the lowest, if they amend not by time.

We know it to be an old practice with heretics, None learned in the
judgment of heretics but such as savor the^.
to contemn all that favor not their heresy, and think all unlearned that
fancy not their faction. But he that was but yesterday a Cobbler, shall be within
few months, a profounde minister, and great Rabbi, nor unknown nor
contemned, if Apollo cast his courtayne about him and the spirit inspire him
to favor the procedinges. Yea he shall be such a docterlike man, that if the
best of all the papists were matched wih him, Fol. 19. a The best of the
papists not to be matched with the simplest protestant. Lib. 1. cap. 14. Trip.
being but the simplest of their side, they should have great wrong.

For which excessive pride well may we with Alexander bishop of Alexandria,
having to do with arrogant heretics cry, O wicked arroga^cie, O unmeasurable
madness, O rage of vain logrie, O wisdom of Satan vehemently inuading their
wicked souls. But redress it we can not. Nor let them swell like hills in
pride, nor be witless like Caulfes, nor be full of lies like lorrels, nor be
^^atting like paratts, nor prating like pies, nor clipping like cut purses,
nor scolding like queanes. It is a natural desease passing with the
inheritance. Wherefore if we will do them good, the only remedy must be to pray
unto almighty God to give the^ the spirit of humility and grace to know
the^ selves. So may it come to pass, that they shall mislike singularity, and
mistrust they own wisdom, and so by conference with the other, attain to the
knowledge of the truth, which God of his goodness grant.

If any wilful protestant, or hot heretic myslyke my writing, for that I
dippe my pen sometimes ing all, and use certain terms, inflamed (as it may
seem) with choler, In the epistle.
I desire them to consider charitably whose words these are. VVillfull
wanderer, young scholar, pelting peddler, Synon, Fol. 18. b
Ape, servant to the devil, Ib^. ^^ b
stui^mblg lade, 40. b
hasty hounde, Fol. 32. b
Tapster, Tynker, ostler, lewd poticarie, Cook ruffian, Fol 90 a
puine, sir boy, Fol. 91 b
solemn sir, 113. a
bold, blind, bayard, 36. a
Spyder, John 119 b
Taberer, a 48. b
fool that walks in a nett, 10 9. a
dolt, dawkin, and 116. a
clowter of a patche of truth upon a whole cloak of lies, with such like,
which are applied to me in this answer to my treatise. Again I desire them to
consider charitably whose words these are, willfullnes, ignorance, vain
devises, In the epistle.
dotages, drunken frenzy, fond, senseless, unsound proufes, stale iestes,
idle tales, Fol. 32. b
unsavory soppes, professed 127. a
impudencye, shameless deserving, 135. b
beastlynesse and vanity, 160. b
ignorant allegations, impudent untruths, applied to my writings. Further if
it be not tediouse for them, I desire them to consider charitably whose words
these are, 78. a. b
Iezabell, Athalia, insole^t, mad, savage, wild beast, applied to Irene, in
the epistle.
Ruffian to Staphilus, disguised gest, sudden convert, Apostata, to M.D.
Harding, dowghtye to M. Dorman, Rascal, to M. Rastell, Dogs eloquence,
pieuish fancies, college of conspiracy, wilful, wittlesse, perverse
confederates, out Iaw^s, lewd Fol. 52. b
liars, image Fol. 13 b
mungers, 94. a
Romish heretics, 19 b
adversaries of truth, 121. a
enemies of God, reverend 68. b
asses, Nice 69. a
masters, popish 19. a
chapli^s, blind 94. a
beasts, senseless hipocrites, sausy 36 a
mouths, Apishe 95. b
imitatours, 105. b
Greasy marchantes, bluddy Ibide^. a
coniurers, 18. a
Antichristia^s, and other such applied to the Catholics. And if they find
them to be their own propre ministers words, issued from the plenifull
spo^ge, and scolding spring of M. Calves. sprite, let him grant us the same
liberty, which they accounte evangelical in their propre holy preacher, and
give us, leave to use his own figure of Regestio^, that is to return back
upon him, either his own terms, or the like, and in imitation of his own
Rhetorique, use his own figures and phrases of speech, or some equivalent
with the^ worthily applied to his person, which he unworthily would lay upon
me. It is reason that they allow that in another, which they commend in them
selves.

If any cold Catholic thinck this to hot, let him remember with what heat
the ancient fathers have written against old heretics. And if he find these
phrases that I use, or the like in their writings, let him bear with me,
that in a more perilouse time, have to do with more blasphemouse heretics. As
the physician by sharp medicines thincketh to cure long festred soores: So
do we trust by this kind of writing to purge the venemouse infection, which
this canker of heresy has bredde, and lodged in men's minds. S. Augustine
declaring, how one may reprove an other of his fault, says, dilige and dic
quod voles. Nullo modo maledictum erit quod specie maledicti sonuerit, In
exposi. cap 6 ad Galath.
si memineris senserisque te in gladio verbi Dei liberatorem hominis esse
velle, ab obsidione vitiorum. I oue and say what thou will. It shall be, by
no means a taunte that sounds after the manner of a taunte, if thou will be
a delyuerer of a man from the seidge of vice, in the sword of Gods word. And
certes seeing I love M. Calfhills person, and hate his heresy, as every
Christen man should, I have used that liberty which he hi^ self took, hopinge
that as I minister hi^ occasion to see his error, so he will gather
understanding, and mislike it, wisdom and deteste it, grace, and desire the
mercy of God to pardonne it. Qui attendit contemptores vt corrigat, Augustine.
in Psalm. 50
nes^^ntes vt doceat, confitentes vt ignoscat, who marketh the contemptuouse
that he may punish them, the ignorant, that he may teach them the bu^ble that
confess their faults that he may pardonne them. But if God has so given him
over to his self will, that for shame of the world he will not change his
perverse turkishe faith, and with the Catholic church follow the right
faith, but for eger zeal of contention will follow his blind guides, he may
be well assured that fire shall come upon fire, Idem in Psalm. 54.
super ardorem dissensionis ardor consumptionis, the flame of consumption upon
the heat of dissension, prepared for all rebellious heretics with Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, by the just and merciful judge, whose name be blessed for
ever.

AMEN.
FAVLTES ESCAPED IN PRINTING.
The faults. Fol. Page Lin. Corrections. Not Grindal ** A 35. not M. Grindall.
Apostical 1 B 24. Apostolical The church the is 2 A 11. The church is Christ
is te 2 a 12. Christ the Expound the scripture 9 a 10. expound not the
scripture your selves 9 b 16. our selves your selves 9 b 22. our selves brood
10 b 20. bred intended 14 a 2. indented to gouerner 16 b 23. to govern may 19
a 32. many that make 20 a 32. that mark peicaunce 20 b 28 penance to
commended 23 b 23 to commend us England 27 a 27 us in England O cumming 27 b 31
O cunning Our 29 b 5 Or Resist 37 a 32 Resistite resistite it 37 a 33
Resistite No gross 41 b 6 No cross to leave 51 a 26 to learn The Greek PS 59
a 18 The Greek Y him the faith 64 b 32 him in the faith maked 73 a 13 marked
percepto 75 a 25 praecepto his 79 b 14 this inferiora 91 a in the margent
interiora. that 208 b 25 to that not be denied 109 a 20 not to be denied to
holy Ghost 109 a 34 to the holy Ghost hitte mark 111 a 8 hitte the mark
appartayneth man 112 a 20 appartayneth to man to referred 113 b 36 to be
referred anoynti^g which chrisme 129 a 14 anointing with chrisme the remitte
131 a 12 ye remitte but fornication 133 a 28 but for fornication your 136 b 13
you An equality 139 a 24 And equality that is 141 a 5 that it is that is 141
a 6 that it is hears 142 b 30 hearers the would 144 b 27 he would Every
wise sees 144 b 33 Every wise man sees No live 145 a 2 not live prophame
146 a 24 profane Church Christ 148 b 16 Church of Christ the 148 b 26 these
our 152 a 12 your nor 154 b 32 our And 170 b 16 Or be 173 a 26 by to sign 190
a 19 the sign Dei iuvauime 200 b 18 Dei iuuamine their air 208 b 7 the air
the like may said 211 b 31 the like may be said.

Whatsoever is escaped besides, I trust the gentle reader will by his own
judgment amend it, and consider where, and by whom this was printed.

Jesus A REPLY TO M. CALFHILS BLASPHEMOVS ANSWER MADE AGAINST THE TREATISE OF
THE CROSS. THE FIRST ARTICLE.
Marvel not (good readers (that M. Calfhil laboreth buselye in the beginning of
this article to plant this position, that the ancient fathers decrees,
writings, and traditions are not to be credited. He does naught else but that
which his progenitors the cursed, and canckered heretics, have done in all
ages. Basil. cap. 10. de spi. sancto.
The Eunomians rejected the testimonies of the father, as things of naught:
and with great clamours exacted proufes out of scripture. The Arrians would not
admit the fathers, nor the word (...), that expressed the
consubstantialitie of Christ with god his father, Lib. 2. ca. 7 and lib. 4. c.
5. historiae Tripart. Lib. 1. co^t. Maximu^. Actioner. Concilj Chalced.
Because it was not found in scripture. Maximus said to saint Augustine, The
words that are not in scripture, are in no case received of us. The
Eutychians cried, In qua scriptura iace^t duae naturae? In what scripture lie
the twoe natures. And so likewise other heretics, as M. Calfhil does now.
But as saint Basile urged the decrees and traditions of the Apostels, and the
fathers against Eunomius: So did the fathers of Nice against the Arrians, Saint
Augustine against Maximus, and the whole council of Chalcedon against
Eutyches: not that the Chatholiques lacked scripture, but because the heretics
did pervert the true sense of scripture to the maintenance of their erroneous
fancies, and blasphemous heresies: and forced the Catholics to stick to that
meaning and sense of scripture, which the learned works of the fathers,
traditions of the Apostels, and authority of the church, had taught them. They
knew that if every heretic might have the interpretation which him self
devised upon the words of scripture, admitted as good, there should be as many
heresies as there were singular fantastical heads, able to devise such fond
interpretations. Libro de praescrip.
And therefore they thought with Tertullian, (who was well acquainted with the
shifts and sleights of heretics) that we should not appeal to scripture nor
make our conflicte and bickering in them, in which either there is no victory
or doubtful, or not very certain. And this reason is given for it. This
heresy admits not certain scriptures: or if it does admit them, yet with
additions, and detractions it turns them up and down, to the maintenance of
their own purpose. And if this heresy fortune to admit scriptures, she
admits them not full and whole as they are: or if she admit them full and
whole, yet by devising diverse expositions, she turns them to a quite
contrary sense. Therefore Tertullian would have old traditions and customs
respected, and all doctrine that Christ reveled to his Apostels, not to be
allowed otherwise the^ by the same churches, which the Apostels them selves did
build by preaching unto the^, as well by their lively voices, as by their
epistels afterward. Further he affirms that all doctrine, The doctrine which
agrees not with the Apostolic churches is to be condemned of lying and
falsitie.
which agrees with these Apos^^cal churches Matricibus and originalibus
fidei, The mothers and originals of faith, is to be reputed for truth,
retayning without all doubt, that which the church took of the Apostels, the
Apostles of Christ: and Christ of god. And that al other besides, what soever
it be, is to be condemned of falsitie, such as sauoreth against the truth of
the Churches of the Apostels, and of Christ, and of God. Wherefore since the
malice of heretics is such, that they admit not some part of scripture, as
in our days, Luther would not admit the epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews,
the Apocalypse of S. John, and epistels of S. James and Jude, used additions,
and diverse interpretations to make them serve his purpose, as al heretics ever
did before, and do at this present, the catholics after the example of their
forefathers, think the only scripture to be not sufficient way to decide
controversies in religion, but ever appealed to the expositions of the fathers,
traditions of the Apostels, and authority of the church: who as it delivered
the gospel of S. Matthew, and others for scripture, so has it delivered a
true sense, meaning, and understanding of scripture: which every man must
follow, that will not be an author of heresy, as Eunomius, Arrius, Eutiches,
Vigila^tius, and diverse other were. For the same holy Ghost that spoke in
them that wrote the ^^^^ture, speaks in the church, that utters the true
meaning (...) scripture.

S. Augustine says, Christ is the bridegroom, In Psalm. 30
the Church (...) is his spouse, and why is Christ ^te bridegroom and the
Church his spouse? Nisi quia duo in carne vna? si duo in carne vna, quare non
in voce vna? Loquatur ergo Christus, quia in Christo loquitur Ecclesia, and in
Ecclesia loquitur Christus, and corpus in capite, et caput in corpore. But
because they are twoe in one flesh? if they be twoe in one flesh, why not in
one voice? Let Christ therefore speak because the Church speaks in Christ,
and Christ speaks in the Church, and the body in the head, and the head in
the body. For the head and the body is but one Christ. If then the true
sense, and meni^g of scripture be in the Church, and what soever the Church
speaks, Christ speaks as the head of the church, we must repair to the
church, and not to the scriptures, for the true understanding, and
interpretation of scripture.

In the old testament, when any controversy rose about the law, the people
were not sent to Moises tables, not written letters of the Bible: but to the
priests, and commanded to enquire of them, and they should show, iudicij
veritatem: Deuteronomy. 17.
the truth of judgment: God said not, the ink and paper and letters of the
Bible keep the knoweleadg of my will. But he said: Malac. 2.
Labia sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam: The lips of the priest keep
knowleadg. He said not, they should require and seek, the law out of the
naked elements, But, exore eius, out of the priest his mouth, because he is the
Angel of the lord God of hosts. Our savior Christ sent not his disciples and
hearers always to the scriptures: he sent some to the figg three, some to the
flowers in the field, Matthew. 24. Matthew. 6.
some to the fowls of the air, sometimes he used examples, sometimes
similitudes, sometimes parables, Tit. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
sometimes natural reason. His Apostel S. Paul used both the sentence of
Epimenides an heathen poet, and also custom and tradition, they said not
always, scriptum est: It is written. Christ commanded us in no place of all the
gospel, to go to the scriptures only. wherefore it is manifest that it was not
his blessed will, that we should have scriptures only to be judges in
controversies and matters of religion. If the hereti^^s object against us,
Joan. 5.
that saying of his: Scrutamini scripturas: Search the scriptures, we tell
them, that the same Christ, the same holy Ghoost, and the same God the father,
said: State, and tenete traditiones, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Stand ye stout, and keep traditions. If they press us with that saying of
God the father, Matt. 17.
Ipsum audite, hear him: we will press them with that saying of God the son:
Qui vos audit, Luc. 10. 1. Joan. 4. Matt. 18.
me audit: Qui nouit Deum, audit nos: Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi
tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus. He that hears you, hears me, he that
knows God, hears us: He that hears not the Church, let him be unto the as
an Heathen and Publica^. If they allege that saying of Christ: Joan. 4.
Illae sunt quae testimonium perhibent de me: It be the scriptures which give
witness of me, we will return unto them the saying of God, Exodus 10. Joel. 1.
by his servant Moses, and Prophet Joel, Our fathers shall tell us, our
aunceters shall show us, and our elders shall bear witness unto us, of the
miracles and mighty power of God: And so convince that we must not have
controversies determined by scriptures only, but also by traditions, customs,
and interpretations of the fathers, whom God has placed, some Apostels, some
Prophets, Ephe. 4.
some Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of the holy
ones, into the work of ministry, to the edifyi^g of the body of Christ
until we come al together into the unity of faith, and knowleadge of the son
of God. And seeing traditions and customs generally observed through out al
Christendom, and interpretations of the fathers agreed upon with one uniform
consent, vary not from the plain and evident scripture, taken in the true
sense that the holy Ghost wrote, and the catholic church receaueth, there is
no inconuenie^ce, but that they should prevail, where there is no express
scripture, and the interpretations of the fathers agreing in one uniform
consent be admitted for the better searching out of the sense and meaning of
scripture.

There be many things in the scriptures of God, which may be drawn to that
sense which every man presumes and imagines to him self, says S. Clement.
Libro 1. recog.
wherefore we must seek the understanding of scripture of him who keeps it
acording to the truth delivered of his forefathers. Which Christ has laid
up in the lap of his church, as in a rich treasure house, and taught that we
should not seek it any where out of that church. And if any doubts of this,
what does he else but doubt whether God, (who doubtlese speaks by the mouth of
his church) be true. S. Basile and Gregory Nazia^zene his brother for saking
the study of Rhetorike, Philosophy, and other profane studies, Eusebius. lib.
11. cap. 9. histo.
and applying their pains to the study of the books of holy scriptures,
Eoru^ intelligentia^ non ex propria praesumptione, sed ex maiorum scriptis and
authoritate sequebantur, etc. Folloed or rather sought the understanding of
the^, not of their own presumption, but out of the writings and authority of
their forefathers, and especially those whom they knew to have taken the rule
of understanding the scriptures, of the Apostolical succession, that is the sea Apostolic.

S. Hierome says of him self, Prefat in Paralip. ad Rogat.
that in the scripture he never trusted his own opinion, but was wounte to
ask for the understanding of those things which he thought him self to
know, how much more then did he in those things of which he doubted? writing
to Paulinus, Epist. ad Paulinu^.
he told him, that in scripturis sacris sine praeuio and monstrante non possit
ingredi. In the holy scriptures he could not go without a guide, and one to
show him the way. Epist 59. quaest. 5.
S. Augustine takes the general custom of the church to be a good way to
expound the scripture, and therefore him self expounding those words of S.
Paul, I desire obsecrations, prayers, supplicatio^s, and thanks giving to be
had for all me^, expounds the^ by the manner and custom of the church. If
there had been any contention or resoning about some mean and trifling
question, Irenaeus thought, Lib 3 co^t. haere. ca. 4.
that we ought to have recourse to the most ancient churches in which the
Apostels lived and learn of them the plain and evident truth of the matter in
controversy, and follow the tradition, Sermon. de pass. and cru ce dom.
which they delivered to those to whom they committed their churches.
Athanasius repeting a piece of scripture, says, For the expounding of this,
it shall be good to have recourse to the holy fathers, and of them to take the
meaning of these words. But to follow this council, and do as S. Clement,
S. Basile, S. Gregory, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Ireneus and Athanasius
thought most best to do, M. Calfhil supposes it, to be, To build upon an evil
ground, Fol. 21. A.
a loss of cost, and trauail, and commending and setting to sale of a ruinous
or infectious thing, in steed of a strong defense, and wholesome place to rest
upon, and would have nothing but scripture, but how does he prove it? Forsohe:
S. Paul says: Gal. 1.
Si angelus e coelo, If an angel from heaven teach otherwise than the Apostels
have preched unto us, let him be accursed. Look better to yowr text sir James,
where find you there those words, Than the Apostles preched to us. will you
be always like yower self, and use your own additions, detractions, and
gloses upon the word of God? were not the disciples prechers of the gospel?
Did not Christ give them authority and commission to preach his ghospel? Why
then do you not translate Euangelizauimus, the disciples preached, as well as
the Apostles preached? Must not we receive and follow that which the disciples
preached, as well as that which the Apostles preached? Had not the disciples
authority from the same holy Ghost that the Apostles had? How say you M.
Calf? If they had, they are to be credited on like. Paul said not: If an
angel from heaven teach otherwise than the Apostles have preached to us, let
him be accursed: But he said: If an angel from heaven preach otherwise than
we have preached, let him be accursed: signifiing that if any preached other
doctrine besides, or contrary to that which the Apostles and disciples
authorized by Christ had taught, he should be accursed. And therefore he says
further (which you suppress) If any preach unto you other doctrine, besides
that which you have received, let him be accursed. He disanulleth not by this
saying, the traditions of the church, and sayings of the fathers, that vary
not from the ghospel: Tract. 98. in Joan.
as you may see by S. Augustine, who says: Si quis vobis euangelizauerit
praeterquam quod accepistis, anathema sit. Non ait plusquam accepistis, sed
praeterquam accepistis, etc. If any preach unto you otherwise than that which
ye have received, let him be accursed. He says not, if any may preach unto
you more, than that which you have received, but if he preach unto you
otherwise, tha^ that which you have received, let him be accursed. For if he
should say so, he should prejudice him self, Thessa. 3.
who coueted to come to the Thessalonians to supply those things which wanted
to their faith. But he that supplieth that which was less, adds, and does
not take away that which was before. He that goes beyond the rule of faith,
comes not in the way, but goes out of the way. Thus much S. Augustine. And by
this (sir) you may learn how that piece of scripture is to be understood. If
S. Paul should be taken, as you mean, both the ghospel of s. John, and his
reuelatio^s should be condemned. For they were written after this epistle was
sent to the Galathia^s. VVherfor deceive not your self and your readers. S.
Paul wills the Galathians to flee such teachers, as should teach that which
was contrary and repugnant to the doctrine of Christ, as they did, who at that
time preached that circumcision, and the law of Moses was necessary to be
observed. And if you would have dealt faithfully, and applied that place of the
Apostle fittely, without all shift of falsyfying, you should have proved, that
the traditions, and writings of the fathers generally received, and allowed of
the catholic church in one uniform consent, had been repugnant to the
scripture, and contrary to the ghospel, and preaching of the Apostels, and then
have said against them, Si angelus e caelo. If an angel from heaven teach
otherwise than the Apostels have preached to us, let him be accursed. But that
was to heavy for your head, and therefore as though you should not be espied,
you ran it over slightly, eue^ as you do the next of S. John, saying: 1.
Joan. 2. Fol. 21 A
Vos quod audistis ab initio, in vobis permaneat. Let that abide in you which
you heard from the beginning. This plainly conde^neth all your novelty. For if
it be evident (as Tertullia^ says) id verius quod prius, Lib 4 co^t. Marcio.
id prius quod ab initio, ab initio, quod ab Apostolis, pariter vtique
constabit id esse ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerit
sacrosanctu^. That that is truer which was first, and that that was first which
was from the beginning, and that that was from the begynni^g which came from
the Apostles it shall be evident with all, that that was deliured of the
Apostels, which was holy in their churches. And seeing you do not observe that
which is, sacrosanctum apud Apostolorum ecclesias, most holy in the Apostles
churches, and especially in the church of Rome, where the chiefest Apostles S.
Peter, and S. Paul had their churches, and suffered martyrdom, you do not
abide in that which you heard from the beginning: and so neither continewe in
the father, nor in the son. You have forsaken the faith of your forefathers,
and the faith in which you were baptized, and the faith of the visible,
catholic and known church, for these xv. hundred years. Exijstis,
discessistis: ye have gone out, ye have departed away: And ye acknowledge it in
your Apology. And that going out, and discession is a token of Antichrists
coming, as S. Paul says. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Joan. 2.
Yea it is a manifest argument that ye have not God. For as S. John says:
Omnis qui recedit, and non permanet in doctrina Christi, Deum non habet. Every
one that goes away and continues not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God.
You have gone away, and not tarried in the doctrine of Christ (for you have not
tarried in the doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, which is one
body with Christ) wherefore that saying of the Apostle may be verified upon
you. As for the Catholics, they continewe in the faith of their forefathers,
in the faith in which they were baptized: in the faith of the Catholic,
visible, and known church. They acknowledge no discession as you do. They
abide in that which they heard ab initio, from the beginning, that is, in in
that, which is sacrosanctum apud Apostolorum ecclesias, most holy in the
Apostles churches. The high mysteries, and chief points of our religion and
faith are al one with theirs in every respect touching the substance. As for
you, how you alter, vary, change, and differ one from another, and flitte
from the Apostles, and that which you heard from the beginning, the world may
see, and thereupon prove vnuinciblie against you, that your doctrine is wicked,
and naught.

2. Joan. 1.
That saying of S. John, If any man do not bring this doctrine with him, do not
so much as salute him, nor receive him into your house, makes against you. For
if (as S, Augustine says) He denies Christ to be come in flesh, that
breaks the church: Then do ye heretics, Tract. in 1. Epist. Joan.
that break the ordinances, traditions, and customs of the church, and divide
it, and tear it by schism, deny Christ to be come in flesh, and bring not
with you the doctrine that S. John mentions, albeit your tongues clatter
never so much of it.

That saying of Christ: He that loves God, hears his voice, (for the which
you send us in the quotation of your margent to the 14. of S. John, where that
is not to be found, but this: Joan. 14.
If any man love me, he will keep my sayings,) makes nothing for your only
scripture, against traditions and customs, and expositions of the fathers: but
rather much for them. For seeing the voice of the Catholic Church, and
prelates whom the father has ordained some Apostles, some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors and Doctors into the work of ministry, to the edifying of
the body of Christ, until we meet all in the unity of faith, and knowledge of
the son of God, is the voice of God, who said: Qui vos audit, me audit: Luc
10.
He that hears you, hears me, it must needs follow, that whosouer hears
the voice of his catholic church, and prelates of the same, hears the voice
of God speaking unto us many ways besides the scripture. But quoth M. Calf.
Matt. 15. Fol. 21. B.
They in vain do woorship Christ, that teach the doctrine and precepts of
men. And veril^e, if he mean it, as Christ spoke it, they do so. But what?
Do not they that teach the traditions of the Apostles, and general customs
of the catholic church, and interpret the scripture after the mind and
uniform consent of the fathers testified in their learned commentaries,
woorshippe Christ? Read the scriptures, search the word of God, confer the
writings of the fathers, and you shall find that the traditions of the
Apostles are the traditions of the holy Ghost, and the general customs of the
Catholic church, the doctrine of Christ, who is the head of the church, and
that the voice of the fathers agreing in one uniform doctrine, is the voice of
God, speaking by the fathers, whom he ordained Pastors, Doctors, and
Bisshops to rule, govern, and edify his Church.

Furdermore you shall find, that, this saying of Christ, is meant of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who rebuked the disciples, for eating with unwashed
hands, and keeping certain curious, and frivolous traditions of their own,
contemned the commandment of God. Whereupon Christ to rebuke their wicked
arroga^cie, Esa 29.
said, Esai prophesied well of you, hipocrites, as it is written: This people
honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: And
streitwayes adds these words: They woorshippe me without cause, Marc. 7.
teaching the doctrine and precepts of men. And that you may see it more
evidently, read further, where it is said: Ye forsaking the commandments of
God, keep the traditions of men, the wasshing of pottes, and cruses, and many
such other like things ye do. And if seeing this, you ca^ not see M. Calf. that
our savior Christ spooke those words, of the fond and unprofitable
traditions of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and not of the Catholic and
Apostolic traditions of the church, and commandments of the fathers, by
whom the church is governed and directed, your sight is very dymme, and
needs either some clear spectacle, or some fine horn. Tract. 18. in Euang.
Joan.
S. Augustine was wont to say, That heresies and certain perverse opinions did
not rise, but whiles the good scriptures are not well understood, and that which
is not well understood, is rashly and boldly affirmed. And in this you may see
a great piece of your own faulle in to heresy. You understand not the
scriptures, but frame unto your self a sense contrary to that which the fathers
teach and the church allows, and that you auouche, that you affirm, and of
the scriptures not understood make a snare as the devil does for the
faithful. Ambros. lib. 4 comment. in Luc:
And as you deal falsely in alleging the scriptures: so work you guilfully
in alleging the fathers and doctors. S. Augustine (you say) framing a perfect
preacher wills him to co^fer the places of scripture together. Let it be so
what conclude you of it? Forsooth, that he sends him not to the doctors
distinctions, nor to the censure of the church, Fol. 21. B. Fol. 22. A.
nor canons of the Popes, nor traditions of the fathers, but only to quiet and
content him self with the word of God. Is not this a worthy and profunde
reason? You might as well say: Christ commanded the jews to search the
scriptures: ergo he did not send them to his Apostles, and disciples, and
traditions that they taught. Or this: M. Grindal commanded a young minister
to study Gods book: ergo he did not send him to the university to learn
Latin, Greek or Hebrew, nor any of the liberal sciences. Or if you will have a
more familiar example, you might as well have said: The old cook of distaffe
lane sent his wife to the shambles, to bye a calves head and content her self
with that, ergo he did not send her to the Sermon at the Cross, lesson in
Paul's, prophesying in Cornehil, nor gossip in yuy lane. There is as good
reason and sequel in these as in yours. Did you not read S. Augustines
prologue before his first book, De doctr. Christ? And found you not there
that he says: The condition of man should be very abject and base, if God
should seem not to be willing, to give and minister his word by men to men?
Found you not that he said: How should it be true that is said, The temple
of God is holy, which temple ye are, if God should not give answers out of this
human temple, but sound into our ears from heaven and by angels all that
he would have deliured to men? Found you not that he said: Charity which
binds men in the knott of unity together, should have no way, occasion or
entree to utter and communicate the secret of minds, if men should learn
nothing by men? Found you noth that both he reproves their fond fancy, who
thought they might have the understanding of scripture from heaven without any
knowledge in tongues, and precepts and instructions from men? As you think we
may have sufficiently by conference of one place with another, and also
accompteth it a snare of the devil, and a most proud and perilous temptation,
to refuse to go into the church, to read the book to hear a man reading and
preaching, and to look to be taken up into heaven, and there to hear the
mysteries of Gods word, and understanding of it? Act. 9. Act. 10. Exodus 18.
Found you not that he declares how Paul was sent to a man, Cornelius to a
man, and that Moses took counsel and the eunuche instruction of a man? And if
you found all this, why make you the simple beleaue, that S. August. would not
have us go to men to learn the true understanding of Gods word? why say your
that he sends us not to the doctors distinctio^s, nor censure of the church,
nor canons of the Popes, nor traditions of the fathers? If your memory had been
so slipper, that reading his second book De Doctrina Christiana, you forgotte
the contents of the first, yet you should not have forgotten that which he
spooke in the eight chapter of the same book, immediately following that which
your self allege. There he says, speaking of his preacher, or rather young
studient in divinity: Ecclesiarum catholicarum quam plurium sequatur
authoritatem, etc. Let him follow the authority of the most catholic
churches, amongst which they are, which deserved to have the Apostles sees,
and receive their epistles. Now sir if S. Augustine send his scholar to the
catholic churches where the Apostles had their sees (of which Rome was the
chiefest) to know which was the Canonical scripture, is it credible that he
did not send him to the censure of the same church to know the true sense and
understanding of the scripture? No M. Calf. He that beleaueth this to be the
ghospel and scripture, because the church tells him, it is so, beleaueth also
that this is the true meaning and understanding of scripture, because the
church tells him it is so. Co^t. epist. Manich. cap 5.
And so did S. Augustine doubtelesse, who said, that he would not believe the
ghospel, unless the authority of the catholic church moved him so to do.
Did you ever read his books against Julian the Pelagian, where he allegeth
the authority of Ireneus, Cyprianus, Reticius, Olympius, Hilarious, Ambrosius,
Innocentius and others? or his epistle to S. Hierome where he says: Epist. 28.
Nemo co^tra fundatissimum morem Ecclesiae sentiat? Let no man think against
the most sure and grownded custom of the church? Or his epistle to Ianuarius
where it is said: Epist. 118.
Those things which we keep, not written, but delyured, which are observed
through out the whole world, are given us to understand, that they are
retained, as commended, and ordained either of the Apostles the^ selves, or of
full general counsels, whose authority is most wholesome in the church? Did
you not read that he says: If the catholic church through out the world
uses any like thing, it is most insolent madness to dispute whether it should
be done in such sort or no? If you did, what folly forced you to say, that S.
Augustine sends us not to the doctors distinctio^s, nor censure of the church,
nor canons of the popes, nor traditions of the fathers? Is it not evident that
he him self used the authority and sayings of the fathers, and kept the
traditions of the church, and thought it a madness to dispute against them? If
you did not read so much in S. Augustine, was your wit so barren, and your
skill so simple that you knew not this to be an evil argument, S. Augustine
sends us not to the doctors distinctions, nor censure of the church, nor
traditions of the fathers, in that place, ergo he sends us to the^ in no other
place, nor no other father besides? Forgot you that it is no sound nor
substantial reasoning upon the authority of any man negatiuely? If you did,
to schole like a sir James, to schole, for shame, and learn your logique and
divinity better, this will not serve yourne turn. Albeit S. Augustine did not
command this, yet other holy men might, and be of no less creditte, S.
Augustine corrupted.
than if S. Augustine had given it in express commandment. But (sir) where
you say, that S. Augustine willed his scholar only to quiet and content him
self with the word of God, where find you that in the 9. chap. and
sequentibus, of his second book De Doctrina Christiana? Will you never leave
your falsifying the doctors? we can find no such thing in the said book and
chapters. Wherefore to save your creditte, bring forth his words, Fol. 22. A
as yet they can not appear. That in the primitive church before the new
testament was written all things were examined according to the sermons and
words of the Apostles, and that he that is of God hears the Apostles, we
grant, 1. Joan. 4.
what infer you upon it M. Calf? If you make this argument: All things were
examined in the primitive church by the words and sermons of the Apostles,
ergo nothing should be examined now, but by the words, and sermons of the
Apostes, we will deny the conseque^t, and auouche the reason to be stark
naught, and desire your woorship to prove a necessity in it, and make evident
declaration that all the words and sermons of the Apostles are written and
come to our hands.

S. Augustine is of this opinion, that we have many things of the tradition of
the Apostles, Lib. 5. cap. 23. de Baptismo. Epist. 118. Ad Pa^ma. co^t. erro.
Ioa^. Hier. Co^t. Apostolicos. lib. 2. here is. 61. 1. Cor. 11.
which are not written, and because the Catholic church does keep them, he
thinks it, an insolent madness to dispute whether they should be observed. S.
Hierome writes that: Symbolum fidei and spei nostrae etc. Our creed and
articles of our faith and hope, was delyured of the Apostles, and not written
in ynck and paper, but in the tables of men's hearts. Epiphanius says: we
most use tradition. For all can not be fotte out of holy scriptures. Therefore
the blessed Apostles delyured certain things in writing, and certain things
in tradition not written, as S. Paul says: Sicut tradidi vobis: As I have
delyured unto you, so I teach, and so I have delyured in the churches. By this
you may learn that the Apostles left many things vnwritte^, which came from
the holy Ghost, as well as the written scripture. You may learn that the xij.
The Articles of our Creed not written in scripture.
Articles of our creed were never written in the scripture: and seeing they are
necessary to be beleaued, although they be not written in scripture, you may
see that some things necessary to salvation, are not written in scripture,
and so prove unto your self, that there is somewhat unwritten whereby
controversies should be examined, besides the written scripture. Further out of
Epiphanius you may note two things, one is, that the Apostles left not all
things in writing that they would have observed of the faithful. The other
that all doubts and controversies, touching matters of faith, are not to be
tried by scripture only, because all can not be fotte out of scripture, and by
this you may learn to have the ancient fathers and unwritten traditions in
better creditt.

But say you, So far as men accord with the holy scripture, and shape there
writings after the pattern that Christ has left, I will not only my self
esteem them, but wish them to be had in most renoune, and reverence. Suerly
they are much beholding unto you, that without derogation to your person, can
think them worthy of such renoune, and reverence with so gentle a condition.
I beseeke you, is there any that reverence them otherwise? Is there any that
esteem their writtings when they write any thing that is repugnant or contrary
to the scripture? Is there any that follow their writtinges when they be not
shaped after the pattern that Christ left? If there be, name him, and blame
him. No Catholic will be offended with you for it. Wheresoever any of the
fathers vary from the received and approved doctrine of the Catholic chuche,
in that he is nor followed, nor reuere^ced, nor absolutely trusted unto. we
gather not out of their writings whatsoever was witness of their
imperfection. That which we gather out of them, and allow to be followed, in
matters of religion and faith, is the doctrine of the catholic Church, in
which they were by the providence of God as apostles, eua^gelistes doctors and
pastors. If there be any imperfections in some, not agreinge withal the rest,
we reject them, and utterly condemn them, and much marvel what moves you
and other heretics to condemn those things for imperfections in the fathers,
which with one uniform consent both they have ever taught, and the Catholic
church governed by the holy Ghost has always allowed. Furthermore we marvel,
that to prove that in no age any man was so perfet that a certain truth was to
be builded on him, you bring only the example of Aaron and Peter, and in your
induction, add not, and sic de singulis. If you would have it a general rule,
you should have done so. But you knew that for Aaron in the old law, we could
make instance of Abel, Abraham, Moses and Samuel, and for Peter in the new
law, bring S. John Baptist, S. John the Evangelist, S. Paul, and other who
never erred in faith, and therefore you did suppress it, and as though you had
made a sure grownde, march forward, and allege another place of S. Augustine
to prove your purpose, Proem. lib. 3. de Trinit. Fol. 22. A
your words are these. Trust me not says S. Augustine, nor creditte my
writings, as though they were Canonical scripture, but what soever thou
find in the word, although thou did not beleaue it before, yet grownde
thy faith on it now. And what so ever thou read of mine, unless thou
know it certainly true, give no assent unto it. Epist. 48.
And in another place, reproving such as will bring forth cauills out of men's
writings thereby to confirm an error, he says that a difference should be
made between there assertions, and minds of men, were they either Hilarie,
Cyprian Agrippine, or other, and the canon of the scripture.

But o merciful God what a miserable shyft is this to impair the estimation of
the Fathers? What a corruption to deceive the readers? S. Augustne in all that
proeme has not those words, Trust me not. And seeing he has them not, what a
vile falsifier are you to tell the simple people, S. August. corrupted
that S. Augustine says of him self in that place, Trust me not. That which
he says to to your purpose is this. Noli meis literis quasi scripturis
Canonicis in seruire. do not addict thy self to my writings as to the
Canonical scriptures. But what is this against the writings of the ancient
fathers? Did ever man esteem S. Augustines words as highly as the scripture?
Distin. 9. cap. Noli.
or so addict him self unto them as though they were scripture? No M. Calf.
Gratian him self (whom your sect maliciously sclaunder) has put this sayng
of S. Augustine amongst the decrees, to prove that the sayings of the
interpreters shoud yield to the scriptures. And certes there was never
Catholic that thought otherwise. Now because we must not addicte your
selves to the fathers as to the scriptures, will it follow that we must not
credit the fathers at all? No forsothe, no more than if one would say, I must
give an high and pearelesse honor unto my sovereign Lady, and Princess, ergo
I must give no honor to the lords of the Council, Epist. 48.
justices of peace, ad shriues of the sheere. As for the other place of S.
Augustine it makes against you and yours M. Calf. You are they that bring
cauills and half mangled sentences out of the fathers writings to confirm your
errous. Your are they that press their authority to confirm your heresy. We
use them but as witnesses to prove that this is the true meaning of scripture,
and truth in matters of faith, and religion agreed upon in their days, and
allowed by the catholic church And if they agree with the scripture and
determination of the church we admit them, if they vary, we refuse them in
that, were they either, Hilarie, Cyprian, Agrippine or Basile, whose authority
I marvel much, how you dare so vilye abuse, and say: Fol. 22. b
S. Basile sets forth by a proper similitude with what judgment the
fathers of the church ought to be read, and quote for your creditte in the
margent. Concio. ad Adolesce^. S Basile abused.
Suerly in all that sermon S. Basile speaks no one word of the fathers of
the church. All his discourse is to teach youngemen, how to behave them
selves in the study of profane writers, as poets, historiographers,
orators, philosophers, and such like. Wherefore unless, Hesiode, Homer,
Virgil, Ouide, Horace, Eschines, Plautus, Terence, Lyuie, Saluste, Plutarche,
Demosthenes, Cicero, Quintilian, Varro, Macrobius, Suetonius, Pythagoras,
Aristotell, and Diogenes are accounted in your learned judgment fathers of the
church, you can not say, that he speaks of the fathers of the church. Of such
he speaks, and not of the fathers of the church. Those he thinks expedient
and necessary for young men to read in their tender years, to whette their
wits, and increase their judgments, that afterward with more facility they
might understand the mysteries of Christian religion. Which thing the very
title of the book might have given you to understand, if there had been nothing
else. But I perceive Momus will be Momus, heretics will be heretics, and
falsify the fathers continually at their pleasure.

Where you say that we are adversaries to you, Fol. 22. b
and to the truth, and that all the fathers had their errors, and in
ceremonies declined al, from the simplicity of the ghospel, Fol 23. a
and that you are only burdened with the name of fathers, and therefore desire
leave to use a Regestio^, and to have the liberty toward other that Hierome
grants to him self, We tell you that you take upon you four pretty
persons, that is, a sclaunderer, a liar, a cursed Cham, and a poor suppliant.
A sclaunderer, in that you say, we are adversaries to the truth. For we set not
our selves against the truth, but defend it, and maintain it against the
assaults and vilanie of heretkies. we continewe and ^ide in that which we
received ab initio. From the beginning, we tread after our holy fathers
steps. Communicamus cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis, Tertul. de prescrip.
quod nulla doctrina diuersa, hoc est testimonium veritatis. We communicate
with the Apostolic churches. That there is no diverse, nor contrary doctrine
amongst us (touching principal points of religion and faith) it is a
testimony of truth. This parologisme petitio Principij, taking that to be
granted which remains to be proved is often in your book: before you had
sclaundered us as adversaries to truth, you should have proved it: that your
selves are such in deed you may see by these places of Tertullian. Ye
communicate not with the Apostolic churches, and therefore hold not that which
you heard from the beginning. You have diverse and contrary doctrine, in some
of the chiefest points of your faith, and therefore have not testimonium
veritatis, the testimony of truth: for there is: Et scripturarum and
expositionum adulteratio, Tertul. de prescrip.
vbi diuersitas inuenitur doctrinae: A corruption of the scripture, and
expositions of them, where there is found a diversity of doctrine. Again in
saying that the fathers declined al from the simplicity of the ghospel, Fol. 23
you sclaunder them. For if Christ according to his promise is with the church
always to the end of the world, and if the holy Ghost teacher of al truth
has been president in it as God promised, then have they not suffered all the
fathers to decline from the simplicity of the ghospel, but has preserved some
to maintain his truth, lest hell gates should prevail against it.

A liar you are for saiynge that ye are only burdened with the name of
fathers: for besides their names you are burdened with their express words,
and plain sentences. The places where you shall find the^ are leyed before
your eyes. Further we burden you with the scriptures, and authority of the
church, that authoriseth those scriptures, and gives the true understanding
and sense of the scriptures. We burden you with the traditions of the
Apostles, and general councels, and laws of emperors, besides the names of
fathers. A cursed Cha^ you are, having a wicked mind to detecte the
imperfectio^s and errors of the fathers to the world and for lack of
imperfectio^s, and errors obiecting most undoubted truths to some, as shall
apere hereafter. And albeit you pretend an holiness here not to follow Cham
Noes son, yet in your answer you do it so often, that you show in what forge
you were framed. A pore supplica^t you are in desiri^g leave to use a Regestio^
and the same liberty toward other which S. Hierome granted against him self.
And because the request is reasonable, we grant it. Use you Regestio^ on Gods
name. Take the liberty that S. Hierome took, mary with this condition that
you abuse it not, nor falsify S. Hierome. Go to what said S. Hierome?
Forsooth, Certe vbicunque scripturas no^ interpretor, and libere meo sensu
loquor, arguat me qui volet. Fol. 23. a
Truly wheresoever I expound the scripture, but freely speak of mine own
sense, let him reprove me that list. Why sir, have you so sone forgotten the
condition that was joined to your license? We told you that you should not
falsify S. Hierome? How falls it out that you so wickedly abuse him? Apol.
co^t. Iouinia.
VVil it never be otherwise? S. Hierome in deed says: Truly wheresoever I
expound not the scriptures, but speak freely of mine own sense, let him
reprove me that list? What follows immediately without any distinction or
point? Nothing M. Calf? Read it ones again, and you shall see these words
there, me durum quid dixisse contra nuptias: so that the whole sentence it
this: Certe vbicunque scripturas non interpretor, and libere de meo sensu
loquor, 8. Hierom not truly alleged.
arguat me cui libet, me durum quid dixisse contra nuptias. Truly whersoeuer I
do not interpret the scripture, but speak freely of my own sense, let him
reprove me that list, that I spooke any hard or severe thing against marriage.
In this place he talks of an i^terpreter, and shows what his duty is. And
says for him self that if he spoke any thing severely, or rigorously, against
marriage, after his own opinion, and not as interpreting holy scripture, every
man should reprove him. But if they could find no such thing in him, then he
willed them rather to attribute it, to the authority of the writer, tha^ to
the fault of the interpreter. He gave not all men license to reprove him: when
he interprets the scripture, he wills no man to reprove him. But when he
speaks any thing of his own fancy, any thing contrary to the scripture,
any thing contrary to the received, and approved doctrine of the church, the^
he gives license, and liberty to all men to reprove him, and by good and
sufficient reason to convince him. And if he did not grant it, we would take
it, and reprove him, and al others. For we admit them, and receive them no
otherwise, than as they agree with the scriptures, and determinations of the
catholic church: Apolog. cont. Iou^nia. Epist. 85.
and so do all catholics. Nor is it the practice of this age to allege the
fathers when occasion serves. S. Augustine alleges S. Cyprian, S. Hierome
alleges S. Ambrose, and Leo diverse fathers sentences in his epistell to Leo
the Emperor against the blasphemies of Nestorius and Eutiches: so that if our
new master find fault with us, for alleging the fathers, and urging their
authority, and pressing the^ with the traditions of their forefathers, we will
desire them, to read S. Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine and Leo, and either with
them to accuse us, or with them and others to license us to do as we do.

We assure your selves upon the tender mercy of our savior Christ, Mat. vlt.
that promised to be with his church always to the end of the world, Ephe. 4.
and gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors, some
Doctors, to the edefying of his body, that we should not be little ones,
wavering and carried away with every wind of doctrine, in the wickedness of
men, in craftines, to the circumuention of error, we I say, do assure your
selves, that God never suffered all the fathers to decline from the simplicity
of the gospel, and to fall to such errors, as should be contrary to his
faith and religion. But if any one did, he raised some other that controlled
him for it: as when S. Ciprian erred, Cornelius bishop of Rome controlled him.
S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and other that came after, found fault with him for
it, as diverse did before with Tertullia^, and Origin, in that they taught
repugnant to the church. But what soever Tertullian, Origin or S. Cyprian say,
if Cornelius or the bishop of Rome for the time did allow it, S. Hierome
approve it, S. Ambrose confirm it, S. Augustine embrace it, Hilarious accept
it, Prosper ratify it, S. Gregory receive it, Fulgentius admit it, S. Bid
like it, and S. Bernard credit it, and others whom God appointed Doctors, and
Pastors in his church, subscribe unto it, we may be well assured, that the
saying of Tertullian, Origin, and S. Cyprian, is the determination of the holy
catholic church, such as no man ought to gain say. Wherefore let us, (giving
the first and highest place to the scripture) nothing imperish the estimation
of the ancient fathers. Let us not wilfully abrogate the decrees of the
doctors, where they agree with the catholic church. Oration dicta in praesent
f^atr. Gregor.
But with the blessed bishop Gregory Nazianzene, let us as long as we have a
day to live, confess with a stout heart and free tongue: Sanctorum patrum
depositum, that which our holy fathers which were nearer to Christ, left unto
us. Let us keep, Primae fidei confessionem, the confession of our first faith.
which was nourrished in us from our tender years: So shall we, no doubt,
remain obedient and faithful children in Christ.

As for the twoe judges of controversies, which master Calfhill apoynteth, the
word, and the spirit, Fol. 22. a
let us (embracing the word and honoring the spirit) inquire of his
wisdom, how the word and the spirit can be judges of controversies? A judge
must be sensible, the word is senseless. A judge must speak. The word is
dumb. A judge must hear, the word is deaf. the word no judge in
controversies.
A judge must examine things brought in controversy. The word, that is, the
bare letter of the Bible (as heretics take it) written in incke and paper,
considered as it lies, nor read, nor pronunced of any man, is deaf, and not
able to prove it self to be the word of God, and holy scripture of Christ.
If one should require the best rabby, and profoundest master among all the
protestants, that exact proufes out of scripture only, for matters in
controversy, to prove and justify out of scripture, that this word, (which
they crake and brag of) is the word of God, he would never do it, so long
as he lives. Al his refuge must be, to the catholic church, that has
adjudged, and declared this be the scripture, and word of God. Wherefore
seeing it has those defectes, it ca^ not be judge of matters in controversy in
the church, especially, seeing al our contention, debate, and controversy is,
of the sense and understanding of scripture, which they received of the
catholics.

And whereas the Catholics say: This is the true meaning of this place of
scripture, and the heretics for their part deny it, and say: Nay: This is
this the true meaning of this place of scripture, and so conte^d stoutely
about it, how shall the scripture be judge, and decide this controversy? It
has no tongue to speak and give sentence. Shall we confer place to place,
and so try out the truth? That is a way of greater contention: For when other
places be alleged, the Catholics may say: This is the right sense of that
scripture. And the heretics deny it, and so proceed infinitely in contention.
Wherefore is it not possible that the scripture only, taken in any other sense
than the Catholic church allows, should be judge, which is the true sense
of scripture and so decide matters in controversy. But peradventure some
cauilling heretic, will sca^derously report of me, and say, I speak much to
the derogatio^ of holy scripture. If any such open his mouth, I will him to
understand that I honor, reverence, and esteem the holy scripture, as well, or
rather better than he. Heb. 4.
I acknowledge with S. Paul, that it is lively, effectuous, and more pearcing
than any two edged sword. I confess that it is, as it were, Esa 23.
a fire, and hammer wasting the rock, a lantern to guide our steps, sweet
br^^d to feed our hungry souls, Psalm. 118. Joan. 6. Joan. 4. Esa. 55.
and pleasant water to quench our heates and lusts: to be short, I confess
that it is, the sweet shoore of rain and snow, that comes from heaven, and
moysteth the earth, and makes it bring forth her fruit and do whatsoever God
will have done, and prosper in all things, for which he sends it. But
notwithstanding it has all these virtues, and effects by the mighty power of
God, yet in all the scripture can you not find that it has this virtue, and
power to be a judge, and decide controversies. No more than the great book of
statutes, and written laws, have to put on my Lord chief Justices robes, and
come to the kings bench, or common place, and give sentence. For seeing as S.
Hyerome says: Contra Luciferia.
The scriptures consiste not in reading, but in understanding, and the Gospel
is not in the letre which kills, but in the spirit that quickens, not in
the outward ryne, but i^ the i^ward pith, not in the leaves of paper, but in
the root of reason, there must be some man that must inform us of the
understanding, and instruct us in the sense of it, and pick out the pyth,
and rule us in the reason of it, as there must be a judge to inform men of
the mind and understanding of the law, and decide their causes as reason and
equity do require.

Now as for the spirit, that it can not be a iugde, especially such a iugde,
as we must have, reason tells you. The spirit no such judge as we must have
in matters of religion.
Our iugde must be visible, the spirit is invisible. Our iugde must be so in
the light of the world, that every man may know where he dwells. The spirit
is so secret, that no man can truly say, out of the Catholic church, here he
dwells, here he abides, here is his resting place. No man can say in this
later age of the world, I am sure the holy Ghost dwells in me, I am sure the
holy Ghost speaks in me, unless he speaks that which the Catholic
church, has taught him to speak. Which being so, the spirit ca^ not be such
a iugde of controversies, as we must have. Wherefore it remains that we
search, who may be iugde i^ matters of controversy. For neither the word
neither the spirit can be judges as M. Calf. says, unless we will have a
judge that is senseless, dumb, deaf, invisible, secret, unknown, and unable
to be gone unto. Or if either of them both might be iugdes, let our good
minister tell us, how it came to pass that when a controversy arose for the
observation of the law of Moses, Actuu^ 15.8. Paul and Barnabee, went, to
the Apostles and priests in Hieru ale^ for decision of a matter in
controversy.
S. Paul and Barnabe Christ's Apostles went to Jerusalem about that question,
ad Apostolos and Presbiteros, to the Apostles, and Priests? They had the
spirit (that is the holy Ghost) given of Christ him self from heaven. They
had the word, that was preached before of Christ. They had the traditions and
precepts of the Apostles, and scripture whatsoever was then written, and yet
they decided not that question neither by the word, neither by the spirit.
But went up to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Priests: which they would not
have done, if they had supposed the word or the spirit to be sufficient iugdes
in controversies.

Our savior Christ redemi^g the church with his death upon the cross, that he
might make it glorious, and without wringle in his sight would not leave it in
worse case, then the Synagog of the Jews was in the old law. And seeing for
the^ he provided a judge that could hear and speak, a judge that was visible,
a judge that had a certain dwelling place, to which the people might resort
for judgment, Cap. 17.
as it apeareth in Deuteromie, where it is said, If thou perceive the
judgment which is before thee to be hard, and doubtefull, between blood and
blood, cause, and cause, lepre, and lepre, and see the judges words within
thy gates to vary, arise and go up to the place which the Lord thy God has
chosen, and come to the Priests of the sort of Leuy, and to the judge that
shall be at that time, and thou shall seek of them, who shall show unto thee,
the truth of judgment, and thou shall do whatsoever they say, who are
presidentes in the place, which God has chosen, and teach thee according to
his law, It can not be, but that he foreknowing that there shoud be heresies,
schisms, and controversies in his church, provided of his tender mercy a like
a judge to determine such controversies, and appointed a visible place whether
men might resort to seek that determination. For he loves us as tenderly as
he loved them. As then he chose a place for the Jews in the Synagog, where
controversies should be decided: So has he chosen a place for the Christians
in this new Jerusalem to end and determine all causes and controversies, and
that place is his catholic church. Which is Locus sanctificationis, Esa. 60.
Chrysostom. hom. 36. in 1. Cor. Matthew. 15. Psalm. 18. Matthew. 18. 1. Tim 3. Esa. 62.
locus angelorum, locus archangelorum, regia Dei: The place of sanctification,
the place of God, the city set upon the hill, the tabernacle placed in the
sun, loved of God above all the tabernacles of Jacob. To this God bids us
go, saying: Dic Ecclesiae. Tell it to the church. This is the pillar and fure
foundation of truth, and voluntas mea in ea, and my will in it, says God: In
this place shall we have controversies truly and faithfully decided. And no
where besides.

Again, as he appointed the Jews: Sacerdotes Leuitici generis, Priests of the
order of Leui to be their judges: So for us he has appointed Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and doctors to the edifying of his body. To
them he has said: Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, Act 20.
etc. Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, in which the holy
Ghost has placed you, bisshops to rule the church of God. 1. Pet. 5.
To them he has said: Feed the flock of our lord, which is in you, taking the
oversight of them willingly without compulsion. And if God has appointed
Apostles, Prophets, Eua^gelistes, Pastors and Doctors, to edify and build
his church, and the holy Ghost has given them authority, and commission to
rule his sheep, then they must rule, they must govern, they must feed
Christ's flock, and try what pasture is best for the^. And if they must do it,
and none but they (for the commission of the holy Ghost stretches to none, but
to such as they are,) the^ is it not, A precept general all men to judge, al
men to try, Fol. 23. a.
what doctrine they receive, as you say M. Calf. For all are not Apostles, all
are not Prophets, all are not Evangelists, 1. Cor. 12.
all are not Pastors and Doctors. The holy Ghost placed not all to rule the
church of God, but vos posuit episcopos, He placed you, that is to say,
Apostles, God appointed one chief judge in the old law and another in the nevve
law Matt. 16. Luc. 22. Joan. 21.
and such like, bisshops to rule the church of God. And as in the old law, to
avoid schism and division, he ordained one of the priests, to be chief judge
for the time: So in the new law, he ordained one to be chief judge, head, and
ruler, of all the rest. And that one was S. Peter, to whom Christ said: Thowe
art Peter, and upon this rock, I will build my church. To thee will I give the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. Thou being turned, confirm thy breetherne.
Feed my lambs, feed my sheep. For by these words, Christ gave him a
singular preeminence, and superiority over all the rest, and as the fathers say
builded his church upon Peter. Whose sayings because M. Calfhill seems not
to have read, I will breefely repete the^, for his further instruction, let him
refell the^ if he ca^. Tertullian has these words: De prescrip.
Latuit aliquid Petru^ adifica^dae ecclesiae petram dictum? Was any thing
unknown to Peter called the rock of the church, that was to be builded? By
this he may understand, that S. Peter was aedifica^dae Ecclesiae Petra dictus:
called of Christ the rock of the church, that was to be builded. In another
place he has these words: Qualis es euertens atque commutans Domini
intentionem, personaliter hoc Petro conferentem? Superte, De pudicitia. Orat.
de consum. mundi. Libro 1. epist 3.
inquit aedificabo ecclesia^ meam? What art thowe turning vpsidowne, and
altering the intention of our lord giving this personally to Peter? Upon the he
said, I will build my church? The blessed martyr Hippolitus, says: Princeps
Petrus, fidei petra, etc: docuit nos, Peter the chief of all, and rock of
faith, has taught us. S. Cyprian says: Petrus super quem aedificata fuit a
domino ecclesia, Libro 4. epist. 9. Ser. de habitu virg.
dicit: Domine ad quem ibimus? Petrus loquitur, super quem aedifica^da fuerat
ecclesia. Petrus super quem dominus posuit and fundauit Ecclesiam, aurum sibi
and arge^tum esse negat. Peter upon whom the church was builded of our lord,
says: Lord to whom shall we go? Peter upon whom the church was to be
builded speaks. Peter upon whom our lord founded, Lib. 1. co^menta in Matthew.
vide Euse. lib 6 cap. 18. histor. Homi. 5. super exodus
and builded his church, says, he has no gold. Origin has these words:
Petrus super que^ domini fundatur Ecclesia, duas tantummodo epistolas scribit.
Peter upon whom, the church of our lord is builded, writes two epistles
only. In another place he writes thus: Magno illi ecclesiae fundamento,
petraeque solidissimae super quam Christus fundauit ecclesiam, vide quid
dicatur a domino: Modicae fidei quare dubitasti? See what is said of our lord
to that great foundation, and most sure rock of the church, upon which Christ
builded his church: Lib. 2 co^t. Eunomiu^
O thowe of little faith, why did thowe doubt? S Basile talking, of S. Peter
says: Propter fidei excelle^tiam, ecclesiae in seipsum aedificationem
suscepit. For the excellence of his faith, In Ancor.
he took the building of the church unto him self: Epiphanius has these
words: Ipse dominus constituit Petrum primum Apostolorum, petram firmam super
quam ecclesia Dei aedificata est. Our lord him self made Peter chief of the
Apostles the firm and sure rock, upon which the church of God was builded. S.
Chrysostom says: Homi. 55. in Matthew.
Christus Petrum vniuerso terrarum orbi praeposuit: Christ made Peter chief
ruler over all the world, and said unto him: Thowe art Peter, and super te
aedificabo ecclesiam meam, and upon the I will build my church. in Psalm. 103
S. Augustine says: Manducat Petrus, quia Petrus petra, petra ecclesia. Peter
eats because, Peter is the rock, Sermon. 26. de sanctis.
and the rock is the church. In another place, he says: Ye have heard Peter
called, Petram rock oftentimes of our lord, as he him self says: Lib. 2. de
voca ge^t. cap. 9. In cap 16. Matthew. Sermon de aniuer. Po^tif. assum. die.
Thoue art Peter and upon this rock, I will build my church. S. Ambrose calls
him: Firmissimam Petram, the most firm and sure rock, that took from Christ,
the principal rock, communion both of virtue, and name. S. Hilarie calls him,
Foelix Ecclesiae fundamentum, the happy foundation of the church: To be short:
Leo speaking of S. Peter says: Tu quoque petra es, thou art also a rock which
art made strong by my virtue and strenght. S. Hierome says: Dominus domus
Petrus Apostolus est: Peter the Apostle is master of the house, to whom God
committed his house. In cap. Marc. 16.
By which it is easy to be seen that S. Peter was chosen of Christ, to be judge
and ruler in his church. If any man will argue out of S. Augustine as M. Nowel
does, that Christ is the rock: and therefore Peter is no rock. I will refer
them to M. Dormans disproufe of M. Nowells reproufe, fol. 189. A, where S.
Augustines words are alleged to prove that he leaves the matter indifferent
to the reader and thinks both opinions true, that Christ is the rock, and
Peter the rock, so appointed by Christ.

Now because Christ would have his church continewe for ever, until his
coming again, the same authority and pre-eminence which he gave to S. Peter,
Lib. 2. de sacerdo.
he gives to S. Peter's successors as Chrysostom witnesses: which being most
undoubtedly true, it is evident, that neither the word, nor the spirit can be
judges in controversies as M. Calf. fansieth, but men that read the word, men
that preach the word, men that understand the word, and not all men neither,
but Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, Chrisost. hom.
44. 23. Matthew.
whom the holy Ghost has placed, Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei, Bishops to
rule the church of God. They must be judges. For they be Clauiculaij, quibus
credi tum est verbum docendi, and interpretandi scripturas. The keybeares, to
whom authority is given to teach the word, and expound the scriptures. They
must decide controversies, but not in every place, but in the place which God
has chosen, that is in the Catholic church, where the spirit speaks,
rules, and governs, and out of the which the spirit of God does nor speak,
nor rule, nor govern, but the spirit of errors, and heresy, the spirit of
malice, and blasphemy. wherefor if you will have M. Calf. the true place where
controversies must be tried, and the true judges, that must judge the^ and
determine the^, come to the Catholic church, and to the Bisshops whom the
holy Ghost has appointed to govern his church. And amongst them resort to the
highest Bissop that is chosen for the time. Remember that S. Cyprian says:
Heresies have not risen, nor schisms sproung of any other occasion, than of
that, that the Priest of God is not obeyed, Libro 1. epist. 3.
nec vnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and ad tempus iudex vice Christi
cogitatur, and one Priest, for the time, and one judge for the time, is not
thought upon in the church in the stead of Christ. Remember that God says to
you, Mat. 23.
do all whatsoever they command you, as he said to the Israelites: Thou
shall do whatsoever they shall say unto thee, Deuteronomy. 17.
who rule in the place whom God has chosen. Remember that he says to you:
Obey your gouerners, and submit your selves to them, as he said to the
Israelites: Thou shall follow their sentence and judgment, thou shall not
bow to the right hand, Hebr. 13.
nor to the left hand. Remember that he says to you: He that hears not the
church is an heathen, and a Publican, Matt. 18.
as he said to them: He that obeys not the commandment of the judge for
the time, shall dye: And if you have any grace, obey the order that God has
appointed in his church, hearken to the voice of your Lord God, and forsake your
private examination of doctrine in matters of controversies: Fol. 22. b
and come to the public, Fol. 23. a
which you memtion, (that is) the common consent of the church. That must be
your ankorhold, that must be your refuge: The private examination is dangerous.
Every one, as he is full of pride, and singularity, so will he have his own
way, and his private fancy and sole opinion to rest upon, and fall into
diverse absurdities, as you have done in this answer. And to come to the
instances. Mark good readers.

Whereas in the very beginning of the first Article of my treatise, I brefely
declared that the word (cross) signified four things in scripture, to
wit, tribulation, the passion of Christ, the Cross whereon he died, and the
material and mystical sign of the Cross, and for the first referred the
readers to the tenth of S. Matthew, ninth of S. Luke, the 8. of S. Mark, for
the second to the first of S. Paul, to the Corinthia^s and first chapter, and
sixth to the Galathians, for the third to the common story of the gospel,
where mention is made how the Jews forced Christ, and Simon of Cyrene to
carry a cross to the mount of Caluarie, for the fourth to the 49. of Esaie,
4. of Jeremy 9. of Ezechiel, 24. of S. Mathewe, and 7. of S. John in his
Apocalipse, Fol. 24. b. Calf.
in comes this freash feloe like a lusty launce-knight, and tells me that
I have but few me^, and in mustering the^ have nu^bred one soldier more then
I have, and like a covetous captain intended for a dead pay. Mart.
Feign would he seem to have some skill in warly affairs, and although he
never struck stroke in bataill, nor heard the sound of trumpet in field, yet
he talks like a politic captain that had long served under some great
Solymans Bassa in war. But if trial be taken of his experience, and skill in
this behalf, ye shall find hi^ neither politic captain, nor faithful
soldier. For no man that has any mean knowledge, or practisse in feats of
war, will say unto his enemy, sir you have to few men to encounter, lest he
send for freash soldiers and more aid, and make him self more stronger.
Again no man will signify to his enemy that for covetousness he retains
fewer soldiers than he ought to do, or for his own gain indenteth for a
dead pay, lest upon this warning he furnish him self better, and provide
that he shall have no advantage against him. Again no faithful soldier will
streeke out of his masters checker book, any one that serves stoutely against
the enemy, or be aggreued to have his masters ensign, and bannerborne in the
field: yet such is the wisdom of this doubty knight, that he has betrayed
him self in both, declaring his ignorance in the one, and malice in the other
Ignorance for that he tells me, that am his adversary, that I have few men
and number one soldier more tha^ I have, and indent for a dead pay: malice for
that he streaketh out of his masters book, one trusty and valiant soldier,
recorded long since in the checker roll. It is an old said saw, a little
money is sone told, the lesser the number, the easier is the tale. A few
soldiers are sone viewed, and the co^pte quickly kept. VVherefor if (as you
say) my soldiers were few, the tale could not be long, if the number were but
small, the account could not be great.

Where you say that I indent like a covetous captain, for a dead pay (that
is) ask allowau^ce for a soldier that is not a live, I must tell you, that
you misreporte me like an discourteous companion. As for my honesty, that al my
soldiers are a live, my checker book shall bear record, and your infidelity
in denying any such to be extant, shall both by the same and other sufficient
witness be controlled. You say, neither the material nor mystical cross in
that sense I take them, Calf. Fol 24 B. Mart.
to that end, that I apply them, be once mentioned in scripture. Alas sir what
have the Prophets, Esaie, Jeremy, and Ezechiel deserved, now after so many
hundred years to be rejected out of the canon? Be not their prophecies
scripture? Can not you and your companions be content to take away S. James
epistle, the epistle to the Hebrews and S. Iudes epistle, but will you also put
these (the principal and chiefest of all the prophets) in the same
predicament? shall they now be compelled to seek a new harber and be no
longer in the canon of scripture? yeas say you, we admit them for canonical
scripture, Calf.
but they make nothing at all for your purpose. Mart. Cap. 49. Cap. 4.
No sir? has not Esai these words, Exaltabo ad populos signum meum: I will
set out my sign on high to the people? does not Jeremy say, Leuate signum in
Sion? Lift up a sign in Sion? Cap. 9.
Does not Ezechiel say, or God by the mouth of Ezechiel: Pass through the
midst of the city, in the midst of Jerusalem and sign Tau upon the men's
forheads, that moorne, and be sorry for all the abominations that are done in
the midst of it? Calf. yeas? Mart. And does not God by the sign that he will
exalt to his people, and have lyfted up in Sion, mean the sign of the cross?
Calf. no Mart. yeas sir. And why not my yea, as good as your nay? why may not
the sense that I conceive of these places, stand as well as that which you
ymagine? Is it not as lawful for me to abound in my sense, as it is for you
in yours? I see no cause to the contrary. I have to supporte me S. Hierome an
ancient father, more expert in the scripture, and tongues wherein it was
written than any of this age. His words because the people should not think
that I spoke after my own fancy, I recited out of his learned commentaries
upon the said prophets: you allege no authority but your ymagination, and
cite us a text out of the prophet Esai, which is not to be found in such sort,
as you turn it, neither in the Greek, nor in the Hebrew text adnexed to S.
Hieromes commentaries, but in Robert Steuens, after the translation of the
Tygurines, allowed by none, but by such schismatikes as they are. And withal
you join a piece of your own fancy unto it, which although as far as it
repugneth not to the rules of faith, it may stand, yet not withstanding, it
lets not, but that the other may be true. For be it, That God answering his
church co^playning of sterilitie, Fol. 38. A
and barre^nesse, said, behold I will lift up my hand and set up my standard
unto the people, and meant thereby, that not only the Jews, but also the
gentiles should be brought to Christ? VVil it follow (as you say) That it was
the preaching of the word that converted the gentiles from errors and
superstition? And nothing (sir) but preaching? were there no miracles done? no
strange signs wrought? no extraordinary virtues and power showed, besides
the word? did not Christ him self say of some: Unless ye see signs and
wounders, Cap. 4. Cap. 3. Cap. 6.
you will not believe? Does not S. John say: Many beleaued in his name seeing his
signs which he wrought? Does not the same Evangelist say: A great multitude
followed him because they saw the signs which he did upon those that were
sick? did not the Jews say unto our savior, what sign do thou then, that
we may see, and believe, what woorkest thou? Ibidem.
I think you being master reader have read these textes: And if you have read
them, I trust you see, there was an other mean to convert the gentiles, besides
the preching of the word. Cap. 6.
Again does not Solomon send us to the emmot, and Christ to the fig tree to
learn? I trust your wisdom will not deny it. Mat. 24. Marc. 13.
If then Christ willed us to learn of them, there be other means for a man to
learn besides preaching. And if emonge those, it has pleased the holy Ghost to
make the sign of the cross to be one, Fol. 38. A
then am not I a falsifier, of the word, but you a false lier before the
lord, so to report of me.

Further where you bid me learn of you, that preching is the hand of God, that
he said he would lift up to the gentiles, Ibidem.
and that the standard which he set up to his people is preching, whereby we
are brought to truth, from blindness and ignorance, I tell you in plain terms,
that I refuse such an ignorant master. And prefer S. Hierome before te^
hundred such new vpstartes and arrogant heretics. Esai. 11.
He says, This hand lyfted up to the gentiles, is the same of which this self
same Prophet speaks: There shall be a rote of less, which shall rise up, that
he may be prince of all nations, in him nations shall hope. And he will not only
lift up his hand, but also exalt, and set up his sign. Psalm. 8.
there is no doubt, but it is the sign of the Cross, that it may be
fulfilled, which is written. The earth is full of his praise. Now sir which is
the better scholemaster, S. Hierome, or master Calfhil? S. Hierome that tells
me, that the hand, that is lifted up to the gentiles, is the rote of less, even
Christ him self, that is preached, or M. Calf. that teaches that it is
preaching. S. Hierome that teaches that, the sta^dard that God will exalte and
set up, is the sign or ba^ner of the Cross, or master Calf. that says it is
the preching of the word, S. Hierome that tells us that God of his mercy
will send us two things, Christ aid his cross, or M. Calf. that by a feate of
his Arithmetike will make of two but one, and Christ and his cross, but a
bare preaching?

Suerly (sire) whatsoever opinion of lerning, the Alebastards, ta^kerdberers,
porters, cobblers, and other your auditors have conceived of you, I will not
acknowledge you for a master, more worthy of credit than S. Hierome, nor
attribute that to preaching, thereby to exclude the cross as you do, which
the prophet, by the judgment of that learned father, attributed to Christ, and
his cross. VVherefor learn of S. Hierom M. Calf. to make one thing of the
hand, that the Prophet me^tioneth, and another thing of the standard: Christ of
the hand, the Cross of the standard, Calf. Fol. 38. a
for so he teaches you: but say you. The Prophet Esai in the text before
teaches, that Gods mouth is a sharp swearde, and that preachinge is a chosen
shaft, had in the quiver of the almighty, and because you thought I would take
skorne to learn of you, Mart.
you willed me to learn of God. It is ge^tly done of you (sire) you have
preferred me to a good scholemaster. I thank you for it. I will daily pray,
that I may have grace to learn, and faith to beleaue all that he teaches. But
is it true that you say, that in the 49. chapter of Esaias, God says: his
mouth is a sharpesword, and preaching is a chosen shaft. In what text shall we
find it? In the septuagintes, and translation of S. Hierome, there is no such
thing. The words that you harp upon, I suppose, are these. Ye Islands
harken unto me, and take heed ye people that are far of. The lord has
called me from my birth and has remembered my name, even from my mothers womb.
He has made my mouth as it were, like a sharp sword, under the shadow of
his hand he has defended me, and has put me as a chosen arrowe. In his
quiver he has hid me. Thus far the prophet. But what is this to preaching?
What word have you here to signify, that Esai should mean as you pretend?
Is it sagitta electa? a chosen arrowe? Suerly if it be so, S. Hiero. deceaueth
us. For he says: In 49. Esai.
Christ verelie of many arrows and many sons, is the only chosen arrowe, and
the only begotten son, which he has hid in his quiver, that is to say, in an
humane body, that the fulness of divinity might corporally dwell in him. By
which words we may learn, that Christ is the chosen arrowe that the prophet
speaks of, and not preaching, his humanity the quiver, wherein he was hid in
this world, and not the scripture. And if saint Hierome had said nothing, the
circumstance of the place duly examined might have told you, that God spoke
there, of the incarnation of Christ, and sending his son into the world to
redeem man. But we must pardon your ouersigth, and albeit you have falsified
the scripture, in saying that to be there which is not there, and unjustly
accused me for false alleging authorities which are in the places which I
quoted, yet will I not deal cruelly with you here, nor note your errous, so
despite fullye to the world, as you would do mine if you had like occasion. But
let me friendly ask you this one question. Did you ever read S. Hierome upon
this chapter of Esaie? If you did ever read him, then can you not be excused
of great singularity and pride, who seeing the words of the prophet to describe
the coming of Christ, and reading the words of that ancient father,
expounding Sagittam electam, to be Christ, and pharetram, his human body,
would not withstanding write, and set forth in printe to exclude the cross,
that preaching is a chosen shaft, mentioned there, by the prophet, where he
says nothing less. If the chosen shaft be Christ as S. Hierome says, the^
can it not be preaching, as you say. For Christ is one thing, and preaching is
another. 1. Cor. 1.
Christ is the thing that is preached (for as saint Paul says: We preach
Christ crucified, preaching the act of man that preaches, directed by God, if
he preach in the unity of his church. If you did never read these
commentaries (as I believe you did not) then were you not well adui^ed when
upon so slipper a ground, you would build, and prove that S. Hierome did not
speak of the sign of the cross. For say you.

Fol 38. b. Calf.
S. Hierom means there by the ensign of the cross, the setting forth of the
praise of God, which is not by setting a cross upon the altar, but by
preaching the crucified.

Mart.
Mart. You harp much upon preachinge, which in deed is an excellent way to
set foort the praise of God, and I trust it shall be better used to his honor
and glory hereafter. Luther. Act. 36. In co^me^. in epis. ad Rom Melanel in
locis co^. and annot. in Joan.
But as it is used amongeste you, who make him the author of evil, saying
that the traison af Judas was as well the work of God, as the conversion of
Paul, false in performing his promise, saying that he gave a piece of bread,
when he promised his fleash: unjust in saying that he exacteth the obserua^ce,
and keeping of his commandments which you say, are impossible: not careful
of his church: saying it may err, whereas he promised the holy Ghost to it, to
gouerne^ it, to comfort it, and teach it all truth, with many things mo,
which I may not speak of, beside your blasphemies against his sacraments,
slanders against his vicare on earth: malice against his members, and desire
of vengeance uttered almost in every sermon, contradictions among your selves
in the high mysteries of the faith: thus I say as it is used amongst you, is
nothing to set forth the praise of God. But what? Is there no other mean to
set forth praise of God, but preaching? Must euetie one that will praise God,
be a preacher? Then let the husbandman forsake his plowgh, and bye him a bible:
Let the merchaunt leave of his traffic, and leppe up to the pulpet. Let women
give over their business, and read lesso^s of divinity. May not all the
minesterie joy in you, and think that they are sped of profou^de clearke who
can reason fo depely against the cross, and say: Fol. 38. b.
The setting forth of the praise of God is by preaching the crucified. Ergo it
is not by settig the cross upon the altar? May not we reason in like sort
and say: The state of the commonweal is preserved by ministering of justice:
ergo it is not preserved by tilling of the ground? The City of London is
enriched by merchauntes: ergo it is not enriched by resort of gentilmen,
strangers and lawyers? Clothing is a relief for the poor: ergo the devotion
and alms of the welthy is no relief for the pore? The honor of the prince is
set forth by worthy exploictes in wars abroad: ergo it is not set forth by
good government in peace at home, with a number as fond as these? Yeas M. Calf.
therefore deceive not your self. There be many ways to set forth the praise
and glory of God besides preaching. Matthew. 5.


Christ speaks of good works in S. Mathewe, and bids us let our light so
shine before men that they may see our good works, 1. Corin. 6
and glorify our father which is in heaven. S. Paul bids us glorify and
carye God in our bodies: by which we understand that the praise and glory of
God is set forth by external acts, as virtuous life, charitable alms, devout
prayer, visitation of the sick, intertayning of strangers, washing holy men's
feet, chaste life, poverty of spirit, humility of mind, chastening of
body, and such like which al men may do besides those that preach. Now then,
seeing there be more ways to set forth the praise of God than preaching,
amongst which it has pleased the ancient fathers to apoynte, and ordain the
sign of cross to be one, as a mean to excite and stire up that heavy lu^pe
of earth, that aggreaueth the soul, and bring us to remember the passion of
Christ, master Calf. does no more overthrow the authority of S. Hierome,
affirming that it is the sign of the cross, that God said he would exalt and
set up to his people, the^ he that makes the reasons before mentioned, or any
like unto the same, does overthrow the state of the commonweal. For the
reason is as good in the one as in the other. The next place of scripture that
he ipugneth and says makes no more for the cross than for a candelsticke,
Fol. 38. b.
is, leuate signum in Sion, lift ye up a sign in Sion. that is as S. Hierome
says: lift up the sign of the cross in the top of the church, and what
shift uses this impugner here (think you) to shift away this place of the
prophet and interpretation of S. Hierome? Fol. 39. a.
In good sooth, one as like an heretic as ever you saw. God says he, spoke
there by an Ironie, that is to say, God mocked his people: Again, There was no
cause why S. Hierome should rune to an allegory: which how folish it is, I
had rather other me^ should conceive, than I declare: for his co^trolling of S.
Hieromes judgment, for going to an allegory, he gives no reason why. Such is
his insolency, and pride to controlle the fathers, and set them to schole
again. Here would I say some what of the difference that is between S. Hierome,
and master Calfhil, saving I nothing doubt but every simple soul sees, that
an old ox is to be preferred and better esteemed then a young calf. But master
Calfhil says: Calf. Fol. 39. a.
If S. Hieromes allegory should take place, it makes nothing for your
purpose, because he talks there of heretics, that make battaill against the
church, and we must not fight against the^ with a cross in our hands.
Wherefore the sign that he would have set up in the top of the church, is no
cross, but preachi^g of the word by the prelates.

Mart.
In deed if heretics had that grace and humility of spirit that they would
gladly harken to the prelates of Christ's Church, and gently embrace the truth
when it is told them, this impugner had said somewhat. But if heretics are so
obstinate and proud, that they contemn al other besides them selves, if they
will admit no other sense, no other interpretation, no other meaning of the
scripture, than that which they have conceived, if they contemn all the
ancient fathers, and general councels, as Arius contemned the fathers of Nice
preaching unto him Ihesus Christ to be God, of equal substance with the father,
Macedonius contemned the fathers of Constantinople, preaching unto him the holy
Ghost to be God, and other heretics contemn other counsels in effect as you
do the general council kept at Nice against image breakers, and that of
Florence, and this of Trent now in our days, preaching unto you that there is
one supreme governor in Christ's church, and that there be seven sacraments
ordained of God, for our comfort in this his militant church on earth, if S.
Paul willed us not to contend with heretics, if the holy fathers not to
dispute with them, because they have such singular co^ceites of their wisdom,
that they will yield to none, preach he Christ and the Gospel never so much,
if it be any thing contrary to their fancy, if S. Hierome knew preaching to
be no way to convince an heretic, (as undoubtedly he did) then all that master
Calfhil has said is not worth a blewe point, and S. Hieromes allegory,
interpreting the sign that God would have lifted up in Sion, to be the sign
of the cross to be set up in the top of the church, stands in as good force
as it did before.

From these places he goes to xxiiii. of S. Mathewe: Fol. 39. b.
and to prove that the sign of the son of man that shall appear in the
clouds at the later day, is not the cross, he bri^geth in a place out of
Chrysostom in his second exposition upon S. Mathewes Gospel. Where I
beseeke you note, how these heretics, for their advantage father this work
upon Chrysostom: and when the catholic alleges any thing out of the said
work, they deny it utterly to be his, and for proof of their allegation
bring the censure of Eras. set before the said work: which is no indifferent
dealing. For if they will have it to be Chrisostomes work, when they allege
it for their purpose, there is no reason why they should deny it to be
Chrysostomes, when we allege it for ours. If I were disposed to follow their
vain in denying of authors, I could say, that were not Chrysostomes work,
and bring his plain words for my purpose out of his comme^taries upon S.
Matthew which never man denied to be his, Homi. 77
where he says upon those words of the Ghospel: Tunc apparebit signum
filij hominis in coelo: Matt 24
Then the sign of the son of man shall appear in the element. Hoc est ipsa
crux. That is the very cross it self. For the cross shall be seen more
brighter than the sun. For the sun shall be darkened. The cross shall
appear. But for what cause does the sign appear, forsooth that the Jews
impudency may be abundantly ouerpressed, and convinced. He will come into
judgment having his cross with him, for declaration of his own justice and
righteousness: I could repete his words in his homilies de Cruce and Latrone,
where talking of the second coming of Christ, and inquiring whether, He shall
come with the cross or no, he says: Hear: Then when he shall come, the sun
shall be darkened, then the stars shall fall, and the sign of the son of
man shall be seen in the element. Thou have seen the glory of the sign,
that is of the cross. The light of the sun shall be made dark. The moon shall
not have her beauty, nor grace, but that light shall glitter and shine. And like
as the pri^celie pomp goes before an Emperor, and the soldiers, as they go
before, carry his flagges and enseignes upon their shoulders, so when our
lord shall come from heaven, a company of angels and multitude of archangels
shall carry that sign upon their shoulders, and denounce unto us, his royal and
princely comi^g. But I will not use that heretical shift, and protestants
refuge. I will rather examine the authority, and convince him by the same.
Fol. 39. b.
Chrysostom as you allege him (sir) says: Some think that the cross shall be
showed in heaven, but it is truer that Christ himself shall appear having in
his body the testimonies of his passion, Hom 49. in Mar. 24
and so forth: These be Chrisostomes words, let it be the truer opinion (as it
is in deed) that Christ shall come at the later day having in his body the
signs of his passion, what will you infer upon it? ergo is the other opinion
false? ergo shall not the cross, the sign of the son man appear at al? If
yower Logic serve you to make such reasons, then I beseech you tell me, how
hold these arguments? It is truer that the city of London is welthier than
the city of Bristowe, ergo the city of Bristowe is not welthi. It is truer
that M. Ieuel is wiser than M. Calf. ergo M. Calf. is not wise, or if you will
have a more familier example. It is truer that an old ox has longer horns
than a young Calf. of xij. months old, ergo a young Calfe of twel months
old has no horns at all? And if yower mymistralitie find this but vain
sophistry, so may you think that to be no verity which you would infer
falsely, upon Chrysostomes authority. If you had remembered yower Logique
rules, you might have concluded thus: This is truer than that, ergo this is
true, and not false. As for the other, look al Aristotell, and your Raphe
ploweman if ye list, you shall never be able to make that consequent good.
Wherefore you had more need to seek yower old Logique rules than I for a fifth
signification of the cross.

Saint Hierome might have taught you that either the passion of Christ, either
the sign of the cross, In 24. Matthew.
might be signified by those words of the Euangeliste: Tunc apparebit signum
filij hominis: Then shall the sign of the son of man appear. For he says:
Signum hic aut crucis intelligamus, vt iuxta Zachariam videant Iudaei, Cap. 22.
quem compunxerunt, aut vexillum victoriae triumphantis. Here we may understand
either the sign of the cross, that according to Zachary the Jews may see
whom they have pricked, either the banner of the triumphant victory. But you
would not vouchsafe to read him. His grave authority was to hard meat for
your quesie stomach. It likes nothing but woodcocks and capons.

Origin in like manner expounding that place of S. Matthew says: Then shall the
sign of the son of man appear, that is to say, Homi. 30. in Mat. 24
the virtue which the son of man wrought upon the cross, and specially
his sign shall glitter in the element, that men of al tribes which before did
not believe Christianity, that was preached, but spoke evil of all, may at that
time cumming to knowledge of it, Per signum illud manifestatum, by that sign
made manifest and open, lament for their ignorance and sin, because they did
not receive the word of God. Here also you see (sir) that at that day both
the virtue of the passion, and sign also shall appear. This notwithstanding if
you cauil, and say that this sign is Christ him self having the sign of his
passion, yet can you not exclude the cross, because that was one sign, and
instrument upon which the other were made. Again here is mention made but of a
sign in the singular number, Christ had may signs and wounds, and five more
notable tha^ all the rest, in his hands, in his feet, in his side. Then of
likeliehoode if the Evangelist had meant only the signs of Christ's body
wounded, he would have said: Apparebunt signa filij hominis, and not, signum,
the signs of the son of man shall appear, and not the sign. Besides to make
Christ, the son of God, that then shall come in majesty, and infinite
glory, a sign of the son of man, and not the son of man him self, is to
vile, and base a thought for a Christian, and meet for such signifiers as
sacramentaries are. But that the sign of the cross also shall then appear,
Cap. 3.
read Hippolitus in his oration de co^summatione mundi. Ephre^ in his book of
penance. read Cirill. Hieros oration ad Constantium, read Damascen lib. 4.
cap. 12. de fide, read S. Hilarie upon the 24. of S. Mathewes Gospel, and
Theophilact upon the same. Whose words to the intent the readers may see,
that the Evangelist spoke of the sign of the cross, I will recite. In English
they are these: Then shall the cross apeare in the element shining above the
sun, to convince the Jews. For Christ shall come against the Jews having his
cross, as a great matter and testimony to justify hi^ self. As if a man be
stroke^ with a stone, he shows the stone with which he was stricken: The sign
he calls the cross, as it were the triumphant banner, and princely standard.

Thus M. Calf. you see by the judgment of these ancient fathers, that the
sign of the son of man, is the sign of the cross, that shall appear at the
terrible day of judgment, and that I need not seek, (as you fondely fancy) a
fyfte signification of this word cross. For it may be a material cross, and
the very same that Christ died on, if it please God. We are not sure of the
contrary. Of what matter his Majesty will have it made, it is uncertain to
us, but a cross he will have it to be, that is most certain. Dispute you as
long as ye list of the one, we will beleaue the other.

As for that, which you prate against the sign of Tau, mentioned in Ezechiel,
and revelations of S. John, it is so childish, that I think, the very fool of
the middle temple (made minister by M. Grindal) would never have preached it on
a benche, at an ale bankett, much less have left it in writing to be seen. But
because every merry man makes much of his babble, and thinks it a precious
thing, I will vnrippe it, that you may see what baggadge is within it, and be
wiser hereafter.

To prove that the sign of Tau with which the people of God were sealed in
Jerusalem, did not signify nor express the cross you bring three reasons,
that shall make me blush you say. But take heed M. Calf. that they cast not
milk in your white wearish face, and make you ashamed. The first is this:
Calf. Fol. 40. a.
The spirit of life, and lively faith is not inspired as soon as a cross is
figured, ergo the letter Tau of which Ezechiell spoke, and seal which S. John
me^tioneth, do not express the cross. The second not much unlike to the
first. The sign of the cross is not sufficient to discern the good from the
bad, the faithful from the infidels, ergo the letter Tau and seal that S. John
mentions do not express the cross. The third is as bad, as the woorst of
the other. It is this. None were sealed with Tau but such as moorned for the
abhominatio^s of Jerusalem, none were signed but the servants of God, but all
men indifferently have the sign of the cross, many more than be grieved with
the sight of sin: Therefore the seal that in those places is spoken of is not
the sign of the cross. Mart.
You may see (good readers) that Logique was hard with him, and evil to be
gotten, when he advised to make such consequentes. But of them hereafter. Now
to his divinity, where he says that the spirit of life, and lively faith is
not inspired, as soon as a cross, is figured, understand ye, that God, who
knows the secrets of men's hearts, and can not be deceived, commanded the
sign Tau (expressing plainly the cross) to be printed in the foreheades of
those that were godly, and lamented the abominations of Jerusalem. not
purposing by that mark ex opere operato, to make men good, that before were
badd, (as M. Calf. mistaketh the matter) or to inspire a lively faith by the
nature of that mark into an infidel, without any godly inward motion of the
person, but to the intent that those that were good, and godly in Jerusalem,
before they received any such mark in their foreheades, might be known by
that make to be good and godly, and thereby escape the plagues that should fall
on the city. So that they were first good as the text is plain, and because
they were good, Tau was figured in their foreheades, and not (as M. Calf.
imagines) to make the^ that were before badd to be good.

Baptism by the very nature of the sacrament, is a full, perfet, and
sufficient cause, whereby the infant is made from the child of wrath, the
child of God, without having any propre faith of his own, or godly motion to
have the sacrament. We never taught so of the sign of the cross, that it is
able to make evil men good, without they have godly inward motions with
faith, hope, and charity. Marry that it gives men occasion to be good, by
calling to remembrance our saviors bitter passion, I declared in the ninth
article, where I told you, what commodity every Christian has, or may have
by the sign of the Cross.

Matt. 9.16 Mar. 6. Luc. 8.
Some men there were that were healed as soon as they touched fimbriam
vestimenti eius, the hem of Christ his garment, ande yet many touched his
whole garment, that had no good thereby. Act. 18.
S. Paul's Napkins did many men good in his absence, ande yet there were many
that took no good by them in his presence. Psalm. 18.
Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei. The heavens show forth the glory of God, yet
how many philosophers were there that denied, some God him self, some his
providence? Christ him self came to save that which was lost, Matthew. 18. 1.
Pet. 2.
not with standing, he was called the stumbling stone, ande rock of offense.
Miracles were also done, both to the confirmation of the faithful, ande
conversion of the Ge^tilles, yet Christ vpbrayed certain cities, Matthew. 11.
Luc. 10.
ande told the^, that if miracles had been wrought in Tire and Sidon, they
would have done pertaunce. And why did not al these work the virtue for which
they were ordained? The fault was not in them, but in the lack of godly
motions in the persons that must necessarily co^curre, that the effect may, by
ordinary course be brought to pass. They give great prouocatio^s to men of
any good nature to come to a godly life, but they bring not the thing fully
to pass without the consent and godly motions of the persons. What then?
shall we say as M. Calf. says: That these heavens are not of his creation,
because diverse look not up and consider the power of God in their creation?
Shall we deny that Christ had any coat, S. Paul any napkinnes, Christ's
incarnation, the Apostles miracles, because they work not in all men alyke?
The scripture it self works not his effect streighte in all me^nes hearts.
Some beleaue, some do not. Shall the scripture therefore be no longer taken for
Gods holy word? as M. Calf. denies the sign of Tau, to be the cross,
because as soon as it is figured, it works not the spirit of life, and
lively faith in all persons a like? God forbidd. Many preach the word of
God, and albeit the seed takes no root, nor any spirit or lively faith be
inspired as soon as it is spoken, yet is it the word of God. If it might have
pleased the worship of this profou^de clearcke, to have looked upon the
prophet, he might have seen, that Tau in that place, made not euel people in
the nature of an efficient and sufficient perfect cause, to be good, but was
signed in good folks foreheades, because they were good before. And
notwithstanding there is no mention made in that place of the prophet that the
sign of the Cross (figured by Tau) wrought any godlynes at all in men's
hearts, but was only commanded to be signed in their foreheades that were
good before, yet for as much as it does continually set before our eyes the
memory of Christ, that died upon the cross, it works in all hearts a
disposition of grace, and as the sky does, make us consider Gods glory, and
all his works. And whereas God gave, when Iulianus was feared with spirits
such force to the sign of the cross, that the evil spirits at the fight
thereof departed in haste, and he might have had good occasion to forsake his
Apostasy if any grace in the world might have taken place in him, it gives
us to understand that albeit the spirit of life and lively faith is not
inspired, as soon as a cross is figured, yet is the cross of Christ, an
heavenly mark, and will work the effects of grace in us, if we be otherwise
apt and meet vessels to receive it.

Where he says in his second reason, that the sign of the cross is not
sufficient to discern the good from the badd, the faithful from the
infidells, I will first examine the sufficiency of this mark Tau, and see
how his reason hangs. That Tau imprinted in the foreheades of the people in
Jerusalem was sufficient to discern the good from the badd, I trust M. Calf.
will not be so rash as to deny the scripture. God gave it for a sufficient
sign at that time to the angel that should strike the city, to know the
good from the badd: if it was not sufficient, then God that took it to be
sufficient, was both deceived him self, and also deceived the angel.
VVheruppon it follows that the angel stroke with the plague as many good as
badd. If M. Calves. discretion be such that he will drive us to confess, spite
of our teathe, that as the sign of Tau, at that time in Jerusalem was a
sufficient mark to discern the good from the badd, even so that same sign
of Tau must be taken for a sufficient sign, to know the good from the badd,
at all times, in all places, among all nations, whereas the scripture talks
but of the sufficiency of the sign, at that special time, in that special
place, among that special people, I must be so bold as tell M. Calf. that he
must have a bell rounge at his ears, to wake him out of his drowsy dream,
that he may learn, that we use not to allow arguments, from particulars to
generals, nor him self neither when he is fully awaked. If he do, ask him
how this argument holdethe? M. Calfhill is appointed to read in Poules, ergo
he must read, at all times, in all places of the world: and with all, desire
him to confer his own folly with this, and see whether it be not like. I
will not press him yet with the doctors that take the sign Tau mentioned
there to be the sign of the cross. Let it remain as it is, to be but the
sign of Tau. Will he grant that as the sign of Tau was sufficient at that
time, to discern the good and badd in Jerusalem, even so that it being marked
in men's foreheades shoul be a sufficient sign to know the good? If not, I
must know why. His answer can be no other (if he answer wisely) but that it
was a sufficient sign then, at that time, place, and among that people,
because God so appointed it, and that it is not a sufficient sign in all other
places of the world to know the good, because it is appointed so no where by
God. If he answer thus, as of force he must, then has he answered fully for
me, why the cross, (meant by Tau (is no sufficient sign to know the good,
because God no where so appointed it. For the which I thancke him, and signify
with all, that it is a sufficient sign to know the bad in all places, in all
ages, among all nations, if they do but contemn it. For they may well be
called inimici crucis Christi, Philip. 3.
ennemies of the cross of Christ, and because they refuse that heavenly
mark, shall be in peril of death when the destroyer comes.

As for the dependence and sequel of his argument, it holds much after this
sort. The working of miracles is not sufficient to discern the true Apostle
from the false, the faithful from the faithless, ergo the working of miracles
is not the virtue of the holy Ghost, that Christ spoke of in the Gospel.
The last argument is so foolish that I marvel much that ever M. Calf. would
suffer it to pass his pen. It has neither rhyme nor reason, nor mode, nor
figure, nor faith, nor truth. The argument runs thus: The servants of God
were sealed which Tau, but many more then be good have the sine of Tau, ergo
the seal that is spoken of in this place, is not the sign of Tau. Does not
this conclusion follow as well out of yower premises, as that the sign of
Tau is not the sign of the cross? look well upon it, and you shall find
them all one. Or if that do not please you, take this. Such as are saved, M.
Calf. by his own reason dri^en to foul absurdities.
are saved by the death of Christ, but Christ died for many more then shall be
saved: ergo it is not Christ's death by which men be saved. So every way by
yower own reason, you shall fall into foul absurdities, by the first to to
deny the scripture, by the second the passion and death of Christ, and yet
you are not ashamed of it. But you will I doubt not hereafter, when ye
consider it better.

Now because you marvel why I cite the seventh chapter of S. John's
revelations, where it is said. Hurt not the land and sea, The seventh of the
Apoc. examined
nor the trees until we sign the servants of our lord God in their
foreheades, I will take pains to examine it for yower further instruction. They
are the words of the Angel, (that is to say) of our savior Christ, to the
diuelles, commanding them not to hurt, neither the land, sea, nor trees,
until they had signed the servants of God in their foreheades. The land and
sea signify sinners.
By the land and sea, sinners are signified, which are vile in consideration
of their sins committed, and inconstant and waueringe, in respect of that
which they have done, and will do. The land, because it is dry, signifies
the covetous, the sea, because it is moiste and fometh, expresses the riotous.
By the trees, good men are meant, The trees good me^.
because they are fruictfull by good works, and always ready to bring
forth good fruicte. The evil me^ that must not be hurt, are those that
should convert and turn to Christ, and persevere to the end, albeit at that
time, they were in darkness of infidelity and other wickedness. The hurt
inhibited to be done, was both vehement temptations in spirit, The hurt
inhibited to be done, to the evil. and to the good.
and also external damage in body, which might have been done, by procuring
death, or stirring up hatred and malice proceeding to murder. The good men were
such as were converted allreadie to Christ, and cleaued fast unto him by
faith, love, and hope, and imitation of his cross. The hurt inhibited to be
done to these, is the mightines of spiritual temptations, and persecutions.
The time Apoc. 7.
The time appointed is the time until they be signed, as S. John says: do
not hurt until we sign, that is to say, both I my self, by framing within,
the sign of faith with the affection of mercy, and power to follow the
cross, and my ministres, by disposing outwardly by doctrine and sacraments,
by which the soul is disposed to the impression of the sign of faith and
grace, which is the sign of the cross, because it comes from the cross,
and shows them to be servants of the cross. The place
The place where the sign must be made is the forheade, which is the seat of
shamefastnes, and boldness, and constancy, and is taken both for the inward
mind, and external part of the body. Two kinds of sealing.
Wherefore the sealing also is internal and external. Internal when faith
and love in the passion of Christ is imprinted in the heart, and desire to
follow it, and boldness to confess it, and constancy to persevere in it, is
ingraffed in the nimde. The external printing of this seal, is by the
Sacraments, and especially by baptism, by which God does work, and
commands to be dispensed owtwardlye. In this sacrament the soul is not
only sealed, but also the body, because the whole body by baptism is
dedicated to God, for which consideration, the man is anointed in the
shoulders, in the head and in the breast in baptism. And on the forehead by
the bisshoppe in confirmation, with Chrisme, and sign of the cross. These two
signs are required, because to make a man hold to confess the name of
Christ, and constant to suffer adversity, the dispensatio^ of the sacraments
by the ministres outwardly, is not sufficient, unless God inwardly does
infuse grace, but when both concur and meet together, the^ is the sealing
perfited. After which sealing by virtue of the sign, which is faith, and
grace, and love of the cross in the soul, with imitation, and imprintinge of
the cross in the body, the faithful are more defended from the devil, than
they were before.

Thus you see sir how that sign which the Euangeliste mentions and sealinge
which he speaks of, in his reuelatio^s is not only faith in Christ, and
love of the passion, but also the outward sign of the cross, not only an
impression of grace in the heart inwardly, but also a printing of the cross
in the body owtwardlye. And this is not mine interpretation, or opinion. It is
his, whom all good men reverence, 8. Tho in Apocalip.
whom all learned men wonder at, to whom if all the protestants in the
world were compared and laid in a balance, for profounde divinity they would
apeare lighter then a feather. Wherefore seeing every one of these five places
do signify and express the sign of the cross, and you in denying the^ so
to do, deny both the scriptures them selves, the very propre word of God,
whereof you vaunte yower self as peart as a pere munger, and also contemn the
hoy fathers, Origin, Ephrem, Chrysostom, Hilarie, Theophilactus, and Hierome,
that be of that mind, what shall we think not of yower co^temning the
witnesses of me^, but of yower deniyng the word of God, not of yower
misreporting the sayings of the fathers, but of yower wreastinge of the (...)
scripture, not of yower cauilling against doctors, but of yower wranglinge
against the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists? Are you worthy to be taken
for a cunni^ge M. Carpenter, or a vile botcher, an expert free mason, or a
durtie mortar maker? My self will give no sentence, let wise men judge, to
them I appeal, to them I call, to their censure I submit my cause. Now let us
hear what you say against the fathers. Chrysostom likes you not: His golden
mouth you say: Fol. 14. a.
Had ledden words, and for speaking honorably of the cross to the ge^tils
you chardg hi^ with running to an extreme contrary. Chrysostom.
But how unmeet a goldsmith you are to judge of Chrisostomes golden mouth,
your coper teath and ledden tongue declare. As for running to an extreme
contrary, we tell you, that albeit it be a true rule, that Contraria contrarijs
curantur: Contraries are cured with their co^traries, yet as the expert
physician in tempering his mixtures, uses such discretion, that no extreme
shall diste^per the body: So although that virtuous father, and heavenly
phisitio^ Chrysostom used (as you say ( one contrary to cure an other (that
is) highlye commended the sign of the cross, Fol. 25. a.
because the Gentilles reproved it: and thought that he could be no God that
would suffer so vile a death upon the Cross, to make them embrace Christ
and his cross, yet you must not suppose, that he so tempered his talk, that
he gave them such words as should infecte their souls: and for true relligion
(which he professed to teach the^) gave them even at the beginning such
lessons as might bring them to error and superstition, and by one evil,
remedy an other. Let me reason with you after this sort. Either it was evil
of it self to commende^ the sign of the cross in such sort to the gentills,
or it was not. If it were evil of it self, no circumsta^ce ca^ make it good.
Romans 3.
Neither as S. Paul says: We must do evil, that good may come. Which S.
Chrysostom knew right well and would not a^uenture to fall into the hands
God, in such a case, having other means to persuade, unless ye will enrolle
him amongst those of whom the poet said: Stulti dum vitant vitia in
contraria currunt. Fools whiles they avoid faults, faulle in to the
contrary. If it were not evil of it self, but for circumstances and
consideratio^s tolerable, then are you much to blame, for condemning so
ancient and learned a father, as Chrysostom was, of follye in saying that he
ran to an extreme contrary as far in one side, Fol. 25. a
as the gentiles were on the other. If yower spirit had been Evangelical, or
any thing like unto theirs who preached Christ crucified, and his relligio^
and faith unto us, you might have learned to have borne with that which you your
self grant to be in some respect tolerable. But he that looks to find a
sparkle of their mekenes in you, is as much deceived, as he that looks to
find a drop of water in the flint stone. For if there had been either token
of humility, sparkel of honesty, or sign of Christianity in you, that
venomous tongue of yowers would never have said, that the sign of the cross,
Fol. 25. b
upon which it pleased Christ to work our redemption, is a magical
inchauntement, a conquest against Christians, an heathnishe observance, and
superstition of the^ that never thought upon Christ: For they be words more
meeter for a Lucian, a Celsus, a Julian, an Apostata, and enemy of Christ,
than for one that is redeemed with his death upon the cross. Matt. 24.
And never read to have been used of any, but of heathens, turks, Jews, or
heretics in these our miserable days.

The holy scriptures called it, the sign of the son of man, the fathers (as
I proved it my treatise) call it, the sign of the Cassiod. in Psalm. 4.
Emperor of heaven, a Chriso. demonst. ad verse. gent
token of much blessing, an Paulinus epist. 11 ad Sever.
pledge of eternal salvation, a triumphant Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 12. de fide
Chrisost. homi. 55. in Matthew.
banner of victory, a sign of Ambro. li. 6. ca. 4. de Sacra.
virtue, an honorable August. de visita. infir. ca. 3.
monument, a heavenly Lact. de vera sapient lib. 4. cap. 27.
mark, and immortal sign. And now in steppeth a Iulianiste, and contrary to
the scriptures of God, contrary to the testimonies of the ancient fathers, in
despite of all Christians reuileth it, as ye heard before, and which is most
abominable of al, in other places of his book, calls it, an idol, a dumb
God, dead devil, a scholemaster of error, and impiety. And as though this
were not blasphemous enough, he likeneth it, to the Gallows, to the helmet of
hell, and coniurers mace. Like heart, like thoughts, like tongue, like
words: he that once has forsaken the unity of Christ's church, will never
speak well of his ministers, cross, and sacraments. Examples we have to many
in these our miserable days, and one to many by this pieuishe Iulianiste: who
besides these blasphemies against the cross, has not spared as in process
shall appear, the saints in heaven, the Sacraments on earth, and ministers
ordained of Christ to be dispensers of his mysteries, until his coming again:
whom we had need to pity rather tha^ to hate, seeing so haynously he abuses
the gifts which he received of God, to bless, and not to curse: to our
instruction, that we may beware of such: to his own condemnation, unless he
repent.

But be it M. Calf. that yower imagination (which is blasphemous for any
Christian man to think) were true, touching the sign of the cross. Was it
sitting for such a sincere professor of the Gospel, such an expert father
in the scriptures, such a profounde Bachiler in Diuinitye, as you pretend yower
self to be, so to revile and rail at it? What scripture taught you that? Do
you not read, that nothing is worse than the devil, and yet not with sta^di^g
does not? S. Jude ^he Apostle tell you, that when Michael the Archa^gell did
co^te^d with hi^ about the body of Moses, he durst not, infer iudiciu^
blasphemiae, infer the judgment of blasphemy? But said: Imperet tibi Deus.
Let God command the? Does not the Wise man tell you, that: Dum maledicit
impius diabolum, Eccle. 21.
maledicit ipse animam suam? The ungodly curses his own soul while he
curses the devil? And could neither the example of the Angel sparing to
curse, and blaspheme the devil, being as fearce as a lion, and cruel as the
dragon against us, teach you, as it teaches other men, to beware of
blaspheming? neither the care of yower own soul, stay you from railing at
the Cross, which Procopius calls Niceph. lib 4 cap. 26. histo. Eccle.
precious, Justinian De sanctiff. Epis. cap. cap. 32. coll. 9.
honorable and holy, Constantine Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Co^st.
healthful, and S. Augustine a Ser. de cruce and latro.
thing of honor? Is the word of God forceable to pearce into men's hearts,
when you preach, and can it not sincke into yower owe mind when you read it?
If it be so, than may you think you have a stony heart, and crooked soul.
But what proof have you for all that which you have said? In so weighty a
matter as this is, some scripture, some father, some council, some example,
some authority should have been alleged. Shall we believe you upon yower bare
word, or trust you upon yower simple credit? Nay sir, not so, we will have
better trial of yower honesty first. And albeit in some poinctes
peradventure you would be a Pythagoras, and credited upon your bare word,
yet shall you not have silence for five years space, as he had of his
scholars.

But what if we did grant you, that some devilish and evil disposed person
abused that holy sign, in practice of witch craft, ought it therefore of any
to be called a Magical inchanteme^t? a Coniurers mace: or such lik? If yower
wisdom will serve you to think so, by like reason such as you are, may cavil
against the holy name of God, scriptures of Christ, and Supper of our lord,
and Pater noster that we use. For that women abvsed the name of God to
sorcery, the devil scriptures to evil purpose, the Corinthians the supper of
our lord, Homil. 21. Cap. 4.
other, their Pater noster to witchecrafte, S. Chrysostom declares in an
homely to the peolpe of Antioche. S. Matthew in his Gospel. S. Paul in his
Epistle, 1. Cor. 11.
and you yower self in this answer where you tell us of a witch, Fol. 2. b.
that with her Pater noster made her payle go a milking. Wherefore if there be
any grace in you, revoke this, for shame, and learn a new lesson, that a
thing good of it self, should not be sclandered or taken away for the abuse
of a few.

Further that the cross was no heathnish observance, The cross no heathenish
obserua^ce Lib. 2. ad vx.
learn of Julian the Apostata your Cosyn, who exprobrated the Cristians, and
not the Ge^tills with having and making of Crosses, which he would never have
done, if the Gentills had had any like custom. Or if you disdain to learn of
him, learn of Tertullian who told his wife, that she should give alms with
out trooble, go to the sacrifice with out scrupule, do her business without
suspicion, serve God boldlye, rejoice merilye, and bless her self openly, if
she married with a Christian after his death, but if she married with an heathe
she could not do it so frelye, which Tertullian would never have said, if
that practice of blessing, crossing, or signing had been practiced among the
heathens. Eusebius. lib. 1. de vita Constan.
Moreover that is was no conquest against the Christians learn of Constantine
the great, who said: By this healthful sign a true token of virtue, I have
delivered our city, from the yoke of the tirant, and made it free, or if you
will disdain for the nobility of yower person to learn of so mean an
Emperor as Constantine was, learn of the highest, that is lord of lords,
and king of kings, yea God him self, who showed that sign from heaven, and
said to Constantine: In hoc signo vince: Overcome in this sign. Learn of
Christ who the next night after apeared unto him, and willed him to make a
sign like unto that which he had seen, and use it in wars. And consider
with yower self that God shewinge that sign from heaven, would never have
caused the Angel to say: Overcome in this sign, Nor Christ apearing to him
in a vision, would have willed him to make and use the like, if it should be a
conquest against us. For he loves us more tenderlye, than that he will suffer
that sign, upon which he conquered hell, death, and sin, to make us his
coheires, to be a conquest against us, and make us no inheritours. With all,
learn that the laws punish such blasphemers, gladio, fuste, and cathena,
with sword, clubb, and chain. And if you think yower self to stand in
such security, in this world that you need not to fear them, yet fear the
indignation of God, who will punish all iniquity and sin. And if he
punished Julian the Apostatats uncle called also Iulianus, in the secret
parts, Socrates lib. 6. c. 10 Tripart.
so that they rotted, and had woormes engendring in them, and made his mouth
that used to blaspheme God, to be the way and instrument of his natural
egestion, and excrements, for casting on the ground the holy vessels and
palles dedicated to God, and sitting upon the^, and pissinge against the holy
altar, and reuiling at Christ as it pleased him, If all his veins opened, and
blood issued out of his body for saing skornfullye, Behold in what vessels
the son of Mary is served, Nicep. li. 14. cap. 36
If Nestorius tongue was eaten with worms, for blaspheming against Christ and
the virgin Mary, think that some horrible plague hangs over yower head,
either in this world to repentance, to set you in state of salvation, if you
have grace to acknowledge it, either to the greater heap of punishment into
everlasting damnation, if you continewe and die in it. Wherefore repent in
time, and do penance for this abominable blasphemye. Act. 8
If perhaps this thought of thy heart may be remitted the.

Yower fansye in saying that the cross was a ceremony amongst the priests of
Serapis: I will differ as yet: Fol. 25. b
In the mean season I will disscusse ij rules that you bring and proceed to the
other auctorities that you seem to oppugn, M. Calves. Rules. Calf. Fol 26. a.
Mart.
and conferr yower answers. The first is this: Whatsoever is brought in under
cloak of good intent, is not straight ways alloweable. To this I answer. Some
things are brought in by the devotion of private men, in particular churches,
and not auctorised generally by the high bisshope. What soever they are, they
bind not generally, nor are straight ways to be allowed of all men. Council.
2. Aurel. c. 9
As for example it was brought in, by the bisshops of France upon good intent
and devotion, that none of the clergy should presume to dwell with the lay
people, without the license of his bishop. Ite^ that none should depart from
Mass, Council. 3. Aure. c. 22 Conc. To let. 4. c. 17
before the lords prayer had been ended, and blessing given of the bishop, if
he were there. In Spain likewise the bisshops brought in upon good intent and
devotion, that the deacons should communicate before the altar, the other
clerks in the quier, and the people without the quier. Besides they brought in,
that every year, from the Ides of December, they should have the Litanie,
sounge or said, three days together. And diverse cuntries have diverse like
unto these. But because they received them, they are not streitwayes allowable.
In your churches, you have brought in the Paraphrasis of Erasmus, Caluins
institutions, to be read as homilies, you have made and iniunctio^, that
priests shall not marry unless the justices of peace take trial of their
wives honesties before, and see whether they be meet woeme^ for such religious
persons. These nor any such are allowable, as generally received, not amongst
the Swinglians them selves. Some things are brought in by a common consent of
all Christendom, expressed and concluded in general counsels representing
the universal body of Christ's militant church on earth. Whatsoever is
ordained, whatsoever is determined, and brought in by them, with the consent
and assent of the head bishop, Christ's vicar in earth, that straight ways is
alloweable, that is to be followed of all the humble, and obedient children of
God. Lucae 10.
Whosoever gaynesayeth their decrees despises Christ, who said, he that
despises you despises me. Whosoever hears not them, must be unto us, as an
Heathen and Publicane. Some things have been brought in by tradition and
custom, Matthew. 18
and never altered in the Catholic church. As that in consecrating the body
and blood of Christ, Cleme^s li. 8. ca 17 Apost. Institution. Just. Mar. Apol.
2. Cyprian. lib. 2. epi. 3 Ambrol. lib. 5. ca. 1. de Sacra.
water should be mingled with wine, that at the Chriso. Ho. 69. ad popul. Antio.
dreadful mysteries, commemoration should be had of the dead, that the Basil.
ca 27. de spirit. sanct. Tertul. de coromil. Fol. 26 a
Chrisme and olye be consecrated, that we sign those that are Christened with
the sign of the cross, that we pray toward the east, and bless our
selves. These are to be allowed because they were never altered. Some other
have been brought in by tradition and custom, yet not generally received, as
that infantes after baptism should receive honye and milk, that children
should receive the sacrament, and such like, which have either ben altered by
authority of such as Christ appointed to be ministers and governors to rule
his church, or suffered to grow out of use by a secret dissent, and lack of
use. These are not to be allowed, and followed. But the cross is none of these.

Yower second rule is this. Whatsoever has been upon good occasion received
once, must not necessarilye be retained still. For proof of this, you bring a
decre of pope Stephen, ma^gled at yower pleasure. Distin. 63. ca. Quia
But of that hereafter when I come to declare your falsitie in abusing the
fathers: your rule and authority we admit. What will you infer upon it?
Because things once received upon good occasion may be altered, shall it be
lawful for every jack straw, to alter and change, when and what pleases
him? Learn you that by the authority that ye allege out of the decrees? To
school sir James, to school, and spell it a little better. The words of the
decrees be these. Si nonnulli ex praedecessoribus and maioribus nostris
feceru^t aliqua. etc. If some of our predecessors, and elders have done any
thing which at any time could be with out offense, and afterward be turned
into error and superstition, let them with out any more delay, and with
great authority be destroyed of them that come after. Here is authority
given to aftercu^mers, to abrogate that which their predecessors made, if it
grow to error and superstition: but who be these aftercu^mers sir James?
Every pieuishe protestant? every lay man that comes after? VVil yower wit
serve you to say so? as you must needs if you will infer any thing upon this
for yower purpose? then by youer judgment every man that cu^meth after, yea
the very Tinkers, Cobblers poticaries, and pedlers (for you can not exempte them
from the name of after cu^mers,) may alter and change what soever their
predecessors have done. And should we not have a goodlye common weal if it
might be lawful for all men to alter things at their pleasure? But tell me
sir James, what was that Stephanus that made the decree which you recited
before? Was he not pope of Rome? Were not the predecessors and sorefathers
that he speaks of, the bishopps that were before him in that see? If it be
so, Calf. condemned by the decree which him self allegeth.
as (if you deny it,) the decre shall controlle you, and reason conuynce you of
follye, then must it needs follow, that the aftercu^mers, that he speaks of,
were the bishopes that should ordinarilye succeed him in that see. And not in
general every one that should come after him. So that it is the bishope of
Rome, M. Calf. that must abrogate and take away whatsoever abuse is crepte
into the church, it is he that must alter the decrees and Canons of his
predecessors, if any be grown into error and superstition.

Call to yower remembrance the rule of the law that says, ff. de Reg. Iuris.
Nihil tam natural quam eode^ genere quodque dissoluere, quo est colligatu^.
There is nothing so natural as to dissolve every thing by the same sort and
kind as it was knit together: and with all consider, that as with us England,
when a law is established by a parliament in one kings days, and to be
repealed after his death by his successors, it can not be done but by an other
act of parliament, so in like case, when a decree is made by a bishope of
Rome, it ca^ not be altered but by an other bishope, that succedeth him in the
same see. Wherefore M. Calf. seeing it has been established by general
Counsels and decrees of the bishop of Rome that the sign of the cross should
be in churches, and these canons and decrees have never been abrogated by any
of them, it follows that it should be retained still, until the B. of Rome
his successors, that Pope Stephen means, abrogate it, as erroneous and
superstitious.

Where you say, that the maki^g the sign of the cross has bredd such
inconvenience that the inward faith has been vntaughte, Calf. Fol. 26. a.
and that the virtue has been attributed to the sign, which only proceeds
from him which is signified, I must plainly tell you, Mart.
that you maliciously sclaunder the catholic church and affirm more than you
shall ever be able to prove. For neither has the faith be^ untaught these xv.
hundred years in Christendom, nor almost these thousand years in England.
Nor yet if there has been any inconvenience or negligence in the prelates for
not preaching, that has not proceeded (as you disdainfully say) of Crossing.
Fol. 26. a.
You tell me that, I do putt causam pro non causa, Where I wisse, You have
little cause, but how well you have kept your shipp from that rock and
put, non causam pro causa let the world judge. See good people M. Calf.
says: Fol. 26. a.
Christen men have used to bless and cross them selves, ergo the inward
faith has be^ untaught. In Tertullians time the inward faith was untaught, and
why M. Calf? Forsooth Crossing was so much used amongst Christians, that
whenever they went out, whenever they came in, whenever they sat down,
or did any other thing, they made the sign of the cross in their forheads. In
9. Ezechiel.
In S. Hieromes time, the inward faith was untaught. For crossing was so much
used, that the figure of it was printed in men's forheds: Frequenti manus
inscriptione, Ad Eusto.
with often inscription of the hand. Yea S. Hierome him self commanded, that:
ad omnem actum manus pingat crucem. At every action of ours the hand should
make a cross: And so likewise in other ages. O fine logitioner and profou^de
divine. An imitation of M. Calves Rhethorique. Fol. 28. a
O cu^ninge argument worthy that all the scholars may hiss out of the
schools? Would a man have thought that a Bacchiler of Divinity and
woorshipful reader in Paul's, could have made so woorshipful a reason? If
crossing bred such inconvenience, that it hindered the teaching of inward faith,
then was the fault in the people, not in the priests, in the laity, not in
the clergy. For the greater number of such Christians, the more crossing, the
more crossing, the greater let to preaching as you say: So sir, have you not
bestirred yower sefe like a pretty clearke? You give us as good a reason for
the hindering of of the inward faith, as the old sage father fool did the
gentlemen in Kent for the stopping of Sandwiche haven, saying that the haven
never prospered since yonder Tinderden Steeple was builded. May not yower
superintende^t M. Grindall much rejoice, that he has so fine a piece nighe his
palace, and give you leave to set forth a new book without the old
privilege? But this is nothing to yonder Tynderden steple. It is a great blot
in yower eye: I dare say you would wish it a fish poole.

Where you chardge us that we attribute to the sign, Fol. 26. a Calf. Mart.
the virtue which proceeds from him, which it signified, I must tell you that
you have ears and will not hear, eyes and will not see, a little wit and will
not understand. For if youer ears had not been deaf, eyes blind, and wit
wilful, you might have heard, seen, and understood, that nothing is
attributed, to the sign without special relation to the merits of Christ's
passion, no effect mentioned to have been done by the cross, but in the
virtue of Christ's death suffered full bitterlye upon the cross. Which clause
I did purposly put in at the latter end of the first article, to take away
occasion of cauilling from all such wranglers as you show yower self, to be.
M. Calf. but a vvragler.
And surely if you did read that clause before, you can not escape the blemish
of wilful malice, for chardging me with that error, saying that I left out
that sentence of Chrysostom, velle^ scire a pagano etc. I would hear of the
pagane how it comes to pass that the sign of so cursed death is so to be
desired, nisi magna crucifixi virtus, Fol. 26. b.
if it be not the great power of him that was crucified, because I would prove
the sign it self, without relation to the merits and virtue of Christ's
pass^on, to be a token of much blessing. The contrary, to convince you, is
there to be seen, Every one that has eyes to see, and cunning to read, may
perceive it. If you did not read that clause before you framed this answer,
then ran you as far on the other side in to the note of ignorance and folly,
for aduentring to make answer before you understand what is the question, and
meaning of him that does propounde it. For as the Wise man says: Prouer. 18
He that answers before he hears, shows himself to be a fool and
worthy of confusion.

Calf. Fol. 40. b
But you ask me, why I bring the example of Julian the Apostata and say, that
man using only the sign of the Cross, puts away all the craft and
subtiltye of the devil, if I attribute nothing to the sign but by relation to
the merits of Christ's passion? Mart.
Here belike yower wit was a wolle gathering, when you devised to move this
question, or youer capacity estranged with some fond fancy when you
conceived it. For answer, I might refer you to the history, but seeing a
thing once told can not sincke into such a wittelesse head, I will tell it you
once again. I brought that story, to express the great and mighty virtue of
the cross, which being made by the wicked Tyrant, and Apostata, of it self,
through the power and force, that Christ by his passion gave unto it, put the
wicked spirits to flight. There was no virtue, no merit, nor faith in Julian,
yet he drove the devils away by the sign of the cross, Chrisost. de monst.
contra gentil.
and why by the sign of the cross? Nisi quia magna crucifixi virtus, but
because the power of the crucified is great? And that triumphant banner of his
victory terrible unto them, and the very printing of it in the forheade, such a
terror, that they durst not abide, which argues that it has virtue specially
of the merits of Christ's death. And if I had omitted the latter clause in my
first article, yet the gentle, and charitable reader might have conceived so
much of this history, if not of this, yet of the other sentence that I
alleged out of Athanasius, where I signify that Athanasius, declaring how
before the cumming of Christ, devils miserably afflicted men, and how when
Christ was come, they were discomfited and overthrown, said, Signo crucis
tantum vtens homo omnes horum fallacias pellit. Atha. de humanit. ver^i.
Man using only the sign of the cross, puts away all their subtlety and
craft. For I declared there out of Athanasius (whose name M. Calf.
suppresseth, least the reader should reverence his authority) that the
subtility of the devil is driven away by the sign of the cross, after the
death of Christ, which argues, that there is a relation made to Christ's
cumming and death, upon the cross. And because it should most manifestly
apeare, I cited an other sentence out of Athanasius in the same place, where it
is said: that if one use the sign of the cross, Christum solummodo nominans,
naming only Christ, all the devils be put to flighte. Which also might have
given you to understand that nothing is attributed to the sign but by relation
to the virtue and power of the crucified.

Wherefore seeing crossing has bredd no such inconvenience, that the inward
faith has been left untaught, seeing the virtue proper to the crucified, has
never been atttibuted to the sign, the sign may remain still, and Christ
that is signified, may be simply preached not withstanding, as he has ever
been amongst the Catholics.

Where you say, that these words of Chrisostom, Calf. Fol. 26. b
hoc morte^ sustulit, hoc inferni oereas portas co^fregit, This took away
death, this broke the brazen gates of hell, convince, that Chrysostom means
not, that Christ, who hanged upon the Cross, made the cross and sign thereof
to be of more virtue, because no material thing, no piece of wood nor sign
did work that effect, nor conquer death and hell, Mart.


We must desire you to make a Comment upon these words, and at the next
edition with priuiledg, according to the Queen's Majesty's injunctions, expound
to whom this word of the comparatyue degree (more) has his relation and what
you mean by it. Ad as (more) must infer a than, so when you tell us, what
that (tha^) is, then shall you have an awnswer to yower than. In the mean
season, the world may see that you mean deceithfullye that will not utter
yower mi^de plainlye. You take much pains, and bring certain places of
scripture to prove that it was Christ, Calf. Fol 26. b Mart.
and not the Cross that redeemed and saved us. I pray you what waltams caulfe
did ever deny that, or think the contrary? And yet what wise man did ever
say, that Christ did redeem us otherwise the^ by his death upon the Cross,
o^r used that as an instrument other wise, than to work our salvation, or made
that sign healthful and comfortable, otherwise than by the merit of his
passion? If you have any mathematical imagination in youer idle brain, or
melancholy fancy in yower wavering head, consult with some astronomers, that
may resolve the one, and drink some Elleborum that may expel the other. For
I think there was never man that had more need.

Now to your answer against the authority of Martialis. First you will have
him to be none of the 72. Fol. 27. a Calf.
disciples, one reason which you bring, is because Eusebius says, the
regester of 72. disciples is found in no place, An other, that Hieronimus
Ge^nadius, and Isidorus never made mention of him* which had been a great
oversight, if his auncientie had been such as I pretend. Mart. M. Calves reasons
against the authority of Martialis soluted.
To the first I reply, that Eusebius in the place which you quote, that is,
lib. 1. cap. 12. has no such thing. And if he had, yet does it make nothing
for youer purpose. For Eusebius in the proheme declares that he gathered his
history out of diverse men's works, which were confusely written, some in this
country, so me in that, and thought that he should sufficiently please, and
gratify his prosteritie, if he gathered together and regestred in order, the
successors of the chiefest Apostles of our savior Christ in the most famous
churches, if he did not show forth all. VVherby it is plain that albeit he
compiled his storye out of diverse Chronicles, yet he had not all the
writings, all the monumentes, all the Chronicles of all men, and all cuntries,
and all things that were written and done in all ages, to his time, fithens
Christ was incarnate. Many things might right well escape his hands, and
pass his knowledge as well appears by his words rehearsed before. To the
second I answer in like manner, that albeit S. Hierome, Gennadius, and
Isidorus made books of Ecclesiastical writers, yet this might pass their
knowledge, and yet no ouersighte committed. For it is not possible for every
man to see every thing, nor to have information, or by mouth or by monument of
all that was done before, search he never so narrowly. Many books and
monumentes of the fathers are brought to light now, that then were hidden, and
many hidden now that then were known, as all that be expert in the
ecclesiastical histories may right well see. VVherfor it is a childish part
of you M. Calf. to deny so ancient an author and infer upon the authority
of Eusebius and S. Hierome and others negatiuely, as (if you infer any thing
against the forsaide author) you must of necessity infer this, Eusebius
says the regester of the 72. disciples is found in non place, ergo Martialis
was none of the 72. disciples: and so consequently there were no such
disciples. S. Hierome, Gennadius, and Isidorus writing the lives of
ecclesiastical writers, make no mention of the foresaid author, ergo there
was none such. Certes if yower divinity should chance to fail, and you
fortune to become a portpannier, or peddler, and sell Sophistry, the veriest
idiote in the country that knows a B from a beetle, will not give twoe lepps
of an old dog, for x. ounces of the best that you carye in all your panniers.
Now to his words.

VVheere that holy father says, Calf. Fol. 27. a
The cross of our lord is an invincible armor against Satan etc. it
pleases his maistership to say that if this may be rightly understand
according to the letter, we need not greatly stand in dread of Satan, he is
easily vanquisshed, we need no further armor, tha^ the cross. Let Christ
alone. This Mars shall suffice. Mart.
But Alas (sir) where is youer wit become, where is your profounde sight in
divinity? Is all gone? It should seem so by yower clerkly answers. For no man
that has wit and common sense, would reason as you do. To show your
fondness plainlye, Tell me I beseech you, Marc. 16.
Is it not true according to the letter that Christ overcame the world and
the devil, and that whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved? Is it
not true according to the letter, that whosoever eats the flesh of the son
of man, Joan 6.
according to Christ's institution, shall have life everlasting? Is not all
this true according to the letter? And this not withstanding have we not need
to fear, and fight against the devil? Does not S. Paul say unto us, Ephe.
6.
Be strong in our lord, and in the mightines of his power, put on the armor
of God, that you may be able to stand against the assaults and privy waightes
of the devil? 1. Cap. 5.
Does not S. Peter bid us to be sobre and watch because our aduersarye the
devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, and resist
him being strong in faith? Luc. 21.
Does not our savior him self command us to take heed to our selves, and
to be ware of surfeting, and drunckennes, and cares of this world? Does he
no^ bidd us watch and pray always, that we may be worthy to avoid the
things that are to come, and stand before the son of man? I trust yower
Maistership will not deny it. As then sir, by these places of scripture, not
withstanding it be true according to the letter, that Christ has conquered
Satan, that baptism wassheth away our sins, that the flesh of the son of
man gives us life, we have commandment to putt on the armor of God, to be
strong in faith, to be sober, to be ware of surfeting, and drunckennesse, and
cares of the world, to watch and pray, and fight stoutelye against the
devil, Nisi enim quis legitime certauerit non coronabitur, 2. Tim. 2.
for unless a man fight lustely, he shall not be crowned: Even so albeit
according to the letter it be true, that as Martialis says, The cross of our
lord is an invincible armor against Satan etc. and by the mighty pour of
Christ and merits of his passion, a sword not suffering iniquity and ghostly
assaults of perverse power to approach unto us, Yet have we need to fear the
devil, and use against him all the means we ca^ to avoid his assaults, and
privy waightes. For he is a mighty enemy, and of great power, and when we
fight against him, Ephe. 6. Job 7.
we fight not against flesh and blood, nor against one only, but against
powers. Besides our life is a warrfare upon earth, and as long as we are
militantes, so long have we need to play the valiant soldiers, and exercise
our selves to fight, that when the enemy inuadeth, we may put on the armor of
God, spread our lords banner, against him, and encounter ma^fully. And if in
fight we fortune to take a foil, or utterly be ouercu^med, the fault is in
our dasterdnes, and not in our weapon. For as S. Paul says. The weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.
But mighty in God, to the destruction and overthrowing of all munition and
defense, made against them.

Further consider how the author calls it, the cross of our lord, which
words give us to understand, that we must be Christ's servants in holiness of
life, and not bond slaves in vileness of sin, lively members of his mystical
body, and not rotten bows severed from the unity of his church, Children
serving him in spirit and truth, and not strangers following our own
appetite, in sensuality and heresy: Otherwise neither this cross that is
here mentioned, nor the passion of Christ it self, shall save us from the
terrible thraldom of the devil, not that either the cross through the virtue
of Christ his passion, either the death of our savior it self is unable to
save us, but because we through our iniquity and sin are not worthy of so
great grace, and benefit.

But quoth M. Calf. Behemoth and Leuiathan (that is the devils against whom
we must fight) are of an other manner of force, none dare come nere them, none
can resist them, Calf. Fol. 27. a
the sword shall never touch them, the spear yealdeth to the^.

But believe him good people no further then you see him. Mart. The scripture
falsified.
For in the 40. chapter of Job which he alleges for his proof, there is no
such thing in the text of S. Hieroms translation, but the contrary rather is
there to be seen. For God says, pone manum tuam super eum, lay thy hand
upon him. To lay hand upon him, is as S. Gregory there says, virtutis
potestate superare, to over come him with pour of virtue, not of thy own, but
of God, who repressing his crueltye, suffers him to rage no more than is
expedient, and turns his fearcenes into the commodity of the elect and
chosen. And if M. Calf. urge his own saying to be true, Mat 12 Marc. 7
ask him whether our savior Christ, when he commanded dumb and deaf
devils to depart from the bodies which they possessed, and expelled whole
legions, and made them go into the piggs, Matthew. 8.
when he spoiled the pouers of the air, Matt. 8. Luc. 8. Coloss 2.
and brought them forth in open show, ask him I say, whether he did not, or
durst not come nigh the devil? Ask him again whether S. Paul came not nigh
the devil when he expelled him out of a maiden at Philippis a city in
Macedonia? Acto. 16.
Ask him whether Christ's disciples came not nigh the devils, when they
expelled them, and said: Luc. 10.
O lord yea the devils are subject unto us in thy name? And if he deny it,
tell him he denies Christ, and his Gospel.

Fol. 27. a
Again where he says: that no man can resist them, that is the devils. Ask
him whether Christ gave not his Apostles virtue and power to cast out devils?
Mar 3. Luc 9.
Ask him whether Christ said not, that they that believe, in my name shall
cast out devils? and if he tell you that Christ gave his Apostles, and
faithful beleuers such authority, and power, then tell him again that the
devil is not so terrible, Cap. 4.
but that he may be resisted. For S. James says: Resist the devil and he
will flee away from you: VVithal tell him I beseech you, that it is a great
shame for him, and a foul sclaunder for the Gospel, to bring in any such
opinion, and falsify the word of God, to maintain such a new and wicked
heresy. The next words that follow, as M. Calf. alleges are these: Fol.
27. a
They esteem iron as straw. and brass as rotten wood: But read as long as
ye list, ye shall never find them in the 40. chapter of Job, as it is quoted
in the margent of his book, wherefore desire him to amend it, at the next
impression. In deed such like words are readd in the 41. chapter of Job. But
not altogether as M. Calf. cites them. S. Hieroms translation has it thus:
Reputabit enim quasi paleas ferrum, and quasi lignum putridum as. For he shall
esteem iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood. And as S. Gregory
interprets them, they are spoken of the devil that shall bear the sweay
when Antichriste cummeth: His force shall be such, that he shall esteem iron as
straw, that is, He shall consume with the fire of his wickedness, the pour and
strenght of those that preach, unless the grace of God does assist them. He
shall repute brass as rotten woodde, that is to say, he shall bring into
dust the constancye of the patient and long suffering, unless God does defend
the^. The other sense, that M. Calf. like an evil gloser says, that none
shall dare come nere him, or that none can resist him, Fol. 27. a
is contrary to the saying of S. James, contrary to the Gospel, and Christ
him self. Wherefore judge of him (good readers) accordinglye, and think
whether he be worthy to be a preacher amongst the people of God, who is so
good a proctour for the devil. My self will say nothing, but wish him grace
to repent for his fondnes, in time.

Now to his answer against the place brought out of Damascene, Damasc.
Fol. 27. b Calf.
whom like a grave iusticer he will not discredit but excuse, although he be
not so sound in all points as was to be wisshed. But mark I pray you have
wisely he does it, Mart.
these are his words: He lived in the time of Leo Isauricus, Calf.
when the blouddye bickering was for images: then Satan be stirred him self.
Then was it no marvel if a man learned and godly other wise were carried away
with the common error. Here is his excuse, Damascene was learned, but he
yealded to error, and that not obscure or doubtful, but common, Mart.
such as all men knew, he was godly, but he was carried away with the world,
learning yealded to error, godliness to unstableness, which is not likely to
be true. For the learned man, being a godly man (as Damascene was) will never
yield to an error, if he know it to be an error, nor the godly man if his
heart be fixed in the law of God, Ephesians. 4. Romans 8.
will be carried away with every wind, of new doctrine, that makes against his
glory. For what says S. Paul, Shall separate us from the love of God?
Shall tribulation persecution, or the sword do it? No: Wherefore if Damascene
yealded to a common error, he was not learned, and godly, if he was learned and
godly he yielded not to a common error. Again if he was carried away with the
swea of the world, he was not godly, and if he were godly, he was not carried
away with the swea of the world. So that M. Calf. must grant his own
excuse to be fond, and imploye a kind of co^tradiction, or acknowledge that
either Damascene was not learned and godly otherwise, or that he neither yealded
nor was carried away with a common error. For both can not stand. Yet he
pleases him self well with this co^ceite, and shifteth away his reason with
as unreasonable talk, as ever man heard. For whereas that father said: that
the cross is given us as a sign upon our foreheads, like as circumcision was
to the Israelites, by this we Christen men differ, and are discerned from
infidels, This is our sheilde, our weapon, our ba^ner and victory against the
devil, this is the mark that the destroyer touch us not, nay it ca^ not be
so (quoth M. Calf.) for Lacta^tius says: The blood of a beast had not such
power in it as to save men: Calf. Fol. 28. a
therefore the sign of the cross is neither sheilde, nor weapon, nor victory
of ours. Mart.
This is as good reason as if some royster had said, my man's shadow can not
keep a knawe from my head, ergo my man's buckler or sword is no defense of
mine. For that the blood of the lamb springled upon the posts of the children
of Israells doors, Lib. 4 cap. 26. de vera Sapient.
was but a shadow, Lactantius in the place that M. Calf. alleges, does
plainly show. But it liked not his lerning to tell us so much, nor yet how he
took the middle of a sentence, and left out the beginni^g, and ending, which is
no unwonted thing with birds of that fether.

Lactant. not truly alleged.
Lactantius there, treats of the mysterye and pouer of our lords cross, and
of the signification of those things which Christ did, or suffered, and how he
was prefigured by the pascall lamb. And amongst the rest he declares why he
streacht out his hands, and says. Christ therefore streacth out his hands
in his passion and measured the world, that he might the^ declare that a
mighty people should come under his wings, and receive in their foreheades,
signum illud maximum and sublime, that most great and honorable sign, The
figure of which, the Jews do now represent, when they springle their door
posts with the blood of the lamb. For when God was ready to plague the
Egiptians, that he might preserve the children of Israel from that plague,
Exodus 12.
he commanded them to kill a lamb with out spott, and set a sign with the
blood of that, upon their door posts, whereupon when all the first begotten of
the Aegiptians were destroyed in one night, Haebrei solo signo sanguinis tuti
fuerunt, non quia cruor pecudis tantam in se vim gerebat vt hominibus saluti
esset, sed imago fuerat rerum futurarum, etc. The Israelittis only were safe,
hy the sign of the blood, not because the blood of a beast had such force, in
it that it could be a safegarde to me^, but it was a shadow of things, to
come. For the white lamb with out spott was Christ, that is to say innocent,
and just and holy, which being offered up in sacrifice of the same jews, is a
safeguard and salvation to all which have written the sign of blood, that is
the sign of the Cross upon which he shedd his blood, in their foreheades. For
the forheade is the hiest door post of man, and the wood which was sprinkled
with blood is a signification of the Cross. Thus much Lactantius, by which
you see that the blood of the la^be springled upon the door posts in Aegipt,
was a shadow, and that it signified the cross of Christ, and not his passion
only, but the cross, qua sanguinem fudit, upon which he shedd his blood, the
sign of which Cross, all men that come under the wings of Christ must
receive in their foreheades. The blood of the lamb springled at that time upon
the door posts was vaileable in a figure, to keep all that had it, from
danger of the destroyer, not of it self, but because God did so ordain it,
that it might apeare how much the truth it, self should avail to defend the
people of God, in the latter and extreme necessity of the world. This also
Lactantius writes in the foresaid place, and in the next chapter treats of
the power of the sign of the Cross, and declares how terrible it is unto
devils, which M. Calf. omitteth. But that men may see how he takes a piece of
an author and snatcheth all morsells to serve his hungry appetite, and
lets the rest go, and never does respect the mi^de of the author, I will
repeat you some of his words that follow in the very next chapter. Thus he
saiethe. Lib. 4. ca. 27. de vera sapien.
Now it is sufficient to declare the power of this sign what it is albe to
do. What a great terror this sign is unto the devils, he shall know, who
sees how when they are coniured by Christ, they flee out of the bodies which
they possessed. Lactant. judgment of the cross.
For as our savior himself when he lived amongst men, did putt all devils
to flight with his word, and did quiet men's minds that were distracted, and
set in rage by their wicked incursions: Even so at this present, those that
follow him, drive out of men the same wicked spirittes, and nomine magistri
sui, and signo passionis, both with the name of their master, and sign of the
passion, of the which thing there is easy proof. For when the gentills offer
sacrifice to their Gods, if any man stand by, that has his forehead signed,
they offer up no sacrifice. Again when certain of our servants stood by
their masters, while they were sacrificing, by making of the Cross upon their
foreheades, they put the devils to flight, so that they could not describe in
the bowels of their beasts, what things were to come: Thus you see what
Lactantius mind was of the cross, and that the sign is such a terror to
wicked spirits, that they vanishe away as soon as they see the figure of it.
Wherefore not withstandinge M. Calfhills half mangled sentence alleged out
of Lactantius, it is true that Damascene writes, that the cross is our
sheilde, our weapon, our banner, and victory against the devil, and that his
answer to Damascene, is not worth a rotten Damson, although he much reioyseth
in it, as may appear by the great triumph and exclamation which he makes by
and by upon it, because I said that the effects before rehearsed were done by
the death of Christ especially, and by the sign of the cross as an external
mean, and used for proof of it, this similitude: As me^ not withstanding the
merits of Christ's passion must receive the sacraments: So fighters against
the violent assaults, of Satan, must use besides the faith in Christ's
passion, the outward sign of the cross. In which similitude, I make my
proportion and likeness between the passion of Christ redeming and saving us,
and the sacraments concurring as external means in the one side, and between
the faith of a Christian man to fight against temptations, and the sign of
the cross, concurring as an owtwarde aid in the other side, that as the soul
fights on her part, so the body which is but a lump of earth, and has no
faith may also fight with a bodily armor, and do his endeavor on his part,
as the mind prays, the tongue speaks, the heart believes, the mouth
confesses, the soul laboreth in heaven, the hand works in earth. Now
comes M. Calf. inuerting my words and manner of speech, and makes me say
thus: Fol. 28. a Calf.
The sacraments must concur with faith, ergo the sign of the cross with
Christ. Which is quite contrary to that I said, Mart.
and not to be gathered of my words. For I am not ignorant, that infantes
although they have no actual faith, be saved by the sacrament of baptism, nor
that Christ is unable to save us without the Cross: M. Calf. deals with us
as Celsus did with the Christians. ^i 7 co^t. Celsum. Fol. 1^ b
Wherefore this wrangler may well be compared to Celsus that Origin had to do
with all, who would attribute those words to the Christians which they never
spoke, as apeareth by his words where he says, after this: Celsus shewinge
forth in many words those things which we never spoke, yet for all that he
brings them forth as though we had spoken them. Which is a sorry shifte, but
consider his argument, this it is.

Notwithstanding God his power that gives increase I must eat my meat, ergo
notwithstanding my labor, whereby I may sustain my self, I must covet my
neighbors goods: here be iiij. parts, as in mine rehearsed before, Christ's
power giving increase, meat nourishing, labor purchasing, covetousness
desiring other men's goods: But the proportion is not like, especially between
labor and covetousness, and faith and the cross: For labor is commanded,
covetousness contrary to the precept, but faith and the cross are both
commanded: faith by the express word of Christ, the cross by tradition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Cap. 17. de Spir. san. Ephesians. 6.
which S. Paul commands us to keep, and S. Basil does in a sort equalle
with the scripture. Besides I am commanded by S. Paul to be strong in the
mightines of Gods power? If the^ gods power be not tied to this, or that, but
is infinite, and showed many and sundry ways (of the which the sign of the
Cross through the merit of Christ's passion is one) as apeareth by the
strange and great miracles, which it pleased his majesty to work by it, why
may not every Christen man upon affiance of Gods mercy and goodness, account
him selfstronge against the devil, with this sign, as one of the instruments,
whereby the mightynes of Gods power is showed? Christ said to Constantine:
Eusebius lib de vita Constan. Chrisost. demonst. ad versus gent.
In hoc signo vince, overcome in this sign. The holy Ghost by the holy fathers
and prelates of the church, tell us that this sign is a terror to wicked
spirits, and bridle to contrary powers. The stories of antiquity and practice
of this present time, declare the same. And why should we not believe them?
Marry it is forbid quoth M. Calf. As covetousness and lusting after other men's
goods is. Fol. 28. b.
If it be so sir, show us that negative commandment, or some sentence, some
clause of the express word of God, that does prohibit me^, to cross them
selves, as we can show you, many places, in which the other is expressly
forbidden. If you can not do it, (as I am sure you can not,) unless you have
some text newly forged at Geneua or framed at Tygurie, which our forefathers
never knew, then revoke yower rash sentence, in saying that it is forbidden
in the express word of God. For it is no where to be seen. VVithal be
ashamed of yower blasphemy in setting the cross against covetousness, and
lusting after other men's goods: and blushe at yower lurde and Calfehish
ignorance in making my words to be spoken by way of comparison, which are
spooken by a similitude.

My self because you have not learned yet, what difference there is between a
comparison and a similitude, would have taken pains to have expressed it unto
you, but that I perceive, you have conceived such a majesty of yower own
person, such trust in yower untruths that you will disdain to be taught of an
old usher of Winchester. Therfere I remitte you to youer Doctor Radolphe.
Li. 1. ca. 24
Learn of him whether you have done well in calling that a comparison. If a man
should say. As every scholar that is desirous to profit in study, must have
besides the benefit of capacity, memory, and wit, a master to instruct him,
and books to occupye him self with all: Even so every soldier that will
gladly get the victory of his enemy, must have besides stoutnes of heart,
actiuitie of body, and skill of war, harnes to defend him, victuals to
nourrishe him, and weapon to invade his enemy, would you make of it a
comparison or a similitude? If according to yower rules of logic, and
Rh^^orike, you find it a similitude, rather than a com^^ (...) ^ry out like a
Calf. against yower self and use yower (...) ^^^clamatio^. O blind ignorance
that coul, de not know a similitude from a comparison. VVoulde a man-haue
thought that a M. of Art, M. Calves Rhetorique. Fol 28. a Fol. 18. b
a bacheler of diuinitye, a reader of Poules, could with heresy have
forgotten logic, Rhetoric, and humanity? You, blame me as though: I
compared things utterly unlike, of the which the one can not infer the
other. But I tell you that it is some Melancholy fancy, or phrenetike passion
in you, to think so. For the words of which you gather that, importe no such
thing.

Where you tell me, Fol 28 b
that sacraments have a promise annexed unto them, I pray you be so good
master unto us as find out by yower Geneuian doctrine, where in all the
scripture, there is any promise made, to bread and wine. If you ca^ show us
none, what shall we think of yower schismatic communion ministered by your
disordred ministres, which is nothing else but bread and wine according to your
doctrine? Sacrament it can be none, because it has no promise annexed unto
it. And if it be no sacrament, what impudencye is there in you, to force men
unto it under the name of a sacrament, and to publishe to the world in yower
Apology, that you have twoe sacraments in yower church, baptism and the
Euchariste? VVheras every sacrament having a promise, and bread and wine (which
is yower communion) having no promise, The communion no sacrament by M. Calves
doctrine.
it must needs follow by yower own rule, that it is no sacrament at all, and
that you have but one only sacrament. Wherefore if you be rigorous to condemn
the cross because it has no promise in express scripture, we will condemn
yower communion of bread and wine, for the same defaulte.

As for the rock which you say you pass over like an unskillful mariner
striking yower helm against it, that Sacraments are no cause of grace, I
would likewise pass it over, Fol. 28. b
but that it is too dangerouse for all that pass, through this sea. For that
Sacraments are no cause of grace, neither scripture, nor ancient father
taught, neither Christen man beleaued. sacraments causes of grace.
Judge yower self. Is it not a greet grace to have remission of our sins?
to be justified, and to have Christ with in us? be not all these great graces,
and is not the sacrament of baptism cause of all this? Read the scriptures,
does not S. Peter say: Do penance, and let every one be baptized in remission
of sins? Dot not Christ say Whosoever believes and is baptized shall be
saved? Does not S. Paul tell us, that: All ye that are baptized in Christ,
have put on Christ? Again is it not a great grace to have the holy Ghost?
And read you not in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 8.
that they by imposition of hands gave the holy Ghost? Does not S. Paul
say unto Timothe For which cause I exhort thee that thou resuscitate and
stir up the grace which is in thee by the imposition of my hands? 2. Tim. 1.
Does he not say to him in his other epistle. Despise not the grace which is
in the, which is given thee by prophecy with the imposition of hands of
priesthood? And what other true co^struction can you make of this, but that
the holy Ghost (which is no small grace) is given by impositio^ of hands,
both in the Sacrament of Confirmation, and orders? Examine the words of the
Acts, and S. Paul in his epistle. In the Acts it is said: The holy Ghost
was given by the imposition of hands: In S. Paul, resuscitate and stir up
the grace which is in the, by the imposition of my hands: neglect not the
grace which is in the, Cap. 4.
which is given thee by prophecy, by the imposition of hands? What plainer
words can you have? See you not that one says, that the holy Ghost, and
the other that grace was given by imposition of hands? And yet will you say
that Sacraments are no cause of grace? What color or gloss have you to
illude these words of the scriptures? Will you say (as you do by the
fathers) that the Apostles and Evangelists, yea and our Savior him self:
Fol. 29. b
meant better than they wrote, and borrowed impropre phrases of the common
speech such as seemed to maintain an error, and ouershot the^ selves in
their terms? And where they said, by baptism, Christ is put on us, remission
of sins is given us, and the holy Ghost and grace is given by imposition of
hands, will you corrupt the text, and say: By baptism Christ is signified
to be put on us, Remission of sins is signified to be given us? The holy
Ghost and graces are signified to be bestowed upon us: And for a truth will
you give us a figure? If this be lawful by yower new Gospel, what assurance
shall we have of our Christianity? what hope, but that, when things shall be
ripe according to yower own appetite, 2. Cor. 4. Coll 1.
you will not say with S. Paul: Christ is the image of God, nor with S. John:
Verbum caro factum est: The word is made flesh: But Christ signifies the
image of God, the word is signified to be made flesh? You have begone
pretely allredy, by interpreting those words of Christ: Hoc est corpus meum:
Matt. 26.
This does signify my body. For this is my body, and certes great doubt lest
you will proceed further. For in heresy there is no stay.

Where you say, Calf. Fol. 28.
That in the sacraments the only promises of God by Christ, both by word
and sign are exhibited unto us, which promises if we apprehend by faith, then
is the grace increased in us, and the gift of God by faith received, is by the
sacrament sealed in us: I beseke you tell us, Martial.
when the thing it self, (that is to say) remission of sins, and other
graces are given us, if the only promises of Christ are exhibited in the
sacraments? and let us understand in what time of our life we shall receue
them? For it is a necessary matter for us, and worthy to be known. For if we
apprehende the promises of God never so much by faith, and lack the thing by
our own follye, there shall no grace effectuallye increase in us, to
everlasting life, as Christ him self says.

Unless a man be borne again of water and the holy ghost, he can not enter
into the kingedome of heaven. Again if grace does not increase, Joan. 3.
nor the gift of God (which is specially remission of sins) be not sealed in
us, before we apprehe^de the promises of God by faith, in what case will you
putt infantes, that have no actuail faith? In what case will you putt the
ignorantes, that have nether wit, nor understanding to apprehende the promises
of God? Shall they be exempted from the kingedome of heaven? Shall they be
imbarred of the merits of Christ's passion? And where as all that are baptized
in Christ, have put on Christ, and by baptism receive remission of sins,
and so are made the children of God into everlasting life, will you take upon
you to estrange them from the mercy of Christ, because, for lack of age,
wit, and understanding, they can not by faith apprehe^de the promises of God
by Christ? It is to unmerciful. Fol 28. b Calf.
Yet so you do, for you say, that when we have apprehended the promises of
God by faith, then is the grace increased in us, Mart.
then the gift of God by faith received, is sealed by the sacrament in us? If
it be then received and sealed in us, M. Calf, and not before, then you exclude
all infantes from eternal salvation in Christ. If it be signed and sealed
before, then are you very ignorant in saying, that the only promises of God are
exhibited unto us in the sacraments, and that they be no causes of grace: And
while you profess to teach me true doctrine, by the way, you run like a
wanton Calfe out of the way, and fall into an old heresy of our new friends
the wicked Anabaptists, lately scoured by yower doctor that died (as the fame
goes) of the lowsy evil at Geneua: Calvin.
for which fondnes I will wish you, neither wringe by the ears, nor
winchester rode, nor butchers beetle, but a cristall glass to see yower
errors and heresies, and grace to revoke them and amend.

When you had done with this digression and wittely talked (as you conceive)
of signs and seals, and promises, exhibited in the sacraments, you return to
the cross, and tell us, that if there were such necessity in the cross to
fight against Satan, Fol. 28 b Calf.
Peter and Paul were fools: Peter for not saying, resistite crucis signo,
resist with the sign of the cross, but fide solida, with a strong faith,
when he gave advise to resist the adversary. Paul for forgetting that piece
of defense, when he furnished a Christian man with his complete harness.

Mart.
Here you are to be noted of much ignorance and follye, both for not
understanding that which you take upon you to confute: And also for judging so
rashly and fondly of the blessed Apostles. Touching the first that there is any
absolute necessity, to use a cross in fight against the devil, I never
taught in all my book, nor do I teach, that the ancient fathers commanded,
but counseled men to use the sign of the cross, in their conflicte against
the devil. Read the fifte Article and see whether you be not lurdely
deceived, in thincking that the Catholics do make it a matter of necessity,
as you would seem to make the simple and ignorante beleaue: and call to
remembrance that law of Justinian the Emperor, Inciuile est nisi tota lege
perspecta, de aliqua part respondere It is an discourteous point to answer
unless all the whole law be well considered. Concerning the second. If it
had been a matter of necessity, yet had there been no follye in S. Peter, nor
oversight in S. Paul in omitting it. For both S. Peter writing twoe epistles,
and S. Paul diverse, to the Romans, to the Galathians, to the Ephesians, to
the Philippians, to the Colossians, to the Thessalonians, to Timothy, to Tite,
and Philemon, omitted a more necessary matter then a cross. For in all those
epistles, there is no commandment, nor counsel given to celebrate the supper
of our lord in remembrance of his death, there is no mention made that the
son is of equal substance with the father, nor of the proceeding of the holy
Ghost, which are matters of importance, and necessary to salvation, not
withstanding they were no fools as M. Calf. would make the^, for omitti^ge of
it. They had the holy Ghost teacher of all truth to guide their hearts, and
direct their pens. They knew what was expedient to be told at that time,
and to those men.

Our savior being here on earth did not show his Apostles all that was
behoofull for the^ to know, at that time, but said: I have many things to
say unto you, but you can not bear them now, Joan. 16.
you shall know them hereafter. Now because our savior Christ being present
with his disciples, and opeaning the scriptures and secret mysteries unto them,
did not tell them all at ones, will M. Calves. wit serve hi^ to think, that, a
folly in Christ? I doubt much: he is so fotted in follye, and infatuated with
heresy, that to maintain his foolish fantasye, and to make some resemblance
to the world, he passes not to streatche a point. It is a small matter with
him to corrupt and falsify the scriptures, he repeated but iij. words out of
S. Peter's epistle, 1. Pet. 5.
and one of the three is falsified. For whereas S. Peter teaching us to resist
the devil, said (as the old translation has) Resist sorts in fide, and as
Erasmus translateth it: Resistite (...) fide solidi: 1. Pet. 5.
Do ye resist being strong in faith: Master Calfhill says: Resistite fide
solida: Resist with steadfast faith, M. Calf. alters the words of S. Peter.
turning the nominative case into the ablative, and alteringe the substantive
to the adjective. Contrary to the common text of the Greek copye, and
contrary to the common edition, and translation of Erasmus, who was ten
hundred degrees better seen in greek than this prating parrat. S. Peter
willed us to be strong in faith, and to join unto our faith sobriety, which
co^tayneth fasting, and to use watchinge, which includes prayer (as apeareth
by his words going immediately before,) for that he knew our adversary to be
strong as a lion, and diverse of that sort, that they can not be cast out and
conquered, Marc 9.
Nisi in oratione et ieiunio, but in prayer and fasting: Diverse may have a
steadfast faith, yet not be strong in faith. For to be strong in faith is to
believe unfeignedly, in the son of God, to love him above all things, and so
to cleue unto him, that no adversity, no tribulation, nor fear of death may
alienate our minds from him, which grace every man has not, that has a
steadfast faith. 1. Cor. 13.
For (as it apeareth by S. Paul,) some may have so steadfast a faith, that
they may transfer mountains, distribute their goods unto the poor, and give
their bodies to the fire to be burned, and yet have no charity, which is the
most chiefest and necessary thing, that is required in him that will be strong
in faith.

Wherefore seeing he sticks not to alter the words of scripture and falsify
them, to forge such a sense as likes his foolish fantasy, there is no great
doubt to be made, but that he will venture upon higher matters if time ripe
things according to his imagination.

The blessed Martyr Hippolitus in his oration made de consummatione mundi,
says that Antichriste shall give unto all the^ that will follow him, a
character, or mark in the right hand, and forehead, that no man may printe
with his hand, that preciouse cross in his forehead: from which time
forward he shall be albe to sign no part of his body, In 13. Apocal.
but shall cleave fast to the deceauer. In which sense S. Ambrose also writes
these words, It may be that as we have a character or mark of Christ, (that
is the cross, with which we are signed: So Antichriste may have a peculier
character and Mark, with which they that believe in him shall be marked. The
mark and seal which he shall give in their right hands and foreheades is
Calculus a Cou^ter with these letters, Antichrists Mark.
(...). and this word (...), Id est nego, I deny, (as Hippolitus supposes).
And as the devil, by his ministers cried unto the blessed martirs, Negato Deu^
tuu^ crucifixu^, deny thy God crucified, so every one that has this seal, and
mark of Antichriste shall say. I deny the creator of heaven and earth, I
deny my baptism, I deny the adoration and honor whih I was wont to give unto
God, which words I repeat here for this purpose, that you (good readers) may
consider, whether Satan by the doings of heretics and practices of
protestants, in these latter days, and declination of the world, begin not
to prepare a way for Antichriste. Do you not see how they stand upon the
negative and cry all, Nego, I deny: Heretics resemble Antichrist by their
Negatiues.
That is to say, I deny that there is any external sacrifice, in the church,
I deny that Christ's body and blood is really and substantially in the
sacrament? I deny that there be seven sacraments? I deny that there is any
priesthood? I deny that there is any prayer for the dead? I deny that
Saints are to be called upon? I deny that good works are meritorious? I deny
that a man may say Mass unless he have some to communicate with hi^? I deny
that there is any power in earth to remitte sins? With a great many things
more? Do you not see M. Calf. as though he had Antichrists counter and mark
in his hand, and foreheade already, denyi^g all that is mentioned before? and
sayi^g further? I deny that the sign of the cross is mentioned in scripture?
I deny that Christen men should make it in their foreheades? I deny that they
should have it in churches? I deny that it is able in a Christen man to
resist temptations? I deny that the sincerity of Gods word was preached these
xiiij. hundred years before Luther and Caluins time? I deny that the ancient
fathers mente as they wrote? I deny that they understood the word of God? I
deny that the general Counsels had the holy ghost? with many things
besides, as shall apeare in process? And to what end is all this denied? See
the subtilitie of the devil, he knows that if he should plainly say unto
men, deny God: they would defye him. Again if the external sacrifice and
sacraments should continewe in their force, and priests be suffered to offer
that holy sacrifice unto God the father, and the old relligion be suffered to
remain, he knows (I say) that God should be honored, and acknowledged in
the power of his majesty, and his own kingedome be diminished. Wherefore he
goes craftily to work, and like a subtle sophister keeps privy his
conclusion, that when he has made men deny the external sacrifice,
sacraments, and priesthood, and such like, he may urge them by their own
grauntes to conclude, ergo there is no God. For if there be a God, he is to be
honored, as he him self sayethe, If I be your father where is my honor?
Mala. 1.
If he must be honored, it must be chiefly with an external sacrifice, as
Abel, Abraham, Melchisedech, and Job and the children of Israel did, and as he
him self by those words of the prophet Malachie: Malac. 1.
A clean sacrifice shall be offered to my name, said it should be from the East
to the west. Which sacrifice can not be understood properly and principally
of prayer, or of the the sacrifice of the heart, because no man can say:
Prouer. 20
My heart is clean, I am pure from sin. And if there be no sacrifice there
can be no God. So upon one inconuenie^ce granted, he infers many and
triumphs over men, when he has seduced them.

When he has thus made them deny God the father, then he practices an other
way to make them deny God the son, and that is, Tract. in 1. Ioa. Ser. 33 de
verbis Apost.
(as S. Augustine says) by breaking of unity, by tearing the body of
Christ, by schism, by renting and swelling against his spouse the church: An
other is by taking away the external signs, that may printe the memory of
his death and passion, in our hearts, and continewe the memory of it in our
minds by often seeing of it, and bringing men to contempt of that under
pretense of Idolatry. Amongst which the sign of the cross is one, as the
ancient fathers record. Wherefore beware of him, yield not to his suggestion,
but knock his head against the rock, Which is Christ Jesus, who by his
death upon the cross, got the victory over him, and made that sign so
terrible unto the^, Quaest. 38. ad Antio.
that whenever they see it: they tremble and flee away, and are miserably
tormented, as Athanasius writes in his xxx. and eight question to Antiochus.
In quoting of which place if the printers hand failed, mistaking one figure
for an other, and set 9. for 8. it was not such a matter of importance, that
required a reprehension with a marginall note. A gentle reader if he could not
find in it one place, would have sought it in in an other, and have ascribed
the error to the negligence of the printer, not to any oversight of the
author. But you may see that M. Calf. had rather play small game than sit
out. And whereas he can say nothing justly against the doctrine, he cauilleth
chiledishlye against the miss quoting of the place. In which tripp if I take
him hereafter, and note how falsely he quoteth his places, bear with me
gentle reader, and impute it to his folly who ministered occasion, and vpbrayed
me first with oversight in that, wherein he him self has, full often failed,
as shall apeare in the chapter of his false quotations. In the mean season,
hear his wise answers to the place of Athanasius, one is this: Fol 29 a Calf.
We have no more the cross on which our salvation was wrought, then we have
the ass on which Christ rode, therefore the devils be not afraid of the sign
of the cross:

And is not this a far fett conclusion, fondly devised, Mart. Arguments like
M Calfhils of Christ's Ass.
and evil fauoredly comparised? and good for nothing? Might he not as well
have said, we have no more the tables that God gave to Moses, than we have the
fire wherein he apeared: ergo they be not the laws of God that men be afraied
to break.

We have no more the copies of David psalms written with his own hand, than
we have his slinge wherewith he killed Goliath, ergo the devils be not afraid
of the words of the psalms. We have no more the melody that David made
before Saul, then we have the harp that he played on, ergo melody is not
good against melancholye. We have no more the epistles that S. Paul wrote
with his hand to the Romans, then we have his horse that he rode upon to
Damascus: ergo the devils coniured with words of that epistle, be not driven
away? The consequent is like, and follows even as well as the first, (that
is) stark staring naught. For as we have not the notes of David psalms song
before Saul, nor the first copies or the originals of S. Paul's epistles sent
to the Romans, but the like melodye as good as that was against Melancholye
passions, and ap^^terne of David's psalms, which being read, Homi. 20. in
Iosue.
yea of them that do not understand them as Origin says, make the devils
afraid, and the copies of S. Paul's epistles, the words whereof have as much
force now as they had then, being used of a Christian with faith and calli^g
upon the name of christ: Eue^ so albeit we have not the cross in all places,
on which our salvation was wrought, yet have we the type, the figure and
likeness of the same cross, which by the merits of Christ's passion, is as
terrible at this present to all wicked spirits, as it was then. Euthymius Titul
19. part. 2. Panopliae
Ea gratia quae semel in prototypo fuit efficax etc. The same grace which was
ones effectuous in the first sampler proceeding also with like efficacy to very
figures and signs of the cross. Nor Athanasius talks of that special
cross on which Christ died, but of a cross in general.

Fol. 29 a Calf.
The second reason is this: As the charmer does not cast out Satan, but Satan
of his own accord goes out to deceive me^, and that they may not go to
Christ, persuadeth them to go to sorcerers: On lik sort the devil may seem
to tremble and quake, when he sees a cross, but it is for no other purpose,
but that we should leave onr confidence in Christ, and repose it in a piece
of wood. Mart.
The devil is craftye I confess, and because men should not go to Christ,
he will rather yield at the incantation of a charmer for a time, than lose the
possession of his servants for ever. But that he tre^bleth and quaketh when he
sees the cross, to make men leave their confidence in Christ, and put it in
a piece of wood, how know you that M. Calf? who made you of his privy
counsel? and secretary of his secrets? Have you any such inspiration of the
spirit? any such nightly vision? any such privy practices? or any such secret
aquaintance with him, as yower forefather Luther had, that you can tell us so
much of his intent and meaning? You make us mistruste it shrewdly, because you
auouche it so earnestly, without scripture, council or ancient father. It had been expedient for you to have added some weight unto that yower assertion. As
long as you simply asseuere it, as a positio^ of yower own, without proof,
no Wise Man will beleaue it. For you may well conceive that the devil uses no
temptation, nor slighte to deceive man, but such as he supposes is most
forceable to overthrow him. And whereas he knows every Christen man to repose
his faith and trust in the merits of Christ's passion, he will not immediately
attempt to bring him from that, to have affiance in some piece of wood. For
so he should betray him self. For the error is so gross and sensible, that
the simplest man that knows Christ crucified, and is learned to beleaue in
God, would detest it, and defy all that should labor to induce him unto it.
His devises are more subtle, his practices more pollitike, his waightes more
weighty. That was an error of the gentills too much disclosed, to deceive any
Christian now in these latter days. If you have so vile and base an
imagination of yower even Christian brethren, that they will forsake Christ,
and repose their hope in a piece of wood, you may assure yower self, that it
is more vile, than is sittinge for one that professes Christ.

The Jews mistrusting that the Christians would forsake Christ, and
woorshippe Policarpe the^ martired, as you do lest we will renounce Christ,
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. Ecclesia. histo. The devil seems not to fear the
cross, but fears it in deed. Athanas. de verb. incar. Signo crucis etc.
Lib. 3. cap. 2. ecclesia. histo. and lib. 6. cap. 1. Tripart.
and repose our confidence in a piece of wood or metal figured, were counted
ignorante, and most wretched men for that surmise: The Christians said then of
them selves we can never forsake Christ who suffered death for the salvation of
the whole world nor worship any other, because we know the true God and him
who is to be woorshipped. The like we may return to you. With all you may
assure your self, that it is too evident by the testimonies of the ancient
fathers, that the devil does not pretend and dissemble a feate at the sight
of the cross, but fears it in deed, and trembles and quaketh at it, and can
not abide it. To begin with Athanasius. Consider that saying of his alleged
before. He said not, that the devils seem to tremble, but they tremble in
deed, they seem not to flee away, but they flee away in deed, they seem not to
be tormented, but are tormented in deed, yea they suffer persecution: Man using
the sign of the cross, dryueth them away in deed, and does noth only seem to
drive them away. Theodoretus says: The devils when they saw the figure of
our lords banner remembered the slaughter and foil, which they had taken, and
mox euanuerunt, and by, and by they vanished away. Orat. pri. co^t. Iulia.
Gregory Nazianzene says, that with the sight of the cross which Julian
made, daemones compescuntur, superantur, the devils were quayled, the devils
were ouercomed. He said not they seemed to be quailed, Titu. 19. part. 3.
Panopl.
they seemed to be ouercomed. Euthymius says by virtue of the cross companies
of devils are expelled, he said not. They seemed to be expelled. Neither are
you able M. Calf. to allege one ancient doctor, that makes for that fond
opinion of yowers, or if you can, let us have his words truly alleged, and
you shall have an answer according. In the mean time this undoubted doctrine
of the fathers, that the sign of the cross is a bit and bridle to the devil,
and terror to all wicked spirits shall suffice us, and I trust, all true
Christians besides.

Fol. 29. a
As for yower suspicious head suspecting the counsel given to the relligious,
that they should arm them selves and their houses with the sign of the
cross, when the devil does assault and attempt them, M. Calf. suspecteth S.
Anthony his counsel as insufficient.
as insufficient, we take far insufficie^t to be credited before S. Anthony
that gave that counsel. He was a holy man given to contemplation, you seem to
be an hipocrite given to dissimulation, he lived in wilderness with great
abstinence, you live in the city with great delicatnes, he was renommed
through all the world, for sanctity, you infamous through out all England for
blasphemy, he a friend to Christ, you an enemy to his church, he a worker of
miracles, you because you can do none, a thincker that they are illusions, he a
virtuous heremite, you a wicked heretic. And certes unless Lucifers proud
spirit had pricked you forward, you would never so presumptuouslye have
suspected that counsel as insufficient, Fol 29. a
which S. Anthony an holy, virtuous, and godly father, altogether occupied in
contemplation and prayer, with whom it pleased God to talk by visions, and
revelations, and by whom it pleased him to work sundry miracles, vide Athana^
de vita S. Antonij.
and great cures, gave to the relligious, and which Athanasius writes and
testifies to be true. But o lord what will not heretics reiecte? whom will
not they contemn besides them selves? There was never man yet so holy, never
doctor so learned, never father so ancient, but they have set him at naught,
where he wrote or spoke any thing against their new doctrine. Yea they have
not spared the very scriptures, and epistles of the blessed Apostles, such is
their zeal to promote their Ghospel. As for this case that is now in hand,
whom shall we credit? S. Anthony that gave counsel to the religions to arm
them selves with the sign of the cross, when Satan did attempt them, or M.
Calf. that forbids it? S. Anthony that counseled it as good and godly, or
M. Calfe that says, it is insufficie^t, and ungodly? S. Anthony that takes
the Cross upon which as an instrument Christ spoiled the powers of the air,
to be the triu^pha^t ba^ner of victory or M. Calf. that seems to take the
death to be the ba^ner of his victory, and not the victory it self, not far
unlike the heretics that thought Christ not to have died in deed but in a
fantasy? I would refer it to yower judgment (good readers) but it is not
hard to judge, nor uneasy to define, unless some will be so mad as to prefer a
young devil before an old saint. Now to his answer against the place of
Chrysostom.

Where that holy father said. Homi. 55. in 16. Mat.
Crucem non simpliciter digito in corpore, etc. Thou must not simply with thy
finger make a Cross in thy body, but first of all thou must make it with
great faith in thy mind, Chrysostom.
For if thou printe it in thy face after this manner, none of all the wicked
spirits when they see the spear with which they received a deadly wound,
will dare to encounter with the, Fol 30. a Calf.
This is neither material nor mystical cross, quoth M. Calf. for neither of
them can be printed in the heart. Therefore it is the faith in Christ's
passion, which the finger can not impresse in the forehead, but grace can
engraffe in the mind of man. Mart.
To convince his folly in this point, let us examine the place. Chrysostom
tells us here, that if we do twoe things, the devil will not dare to
encounter with us. The first is to printe the passion of Christ with great
faith in our minds. The second to make the sign of the cross with the hand
in our bodies, his words be plain for both. And as he makes mention of body
and soul, so does he apointe ij instruments to imprint the passion of Christ
in the^, faith for the soul, and the figure of the cross for the body. If
percha^ce M. Calf. being in some drowsy dream, Tell us M. Calf, what crosses.
Chrysostom. would have made with the finger?
saw not this, nor yet will conceive it, ask him what Cross it was, that
Chrysostom would have made in the body, with the finger, if it were not a
mystical cross? If he say Chrysostom means no ^rosse made with the finger,
because it can, Not be printed in the heart, ask his worship what Chrysostom
meneth by those words, Crucem non simpliciter digito in corpore etc. Thou must
not simply pri^te a Cross in thy body, with thy finger, but first of all thou
must printe it with great faith in the mind? Is not digitus Latin for a
finger, and corpus Latin for a body, Crux, Latin for a Cross, and Formare,
Latin to frame, shape, form, and make? I trust his cunning serves him to
think so. And does not he that tells his seruante twoe things, and says,
sir, do this first, mean that he should do the other afterward? In like
sort does not Chrysostom bidding us in this place print the passion of
Christ first of all in our hearts, with faith, mean that afterward we should
printe the cross in our bodies with the hand? Look well to his words. It
follows: Si hoc modo faciei tuae impresseris. If thou printe it after this
manner in thy face? What manner, M. Calf? speak man, be not ashamed? tell
truth and shame the devil. What manner was it? any other than that which he
mentioned before? First by faith in the soul, afterward with the finger in
the body? No no: Yower gloses are too gross to gloss such an evident matter as
this is. Fol. 30. a
Yower reason in saying: it can be no mystical Cross, because it ca^ not be
printed in the heart, is not worth three lepps of an old dog. For albeit it
can not be printed in the heart by man's finger or hand, yet may it be
imprinted with preaching, meditation, and faith as Chrysostom says.

Where you say that the cross which Chrysostom there mentions is faith in
Christ's passion, etc. You betray your own ignorance, and give us to
understand that your capacity conceaueth, not what Chrysostom means: his
words be these: Crucem magna profecto fide in me^te prius formare oportet. You
must first printe the cross with great faith in yower mind, the cross that
he speaks of in this latter clause, is the passion it self, and affiance in
the virtue and power of it. Which must be printed in our minds: faith is the
gift of God by means where of the passion must be printed with in us. M. Calf.
confounds the passion and faith in the passion
And will youer pregnant wit serve you to confound the mean, with which men
must printe, and the thing that must be printed? Is there no difference between
the conduicte pipe, and the water? the wine and the tunnell, by which as means
the water is conveyed into the city, and the wine to the vessel? Acknowledge,
your folly for shame, and learn to take the doctors sayings in their true
meaning. Learn that the passion of Christ is one thing, The pass on and faith
in the passion not all one
faith in the passion of Christ an other. The passion is the pains, torments,
and death that Christ suffered for us, faith is a grace ingraffed in us to
believe it. The passion is the Ransom and price that was paid on the cross for
our redemption, faith is the mean that makes us partakers of the virtue and
merit purchased by it. The passion is the acceptable sacrifice that Christ
made for our justification, faith a gift of the holy Ghost, that by pouer of
that makes us a sweet sacrifice to God the father. When you have learned this
and considered the words of Chrysostom, I trust you will neither affirm that
the cross mentioned in that place is taken for faith in the passion, nor
think that the collectio^ which I made out of that fathers words for
printing the merits of Christ's passion first in the mind, and afterward in
the body, is indirectly gathered, Fol. 30. b
nor to be shifted away with this Sophistication: Frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora. In vain it is done by more, which may be done by
fewer. M. Calves. Sophistry
A strange rule of new Sophistry practiced most about the impugning of
definitions and divisions, not to be admitted among divines, for by that same
rule, you may illude all the mysteries of our religion.

Our Salvation might have been wrought by the absolute pouer of God, ergo the
incarnation, and passion of Christ was in vain, we might be taught the
gospel from heaven with out ministres, ergo the apointing of prechers was in
vain. The English communion might be in fewer words, ergo the saying of so
many words is in vain. Some may be saved by faith, ergo it is vain to do
good works, and so illude all the mysteries of our faith, and religion. But
keep yower sophistical rules for the Sophisters, it is not to be admitted
among divines. Christ said. Luc. 17.
When ye have done all that ye can, say ye are unprofitable servants, but by
yower judgment (M. Calf.) If we may be saved with doing as little as the these
upon the Cross, it is in vain to do all that we can. For frustra fit per
plura quod fieri potest, per pauciora. In vain it is done by more, which may
be done by fewer. This is yower profounde lerninge this is yower new divinity,
The nevve doctrine.
this is yower Evangelical doctrine invented by Satan to destroy all that the
forefathers builded, contented with as few prayers, and ceremonies, as little
fasting and watching, as simple alms and devotion, as little modestye from
lying, and railing, as mean care of sclaundering and blaspheming, as possible
may be: Quia frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

Origin.
From Chrysostom you go to Origin, and many matters you lay forth, to
infringe his authority and diminishe his credit. But how fond some of them
are, it shall apeare hereafter. Now let us see how wisely you shift to avoid
that place. Calf. Fol 31. a b.
Origin (say you) asking a question how it is possible to avoid, that sin
raygne not in our bodies, Coll 3.
answers, and says. It is possible to avoid it if we do as the Apostle
says. Mortify your members which are upon earth, and if we carry about
always in our bodies the death of Christ. For it is certain that where the
death of Christ is carried about, sin can not raygne. Est enim tanta vis
crucis. For the power of the cross is so great, whereby it is evident, that he
speaks of the death of Christ, and that is the cross that be commends.

Mart.
Very true it is (M. Calf.) that the way to provide that sin reign not in our
bodies, is to mortify our members upon earth, and to carry the death of
Christ always in our bodies: Never man denied it, but licentious heretics
which plainly affirm that men can not mortify their members on earth, Free
vvil proved by Origin. In epist. ad Romans lib. 6. Fol. 30. a
or live chaste, and utterly take away free will, which Origin plainly proves
by those words of the Apostle, the very next sentence before, but you could
not see that, neither when you answered the place of Chrysostom how he takes
the cross to be the death of Christ, and not faith in the passion, as you
fondly imagined before. Neither could you see by what means he would have the
death of Christ to be continued and carried in our bodies, and because other
should not see it, you stayed in the midst of a sentence and uttered not
Origens words, as he spoke them. He said not, the power of the cross is so
great, and made a full point there, (as you do) but he said: It is so
great, that if it be set before a man's eyes, and kept faithfully in his
mind, so that he look with steadfast eyes of the mind, upon the very death
of Christ, no concupisce^ce, no sensuality, nor envy is able to overcome him.
This (sir) said Origin: And you might have seen if yower shaking head suffered
your gogling eyes to be steadye, that as Chrysostom would have the cross to
be printed in the body and soul, So Origin would have it set before the eyes
of the body and soul: that by outward sight with the eye, the inward mind
might conceive a full impression of the death, and passion of Christ. Consider
his words. Origin would have the cross set before our eyes.
In the first clause he would have it set before our eyes. In the second to
be kept faithfully in the mind. And is there any way so convenient, either to
set the death of Christ before our corporal eyes, as the sign of the cross,
whero^ Christ suffered? Let us have yower devise and if you devise a better,
let us hear of it, and we will thancke you for it: But all the politic wit in
yower pieuishe head ca^ not: neither is there any thing able to be leyd
before the eyes, that can move veheme^ter affections to the mind, or make
deper impressio^s of Christ's death in a heart meek and gentle, than the
cross which is seen by the corporal eye, as I have proved in the eighte
Article of my Treatise. Wherefore until yower better devise be devised, we
will say that Origin willing the death of Christ to be set before our eyes,
and kept faithfully in the mind, would have it set before the eyes with a
crucifixe, and kept in the mind with virtuous meditation and godly
preachinge.

If you say that Origin by the eyes and mind which he speaks of, meant but
one thing, how will you excuse him from that foul figure Tautologia in so
few words in one sentence? what shall become of yower own rule, frustra fit
per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora? will you make him that in his time
was counted the flower of the world, so ignorant in matters of diuinitye, that
he knew not what he wrote? So unskillful in diting his style that he could
not avoid Tautologiam, in twoe clauses separated, but with one comma? So rude
in logic that he knew not your rule frustra fit per plura? No I dare say
you will not, if it were for nothing else but that he destroys Imagery, as
you say. But of that in another place. In the mean while you see that all
though the cross be the death of Christ that Origin speaks of, yet is it
the sign by which he wills that death to be set before our eyes, because
it can not be so conveniently and effectually done by any one visible thing
besides.

Yower extrauagantes and impertinent digressions made against priests and
nuns, I willingly omit, because they be sclaunderous. Fol 31 b
Yower tauntes and scoffs against me I wittingly contemn, because they be
ridiculous. Mine intent is only to examine yower answers, and not to dally
with you in trifles. The next authority then that you labor to infringe is
that of Cassiodorus, Cassiodorus.
a learned father and grave Senator, alleged out his comme^taries upon the
4. Psalm, where he says. Like as the Coin bears the image of the
Emperor: Even so are the signs of the faithful, etc. But you say never a
wise word to it, but, what thought, Fol. 32. b M. Calf. answers like a
cook Ruffian.
much like to a Cook Ruffian, who chidden ones for making his master
vnsauorye soppes, said, in his fustia^ fumes, what thought, and for anger
would speak never a good word besides, for his own excuse. In which point
if his wisdom be weighed with yowers, it will counterpeise it a great deal.
For he by silence did lessen his fault, for evil cokerie, you by multiplying
of words disclose yower vnskill in not knowing the marks of Christianity.
The effect of yower answer is this: Fol. 32. b Fol. 33. a Calf.
Though the signs of the heavenly Emperor be printed upon the faithful, as
the image of the Emperor is in his coin, yet is a roode, or a crucifixe, or
wagging of a finger not able to show whose men we are, as the printe in the
money does show whose the coin is. For wheresoever that image and
superscription is stamped there is it certain, who has right to the coin.
But whosoever has the sign or stamp of the cross, show not thereby whose
servants they are. Marc.


Here is much said, but naught proved. Belike you have purchased some
protection, and privilege to say what ye list and prove what you please. If
it be so, we will resemble you to the banckroutes in London, and for a Ladde of
Ludlowe take you for a Lacker of Ludgate. Their property is to require payment
of others and to make none them selves, and so do you here. Reason would that
as you deny it constantly, so you should prove it substantially. For no
Wise Man has you in such admiration and credit that he will beleaue it,
because you deny it.

The cross has evermore ben an especial sign of Christianity, and
wheresoever the faith was preached, the sign of the cross was had, and
reverenced, as I prove in the 3. and first article of my of my treatise.
Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 5. hist. eccle.
In the beginning when any were converted to the faith they that were in
authority gave them, signum dominicum, our lords sign, which was the cross,
and by that they were known to be Christians. Damascene says: By the cross
the faithful are discerned from the infidells. Lib. 4. ca. 12. de side. In
Psalm. 4.
Cassiodorus (whom we have now in hand) says, that the sign of the
heavenly Emperor is printed upon the faithful, as the image of the earthlye
Emperor is pri^ted in the coin, and to what other purpose, or reason is it,
but as the Emperor his coin is discerned by his image, so the faithful
Christians should be known by that sign (which is the cross) only peculier,
and proper to the Christians. Else: Why do you in your communion book
command it to be imprinted and made in childrens forheads in baptism? The
gentills did ever detest it: the Christians always esteem it: The Jews
abhor it: The Christians honor it. The Turks defye it. The Christians
desire it: Heretics blaspheme it maliciously: The Christians worship it
reuere^tly, heretics reiecte it with much vilaine: The Catholics set it up
with great piety.

They rail at it with much blasphemy. The Christians whersoeuer Christ was
preached, in testimony that they beleaued in the crucified, did set up his
cross as a ba^ner and recognisance honorably to be known for Christ's
soldiers. For testimony whereof, if any will see proof of it, I referr him to
the 3. and 5. article of my book. There notwithstanding all M. Calves. cauills
he may be satisfied. And albeit we can not enter into other men's consciences,
and judge the Pope, and Prelates to be the best Christians, for hanging Crosses
about them, yet by that may we judge them to be Christians, and men that have
affiance in the merits of his passion, because none but Christians commonly
use, that blessed sign. The Gentills, Jews, Turks and heretics (as I said
before) hate it, and what they hate they do not willinglye use. If the^ the
using and not using of a thing makes one man to be known, externally from an
other, why may not the having and not having of a cross, discern a Christian
outwardly from an infidel? In London a gentle man's servant is known from
others by the badge on his sleaue. The Lawier by his Coyfe, Some me^ known
from other by their habit.
the Citizene by his gown, the minister by his hat, and every man of
experience that sees them, can say, he is a gentleman's servant, he is a
lawier, he is a Londiner, and he is a minister. And shall not the cross of
Christ be a sign sufficient, outwardly to discern this or that man to be a
Christian? I refer it to the judgment of the wiser, out of which number, if
M. Calf. will exempte him self by his profounde knowledge, Fol. 33. a
Knowing the most crossers (as he says) not to be the best Christians, I can
not be against his singular head, and self will, sine viuat ineptus, Let him
live like a Wise man by him, self alone.

In the latter day when all the secrets of darkness shall be revealed men's
thoughts discovered and doings rewarded, he shall find that the enemies of
the cross, and no crossers shall have no part with Christ. But as all that
had not the blood of the lamb sprinkled upon their door posts in Egipte,
Exodus 12.
nor the sign of Tau signed in their foreheads in Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.
were killed by the destroyer: So at that dreadful day, they that have not
the blood of Jesus Christ sprinkled in their hearts, and the sign of the
cross in their foreheades, shall be in woeful case. For then the cross which
they hated shall apeare (says Ephre^) and vex them and trooble them: Cap. 3.
de poenitent. Homi. 55. in 16 Mat.
Then will Christ (says S. Chrysostom) be ashamed of them, because they were
ashamed of so great a treasure. But if a man should come to a point of law
with M. Calf. and ask him, how he knows that the most crossers be not best
Christians, and demand causes of his knowledge, quia scire est per causas
cognoscere, to know is to know by causes, I thi^cke he would ask a very
long term ad proponendu^ omnia, and in the end let fall his suite, and from
knowing leap to supposing. For be it that he knows some that use the sign
of the cross, to be of evil conversation, and very lewd, for their vicious
life, will it follow that he knows all to be such? No, unless he were a
young God, or nere Cosyn to David George that would be Christ. Let me reason
with him a while. How say you M. Calf. be not the Dominicans, Obseruantes,
Carthusians, and other religious me^, and women, most crossers (as you term
them)? Fol. 33. a
Do they not renounce the world, forsake all that they have, and distribute
their goods to the poor, and bind the^ selves from the pleasures of the
world? Are they not content to fare evil, to have hard lodging, and simple
apparel? Do they not fast much, watch long, rise at midnight, and spend
most part of the day in study and co^templation? Is it not so? How say you
man? If you deny it, the world shall convince you of impudency. And will you
say that these men be not the best Christians? Where is yower wit? Christ
counseled him that would be perfect, to sell all that he had, and give it to
the poor, Mat. 19. Mat. 26. Coloss. 3. Philip. 3. 2. Pet. 3.
and follow him, he counseled men to watch, to fast, to pray, to abandone
the pleasures of the world, to mortify their members upon earth, and to have
their conversation in heaven, and come as nighe as they can to imitation of
him, whereupon I may make this argument, All that follow these, and other
counsels of Christ most nearest, be best Christians (for Christ said of
Marie that would not incumber her self with worldly cares, but live in
contemplation. Luc. 10.
Marie has chosen the best part, But these relligious men and woeme^ to the
outward show, (beionde which we may not judge) observe these and other,
counsels of Christ, tending to perfection, The most crossers the best
Christians.
most nearest of all other and show nothing to the contrary. Ergo of all
other they be the best Christians so far as man can judge, and so
consequently the most crossers the best Christians. Where is now yower
knowledge become M. Calf.? Has it not confounded it self? Must it not come
(as I said) from a knowing to a supposinge, and that supposition in time be
found vain, and vnsittinge for a christian? Try it and you shall find it,
and know yower self better.

Calf. Fol. 33. a
Yower words that follow, That the sign of God, is belief in Christ, and
grace to do thereafter, and the merits of his passion our succor, Mart.
our refuge, and defense, we acknoweldg to be true in a sense, and so true,
that whosoever denies the^ denies the mystery of our redemption. But what
need (they) in that place? Was there ever Catholic that did gain say it?
And because Cassiodorus, In Psalm. 4.
and other say, The Cross is our succor, our refuge and defense, think you
that they exclude the death of Christ, and merits of his passion? Gregor. li.
5. cap 11. in Job. One truth not be destroyed by another. The passion of Christ
and sign of the cross our defense. and how.
No: but you would follow yower progenitors, whose property was to mingle
good with evil, that they might creep into creditt with their hearers, and by
teaching one truth destroy an other. But that is not commendable. Faith is
not so to be preeched, that good works be contemned, grace not so advanced,
that free will be condemned, nor mercy so commended, that Justice be not
feared, liberty not so signified, that discipline be decayed. The omnipotencye
not so declared, that the Sacraments and other external means be rejected.

Concerning the matter in hand, both the passion of Christ and sign of his
cross, be our succor, our refuge, and defense. The passion as principal, the
sign as a mean, the passion as a fountain giving virtue to all, the sign as
a conduicte derived from that spring. The passion as a Castle, strong inoughe
of it self, the sign as an instrument taking force from thence. For (as
Cassidorus says, and I alleged in the end of the 6. article, In Psalm. 1.
) spiritualis aqua signu^ crucis inu^dat, spiritual water does flow into
sign of the Cross, that is to say, heavenly grace does flow in to the
sign of the cross, which is known to be the salvation, of faithful souls,
and also the grace and virtue, which was once effectuouse in the first pattern
proceeds (says Euthimius) with like efficacye to the signs of the cross.
Besides Damascene tells us that, Libro 4. cap 12. de fide.
vbi est signum Christi, ibi ipse erit. Where the sign of Christ is, there
he will be him self, If the party be not unworthy to receive him. Thus you
might have vttred both these truths, and not by vttringe one have condemned
the other, saving it liked you better to intermedle a few sweet sugered
words, that the ignorant might drink of yower poisoned cup, than simply
to utter the truth, that yowr falsetie might not be espeied. Vt supra.
But it is says S. Gregory a property of heretics, so to do. And you have
practiced their properties so long, that now you can not leave them nor
theirs. From one you flit to an other. And as Celsus, Lib 7. co^t. Cells.
(as I mentioned before, out of Origin) did attribute to the christians those
words which they never spoke: M. Calf. attributes that to us which we never
spoke nor meant.
so do you infer of my words that argument of which I never dreamed on, nor
wise man could find, if he sought witht a lantern, wherein you seem, not to
have had yower common senses at commandment, but either in captiuitye to
heresye, or in thraldom to phrenesie, or in danger to both. For unless
hatred to the truth, engendered by heresy, and foolish fantasies conceived by
phrensye, had estranged yower wits, you would never have forged so folishe an
argument, and falsely impute it to to an other. But such forgeries and foolish
shifts they must have, that will defend heresies. To try yowr honesty, I
desire no more of the gentle reader but to peruse the similitude, deduced from
faith joined wirh charity, to faith assisted with the sign of the cross, by
way of an answer to heretics objections, and note whether he can deduce and
frame out of it this argument of yowers, Fol. 33. a b.
The sign of the cross is as necessary to co^curre with our belief, as
charity to be with faith: But faith without charity, is a devils faith, ergo
belief without the sign of the cross is diuelishe? I am sure none but such
as are evil affected in causes of relligion, and dance after such ministrells
pipes can pick out such a sense of my words. For here is no such to be
found. Fol. 21 a of my treatise.
Thus I say: As not every simple, bare, and naked faith, but such as works
by charity, is the victory that conquereth the world, the mean that makes
our souls meet habitations for the holy Ghost, the way that leads us to
heaven: Even so say we, that faith works to man the foresaid effects,
expels devils, puts out their fiery darts, and defends man from all
their fury and assaults, Mary not every faith, but such as is steadfast,
constant, and strong, joined with charity, builded upon hope, stre^gthened
with prayer, augmented with fasting, and assisted by the sign of the cross.
And I beseeke you what word is there here that expresses such an absolute
necessity between the sign of the holy cross, and faith as is between faith
and charity? Yea by what words may it be but probably gathered? Is it this
word assisted? if it be so, let us see, by what reason they can make it good.
To be assisted by one is to be helped by him, as in time of war, for a prince
to be assisted by a garrison sent from his friend, is to be helped by that
garrison of his friend. Now as no Wise Man will say, that the friend that
helps the prince is greater than the prince in his realm, whom he helps,
or that the aid which he sends is of like necessity, as the power which he
levied of his own subjects at home: Even so none can say that the sign of
the cross is either of as great power, or as necessary as faith. Albeit in
resisting and expulsing of devils, it does assiste and help faith.

That faith needs the helps of fasting and prayer, and sign of the cross,
17. Matt. Lib. 4. ca. 27. de vera sapientia.
I proved the first, by our saviors words, where he told his disciples, that
there is a kind of devils which is not cast out but in fasting and prayer:
the second out of Lacta^tius, where he says that as Christ by his words
did expel wicked devils, so now the followers of Christ do cast wicked
spirits out of men, both with the name of their master, and sign of the
passion. And because he talks so plainlye of the name of Christ, and sign
of the cross, M. Calfehills scoffinge wit divised a new tau^te for him, and
said He tied two points together, the name of Christ, Fol. 33. b
and sign of his passion, Wherein if I were disposed to imitate his
Rhethorike, I could more justly say, that he compares the name of Christ,
and sign of his cross to twoe points, then he can auouche that I compared
the cross with charity, and hope, fasting, and prayer. But I will not follow
so lewd a president. My chiefest purpose is to discuss the pith of his
answers to the authorities brought out of the fathers. Fol 33. b Calf.
To Lactantius eue^ now recited he says. The name of Christ is spoken of in
many places of scriptures, and all those places prove a true effect, but in
all those places the sign of the Cross is not spoken of, wherefore the name of
Christ alone would have done as much as the name and sign together. Nor we
must impute the virtue to the sign, though contrary to the use, Mart.
and example of Scripture it pleased some men to add it. To so foolish a
reason, a breife answer shall suffice, and that is. Nego argumentum, I deny
that argument. And when you justify it by good reason, I will disprove it with
better, until that come, ye and then too we will better creditt Lactantius
than M. Calf. in this point, and more regard, the twoe points that he tieth
together, the name of Christ, and sign of his cross, then all the pellfrey
ware that he bears in his pedlers pa^nier. What? Nay soft quoth M.
Minister, you do not well to like^ hi^ to a peddler, for he sustayneth a nobler
personage, and is of late made a high counseler with God, Fol. 33. b
so privy to his will and so well experienced in his power, that he can now
assure us that twelve hundred years ago, the name of Christ alone would
have done as much as the name and sign of his passion together.

If it were so, for that respect he ought to be had in better reputation
for his masters sake. In deed he talks arrogantlye of his person in the end
of his book, and determinately like a counselor with God in this place. But
the more higher he is in opinion of him self, the more viler shall he be in
the sight of God, and estimation of the wiser. It is an old rule in the law:
Duo vincula sortius ligant. 2. Tim 2.
Twoe chains bind faster. The name of Christ is holy, mighty and great,
but if a man will have it stand hi^ in stead, he must join an other li^cke
unto it, that is hatred of sin, How the calling upon the name of God helps
us.
for as S. Paul says: Every man that calls upon the name of God must go
away from iniquity. And (as S. Augustine says) he that calls upon the name
of our lord, must go from iniquity: if he will have the name of our lord
profitte him. The Apostles did many miracles in the name of Christ, yeat when
a child possessed with a spiritte was brought unto them to be healed, they
could not heal him by calling upon the name of Christ, Sermon. 11. in Euang.
Matthew.
which they practiced as may be gathered by a story of the Bible, because that
kind of devils (as Christ said) is not cast out but with fasting and
prayer. Mat 17. Mark 9. Luc. 9.
Behold the name of Christ alone called upon of the Apostles (who had as
strong faith as ever any had) could not cast out a devil, and bind him to
depart out of a child. Christ besides the calling upon his name, told that
twoe other linckes were necessary to bind that kind of devils, to wit,
Matt 17.
fasting and prayer. And shall we think that either there be no such devils
raging like roaring lions now, or that we are able to cast them out by the name
of Christ alone, VVheras the Apostles could not? No no: If we have that
fantasy we do deceive our selves. Faith being decayed in these latter days,
and charity waxen cold, devotion slaked, and prayers not very fervent, and
yet the power of the enemy being as mighty as ever it was, it is reason that
we join all our force together, and call upon the name of Christ, trust in
the merittes of his passion, fast srome fleshlye delights, iniquity and
sin, pray without intermission, and use all the helps whatsoever they be,
whereof the sign of the cross is one, taught vndoubtelye of the holy Ghost,
and practiced of Christ's catholic church, universally througheout all the
world, until this day, and all will be little enough. Wherefore M. Calf. being
no counselor with God (for as S. Paul says: No man is counselor to him,
Romans 11.
his ways be insearcheable) may be ashamed to define so absolutely without any
reason, scripture, or doctor that the name of Christ alone would have done as
much, as the sign and the name together.

Where he says, Calf. Fol. 33. b Mart.
that we must not impute the virtue to the sign, we tell him plainlye that we
never did so, but referred all the virtue to the merittes of Christ's passion,
and none to the sign, otherwise than to an instrument, by which the virtue is
wrought, as remission of sins is by water in the sacrament of baptism.

Where he says, Calf. Fol. 33. b Mart.
that contrary to the use and example of Scriptures, it pleased some men to
add it, We desire him to show one express text in all the scripture, from
the first of Genesis, to the last of the Apocalipsis, where it is inhibited,
and where the use and example of scripture, is contrary unto it, No scripture
forbids and the sign of the cross. Calf. Mart.
we would gladly learn it. If he ca^ show none (as I am sure he ca^ not, let
him be ashamed of his impudent assertion. You say it is not commanded in
scripture, ergo it is not to be used.

We deny that consequent, and and say it is not forbidden in scripture, ergo
it may be used. If you admit not this, tell us by what scripture, you have
been commanded to use this and that collecte at yower communion? to set the
table in the quier? to put a cope upon the ministres back? to have three at
the least to receive at yower communion? or singe Gloria in excelsis, at the
latter end? What scripture have you for all this? If you have none at all, but
use it because you think it not inhibited, be not offended with other for
using that license laufully, that you take yower self, at your pleasure.

Next to Lactantius I joined a sentence out of S. Augustine to prove, that the
sign of the cross, S. August.
De Symb. ad Cathe. lib. 2. ca. 1.
is a weapon and engine to fight against the devil. The sentence is this. We
have received the remedy of faith against the poison of the old serpent, that
if our adversary the devil will at any time lie in weight for us, the man
that is redeemed, may know that he ought to meet with hi^ with a steadfast
faith, Crucis vexillo.
or (as M. Calf. will have itt, with the Sacrament of faith and ensign of the
cross. To shifte away this sentence, a question is propounded, and answer
framed as it pleases M. Calf. The question is this.

Fol. 34. a. Calf.
What means s. Augustine by that Metaphore? What is that ensign of the
cross? The banner that is carried about the church yard in procession? The
answer: No, but that which in the self same sentence before he called Canticum
salutis, the song of Salvation. Mart. Fol. 25. b Fol. 29. b.
A strange Metamorphosis (good readers) M. Calf. that before uttered many
blasphemous words against the cross, can now say, it is: Canticum salutis,
A song of Salvation. O that he would as gladly embrace the truth, when it is
told him simply, as he ca^ find starting holes to shifte it away
phantasticallye. For in deed this is a mere fantasy, and shifte of descant,
clean besides the plain song. S. Augustine, (upon whom he fathereth this his
fantasy) instructing in that place, Cathecumenos, young Nouices as it were in
the faith, declares part of the ceremony used about the^, of the which this
was one. They were brought from certain secret places, where they had been,
into the face of the church, and there humbling them selves, with all
humility, were examined, and prayed for. That the proud spirit might be
expelled, Christ most highest of all, and yeat humble, was called upon for
them. They were humble, and meek, they made their petitions, or ando,
psallendo atque dicendo: Psalm. 138.
Proba me Deus and scito cor meum, praying, singing and saying: Try me (o God)
and know my heart. God tried them, God examined them, God touched his
servants hearts with his fear. God by his power drove the devil away from
them, and delivered his family from the others possession and thrauldome. But
to our purpose: with in few lines, after, it follows: Our lords familye
therefore being purged, after that they had sounge, the song of Salvation, they
received the remedy of faith against the poison of the old serpent.

But was this song of Salvation a banner of the cross (as M. Calf. fansieth)
No: S. Augustine says hi^ self. It was that verse of the Psalm: Psalm 138.
Proba me Deus meus and scito cor meum, Try me o God and know my heart. This
song they sange after they came into the face of the church, and when they had
sounge this song, then did God try them, and examine them, and touch their
hearts with his fear, and deliver them from the servitude of the devil. And
when they were thus purged and tried, and entering now by faith into the
mystical body of Christ, which is their health and salvation, and sounge that
verse of David, S. Augustine called it: Canticum salutis, the song of
salvation. This is S. Augustines mind. This might M. Calf. have seen in the
same place, if it would have pleased him to have marked all that S. Augustine
said. Further he might have seen with in xiij. lines after the beginning,
this saying of S. Augustine: Per sacru^ crucis signum.
Ye are not yet borne again by holy baptism, but you are conceived in the
womb of yower holy mother the church, by the holy sign of the cross.

By which he might have learned, that according to the use of the primitive
church, of which Eusebius mentions, Lib. 6. c. 5 hist. eccle. Theodor. lib.
7. cap. 34. Tripar
they that began to profess Christ had the sign of the cross given them,
and by that sign were as it were brought to Christ. But he would not see it,
it was not for his purpose. But we must pardon him. A rollinge eye in a Calfes
head, does not narrowlye mark all that lies before him. That which was
nothing to the matter in hand, nor any one jot against that, which I alleged
for the sign of the cross, he espied to make a smoother, and nothing else: For
what thought S. Augustine, bids us use, The chaste fear of God, and faith
of prayer, as twoe weapons against the twoe terrible engines, of the devil,
pleasure and fear? Will M. Calfhills Logike make it follow, that he does
forbid us to use the sign of the cross? This is too strange, and new
triflinge follye.

S. Augustine in the very same place before, talked of the remedy of faith,
and sign or banner of the cross, vt talibus armis indutus facile vincat
Christianus, that the Christian being furnished with such armor might easily
overcome, and because he repeateth not the same again in the other place, M.
Calf. says he does not bid us make the sign of the cross in our forheades.
What trifli^ge folly is this? How holds this argument? Fol. 34. a.
S. Augustine (in that place) does not bidd us use the sign of the cross:
ergo he bids us in no other place? S. Paul in ten of his epistles does not
bid us celebrate the supper of our lord, ergo he bids us no where? Christ
in the 1. Chapter of S. Matthew. does not bid us pray, ergo he bids us no
where. If you find them stark stari^g naught (as in deed they are) then
fear not to give like sentence of M. Calfhills. For they differ not the
breadth of a nail. For as S. Paul bids us celebrate the supper of our
lord, 1. Cor. 11.
in his epistle to the Corinthians, although he did not in the other, and
Christ commanded us oftentimes to pray, notwithstanding he did it not in
the first of S. Mathewe: Even so albeit S. Augustine did not bid us expresselye
in that sentence and clause, to make the sign of the cross in our foreheades,
yet in the xxviij. line before, in the same chapter he told us that a
Christian man must use against the devil, the remedy of faith and sign of
the cross. And in diverse other places of his works, bids us use the same.

Thus you see (gentle readers), M. Calfhills answers to be no thing but mere
Cauilling and wranglinge. You see the authorities brought for the use and
virtue of the cross, stand in their force, and in the same sense for which
they were brought, and never an argument, Fol. 34. a
either to halte down right, or to ru^-, ne of uncertain feet, as the
adversaries do. Wherefore let truth prevail, and heresy quayle, let the
ancient fathers have credit, and this new vpstarte his deserte. As you find
him limping in this little allredy examined, so shall you in all the rest. Read
with indiffere^cye, and see, there is nothing so absurd but he will mainteyne
it after his feeble fashion, rather than grant that the sign of the Cross
used of a Christian man, is through the merits of Christ's passion of virtue,
or power against the devil.

He tells you that I prefer the bare sign of the cross before naked sole
and only faith. But there he makes a lie sir reverence. For I do not
absolutely prefer the bare sign before naked, Fol. 34. b
sole, and only faith: but declare an experime^t, and fact, where the bare
sign of the cross wrought that in Pagan, which a naked, sole, and only faith
did never by any Christian, and the declaring of a fact, is not a preferring
of one thing before another. I know that a naked faith, which in time may
grow to a perfection is better tha^ any external sign. But what needed all
this babble about naked, sole and only faith? It nothing impugneth any thing
that I said. But for M. Calfhils pleasure let us hear the reasons by which he
proves, that a naked and devils faith is better than a Cross.

The first is this, Fol 34. b Calf.
that the devils faith does teach somewhat. The second, that it takes away
the excuse of ignorance. The third, that it forces a sin upon us. The
fourth, that a naked faith is able with out further information to instruct
him, that nether did, nor ever could hear at all.

As for the first, Fol. 35. a Mart. M. Calves first reason.
in good soothe as we must confess that as the naked and devils faith teaches
all that have it, some what, so may we not deny, but that the cross teaches
us somewhat. But the teaching of some what does not always make a thing better.
He that teaches nothing, is some times better than he that teaches some what,
as the ignorant that holds his peace is better than the protestant that
teaches heresy. That which we teach, is that as a naked and devils faith
avails nothing, unless it be clothed with charity, so the bare figure of
the cross, ordinarily profits nothing unless it concur with faith. But
this is nothing to the purpose. We see in heretics, that have this naked and
devils faith now a days, The fruictes of the naked and devils faith.
contempt of the Majesty of God, blasphemy against Christ, disobedience to
his laws, dishonor to his governors on earth, rebellion against princes,
spoiling of churches, sacriledg of religious, malice against Catholics, pride
of heart, wantonness of body, covetousness of money, with a great many such of
M. Calves somwhatts. But in those who having faith clothed with charity honor
the cross, and are contented to have it in their churches, we see no such
somwhats.

To see your folly, reason but this with your self M. Calf. That is better
which works to man the less harm, but the Cross works less harm to
man, than the devils faith, contynuing still a devils faith (for it works
none at all), ergo the cross in this respect is better than the devils faith.
Of the second reason, The second
that it takes away the excuse of ignorance, what can ye infer, but that it
makes men's sins that have it, more grievous, Luc. 12.
and damnation more terrible. Does not Christ say that the seruante that
knows his masters will, and has not prepared him self, and done according
to his masters will, shall be beaten with many stripes, but he that does not
know it, and does things worthy of punishment, shall be beaten with few? And
shall it now be better because it takes away the excuse of ignorance? Me
thi^cketh you might better have said: That is worse which makes man's damnation
greater, but a naked and devils faith, knowing God and not glorifying him as
God, does make our damnation greater than all the signs of the cross in the
world, ergo a naked and devils faith in this point is worse than the cross.

The third
Concerning the third reason, where you say: that faith forces a sin upon us,
and allege Christ's words for it, you show your self neither skilful in the
scriptures, nor true Christian. For the place which you allege out of S. John
proves, Cap. 15.
that the Jews (of whom Christ spoke, had no excuse of their sins, because
Christ had preached unto them, and they continued still in their incredulity,
and would not beleaue in him, nor have any faith of his incarnation, death, or
resurrection. If they would have had faith, M. Calves doctrine, that faith
forces sin upon us.
they should have been delyured from sin, for they should have been justified
by the death of Christ in lauacro regenerationis, in thee bath of regeneration
and baptism. Furthermore no true Christen man would ever say, that faith
forces sin upon us. For faith is the gift of God, and the gifts of God
force not sin upon us. As he him self is holy, so are all his gifts: and
make us holy, If we use them to such effects as he gave them unto us. If a man
should urge you that crake unto the people, that you teach nothing, but the
sincere Gospel, where you find this positio^, faith forces sin upon us,
in all the Ghospel of Jesus Christ, what could you say M. Calf? If you have any
scripture, council, or father, let it apeare, if you have none, then are you
little better than an Atheist, to say, that faith (which is the gift of God)
forces sin upon us: But if your position were true, we might make this
reason against you. Whatsoever forces sin upon us, is worse than that
which forces no sin upon us: but the naked and devils faith forces sin
upon us (as you say) ergo it is worse than that, which forces no sin upon
us. But the cross forces no sin us, ergo it is worse than the cross. That
the cross forces no sin upon us, it is manifest, for it has no life, no
sense, nor power to use any force. Matthew. 15. Marc 7.
All that polluteth and defiles a man cu^meth from the heart. From thence,
come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, theftes, false
witnesses, and such like, these be they that defile man, and not crosses M.
Calf.

The fourth reason is so fond, The iiij.
that I think your brain had some convulsion, and wit distraction, when
you devised to utter it. For who but you, knowing that faith comes by hearing,
Romans 10.
and hearing by the word of God, would say, That a naked faith is able to
teach him, that there is a God, that neither did, Fol 35. a
not ever could hear at all? The man that did never hear, can have no faith,
quia fides ex auditu, for faith comes of hearing. If he has no faith, I
would feign have your devise, how faith can teach hi^. The instincte of
nature, visible things of this world, as the moui^g of the heavens, the
increase, of the earth, the face of man, and sight of others may instruct
such a one, that there is a God. And the sight of the cross and crucifixe can
express unto his eye that one died upon the cross: but that faith (which is
not in him) because he never had any sense of hearing, can do it, it were a
pretty devise to le^ne.

The Philosopher Aristotle taught, that, De sensu and sensibili.
Auditus est via ad disciplinam. Hearing is the way to learning, lack
hearing, and the sense of hearing, and lack learning and all that must be
learned by hearing. But M. Calf. had forgotten that principle of philophie, and
no marvel for he begins pretelye to forget Christianity. As for the
absurdity, which he finds in comparing the fained and devils faith, which
is a gift of God, Fol. 35. a
he says) and a quality of the mind, to the cross which is the work of
man, will apeare none at al, if he remember how S. Paul compared the high
priest who was in authority, Acto. 23.
and had no doubt great gifts of God, and some kind of faith, such as M.
Calfhills feigned devils faith is, to a painted wall, which was the work of
man, full of rubble and durte. And now to his Cosen Julian, and his judgment
of that experiment. Mark it well. It is profounde.

Fol. 35. b M. Calves. Notes.
First he notes, that wicked, reprobate and godless persons can use the sign
of the cross, as well as other, which if they can do, and notwithsta^dinge
have never a whitte the more faith, it can not be (says he) that the cross
dryueth out heresies, that it conuerteth obstinate sinners, that it makes
wicked men thinck upon God, or that it is comfortable in desperation. Mart.
Is not this a proper note, and he a cunninge noter? Is it not to be noted as
well that lechers, usurers, heretics, covetous men, and other lewd persons
can have the Bibles in their houses, resort unto sermons, hear the word of
God, as well as other that are virtuously disposed, and not withstanding have
never a whitte the more care to amend their lives? Yeas verily, the more is the
pity: And because all wicked me^ do not take occasion by reading of the Bible,
and hearing of Sermons, to amend their lives, shall we say (as M. Calf. does of
the cross) that the word of God can not make lecherers chaste, usurers
honest, covetous me^ liberal, heretics catholics, and naughty men good?
Haebr. 4.
God forbid. The word of God is lyvely and effectuous, and more percing than
any twoe edged sword? Esa. 55.
It shall do all that God will have done, and prosper in those, for whom he
sent it. When it falls, it falls like the sowers seed, some by the high
ways side, some upon the stones, some amongst thorns, and some upon good
ground. Some hear with one ear, and let it out at the other. Some receive it
with joy, but suffer it not to root: and in tribulation be offended for it.
Some hear it, but are so choked with riches and cares of the world, Matt. 13.
that it does not fructify. Some have humble gentle, and mild hearts, and
they bring forth fruicte in great plentye. In like sort, Some seeing the
cross, go by, and think not of it, but rather contemn it. Some see it
gladlye and think of it, but they are worldly, and can not enter into any
meditation of Christ's death, by often sight of it. Some have holy meditations
of Christ, and his passion, by occasion of it, and yeat do not fructify. Some
that have remorse and care of eternal salvation, by sight of it fall into some
heavenly contemplation of Christ's benefittes, and passing love toward us,
and fructify an hundred fold. Now because all that see it do not take like
commodity by it, shall we generally say as M. Calf: says, that it drives
heresies out of no man? It co^uerteth no obstinate sinners? It makes no wicked
men to think of God, nor is comfortable to none in desperation? or say as he
notes in the margent, Fol. 35. b
that these are contradictions in Martial? It were no point of wisdom to
build such an argument of so sclender a reason. For that admitted, many other
absurdities will follow, especially that which I declared before.

Now that the sight of the cross, beheld with earnest meditation of Christ,
humbling him self to death, to gather us together, and bring us into unity,
expels heresy, not I only, but that holy father Ephrem, witnesses in
these words: De poenit. cap. 3.
Crux est haeresium expulsatrix: the cross is an expeller of heresies, whose
words M. Calf. that reproves the virtue of the cross, should rather have
answered wisely, then condemned foolishlye. That some obstinate sinners are
converted, or rather induced to convert by sight of it, not I only, but
Athanasius teaches. De humanit. ^erbi.
And his authority should rather have been diligently weighed, than
disdainfully rejected. That it is comfortable in desperation, diverse know
that have been disquieted by the devil, and by Gods grace, through the
co^templation of this, have gotten the victory, and triumphed over him. For
examples sake I could have named some, but that I thought the gentle reader
would credit it, and did not mistruste that any heretic would scoff at it:
But I perceive, under every stone there lies a Scorpion. The 2. Note. Fol. 35
b. Calf.


His second note is, that the devil was not sore hurt by the Cross, for
notwithstanding he retained the possession of whole Julian both in body and
soul. Mart.
If his note books at home, have no better notes than this, there were a
foolish note book God wot. You forget your self (sir). We speak not of
harm done unto the devil, but of his fleing away at the sign of the cross.
Why urge you not that? The devil was not by coniuration called up, to hurt
Julian, but to help him. etc. For Julian had to consulte for an empire, and
thereim the devils counsel was required. But when Julian saw that terrible
and oughly sight of so foul a find, he was in great fear, and woeful
agony, and so upon the sudden, having no other refuge, he made the sign of
the Cross in his foreheade, as he commonly, used when he was a Christian. The
devils were put to flight, and driven back again. Was this, after a sort,
no harm to the devil as you term it? Imagine M. Calf. that M. Gryndall
sends a Currier for you hastily to bestow some fat prebende upon you, and
some one by the way draws his sword upon you, and makes you run away for
fear: have you no harm by it? Yes verelye: for the infamy that shall redounde
to such a dowtye knight for cowardnesse is harm sufficient, if there be no
more. Calf. Fol. 35. b M. Calves. reason. Mart.
But let us hear what reason you have, why the devil had no harm. The devil
(you say) retained the possession of Julian both body and soul, ergo he was
not hurt by the Cross that he made. O that wit of yours how fine it is.
When you went to M. Grindall you kept possession of your house, ergo when you
ran away for fear, you had no harm. A pyrate robbed by another pyrate keeps
the possession of his ship, ergo he has no harm by the pyrate. Is not this
substantial gear? either get you better stuff, or hold your peace for
shame. The third note which you gather, Fol 35. b The 3. note.
is that the devil faineth him self, to be afraid of that which with all his
heart he would have me^ use. To this in part I answered before, and proved
that the devil seems not to fear the cross, but fears it in deed. To say
somewhat besides I think it superfluous, unless M. Calf. will tell us by what
secret conference he has learned that the devil did at that time feyne him
self to be afraid of the cross that Julian made, or would have men use the
cross, and how we shall know when the devil is afaid. And what is the
point which he would have doobled, If he had been afraid in deed, when
Julian and the coniurer were together? There was no cause why the devil should
feign a fear to deceive them. They were both his own already. Et quod suum
est, amplius suum fieri non potest, says the law, that which is a man's
own, can be no more his own, than it is. There was no cause why he should
dooble a point. Julian was his dearling, the coniurer his friend, and none use
to doble with their friends, for fear of breach of amity. There was no cause
why the devil should play such open play, and run away, except it were
for fear of the sign of the cross: he was called up by the coniurer to serve
Julian. Julian was as glad to have him as the coniurer, and the devil would as
gladlye serve them. There was no occasion of fear otherwise ministered, and
yeat to run away under pretense of fear? How can this stand? It is a
great torment to the devil to be raised up by coniuration, and the oftener he
is co^iured, the oftener is his pain increased. VVherby it apeareth that being
called up by the coniurer, he would not (as M. Calf. imagines) play open
play and make as though he were afraid, and run away, and suffer new
torment by an other coniuration, only to make sport. Now let us have a rule
of M. Calf. to know when the devil fears in deed, and when he pretends to
fear. He tre^bleth at the name of Jesus, he quaketh also at the sign of the
cross, he flees when he hears his name, he runs away when he sees his
sign. His tremblinge argues fear, his runninge away cowardnesse: Now to
know which is for fear, and which is under pretense of fear, were worth the
learning of so cunning a man as M. Calf. prete^deth him self to be in the
devils policies. If it be by no other than running away, he may say, that he
pretends fear at the name of Jesus, as well as he does at the sight of the
cross. For he runs away at both.

Where you note sir contradictions in me, Fol. 35. b
because I said the sign of the cross must concur with faith, That which
M. Calf. avouches to be contradictio^, proved none.
and faith, with the sign of the cross, and declared twoe experimentes, one
of Julian, and an other of a Jew, in whom the sign of the cross wroughte
great effects, without faith, you seem to be so desirous of quarrelinge, that
you would rather fight with a shadow, than sit still and not be counted a
quarreler. You might see, that in the first, I had respect to the ordinary
way that God appointed us to fight with all against the devil, and therefore
said that the sign of the cross must co^curre with faith, and faith with the
sign of the cross. And that they iontly concurring together have driven out
of men not only one spirire, but whole legions of devils. In the second that I
had respect to an extraordinary way, by the which it pleased god to declare
the virtue of the cross, and what force it had, ex opere operato, by the work
wrought, yea by an Apostata and infidel, who had neither faith, neither hope
in Christ. And these twoe diverse respects considered, you might plainly have
seen, that there was no contradiction at all. For in Contraries there must
always be one respect. And if that respect vary in time, place, manner, or
other circumstance, there can no contradiction be employed. If a physician
should say unto you. Sir, this is the most common, and ordinary medicine,
that our art prescribes to cure one sick of a frenzy, and yet notwith
standing tell you that he knew a man fallen into as deep a phrensye, as you,
cured whith out that medicine, Or to use a more familer example, if a man say
unto you, whosoever will go from London to Lambeth by water, must have a
bardge, whirre, or some such vessel, and yeat tell you how the last year,
save one a man might go between London and Lambeth by water, with out any
bridge, whirrie, bote, or Scullowe, will yower wisdom say that either the
physician in his words, or the other man in his saying imployeth a
contradiction? I think not. And if you can find none in these, look well,
and you shall find none in the other. And marvel first at your own ignorance,
that understand not that which you take in hand, to confute, Secondly at your
own follye, for wrangling and quarreling, where you have no just cause.
Thirdly at your own disobedience, who being a professor of diuinitye and
reader in Poules, and sometimes a lustly brave younker serving man like with a
badge on your sleue, an earnest fauorer, and quick furderer of the
superintendentes injunctions, would set forth a book, nether perused by the
learned, nether privileged by the queen, M. Calves book printed without
priuiledg.
nor allowed by order, commanded by injunctions, which you being a faithful
subject (as you say) should willinglye have allowed, and not wittinglye
contemned. But I see heretics will be always contemners of authority and rule,
bold, wilful in there own conceit, me^ that fear not to bring in sects,
me^ that forsake the unity of Christ's, Catholic church, and break all good
order.

THAT THE CROSS OF CHRIST WAS PREFIGVRED IN THE LAW OF NATVRE FORESHEVVEN BY
THE FIGVRES OF Moses Law, denonced by the Prophets, and showed from heaven
in the time of grace. ARTICLE II.
Fol. 41.
AS THE Philosopher whom M. Calf. mentions in the beginning of this article
thought it not good to tell the fool that came unto him, Fol. 41. a
and asked what was honesty, because he had nothing to do with it, so did I
ones think it not expedient, for me, to answer this contentious quarreling of
M. Calf. who professing the sincerity of the Gospel, Philip. 4.
and commanded so to behave him self, that his modesty might be known to
all me^, does so revile and rail in all his discourse, that whosoever fiftethe
it, shall find no point of honesty or modesty, from the first leaf to
the last: which in part he confesses him self, In the preface to the reader
saying that he is more aspre in his writing, than modesty requires: But the
truth of the cause, so blasphemouslye reviled, desire to profitte my dear
country so miserably deceived, and care to reduce him that so blindlye
wandereth, have made me take in hand the disprouing of this his answer, which
is more worthy to be condemned than remembered. Briefly therefore to join
issue with this quareller that says: Fol. 41. b Calf.
The sign of the cross was neither prefigured in the law of nature, nor
foreshewed, by the figures of Moses law, nor denounced by the prophets, nor
showed from heaven in the time of grace, but the passion of Christ, and manner
of his death was only prefigured, Mart.
What will he say to the fathers, and especially to S. Augustine, that
speaki^g of the widow to whom Elias was sent, and of the sticks that she
gathred says: Non hic solo signi nomine, Co^t. Faustum Manich li. 12. cap 34.
sed etiam numero lignorum, signum crucis exprimitur. In this place the sign
of the cross is expressed, not with the only name of wood, but also with the
number of the pieces of wood? What will he say, to those express woods of
his, Moses manus ad coelum extendit, iam tunc figuram crucis Christi
ostendens? Moses lifted up his hands to heaven, De 5. Heraes ad quod vult
Deu^. ca. 2. Fol. 175. b Fol. 29 b
showing eue^ at that time the figure of Christ's cross? VVil he say: that
they ouershotte them selves in their terms, and meant better than they wrote?
If he do, Let me ask him this question. How say you (sir) was not the
cross an instrument on which Christ should be put to death? Was it not one
of the means, by which the manner of his passion was wrought? What say you?
was it? or was it not? If it were, then by yowr own confession, M. Calf. by
his own confession co^u^nced a liar.
saying that the passion of Christ and manner of his death were prefigured, You
are convinced to be a liar. For if the manner of his passion, and means how
he should come to his passion were prefigured, and the cross was one of those
means, then must it necessarily follow, that the cross was prefigured: and
that you have done me great injury in denying it.

If the cross were no instrument of his death, then was not Christ crucified,
and so by your opinion the world not yet redeemed. Your often confounding and
taking the sign of the passion, for the passion of Christ it self, ministers
many occasion to suspecte, least you be one of them, that intend to raise up
the Manichees heresy, that Christ had but a fantastical body, and suffered
here not in verity, but in fantasy: Take heed, vide Ambrosium sermon. 55. de
cruce and Augustinu^ ser. 19 de sanctis.
you crepe apace toward it. Again, whereas Damascene, and Cirillas, and
diverse other do expresslye tell us that the tree of life planted in the
midst of paradise, did prefigure the sign of the Cross, dare you being but
an vpstarte, of no experience, nor lerning, in comparison, controlle them of
ignorance in the scriptures, and mysapplying the figures of the old testament?
or of seking allegories more then neded? Were they men of such mean lerning
and cheuerill consciences, that they would run from a reveled truth, Fol 42.
a
to their own fantasies, and devises: and ouershoote themselves? No no: their
virtue and lerning declare the contrary, too well known, to be imperished by
such a pelting pellferer, who falsely persuaded, that he has the best and
fynest ware, that is in all the world, sets up a new shop, and like a
mountibanke prayseth his own confections, Lib. 4. ca. 12 de fide.
and reproves other men's? As for example, where Damascene resembled the tree of
life in paradise to the cross, this man (as though he had authority to sit
in judgment over all,) says. Fol 42. a
Calf.
As in one sense I condemn it not, so in an other sense I like it not: the
words that are inferred savor not of scripture: Mart. why M. Calf likes not
Damasc.
He will be above all, he will like, and mislike all, he will teach the fathers
how to interpret scriptures: Is not this excessive pride? and Lucifers own
spirit? he likethe not Damascenes judgment, and why? The thief never likes
the judges sentence be it never so true, if it be against him. Besides whereas
S. Ambrose said, Lib 1. de fide ad Gratia in prol. Lib. 8. ca. 17. in Euang.
Ioa^. Lib. 4. ca. 12. de fide. In 7. Exo.
that the standarde of Abraham when he fought for his brother Loath, Cirillus,
that the woodde laid upon Isaac when he should be sacrificed, Damascene that
the blessing of Joseph's twoe children by Jacob, Origin that the rod of Aaron
being all figures of the old law, prefigured the cross, yet this man says,
that it was not figured in any at all. Let the doctors dally in figures as
they fansye, (says he) let not us depart from the verity of the word. If
they speak one thing, and mean an other let us take their meaning, Fol. 41.
b Calf. Fol 43. Mart.
and let their words go.

As though such learned and virtuous fathers, would dally in figures after
their fancy, and go from the verity of Gods word, or speak one thing and
mean an other, and so voluntarilye err them selves, and be occasion of error
to other. This imagination is too vile, and thought too sclanderous for a man
to conceive of such noble lights of the world, and now by the grace of God
saints in heaven. Fol. 23. a Fvl. 96. a Fol. 85. b
But yet such is M. Calfhills opinion of them, and not of them only, but of
all the fathers that have lived these thirtene hundred years since Christ.

A terrible matter, God commaundethe us to ask our forefathers, and they shall
tell us, and what shall they tell us? the truth. Deuteronomy. 32.
For orherwise God would not send us unto them, but to learn the truth, and
now M. Calf. bids us not go the fathers, they run from a reveled truth
to their own devises, Fol. 43. a.
they dally in figures as they fancy, M. Calves opinion of the fathers.
they speak one thing and mean an other? Is not this to advance him self
against God? Let the indifferent judge. If any say, the protestants and
such as M. Calf. is, prefer the scriptures before the fathers, So do the
Catholics too, and ever did, and yet never contemned their exposition upon
the scriptures, where it is agreeable to the doctrine of Christ's catholic
church, nor thought them to be so ignorant that they knew not the meaning of
scripture, or so malicious that they would speak one thing, and mean an
other to bring men into error, or so void of the grace of the holy Ghost,
that making such learned commentaries, and expositions upon the scriptures, such
godly sermons, and deuote homilies to the people, such treatises of fasting,
prayer, and alms deeds, and such like amountinge to great volumes, they
would vary from the true sense of Gods word, and go from the sincerity
of the Gospel. Nor Damascene sauoreth the less of scripture because, he said:
Seeing death came in by the tree, it was convenient that life and resurrection
should be given again by a tree, If it may have a gentle interpretation, and
be taken as he meante, that is for the mean, and instrument by which death
came, and life and resurrection was given. For he was not so unskillful in the
scriptures, but that he knew S. Paul said: By one man sin entered in, and
by one man resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. Romans 5.
Nor so ignorant in the principles and grounds of the faith, but that he knew
that our fall came by Adam, and our salvation by Christ, as the chief author
and woorker of it. Wherefore you do very great iniurye to so learned a father
to charge him with ignorance and not savoring of scripture. And albeit you
labor busily to discredit him, and Cassiodorus and Cyrillus, for saying that
the tree planted in the midst of paradise prefigured the cross, Fol. 42. a
and bring certain places of S. Augustine to prove that it is called the
wisdom of God, and Christ hi^ self, yet shall you have no advantage against
them, nor improve their interpretatio^s. The scripture is a great deep pole,
it has many dark senses, and secret mysteries, which may be diversely taken,
and signify diverse things. As for example, the paradise that God planted for
man, What paradise signifies mystically.

Lib. 13. ca. 21. de ciuitace Dei. Sapientia^.


signifies (sayethe S. Augustine in the place which you alleged before) the
life of the blessed, the four fluddes, the four virtues, wisdom, fortitude,
temperance, and justice, the trees signify all good lerning, the fruictes of
the trees, the manners of the virtuous, the tree of life, wisdom, the mother
of all goodness, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the experiment that the
commandment of God was tra^sgressed. This is one sense. Besides this it
has an other signification. Paradise signifies the church, the four
fluddes, the four Ghospells, the trees holy men, their fruictes, their
works, the tree of life, Christ, Free will
the tree of knoweledg of good and evil, proprium voluntatis arbitrium, man's
own free will. By which you may see that one thing in the scripture may have
diverse mystical significations, and never a one confound the other. The tree
of life signifies Christ, and wisdom the mother of all goodness (as S.
Augustine says,) we grant. It signifies also the cross of Christ, as
Damascene, Lib. 13 de ciui^. Dei cap. 21.
Cassiodorus, and Cyrillus say, no Wise man can deny. For both may stand,
and one bring no confusion to the other, as S. Augustine proves by diverse
examples of the old testament. Wherefore (sir) in proving it to signify
Christ, and wisdom, you prove nothing, but that we grant, and yet nothing
improve that which we say, that it signifies (as those fathers interpret it)
the cross of Christ. Libro primo de moribus.
But I perceive the drunckarde will never lack wine, nor the quarreler matter
of contention. True it is that Seneca writes. Every man sauoreth of that which
he has learned. You have learned in Luther and Caluines schole, to be
contentious against the church, and impugn one truth with an other, and that
you practice now, but how wiselye the event shall try.

The liftinge up of Moses hands (you say) signifies prayer, ergo it
signifies not the cross, Calf. Fol. 43. a Mart.
or else you say nothing against it. An argument like yower self. For if it
were true, that the lifting up of Moses hands did signify prayer, yet does
not yower reason hold in form of a good conseque^t. For it may signify an
other thing beside prayer. That the lifting up of Moses hands did signify
prayer, you say, Fol. 43 a
it is evident by consent of all men, and bring but one, both evil quoted
and nothing for yower purpose. Consider yower words: Chrysostom says libro
primo de orando ad Deum, it is: Libro secundo de orando Deu^, mende yower book
Sir. Calf.
How did Moses preserve the people of Israel in the wars? Did he not
deliver unto his scholar his armor, and host, but he him self set his
earnest prayer against the multitude of his enemies? Thereby teachi^g us that
the prayer of the righteous is more auayleable, than armor, or horse men? Thus
much S. Chrysostom in deed. Mart.
But where is there, in all this sentence, one clause, yea one word that
says: The lifti^ge up of Moses hands did signify prayer? Of the lifting up
of Moses hands.
There is none to be seen: All is spoken in the commendation and force of
prayer: by which Moses conquered Amalech, yet not without the liftinge up of
his hands. For as the scripture says: When Moses lifted up his hands, the
Israelites overcome, Exodus 17.
when he did let them fall Amalech had the victory: There are twoe actions,
liftinge up of the hands, and prayer. If prayer only had been necessary, he
might have made it secretlye, and continued it without pain, and never needed
Aaron and Hur to stand on both sides to bolster up his hands. For prayer may
be made without liftinge up of hands, and great wearines of the body. Now
whereas Moses prayed with his heart, and lifted up his hands, M. Calf. can
not well include the^ in one. For if he make them both one, and will have the
liftinge up of Moses hands to signify prayer only, then must he make one
thing in one respect to be a figure of it self, which is impossible. For
things them selves can not be figures of them selves.

That he might have made his prayer without lifting up of his hands, and
continued the same without pain, without Aaron and Hur on both sides to
bolster them up, no man doubts. Tertullia. li. 1 aduer. Marcio. and 2.
Tertullian says: Now verilye why did Moses then only pray sitting, with
his hands cast abroad, when Jesus fought against Amalech, where as in such
perplexity, he should rather have commended his prayer, by falling down upon
his knees, with knocking his breaste with his hands, and leying his face
flat upon the grownde, except it were because, where the name of Jesus was
mentioned, which should fight in time to come, against the devil, Habitus
crucis erat necessarius.
there the very form, and habit of the cross was necessary, by which Jesus
should carry away the victory. Here Tertullian declares that if nothing had been to be signified in the lifting of Moses hands, but prayer, it might
better have been made with kneling and knocking of the breast, and prostrating
him self upon the grownde, but because the holdi^g up of his hands did
prefigure the cross of Christ, who should fight against the devil, as he did
then against Amalech, it was necessary for him to express the figure of the
cross in such manner, as he did. Where is now yower consent of all sir? Can
yower number come but to one, and that one speak never a word at all of the
liftinge up of hands in either of the places which you allege? Alas I pity
yower case. There is great lack, and evil store, where one is all. You are
such a weakeling and in danger of such famyne, that I think you will starve
before you come to yower full grows, and never prove a good ox to tread out
the true corn in Christ's flower, unless you make better provision, but to
the matter.

Fol 44. a Fol 28 a De 5. Heraes quod vult. Deu^ cap. 2.
What fond toye came into yower idle brain, when you said, the lifting up of
Moses hands did not signify the figure of the cross? Did you not see in my
book, this saying of S. Augustine, Nobiscum est Moses ille etc. With us is
that Moses, the great friend of God: who to the end he might overthrow his
enemies, held up his hands to heaven, even then showing the figure of
Christ's cross? Christ's cross prefigured by the lyfti^g up of Moses hands.
Lib. 4. de Trinitate cap. 15. Calf.
Did you not see in the next side of the same leaf, this saying out of the
same father? Ille superbissimus spiritus etc. That proud spirit is discomfited
and overthrown by the cross of our lord which was prefigured by the hands
of Moses? And if you saw them, why did you dissemble them? Why did you not
frame an answer to them? Make they nothing to the purpose? Construe them and
see: Moses ille, that Moses, magnus amicus Dei, the great friend of God, est
nobiscum, is with us, qui the which, vt, that, vinceret hostem praeliantem, he
might overcome his enemies warring against him, manus ad coelum extendit:
Lifted up his hands to heaven, ia^ tu^c figura^ crucis Christi ostende^s, even
then showing the figure of Christ's cross. Mart.


Well done, how say you now sir? Is not figura crucis Latin, for the
figure of the cross? and oste^dere Latin to show, and manus Moysi, Moses
hands? See you not by this time, that the lifting up of Moses hands did
prefigure the cross of Christ? Well done, to the next.

Ille superbissimus spiritus, that most proud spirit, Calf.
nega^s transitum, denying passage ad terra^ promissionis to the land of
promise, superatur is ouercommed, per crucem domini, by the cross of our
lord, quae, the which, praefigurata est, Mart.
was prefigured, manibus Moysi, with Moses hands.

How say you now, is not figura caucis Latin, for the figure of the cross,
and ostendere Latin to show, and manus Moysi Moses hands? What say you to
this? Did not Moses hands prefigure the cross, being lyfted in such sort as
they were? What will you have playne^? recante for shame, no shifte will serve
you. You can not say that S. Augustine takes figuram crucis, the figure of
the cross, to be the death of Christ, for an external figure of a thing ca^
not be one with the thing it self, and S. Augustine says not, Moses hands
did show the cross, but figuram crucis, the figure of the cross, which
argues that you can not make the figure of the cross, and the cross, which
is the death of Christ, to be all one, unless you will make. S. Augustine
fall into the Manichees heresye, and say that Christ's passion was figurative,
and not true, and in deed, which is too soon for Satan's purpose to begin
as yet. The harvest is not ripe, nor the harvest men framed to that Iewer,
albeit some be more readier than some. Among whom take heed M. Calf. that he
be not accounted one, that has separated him self from the unity of
Christ's church, and says that the sincerity of Gods ordinance was refused
within two hundred years after Christ, Fol. 96 a Fol. 85 b
and that sythens Syluesters time, in most parts of Christendom a man could
not have espied any piece of sincerity, having as many eyes as Argus, and
counterfeting a new religion, prophaneth the sacraments of the church,
breaks the old ordinances, and contemns all the ancient fathers in
comparison of him self, and thincketh that he and his only have the true
meaning and sense of Gods word, such as the holy Ghost never reveled before
these latter days. For of such factes a vehement presumption is soon gathered.

Lib. 20. ca. 8. de ciui. Dei. Fol. 43. b
You find fault whith me for interpreting those words of S. Augustine, Manibus
in figuram crucis extensis, his hands held up a cross, and would have it
word for word interpreted, Manihus his hands, extensis, streached out, in
figuram crucis in the form of a cross. That me^ may not thi^cke that you
have no just cause to quarrel, I pass not a point to confess an oversight
in the interpretation of those words: for if I did, you should have no
aduantadge by it. For whether Moses hands were stretched out in the form of
a cross, or held up a cross, it makes against yower assertion, and proves
plainly that it prefigured the sign of the cross, as is proved by the places
of S. Augustine recited before.

Nor have we as you foolishlye surmise by that allegation bewrayed our
ignorance: for a man may hold up his hands a cross, Fol 43. b
and never need to put one hand over an other, and frame as you say a S.
Andrews cross, Nether need we say that Moses to represente the cross
which we have in the church, put one of his hands under his other elbowe,
which were a strange thing to be done, and meet for some tumbler. For if he
had but held up his hands, the very holdinge up of them had prefigured, and
represented the misterye and sign of the cross. For as S. Ciprian sayethe by
liftinge up the hands, S Cypria^ de coena domini. Arnobius li. 8 aduersus
gentes. Fol. 43. b.
the misterye of the Cross is represented, unto us. And Arnobius says, Cum
homo porrectis manibus orat, signu^ Crucis est. When a man prays having his
hands stretched out it is a sign of the cross. But let me take yower own
interpretation and see what argument may be builded of it, against you. You
say, the stretching fooorth of hands in the figure of a cross, (for so you
mean) is at the arms end, as Christ's was on the cross, but the stretching
forth of Moses hands, was in the figure of a cross, at the arms end, ergo
it was like the stretching of Christ's hands on the cross, and so
consequentlye did prefigure the cross, as by yower own interpretation it is
playnlie convinced. I would thancke you for it, but it was against yower
will.

As for the greek Y Pithagoras letter, Fol. 44 a
which you say was the old figure of the cross, and have no better proof
for it, than a glass window in a gallery at Lambeth, I will leave it to the
painter, and glasier, until you can show more antiquity for thatt, then we
can for this. And seeing you make yower self so skillfull an antiquarie, and
learned in old monumentes, save yower poor credit, and small honesty, and
bring forth but one president of scripture, and antiquity, contrary to the
form of the cross which we use, and to instruct poor souls that would
learn, recite but one place, or express text of scripture, Fol. 44 a
which is (as you say) against the having of the sign of the cross, No^
facies tibi sculptile, thowe shall make to the self no graven thing, VVil not
serve for it. Hitherto against yower fond awnswers, to the authorites of the
fathers brought to prove that the sign of the cross was not foreshewen by
the figures of the law.

Now let us hear whether you had just cause of laughter with indignation
against my argument made, Fol 44 a
upon the place of S. Augustine, and thence proceed to yower replies against
the predictions of the prophetts. S. Augustines words be these. That most
proud spirit mediator to bring men to hell etc is discomfited by the cross
of our lord, Lib. 4. de Trinitate cap. 15.
which was prefigured by the hands of Moses. To this mayor proposition of S.
Augustines, I added this minor, and conclusion. But by Moses hands, the sign
of the cross, was prefigured, ergo by the sign of the cross, devils are
ouercommed. Now sir is there, nor wit, nor common sense, (as you say) in
this argument? Fol 44. a
Or was S. Augustine, in yower judgment, so wittlesse and void of common
sense, that he understood not what he said, when he made that mayor
proposition? or is the minor, so far out of square, that it can not be joined
with the mayor? Or is the conclusion so absurd that it can not follow of the
premises? Judge by yower own argument: you would have it thus. Fol 44. a
Devils are disco^fited by that which Moses hands prefigured: but Moses
hands prefigured the sign of the cross, ergo by the sign of the cross
devils are discomfited. Is not this all one in effect? Have you not the same
matter, and the same sense, that I had in mine? And have altered nothing, but
added a term, and left out certain words, which I added to make it more
plain, Which does not infringe the substance and ground of the argument, but
the form and fashion only? And will you laughe with indignation at an
argument all one in effect with yower own, because it is not in mode and
figure? Does not yower Logic teach you, that the argument that lacks mode
and figure is not to be reproved as evil, nor the former of it, void of wit
and common sense, if it be reducible to any mode and figure? Have you not
heard of many such in Logic? And if you have forgotte this, may we not
laugh (not as you do with indignation (for that may welbe called a dogs
laughter) but with good reason at yower malepertnesse in findi^ge fault with
that, which to no man that has wit, or common sense, seems reprehensible?
VVeighe it well M. Calf. and for proof of the minor, which you think worthy
to be denied, seek to that which I said even now of the lifting up of Moses
hands.

Now to his cross answers against the sign of Tau, The sign of Tau. Fol 44
b
he professes him self to be a man of great learning, and to have deep
sight in many sciences, and yeat when it comes to trial, he is proved to
utter nothing but idle fumes, and vain toys, to whom I am sumwhat beholding.
For where before, to instruct such young scholars as I am, he said nothing,
now for my further lerning, he will add somewhat, which in the end shall be,
for any good reason or wisdom, less tha^ nothing. Hear it I beseech you,
for yower instruction as well as for mine. Tau (says he) which Ezechiell
spoke of, Calf.
did not figure our cross, for the prophets spoke Hebrewe, and the Hebrewe
character is a very pair of Gallows. Here, it is to be noted, Mart.
that either M. Calf. has not charitably acco^pained his brethren, neither to
Tiburne, nor to S. Thomas of Waters, and taken a true view, and proportion of
the Gallows, either that he is not so good an Hebrewe, as by pronouncing his
words Noah and Elissha, after the sound of that tongue, as the parrat does
her (...), he would make the poor prenteses of London believe. For albeit the
Hebrewe character somewhat resemblethe a pair of Gallows, yet has it not the
very figure of a Gallows. A difference there is, for one line is longer, and
not so smothelye drawn neither above, nor beneathe, as the Gallowe posts are.
VVerfore unless the Gallows that he saw last, was iointed, for some
displeasure done to the brotherhoode, in one post, and made shorter then an
other like a Iambus, I marvel that M. Calf. would so definitiuely say, that
the Hebrewe character is a very Gallows. He might have had a trewer figure
and proportion of a very gallows in an other Hebrewe letter (...), if his
sight had been good, but that he would needs play the gallows, and to bring
men in hatred with the cross, term it a very gallows, as some preachers
about Ca^terburye have done. But how fondlye he fails in this, and
betrayeth his ignorance in the Hebrewe character, you shall hear.

The charecters which the old Hebrwes used when Moses, and the prophets
wrote, were somewhat differing from those which we have now, and especially
the last letter Tau, as it is evident by S. Hierome, In 9. Ezech.
upon the ni^ght of Ezechiell, where he says: Antiquis Hebraeorum literis
quibus hodie vtuntur Samaritani extrema Tau litera crucis habet similitudinem,
The hebrew letter Tau has the true foorme of our cross.
quae in Christianorum frontibus pingitur, and frequenti manus inscriptione
signatur. That is to say. In the old ancient letters of the Hebrews, which
the Samaritanes use at this present, the last letter Tau has the likeness and
form of the cross, which is painted in the foreheade of the Christians, and
signed with often impression of the hand. Thus much S. Hierome: who with
paynful trauail, long study, and great chardge, attained a great excellency
in the Hebrewe tongue: where note first, that in calling them the old letters
of the Hebrews, he declares, that they which were used in his time, were new
and differi^g from the other. As if we would say, this was the old fashion,
this was the old coin, this was the old law, it is to be understood, that
now we have a new fashion, a new coin, and a new law, differing from the
other. Secondarilie in saying that the Samaritanes use those charecters at this
present, he proves not only a manifest difference, but declares that in his
days they were used, yea and seen, no doubt of him self. Whereupon he
boldelye pronounces, that the Hebrewe letter Tau had the very figure and
form of the cross, which is painted in Christen men's forheades, and signed
with the often impression of the hand. Wherefore unless M. Calf. will say,
that Christian men heretofore, had a gallows painted in their foreheades, and
the figure of twoe posts with a beam ouerthwhart, signed with often
impression of the hand in their foreheades, he can not bring to pass that the
Hebrewe letter Tau, which Ezechiel writing in Hebrewe used, and at the
commandment of God signed in men's foreheades, is a very gallows, nor any man
else, but such as with M. Calf will make a quarrel to the gallows, or gallye
posts.

Upon this place of S. Hierome, every simple soul may reason thus with our
great Hebrewe man, that says, Fol. 45. a
there is no licknesse betwixt that Hebrewe letter Tau that Ezechiel used, and
our cross. The last letter which the old Hebrews had, and Samaritanes use
at this day, has the likeness and form of the cross which is printed with
the hand, in Christen men's foreheades, but Tau is the last letter, which the
old Hebrews had, and Samaritanes use at this day, ergo Tau has the
liknesse and form of the cross that is printed in Christen men's foreheades.
And that is the true sign of our cross, ergo the old Hebrewe lettre Tau has
the true sign of our cross. Which part of this argument will M. Calf.
deny? the mayor is S. Hieromes, Answer directly M. Calf.
a man much better learned in the Hebrewe tongue then he is. The minor can not be
denied it is also S. Hieroms, the premises then being true, and the form of
the argument good the conclusion must needs follow. Where is now the great
lerning of our profounde clerk become, that will teach other that which he
has not him self? Is this the addition that he will give for our further
lerning: Fol. 44. b
this and no other? Away with it for shame. It is meeter for Cobblers of queen
hyue, and dru^ckardes at S. Katherins, and others that are well seen in ciathis
ebriorum, than for those which profess then selves master readers in
characteribus Hebraeorum.

We are taught an other lesson for our further learning, and truer instruction
of the blessed father S. Hierome, more sound and strong, than can be removed
with the fantasy of so you^ge an Hebrewe. You^ge for his skill, and old for
his malice. For unless he would have willingelye erred, and malitiouslye
deceived, he could not chose but see this place that I have alleged. For it
follows in the very next word to the sentence that he him self recited
out of S. Hierome, in the same chapter. Wherefore trust him as you find
him. You have S. Hieromes works, you I mean that be learned, confer the
place, and see his subtilitie, and warn yower fre^des of it. Nor deaceaue, nor
be deceived any longer. You that have no sight in the latin^ tongue, desire
some to peruse the place, and when you have tried the truth cry Vae to him for
deceauinge you, and shame to yower selves that being wise men believe so
foolish a caulfe.

Homi. 14.
If any will not believe this, for further instruction he may add the words of
S. Chrysostom upon S. Mark, where he says, The mysterye of the cross, is
showed in the number of three hundred. The letter Tau is a note of three
hundred, whereupon it is said in Ezechiel. Cap. 9.
And thou shall write Tau, in the foreheades of them, that moorne. And
whosoever has that written upon him shall not be killed. For whosoever has
the sign of the cross in his forehead he can not be strooken of the devil:
And if that will not content him, take Tertullian more ancient well nigh by ij.
hundred years, he says: God did foretell that Christ should suffer
persecution, and his Apostles in like sort and all faithful men signed, Illa
scilicet nota de qua Ezechiel, etc. with that mark of which Ezechiel speaks,
The sign Tau. in Ezechiel signifies our cross.
our lord said unto me pass in the midst of the gate in the midst of
Jerusalem, and give the signs of Tau in the forheads of me^. Tau is a lettre
of the Greeks, and our Tau is a sign of the cross, which he did porte^d or
foreshewe, that it should be in our forheads in the true and Catholic
Jerusalem. This considered, I trust you will better creditte the authoririe of
these fathers, declaring manifestly that the old letter Tau which Ezechiell
mentions has the likeness of the cross of Christ, printed in Christen men's
foreheades, than the follye of M. Calf. that says it is a very gallows, Fol.
44. b
and bids, us go to the idol Serapis, If we will have any figure of old
time for the cross, which we have in express signification and foorme showed
of God him self, by his holy prophet Ezechiel. But if we had no president of
antiquity for the sign of the cross, as M. Calfehill full calvishlye
cauilleth, what shame were it to take a pattern there? May we not take salutem
ex inimicis? Health of our enemies? and instruction out of the gentills
writings? The old fathers think it laufull. If there were a Jew in England
M. Calf. that wrote the Hebrewe characteres so fair and fine as no man in the
world could counterfeate the like, I suppose you would think it no shame to
yower worship, nor dishonor to yower person, to go unto him, and purchase a
copy of his charecters. But to instruct so long a reader at Paul's, so old
a M. of art, and so cunning a Bacheler of Divinity as you are, I will declare
for yower further learning, and better instruction, because I perceive you
content yower self with English Doctors, and do but skimme over the
ecclesiastical histories, and ancient fathers, I, I say, being sometimes
usher of Winchester will declare that this sign was not in the idol of
Serapis, by any knowledge of the Egiptians, but by the secret disposition and
eternal providence of God. Socrates an ancient historiographer, talking of the
idol Serapis, among other things, sayethe thus. But I do not thi^cke that
the priests of the Egiptians foreknewe the cumming of Christ, and made the
sign of the cross. The cross set in Serapis by the providence of Coll 1.
For if the mystery of the cumming of our lord was hid (as the Apostle
says) and kept privy from the prince of naughtines the devil, how much
more was it kept privy from his servants the Egyptian priests? but the
providence of God did make this before, that that might be done in questioning
about those letters, which was showed in the Apostle S. Paul. Act 17.
For he enriched with the holy Ghost, brought many of the Athenians to the
faith, at what time, as he expounded those things which were written in the
altar, as he in his own opinion thought best: except peradventure some man
will say that God wrought, in the Egiptians priests, as he did in Balaam and
Caiphas. For they also are said to have prophesied. Thus far Socrates: where
note (good readers) that if we had to go to Serapis, M. Calf. by sendi^g us to
Serapis, for a pattern of the cross, sends us to the providence of God.
for a pattern of our cross, as M. Calf. would have us, we should go to
that which God him self foremade, to that which God by his providence
ordained, to that which in those letters he would ha-prophecied, and so
directlye to Gods ordinance, and have in Serapis that blessed sign, which
according to the old tradition and interpretation of their holy letters,
signified vitam futuram, the life to come.

Now a word of his great marueling, and my wondering to shut up this
chapter. Fol 45. a b Calf.
I marvel quoth M. Calf. what ^oye came into yower idle head, when for a
proof of the undoubted sign of the cross, you bring forth the words of
the Psalm, O lord the light of thy countenance is sealed on us. Mart.
And I wonder what brainesicke passion pierced yower wit, when you devised to
chardge me with that which I never said, nor any indifferent man can gather of
my words. To declare that you devise matter of marueling as a vice does of
laughter on a scaffolde, when he has naught to say, I will repete my words
of which you take occasion to marvel. In the xxx. leaf and second page,
which according to yower promise you quote not after yower appointed order,
because belike the reader should not confer the place, Esa 49.
and see yower false iuggingle, I say thus. Again by his said prophet, he
says: Behold I will lift up my hands to all nations, and set up my sign
on high to all people. That sign says: S. Hierome is undoubtedly the sign
of the cross, which God also signified in the same prophet, Esa 66.
and put (as S. Hierome there declares) in our foreheades, that we may freely
and franklye say: Psalm. 4.
Signatum est super nos, lumen vultus tui domine. O lord the light of thy
countenance is signed and sealed upon us: These are my words repeted orderlye
as they lie in the book: Now sir in all this where find you that the words
of the Psalm are brought for an undoubted proof of the sign of the cross?
Is yower skill so small, that you can not conceive what is mea^t by so small a
sentence set out in English? Is yower eye sight so dim that you can neither
see the name of Esaye and S. Hierome in the text, neither the 66. chapter
quoted in the margent? But when I bring a sentence to one purpose, must you
wreaste it to an other, when I speak out of Esaye, must you answer out of
Ezechiell? when I cite S. Hierome in one place, must you take his words spoken
in an other place? I am sorye for it, and wish you a guide to direct yower
stepps, and some Collirium to purge yower eyes, least if you continewe in such
blindenes, you fall into the ditche, and draw to the increasinge of yower own
damnation diverse seely souls with you. Did you not see that first I brought
the saying of the prophet Esai, in the 24. chapter, and S. Hieroms
interpretation upon that place for the cross, and afterward for further
evidence of the same noted the 66. chapter of the said prophet, and S.
Hierome declaring that God did put that sign in our forheads, that when we
had receued that sign in our forheads, at baptism, and learned the faith of
Christ, we might freely and franckely say, Signatu^ est super nos lumen vultus
tui Domine? O lord the light of thy countynance is signed and sealed upon us?
And if you did see it, why did you dissemble it? Is it not evident enough that
the words of the psalm used in that place by S. Hierome declare the end why
God would have that sign to be printed in men foreheads? and that the end was
nothing else, but that when they had received that sign at baptism, and were
now made children of inheritance and lightened with the light of faith and
grace, they might rejoice in God, and sing that joyful song. O lord the light
of thy countyna^ce as signed and sealed upon us, we are sure of thy favor, and
certain of thy grace, for we have thy signet, we have thy seal, we have that
mark which thou would to be set in the forheads of all thy faithful? And
if this be not plain enough what is plain? Certes when I wroteit, I took it
to be plain enough for all that had wit to conceive, or eyes to see. How
soever it be, yower shifti^g vain was very barrayne, when this was devised,
and yower copye far spent, when this refuge was sought to put it in the readers
ears, that we are so insensible, as to think, that either the wood in the
roode lofte, Fol. 45. b.
or Crucifixe on the altar is the light of Gods continaunce, or that it can
be printed in the fleashly foreheades with a finger.

Such imaginations are to gross, and heathenishe, unfit, either to be vttred
in mouth, or conceived in heart of one Christian against an other. And certes
M. Calf. if there were any such evangelical charity in you as Christ
requires, such a surmise should never have entered into yower heart, much
less have been spoken with tongue and uttered in printe to yower perpetual
infamye. Take heed: Qui amat periculum, peribit in eo. Ecclesi. 3. M. Calves.
braule about the shevving of the cross from heaven to Constantine.
He that loves danger shall perish in it.

Yower braule made about the shewinge of the sign of the cross from heaven
to Constantine, the great may welbe compared to an angrye and choleric
ruffians fight. For as he in his vehement passion, werieth him self with
vain blows, and opens his body to the enemies sword: right so by yower
triffling talk, you have opened yower gross ignorance, and given the
adversary great advantage to trippe you. First you confess it to be true
that a cross in the fourth signification, such as I spoke of, was showed
from heaven in the time of grace, wherein you are contrary to yower self,
and injurious to me: for you said in the beginning of this article, that this
sign was not showed from heaven in the time of grace, Fol. 41 b
and that if either of those signs was prefigured in the law of nature,
foreshewen by the signs of Moses law, etc. You did me wrong in reproving of
me.

Fol. 45 b
Secondly you say I have good testimonye for this, wherein you are a liar in
saying that there is no lauful president of the sign of the cross, Fol. 151. a
but call it an idle devise of man.

Fol. 45.
Thirdlye that God commanded him to make that sign, and carye it in his
standarde, wherein you are contrary to yower self, Fol. 44. a
for you say a little before that it is against Gods word, to have and occupy
the sign of the cross.

Fol. 46. b
Fourthly you confess that Constantine set up his cross in the markett place
to the end it might there remain as a testimonye of the pouer of God, wherein
you are contrary to yower self, Fol. 26 a
for in the first article you say that the cross was never received upon
good occasion.

Fol. 46 a
Fiftelye you say, that whosoever did behold that sign of the cross, might
by and by conceive, of whose relligion this Emperor was, and in whose name he
overcame his foes, wherein you are contrary to yower self, for in the first
article you say that a roode, or crucifixe are not able to show whose men we
are: Fol. 33. a
as the printe in the money does show whose the coin is. Wheresoever that
image and superscription is stamped, there is it certain, who has right to
the coin. But who so ever has the figure or stamp of a cross upon them,
show not thereby whose servants they are.

Sixthlye that at the first gathering of the church together newelye come from
the gentiles, Fol. 46. a
the visible sign of the cross was thought very necessary. VVherin you are
contrary to yower self, for the first gathering of the church together from
the gentillls, was by Christ and his Apostles. And if at that time it was
thought very necessary to have the visible sign of the cross, then was there
either some precept or counsel given by Christ and his Apostles to have that
sign, but you say, Christ left no precepte of his cross, amongst us. Fol.
34. a b
The Apostles never used the sign of the Cross, nor gave any counsel, or
commandment for it.

Seventhly you grant that by the cross, as an outward mean, me^ might be
brought by a little and a little to think better of Christ and serve him.
Fol. 7. a Fol. 11. a
Which is both contrary to yower doctrine in our preface, where you call
Images du^be doctors, which take out nothing else but lessons of lies, and
bring no knowledge, but blind in ignorance: and also to all your discourse in
the ninthe Article, where you say, that no cross can tell you (that is a
Christen man, as I think) for so you speak in yower own person, Fol 167. a
Six co^tradictionum opeaning of one story.
that Christ came once into the world, and so forth. And is not this a
great foil for you. Six contradictio^s so manifest, so evident, so open, in
so little rome in the opening of one story, without shame, of the world and
fear, to deceive the simple, besides lies and other smothering smokes? O M.
Calf: where were the twoe functions of yower soul, sensus and memoria, sense
and memory? are they both lost, and yet you take upon you to go about like
a peddler, with a fardle of lies? Beware what you do, Fol. 36. a
you said even now, Mendacem oportet esse memorem: A liar must have a good
memory.

The Philosopher Aristotle says: Fumo and halitu carbonum, homines
aggrauantur and plerunque exanimantur: De sensu and sen^.
Men are troobled with the smoke and breathing of coals, and often times
styfled. And so may you with the smoke of untruths, smother of lies, breathing
of falshodes be quicklye confounded.

Besides these six contradictions you mingle with the history certain notable
lies: for you say that the sign was not showed from heaven to confirm
Constantines faith, but to put him in assurance of the victory, Luc. 5.
which is very false. For Lib 1. ca. 4
Consider the story. It is written in the Tripartite history, that Co^sta^tine
desirous to vanquishe and overcome Maxentius, and deliver the Romans from
his tyranny, thought what God he might have, to aid him in the war: For he
knew, that the Gods which Diocletian did worshipe, were able to do nothing,
and that his father contemning, the paganes relligion, lived in much felicity:
And whiles he was in this meditation, he saw in his sleep the sign of the
cross, placed very brighte in the eleme^t, and angels saying unto him, O
Constantine in this overcome. By this it apeareth that Constantine was yet
neither Christian nor earnest Pagane. The Paganes Gods he detested, as
impote^t, the Christians lord and God, he knew to be omnipotent, yet God the
son crucified for them, he knew not.

Now because he should know him, and believe in him, and have him for his aid
and succor in the bataille, this sign was showed him from heaven: this
miracle was wrought. And was not this M. Calf. to instruct hi^ and confirm
hi^ in the faith? The end of miracles. Lib. 2. ca. 8. de ciuit. Dei. Capit. 62.
quaest. ex nouo testamen.
To what end were all Christ's miracles, but to declare him self to be god,
and to confirm me^ in faith and belief of the same? Read you not in S.
Augustine, that before the world believed, miracles were necessary, vt
crederet mu^dus, that the world might believe? Have you not seen this in
sentence him? Signs and virtues were done of the Apostles for that end, that
infidells might be allured to the faith? And shall this sign be showed from
heaven not to instruct and confirm him the faith? What vanity is this? too
shameless M. Calf. too shameless, leave it, or else you shall be but a vain
liar. The principal end was to instruct him and confirm him in the faith,
the second to encourage him with hope of victory, which you might have learned
by considering the circumstance of the history, and to what end signs are
showed, and miracles wrought: But he that said: 3. Reg. 22.
I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophetts,
would not suffer you so to do.

And other lie you make in recounting the showing of the For a personal
privilege passes not the person, to whom it was given. It dies with the
person. Then if God would have had this to have been a personal privilege, it
should never have passed his person, but have been showed only to
Constantine, and seen of him only. It should have died with him, but many
other did see it at that time, besides Constantine as the story mentions.
Lib. 1. cap. 4. Tripar.
And Christen princes ever since have graued it in their flagges, portrayted
it in their palaces, and made it in their foreheades, and continued it in their
chappells, as experience teaches.

If you will have it a personal privilege, because Christ spoke only to
Constantine, and commanded him to make that sign, by like reason you may say
that Christ speaking at his last supper to his disciples only, and
commanding the^ to do those things, that he did in remembrance, of him, gave
them but a personnall privilege. For he was alone with them in the parlour, he
spoke to none but to them, he said to none but to them do this in remembrance
of me, and being personal it passed with their persons. So ever sithe^s by
yower divinity, there was none that had authority to celebrate the memory of
Christ's passion, so well you have profited in Satan's schole.

A third lie you make in saying that Constantine was newlye Fol. 46. a.
For as Socrates writes, even before the appearing of the sign He thought
what God he might have to help hi^ in battaille, which cogitation argues that
he was not converted, to the faith: for faith is not to seek in what God the
faithful shall believe, Lib. 9. ca. 9. histo. Eccle.
nor of what God he shall have aid. And albeit Eusebius says, that when he
marched against Maxentius with his army, he was a fauorer of Christian
relligion, (as some heathen Emperors were before) and a worshipper of the true
God, as the Jews are at this present, Yet not withstanding he had not
received the sign of our lords passion, as the solemn manner is amongst us,
to bring men first to Christ, and make them Christians, whereupon the sign
of the cross was showed him in the Element, and ita coelitus inuitatus ad
fidem, and so from heaven invited and called to the faith, he semethe to me no
inferior the^ he was to whom it was said Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute
me? By which you see that he was called to the faith of Christ from heaven,
Acto. 22.
which was by the apparition of the sign of the cross, and not before, as you
falselye affirm.

Further where you interpret the words in hoc signo vince. overthrow thine
enemies in this sign, Fol 46. a Calf. Mart.
that is to say in his name, whom this figure represents, we require you to
prove this yower gloss, either by some text of scripture, or authority of
some ancient fathers. Yower bare assertion is to be counted lighter than a
fether. Yower naked words naught else but puffes of wind: otherwise you for
this presumption shall be taken either for a false gloser, either a perverse
corrupter and peruerter of Gods word. In all scripture I believe you shall not
find, signum, taken for Nomen, (that is to say) this word sign, for the
name of God. If you say the name of God, is glorious, and add further, that
whatsoever we ask in his name, we shall obtain, whatsoever is to be asked of
us, must be asked in his name, I grant it, and all Christen men confess,
that there is no other name under heaven, by which we may be saved, but the
name of Christ, with all we say that our savior Christ who made his holy
name so glorious, and promised us salvation, and all that we desire, in his
name, does also promise in this place, victory to Constantine, in the sign of
the cross. He said not overcome in my name, Christ said not to Co^sta^tine,
overcome in my name but in this sign.
but in hoc signo vince. Overcome in this sign. He said not, overcome in his
name, whom this sign represents, but in this sign which the element
shewethe. And as he promised it, so he did perform it, in that sign he
overcame, his enemies and got the victory. Not that the sign was of force,
to fight, but that God gave such power to that sign where it was, that they
ouerthrewe their enemies. For proof whereof, read the storye again M. Calf.
Lib. 1. cap 4. Tripat.


In Sozomemus you shall find these words. Christ apeared to Constantine as he
was a sleep with the sign, which he saw in the element, and commanded that
there should be a figure of that sign made, quae auxilio foret, which should
be an aid unto him in the conflictes and skirmishes of his wars: Here I
pray you (sir) who is antecedent to the relatyue, Quae, it is not, figuratio?
then belike Christ would have the sign and figure to be an aid to the
emperor in his wars, over and besiders figuratum, the figured?

He would him to overcome in that sign over and besides, his name whom that
sign represented. And seeing Christ willed him overcome in that sign, and is
able to give sufficient strenght and power unto it, and because he promised it,
would do it, shall we believe the gloss of yower idle head, and discredit the
words of Christ's mouth and say, he bad him not overcome in the sign, but in
his name, whom that sign represents? No: If Christ had meant as you
imagine, it had been as easy for him, to have showed his holy name, from
heaven, as it was to show the sign of the cross, and as easy to command
the Emperor to write the name of Jesus, and use that, as an aid in war, as
it was to command him to make the sign of the cross, and use that. But
Christ did it not, not that he would not have Constantine to put his trust
and affiance in his name, or to look for victory of any other God, but of
him, but that he would bring him to the faith, and declare the mightines of
his power by the sign of the cross, upon which he was crucified, Co^sta^tine
caused the sign of the cross to be paincted. Eusebius lib. 1 de vita Constant.
Fol. 45 a Calf. Mart.
which that it might be known to all the world, Constantine caused the sign
of it, to be painted on a pillar at his right hand with this inscription. By
this healthful sign, a true token of virtue, I have delivered our city from
the yoke of the tyrant and made it free, which words you suppress.

Again sir whereas you say, that whatsoever it has pleased God for his glories
sake at any time to do, must not be drawn for example to us, Will you infer
upon it, that because all things are not to be drawn for an example, therefore
nothing is to be drawn for an example unto us? As because we can not fast
forty days, Matt. 4.
and 40. nights, shall we not take example to fast one day and one night? Or
because we ca^ not feed five thousand with five barley lofes, and twoe fishes,
shall we not take example to feed one or twoe poor Christians? Joan. 6.
Or because we can not be so meek, so patient, so humble, and so ready to
give our souls, for our flocks, as he was for the world, shall we not draw
unto us the examples of his humility, and of his love toward us? and learn
by hi^ to be meke, patie^t, humble, and ready to give up our selves, for his
sake? Or because we ca^ not take example of his walki^g on the water, Matt 14.
Luc. 8.
to do the like, shall we not take example of his going to Iairus house to
visit the sick? Alas (good readers) what reason is there in this? Of whom
shall we take example, if we take not example of God? who shall be our pattern,
if Christ be not? Whom shall we follow, if not hi^ in all those things
which are lawful and possible for us to follow? I trust yower divinity will
not deny this M. Calf. and if you do not deny it, then does yower vniuersalll
proposition what soever etc. make nothing against us. Fol. 45. b
For if some things that Christ did may be done, although all that he did may
not be done, and examples drawn of some things unto us, albeit there can not
be of all, there is no inconuenie^ce, How Constantine used the cross.
nor let, but that we may be bold upon the commandment of Christ given to
Constantine to make the sign of the cross and use it for an aid as he did,
and draw example unto us of that virtuous Emperor to make it in our
foreheades, to set it up in market places, to erecte it at our gates, to bear
it in our hands, and honor it as he did.

First Christ commands nothing that is unlawful, and no other thing than
the Christians were commanded of the holy Ghost by the blessed Apostles.
Secondarily if his blessed will had been, that this precept should have extended
no further than to Constantine, so many ancient, holy and learned fathers would
never so highly have commended it, the general counsels directed by the holy
Ghost, would never have commanded it, the Christians in all ages, and all
cuntries ever since, should not without controlment, and threat of Gods
displeasure, have continued it. Wherefore you may be ashamed to deceive the
simple people with such pretensed reasons. And whereas you have said nothing to
any effect, to vaunte so co^fide^tly, and say: What president is this to
prejudice my cause? Fol. 46. a
As though yower fond general proposition (but in deed particular if malice
had not made you blind) forbidding us to take example of God in some things,
because we may not take example of him in all, iiij. lies and six
contradictions vttred in one story no president to prejudice M. Calves. cause.
1. Tim. 1. Cap. 28. Prouer. 10
yower vain gloss in perverting and altering Gods word, yower iiij. lies, and
six contradictions in repeating of one story, were not a sufficient president
to prejudice yower cause, and discredit you for ever. Yower own conscience
would condemn you in this case, unless you repelling conscience, had made a
shipwreck (as S. Paul says) about faith, and said with those Mynions, that
which the prophet Esai mentions: We have put lying our hope, and with lying
we are defended. But beware, it is a brickle bridge to go upon, and an evil
staff to stay by. The Wise Man says: He that leans to lies, feadeth the
winds, and the very self same man follows fleing birds.

Here would I have knitte up the knott of Constantine, Contradictions.
and passed to an other matter, but that I thought it good to put the reader in
mind of certain other co^tradictions, and an absurd principle. The cross he
says, is necessary, and yet superfluous, tolerable and yet impious.
Necessary to make Gentills think better of Christ, but superfluous to put
Christians in remembrance of Christ. Tolerable among them that came from
infidelity, but impious amongst them, that profess Christianity, and that
in respect of the abuse? as though the abuse could make a thing good of it
self, wicked and impious.

His absurd principle is this: talking of such extraordinary means in which
he accompteth the cross, he says: Fol. 46. b Calf.
Whatsoever our need is through our own defaulte, surely we ought not to
have them, that is to say, these extraordinaries aids: God is not pleased
with them. Where is this in scripture? Mart.
What Prophet: What Apostle, What Evangelist, What council, What father
ever taught this doctrine? What reason is there in it? If we stand in need of
a thing, yea through our own defaulte, ought we not to have it? What if a
Ruffian quarreling with his companion be wounded, and so stand in need of a
surgion, ought he not to have one? What if a man take a surfett, and stand in
need of a phisitio^s counsel, ought he not to have it? What if yower self
M. Calf. stood in need of a friend to put you in remembrance of yower duty,
ought you not to have one? Yes verelie, and God will be nothing displeased with
it, and so likewise in this case.

Charity that knitteth all men togheter in one body with Christ wills us
to do all that we can to edify one an other. Ephesians 4.
As apeareth by S. Paul, where he says: Christ has given some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Doctors to the
consummation of the saints, into the work of ministration to the edifying of
the body of Christ. Seeing then we be appointed ministers to edify the body of
Christ (that is to say all Christians) we must omit nothing that may
appartaine unto the edifying of them. VVherfor if they stand in need of such
extraordinary means, as you M. Calf. mention, and may be edified by the^, they
ought to have them, and we to give them. For we are appointed ministers under
Christ in aedificationem, 1. Cor. 14.
to edifying, and all things must be done as S. Paul says to edify. He him
self understanding that the Corinthians could not receive the mysteries of
Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
but stood in need as yet of mild and sweet doctrine, says: I gave you
milk to drink, and not hard meat, for as yet you could not digeast it.
Thereby teaching us to condescend to the infirmity of our brethren, and to do
all that we can to edify them. Our nature then being dull and heavy, and
neding many helps to provoke it to the contemplation of heavenly things, and
meditation of Christ's death and passion, we may use extraordinary means to
stir us up the more, and bring to memory the merits of Christ's death.
And seeing amongst all other means, the sign of the cross does most lively
set Christ before our eyes, as preching does declare unto the ears, there is
no reason, but we may have it, as God by the Apostles, Christ in Constantine,
the holy Ghost by the prelates of his church, in 2. general counsels have
commanded us.

An other principle M. Calf. propounds unto us (good readers) fathred upon
Chrysostom Homi. 44. in 23. Fol. 46. b
Matt. in opere im perfecto. It is this. Calf.
before the knowledge of God was in men it was reason that the pouer of God
should be known by the holiness of men, but now it is madness. Mart.
Here how faithfully he demeaneth him self, consider I beseech you: first
Chrysostom in all that Homily has no such sentence, but among other things
he says. good works necessary to salvation. An heretic doble the child of
Hell. The chardge of interpreting scriptures committed to Priests
To all men generally these two are necessary to salvation, true faith and good
works. Again he says, he that goes over to heresies, is dooble the child
of hell, first because he forsakes the truth which he did hold. Secondarily
because he is become an enemy of truth. Besides he says. Priests are the key
keepers to whom the chardge of teaching the word of God, and interpretinge
the scriptures is given, with many notable things, which M. Calf. could not or
would not see, and consider that, as he uses him for a witness in some
points, so he should be pressed to admit his testimony in others, which would
utterly condemn him and all his. But what means M. Calf. by this trow you?
Must not the power of God be known by the holiness of men? VVil he be always
like him self, and deny the scripture? Does not Christ say: Matt. 5.
Sic luceat lux vestra, let yower light so shine before men, that they may
see yower good works, and glorify yower father which is in heaven? does not
the holy ghost say unto us by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 6. God glorificed by our good
vvoortes.
Glorify and carry God in yower bodies? And if we must glorify God by our good
works, and carry hi^ in our bodies by holiness of life, must not his power be
known by our good works and holiness? If M. Calf. deny this, I would feign
learn of him, what it is to glorify God, if it be not to make his omnipotency
and mighty pouer known unto all the world? But he will say, Calf.
his secretary wrote evil, and the compositour set worse, and the ouerseer
or Correctour did ouersee it worst of all. It is in the 24. Homily of the same
work fathered upon Chrysostom. Matt.


So is it also that the priests, Put a weighty loode upon them that come to
penance. Priestez enjoined penance.
By which words and others in the same place, it may be proved, that priests
inioned me^ penance. What says M. Calf. to that? Forsoothe Erasmus affirms
it undoubtedly to be none of Chrisostomes work. Ah sirrah, in one place and
in one Homily Chrysostom spoke this, and he spoke not that? what indifferency
is this (good readers)? were it reason that he should say, this is Chrysostomes
saying, and yet say, that, that is not his saying, which he writes in the same
Homily? I dare say you think not so: yet such shifts must protestants use to
defend their heresies. In deed I acknowledge that the auctour of that work
has such a saying, in that Homily, and means, that it is but madness for men
to seek for miracles, and not to believe the mighty work, and dreadful power
of God, unless there be such holiness in me^, that they work such miracles,
and do such cures as S. Paul did by the Napkins, and Partletts, that were sent
from his body. But what is this against the Cross? M. Calves. Similitude,
Fol. 46. b
Thincketh M. Calf. that this similitude, As it is madness to have the power
of God known by the holiness of me^, So the sign of the Cross is not only
superfluous, but also impious, will hold? It resembles no more the nature of
a similitude, than does an ox of an elephant, saving that it has the usual
terms which every be^chwhistler ca^ use. For a similitude is a resembli^g of
one thing to an other, What is required in a Similitude.
which must in some poi^t be like, to that unto which it is resembled. It must
co^taine four things, twoe that must be likened, and 2. wherein they must be
likened. Let this be one for an example. As they grievously offend, who with
poison infecte the common fountain, whence al me^ fet their water: So do they
deserve very evil of the co^monweale, who do corrupt the prince his mind with
naughty counsel. Here the common fountain, and princes mind are 2. things
likened. The infecting of the fountain with poison, and corrupting the princes
mind with evil counsel are the things wherein they are likened. The
resembling of one to the other is good.

The foresaid similitude which M. Calf. seems to make of S. Chrysostomes
words is a nowne heteroclite, maimed in twoe of his principle parts. If he
had said thus: As it is madness to have the power of God known by the holiness
of men: So it is impious to have his glory set forth by the cross, I would
have denied the second part of this similitude, and showed reason of
diversity. But seeing he urges not so much, I will use no more words then
need, only this I say, seeing M. Calf. grants the sign of the cross to be
not only tolerable, Fol 46. b
but also necessary, as Constantine used it, He may also grant it to be not
only tolerable, but also necessary as Christians now a days use it. For we
use it no otherwise than Constantine did. The Christians use the cross no
otherwise tha^ Constantine did.
He made the sign of the cross in his forehead, so do we: he caused it to be
paincted in a table: so do we. He set it up at his court gate, so do other
Christian princes in their palaces. He wrought it into his banner, used it in
the wars: So do we into our flagges and ensigns. He set one of gold in
the church upon S. Paul's tumbe, we set some of stone, timber and metal in
churches, upon the alters, in roode loftes, windows, and so forth. He did
honor it calli^g it: A singular sign, and ensign a toke^ of much virtue and
power, we reverence it with like epithetons, and titles of honor. To be
short, We do use it as Constantine did use it, and no otherwise then
Constantine used it. If the adversaries reply, and say that Constantine did
never cap, nor knele, unto the cross, let the^ prove that negative, by
scripture, council, or doctor: in this point I will stand with the best of
them all, that no ancient writer, no famous historiographer, savoring of
antiquity, ever wrote, that the virtuous Emperor Constantine did not Cap, nor
kneel, nor do any other honor to the sign of the cross. Which negative
when they prove, charing cross will say they lie, and this, till then.

Now to an other, M. Calfehill, perceauing that the ancient histories make so
often mention of the cross showed from heaven, that it can not be denied, but
that it was a very true Cross, which was first made in Iulianus and the Jews
apparel, Lib. 5. ca. 50 Tripat.
with a shooer of rain, and afterward showed from heaven, when they would have
builded the temple again, gladly forgets his vain assertion, that the
sign of the cross was not prefigured in the law of nature, nor foreshewen by
the signs of Moses law, nor denounced by the prophets, nor shewe^ from
heaven in the time of grace, and as though he had never affirmed any such
thing, passes it away in silence, and finds fault with the application,
Fol. 48. b
and yet gives no cause why: but resembles me to a fool, that walks in a
net, and to children that think they ca^ not be seen, when their heads be
hid: which is as much to the purpose, as to prove a minister an honest man,
some Iester would begin to make a discourse, of one that has a head like an
ape, eyes like an oule, ears like a Calf. A mouth like a mastyfe, teethe like
a Tiger, and tongue like a dragon, and say no more, as this Wise Man does.

That done, (finely as he imagined) fault is found with a conclusion where I
made none, but declared a cause, why God foreshewed the sign of the cross by
so many figures in the law of nature, Why the cross was prefigured.
Moses, and the prophets, which was that we should highly esteem the thing,
which those figures signified, and believe that as those figures wrought
temporal benefits to the Israelites. So the truth (that is the cross it
self) shall work to us, believing in Jesus Christ, and having that sign
printed in our foreheades, the like benefits etc. When he heard this, as one
set suddenly in a chafe, Calf. Fol. 48 b
he demands who told me, that the truth of those figures was the cross it
self? then how I prove that those figures wrought temporal benefittes to the
Israelittes?

Mart. Gene 2. Te^porall benefits wrought to Israelites by the figures which
signified the cross. Gene. 48. Exodus 17. Ibidem.
To cool that cholerike heat, I answer, Damascenus, Cassiodorus, Cirillus,
Ambrosius, Origenes Augustinus, Tertullian and Justinius martyr told me, that
the truth of those figures, was the Cross on which Christ died, and not only
Christ him self. That they wrought to the Israelites temporal benefitts, I
prove by the scripture. All that was lawful for Adam to eat in paradise,
wrought him temporal benefitte, before his fall. But the tree of life was
laufull for Adam to eat: ergo the tree of life wrought him temporal benefit.
The ark of Noah preserved him and his family from drowning. The blessing of
Jacob made Joseph's children increase into great multitudes upon the earth,
Moses rodd brought water out of the rock in the wilderners, the liftinge up
of Moses hands got the^ the victory over Amalech: The wood cast into the
river Marah made the water pleasant and sweet to drinck, Exodus 15.
which was before very unsavory and bitter. All these were figures of the
cross, and the benefits te^porall wrought to the Israelits by the mighty
power of God through them, as external means, ergo by the figures of the
cross temporal benefits where wrought to the Israelites. Thus says the
scripture and holy word of God. Calf. Fol 48. b
But quoth M. Calf. if they were causes of any good that came, they were causae
stolidae, as Tullie calls them, foolish, mean, and isntrumental cawses,
and not efficient. Mart.
But where does Tullie tall them so M. Calf.? where does he write, of Adam and
the tree of life planted in paradise? Where writes he of Noah's ark, Jacobs
blessing, Moses rod, streki^g of the rock, lifting up af his hands, the
wood cast into the river Marah, or any such? Tell us for shame, where does he
call them causas stolidas, folishe, mean and instrumental causes, and not
efficient? If you be as cunning as ye brag in Tullie, note the book, quote
the place, assign the chapter? save your poor honesty. We will not cease
to call upon you, until you tell us, where Tullie calls them, causas
stolidas folish, mean and instrumental causes, and not efficie^t. Whatsoever
Tullie says of them: we are, sure, that our Logicque taught us ones, that
omnes instrumentales causae sunt in genere efficientium. All instrumental
causes are in the nature and kind of the efficient, and so were you as I
suppose, before you learned that Tullie called them, causas stolidas, The means
by which God wrought benefittes to his people called, folish causes.
folish causes. Note here good readers, the fruicte of heresy, one that
pretends to be a Christian, out of Tullie finds occasion to control Gods
doings. Because he of his infinite mercy was the only efficient cause of all
benefitts to the Israelites, and used the other as means and instruments to
work them by, M. Calf. lerneth of Tullie to call those means by which god
wrought, Causas stolidas, foolish causes. Does not Satan show him self in
his liknesse here? Draws he not well toward a thing called Atheism? See to
what absurdity the devil will drive him by disputation, Horrible blasphemy.
he has done no more allredy by his minister, but proved God, (which is
horrible blasphemy) a fool. Mark his reason. Whosoever works by foolish
causes or means, is a fool, but God wrought those benefittes to the
Israelites by foolish causes, ergo you know what follows. Which part deny
you M. Calf? all worldly wisdom affirms the mayor to be true, The minor is
yower own: the form good: the conclusion must needs follow. See you not to
what absurdities you fall, and profit apace in yower M. schole? who but you or
one of yower profession would have fallen into such horrible blasphemy? How
the nevve religion is mayntayned.

Arrogancy of heretics.


Can not yower doctrine be mainteyned with the scriptures denied, the counsels
disauthorised, the fathers condemned, but must God be blasphemed? Must the
means by which he wrought benefits to his people be called: Stolidae causae,
folish causes? O the arrogancy of heretics. From contempt of men, they fall
to blaspheming of God, from inuerting the sense of his word, they come to
controlling of his wisdom: with them the means that he works his benefits,
be causae stolidae, foolish causes. And because M. Calf. is sure of it, and
proves it out of Tullie, and yet shows not where we shall find it, men must
believe it. But that warrant is not sufficient. Therefore be not deceived (good
readers) it is a lamentable case, When a phrase of Tullie must control the
doings of God in divinity. A practice to be left to the heathenishe pagans,
and not to be imitated of true Christians: yet such is the wisdom of M. Calf.
that to shifte the matter that he takes in hand, he sticks not to use it,
and call the means whereby God woorketh, causas stolidas, folish causes.

Fol. 48. b Fol 49 a Calf.
And where he says that because I made no distinction of those words which
might be diversely taken, and join the truth and cross together, my meaning
is with covert speech to deceive the simple, and cause them to derive the
glory from the truth, and tranffer it to a figure, to have in reverence the
idle sign, Mart.
and let the thing signified be forgotten, I would some good fellow would
tell him in my behalf, that with one breath he utters him self to have an
evil memory, and a sclanderous tongue. For in the beginning I made a division
and distinction of that word that might be diversely taken, and signified in
what sense I would have it understood. So that in other places, I neded not
to use a vain repetitio^ of one thing: which if M. Calf. remembered, why
requires he a new distinction? If he did not, let him go to schole again,
and learn the art memoratyue a little better: or mislike his wit for finding
fault where none can justly be found.

That his tongue is sclanderous each man that has eyes may see. For by the
whole discourse of my treatise, M. Calves. tongue sclanderous.
it may be seen that I require the sign of the Cross to be erected in
churches, set up in high ways, had in private houses, The causes why I
require the cross to be set up. Fol. 49. b
and printed in in men's foreheades, to make them remember Christ, and by often
sight of it, to be brought to the remembrance of his death, and memory of his
passion, and so be stirred from vice to virtue, from the love of the world,
to the love of God. Yet, as though he had crepte into my bosom, and searched
the secrets of my heart, (which God only knows) he reports, that my
meaning is by covert speech to deceive the simple etc. and make them forgett
Christ, which surmise is far unsitting for one that professes Christian
charity and sincerity of the gospel, and very sclanderous.

But like gospel, like fruictes: where he bids me, Fol. 49. a
Mark Tertullians judgment of the figures of the old testament co^cerninge
the Cross, I have done it according to his aduertisme^t and marked very well,
M Calf. vnderstadeth not Tertullia^. Lib. 3 aduers. Marcio.
that whereas he studieth to imitate Tullies phrases, he understands not
Tertullians sense. For in the very sentence which he alleges, praedicatio is
not taken for preaching, but for predication, (that is foresaying) as each man
that considers the circumstance of the place, and notes Tertullians style,
may easily see: for my part because the discussing of it is more curious, tha^
necessary, I omit it, and referr the judgment of it to the learned. And
return to the examininge of the defaulte that he finds with my application.

I said the sign of the Cross was showed Constantine in in his great
anxitie, to instruct us that in all anxietie of mind and pensifnes of heart,
the Cross of Christ shall be our comfort, Calf. Fol. 49. b Mart.
and the sign a mean to overthrow our enemies. The first part M. Calf.
grants, the last he denies, and asks where I find it? As though the
very story declaring that Christ commanded the sign to be made, and used as
a help, did not convince, that, to all Christians trusting in the merits of
Christ's passion, it should so be a mean to overcome their ghostly enemies,
as it was to Constantine to overcome Maxentius, especially whereas the Angels
showing the sign to Constantine said, In hoc vince: Overcome in this sign.
But let us hear M. Calfes reason why this may not be inferred upon the story.
He says: Calf. Mart.
God has more means of comfort than one, he delivers his that are in
danger by diverse ways. You take much pains to prove that which no man
denies, we grant it. What will you build upon this positio^ against me?
will you say thus: Christ has more means of comfort than one, and delivers
his out of danger by diverse ways, ergo he delivers none by the sign of
the cross, ergo the cross is no means of comfort? If you make this argument
as you can make none other of this principle against mine assertion, I deny the
consequent, and bid you resort to the young scholars, in the paruis schole,
and consult by what rule in Logic that argument holds. And upon
consultation with some learned clerks in the faculty, I doubt not but you will
say, deceptus perij miser: I was deceived poor man.

On like sort when that which you infer upon the apearing of God in a
priests attire to Alexander, and serving of Paulinus in the habit of a
gardener shall be examined, and proved to have no liknes in a manner to the
apparition of Constantine, and that you can not infer of them that we must have
the sign of a priest in his maskinge garments, (for that is yowr scoffing
term) because God apeared to Alexander in a priests attire, Fol 49. b
or that we must have a byshope a gardener, Fol. 51. a
when prisoners must so be ransomed, because by Paulinus God delivered some
after a strange manner, You will say, I marked not the story well. I remembered
not, that God said to Constantine, ^n hoc vince, Overcome in this sign, and
said nothing to Alexander. I forgote that Christ apeared unto Constantine the
next night, and bid him make the sign of the cross, and use it for a
comfort and aid in the wars, and never willed Alexander to make any priests
apparel. It could not sincke into my head that Christen men both before that
time, and ever since used the sign of the cross, and had great help by
it, which they could never have by a priests apparel. And so when suite of
law shall be commenced against you, Caput quoniam ignorantes, must be your
proctour, and illude all the action, with such an exception.

Diogenes marueled much at certain grammarians that diligently inquired and
searched out the miseries of Ulysses, Diogenes.
and were ignorant of their own. So may we justly wonder at this curiosity of
M. Calf. who sought out twoe long histories of Alexander and Paulinus, nothing
to the purpose, and forgotte that which he had in hand of Constantine, of
much importance, and fit for the purpose. For none but such as lack wisdom,
would have omitted to search such circumstances as make against him, and
think to bleare simple folks eyes with fancies of his own head, colored
with the truth of twoe histories.

Truth may by some outward show be colored for a time, but it can not be
hid long. The Ass that had on the lions skin and would have made his
master afraid, was at lenght espied by his long ears, and made ridiculous.
But peradventure, if M. Calf. were posed of his superintende^t, why he dallieth
and trifleth, and uses such vain shifts, that each man may as well espy, as
the good man espied his ass by his ears, I think he would answer as a
fisherman sometimes co^trolled for trooblinge the river, The fysher Ma^s
answer.
and not suffering the neighbors to have clear water, answered: Nisi sic
fluuius perturbetur, me oportebit esurientem mori. Unless the river be thus
troobled, I must dye for hunger. For certainly unless he should trooble the
river in such sort, his eloquence were spent, and cause quite marred. The
clear water would quickly purge the filthy mudde that he stirs. Mark and
you shall see.

Lib. 5. cap. 50. Tripar.
Sozomenus says, The sign of the cross made in Julian and the Jews
apparel, did signify after the interpretation of some, that the doctrine of
the Christians came from God, and that all me^ ought to be marked with the
cross. M. Calf. troobleth the water here, and because me^ should not believe
it, Calf. Fol. 51. b
stirs such a mudde, as stincketh of follye a mile of. For he says: The
cross noted Julian and the Jews to be persecutors, Mart.
ergo it is necessary for us to be noted as persequutors. Where first it is to
be noted that he understands not the history. Julian being a Christian
changed his relligion, Julian a superintendent
and named him self a superintendent of the Pagans, and cumminge into the
temples of the paganes, did sacrifice, and counseled his subjects to do the
same. Now to declare that he had done very evil in forsaking his relligion,
and sacrificing to idols, God showed him twoe strange and wonderful things.
Circa occasum Pliadum,
For when the vintinage was past, and all grapes gathered, the vines brought
forth new grapes, and a shooer of rain falling from heaven made with every
drop a sign of the cross in his soldiers apparel. Some said the grapes
growinge at such unseasonable time, signified that the Emperor should be
undone, and his Empire of no long continuance. And the cross did forshewe
that the doctrine of the Christians came from God, What the cross signified
which was shevved to Julian. Lib. 5. Tripar. cap. 50. Tripart.
and that all men ought to designed with the cross, which interpretation to be
true, time tried shortly after sayethe Sozomenus. For he reigned but 3. years,
and afterward, under Iouinian, and other Christian Emperors the Christian
faith and relligion floorished. By which you may perceive, the cause of those
miracles showed to Julian, was to work penance in him, and to make him
return unto Christ, and observe that faith and relligion which by the sign
of the cross was signified to be the true relligion that came from heaven,
and should go over the world: and not as M. Calf. fansieth to note him to be
a persequutor.

He was in deed a blouddy Tyrante, Julian not noted by the cross to be a
persequutor.
and a terrible persequutor as the story testifies, but that by the cross he
was noted to be such a one, all the divinity in M. Calfes brain will never
prove it. But if it had noted him to be a persequutor: how does this argument
hold? The cross noted Julian to be a persequutor, ergo it is necessary for us
to be noted as persequutors? Holds it not then times looser, then his
wavering head, when he ietteth up and down the streets? Let the Lo^dyners
judge, or judge yower self by a like: The bearing of a fagotte before the
cross in procession, noted the bearer to be an heretic, ergo it is necessary
for all that bear faggotts to be noted as heretics. And if there be good
reason in the last, think that I have done M. Calf. wrong in controlling
the first.

Further where he says: Fol. 51. b
that none were maked but such as had reneged their faith, If he restrayneth
his universal proposition, to Julian and his company, and that time, when they
were marked, we grant it to be true: If he means it more generally, we
utterly deny it, as vain, false, and most absurd. For the Christians in all
ages were marked with the sign of the cross, as a token of their profession
and faith, only peculier and proper, to the Christians, as I declared before.
Fol. 51. b
Thirdlye where he wishes that we may never have occasion to be marked as
Julian was. If his wish be, that we never have like occasion to renege our
faith, it is godly: If it be, that we should not be marked as Julian was with
the cross, and when we have forsaken God, be called to penance, by that, or
some like visible sign, by which it shall please him to show his mercy
toward us, as he did to Julian, if he had had grace to receive it, it is
most impious and ungodly. For it is to wish and pray that he may not have
occasion of grace ministered unto him, to know him self, and return to God.

Fourthly in saying, Fol. 51. b The cross alvvayes porte^deth goodness
that the cross does not always portende goodness, he shows much ignorance.
For he seems not to know that God being the only shewer of it from heaven,
and author of all such strange fightes, and miracles works all things to
good to those that love him. The cross then, being the mean by which it
pleased God to signify unto Julian, that Christ's relligion, and faith came
from haven, and that all men ought to be signed with the Cross, could not,
but portende unto him great goodness, and have wrought it in deed, if he had
not obdurated his own heart like as Pharao did. Fiftelye I much marvel why he
says, Fol. 51. b
that the glittering sign of the Cross in the element, and Crossinge of the
Jews cotes, was but a token of Gods wrath and vengeance, and that albeit it
was signum Crucis salutaris, the sign of the healthful cross, yet it was not
healthful to them etc. The cross shevved to Julian was a token of the love
of God if he could have so conceived it. Lib. 6. ca. 43 Tripar.
For albeit it signified that God was angry with their enterprise, yet it
signified not that only, but also declared his especial love in making them
understand that he was God, whom their forefathers crucified, that his death
being acknowledged, and faith in his passion conceived they might turn unto
him and be saved. And so of likelyhoode diverse were. For as the story
mentions, many considering that which happened, and fearing the plagues and
stroke of God, returned home to their houses, confessing him to be God whom
their fore fathers had nailed upon the cross.

Again that the cross otherwise healthful, was not healthful unto them, the
fault was in their follye, that would not so demean them selves that they
might have benefitte by it, and not in the cross, which through the virtue of
Christ's passion, is healthful to all that be not a stop, and occasion of
the contrary. Thus you see (good readers) that both the examples brought for
proof that the sign of the cross was showed from heaven in the time of
grace, and also the auctorities of the fathers alleged, to declare that it
was foreshewen by the figures of the law of nature, and Moses, and denounced
by the prophetts, stand in their force, and are nothing impaired by M. Calves.
battrie, nor impugned by his babble.

Wherefore his deali^g in this case may be well compared to the devise of a
politic practiser, knighte of the order of Macheuel, who understanding that
the protestants were discomfited in their rebellion against the king in
France, gave out letters to his friends, that the prince had won the feilde,
to comfort them for a time. And seeing M. Calf. says: he could not see that
the cross of Christ was prefigured in the figures of the old testament, in
like manner as Faustus the Manichee cried, that he could not find any thing
that apparteyned to the foreshewing of Christ him self, you may say as S.
Augustine did of Faustus. Quid autem mirum, si oculos habet, ad legendum, Fol.
41. b Lib 12 ca. 30. contra Faust. Manich.
cor autem non habet ad intelligendum, qui positus ante ostium dominici
secreti, no^ fide pietatis pulsat, sed elatione impietatis insultat. What
marvel is it, if he has eyes to read, and has not a heart to understand, who
placed before the door of our lords secrette, Knocks not with the faith of
piety, but insulteth with elation and pride of impiety.

THAT EVERY CHVRCH, CHAPEL, AND ORATORIE ERECTED TO THE HONOR AND SERVICE OF
GOD, SHOULD HAVE THE sign of the Cross. ARTICLE III.
HEARD you never (good readers) of the famous-rouer Ropers companion, who
having often a jury empaneled upon him, did ever refuse the forema^ of the
quest, and found some frivolous exception against him, because his guilty
conscience knew, that if his verdict might be heard, he should be convicted?
The like part pleyeth M. Calf. in this Article: and because his conscience
accuses him of vilanie, and blasphemous words against the cross of Christ,
and by plain evidence sees, that unless he find some foolish shift, to
illude the authority of the ancient fathers and general counsels, the
world would condemn him, first he leyeth some vain exceptions against
Abdias, the Apostles companion, that saw, Christ here in earth, and afterward
with such sclanderous words reuileth the doctors, and fathers of the second
council of Nice, and the empress Irene in whose time it was kept, that a man
would think some fury of hell, had inflamed his spirit. With his
exceptions, against Abdias he fills much paper, to make a show of some
truth, but how vain they are, in part I will declare, the rest because they
be but gesses of an idle brain, M. Calves. exceptio^s against Abdias. Fol. 53 b
Calf. Mart. Cap. 1.
I will leave to the judgment of the indifferent readers. One exception
brought to prove Abdias work to be a lege^d of lies, is this: he reports
that Mary the mother of Christ did make a vow of chastity. True it is he did
so: we grant it. And is this a strange point in your divinity, and
dissonant from all godly lerning? Why it is the gospel. M. Calf. S. Luke
says: when the angel said unto our Lady: Ecce concipies and paries filium:
Behold thoue shall conceive and bring forth a son, She answered. How shall
this be done, seeing I know not man, which soothly she would not have said,
Lib de sancta virg. cap 4. The doctors teach that our Lady made a vow
chastity.
unless she had vowed her self before, a virgin to God, says: S. Augustine,
but because the manner of the Israelites as yet refuses this, she was
dispoused to a just man, not such a one as should violently carry her away,
but rather maintain and defend that, which she had vowed, against such as
would offer her violence. How be it also, if she had said this only, how
shall this be done, and had not added further, because I know no man, she would
never have asked, how she being a woman, should bring forth a son, promised
her, if she had married to have carnal company with her husband: She night
have been commanded to remain a virgin, S. Augustine.
in whom the son of God should take the shape of a servant, by miracle meet
for it, but she that should be an example to all virgins, lest she alone should
be taken to be a virgin, which had deserved to conceive a son without company
of man, she dedicated virginity to God, whereas yet she knew not what she
should conceive, that in an earthly and mortal body, there might be imitation
of heavenly lif^, voto non p^^cepto, amore eligendi, Our Lady made a vow of
virginity.
non necessitate seruiendi, by vow and not by commandment, by love to chose,
and not by necessity to serve. So Christ by his, being borne of the virgin
Mary, which determined with her self to remain a virgin, before she knew who
should be borne of her, had rather commend holy virginity then command it.
Thus far S. Augustine, who proves by the very words of the gospel that
our Lady made a vow of chastity, and yet M. Calf teaches, that it is a
strange point, Fol. 53. b
and dissonant from all godly lerning.

Have ye not a proper minister of him (good readers?) Begins he not pretely
to practice after his masters mynistery, that now even in the spiring of his
Apostasy, dares set out in print, to the view of the world, and sight of
the posterity, that a doctrine builded, upon scripture and Gospel of Jesus
Christ, is strange and dissonant from all godly learning? What will he not
venture here after, that begins so freashly? Diverse ancient fathers
besides S. Augustine, Ambrose. Lib ^. in Lucam.
thought it no strange doctrine. S. Ambrose says upon S. Luke, that in the
virgin Mary, there was: Professio virginitatis, A profession of virginity:
(that is to say) She professed her self to be a virgin. Again: Habes
propositum, vides votum. Note this M. Calf. Ibidem Lib. 3. de Trinit. S.
Hilarie.
Thou have her purpose, thou see her vow. S. Hilarie says: The Angle
saluteth Mary, and promises, that she, being a virgin, should be mother of the
son of God Illa virginitatis suae conscia, difficultate facti commouetur: She
being witting of her own virginity, was moved with the difficulty of the
fact, that is to say. She was troobled with thinking how it should come to
pass.

Now unless she had determined, with her self to keep her virginity, she
would never have been troobled with any such thought. Nature taught her, that if
she used the company of man, she might conceive. Wherefore in that she was
troobled with the salutation of the Angel, and thinking how it might come to
pass, that she should bring forth a son, it is evident, that she made a
vow, to co^tinewe a perpetual virgin, and never to know man.

S. Bid.
S. Bid upon S. Luke says: The virgin asking how this should come to pass,
Reverently showed forth the purpose and intent of her mind, Hom 4. de virg.
that is, that she had determined to live a virgins life. S. Bernard speaking
of those words: Quomodo fiet istud, etc. How shall this be done, S. Bernard
and so forth, says: Our lady doubted not of the fact: She requires the
means, and order how it shall be. For she asks not whether this shall be, but
how it shall be, as if she would say: Seeing my lord God, witness of my
conscience, knows, that his hand maiden has made a vow, not to have
knoweledg of any man, after what manner, after what order shall it please him to
have it done? Mark M. Calf.
If I must break my vow, that I may bring forth such a son, I will reioise
of my son, and be sorry for my vow. Thus much S. Bernard. Now (gentle
readers) if it were a strange point and dissona^t from all good learning, Fol.
53. b
as M. Calf. says: To affirm that Mary mother of Christ, made a vow of
chastity, then has the ancient fathers S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hilarie,
S. Bid and S. Bernard, being all virtuous and godly men, well seen in the
scriptures of God, and expositions of the old interpreters, before the^,
taught a strange point and dissonant from all godly lerning. Did S. Luke the
Evangelist deceive them, and us in reporting the virgins answer to the angel in
such sort as he did? It were blasphemous so to think. And if that were the
virgins answer, then natural reason does inuincibly prove, that as these
ancient fathers say, our Lady made a vow of chastity. Wherefore there is
no cause why M. Calf. for any such saying should discredit the authority of
Abdias.

An other exception against Abdias is, that a church, Fol. 32. a.
was builded at Ephesus and dedicated to S. John in his life time, which may be
proved false by a thousand testimonies, says he, and yet of those thousand he
brings not one, which signifies that either he is a very pynching nygard, or
else a passing Craker, or shameless lier. Wherefore to purge him self, let hyn
show some of those thousand that say: There was no church builded to S. John
at Ephesus in his life time. Fol. 52. a
That it is derogation to the honor of God, and contrary to the use of the
primitive church: He says it only, but brings neither sentence out of
scripture, nor testimony of any father to prove it: and good cause why. For he
had none to bring, that which he alleges out of S. Augustine, makes nothing
against us. For the catholihe church ever taught, and teaches at this present,
Churches builded principally to the honor of God.
that every church, chapel, and oratorie is builded immediately and principally
to God, and the service which therein is dew to God only, is given to no
creature, be he Angel, or Archangel or any other blessed Saint in heaven.
Mary, that churches, chapells and oratories at their dedication have been called
by the name of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John, and S. James, or such like, as it
pleased the devotion of them that first erected them, we teach it not only to
be laufull, but also honorable to the glory of God, and his saints. Laufull,
first because no scripture nor council did ever inhibite it, No scripture nor
council forbids churches to be builded in honor of Saints. Vide epi.
tome^ Council. De ecclesiast. dog. cap. 73. They are heretics and no
Christians that think the bodies of of Saints and holy relics not to be
honored
but condemn them as heretics that did impugn it, as Eustachius was
condemned in the council of Gangre the year of our Lord 324. for contemning
churches of martirs and chappells called by the name of saints.

Secondarely, because the fathers have used, and the catholic church allowed
it, and account hi^ no Christian that denies it. S. August. or whosoever was
auctour of the book, De ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, says: We beleaue that
the bodies of saints and especially the relics of the blessed martirs are
most sincerely to be honored, eue^ as members of Christ, and that Churches
called by their names, are to be gone unto, with most godly affection and
faithful devotion, as holy places dedicated to the service of God. If any man
contrary and gain say this sentence, he is thought to be no Christian, but as
very an heretic as ever was Eunomius and Vigila^tius. Where note briefly,
that the holy fathers did not only build churches, and call them by the manes
of saints, but also persuade the^ selves that they ought to go unto the^ with
great devotion: and whosoever did think that no sownde doctrine, was
accounted no Christen man, but an heretic. Which being so, Alas in what
predicame^t, shall we put M. Calf? By the determination of the council of
Gangre, and sentence of S. Augustine, he must needs be an heretic.

That it is honorable to the glory of God and his saints, I make this
reason: what so ever God commanded to be done was honorable to him, To build
churches in honor of Saints, is honorable to God.
and all his saints: but God commanded churches, to be builded in the name of
saints, ergo it was honorable to God, and his saints to build churches in
their names. The mayor I think M. Calf. will not deny. The minor is proved
by S. Ambrose in the life of Geruasius and Prothasius, where he tells, that
in the lent he had a vision, and because he would be assured of it, he made
his humble prayer to God, that if it were an illusion of the devil, it might
vanish away, if it were a true vision, it might appear more perfectly. That
done he augmented his fast, the vision apeared as it did before. The third
night, his body being now worn with fasting, and he not sleeping, but
wondering at it, the vision apeared unto him again: that is, to say, two
youngemen in white apparel, and a third person which was like the blessed
Apostle S. Paul, whose countenance he knew by his picture, who amongst other
thinghs told him, that the young men which he saw, were Geruasius and
Prothasius, holy martirs of Christ. Whose bodies thou shall find in the place
where thou stand and praiest: thou shall find a cophine covered with earth,
twelve foot under the ground, S. Ambrose commanded by God to build a church
in the name of Geruasius and Prothasius.
which cophine thou shall take and lift up on high, and build a church in
their name. Thus much S. Ambrose: the premises the^ being true, and the form
good, the conclusion must needs follow.

Here if M. Calf. will quarrel, and say, that it was S. Paul, that commanded
the church to be builded in the name of Geruasius and Prothasius, and not God
him self, we will him to under stand, that as S. Paul being made an elect
vessel to preach the faith of Christ to the Gentills, did nothing but that
which God and the holy Ghost willed him to do: So being now a saint in
heaven, he neither does, nor can do any thing, but that which it pleases God
to comma^de him. Wherefore he may be ashamed of his most blasphemous assertion
saying, that is a derogation to the honor of God.

Where he says: Calf. Fol. 52 b.
It is contrary to the use of the primitive church, and that all men agree that
until the reign of Constantine, there were no chapells nor oratories erected
in honor of any saint, Mart.
You may perceive (good readers) from what fountain, he fetteth his doctrine,
and that he trauayleth neither in the study of the ecclesiastical histories,
nor ancient fathers, but in such halfpenny doctors, as have written these
later years, as Luther, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Bale, P^^idoru^ v^^g.
cap. 6. de inue^t (...) Churches build (...) hon^^^ of Sa^nctes ^^fore
C^^stant^^^^ time
and the author of the homily against images, and Magdeburgenses, and such
infamous friars and Apostatats. In Paris at this present in via Iacobea they
have an au^cie^t church builded by S. Denise and his companions in honor of
S. Stephen, and because they had the service there for a time in Greek, they
call it S. Estienne le Grec. Pius the tenth Pope after S. Peter, in the year of
our lord 155. as Pantaleon notes dedicated a church to S. Prudentia. Calixtus
or as some write Calistus the sixthene Pope after S. Peter in the year of our
Lord 220. builded a church at Rome, beyond the river Tibris in honor of our
blessed Lady. And all these with many more which I could reckon (were it not
that I fear tediousnes in so plain a matter) were builded in honor of
saints, Polid. lib. 5. cap 6. de invent. rerum. and li. 8. cap. 1.
long before Consta^tyne was borne. Where is now M. Calfhills creditte
become? What truth is in his words? What verity in that bold assertion,
Where he says, that it is contrary to the use of the primitive church, to
build churches in the honor of saints? Is it not turned into a vain
smothering smoke, and he taking upon him to instruct other, as puines, and
young scholars, proved to have no sight in antiquities, nor skill in those
authors, which favoring his affection wrote the story of antiquity, and
mentioned this that I have last recited? Judge you (good readers) for my part,
I pity his ignorance, and wish him the spirit of humility, and
understanding, that by the one he may know him self, and by the other learn,
how by his new M. and Apostatical doctors he is lurdely deceived.

Fol 51. b Calf.
An other exception against Abdias, is that he makes S. John to say: virtutum
opes habere non posse qui voluerit diuitias habere terrenas: That he can not
have the riches of virtue, that will have the riches of the earth. Mart.
But if this be a sufficient reason to impugn so ancient a writer, and M.
Calfhills wit, may be commended for it, than to purchase like commendation,
some pretty protestant may start up hereafter, and deny the Gospel of S.
Matthew, Matt. 19.
and the Epistle of S. Paul to Timothe. For S. Matthew makes Christ to say: It
is easier for a camele to go through the eye of a needle, tha^ a rich man to
enter into te kingdom of heaven. S. Paul says: 1. Tim 6. Qui volu^t fieri
diuites. etc.
They that will be rich fall into te^tatio^, and snare of the devil, and into
many unprofitable and hurtefull desires which drown me into perdition, and
destruction. And are not these sentences, all one in effect, with that which
Abdias attributes to s. John? he says they that will have riches of the
earth ca^ not have the riches of virtue: S. Paul says, that they that will
be rich fall into te^tatio^ and snare of the devil. What difference is there
between these two sayings? VVoulde not he have riches, that desires to be
rich? A wiseman would think yeas, and if it be so, then has Abdias varied
nothing from the blessed Apostle S. Paul, The doctrine of Christ objected as a
fault to Abdias. Fol. 51. b
nor doctrine of Christ in the gospel: but M. Calfhils capacity gaping after
the riches of the world could not conceive that, nor take the saying of Abdias
in that sense, in which the saying of Christ in Saint Mathewe, and S. Paul to
Timothe is to be taken, but must make the simple people believe that it
accords not with the doctrine of Christ. VVherefor to oppose M. reader in
this point of doctrine, tell us sir, dot not Christ teach contempt of riches
contempt of the world and all inordinate willing and desiring of earthly goods?
1. Tim. 6.
Says he not by his Apostle, that they fall into the snare of the devil,
and many unprofitable desires, that will be rich? that is have an inordinate
desire and unbridled will to be rych, an get the goods of the world? If
Christ taught this, then was it Christ's doctrine. If it were his doctrine,
then that which Abdias attributes to S. John, varieth not from Christ's
doctrine. For take the words which your self allege, that he can not have the
substance of virtues, that will have the substance of the earth, what is there
here that accords not with Christ's doctrine? Have you not the same terms in
one that are in the other? Volunt in S. Paul, and voluerit in S. John? and
signify they not both one thing? that is, an inordinate will, and desire to
have the riches of the earth? And do not they that have this inordinate will
and desire fall into the snare of the devil, and many unprofitable and
hurtefull desires, which drown men into death and perdition? And whiles they
are in the snare of the devil and such unprofitable desires that bring
perdition, can they have the substance of virtues? Speak M. Calf. This is the
doctrine of Christ, this is the doctrine of the holy Ghost, in S. Paul. And
this is the same that S. John preached, and Abdias reported. And certes like as
you sir being sick of an agewe ca^ not have your health before the humor that
is predominant, and matter of your sickness be al purged or consumed: Even so
the man that has this inordinate will and desire which the Apostles speak of,
can not have the riches of virtues, before that lewed desire and inordinate
will be purged and consumed with the fire of Gods word, and love of Christ,
and he made a new man in holiness and righteousness. Wherefore I much marvel
that you dirst ve^ture to say, that the foresaied sentence of Abdias attributed
to S. John accords not with the doctrine of Christ. My self will not condemn
you of contrarying and gaynesaying the word of God, and doctrine of Christ in
this case. Let your own indifferent brothers judge, how little you savor of
any sight in divinity for saying that those words of Abdias accorded not with
the doctrine of Christ. That the readers may understand how foully you have
corrupted Abdias, and left out a word, and altered his meaning, I will examine
the place.

He told there how S. John talking against riches, spoke also of curing the
sick of the palsy clensing the lepers and casting out of devils, and
afterward said: Sed has virtutum opes habere non possunt, qui voluerint
diuitias habere terrenas. But they can not have these powers of virtues that
will have the riches of the world: Where the Apostles meaning was that they
could not have the grace and virtue of curing the sick, and working of
miracles, who inordinately desired the riches of the earth, M. Calf. leaves
out craftelie, the word (has) those, and puts it indefinitely, as though
the Apostle meant, that they could have no virtues at all, but this is plain
couyn, worse than liegier demayne. Some man would count hi^ an ass, for
leaui^g out the word (has) but I will not trooble his conscience. Let it be
but a wilful escape, propre to heretics.

The fourth exception is this: It is more then a miracle to me that Abdias
should be such an ancient writer, Calf. Fol 51. b mart.
because neither Irene, neither Eusebius, nor S. Hierome make mention of him. A
great matter to be woundred at: a Wise Man would rather have woundred how it
could be that three learned me^, should be able to write the whole histories
of things done long before their time, and have true notice of all that was
done in all cuntries, towns, cities and villages, and omit nothing, that was
done. But M. Calfhills merueilous wit will never lack strange things to
woundre at. Yt is to be thought, if M. Horn him self, as wise a man as he is,
should tell him of VValtams Calf. that went nine mile to suck a bull, it should
be more then a miracle unto him.

The fifth exception is that S. John allowed the fact of Drusiana, which
withdrewe her self from her husbands company. Calf. Fol. 51. q Mart.
That is a false lie. For there is no mention in all that history (where
Abdias talks of Drusiana) that S. John allowed any such fact of hers. Calf.
Fol 52. a
The sixth that S. John turned trees into gold, and made broken jewels whole
again. For they were fond miracles, and had no apparaunce of truth (quoth M.
Calf. Mart.
As though the Apostle provoked there unto to declare the mighty power of God,
and standing in hope to win a soul to Christ (as he did in deed) should
disdain to work such a miracle to so good and end. If you had looked to the
story M. Calf. and considered the circumstances a little better, you would not
have called them fond miracles, and miracles that have no appearance of truth.
But we must bear with your boldness. If you contynewe, we may fortune to hear,
that the turning of Moses rod into a serpent, Exodus 7.4. Reg. 6. Joan 2.
the making of an hatchet swymme upon the water, the going of Christ through
the doors, the turning of water into wine, shall be counted fond miracles. For
take away first the authority of the church that allows the scripture, as
heretics have done, and the^ the scripture it self, as in part they do, and
there is no more reason why they should not stick to call these miracles, that
I rehearse out of the scripture, fond miracles, and miracles that have no
appearance of truth, than there is why they should say so of those that Abdias
refers to S. John. Thus you have heard some of the fond exceptions that M.
Calf. brings against that ancient father, and by these you may judge of the
rest.

Dionysius Alexandrinus, an ancient, learned, and holy father, understanding
that diverse condemned the Apocalypse of S. John, said: I verelie dare not
condemn, Eusebius lib. 7. cap 23. histo.
and reject the writing of this book, especially seeing many of the brethren
are of the same opinion with me, that it is S. John's: So modesty would have
required, that M. Calf. should have said of Abdias, and because many think
it, to be his work in deed, especially Lazius, and Sebastianus Munsterus a
master of his, who were, at the finding of it, he should not so contemptuously
have rejected it, and called the author, a liar, Fol. 51. b Fol. 53. b
a landleaper, an author of strange doctrine, contrary to all godly
learning: but you see what modesty is in protestants tongues, and reverence in
their hearts to antiquities. Ever sythens friar Luther gave example to
contemn the scriptures, and especially the Epistle of S. James, because it
made against his position of only faith, his disciples have not stickt to
conte^ne doctors, counsels, yea and the scripture it self, where it makes
against them. His other exceptions against Abdias, I omit to avoyde
tediousnes, now you shall hear what he says against, the counsels.

M. Calves. answers to the cou^cells. Did 1. ca. Nemo. The council of
Orleance. Calf. Fol. 57. a Mart.
I alleged out of Iuo and Gratian his canon made in a council kept at Orleans.
Let no man build a church before the bishop of that diocese come and set up
a cross, to which, M. Calf. talking much in vain, and so proving even as
other principles of his religion be proved, that the Ring of the church door
by the same reason is a piece of Gods service, with many like follies to no
purpose, answers thus in effect: In that decree order is taken for things
necessary before the church be builded. But we require what is necessary
service in a church hallowed. If wise men will judge him to be a very ignorant
advocate, who having his clients case given him in writing, and the copy
always lying before his eyes, can neither conceive, the meaning of it, nor yet
propounde it in such order, as it is given him, what shall we think of M.
Calf? Who taking upon him to be advocate for the protestants against the
cross of Christ, neither understands the case which he has to impugn,
given him in print, and leyed before his eyes in manifest terms, nor yet has
learned to tell it in such order, as it is given him? Donetur rude. In the
beginning of this third article it is set forth with charecters legible
without spectacles, that every church chapel, and oratorie, erected to the
honor and service of God, should have the sign of the cross, yet this new
advocate for the contrary part, having viewed the matter substantially (as he
thinks) and having nothing to say against the canon, but forced to say, that
the practice of the church was so then, leppeth out into a bye matter, and
says: Fol. 57. a
We do inquire what is necessary service in a church hallowed, and so for a a
shift to deceive the simple calls the reader, very rudely from the state of
the matter, that is treated in the article. But that will not serve him. Every
man that has eyes, sees that our reasoning is of the sign of the cross, and
not of necessary service in the church. Necessary service in a church
hallowed is matyns, mass, and euensong, preaching and christening, and such
like. Of this there was no word mentioned. The sign of the cross erected and
set up there, is no necessary point of this vocal and ordinary service, no
more then the covering of the book and defke that holds hi^ is. Wherefore
our fresh advocate may be thought not to have had his wits very sobre when
he ymagined to color an evil cause with such a bye train. So he say somewhat
in appearance, for the time, he passes not how little truth be found in his
tale, when it comes to examination. By his own confession a cross is
necessary according to that decree before the church be builded, afterward,
when it is builded, A cross necessary before the church be builded. Fol 57. a
it is not necessary: what reason is there in this? If there were only (as M.
Calfhil says) a civil police in it, and no point of religion, why did that
council command a cross specially, before all other things, to be set up
there, and that by no private man, but by a bishop? Let us here a substantial
cause, of his pregnant wit. And he shall be accounted to have more wisdom in
that little Calfes head of his, than that whole council. Fol 57. a Calf.
But to what purpose do we allege counsels? M. Calf. says if there were a
most plain determination for the cross in this or any such like council, he
is no more bound to the authority thereof, then we will be to the English
Synodes, held in king Edwardes days, and in the Queen's majesty's reign that
now is.

Here is a plain puritaine, and notorious protestant. Mart.
He shows him self in his likeness. But (sir) how, and how far you and
every man is bound to obey the decrees of the provincial counsels, I will not
dispute. It requires longer time, yet this by the way, I will say that you
are more bound to obey that, tha^ we are either to obey the Synodes kept in
king Edwardes days, either yours in these later years. For first the Synodes
in king Edwars time were by laufull authority, revoked, and abrogated, and
therefore bind no man to obey them. These which you have held of late, The
protestants Synodes kept without true bisshops.
are of no authority, nor worthy to be called Sinodes, but conspiracies,
co^uenticles, or assembles that had never a laufull and true bishop in them.
The council at Orleau^ce had thirty and three bishops, laufully called,
instituted and created. They kept them selves within the unity of the church,
ye like Apostatats have forsaken it. Their decrees were to edify, yours are to
pluck down. Look then how much more, we ought to obey true bishops, than
false usurpers, Christians living in the unity of the church, than renegates
that have for saken the church, men that desire to edify, than such as labor
to destroy: So much more ought we to follow that counsel being but
prouincial, than your Synodes being but schismatic. The next Canon alleged
out of a council kept at Toures, The counsel of Toures.
requiring, vt corpus Domini in altari, non in armario, sed sub crucis titulo
componatur, That the body of our lord consecrated upon the altar, be not
reposed and set in the reuestrie, but under the roode, M. Calf. thinks to
illude which his folish cauills. Calf. Fol. 67. b
Armarium, he says, may be well taken for a library, for a closet, or
almerie, but no more for a reuestrie than for a belfrie. Mart.
And why so sir, is not Armarium, properly a place, where any thing is laid,
as books, coats, household stuff and such like? And does not the reuestrie,
resemble such a place more properly then a belfrie. Fol. 57. b
Your self confess it to be the fathers meaning, and if it were the meaning of
the council, it was to much arrogancy in you to condemn it, as folish, and
excessive folly to reprove them, who take the meaning of the author, and
stick not so precisely to the bare letter.

S. Augustine resoning against the Arrians contending earnestly the for word
(...) asked, Epist 174 It is folly to conte^d about the word. when we
know the thing
Quid est contentiosius qua^ quu^ de re constat, certare de nomine? What is
more contentious the when there is plain evidence for the thing, to contend
upon the name? In like manner we ask you what more evident sign ca^ we have of
a brauling brabler, than such manifest contention about a word, when we know
the thing that is meant by the word: your own freinde the has augme^ted Sir
Thomas Eliots Dictionary, could have told you that armariu^, is a place where
books are laid, or other stuff of household, and by that you might have
gessed, that there is more affinity betwixt, Armarium, Armariu^.
and a reuestirie, than between Armarium and a belfrie. But if it be your
manner in reading, to daily about the word when you have the true sense of
the author, as you do here, certes I will not will every of your hearers to
gather a rod for such a reader, but desire your tender hearted damsel that
would not willingly have you hurt, with a rod, to get a pecocks tail, for
fear of smart. When I was at VVynchester, I taught my scholars evermore true
significations of their latin words, and when any came in construction, that
had diverse significations, I expounded them, and when they translated, I
taught them to keep the sense, and meaning of the author, although the
propriety of the word strictely taken, would scarce abide it. And for so
doying I suppose none would think the usher worthy of rod, but such a wise
man as you are. Titulus crucis.
As for the fault you find with the interpreting of Titulus crucis, for a
roode, it is so childish that it is to be laughed at, rather then answered, but
take it whether you will for a roode, or for the title of the cross, it does
manifestly convince, that there was a cross in the church, which is the
principal point that I took in I hand to prove in this Article.

Where you marvel that I would not rather expound it for a pixe, than a
roode, Fol. 57. b
in good soothe I can not let so marvelous a monstre to marvel at his own
shadow if he please. Where you say, Calf. Ibidem.
that you never heard before this time that the sacrament was reverently kept
under the Roode, that the altar refused, Mart.
the roode should be reverenced. Surely it is no great marvel, for a man of
so little experience of foren countries, and so small travail in reading the
ancient fathers, and counsels. But (sir) you take the matter amiss. The
words of the Canon do not tell you that the sacrament was carried up to the
roode loft, but said it was set, sub crucis titulo, under the roode, or title
of the cross. Which might be in an other place, besides the roode loft.
Again if it had been their meaning to have it set in the roode loft, yet
would it not follow, that therefore the altar was refused, Diverse countries
have diverse places to keep the blessed Sacrament.
or thought no worthy place to keep it. Diverse countries have diverse places
to keep the blessed sacrament: these lower parts of Germany have a place,
besides the altar, builded of purpose very honorably to reserve it in, yet
for all that they refuse not the altar, nor contemn it, as unworthy for it,
but take the other to be a more safe, and commodious place: other hanged it
reverently over the altar, other kept it in the reuestrie.

The council of Chalcedo^ in Trullo.
The next council which I alleged was the sixth general council kept at
Constantinople in Trullo. But M. Calf. could not find any Canon in that
council that made for the cross, and no marvel. For he followed not the
counsel of our savior saying: Quaerite and inuenietis, Seek and ye shall
find. In the sum of the counsels gathered by the reverend father Carranza,
the 73. Canon of the sixth general council is this. Seeing the lively cross
does show unto us that healthful thing (that is to say) the passion of
Christ, it behooves us to imploye all our study, that we may give unto it,
that honor which is meet and convenient. Wherefore we giving adoration unto
it, with mind, tongue and sense, command that the figures of the cross,
which are made of some in the grownde, and pauiment, be taken away, lest our
triumphant sign of victory, be iniuried by the treading of those that pass
and go that ways. The judgment of the sixth general counsel of the cross.
This if M. Calf. would have sought, he might have found, and noted, First,
that the cross by the judgment of two hundred 27. fathers does represent unto
us the passion of Christ. Secondely that they thought it their duty to give
dew honor unto it. Thirdly that with mind tongue and sense, they gave
adoration unto it, that they called it neither idol, nor sign of conquest
against the Christians, but a triumphant sign of victory, for the Christians:
Last of all because they would not have that holy sign to be trod upon, and
defiled with men's feet, they commanded, that no sign of the cross should
be made upon the ground, or pauiment, and if any were made, they willed it to
be taken up, and had away under pain of excommunication. In such honor and
reverence they had it in those days.

But if M. Calf. or any of his, reply, and say, that here is no mention made of
any cross in the church, let him consider the words of the council well,
first where they say: Quum crux viuifica illud salutare nobis ostendit: Seeing
the lively cross shows unto us that healthful thing, it is manifest that
there was a lively cross to show them that healthful thing: Secondarely,
where they attribute adoration, unto it, with mind, tongue, and sense, this
word sense, declares that they had a sensible cross, to which, they might
show their reverence with their external senses. Again the devotion of the
people, being such that they would paynt it, or engraue it upon the ground,
and pauyment, it is not to be thought, but that they had it in other places.
And if in other places, why not principally in the church, Where they should
have most occasion to remember Christ death and passion? and in remembrance of
the great benefit purchased by the cross, honor and reverence that holy
sign? Last of all, the prohibition forbidding it to be made in the ground and
pauyment, does evidently convince, that it is lawful to be made in other
places. For a prohibition restrictiue, forbidding a thing to be done in this or
that place, and no more, is a laufull permissio^ for all other places, which
are not namely included in that prohibition. For proof whereof, I refer me,
to M. Calfhils own advocate or lawyer, what so ever he be, so that he have a
little more sight in the law, tha^ the reader of Poules has in divinity. Now
if it might have pleased him to have consulted with his learned counsel, he
should right well have perceived that the gatherers of the counsels into a
sum (who^ he calls patchers of ragged relics) Fol. 57 b
did not take the vj. council of Constantinople, for the vij. of Nice, nor
that there was any slyght dealing in pressing the authority, and not alleging
the words, the number of the canon was cited in the margent, the cause why it
was brought, alleged, and either of these causes, is sufficient to excuse me
from all sinistrous opinions of slight dealing. The seventh general coucel at
Nice.
The fourth counsel which I brought, was the seuent general counsel kept at
Nice against image breakers: but against these M. Calf. opponeth three other
counsels, one at Constantinople under Constantine the fifth, Fol. 58. b
another at Eliberie in Spain now called Granata, the third at Franckford in
Germany.

The counsel of Co^sta^tinople under ^eo the fifth no lauful counsel.
The first all the world knows to be no laufull council, but a co^uenticle
of heretics, condemned by the catholic church both in the council of
Franckford, kept in the time of Charles the great in Germany, and also by the
council Laterane in Rome, to which the forsaied virtuous Emperor sent twelve
bishops out of France. Wherefore that assemble at Constantinople being
unlawful, the callers of it heretics, the proceeding inordinate, without
their true head, it must follow that their decrees were unlawful, their
reasons schismatical, not founded upon scripture, but wrested to a wrong sense
after their manner, and therefore not worthy the answering.

As for the second, who but bold protestans dare affirm that about the same
time when the council of Constantinople was kept in Greece, this council was
kept at Eliberie or Granata in Spain? It is to be seen in the acts of the
cou^cells and sum gathred by a learned man of Spain, that it was kept in the
time of Syluester in the year of our lord 335. after the acco^pte of their own
doctor Pantaleo^, about the time of the first Nicene council. And I marvel
that M. reader, of Poules could not se it. Apoc. 22.
But, he that is in filthynes, may grow in filthynes still, he that is in
such gross ignorance, may be ignorant still. M. Calfhills author whom he
follows in this point, and of whom he borrows the most of that which he
infarced to no purpose into his book, against images, and made no mention of
him, in very deed reads it so, in the Homily against Images, fol. 37. and so
one blind batfouler leading an other, they fall both into the mire of
ignorance. Whereby you may see what ancient authors, M. reader studieth
most. As for the council it self, it decreed that A bishop and priest might
have his sister in his house, Canon 27
or daughter being a virgin, and professed to God: but no other woman. Why is
not this kept? Why have they their nurceries? Why have they their houses deck
with woman's kirtelis, Cassocks, and fardingalles that are no sisters nor
spiritual daughtters, Cap 33.
but carnal Concubines? It is decreed also, that Bishops, priests, Deacons
and subdeacons, The protestats observe not the Canons of the counsel of Eliber.
being placed in the ministry should abstain from their wives, and not
begett children, It is decreed that all that did so should be thrust out of
their Clergy. Wherefore keep ye not this Canon? why have your colored and
votarie bishops, pretensed wives? Why have your friars, mounkes and lecherous
priests their amorouses in their arms? Why fill they the country which
bastardes? Why keep they their benefices? Why deceive they the poor people
by purchasing of lands and procuring of leases for their brattes? It is
convenient that those decrees should stand in force as well as this, which ye
allege. The same fathers that made one, made the other, and at the same time
in the same council, and with the same spirit. Wherefore they ought to be
credited a like. And seeing you urge their authority, in one and refuse it in
an other, I might use your own Rhetoric and tell you that I am no more bound
to follow that counsel in one cano^, tha^ you ought to obey their
determination in the other, Cap. 36. This cano^ of the Elibertine council
speaks not against al images. Pictures upon wales phibited only by this
cano^.
but I will not deal so with you. The cano^ is good and makes nothing against
the catholic faith touching the use of images. This is the cano^: Placuit
picturas in Ecclesia esse no^ debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in
parietibus depingatur: We decree that pictures ought not to be in the church,
lest that be painted on the walls which is worshipped and adored. Where note
first that pictures only are prohibited by this decree, and not every picture
neither, but such as were painted in walls. Secondarely that this prohibition
is but particular for pictures on walls, and being such, excludes not other
images, but rather permits them: for edictes prohibitorie, forbidding
certain cases, permit all that is not specially forbidden, if it be,
eiusdem generis and subiecti, of the same kind and the same matter.

Thirdly that here is an evident proof that pictures were then worshipped. For
this argument follows necessarily upon those words. That was worshipped
which was for bidden to be payncted in the walls: but pictures were forbidden
to be payncted upon the walls, Answer M. Calf.
ergo pictures were worshipped: the mayor is proved by the later clause of the
canon: Ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus depingatur. That that be not
payncted in walls, which is worshipped and adored. For nothing can be payncted
in the wall, but the image of some thing. If M. Calfhill say, that it is meant,
that God which is adored and worshipped, should not be payncted in the
waulles, he will be contrary to him self and doctrine of his own counsels, and
doctors. For he and they teach, that neither God, neither Christ ca^ possibly
be payncted. And if it be so, then that which the council said in that canon,
is worshipped, and adored, is neither God nor Christ, but some thing that
maybe payncted. Wherefore this impugner with his M. the author of the image
homily, may streeke this council out of their books, and cry shame of their
ignorance, for bringing that which proves manifestly against them.

Why the counsel of Eliberie, did forbid pictures in wales
Now why that council did forbid pictures on walls, to help your
understanding, ley down your pecocks tail, and disdain not to learn a
Lawyers point of an usher of VVynchester, and studient in Louayne. For the
better understanding of a statute or Canon, diverse circumstances are to be
considered. Amongst which for this wiche we have now in hand, Circu^sta^ces
to ba considered
you must note, the place where it was made, the persons that made it. The time
when it was made, and the cause why it was made. They that made this decree
were catholic bisshops, and faithful dispe^sers of Christ's mysteries, such
as knew to geaue their people: Luc. 12.
Their measure of wheat in time. The place where it was made, was Eliberye or
Granata a city in Spain, which at that time, and long after had many
infidels and Paganes, that despited Christ, and his religion: and because they
were idolatours them selves, thought the Christians to committ idolatry by
having of images. The time when it was made, was when they feared persecution,
as apeareth by the 59. and 60. Canon of the same counsel. The cause why it was
made, was because when the Christians by the tyranny of Pagans and persecution
of infidels should be forced to flee, and forsake their churches, they should
be driven to leave their pyctures in the walls to be mocked, scorned, and
laughed at, by the infidells, to the great contempt of Christ and sclander of
the Christians. These circumstances considred no marvel, if such Catholic
bishops desirous to win the idolatrous to the faith of Christ, and standing
in fear daily of persecution, and knowing that if upon the sudden they
should be forced to flee, the Pagans would pille their churches, and make
their pictures left in the walls, a mocking game, as they did crucify the
image of Christ in Berythus, Athanas. de imag. Christ. Ephipha. epist ad 5.
Synod. Constable. to. 2. Council.
and stoned a cross in Tyrus, no marvel I say, if for such considerations
such holy fathers made such a decree, and prohibited pictures on the walls in
churches. At this present all catholic bisshops upon like occasion would make
the like. But what if those fathers had no such considerations, but did
absolutely forbid pictures in the church? What would it advantage his cause?
Dot he not remember that it was a prouincial Synod of xix. bisshops, Fol. 88.
a Marcell. Epist. 5.
whose jurisdiction stretched no further than to their particular provinces?
Does he not remember that when the time is changed, that which was well done
before, may be changed according to S. Augustines rule which he him self
alleges, in another place? If he does not, it must be told hi^, and further
signified, that pictures and images were not only received into churches in
diverse other cuntries, but also permitted and commanded by general counsels,
as by the council of Nice under Adrian the first, by the council of Rome under
Gregory the second, and the council of Franckforde under Adrian in the time
of Charlemaigne. And seeing by these general counsels the decree of that
particular Synod was abrogated by the aftercummers, according to Pope Stephens
decree, and altered for the diversity of time, as S. Augustine permits,
there is no reason why we should be pressed with the authority of that Canon
which was ones abrogated, and forced to prefer one prouincial Synod, before
three general counsels, and driven more to esteem the order of one province,
than the authority of the universal church. VVherfor M. Calf. has by no
ways, any vantage by the Elibertine council.

Now as for the council of Franckford held in the time of Charlemayn, it
condemned not (as you falsely report) the seventh council at Nice, but the
false and forged Synod or Conuenticle of heretics assembled at
Constantinople, and all image breakers. The book which you say, Carolus
magnus, made against images, Fol 58 a vsque ad Fol. 78. a
is a false forged tale, as you may see in the confutation of the Apology Fol.
328. and all the long process of dispute alleged out of that book, is not
worthy so much creditte, as the tale of Robynwhode on wakefyld on a grene, and
therefore neadeth no answer.

Fol. 78. ab Fol. 79 a
The sclaunderous and spiteful words which you have used against Irene and the
council of Nice, would never have been uttered, unless malice had hardened
yower heart, and heresy blinded yower eyes. For who but you would declare, the
bare fact of a prince to his reproufe and not tell the circumstances? Who
would say the king exercised extreme Tyranny against such and such persons,
and not declare the causes why? No man that means vprightlye. For as the
circumstances and causes why things are done may aggrauate the indignity of
the fact: So may they either somewhat extenuate it, or alltogeather excuse it.
Fol. 78. b Calf.
Twoe great and haynouse factes (as you think) you lay to Irenes chardge:
One that she burned Constantine the fifte his bones, after he was dead. An
other that she Scratched out her sons Constantines eyes, Mart.
whiles he lived, and berefte him of his empire, and life.

Co^sta^tine the fyfte a wicked emperor blasphemy.
But (sir) why told you not the circumstances and causes, which moved her to
dig up Constantine the fifte his bones, and burn them? Why did you not
tell that he was a wicked Emperor, and said unto his own Patriarch
Anastasius, that Christ the son of God was not man, nor borne of the virgin
Marye, otherwise then he was him self borne of his mother, called in like
manner Marie? Why did you not tell that when he was plagued morbe elephantico,
and miserably tormented, he said lying on his death bed, I am condemned to
everlasting fire? Desperation.
Why did you not tell that Irene understanding this, and exhorted by Theodorus
then patriarch, dug up his body and burnte it, and cast the ashes in the
sea? Why I say did you not tell all this? And (which is not to be omitted) why
did you not tell that the said Constantine dug up saints bodies and cast
them into the sea, Impiety.
and compelled a gentlewoman of Bizance to dig up her husbands bones after
he had been long buried, and cast them into the sea, where theaues, murderers,
and sacrilegers were wont to be cast? Were not all these circumstances to be
told? Yeas M. Calf. if you had dealt faithfully. But if those circumstances
had been told, then should all Christen men have understood that the just
judgment of God, fell upon that cruel tira^t, and Irene have been judged to
have done nothing, but that which beseemed a virtuous Empress. But that was
not for yower purpose, and therefore you suppressed all the said circumstances,
and to exaggerate the matter more cruelly made twoe foul lies. For you say.
Fol. 78. a Calf.


This did the good daughter the defendour of images, because her father when as
yet he lived had broke the^ in pieces. Mart.
For neither Irene was his daughter, otherwise the^ by marriage, and not
properly to be called daughter, Why Irene burned Constantines bones.
neither was his body dug up and burnt, because he broke and burnt images,
but because he denied the incarnation of Christ, and died in desperation,
saying. Igni inextinguibili addictus sum. I am condemned to everlasting fire.

The other fact which you lay to Irenes chardge is, that she bereaved the
Emperor of his crown, and scratched out his eyes, and murdered him, which
were cruel factes I confess: and as I deny it not, so will I not defend it.
But sir, why did you not tell us, that when the said Emperor had the
government in his own hand, he put his own mother in prison, and that in
subiectos immaniter saeuit. Co^sta^tine Irenes son a wicked tyra^t.
He waxed cruel and raged most vnmercifullie against his subjects? Why did
you not tell that he punished diverse men with strange kinds of torments, and
governed his empire tira^nicallie? why told you not that he compelled his own
wife called Marie, to go into religion and married his maid? Why told you
not that he did put out his uncle Nicephorus eyes, and cut of Christophorus
and Nicephorus tongues, because the soldiers would have created the said
Nicephorus Emperor? Why told you not that he used like cruelty against many
noble men, for which the whole city of Constantinople, and the whole army
conspired to depose him, and make a new Emperor? Why I say did you not tell
all this? was it not necessary to be told? Would any true meaning man
declare a fact to an others infamy, and conceal the circumstances? No, I
suppose, in such weighty matters. But let it be yower oversight. Why did you
not according to yower promise prove by scripture, council, and ancient
fathers that Irene was as you say a Iezabel, Calf. Fol. 78. b
an Athalia, a woeman past all honesty, a woeman that perverted lawful
counsel, that she might go a whooringe with her idols still, a woeman that
became more savage than a wild beast.

Mart. Praises given to Irene. Cuspinia.
The histories give her sovereign praise, and great titles of honor. Some
say she was: A most godly woeman, more wise and politic in governing the
state, tha^ Leo and Consta^tin her father in law, notable as well for her
beauty, as for her holiness and goodly qualities, a woeman of singular
wisdom, and integrity, worthy to be esteemed. Some said she was pijssima
imperatrix, Eutropius lib. 22.
a most godly Empress, and that she took the Empire with her son
Constantine, gloriose, diuinitus, honorably by the providence of God. As for
her practices against her son, Cuspinianus says, That she cast him in
prison, and that afterward his eyes were pluckte out, and where for anguish and
sorrow he died, vti mulier optima publicum bonum priuata charitati praeferret,
that like a good woman she might prefer the profit of the common weal, before
her private love. This considered, it had been reason that you should have
brought some ancient father, some allowed historiographer, to have confirmed
yowr saying, and improued these and such other as I have brought, before you
had fallen into such a raging heat, of railing without all consideration of
the circumstances, and causes that moved her to do as she did. But I perceive
the french proverb is true. Un asne picque convenient que il trotte. An Ass
prict with the spur must needs trotte.

Besides when you spoke of yower Council of Constantinople assembled by
Constantine the fifte, Fol 58. a
son to leo surnamed Isauricus, why did you not tell us that the said Leo
that spoiled the churches, and broke down images, was moved to do it by twoe
Jews, Inchaunters, sorcerers, Zonaras. To. 3. Annali What manner of man he
was that first did pluck down images, and what cou^sellers he had for that
purpose. Zona. To. 3. Annal. Zona. vt supra. Zona. 3. Annal. Cuspinia.
and co^iurers who promised I fitho prince of Arabia an Empire and long life,
if he would cast the images of Christ and his blessed mother out of the
churches, and fleing out of Arabia into Isanria, promised the like to Leo, and
asked nothing for their reward, nisi vt Nazareni er genitricis eius imagines
tellerentur: but that the images of Christ, and his mother, might be taken
away? Why did you not tell us that the said Leo promising these Jewish
inchaunters to perform their request, began war against God, and with a
terrible noise invaded the holy images? Why did you not tell that he depryued
Germanus of his patriarkshippe, and ordained Anastasius, because he would not
consent unto him for the plucking down of images? Why did you not tell us
that he set a princely palace on fire, and burnt goodly books, and twelve
notable learned men mayntayned there to the furderaunce of learning, and
furnishinge the Emperor with grave and wise Counselers, and all that was in
the house, because they would not assent unto him for the destroying of images?

Why did you not tell us that he was an enemy of the Catholic faith, a
sacrileger, a blood sucker, a lyonlyke beast, covetous, impious, opinatiue
against the equality of Christ, the son of God, and true God with his
father, an image breaker, and fighter against God? The histories report these
things and other wickedness of him, as you may see in Eutropius, Zonaras, and
Cuspinian. This would have been told, that the people might have understood
what manner of man he was that first in surch raginge sort pluckte down
images amongst Christians, Leo Isauricus cou^sellers that moved him to pluck
down images.
and what counselors he had to exhort him unto it, to wit twoe Jews and
inchau^ters, and what grave fathers he had that did dehorte him from it, but a
great piece of your subtilitie and craft should have been desclosed by it.
Therefore you thought it not good to meddle with it.

Eutropius lib. 21. A description of Co^sta^tine under whom M. Calves. counsel
was kept against images.
Again why did you not tell us that Constantine the fifth son to Leo, was a
more wicked man than his father and a very forerunner of Antichriste? Why did
you not tell us that he was called a persequutor, an unmerciful and most
savage beast, always cruel, of wild and beastly manners, hurtefull,
fearce, rude, a forsaker of God and his saints, delited even from his youth
with magic, inchau^tme^ts, sorcery, blouddy sacrifices, calling up of
devils, wantones, riote, and all inventions that corrupt the soul?

Why did you not tell us that he so wallowed in all kind of vice, that he
was, non Christianus, non Paganus, non Iudaeus, sed colluuio quadum impietatis
etc. Not a Christian, not a pagane, not a Jew, but a certain lump and heap
of impiety, like the beasts of Africa, which are reported to be borne with
diverse ouhgely shapes, by reason that the beasts of diverse kinds do coople
together?

Why did you not tell us that he betrayed many of his nobles, cut of some of
their heads, pickte out some of their eyes, punished diverse of his
counselors, murdered diverse religious men, burnte their houses, profaned
their churches, ransacked their Reuestries, took away their Jewels, alienated
their lands, and possessions, and for penance had three wives at ones? All this
is written of hi^ either in Eutropius, Zonaras, Sigiber te or Cuspinian, and
more, as neadful to be known as that which you heaped up against Irene. And I
beseeke you why was none of all this told? Belike you feared that if so much
should have been vttred, men should have learned that they that gave counsel
to the pluckinge down of images, were runnagate Jews, co^iurers, and
practisers with devils: The emperors that plucked down images
The emperoures that followed their counsel, were Tirantes, persequutors,
ma^quellers, sacrilegers, foreru^ners of Antichriste, enemies of Christ, and
the vilest and most wickedst men that professinge Christ, ever sat in that
Empire, and so yower Constantinopolitane Council against images, should have been found to be nothing but a conspiracy, hatched of the devil and his
ministers. But that was not Evangelical simplicity, nor Christian charity.
Truth should not be concealed, nor the ignorant deceived, with glorious words.
Well may a minister face out a lie for a time, but certainly time will
discover it, and reveal it to his utter shame.

And as for you M. Calf. seeing you like so well that Consta^tinopolitane
conspiracy assembled by Constantine the fifte, that you prefer it before the
true and laufull council, assembled at Nice, take heed lest many think of
you, as they did in those days of Constantine the fifte. Is it not a foul
ouersighte of you to worthy that Council of authority that was assembled by
an enemy of Christ's faith, and religion? kept by heretical bishops, who
dertermined what pleased the^, and neither had the bishope of Antioche,
Alexandria, Jerusalem, Lib. 4. ca. 9. Tripart. Lib. 5. cap. 29 Tripar.
nor Rome present at their conuenticle? VVheras the order of the primityue
church was, and at this present is, that no council should be heald and
reputed good and laufull, which the bisshope of Rome did not confirm, and
ratify? Is it not a gross ignorance to affirm that Eutropius says there
were 338. bishops at that assemble, whereas he says. Lib. 22.
The wicked Constantine gathered Iniquum concilium triginta octo episcoporum, a
wicked Council of thirty and eighte bisshopps against the holy and venerable
images? For shame where was yower eye sight, when you looked in Eutropius, or
did you not look in him at all, but speak by the advice of some learned
brothers note book? who for the word ( iniquum in Eutropius, wrote tercentum,
Lib. 22.
and made a strange Metamorphosis,) if you did so, (unless he has better
evidence than I can yet se) he deceived him self and you both. For Eutropius
printed at Basile, by Frobenius, the year of our lord 1532. writes thus.
Constantinus impius contra sanctas and venerabiles imagines concilium iniquum
triginta octo Episcoporum congregauit. That is, wicked Constantine gathered a
wicked council of thirty and eight bisshoppes against the holy and venerable
images. And albeit Sigibertus reports, that there were three hundred and
thirty, yet might you have better credited Eutropius, as more ancient and
likelyer to know the truth then he. And have imagined that the printer might
sooner add a figure of 3. to 30. than an other printe, iniquum, for terce^tum,
that is (wicked) for three hundred. But it was not for yower purpose.

VVherfor sir, saying you will not tell the people what they were that first
gave council that images should be plucked down, nor signify what manner of
me^ they were that wroughte these troubles in Christ's Church, to declare it
breiflye (albeit the wiser may see it by that which is declared alredie) yeat
for the further understanding of the simpler, I will ley it down playnlie, and
truly, as every man that will read, Zonaras, Eutropius, Sigebertus, Suidas,
and Cuspinian of these Emperors lives may see.

The counselors of plucking down images.
This first holy men that persuaded the Christians to throw down images, were
twoe Jews, both runnagates, inchaunters sorcerers, and coniurers and
practisers with the devil. And an other runnagat called Bezer who had forsaken
his Christianity, and became a Jew. These were the counselers. The Emperors
that followed these counselors were Leo Isauricus, The emperors that
follovved their counsel. Leo Isauricus.
Constantine the fifte, Leo the 4. and Constantine the sixte. As for Leo
Isauricus, he was as you heard before an enemy of the Catholic faith, a
sacrileger, a blood sucker, a Lion like beast, covetous, impious, opinatiue
against the godheade of Christ, an enemy of God: he deprived an holy
patriarch and placed an heretic, he burnt a goodly and pri^cely palace, with
the books, jewels, ornaments, and all the learned men that were within it.
Co^sta^tine the fyft.
Constantine the fifte, son to Leo, was many degrees worse then his father,
even a very forerunner of Antichriste, as cruel a persequutor of the
Christians, as Decius or any of the heathen Emperors was. He was of wild and
beastly ma^ners, a forsaker of God and his saints, so fearce and rude that he
was called a most unmerciful and cruel beast, he delyted in wantones and
riotte, he had great pleasure in sorcerie, magic, and inchaunteme^tes, in
blouddie sacrifices, and calling up of devils. He worshipped Venus, Suidas.
offered humane sacrifices unto her, and killed boys for to please her. He
betrayed his nobles, cut of their heads, pickte out some of their eyes,
murdered diverse religiouse men, and spoiled them. He dug up saints
bodies, and hurlde them into the sea. To be short, he was as ye heard before,
neither Christian, nor pagane, nor Jew, but a certain lump and heap of
impiety, like the beasts of Africa, that are of diverse oughely shapes. Under
this sweet Emperor, Leo 4.
M. Calfhills Council of Constantinople was kept against images, and God
will. Leo, son to this Co^sta^tine, was as wicked a man as his father, and
heir as well of his impiety, as of his empire. Constantine the sixte his
son, Constantine 6.
walked as his father did, and was a very tirante murdered his nobles, put his
own mother in prison, forced his own wife to enter into religion, pickte out
his uncle Nicephorus eyes, cut of Christophorus and Nicetas tongues, and did
such horrible and villanouse acts, that the whole city of Constantinople
detested his crueltye, and sought means to depose him. These were the
emperors that made the blouddye bickering against images, these were they that
defaced the churces, of the Christians, and broke, and burnte the images of
Christ, and his saints. These our protestants follow, these they take for
their president. Under one of these, yea under the vilest of them all, was the
conspiracy of Constantinople kept by a few schismatical bisshops contrary to
all order and law. And this they reverence and prefer before the lawful
council of Nice.

Now whether they are to be followed, and their president imitated of any
Christen man, I leave it to the indifferent readers. In all good Christian
hearts, that can not be thought to tend any thing to the honor of God, which
was devised by Jews that were inchanters, sorcerers, and coniurers, and
practisers with the devil, and put in practice by Tirantes, persequutors,
enemies of God, and faith of Christ, as they were that broke and abolished
images.

As for the council of Nice, that it was a lawful general Council, summoned
duelye and kept orderlye, and confirmed truly, as the ecclesiastical
ordinance have decreed, No man denies, but either he that is altogether
blinded with heresy, or not traualed in readinge the histories of the church.
He that has read no more but the talk of Paulus Patriarche of Constantinople
unto the Empress Irene, and her nobles, and marked the sad and grave oration
that Tharasius that succeeded him, made before this council was kept, can not
chose but say it was, Sancta and vniuersalis synodus. An holy and general
Synod. And so for all M. Calves. Serpentine tongue we will accept it, until his
Mastershipp prove by the scriptures, councels, and fathers that it was no
general and lawful Counsel. That which he fathereth upon Carolus magnus, is as
true as the book against images, to wit naught, else but a very sclaunder.

S. Ambro.
Where, upon S. Ambrose words extolling the cross and making a comparison
between a church and a ship, where it is said: As a church can not stand
without a cross: Even so a ship is weak without a mast, I made this argument,
That must needs be in the church, without which the church can not stand: But
(as S. Ambrose says) a church can not be without a cross: Therefore a cross
must needs be in the church, M. Calfhil like a cu^ni^g carpenter, that knows
a fine slight to pluck down churches, thinks in deed that no church can
stand without a cross. Fol. 79. b Calf.
For unless ye have (quoth he) the cross beams, and cross pillars with one
piece of timber shut into an other, which is the very sign of the cross, I
can not tell how the building can abide. Mart.
Is not this a high point of skill in such a master workman? If one had been
prentise x. years to John Iumbler, this profounde paradoxe, might right well
become his bald head, when his night capp is of. But I beseke you sir, is Crux
Latin for a cross beam, and cross pillar? Or was S. Ambrose (a most
eloque^t father in the judgment of all learned me^) so ignorant and barbarous
in your sight that the knew not what was Latin for a cross beam, or cross
pillar? Or if he knew it, Crux never taken for a cross beam nor cross
pillar.
was his tongue so stuttring that he could not utter the concept of his mind?
But must he neades take Crux, for a cross beam? Fie for shame? Confer your
Calepine, Look on M. Copers dictionarie, search the vocabularie that you
learned at Ludlowe consult with the Cobbler at Queen hiue, and upon mature
deliberation, Let us hear their better advise. That S. Ambrose is not so to be
understood, al wise men see beside your self.

In the same place he says: Arbor quaedam in naui, Sermon. 55. S. Ambro.
wrested.
est crux in ecclesia. The cross in the church is as it were a certain tree
in the ship. The tree in a shipp (that is to say) the mast, is not a cross
beam, nor cross pillar, ergo nor the cross in the church. Again where
strayt upon the similitude he inferred these words: For by and by the devil
does disquiet it, and the wind does squatte it. But where the sign of the
cross is set up, by and by both the iniquity of the devil is beaten back,
and the tempest of wind appeased, it is manifest, that, signum Crucis, the
sign of the cross, does not signify nor cross beam, nor cross sail. For
the devil is neither a fraied of a cross beam, nor wind alayd with hoysing
up the cross sail. The cross beam has no force to drive away the iniquity
of the devil, S. Amb^o. meaning far vvide from M. Calves. fancy.
nor the cross sail power to alay the wind as the sign of the cross has,
of which S. Ambrose speaks. Wherefore he must needs have a far other
meaning tha^ that which our minister deuiseth of a cross sail or mast. And
what other can it be, but that which he him self discourses of in those
sermons, the very sign of our cross, which through the merits of his
passion has such virtue that it drives away the iniquity of the devil, from
the church upon the land, and assuaged the tempest of the wind upon the seas.
For the first you may take example of the church, preserved from fire, by the
sign of the cross in Nola, for the second, Sir Ambro. Cave.
sir Ambrose Cave on of the Queen's majesty's honorable counsel, sometimes
knight of the Rhodes ca^ tell you that by Rhodes there is a little Ila^d, and
in that a rode, for ships, where no anchor, nor cabel will hold the ship,
unless the maryner make the sign of the cross over the place where he
casts his cable and pitcheth his ancker, this has he reported to diverse men
of worship, and as he loueht, the faith of a gentle man, and desires to be
reputed for a faithful knight, So I dare say he will not be a shamed to say
again, that which he has so often said before. Now sir where you say, Calf.
Fol. 80.
my ignorance, or unfaithfulness is to apparent for fathering these words, if a
church lack a cross, by and by the devil does disquiet it, and the wind
squatte it, Upon S. Ambrose,

Mart.
I must tell you that your skill is very simple, if you can not pyck that sense
almost word, for word out of S. Ambrose: and your rudeness to apparent, if
you can not see that he talks there of iiij. things, a church and a ship,
the devil and the wind, the devil for disquieting the church, the wind for
squatting the shipp: Besides I must tell you that you are to be noted of
vnfaythefulnes in translating the sentence of S. Ambrose, alleged in this
place, as shall apeare when I come to treat of your false interpretations and
translations. In the mean season what means your wisdom, Calf. Fol. 80. b
to say, that if my opinion be true, we need not fear the burning any more of
Paul's, make a cross on the steple and it shall be fase? Mart.
Because S. Ambrose, and I upon creditte of his word said, that a church can
not stand without a cross, will you with your logic, make us say, that it can
not be burned, if it have a cross? no M. Calfhil. All the wit in your head,
and sophistry that you learned, is not able to do it. We know when God upon
just indignation will punish, nothing is worthy to stand in his sight.
VVherefor no meruell if neither cross, neither policy of men could help that
terrible fire sent from heaven, to declare the wrath of God, for polluting his
church with your schismatic service and horrible blasphemy when by right
order of the church the feast of corpus Christi, should have been celebrate.

Calf. Fol 80. b A notable lie.
Where you say that, twice whithin fifty years the like plague happened in
the most Catholic time, I must crave pardon, and say, Sir reverence of your
ministry, ye lie. For no cronicle since the church was first builded makes
mention that Paul's steple was set a fire with lightning from heaven and burnt
down to the battilments, and the whole body of the church with certain yles
clean consumed, and the communion table burnt in the quier within the compass
of three or four hours, on corpus Christi yeaue, as of late it was. Wherefore
you may be a shamed of this loud lie, Fol. 80. b
to say that the like plague happened twice within the compass of l. years.
Where as it is not to be found, that it happened so much as ones, thanked be
God. In deed it was ones or twice set a fire, but quenched by the goodness
of God strayt, without any great harm, and ones hapely by a morrow mass
priest. Which I meruell why you did omit to report. But you had rather
adventure your credit in facing a lie, tha^ by reporting the truth, say any
good a of priest. God requit it you in that day.

Against Lactantius you say much to no effect. Fol 81. a
If he can not confirm our doctrine so well as impugn others, as S. Hierome
says, why do you allege his words so thick? Seeing his works be accounted
by Gelasius inter Apocripha, Ibidem. Heretics account Lactatius works
inter Apocripha, and allege them for their purpose.
such as may be read, an no doctrine grounded on, as you say, why do you and
the author of the image homily, use his authority? There is not one author
of whom you borrowe more testimonies, but evil applied against images, than
out of Lactantius, and is not this shame for you? The law says: Nemo debet
consequi beneficium ex eo quod nititur impugnare: No man ought to obtain
benefit of that which he endeuoreth to overthrow. Wherefore seeing you
overthrow the authority of the witness, which you bring, there is no reason
why you should take any advantage or help by his words. But what is it that
heretics will not do? what corner that they will not seek? what hole that
they will not pry, to epsy some aparant color to ouercast their evil favored
fantasies? Lacta^tius when he seems to make for the^, is an ancient and
approved father. When he makes against the^, then either his works be
accounted Apocripha, not sownde enough to build any doctrine upon, either
utterly rejected as none of his. Fol. 81. a Calf.
As for example, his verses upon the passion M. Calf. verelye supposes to be
none of his making, and is induced to think so for these three causes. M.
Calves. reasons why the verses of the passion be not Lactantius own. Mart.
First S. Hierome making mention of all his writings makes no mention of
this. Secondarely churches were scarcely builded in his time. Thirdly that it
was a doctrine different from that which he him self taught, and was generally
received in his days. But if any might be so bold to ask this cross
crucifier how he proves, that S. Hierome made mention of all Lactantius
works, what could he say? How would he shift his hands, and make it appear
that Lactantius wrote so many books, and no more? and that S. Hierome saw all
those books? It would grauel him. As every man beleaueth that S. Hierome
desirous of learning read much, and saw much: So no wise man thinks it
possible, that he could read or see all that was written. Wherefore seeing
many things might escape his sight, and come to knowledge many hundred years
after, this is no sufficient cause to say. S. Hierome makes no mention of that
book, ergo it was none of Lactantius writing. No more than if one would say,
John Fox makes no mention in his Martyrloge that Crammer was pardoned for
traison, and burned for heresy, ergo it is not true that he was a traitor and
an heretic.

As for the second cause, that churches were scarcely builded in Lactantius
days, it would have proved a stark lie, if he had not said, scarcely. For
that the Christians had churches and places of prayer, yea in the Apostles time
and ever afterward albe it not so gorgiously builded, nor freely freque^ted,
as they have been since the time of Constantine the great, apeareth both by
the scripture, The Christians had alvvayes churches.
and ecclesiastical histories, as in part I have proved before. S. Paul
rebuking the Corinthians for eating and drinking in the church, said: Have ye
not houses to eat and drinck in? Aut ecclesiam Dei contemnitis? Or do ye
conte^ne the church of God? 1. Cor. 1. Cap. 14.
In the said epistle he said it is shame for a woman to talk in the church,
and talks of the coming in of the idiote and simple into the church, which
argues that they had then a church, that is to say some place where they
might pray, and to which men might resort. S. Hierome tells that Cornelius
house was made a church. In vita Paulae.


Philo Iudaeus who lived in the time of the Apostles, speaking as Eusebius
notes, De ecclesiis, of the churches, which the Christian men had at that time,
writes thus. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 17. histo.
Est in singulis locis consecrata orationi domus. There is in every place, a
house hallowed to prayer, which is called a monastery which in our tongue may
signify a company of honest men, unto which place, (...). Religious men and
women in the time of the Apostles. Hymns. Lib. 7 cap. 11. histo. Eccle. In
inferiora altaris. Aulters. Libro 8. cap. 25. Fol. 81 b M. Calf. co^uinced by
this own words.
some seuering them selves from the world, lead a virtuous and chaste life,
and bring nothing into that place that apartayneth to meat and drink, or
other necessary service of the body, but only the books of Moses, and
volumes of the prophets and hymns to serve God, and such other things.

Eusebius declares that when in the persecution of Valerian, at Caesaraea a
city in Palestine, one Marinus should be put to death, the bishop took him by
the hand, and leed him, Ad ecclesiam, to the church, and there, with many
words confirming him to the faith brought him to the inner part of the
altar and animated him to martirdom. Again in the xxv. chapter of the said
book there is special mention of a church made in a manner by miracle. For
at the prayer of S. Dionise of Alexandria, a rock was removed, and place made
to build a church. But what seek I further proof of this, seeing, M. Calfhils
own words confessing that Diocletian hurled down, and spoiled the temples
of the Christians, prove it evidently: for if he spoiled their temples and
hurled down their churches in his time, then before his time, temples and
churches were builded, and Christen me^ served God in them.

Besides where he says, Calf. Fol. 85. b
that the Christians had their Oratories plucked down, and therefore had no
leisure nor liberty, to be at such idle cost, nor had time to make images of
Christ, it makes nothing to the purpose. Mart.
For let it be vndoubtidly true that the persequution under Diocletia^ was so
terrible that the Christians, had neither liberty, nor leisure to make images,
will M. Calf. infer upon it, ergo they could not look upon those which were
made before? Ergo Lactantius, did not make those verses exhorting every man to
woorship the cross? Straggling arguments
No, I suppose, if he be in his wits. These arguments stragle far, and wide
from all good reason, much like as if either an idle soldier would say: The
enemy came so fast and fierce upon us, that we could not run to the armarie
to fet new weapon, ergo we could not fight with the old: or a horse leeche
and Mountibanck, would reason thus: when Galene wrote his book of physic,
none were sick, ergo the work De sanitate tuenda, is none of his. For as the
soldier might fight well with his old weapon, although he could not come to
the Armarie for new, and Galene write his book de sanitate tuenda, to instruct
all that should be sick afterward, although none were sick presently: So
albeit the Christians were so persequuted that they had no leisure to make new
images, yet were they not so straighted, but that they might behold the old.
And although the churches were throwe^ down, and no cross nor Crucifixe left
in them, nor Christians then daring openly to worship them, yet might
Lactantius make those verses to instruct other that should come after, as well
as those that lived presently with him. And certes seeing it apeareth by S.
Hierome, that he had a grace in poetry, and made other works, carminibus
Hexametris, De viris illustr.
in long verses, as these are, there is more cause why this conjecture should
be true, than that guess of M. Calfhils likely: especially seeing it has passed
these many years under his name uncontrolled, yea of Erasmus, who was a
professed enemy to most of the ancient fathers works, if they had any
evident and plain testimony to convince certain truths of the catholic
faith against the heretic.

But as Lactantius lived under Diocletian when Churches, were thrown down, so
lived he long under Constantine, when churches were a building, De viris
illustr. Lactatius lived under Constantine.
and dedicated his books of divine institutions, unto that good Emperor, and
as S. Hierome records, taught his son Chrispus in France, where the
Christians lacked not churches at that time. For Constantine, by and by as soon as the council of Nice was ended, and his solemn feast celebrated: Out of
hand builded churches in all haste, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18. Tripa.
and did it in every city, and at the city that of his name was called
Constantinople. The first church he builded, was not at Jerusalem in the xxx.
year of his reign, as it pleases M. Calfhill to lie for his vantage. But of
that when I come to talk of his lies, this for the present I will advertise the
readers that there is no reason why Lactantius verses written of the passion
should be refused as none of his, because he lived under Diocletian, when
churches were thrown down. For (as I have proved) he lived in great favor
with Constantine as it may appear (because he had his son to teach) when
churches in all cities of the Emperors dominions were builded. VVherefor this
crossequareller may whissel for a new reason: for his second is nothing worth.

Touching the third cause, Calf. Fol. 81. a
that this doctrine to worship the cross, is different from that which
Lactantius taught, and was generally received in his days, for a brief answer,
Mart.
we say it is very false. For he never taught that it was unlawful to bow the
knee to the sign of the cross: nor contrary to the religion of Christ to
worship it, in such sort and manner, as the Christians do. Read his works
over and over, and you shall find no clause, that condemns this religion of
the Christians. Lacta^tius never reproved the vvoorshipping of the cross.
In deed he is very vehement, and that justly in his books De falsa
religione, against the gentills, who worshipped stocks, and stones, the sun,
and moan, the earth and sea, and dead men, and women, as Iuppiter and Juno for
Gods. Their superstition and idolatry, he conuinceth many ways, and proves
that God is not to be sought for, in earthly things, but in heaven, as the
whole chapter alleged does manifestly declare, where it is said, Libro 2.
cap. 19.
who soever endeuoreth to consider the mystery of man and to keep the dignity
of his nature, let him raise up him self from the earth, and when his mind is
lifted up, let him lift up his eyes to heaven. Let him not seek God under his
feet, nor pluck out of the place where he treads, that which he must adore,
For what so ever is under man, must of necessity be inferior to man. But God
is greater than man, and therefore is above, and not beneath, not to be sought,
in this low and base region, but in the highest of all. VVherefor there is no
doubt, but that there is no religion, where there is simulachrum. A false and
feigned image. Simulachrum.
Nam si religio ex diuinis rebus est etc. For if religion consiste of Godly
things, and there is no godly nor divine thing, but in coelestibus: In
heavenly things, then false and feigned images lack religion, Lacta^tius
speaks against the false and feigned images of the ge^tils.
because there can be no heavenly thing, in that which is made of the earth,
which may apeare evidently to a wise man by the name it self. Quicquid enim
simulatur id falsum sit necesse est, etc. For what soever is counterfeted, that
must needs be false, and that can never take the name of truth, which by deceit
and imitatio^, counterfeteth the truth, and so forth, By which it is manifest
that he speaks of the gross, and idolatrous gentiles, that could not lift up
their hearts to heaven, and seek God there: but had earthly cogitations, and
thought the sun and moon, the earth, sea, and the idols which they made, to
be their God, and so worshipped them: which to make more plainer, in the neyt
chapter of the same book he says: Now then a great and hard portion of
the work which I took in hand, is dispatched, unless I be deceived, and the
heaue^lye majesty giving me grace, and power to speak, I have driven away the
old canckred and festred errors.

Wherefore unless M. Calfhils Evangelical spirit has forced him to fancy,
that the Christians worship the sun and moon, and dead stocks, and stones
as God, and fett out of the earth, and place where their feet tread, the thing
which they woorshipp for God, and be fallen from Christianity to the old
canckerd and festered errors of the idolatrous gentiles, he can neither say
that the Christians err in woorshipping the cross, nor that the doctrine of
Lactantius in his treatise upon the passion, is different from that which he
him self teaches. In his other books he forbids us to worship idols as
the gentiles did. In this he counsels us to worship the cross of Christ as
the Christians do, which to have been evermore laufull in Christ's church
shall evidently appear, When I come to talk of adoration in the tenth
article.

As for these words: Carent ergo religione simulachra, quia nihil potest esse
coeleste in ea re quae fit ex terra, False and forged images lack religion, be
cause there can be no heavenly thing in that which is made of earth, it is to
be understand, that simulachrum signifies not as M. Calf. translateth it ever
image, but (as Lactantius him self declares and the Etimologie of the word
gives) a feigned or forged image, such as the gentiles images of Jupiter,
Mercury, and Apollo were. In such there is no religion, but much impiety. The
images that Christian men use in their churches are nor feigned, nor forged, but
true images of Christ, and his blessed saints, not honored as Gods, as the
Gentiles idols were, but used to represent unto us Christ and his saints. And
so far forth we do reverence them and worship them, not for the lump of
earth, mass of metal, or piece of timber whereof the are fashioned, but for
their sakes who by them are represented. Directing our hearts to the first
samplers, How Christen me^ vvoorship the cross.
and not fixing our minds upon the work of the artificer, as these two
verses: Nam Deus est quod imago docet, sed non Deus ipsa: Hanc videas, sed
mente colas quod cernis in ipsa, God it is that the Roode does show, it self
no God, but woodde: See this with eye, but serve with mind that thereby is
understood, used of the fathers of the Nicene council do manifestly declare,
and Damascene witness, speaking of the worshipping of the cross. We adore
also the figure of the lively and precious cross, albeit it be made of an
other matter, no worshipping the matter, for God forbid that, but the figure,
as the sign of Christ. By which it is evident that in a thing made of earth,
considered in his own naure there is no religion. But in consideration that it
signifies a holy thing, no Christen man can deny, but that there is such
religion in it, that it deserves honor and reverence of men for the thing
signified. As for example man is made of earth: Consider him in his own
nature, there is nothing in him, but a lump of clay, and mass of sin, not
to be esteemed. Consider him as he is made to the image of God, endued with
grace, and washed from sin in baptism by Christ, there is an heavenly thing
in him worthy to be reverenced. If this sense please not M. Calfhils honor, M.
Calves reason against him self.
let him reason thus with him self. There can be no heavenly thing in that
which is made of earth, but I Sir James Calfhill am a thing made of earth,
ergo there can be no heavenly thing in me, ergo I have nor modesty nor shame,
nor honesty, nor truth, nor charity nor faith, no virtue, nor grace, nor any
other heavenly gift that proceeds from God, an so by laboring to prove that
Lactantius spoke against the images of Christ and his saints, have proved my
self no true member of his church. As for the place of S. August. Crucis
mysterio basilicae dedicantur. Sermon. 19. de Sa^ctis. Calf. Fol. 82. b
Churches are dedicated with the sign of the cross, M. Calf. says, he
speaks of no thing else, but of the mystery of the cross, and not of the
sign, as I ignora^tly translate it, Mart.
where at I meruaill much. For protestants were wounte to be so delited with
signs, that rather tha^ they would lack a sign, they would co^trolle Christ
of impropre speech and where he said: This is my body, make hi^ by their
interpretation say: this is not my body, but the sign of my body. Here and in
other places where me^tio^ is made of a sign, it must not be taken in that
sense, that the authors mean, and words bear well enough, but for the thing
it self, and that only and alone without the sign. Which can not be. For
albeit the passion of Christ does sanctify al things (which all Christian men
do confess) yet is there no sanctification wrought by ordinarye course to man
and the creatures of God, How things are sanctified.
but by prayer and other external means. As for example, It is the passion of
Christ that takes away our sins, but by the element of water and ministry
of man in baptism. It is the passion of Christ that does sanctify his
creatures, 1. Tim. 4.
but, per verbu^ Dei and oratione^, By the word of God and prayer. It is the
passion of Christ that halloweth and consecrateth churches, but by his minister
the Bishop, praying, In 1. Cor. 7.
and making the sign of the cross, which is, as S. Ambrose says: Quaedam
sanctificatio, A certain sanctification. For proof where of, let us examine a
little better, the place of S. Augustine. Sermon. 19. de sanctis.
He says: Crucifixus noster a morte refurrexit and coelos ascendit, crucem
nobis in memoriam suae passionis reliquit, crucem reliquit ad sanitatem. Hoc
signum praesidium est amicis, etc. That is to say: Our savior Christ
crucified, rose from death, and ascended into heaven, he left us the cross in
remembrance of his passion, the cross he left to health, this sign is a
safeguard, to the friends, and a bar to the enemies: with the mystery of the
cross, the font of Baptism is hallowed, with the sign of the same cross,
they that are baptized receive by imposition of hands, the gifts of grace, cum
eiusdem crucis charectere basilica dedicantur, with the sign, or figure of the
same cross, churches are dedicated, aulters consecrated, the sacraments of the
altar with the putting in between of our lords words are made. By this self
same sign priests and Deacons are promoted to holy orders. Thus far S.
Augustine: where it is to be noted, that this ancient father, Christ left us
the cross in remembrance of his passion.
saying that Christ left us the cross in remembrance of his passion, means
that Christ left us a true sign and figure of his cross, otherwise we must
condemn S. Augustine of barbarism, and impropre speech. For if you take,
Crucem, in that place for the passion it self, then must you say, Christ left
his passion in remembrance of his passion, which we re sluttish a figure to
precede from so learned and eloque^t a father.

Neither can M. Calf. have any advantage to escape the force of this place by
the next words following, Crucem reliquit ad sanitatem, he leaft the cross to
health, that is to say to work health to men. For the very sign of the cross
through the merits and virtue of Christ's passion, has wrought health to
many, as the histories declare, and S. Augustine him self wittnesseth in his
books de ciuitate Dei, Libro 22. cap. 8.
where he tells how a gentle woman called Innocentia, was cured of a Cancker
in her breast with the sign of the cross. Besides the words. Hoc signum
praesidiu^ est amicis, This sign is a safeguard to freneds and the rest that
follow, declare manifestly, that he spoke before of the sign of the cross. To
express the same he uses these terms, signu^, mysteriu^, S. August. in this
place speaks of the sign of the cross.
character, Sign, mystery, character, or figure. Whereas if he he had meant
nothing but the passion, it had been sufficient to say: Cruce rudes
cathechizantur, cruce fons regenerationis consecratur, cruce basilicae
dedicantur, etc. The ignorant are thaught with the passion, the font of
baptism is hallowed with the passion, churches are dedicated with the passion.
He would never have used so many words. But he knew both to be necessary.
The passion as the principal from whence all sanctification and holiness
comes, the sign as an instrument by which is it derived unto us, and to the
thing which is to be sanctified. Therefore supposing all Christen men to be
verily persuaded of the first, he thought it expedient to commend the second,
that is to say, the sign of the cross, by which the sanctification specified
before is wrought.

Besides, that the mystery of the cross is taken in this place for the sign
of the cross, it may well apeare by an other place of S. Augustine, De symb. ad
Cathec. lib 2 ca. 1. Act. 1.
where talking of those that were Catechumeni, young learners of their faith,
he says as I mentioned before, ye are not yet borne again by holy baptism,
but ye are conceived in the womb of your holy mother the church, by the sign
of the cross. For here it is evident, that young learners, called
catechumeni, when they were taught the faith received a sign of the cross,
and by that sign were adopted in to the number of Christians, as the manner
was in the primitive church, and by that taught how Christ died, which thing
S. Augustine means here, by these words: Crucis mysterio rudes
cathechizantur, the ignorant are taught with the mystery of the cross. If
this like not our adversaries vain: Let him construe it, and se how it can
serve his purpose. Calf. Rudes, The ignorant, cathechiza^tur, are taught
mysterio, with the mystery, crucis, of the cross. Mart. Well, what ca^e is
mysterio? Calf. The ablative case. Mart. why so? Calfhill. All verbes require
an ablative case of the instrument, of the cause or of the manner of doing.
Mart. Ah, well done Sir, I perceive you have not forgott all your grammar
rules. By your rule then, mystery, in that place signifies, either an
instrument wherewith they were taught, or the cause why they were taught, or the
manner how they were taught: if it be so, then can it in no wise signify the
passion it self. Because the passion is neither the instrument, where with they
were taught, neither the cause why they were taught, nor the manner how they
were taught, but the very thing it self which they were taught, and so brought
to faith in Christ, and hope of eternal salvation, by his death. M Calf.
co^uinced by his gra^mer rules.
Thus by his own co^struction, you may perceive (good readers) that he does,
but cavil and quarrel and deceive the ignorant with some show of words.
Mysterium in that place of S. Augustine can not otherwise be taken in the
judgment of any learned man, than for the sign of the cross: Neither am I to
be accused of ignorance for translating it so, seeing the author him self does
so take it, and reason convince, that it can not be otherwise. Mary I must
confess an error in the printer, who in this place having mysterio in his
copy, but dasshed a little with a pen, and charactere written for it in the
margent, set mysterio, for charactere, mystery for charecter, and so altered S.
Augustins words, as he has done in an other place, for which, pardon would
esely be obtained, if it might be known with what difficulty books are
printed of duitche me^ that understand not our la^guadge. The words of S.
Augustine are: cum eiusdem crucis charactere basilicae dedicantur, with the
charecter or figure of the same cross Churches are dedicated.

What is the charecter or figure of the cross? the passion of Christ as M.
Calfhil imagines? no: but one of the instruments with which churches are
dedicated, in honor of Christ, to celebrate the memory of his passion, the
very sign it self, of which he talks much in that sermon. But to disprove
this, M. Calfhil uses this fond reason. Fol. 82. b Calf.
The sign of the cross is no ordinary mean wherbie God uses to confer
health upon the sick, ergo he has not ordained it to remain in the church
for any remembrance of his death and passion. Profoundely by S. Mary, and like
a clerk, Mart.
if I were acquainted with ever a point maker in VValtam, I would request him
to give this fine logisoner, some halfpenny points, to tie his loose arguments
to gether. For unless they be better tied they will rau^ge so far, that they
will shame that their M. for ever: Diogenes on a time meeti^g a mynstrell that
made as good melody as this minister, makes argument, used this salutation
unto him, Salve galle, God morrow cock, and when the minstrell asked, why he
saluted him after that sort, mary (quothe. Diogenes Laertius.
Quia canens omnes excitas.

Because with your mirry pyping you stir up all. So if a man happily meet
this our ministre early in the morning, he may put of his cappe gently, and
say, Salve galle, God morrow M. Cock, and if he ask a cause why, Diogenes
answer may suffife, Quia omnes excitas, because you stir us up all to
laughter with your gay sophistry. It is much like as if one should say. The
bible is not and ordinary mean whereby God uses to confer healt upon the
sick, M. Calves. reasoning
ergo God has not ordained it to be preached in the Church for a declaration
of his holy will: and so proceeding a little further negatiuely, deny and refuse
the scriptures with the Swenkfeldians. VVherefor good readers beware of this
younker betyme, let him not deceive you any longer with vain words: his
reason has no more truth nor sequel in it, than that, which as you see be is
both impious and blasphemours, and yet you see, how he gloseth it. He tells
a fayer tale that Christ, Calf. Fol 82. b
left us his words to put us in mind of his passion, and the poor and
comfortless Christians to feed our eyes upon: as for the Roode and crucifix,
they may be compared to the gentiles idols. Mart.
Touching the first, no man can deny, but that Christ has left his words to
excite us. But what of that? will M. Calfhill infer upon it, ergo he has
left nothing else beside his word, to put us in mind of his passion? All men
can not read, all men can not come to the church. All men can not here a
sermon, all men can not be in place where M. minister is at all times and all
hours: and has God ordained nothing to put them in mind of the passion of
Christ? That were hard. If you say he has ordained the poor and comfortless
Christians to put us, that is as M. Calf. means in his own person, and his
brothers, Archedeacons, and Chancellers, deanes and superinte^dents, Lords and
Ladies and other that are rich, in remembrance of his death, what is ordained
for the poor, and co^fortlesse them selves, that seldom come to church, that
hear sermons very rare, that scarce have a minister to preach unto them in a
year? has he provided nothing for them? Did Christ take such pain to redeem
them, and now does he forgett to provide for them? No M. Calf. God has
special care of all, and has diverse ways and means besides his word, to
put us in remembrance of the death of our Saluiour Christ. Of which seeing it
has pleased his divine majesty to ordain by general councels (to which he
promised the assistance of his grace) and appointed by the prelates of the
church (to whom he committed the chardg and government of his flock) the
sign of the cross and images to be one, what impiety is there in you to
liken them to the ge^tils idols, and judge Christen men to be idolatours?
Intolerable I assure you. The blessed martyr Iustine says: Quaest. 149
If to such impiety which opinion and imagination only breadeth talk and
assertion be added, the impiety is made more greater. If it be both affirmed,
and put out in writing, of necessity such ungodliness compriseth all malice and
wickedness.

Your digression and wild wandering talk, Fol. 83. a
and places alleged out of S. Augustine, make nothing against our images. All
is spoken against the idols of the gentills, which we detest. In his days
Christen men had images, yea in the churches, as I have declared in the
preface, and proved M. Calf. both to misconter, and also to falsify S.
Augustines words. Wherefore credit him accordingly, and never think that so
ancient a father, and learned bishop as S. Augustine was, could be so fondly
affected, as he ymagineth against the use of the images of Christ and his
saints amongst Christians in the church.

To come to Paulinus, Fol. 84. a- Calf. Paulinus.
our adversary grants that a leven hundred years a go, the sign of the
cross was erected in some churches, but he says, it suffiseth not to say,
Mart.
this was once so, but proved it must be, that it was well so. The prescription
of a leven hundred years, the use of Christen people, the authority of so
ancient a father, as Paulinus was, will not serve to dispute against
heretics: we must find manifest and evident proof, yea and that in the
scripture, that they did well in having crosses in the churches, or else it
shall not prevail, nor then neither: What hardness of heart and incredulity
is this? S. Bernard was wont to say, that it was: Imperfecti cordis, De
praecepto and dispe^satione (...).
and infirmae voluntatis indicium statuta seniorum curiosius discutere, etc. A
token of an imperfect heart, and weak will, to discuss somewhat curiously the
ordinances of their elders, to stick at all that is enjoined, to require a
reason of every thing and to suspect evil of every precept the cause whereof
is not known, neither to obey willingly at any time, unless they hear, that
which happily please them, or plain reason or undoubted authority, do
evidently show, not to be otherwise lawful and expedient. And certes so may
we say of M. Calf. requiring proof, that the ancient fathers did well in
governing the church of Christ committed unto their chardge. But seeing it
pleases him to have it proved that it was well done, I will reason thus with
him. Paulinus that hearing (as S. Hierome says) those words of our savior,
Epist. ad Pauli. de instit. Mona^hi.
if thou will be perfect, sell all that thou have, and follow me, turned words
into works and following the naked cross clymed up the lader of Jacob, and
reioised that he was poor, and puris manibus and candido pectore, and spiritu
and operibus, with clean hands, sincere heart, both in spirit and all his
works, Paulinus (as S. Ambrose says) nulli secundus, second to none,
Paulinus that gave away all his goods, Libro 6. epist 36. ad Sabi.
Quo impensius Deo seruiret: that he might serve God more earnestly, Paulinus
Bishop of Nola* copiosissime Lib 1. cap 10. de ciuit* Dei.
sanctus, abundantly holy (as S. Augustine says) seaking God in simplicity
of his heart, Epist. 32. ad Pauli.
sentiens de illo in bonitate, and afferens ei claritatem et honorem, thinking
of God in goodness, and bringing unto him glory and honor, Epist. 34 Lib. 3.
dial. cap. 1.
Whose breast is such an oracle of God, that we presumed to have answers given
from thence to the most babbling questions, Paulinus (as S. Gregory says) Vir
domini, the man of god, that gave all that he had to poor and nedy captives,
This Paulinus, I say, so holy, so virtuous, and so learned a bishop, set up
the sign of the cross in his church at Nola, and desired others by his
letters to do the like, and no Catholic Bishop or general council did ever
find fault with him, ergo it was well done. If he deny this argument I prove
it after this sort? Whatsoever any holy and learned father, skilful in the
scriptures of God, and right sense of the same did at any time, and was never
controlled of any catholic and learned father for the doing of it, was well
done, and must so be taken. But Paulinus an holy and learned bishop etc. did set
up the sign of the cross in his church: and was never controlled of any
learned and catholic for it: Ergo it was well done. De corona militis.
If M. Calf. reply, and say, it was done without warrant of scripture or
commandment from God, Let Tertullian answer, he says: Do not thoue think
it laufull for every faithful man to conceive and ordain, especially that
which is agreeable with God, which is expedient for discipline and good order,
which is profitable to salvation? seeing our lord says? Why do ye not judge
of your selves that which is good? etc. If that will not serve, Let S. August.
answer, who in one place says thus: Lib. 50. homi. 49
I fully and wholly warn you of this. I require you, I command you, the
bishop commands you, Christ commands by me. In another place he says:
God has spoke by Angels, by Prophets, by his own mouth, In Psalm. 49
by his Apostles he him self speaks by his faithful servants, by such a
simple man as I am he speaks, when I speak the truth, he makes a sound
every where, tangendo, modificando and inspirando. By touching directing, and
inspiring their hearts. By which it is manifest that what soever is done, by
the bisshops and faithful dispensers of Christ's mysteries in the unity of the
church to the honor of God, is done by God him self, who gives his stewards
commission here in earth, to plant, and sow the seed of his Gospel, and
work all things they ca^, to the edifying of his body, Ephesians 4.
which is the church until we meet all in the unity of faith and knoweledg
of the son of God. So that M. Calf. neadeth no longer doubt, but that it was
well done to set up the sign of the cross in the church, seeing it was done
by so learned and holy a bishop, and faithful steward of Christ, as Paulinus
was, who knowing his masters will in his scriptures, would never aduentred to
have set up that sign, if from the beginning of Genesis to the last letter of
the Apocalypse, which he had oftentimes read, and profundely tried) he could
have found any precept, or clause that did fobid it.

Whereas he chardgeth Paulinus, for commending a woman, Fol. 84. b. Calf.
that separated her self from her own husband under pretense of religion, and
cites in the marge^t the 3. epistle ad Aprium. I give him to understand, Mart.
that he foully reports this holy father. In all his third Epistle, ad Aprium,
there is no such thing to be found, but the contrary. Whereby it apeareth,
Paulinus sclaundered.
that M. Calfhil trusts Melanchton, Luthers slave to much, and would not
remove his eye from the book which he made (de ecclesia) of the church, to
the original and epistle of Paulinus, where the very argument shows, that he
commends Apers wife, because she abstayned from wedlock woork, by the consent
of her husband, according to S. Paul's counsel.

In the epistle it self there be two notable places, that convince this to be
an open sclander. The first is this: Benedicti vos domino etc. You are blessed
of God, who made both one, hyding two in him self, woorking miracles alone,
who turns not only souls, but affections, changing temporal things, into
such as are everlasting. Behold, ye that were before one, man and wife, are
not now man and wife, as ye were. You being the same, are not the same. As ye
did not know Christ in fleash: So you do not know one an other according to
the fleash. Haec mutatio dextrae excelsi. This change is of the right hand of
the highest. The second place is this: Non illam a proposito tuo discors
abiungit volu^tas. No disagreing will, does separate her from thy purpose. But
(which is more marvel) one uniform faith does divide her in woork, that is
joined in will. By which it is evident that Aper and his wife did very well
agree together, and separated them selves by mutual consent, from carnal
company. Aper entering into holy orders, and made a bishop, his wife remaining
in the state she was before, addressing her husbands woordly things, and not
refusing his company, as M. Calf. falsely affirms without mutual consent
under cloak of religion.

Fol. 84. b
Besides where he says that Paulinus affirms that the book of the epistles
which the Apostles wrote, laid unto diseases healed them, A lie fathred upon
Paulinus.
and alleges for it, his verses, ad Cytherium, tracke him he that will and he
shall take him in a lie, and well understand that he leaves the goodly
pleasant ryuers, and fissheth in durtie puddells and stinking lakes. First
Paulinus there, speaks not in general of the books of the Apostles
epistles, but of the book of S. Paul's epistles only. Then he says not that
they were laid unto diseases, but tells how one Martinianus, with other
Christians, being in danger of drowning, was preserved by that book, through
the goodness of God, who as he he gave. S. Paul ones, all their lives that were
in the peril of death upon the sea, so he gave Martinianus and his company at
that time. But as for any one fillable of leying it unto diseases, it is not
there to be found. Wherefore what credit shall we give to this cross byter,
who with a false sclander and vain lie, labors to discredit so ancient a
father? Any more then to a sclanderer and liar? He that lysteth to be deceived
may: he that leeketh to understand the truth will better try, ere he trust, if
he be wise.

If Paulinus had either commended Apre wifes, for separating her self from her
husband without mutual consent, or affirmed that the books of the apostles
epistles laid to deseases healed them, yet should the word of God have never
the less force, nor medicines be abhorred, nor men accounted fools for
imitating of him, in setting up the sign of the cross. For where a Doctor
swarueth from scripture, no man ought to follow him: where he speaks not
against the scripture, but tends to edifying, and has the use of the church
and consent of all Catholic Bishops for that doctrine, therein whosoever does
not follow him shall be acompted but an arroga^t fool, Confidens in stultitia
sua, trusting in his own folly. Prouer. 17


Now let us consider, what he says against Justinians co^stitutions, and
custom of the Church. First he says, Iustinianus. Calf. Fol. 84 b Fol 8^. a
Mart.
that the order taken by Justinians constitutions, That no man build a
church, before the Bishop has consecrated the place with prayer, and set up
the sign of the cross, is but politic, as he answered to the Synod kept at
Orleance, and no matter of Religion. But let me ask him this question. If it
were only a civil policy, why was it not done by a civil magistrate whom God
has ordained to rule in politic matters and civil affairs? If it were no
matter of religion why is the bishop required to be there? Why is he willed to
hold up his hands to heaven, to hallowe the place with prayer? and to set up a
cross, more than any other thing? Is it not the mark that signeth, Emperors
and kings, princes, and dukes and all that will be saved by christ, in the
forhead? Is it not the mark and sign as Justinian says) nostrae salutis, of
our salvation? No Christen man believing that our redemption was wrought upon
the cross, can think otherwise. The Bishop then being religious for his
person, the lifting up of his hands praying, and consecrating, pertaining to
religion, why should, the setting up of the cross required to be done, as well
as the rest, and that with prayer and consecration, which pertain to religion,
and by a bishop who is religious, why I say should it be politic only and no
matter of religion? M. Calf. forgeteth his old logic rule, that says
similium idem est iudicium, of things that are like we must have like
judgment. If he do so, yet I trust he remembers his grammar rule that
teaches him, that all that belong to one thing must be put in one case. The
bishop that dedicateth the church is religious, the holding up of his hands,
and consecraring with prayer pertayne to religion. Therefore the sign of the
cross, which is one of the three things, that Justinian requires in
dedicating of a church, is a matter of religion, as well as the rest, and not
politic and civil, as our you^ge M. pretends: but put case that it
appartayneth to the external policy of the church? May there any unlawful
thing be allowed, for the setti^g forth the policy of the church? No. But let
that be pardoned. why says he: that Justinian lived in the time of great
ignorance and barbaritie, Fol. 85. a.
and enacted a thing contrary to truth? If there were nothing else, the writing
of the civil law, Justinian lived not in time of ignorance.
might plainly convince against him, that men of those days were neither
ignorant, nor barbarous. It is so wittely conceived, and so eloquently penned,
that if wisdom were to be sought, and eloquence lost, they might be found
t^^re. In his time lived Priscianus, a notable gra^marian. Procopius, a learned
historiographer, Arator, a divine poet. Cassiodorus a notable divine,
Benedictus, a virtuous and learned abbot. S. Medard, and Gildard both Bishops
and Brothers by one father, and mother, Vide Pantaleon.
Doctissimi, very excenllently learned, Siluerius pietate and eruditione
pollens, notable for Godlynes and lerning. In his time the fifth general
council was kept at Constantinople against iiij. famous heretics, Peter,
Anthymus, Seuerus and Zoaras, to the which Epiphanius, bishop of Tyrus, and
other learned Bisshops under him sent their learned epistles, by which it is
easy to be perceived that Justinian lived not in the time of ignorance and
barbaritie.

As for his laws whether he enacted any thing contrary to a truth, let such as
have authority judge. They that are bound to live according to the prescript
of laws, must not sit in judgment of the equity of the laws. It is an evil
common weal, where every theafe may say, the laws of the lawful prince are
enacted conrrary to a truth. Yet such is the audacitie of heretics that
whatsoever law likes not their ligier and light brains, they will say it is
enacted contrary to a truth. But how prove you M. Calfhill that this law of
Justinian is enacted contrary to a truth? Has Christ who is truth it self,
forbidden it? Has the word of God (which is infallibly true) inhibited it?
Have any Apostle or general council ruled by the holy Ghost condemned it? If
it be so open your secrets, and communicate them with us. We read the
scriptures and can find no such inhibition. We turn over the counsels, and
can note no such countermaunde. The daily practice of the church assisted,
according to Christ's promise with the holy Ghost, shows us the contrary. Pius
the fourth of blessed memory, building a church in these later days,
hallowed it him self, and according to the order of the Canons, and this law
of Justinian set up there: Venerabilem crucem, signum salutis nostrae. A
reverend cross the sign of our salvation Which is a material cross, M.
Calf. a cross in the fourth signification, of the which I promised to speak.
Look to my division in the first Article, and if you find it so, then deceive
not the simple with inuerting my words. And seeing you account, Iustinia^s
authority grave that calls the cross, venerabilem, adorandam, and vere
honorandam, reverend, worthy to be adored, and truly worshipped, and
accompteth it, Signum salutis nostrae: The sign of our salvation, think your
own head, but fantastical, and judgment very light, for accompting it
impious, and blasphemous, and calling it an heathenish observance, a magical
inchauntme^t, and conquest against Christians.

With all, consider that you gain nothing but shame to your self: every boy
in the schools can tell you, that, opponere non est soluere: An objection far
from the matter, is no answer. The constitution that you bring of Valens and
Theodosius, against the law of Justinian, Fol 85. a Vale^s and Theodosius.
is borrowed out of the image homily, and that which you attribute to Petrus
Crinitus the homily author refers to one Petrus Erinilus. In the which you
are both grossly deceived, you for trusting Petrus Crinitus, as a received
author, who lived but of late years, and was of no fame, nor profounde
lerning, but skilled in points of humanity, like a peda^te of Italy: He for
fathering that upon an author whose name is a well known as the man in the moon. We may perceive what narrow shifts you seek, when for a proof of so
ancient a law, you repair to him that lived in a manner, but yesterday. Sweet
flowers be rare where nettels, are so made of. Good authors scant, where an
humanitian, a scholemaster, and a late writer is alleged, for a received
author. Let me use your own Rhethorick. No such co^stitutio^ of Valens and
Theodosius to beseene in amy ancient author as M. Calf. allegeth.
If Valens and Theodosius, made such a law what an oversight was it of
Eusebius to suppress it? What an escape of Sozomenus and other
historiographers, to forgett it? What negligence in the fathers of Nice that
could not epsy it? what evil chance that it never came into the Code of
Iustinia^ with other Emperors co^stitutio^s? In good sooth he had need to
have as many eyes as Argus and then thousand more, that should find that
constitution, Which was never made. The constitution that you cite out of
Peter Crinite, has no appearance of truth. Vale^s and Thedosius never lived to
gether. Lib. 1 Ti. 8
Valens and Theodosius the second never reigned together, much less made this
constitution. The constitution which you mean was made by Theodosius and
Valentinian and is registered in the Code of Justinian in this sort: Seeing we
have a dilligent care to maintain the religion of God, in all points, we
specially command that it be laufull for no man to engraue, or paynte the
sign of our Savior Christ, either in the grownde or in flint, or in marble
stones leyed upon the grownde, but whatsoever cross is found (so painted or
engraued (we command it to be taken away, and will him to be severely
punished that shall attempt the contrary to our ordinances. Thus much
Theodosius, and Valentinian. And what has M. Calf. gained by this, but an
opinion of folly, that had rather trust Peter Crinite, a late writer, than
seek to the original, and try out the truth.

Now then seeing we have found the true constitution, not of Valens and
Theodosius, but of Theodosius and Vale^tinian, let us see whether it makes not
much for the honor of the cross. First they call it: Signu^ saluatoris
Christi, the sign of our savior Christ. If it be his sign, the^ is it
honorable. For all that is his, is holy, The cross the sign of our savior.
and worthy of all honor. Again if it be the sign of our savior Christ,
the^ is it nor magical inchauntement, nor co^iurers mace, nor helmet of hell,
nor conquest against the Christians, as M. Calf. says. For as there is no
society between Christ and Belial, so is there no likeness between those
things that appartayne to Christ and Belial. Besides the good Emperors would
not have it trodde upon. Nor vilanously abused, and therefore did forbid it to
be printed upon the grownde, and in forbidding that, they tought they should
maintain the religion of God. But M. Calf. and his co^panious think the
throwing of it down and tredding it under their feet, and vilanous abusing of
it, to be a mayntenance of the religion of God, even as the infidells and jews
thought they should do God very acceptable service, if the destroyed the faith,
and religion of Christ. Wherein how far they are wide from the piety and
zeal of those good Emperors, every indifferent man may see: And note withal,
that the scalding sprite of scolding eloquence, M. Calf^. phrase. Fol. 85. b
propre to protestants, came fiercely with some raging heat upon M. Calf. when
he thought to shift away the authority of the church by calling it, the
Synagoge of Satan. That sclaunderous term is often in their writings, but
oftener in their mouths. Fol. 85. b
But tell us O, ye Evangelical brotherne that will admit nothing but
scripture, that brag unto the people that you preach nothing, but the word of
the lord, and boldly say that you follow the ancient fathers of the
primitive church, tell us, I say, Fol. 143. The comme^dation which the fathers
give the church of Rome.
where find you in all scripture, that the church of Rome is called the
Synagog of Satan? What ancient father does so report of it? What doctor of
the primitive church does so term it? I told you in my conclusion that by
Ignatius (who lived within an hundred and eleven years next after Christ) the
Church of of Rome where Peter had his seat, was called, a church sanctified,
and lightened with the will of God, president and chief in the nation of the
Romans: worthy of God for faith, preeminence, blessedness, and peace: founded
in the faith and love of Christ: I told you out of S. Cypria^, that it is
called the principal church, from whence the priestly unity is sprounge: out
of Irenaeus, that it is the church to which all Christen me^ must come for the
mightier principality, and preemine^ce. I told you out of S. Amb. that it is
the house of God: out of Leo, that is a scholar of truth, an holy nation a
priestly and princely city, made by the holy seat of Peter the head of the
world. I told you, out of Theodoritus, that is the greatest church, the most
noblest church, and the church that has the preside^ceshipp over all nations:
out of the oration of Martinianus the Emperor and Laws of Justinian, that it
is called, the Apostolical throne, the country of laws, the fountain of
priesthode, Find us your terms that you give to the church of Rome, in the
fathers M. Calf? Fol. 85. b
and head of all churches. Why beleaue ye not them? If ye will be children of
the ancient fathers, why vary you in principal points, from those things
that the fathers have written? Why say you that ever sythens, Syluesters time
which was in the year of our lord 318. such fylth of idolatry and
superstition has flowed into the most parts of all Christendom out of the
synke of Rome that he neded as many eyes as Argus, that should have espied any
sincerity until the time that heretics, and miscreants began to reform the
decaid state? Irenaeus calls it Ecclesiam maximam, antiquissimam, omnibus
cognitam, a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo fundatam, Lib. 3.
ca. 3.
a great church, a most ancient church, a church known to all, a church
founded of the two glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. S. Cyprian says:
It is the only church to which infidelity could never have access. Epist. ad
Damas.
And sithe^s Syluestres time, S. Hierome said. The holy church of Rome, which
has always remained unspotted, shall contynewe always, God providing for it,
and S. Peter helping, without the insultation of heretics, and persist
steadfast and immouable always. Again in the same epistle he says: The evil
child being banished from the patrimony, the authority of the fathers
remains vncorrupt, with you only. Ibi cespite terra faecundo dominici seminis
veritatem centeno fructu refert. There the grownde with her fertile soil, does
bring forth the truth of our lords seed with an hundred fold increase. S.
Ambrose says, Epist. ad Siricium Papa. Epist. 162.
that the church of Rome does observe the faith of the Apostles undefiled and
without bleamish. S. Augustine says, that in the church of Rome, semper
Apostolica cathedra viguit principatus. The principality of the Apostolic
chaier has always flourished. The same father reckoning up all the Bishops of
Rome from S. Peter unto Anastasius, Epist. 165.
who was the sixth Pope after Siluester, says: Of al those, there was: Nullus
Donatista, never a Donatist, not one traitor. Now if any of the six, that S.
Augustine reckons after Siluester, had suffered idolatry, and superstition,
to flow out of the Synke of Rome into the most parts of Christendom (as you
say) they had been worse than Donatistes, worse than traitors. But by S.
Augustines judgment there was no heresy, nor traison in that see, much less
idolatry, and superstition.

S. Bernard, said, In the church of Rome, fides non potest sentire defectu^:
Epist. 190. ad Innocent. Papa.
faith can feel no defect. And with what face ca^ you say that these twelve
hundred years and more, there was no sincerity in the church of Rome, but
idolatry and superstition? If it be so how was the promise of Christ made to
S. Peter, Matt. 16. Matt. 28.
that hell gates should not prevail against the church fulfilled? How has
Christ kept his covenant that said. Behold I am with you all days until the
end of the world? How has the holyghost of who me it was said, Ille suggerei
vobis omnia, and docebit omnem veritatem, Joan. 14. Joan. 16.
he shall prompt unto you all things, and teach you all truth, discardged his
office? How are S. Paul's words verified that said, the church is, columna
and firmame^tum veritatis, the pillar and foundation of truth? 1. Tim. 3.
Let us have your judgment. For if the most parts of all Christendom were
from the time of Siluester twelve hundred years in idolatry and superstition,
without any piece of sincerity, hell gates prevailed against Christendom,
Christ was not faithful in his promise, the hoylyghost not careful in his
government, S. Paul not wise in his words.

If you say, that Christ had his church remanyning in some countries not
withstanding the most parts of all Christendom fell into idolatry and
superstition, we tell you that this is plain against scripture. Christ's
church is Catholic, and universal, dispersed through out the whole world. It
remains not in corners and coasts as heresies do. God promised Abraham,
Gene. 26. Psalm. 2.
that in his seed all nations should be blessed, he says to Christ ask of
me and I will give thee nations for thy inheritance, and the ends of the
world, for thy possession. If the the whole world is Christ's possession, and
the whole world is his inheritance, his church must needs be universal in the
world, and not be shut up in this or that corner. The Donatistes were in that
heresy, that the church which was ones universal, decayed and rested with
few in Afrike, In Psalm. 101.
as you be now. But S. Augustine said, they that say so, be not in that
chuch. He accompteth their voice that say so, abominable and detestable, full
of presumption and falsitie, bolstred with no truth, lightened with no wisdom,
tempered with no wit, but vain, rash hedlong, and pernicious, as you may and
see in the fortress of faith, set forth by M. Stapleton of late, Fol. 18.
discussed at large.

Again if Christ had a church in some corner all that time, you must tell us
where it was. The church of Christ is visible, as a city set upon an hill,
Matt. 5. Matt. 18.
it can not be hid, men must resort unto it. Christ willing us to tell the
church if occasion so served, meant that his church should be known.
Wherefore if twelve hundred years and more, idolatry and superstition flowed
so into the most parts of Criste^dome, Fol. 85. b
that he neded as many eyes (as Argus that should have espied any piece of
sincerity, I would you and your fellows would vouchesafe to use some honest
conference, and upon an uniform accord signify unto us in writing, Diverse
opinions amongst protestants for the time when the church began to decay.
Fol. 85. b Fol. 96. a.
why and when Christ lost his church, through out the world, and suddenly
began to have it amongst protestants. As yet you are not agreed when Christ's
Church began to fail: you say here that sythens Siluesters time, idolatry
and superstition flowed into most parts of Christendom: In an other place,
you say that within.cc. years after Christ many idle ceremonies, crept into the
church, and the simplicity of Christ's ordinance was refused. Luther said the
church decayed after v. hu^derd years, the M. of the martyrologe after a M.
years, M. Iuel, after six hundred. So that as yet there is a great variety
between the gospellers, when the church began to fail. Wherefore seeing my
request is reasonable, Epist 161.
such as S. Augustine made to the Donatistes, let us learn of your wisdoms
when the church failed, where it has been sythens, and how it came thither,
what Bisshops it had, and by what succession it continued. Tertullian required
heretics to show the beginning of their churches, In prescr.
and declare the order of their bisshops, running so down lineallye by
succession, that the first bishop had one of the Apostles, or Apostolic men,
Prove your succession M. Calf. shevve the begynni^g and continuance of your
church. In Psalm 18 The Catholic church alvvayes visible. Luc. 15.
his author and predecessor: as the church of Smyrna had Polycarpe placed of
S. John, and the church of Rome S. Clement ordained by S. Peter. The same must
we require of you. For Christ had ever more a visible church in earth. For
God, says S. August. Has placed his tabernacle in the sun, that is his holy
church, he placed his Church is an open place, not in secret, not that it
should lurk in a corner, not that it should be as it were secret, lest
peradventure, it might be as it were secret, as the conuenticles of heretics
are. He has placed his tabernacle in the sun: why do thou o heretic flee
into darcknes? Art thou a Christen man? Here Christ. Art thou his serua^te?
Here thy lord. Art thou his son? Here thy father. A me^d, reuyue again, let
us say of the, he was dead and is reuyued again, he was lost, and is found
again* Now if you M. Calf. can show no such church set upon a mountain, or
placed in the sun, as I am sure you can not, think this spoken to you, and
be not ashamed to learn of S. Augustine, where he says against the Manichees,
There be many things which keep me justly in the bosom of the catholic
church. The consent of all people and nations do keep me: Co^t epist. Manich.
cap. 4.
the authority begone with miracles, Nourrished with hope, increased with
charity, and established with antiquity, does keep me. The Catholic church
ever prevailed against heresy.
The succession of Bishops from the seat of the Apostle S. Peter, to whom
Christ committed the feading of his sheep after his resurrection, until this
Bishop that presently possesses the place, does keep me. Finally the name of
the Catholic Church, does keep me, which has only so prevailed against
heresies, that whereas all heretics would be called Catholics yet for all
that, when a stranger asks where, or whether, he shall go to the Catholic
Church, none dares show any Church or house. By which you may see that the
Church of Rome, has ever prevailed against heresies, The succession of
bisshops in the church of Rome. asure bo^de to stay me^ in the Catholic church.
and that the succession of Bisshops in that Seat is a sure bond to stay men
in the Catholic church, and such, as stayed S. Augustine him self at that
present, who was long after Syluesters time; and a man that knew the
scriptures to well, to be deceived either with idololatrie, or superstition.
Wherefore both you and your fellow protestants must either deny, that Christ
had any church these twelve hundred years, or recant your vilanous terms, and
sclanderous words, in saying that the church of Rome, is the Synagog of Satan
and synke of idolatrye and superstition. For as I proved out of the fathers, it
is the only church, that has condemned all superstition, and idolatry. It is
the church that has ever prevailed against heresy and shall never be over
thowe^, No, not by hell gates, and all the power of the devil: or else deny
your selves to be children, of the church and followers of the au^cie^t
fathers. For either they were deceived, or ye be liars. Besides, that the
church, of Rome is the Catholic church or at the least wise, the root and
mother of the Catholic church it apeareth by Cypria^, S. Ambr. S. Hierome,
Libro 4. Epist 2. Libro 4. epist 8. He that vvil be a Catholic must
communicate with the church of Rome.

In Orat. fu. de obit. fra.

Ad Dama^^. Au^ent. tit 4.


and Justinian. By S. Cyprian who says, to be with Cornelius (who was bishop
of Rome) was to communicate with the Catholic church: to allow and firmly
hold the co^munitie of Cornelius, was to hold and firmly keep, the unity and
Charity of the Catholic Church. S. Ambr. says, to be one of the Catholic
Bisshops is to agree with the church of Rome. S. Hierome, tells, that every
one that gathers not with the bishop of Rome scattreth. Iustinia^ says,
the Church of Rome is matter omnium sanctaru^ Ecclesiaru^: The mother of all
holy churches. Wherefore if any church is to be followed, this is to be
followed, if any is to be obeyed, this is to be obeyed. If the tradition or
custom of any church is to be kept, the tradition and custom of the church
of Rome is to be kept.

Because it never admitteh any custom that is contrary either to reason, or
truth, but condemns then, that despise the truth and follow customs, as the
eight distinction in the decres, does plainly declare, and with all concludes
that when truth bears with custom, Custom. Cap frustra did. 8
nothing should be more firmly holden than custom. Therefore if M. Calf. would
have gained any thing by disanulling their custom, he should have proved
first, that it is against either reason, or truth: and then have alleged the
Canons against us, for presuming to build upon custom. But that passes his
capacity: De bapt. cont. Donatist lib. 2. cap. 8.
his London learning could not streatch so far. S. Augustine talking of the
custom that the church had to receive them by imposition of hands who had been baptized of heretics, beleaued that, that custom came of the tradition of
the Apostles. As many things are not found in their writings, neither in the
counsels of their aftercummers, yet for all that, because they are kept
through the universal church, they are beleaued to have be^ delyured and
commanded of none, but of the Apostles. Here I beseek you mark, S. Augustins
reason: he proves that certain things not written in scripture, nor
determined in councels, were beleaued to have been delyured, and commended of
the Apostles, Things generally used beleaued to come from the Apostles. De
corona mil it is.
because they were used generally in the Church, which reason Tertullian also
used long before. For speaking of an old observance he says, if no scripture
has determined this, certes custom has strenghtned it, which vndoubtidly
proceeded out of tradition. For how can a thing, be used, unless it were left
first by tradition? So that it is to be understood, that if there were neither
scripture, nor council, that made, for the use, and having of the sign of the
cross, yet seeing it has been generally used in all Christendom, Custom.
this twelve hundred years ever sythens pope Siluesters ryme, by M. Calfhils
own confession, this general and ancient custom, were a sufficient argument
to prove that it was delyured, an commended unto the church by the Apostles,
neither against reason, In co^tradictorio Iud. cio.
nor scripture. But thanks be to God besides tradition, we have Cou^cells of
the bisshops and laws of the Emperors whose authority is more weightier than
can be blown away with the belowing blast, of such a quarrelling Calf.

As for his sclandring the virtuous lady Helena with superstition, I will talk
in the eight Article. Fol. 86. a
As for his synistrous surmises that the Christian Emperor Constantine would
have some piece of Ge^tilitie observed in building of churches, Fol. 86. b
I count as vain. His tongue is no slander. As for the reputing the decrees
of Siluester, Donation of Constantine, apparation of Peter and Paul to be
tales and impudent lies, I do not meruel. Fol. 86 b
Heretics will deny the most vndoubtedst truth, that is, yea the plain
words of scripture it self, if it make against them. as Luther denied the
epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, S. James epistle and S. Iudes, and the
Apocalipse of S. John.

As for his comparing Jonas Bishop of Orleaunce, a great learned man, that
lived eight hundred years sythens, and more, unto a netle, Fol. 87. a
it is not rare, with protestants. No man is learned, no man worthy of credit,
if he favor not heresy. Wherefore gentle readers since M. Calfhills
conjectures against Abdias be but vain, since his disprouing of the authorities
brought out of S, Ambrose, Lactantius, Paulinus, and S. Augustine and general
counsels is convinced, to be but mere quarreling, since it is declared, that
the catholic church ca^ not be shut up in corners, but must be dispersed,
through out the woorld, contrary to his, and all the protestants prating, Since
all truth is proved to have issued out of the church of Rome, as the undoubted
fou^tayne of all true Christianity, Since it is convinced by undoubted
testimonies, that the church of Rome is teacher of all truth, and enemy to
all infidelity, superstitition and idolatry, Since the custom, to have the
sign of the cross in churches, chapels, and oratories, came first by
tradition from the Apostles, and afterward was confirmed by general counsels,
and laws of Emperors, to have been used always where true Christianity has
had his force, as you love Christ crucified on the cross, be not ashamed to
have the sign of his cross in your churches, chapels and oratories, and al
other places what so ever they be deputed to Gods honor and service.

THAT THE SIGN OF THE CROSS WAS USED IN ALL SACRAMENTS. etc. THE FOVRTH
ARTICLE.
ALbeit you have M. Calfhil battred like Solyma^s blouddy Bassa, against the
material cross of Christ, and used all violence that you can, to raze it up,
and ley it flat upon the ground, yet may you see, that no shot of yours have
pierced, but rebounded back again, and put the gunner in danger. And as that
triumphant sign of victory stands, displayed upon the walls, for all your
force: So keep I both watch and ward and flee not from the walls into any
other castle, than I took my self unto before. From thence you shall never be
able to drive me with all the fire you can make. I have heard of some that
carrying fire to mischiue others, have been burned to ashes them selves.
Wherefore by my counsel you shall do well to take heed, how you meddle to
much with fire. A little sparkle may kendle to a great flame. And one in a
castle is not fiered out but with long siedge and some perilous attempt. But
let us mark what flames of fire you make.

You acknowledge, Fol 87. Fol 88. ^ Calf.
that the Christians used crossing to testify their faith in despite of their
masters enemies: And that upon zeal and devotion, the fathers admitted the
sign of the cross into Gods service, as a laudable ceremony, and whished all
men to use it. But you seeing some superstitions men to abuse it, and of a
ceremony make a necessity, and noting that the people bend not their hearts,
The Christians scla^dered.
to the consideration of the heavenly mystery, but defixe their eyes, and
repose their affiance in the earthly sign, were forced to refuse it.

Mart.
Here to omit your false sclandring the fathers for superstition and abuse of
the sign of the cross, and unjust co^demning Christen people of forsaking
God, and putting their affiance in a sign, because you say you were forced to
refuse the sign, Let me ask you first, who forced you to refuse it, but your
own wilfulnes? Secondarely what are you? From what coasts come you? Who
made your ministres in Christ's church? Who called you when you stood idle
in the market, Matt. 20.
and sent you into Gods vynearde? What laufull bishop gave you authority to
preach and ministre the sacraments? Let us have your evidence and see, or else
we will say unto you with Tertullia^, De praesct.
putting in certain names of our new heretics, Tertullia^s question applied
to our ministers. Answer sires.
for his old, what do ye in my grownde, being no work men of mine? By what
right do ye cut down my wooddes M. Horn? By what authority do you
transuert and turn away my fountaynes M. Iuel? By what commission do ye
remove my bounds M. Grindal? And all ye other ministers why sow ye and feed
ye here, at your pleasure? It is my possession, I have possessed it long, I
possessed it before you. I have sure evidence and originals even from the
lords whose inheritance it was. I am the heir of the Apostles. As they
ordained in their testament, as they committed it to my chardge, as they
adjured me, so I keep it. As for you, they have disherited you always as
foreners and enemies. If you can not show your vocation to be laufull,
according to Christ's institution, and ordinance of his church, then will it
follow that you are no true ministres, and dispensers of his mysteries, nor
prelates, that have charge to rule Gods people, and therefore have no authority
to do what ye please, and refuse what ye list. For he that can not make a law,
can not refuse a law that is made. The use of the sign of the cross then,
being a tradition deryued from the Apostels, and generally received in
Christ's catholic church, and things received by tradition having as S.
Hierome says: authoritate^ scriptaelegis, Authority of a written law,
Aduersus Luciferia.
you ca^ not justly violate and break this law, unless you will set your
selves wilfully against Christ, and the holy Ghost. For as S. Cyprian says:
Sermon. de Ablut. p^dum.
That is no less ratified which the Apostles delivered by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost, than that which Christ him self delivered.

The authority which you bring out of S. Augustine and S. Gregorye to prove
that things ones received, Fol 88. a
may for circumstances of persons, time or place, or other considerations be
changed, I admit with all my heart: The protestants have no authority to
make any ecclesiastical. laws.
and confess that things ones received, may for circumstances be changed, in
such sort, and such things as they mean. But by whom must they be altered and
changed M. Calf.? of every private man? No: but of those that have authority
to make a law: and that authority lack you and your congregation, who having
no bishops, ca^ make no Ecclesiastical laws, nor abrogate the old? if you
will press us with your Synodes, we will prove unto you, that if you had as
may apostaticall bishops, as you have ministres and priests, it would avayle
no more then a goose feather in the Tems, Seeing the ecclesiastical rule
commands that no councels should be kept contrary, or besides the mind of
the bishop of Rome, and Julius the first writing for Athanasius to the
bisshops of the east says unto them, your rule nor has, nor can have, any
force, Lib. 4. ca. 9. Tripart. No council to be kept without the consent of
the Bishop of Rome.
because that council was not kept of Catholic Bisshops, nor had a legate from
the church of Rome, whereas the canons command that counsels ought not to be
kept without his authority. Wherefore you condemn your self and all your sect
of much arogancie, who being but private men, not called to the offices which
you presumptiously usurp, by any laufull means, nor hired of any true
gardener, that has the custody of Christ's vynearde, do take upon you to
refuse the laws that your forefathers made and Christen people have hitherto
observed.

Where you talk of compulsion and say, Fol. 88. ^
that you were forced to refuse that laudable ceremonye, It is well known that
there was never violence used against any protestant to make him renie the
Catholic faith, or sign of the cross, and that you were not otherwise
forced, than voluntate, by your own wilfulnes. But if great violence had been
used to force you unto it, you should rather have suffered, all torments then
have broken the unity of the church, knowing, that it is more gloriouse to
suffer martyrdom, Dionys. Alex. epi. ad Nouat. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34. Cap.
27. de Spir. san. The rejecting of traditions a destroynig of Religion.
that the church be not divided, than that idols should not with sacrifice be
honored. S. Basile talking of Ecclesiastical institutions written, and of
certain traditions and customs that are used amongst Christen men, and not
written, numbered the sign of the cross for one, and says that there is like
affection of piety dew unto both, and supposes that if we cast away such
customs, religion shall have great detriment and loss, and the preaching of
faith be brought to a naked name. Which being undoubtedly true, every man,
that is desirous to have the Gospel of Christ reverenced, true religion
maintained, and faith sincerely preached, should defend such traditions and
customs as the Apostles, and ancient fathers, did recommend unto the church,
for maintenance of Christ's religion, and not be forced by a little wilfulnes to
refuse them at their pleasure, as M. Calfhil say they are.

Traditions must be observed. 2. Cap. 2.
S. Paul commanded the Thessalonians to stand, and keep the traditions which
they had learned either by his epistle or by his sermons and talk. And in them
warns us to do the like. VVherbie we may perceive that he would have us to
be constant in observing of traditions, and whatsoever pretense or color Satan
transfiguring him self into the angel of light uses, to pluck us from them,
under the shadow of superstition and other gross abuses, we must not flee
from that which we received. For he cries: State, tenete: Stand stout, keep
fast, let no violence force you, to refuse that which is delyured unto you.
Wherefore I exhort you M. Calfhil, to refuse your foolish fancy, and keep
traditions and customs, according to the counsel of S. Paul. And if
wilfulnes here to fore forced you to refuse them, let reason induce you now
to embrace them, Policarpe Epist. ad Ephesios. Origin. In exposi. 1. ad Titu^.
Homi. 29. In Matt.
that as that blessed martyr Polycarpe said: We forsaking the vanities of
many, and false doctrines, may return to that word which was delyured us from
the beginning. Orige^ accounted him an heretic that professes to beleaue
Christ and beleaueth otherwise of the truth of the Christian faith, than the
tradition of the church has defyned: and counseled us not go away: From the
first Ecclesiastical tradition, nor beleaue otherwise then the church of
God, by succession has delivered unto us. Which counsel if you could
follow, you would not be such a sworn enemy to traditions, nor esteem the
ecclesiastical histories, written by such authors as all the world regard
and reverence, to be but tales: but to maintain heresy, traditions must be
rejected as trifles, visions as illusions, fathers as fablers, histories, as
lies. Which is lamentable, that so foul a bird should vnplume so many, to
feather her fylthy neaste.

If the history of Probianus be but a tale, M. Calf. and Sozomenus author of
it, no better tha^ a thief, as you make hi^, why has it passed the judgment,
of so many, under the name of an ecclesiastical history, which is a testimony
of things done in the church, and witness of the truth? Sozomenus likened to a
thief. Fol. 89 a
Cassiodorus the Senator in the preface before the Tripartite history, says:
that the ecclesiastical history, written, mirabiliter as it were by miracle)
by the three greek authors, Theodoretus, Sozomenus and Socrates, is proved and
tried to be very necessary for all Christians: and therefore, he bids every
man read them boldly. For whosoever so does, shall have great knowleg and
commodity by it. Theodoret he reckons for a reverend bishop, Sozomenus and
Socrates for most eloquent, wise, and no doubt grave and learned me^.
Wherefore either he must report an untruth, or you make a lie M. Calf. For if
the history written as it were by miracle, be very necessary, for all
Christians, then certain it is that it co^sisted not of idle fables, and
fabulous tales. For to what purpose should tales be very necessary for all
Christians. If it consisted not of tales, then can you with no more right
condemn this story of Probianus, for a tale, tha^ any other thing that the
said author writes. If Sozomenus be a light of the church and a most
eloquent man, then have you sclaunderously, let your tongue slip, in
resembling him to a thief, Calf. Fol 89 a
that leaping over a pale leaves a piece of his cloak behind him, and so
passes that we may tracke him by the foot. Mart.
But let us consider what a fine blood hownde ye are to tracke a thief by the
foot. Sozomenus says, that the divine power apeared to Probianus, because he
would not worship the cross, Lib. 2. ca. 19. Trip.
and showed him the sign of the cross, which was upon the altar of the
churhe, where he was, and made it plainly apere, that ever sythens Christ was
crucified, all things which were done for the commodity of man, were done by
no means without the virtue of the holy cross; Fol 89 b Calf.
nor of holy angels nor of good men. You say, either the collectour of this
was a liar, or I an evil applier. For quoth you, Angels can not make any
material cross, such as is set up in Churches, nor mystical, such as men use
to printe in their foreheades. For they have no bodies to bear it, nor hands
to make it. Mart. Gene. 32.
VVorshipfully sir: If your senses serve you no better, your nose will sooner be
hired to be some poor man's sow, than required to serve some gentle man's
foster for a blood hownde to tracke a thief Did not the angel wressell with
Jacob, and breeke a synowe in his thighe? Did not the angels that came to
Sodoma lodge with Loath, and eat and drink in his house? Gene. 19.
Did not the angel Raphael, that went with Tobias to Rages a city of Medes,
walk, eat, speak, and receive money for Tobye? Look the fifth, sixth,
seventh, eight and ninth chapter of Tobias: Did not the Angel take up Abacuc
by the hear, and carry him from Jury to Babilo^? Look to the fourthtene of
Daniel. Did not the angel Gabriel when he was sent to our Lady in to Galilee
in Nazareth, go into her? Did he not salute her, with that sweet salutatio^,
Aue Maria, that the church uses in remembrance of Christ's incarnation and
honor of the blessed virgin? Did he not, talk with her, and when his message
was done departed he not again? Look the first of S. Luke. Did not the angel
come down from heaven and roll away the stone of Christ's sepulcher and sit
upon him, and speak to Mary Magdalene and the other Mary's and willed the^ not
to fear? Look to the 28. of Mathewe, and to be short look through out all
the scripture, and you shall find that where it pleases God to do any thing
for the commodity of man, by the ministry of his blessed angels, he suffered
them to take the shape of our bodies, hands legs, tongue, and all, and to do
such corporal functio^s as apertayneth to any part or membre of the body.
VVher for unless some evil angel bewitched the senses of your body and
powers of your soul, I can not see what should force you to disgrace the
truth of this story, because angels have no bodies, to bear the cross, nor
hands to make it? Of ten hundred shifts, this was the worst: every one that
knows God to be omnipotent, can easily conceive, how the angles may have
bodies and hands to work the will and pleasure of our lord in earth, or to
make a cross without hand or body.

Now sir for my discharge that I am no fond applier (as it pleases your
worship to term me) let the i^differe^t reader that understands the story,
and is able to weigh the circu^sta^ces of it, judge. Probianus of a Paga^ was
made a Christian, that is to say he beleaued in Christ, and hoped to be saved
by his death upon the cross, Lib. 2. cap. 19. Tripar.
but he would not worship the cause of all our salvation (that is to say) the
most holy cross: What is this cross, which he would not worship? The
passion of Christ, as you say? No: For he was a Christian, and being a
Christian, he did honor, reverence, adore, and love the passion of Christ,
and had the hope of his salvation reposed in it. And whosoever does otherwise
can not be a Christian. Wherefore, the cross that he would not worship must be
an other thing, than the passion it self. And what can it be but the very sign
of the cross which all young co^uerses, were wont to have delyured unto
them, when they began to be Christians, and God showed him by his divine power
in an holy vision from heaven, standing in the church, upon the altar, A
cross standing upon the altar is not the passion M. Calf.
a place of great honor and reverence, for the dreadful mysteries that there
be offered. Nor have you any advantage, against me, because S. Cyprian. S.
Augustine and Chrysostom treating of the passion do use the term Cross, when
they mean the crucified. The same fathers very oftentimes in their works use
the same term cross, when they mean the sign of the cross, as the learned
know right well, and you are driven to confess the like in this Article of
Tertullian, Prudentius, and S. Hierome. Fol. 88. b


But notwithstanding all the fathers: used the sign of the cross in
ministration of Sacraments, Fol. 89. b
and sometime otherwise, as M. Calfhil grants, yet it contenteth him not, but
with a vehement spirit, and hot interrogatio^ he makes these demaundes. Fol.
89. b Fol. 90. a Calf.
Shall we be restrained to that whereof there is no precept in scripture, nor
they the^ selves yield lawful cause? Think you that they did attribute, so
great virtue to the wagging of a finger, that the holy Ghost could be called
down, and the devil driven away by it? Think you that they would have
neglected, churches, refused sacraments, doubted of their health, if the
priest had not broken the air first, and with his holy hand, made an
owerthwart sign?

To answer mildly because his patience is some what broken, Mart.
and charity chafed, I tell you (sir) that if you will be a Christian man, and so
reputed you must be restrained, to what whereof there is no precept in express
written scripture. As for example. There is no precepte in express written
scripture that commands you to beleaue that in the blessed Trinity there be
three persons and one God. We must be restrained to that whereof there is no
commandment in express scripture.
Yet you must be restrained unto it. There is no precept in express written
scripture that the son of God, is of equal fubsta^ce with his father, that
the blessed virgin Mary was the mother of God, that she continued always in
virginity, without the carnal company of man, that the Saboth day refused,
the sounday should be kept holy, that the sacrament fhould be received
fasting, that infants should be baptized, that bisshops should not practice
jurisdiction in other men's Diocese; that the baptism of heretics should be
auayleable. That there is a distinction of the books of scripture, some to be
canonical, some Hagiographal, some Apocriphal. For those and many more you have
no precept in express scripture written in the compass of the Bible, yet you
must be restrained unto them, maugre your beard, as now you are to square
capps, and priests gowndes although there be no precept of them in scripture.

Touching your second demand, it is most evident that as soon as prayer is
duly made, and the name of God called upon, and sign of the cross drawn wit
the hand, the holy Ghost according to the promise of Christ cu^meth down,
and sanctifies the gifts offered, and things brought to be consecrated,
vhatsoeuer Sacrament, or Sacramental it is, and that the devil is driven
away. As for the third, I verily beleaue that none of the old fathers at that
time did neglect the churches, refuse the sacraments, doubt of their health, if
the priest did omit the sign of the cross in any sacrament or ceremony: and
the same opinion have all true christians and catholics in our age. Fol. 52. a
My self told you in this article of my treatise, that the cross was used in
celebration of Christ's sacraments for two causes. The first is to put us in
remembrance of our redemption by the cross. The second to declare that all
sacraments have their virtue and effect of the merits of his passion? and
said further, that albeit the ancient fathers taught, If the sign of the
cross be omitted the sacraments lack not their virtue.
and catholic church commanded, that the sign of the cross should be used
in all sacraments, yet it is not their meaning, that any sacrament lacks his
operation, effect, and virtue, if or for necessity, or by oversight, or by
ignorance, the said sign be omitted: But when of self will and purpose the
order of the church is contemptuously broken, and the intention of the
ministre evil, and faith worse, as theirs is, who be Zuinglians, Caluinistes
and such like, there is no doubt, but that they offend the goodness of God, and
in omitting the sign of the cross, transgress the ordinance of the holy
Ghost, and tradition of the Apostles and ancient fathers. This sir to take
away matter of cauillation, I told you: there might you have seen it, if you
would have taken pains to have sought it, and because you might and would
not, learn more good ye pieuish puine Iulianiste, than so fondly to think, M.
Calf. understands that which he takes i^ hand to reprove.
and falsely report, of another. Learn to understand the author which you
take in hand to reprove, before you set forth your reprouf, lest whiles you
improve that which is not to be reproved, you prove your self as wise as
VVillia^ VVittlesse of VValtam. But because you require me to examine the
words of my author, for my part seeing I am in your judgment, but a puine,
a young scholar, Fol 90. ^
one that has not learned his leasson well, I will join a third person to be
an vmpier in this cause between you and me, and because you shall not suspect
him as partial, or refuse him as to favorable to papistrie, let it be one that
cares as little for papistrie, as for honesty: D. Cox or M. Grindal, if you
will: One, I pass not which. M. Grindal because he is your Diocesan, if you
please. Well go to then. Martial. Sermon. de passio.
S. Cyprian says: Whatsoever the hands be which dip those that come to
baptism, whatsoever the breast is, out of which the holy words do proceed,
the authority of operation gives effect to all sacraments, in the sign of
the cross. Here S. Cyprian teaches that men have authority by commission
from God, to make, and minister his sacraments, and that in the figure, and
sign of the cross, Fol. 90. a
all sacraments have their effect. Calfhil: Yea sir, say you so? show the
commandment, for the sign of the cross, if ye will have Cyprian to mean of
it. Mart: I proved even now, that if you will be a Christen man, and will be
reputed for one, you must be restrained that whereof there is no precept in
scripture written in the volume of the Bible. If you will have it proved out of
scripture written by the holy Ghost in the hearts of men, and not in leafes,
of paper, and sheep skin, look in Tertullian and S. B^^ile, and other
ancient fathers, that say it was a tradition and practice of the catholic
Church.

Calf. What talk you to me of traditions, customs and scriptures, written in
men's hearts? if it be not in Gods book, away with it. Grindal.
Grindal. O pacify your self sir James, for the lords sake. It must not be
so. The Apostle S. Paul and his scholar Timothe exhorted men to keep those
things, Act. 16.
that were decreed of the Apostles, and elders that were in Jerusalem. The
said Apostle willed the Thessalonians to stand stoutely and keep the
traditions, ^ Thessalonians. 2.
which they learned either by his epistle or by word of mouth: and in very
deed if we reject traditions and customs, Cap. 27 de Spir. san.
we shall bring (as S. Basile says) the preaching of faith to a naked name,
and never be able to maintain our own religion. For we have many things by
custom and tradition, of which we can show no precept. Calfhill. Calf.
Why if it please your superinte^dentship what shall we do? If we admit the
traditions of the Apostles, and ancient fathers, Grind.
our religion will never be mayntained. Grindal. If we condemn them, all the
world will cry out upon us. Athanas. epist ad Afros de Arimine^si council.
For who will not hate them (says Athanasius) that refuse the constitutions,
of the fathers, and prefer those things that were made of l^te contentiously,
and with great violence at Ariminum? Very few or none. Therefore sober your
self, sir James: and go wisely to work. Every thing has a time: Mar not
al upon a little headynes and hasty courrage. It can not be denied, but that
men have authority of operation from God (that is to say) commission and
authority, as ministers, to work and make his sacraments. Men have authority
of operation. Matt. 28. Joan. 20.
The words of Christ are plain: As my father sent me: So do I send you:
Therefore going forth, teach all nations, baptising them, in the name of the
father, and of the son and of the holy Ghost: Receive ye the holy Ghost,
whose sins ye remitt, are remitted them, do this in my remembrance. Here you
see commission, and authority is given to baptize, to releese sin, to
celebrate the supper of the lord, and if according to this commission one be
baptized in water, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
Ghost, this Sacrament has his effect. And if he be not so baptized, by
ordinary course it has no effect.

Wherefore it is not be denied, but that the authority of operation, that is
to say, a man having authority to work and make his sacraments as gods
ministers, gives after a fort effect to the sacrament. For before the man does
his duty commanded by God, in that behalf, there is nothing done, when he
has spoken the words of Christ, Ego te baptiso, I baptize thee and so
forth, then is the soul washed from his filth, then is remission of sin,
given, and then has the sacrament his full effect, and not before. Calf. Nay
if please your superintendentshippe. De baptis. Christi. Fol. 90. b Remission
of sins given by Sacraments. More Sacraments tha^ two.
Cyprian says, Christ came to baptism, not wanting a washing in whom there
was no sin, but to the end that a continual authority might be given to the
Sacrament, and not accepting of persons commend so great a work. For
remission of sins, be it either given by baptism, or by other sacraments,
properly appertains to holy ghost, and the priuiledg of this effect remains
unto him alone. As for the solemnity of words, and calling upon the name of
God, and signs attributed to the apostolical institutions through the
ministry of the priests, they make a visible sacrament, but the thing it self,
the holighoste does frame, and make, and to the visible consecrations, the
author of all goodness, does visiblie put his hand. Here you see that the
effect is given to the holieghost, and only to the holighoste, which you
attribute either to the priest or to the sign of the cross. Grind.
You talk as though you did not understand the scripture. No Christen man
doubts, but that the holyghost is author of all grace, and gives effect to
all sacraments: but the holyghost has put all things under a law, he works
every thing by a mean. And in scripture, the effect that is wrought by God, is
attributed, in a sort to the man that works, Things done by God, attributed
to men. Acto. 28.
although the holyghost be the principal and chief worker of all. For example
when Publius father was cured, of his agewe and bluddye flix, the scripture
says that, S. Paul sanauit eum, healed him. Here the effect of healing;
propre to God only is attributed to S. Paul, because S. Paul was the mean by
which God vouchesafed to confer health upon him. In the second chapter of the
Acts it is said, many wounders and signs were done by the Apostles in
Jerusalem: Exodus 10.
because God did it, by them, as instruments, and means. In like manner
because the Bishops and priests being dispensers of Christ's mysteries, do
either dippe the child in the font, that must be baptized, or pour water
upon him, and celebrate the Supper of the lord, and pronounce these holy
words, and consecrate according to the institution of Christ, whereby
remission of sins and life everlasting is given, this effect which God only
gives, is according to scripture, said to be given by the bisshops and
priests, in these sacraments, as means, and these men as ministres, to give
remission of sin and life everlasting by. So you may see that, S. Cyprian,
The meaning of S. Cypria^s place.
saying that the holy ghost gives effect to all sacraments, means that the
holyghost is author of all grace and gives effect to all sacraments,
immediately by his absolute power, and mediatly by the ministry of man, whose
service it has pleased his divine majesty to use, as means to work, these
effects to his people. Calf. what my lord, S. Cyprian says remission of
sins, Grind. Matt. 10.
properly appertains to the holyghost and is dew to him only: So Christ
says, It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your father that speaks
in you. Did not the Apostles, therefore speak? I perceive you understand not
what you say, nor your own author neither. I told you that remission of
sins appertains properly and only to the holyghost, immediate, immediately.
For he is the fountain from which all grace flows, he the author from whom
all virtue is deryued. But as every fountain disperseth his water by diverse
ways to the use of man: So does the holyghoste disperse his grace by diverse
means. And because he does it by external means in sacraments, those
external means are said to give effect unto his sacraments.

That remission of sins is given by baptism, and other sacraments, as
external means, S. Cypria^ testifies plainly, in the words that you
alleged. For he says: Remission of sins, De baptis. Christ.
whether it be given by baptism or other Sacraments, proprely appartayneth to
the holy Ghost. Here you may see that he acknowledges remission of sins, to
be given by baptism, and other sacraments, Remission of sin is given by
other sacraments besides baptism. There is a visible consecration.
Officialibus. There is a sanctifica done of duty. Calf.
yet properly by the holy Ghost, and by them, as means. Besides he talks
there of visible co^secrations and of sanctifications done of duty, and says
that the author of all goodness does put his hand inuisiblye to those visible
consecrations, and the holy Ghost infuse the fulness of grace to those
sanctifications, and perfet the thing of the Sacrament. VVherby you may
understand, that there is a visible ministry, and external operation, by
which the holy Ghost gives the fulness of his grace. Take away one, the other
cease: use the visible consecration, and the invisible grace is granted,
through the omnipotency of his word that ordains it.

Calf. Well may I grant as your superintendentshippe have proved, that after
a sort the authority of operation, gives effect, to all Sacraments: but I
can not be persuaded, that S. Cyprian speaks here of a cross, as Martial
fansieth. Martial: Mnrt.
No sir? you are very hard lased and loath to beleaue. May it please you before
you superinte^dent here, to consider the place of S. Cypria^: and for better
understanding of it, call to remembrance, a few words that went before?
Talki^g there of the blood of Christ, he says: It is of such authority and
power, that it does not only fence the door posts of Israel, The virtue of
the cross.
but even the very, and only sign of that sacrament, does drive away devils,
and the virtue of the hoy name, and mark of the blood, is terrible to all
wicked spirits, wheresoever it is seen. In brief, whatsoever the ministres of
the sacraments be, whatsoever the hands are that dip those that come to
baptism, whatsoever the breast is, out of which the holy words proceed, the
authority of operation, gives effect to all sacraments in the figure of the
cross, and the name which is above all names, being called upon by the
dispensers of the sacraments does all. Here I pray you (sir) what is the sign
of the sacrament that drives away devils? What is the mark of the blood
that is terrible to wicked spirits? Calf.
Calf. Marry the passion it self. Mart: We know that the passion of Christ
is terrible to the devil, Mart. Calf.
and all wicked spirits, but is that S. Cyprians meaning only? Calf. What
should he mean else? Mart. I will tell you: He speaks there of the passion of
Christ, Mart.
and to prove that it is of great virtue and power, able to drive away devils,
he uses these reasons. The sign of the sacrament (that is the sign of the
passion, for so is Sacramentum taken some times in S. Paul) drives away
devils. Again the virtue of his name and mark of his blood is terrible to
wicked sprites, ergo much more the blood it self.

Here the grater is proved, by the less, the passion by the sign. As then the
thing that is proved, must be diverse from that, by which it is proved: so in
this place the sign of the Sacrament, (that is the sign of the passion) and
mark of the blood must be diverse from that which was proved: otherwise S.
Cypria^ said nothing, but proved one thing by it self, which is absurd. For a
more familier example, if one would say, my lord Mayours mace borne in the
street makes malefactors afraied, ergo much more my lords own person, would
you not think M. Calfhil that my lord mayor were one thing and his mace an
other? Calf. yeas I would. Mart. so may you in this case. For it is al one.
Calf. Nay, yet had I rather be crossebitten than confess that. Martial.
Diogenes words to the boy that cast stones at the galloes.
on a time Diogenes seeing a beardlesse bachiler casting stones at a galloe
tree, said unto him, Go to sirrah, In good faith, one day you will hitte the
mark: So in good soothe to you sir, that had rather cast stones at the cross,
and be cross bitten than confess the truth, we may say, Take heed, sir, one
day you will hitte mark.

The third reason that S. Cyprian makes, for proof of this (as you may see
by the continuing of his talk, by the aduerbe of order, and particle,
Illatiue, denique, which signifies that something follows, appertayning to
that which went before) is this, Authority of operation in the sign of the
cross gives effect to al Sacraments
The authority of operation in the sign of the cross gives effect to all
sacraments, ergo much more the passion of Christ it self. Here the virtue of
the passion, is proved to be great by the figure of the cross. For be the
dispensers of Christ's Sacraments never so wicked, yet if they call upon the
name of God, and make the sign of the cross, and work according to the
authority of operation that is given them, and do as their commission
chardgeth them, the sacraments have their full effect. Calf. Why sir, Fol 90.
b Fol. 91. a
refer you the authority of operation to the priest, that makes the cross
with his thombe. Have ye forgot that you learned out of S. Ambrose, Aliud est
elementum, aliud est consecratio, aliud opus, aliud operatio. The eleme^t is
one thing and consecration an other, the woork is one thing, and operation an
other, The work is done by the priest, the operation by God. So S. Ambrose
says also, that the consecration is. Non sanat aqua nisi spiritus descenderit
et aquam illam consecrauerit. The water heals not unless the holy Ghost
come down and consecrate the water. Fol 90. b. Fol. 91. a
Mart. I am glad that at lenght I know who it is that made the propre dialogue
in your book between. C. and M. Before I stood in doubt of it: because. C.
you know, stands for Calf. Cuckold, or Cuckoo, as well as for Calfhill, and
M. for Marti^, Mathewe or Mortimer, as well as for Martial: and I persuaded my
self that M. Calf. would propounde no such questions as C. did, and was sure
that Martial, would frame no such answers as your naked M. imagyneth. But seeing
time tries truth, and falshode shows it self, I will deal with you
accordingly. Now to your question. I have not forgotten sir that which I
learned out of S. Ambrose. I remember it right well. He has those words: but
not in that sense which you take them, and that you may the better understand
it, and the readers see how you have perverted it, let us consider the place,
and gather. S. Ambrose meaning of his words that go before, S. Ambro.
perverted
and come after.

Before, he spooke of Naaman the Syrian that was cured of his lepre by washing
in the water of Iordane: De sacra. lib. 1. ca 5.
and asking the question what that should signify, he said: vidisti aquam.
Sed no^ aqua omnis sanat, sed aqua sanat quae habet gratiam Christi. Aliud est
elementum, aliud consecratio, aliud opus, aliud operatio. Thou have seen the
water, but all water does not heal, but that water heals, which has the
grace of Christ. The element, is one thing, the consecration an other: the
work one thing, the operation an other. Afterward declaring how Christ
came to S. John to be baptized, and shewi^g a cause why Christ went down into
the water, and then the holy Ghost came, he tells that the form and manner
of our baptism, has this observation, that first the font must be hallowed
(how like you that M. Calf?) then he that is to be baptized, must go down
into the water. For as soon as the priest comes in, he makes an exorcisme
(how like you that?) Secondarely he makes an invocation upon the creature of
water (what say you to that) and afterward he makes prayer, that the font may
be hallowed, and the presence of the everlasting Trinity be there present.
This leyed together you may see that in baptism, of which S. Ambrose spoke in
that place, there is water, there is exorcisme, there is invocation over the
water, there is prayer to hallowe the font, and one to be washed in the font.
So that S. Ambrose by the element means water, by consecration, the
invocation of the name of God, and blessed Trinity upon the creature of water,
to hallowe the font, and there to be present: by the work he means remission
of sin given by the goodness of God to him that was baptized, by operation he
means the exorcisme, prayer, ablution, and act of the priest, washing him
that was baptized. and this is the very meaning of S. Ambrose. The work that
is wrought, to wit the remission of sins, is not as you foolish by imagine,
done by the priest, Fol. 91. a The work in baptism done by God and not by
the priest.
but by God, to whom only and immediately appertains remission of sins. It
is the operation, that (is to say) the exorcisme, the act of ablution and
wasshing, that is done by the priest, and not the work. For if you say that
the work is done by the priest, and the operation by God, then do you
prefer the priest before God. For in all the course of nature and grace,
where besides the operation there is a work: Digni^s est opus operatione, the
work is woorthier than the operation, as the end is woorthier tha^ the
means, by which we come to the end. And if the work be woorthier than the
operation then is the worker of the saed work woorthier than the operation by
which it was wrought: and so by your fro^tike fancy, the priest more
woorthier them God. See you not into what blasphemy your gross ignorance
brings you? Recant for shame, and give to God that which is Gods, and to man
that which appartayneth man. Let the work in baptism, which is remission of
sins, be given to God, whose properly it is: let the operation, which is the
saying of prayers, making of exorcisme, hallowing the water, dipping the child,
and whole act of ablution, be the priests whose ministry God uses in that
work. Likewise in S. Cyprian the authority of operation is not after your
fancy, Ibidem.
the power of the holy Ghost. For authority of operation is a commission,
license, or grace, given to man to work. The holy Ghost is the author that
gives this authority, commission, license, and grace. Authority of
operation, remains in the party that has lawfully received it, be he never
so vicious, the holy Ghost dwells in none by special grace; that enormously
synneth.

Wherefore you did very evil when you taught yower young scholar, Fol. 9^.
that authority of operation is the power of the holy Ghost. Not because it is
untrue that the holy Ghost does sanctify, consecrate, and work every thing
inuisiblye, but because by this invisible sanctification, consecration and
working of the holy Ghost, you labor to exclude the visible sanctification,
consecration, and working of the priest, and so by one truth destroy another
(that is) that the priest does sanctify, consecrate, and work. For as S.
Ambrose says: Thowe we^st in, thowe saw the water, Lib. 1. de Sacram. cap.
5.
thowe saw the priest, thowe saw the Levites: Lest some should happily
say, is this al? Yea verily it is all, it is truly al, where all the whole
innocence, all the whole piety, all the whole grace, and all the whole
sanctification is. Thowe have seen all that thowe could see with the eyes of
the body, or sight of man. Thowe have not seen those things, which are done
and not seen. Those things that are not seen, are much more greater. Because
those things that are seen are temporal, those things that are not seen,
are eternal. By which you see that the priest sanctifies, 2. Cor. 4.
the priest consecrateth, the priest works, and that that which the priest
works, is all innocence, al piety, al grace and al sanctification.

Likewise in saying that the sacraments have their effect in the figure of the
cross, Fol. 91. a
that is as you say in Christ him self, you walk deceithfully, not because
it is untrue thal all sacraments have their effect in Christ, and only by
Christ, and merits of his passion, but because you exclude the use of the
sign, from the celebration of Christ's sacraments, which the holy Ghost
taught, and the catholic church received by tradition from the Apostles, as
many ancient fathers witness, and is now generalie observed through all
Christendom, where the corruption of heresy, has not entered, and shall
prevail and be used, maugre all heresies and heretics, in dispite of the
devil. Grind. In deed (sir James) we can not deny, but that the old fathers
used the sign of the cross in all sacraments. Justinius Martyr, Apolog. 2
talking of the cross, bids us view in our minds, and consider with
reason, all things that are in the world, and see, whether sine hac figura
administrentur, they may be done without this sign. The very words of S.
Cyprian, which you alleged even now out of his sermon, De baptismo, declare
no less. Calf. I meruail, that your superintendentship should think so.
Grind. do you so sir James? Construe the words, that you alleged.

Calf. Verborum solennitas, The solennitie of the words, Fol. 90. b
and sacri inuocatio nominis, and the calling upon the name of God, and, and,
signa, the signs, attributa, attributed, institutio nibus Apostolicis, to the
Apostolical institutions, sacerdotum ministerijs, through the ministry of the
priests, celebrant, do make, visible sacramentum, the visible sacrament. Grind.
In very deed you have translated it so, and set it out in your book. But how
well your self shall see. I pray you what case, is Institutionibus in your
construction? Calf. The dative case. Grind. Then signs were attributed to the
apostolical institutio^s. Calf. yea my lord. Grind. what were thoose signs
and what were those apostolical institutio^s sir James? Calf. You oppose me
hard, my lord: The signs are the visible elements, the Apostolical
institutio^s, are sacraments as I think. Grind. Ah sir, you have deserved
not only to be had to S. Anthonies schole and laid over the form, but to be
brought to the consistory and deprived of your lesson, Archdeaco^ry, and all
that, you have. You a preacher, and guide of the people, that can not tell of
whose institution, the sacraments are? I had thought that Christ had
instituted the sacraments? yourself speaking against the sacrament of holy
orders, Fol. 104. a
said that neither angels nor men make a sacrament, and are you driven now
to contrary our own saying, and tell us that the institutions of the Apostles
(who were men) be sacraments? By the faith of my body, I am ashamed of you.
Look better upon it, and construe it ones again. Calf. Verboru^ sole^nitas,
the solennitie of words, and sacri nominis inuocatio, and the calling upon
the name of God, and signa and the signs attributa, attributed,
institutionibus apostolicis, Signs attributed to the sacraments by the
institution of the Apostles.
by the apostolical i^stitutio^s, sacerdotu^ ministeriis, through the
ministry of the priest, visible, sacrame^tu^ celebra^t make a visible
sacrament. Grindal. This is an other matter, by like then, besides the
solemnity, of words, and calling upon the name of Christ, there were
certain signs required, by the institutions of the Apostles, to be used by
the ministry of priests, to the making of a Sacrament? Calf. It seems so:
Grin. What were those signs? the visible elements, as you said before? Calf.
what will you have them be be (my lord)? Grind. Not visible elements (sir
James): As the Apostles did not institute the sacraments: So did they not
institute the visible elements, which are matters of Sacraments. But the signs
which they instituted, were certain rites, and ceremonies, for the dew
celebration of the sacraments. And what were those rites and ceremonies that
they ordained and instituted, I beseke you? Were they not such as the church
has ever sithe^s used? And of al those what one has more mention in their
writings, the^ the sign of the cross? I assure you none. Wherefore this
co^te^tious braule of yours, is not commendable. It gives the Catholics more
advantage, against us, and makes them more curious to seek out antiquities,
and the more antiquity they find, the more shall our novelty decay. The
Wise Man commands us, not to strive of that thing, which does not molest us,
and not to meddle with many things. I wish you had followed his counsel: Eccle.
11.
by your impertinent speeches, you do nothing, but show the weakness of our
cause. To what purpose I pray you, is that foolish Dialogue that you make about
the words of S. Cyprian? Is it not not all one to say, the authority of
operation, gives effect to all Sacraments in the figure of the cross, and the
authority of operation in the figure of the cross gives effect to all
facraments? There is no difference in it at al. Search well and you shall find
it so. There are no points to distinct the parts of the sentence, as you
imagine. I have consulted diverse printes, and from the word operationis they
continue it to the last, which is, effectum, without any point at all: and as
far, as I can se by S. Cyprians drift in that place, those words should
rather be governed of the verb, than of any other word that goes before the
verb. For he proves, that the virtue of the passion is great, by the sign
and figure of the cross, and power that it has, which could be to no purpose,
if he would have these words in figura crucis, in the figure of the cross, to
referred to the operation of authority that went before, and not to the verb
largitur effectum, that follows after.

Again where you find fault, with your adversary, for staying there, and not
alleging the other words, that follow, it argues that you do but quarrel.
For it is presupposed that every Christian man beleaueth, that in the
celebration of the sacraments, the name of God is specially to be called upon,
and that his holy name (as S. Cyprian says) does all things: To talk
therefore of the invocation, and calling upon the name of God, which all men,
do confess, it was not to his purpose, but of the sign of the cross, Which
you and such like deny. And seeing he took those words, that made specially
for his principal purpose, and omitted the other as loath to be tedious in
speaking of that which no man denies, no wise man, would mislike his doing
therein, nor allow, your superfluous pains, M. Calf. takes much pains to
prove that which no man denies.
in proving out of S. Cyprian, that which the church ever taught, and all
Christen men hold at this present, that all things do stand and be brought to
perfection, by the majesty of God, and truth of faith, and that sacraments are
not imperfect if they lack a cross, as the author told you in the 52. leaf
of his book. Which being so, Eccle. 8.
you should have abstained from contention as the Wise man says, and never
have contended in words, as S. Paul teaches, knowing that: It is honor to a
man, 2. Tim 2. Prouer. 20
who separateth him self, from contention. The Catholics will report of us,
that we pass not what we say, be it never so absurd, and from the purpose, so
we say somewhat for the present. They will say, as father Gregory said, Lib.
8. ^^ 2. M^^^l.
that heretics by their inquisitions seek not to attain the truth, but to be
victorers, that is to have the last word: And whiles they desire to show them
selves outwardly wise, inwardly they are tied by foolly with the chains of
pride. VVherbie it comes to pass, that they seek matter of contention, and
can not speak peacebly of God, which is our peace: and of a matter of peace,
become inuentours of contention and strief. Wherefore deal more circunspectly,
be not so contentious. If I had been of counsel with you before, or if you had
according to the Queen's majesty's injunctions repaired to me for privilege to
the printing of your book, yt should not thus have passed. It had been a
thousand times better for us, if it had been suffered to pass away in silence,
but now set a faier face upon it, and let it go.

Here good readers, you see the force of truth how it prevails, and how
the enemy of truth is confuted by him, that otherwise persequuteth the truth.
At the instant, when I took him to be arbiter, I suppose he had in his
meditation, that verse of David: Psalm. 118. Number. 22.
Et ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis vsquequaque. O take not the word
of truth utterly from my mouth, and as Balam hired to course, could not choose,
but bless: So M. Grindal professing otherwise to mayntaine lies, could not
choose but in this case defend the truth. God be thanked for it. But to let M.
Grind. take his ease, and return to M. Calf. another while, you shall
understand good readers that he is forced to confess, Fol 89. a The fathers
used the sign of the cross in ministration of sacraments
that the ancient fathers used the sign of the cross in ministration of the
Sacraments*, and that a ceremony wanted, if the making of a cross wanted.
Which being true, where is their great crake, that they have restored the
communion to the use of the primitive church? where is their vaunte that they
follow the ancient fathers? Al is turned into a vain brag. By their own
confession, in those days in celebrating the supper of our lord, the sign of
the cross was used, and in other sacraments, now it is rejected with the
sacraments. They observed it for a godly ceremony, now it is contemned for
gross idolatry. How sta^ds this together? As right as the ministres badge in
horn church yard. Calf. Fol. ^. b Mar^*
But M. Calf. says, that our sacraments lacking the sign of the cross and
that usual ceremony, be perfect not withstanding. Wherein he is much to be
commended for a iolye wise sire, The sign of the cross but a ceremony, yet
not vvilfullie to be omitted.
that affirms that, which no man denies, and although the thing be told him
ten times, yet will not vnbutten his precious ears, to let in so little a blast
of wholesome wind. Ones again therefore I tell you M. Calf. that we confess,
that the sign of the cross is but a ceremony, yet such a ceremony, that
whosoever does wilfully omit it, and contemptuously reject it as
superstitious, tra^sgresseth the ordinance of the holy Ghost, tradition of the
Apostles, custom of the church, and decrees of the fathers.

Further we say, with S. Augustine that if the sign of the cross lack in the
Sacraments, None of them is done rightly, that is, according to the solemn,
rite and ceremony: And so, you M. minister might have conceived, that I M.
lawier did so take it, both by my words that went before, and by this
alleged here out of S. Augustine. And albeit the English word (rightly)
being written so, for ritely, Fol. 52. a
did minister you occasion to think the contrary, yet might the latin word,
rite: have given you to understand, that it was meant of the solemnity and not
of the substance. But if your will had followed your wit in this, your self
should have lacked words, your book stuff, the printer work, and prentises
matter of error, which had been a great oversight.

Concerning your robbing the Sacraments, of their effect, Fol 92. a August in
Ioa. T^ac. 40 and de Catacl. cap. 5.
and attributing the same to faith only, and for proof of it alleging a place
out of S. Augustine, wherein you followed your Sarum Solymam, who is answered by
doctor Harding in his reiondre lately set forth, I say nothing but refer you
to that. There shall you see it confuted to your shame. Your cauills against
the vision of Probianus and fancy that angels can make no crosses, because
they have no hands, I answered before: Fol. 93. b
likewise your braule about S. Augustines place for mystery, and trifling
against these words operationis Authoritas, out of S. Cyprian, I have already
confuted, Ibidem.
only you say Chrysostom makes nothing for me, and bring no cause why. As
long as your do so: my yea, shall be as good as your nay. But how lurdely you
deceive, and are deceived, the learned that have S. Chrisostoms works may see
by conference of his places. For the unlearned, Ho. 55. in 16. Matthew. The
cross a banner and ensign of victory.
it may suffice that S. Chrysostom says, When we are Christened, when we
are nourished with the holy meat, when we are placed to be consecrated in
holy orders, that banner and ensign of victory always assisteth us. I pray
you good sir, what was the ensign of victory, that Chrysostom speaks of,
but the sign of the cross? The passion, was the conquest, and victory it
self, as S. Paul testifies, and not the ensign of victory. The sign and
the thing signed, be two things, in wise men's judgment. If some drousie
dream, have made you dote, and think the contrary, awake betyme, and stretch
your lymmes or else we will say, God night M. Calf.

Fol. 94 a
Your idle digressio^ and blasphemous words vttred in your raging heat,
against the ceremonies used in the dedication of churches, I wittingly omit as
loath to spend two leafes as you have done, in co^futing not your reason, but
your railing. For reason you do not soberly, but rail impudently, as your
evangelical manner is. Wherefore seeing you rail, where you should reason, I
think it not reason to enter any long discourse of it, and reason against
railing. The church that uses those ceremonies is of sufficient authority to
convince the using of them to be laufull, and such a pillar and foundation of
truth, that rail against it as long as ye list, you shall but utter your
malice and spend your breath in vain and hurt it no more, than the bloystring
wind, that beats against the rock.

I remember when I was a scholar, I learned a tale of an eluish angry beast,
called a wesell, that coming to a smythes shop and finding a fyle, did lick it,
and gnawe it, until her tongue was rased, M. Calves. tongue like the vvesel,
that gnavved the Smithes fyle.
and the blood dropping out of her mouth: Yet she made her self merry so long,
with licking and gnawing the fyle, thi^king to get away somewhat of the iron,
that she had her tongue lickt of. So may you, M. Calf. lick, which your
venomous tongue, gnawe with your Tigers teethe, the cetemonies of the church,
and delight your self in it: You shall hinder it no more, tha^ the eluish wesell
did hurt the yro^ fyle: and perchance by licki^g, lick out your own tongue,
before you disgrace the church, and ceremonies therein used. From railing,
you run to your sorry refuge of denying. Being pressed with the authority of
S. Dionise. S. Paul's scholar, and bishop of Athens, you have no shift to
elude it, but to deny the he heavenly and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy to be S.
Dionises work, and call it a bastard book, unjustly fathered upon him, which
is a shift next the worse, and most agreeable, to your negative divinity, M.
Calves. reasons against S. Dionise works ansvvered.
and ablative doctrine. But as your impudence passes honesty, in denying, so
does your folly show it self planly in vttring the reasons, that induced you
to deny it. For who but such a minister, as you, would say, Eusebius and S.
Hierome made no mention of S. Dionyse heavenly and ecclesiastical hierarchy,
ergo, he wrote no such work? I told you before that it was possible that
many things might escape Eusebius knowledge, and S. Hieromes also, concerning
the history of things done, before in diverse ages, diverse cuntries, and
diverse Emperors days: and so I tell you again. And for to instruct such and
old Bachiler and young reader of English divinity, I tell you here, that
Origenes, Sophronius Archibishop of Jerusalem, Gregorius Nazianzenus,
Ignatius, Testimonies cited of S. Dionise by the ancient fathers.
the third Archbisshop of Anthioche, after S. Peter, do cite places out of his
epistles, and hierarchies, as you may see in the epistle before his works set
forth in Greek by Morelius, the kings printer in Paris, the year of our Lord
1562.

Your other reason why that book should not be S. Dionyse is this: He speaks
of God fathers in his book, but the use of God fathers was not invented
fourtye years after, Calf. Fol 95. b
ergo that was not his work. The Minor you prove by Hyginus, that lived an
hundred and fourthy years after Christ, Mart. The antiquity of god fathers.
and instituted, that at every Christening there should be at the lest on God
father and one God mother: where the gentle reader may see, that that ceremony
used, in the church, is not a late devise, nor new inuenton, but fouretene
hundred years old. But be it that Higinus Pope of Rome did first institute in
the west church, that God fathers and God mothers, should be present at
baptism? what will you infer upon it M. Calf? Will you say this, Pope
Higinus was the first that instituted godfathers and godmothers in the west
church, ergo S. Dionyse bishop of Athens did not speak of it nor think of
it, xl. years before in Athens amongst the Grecians? How holds this
argument? Why speak you not? Or tell us the sooner, or we will say that as
yet, it hangs as far wide, as Athens is from Rome. Consider it by a like. The
Queen's majesty was the first that ordained by act of Parliament, that every
man should eat fish in her realm upon wenesday, ergo the kings and bisshops
of Italy, France and Spain, yea and England too never thought nor spoke of
the wenesdayes fast before. Is not this paltrie? leave it, leave it, for shame.

Higinus borne in Athens.
Higinus, being a Grecian, borne in Athens, where S. Dionyse was bishop, might
know the orders and ceremonies which he had received of his master S. Paul,
and planted in his church at Athe^s, and knowing them might by his authority,
being now bishop of Rome command the same order, and ceremony to be used
in the Latin church, not as first inuentour or institutour, but as a new
reuiuer and recommender of old ordinances and ancient ceremonies, like as
holy Augustine, our Apostle, having commission from S. Gregory, to chose out of
all churches, Did 12. ca. Nouit.
those things which were godly, religious, and honest, and delyured them to our
forefathers to be observed, was not to be counted the first inue^tour,
institutour, and ordayner of new ceremonies, but a reco^mender of old, such
as were used in other churches before. Which being undoubtedly true, your
reason serves no more to infringe the authority of S. Dionyse heavenly and
ecclesiastical hierarchy, than the paryng of a nail to battre the bisshops
palace of Canterbury. Neither ca^ you have any evasion to escape and refuse the
sign of the cross, because the ancient fathers repelled the traditions of
their elders, Fol 96. a Calf.
and after established other of their own, nor think that because their
example proves no use Apostolic, or necessity to have been in them, that
their president authoriseth you to disanulle the other. Mart.
For they were laufull bisshops, dulye called to that holy ministry.
Wherefore as true shepeheards of Gods flock, and faithful dispensers of
Christ's mysteries, they might by their authority alter and change, such
traditions, as according to the variety of time, and disposition of men, they
understood to be burdenous, and unprofitable for the people. As in very deed
the church of Rome (mother and head of all churches) has altered diverse. But
as for you who are but murderers and theaues, false prophets, that run
before you were sent, deceithfull woorkmen that were never hired, presumptuous
usurpers that were never lawfully called, adulterous ymps that can prove their
inheritance by no succession, that is three score years old, you I say have no
more authority to alter and change any ordinance, Our heretics have no
authority to change the decrees of the au^cie^t fathers.
statute, decree, tradition, or ceremony of the church used of the ancient
fathers, than the fool of the middle temple has to change the principles, and
grownds of the common law. Wherefore you may wype that conceit and fancy out
of your head, and think it undoubtedly true, as I said before, that he that
has no authority to make a law, has no authority to abrogate a law: and
before you may presume to alter and change, by any president of theirs, who for
these fiftene hundred three score and five years can show their succession
from whence they came, prove your petrigrewe by lyneal descent, from that raze,
or else you shall prevail nothing.

Where you tell me, Fol. 96. b Calf.
that you have as good authority for honey, milk, and wine to be restored in
baptism, and communion to be given to children, as I have for the cross, You
deceive your self and the simple reader. For, giving of honey, Mart.
milk, and wine in baptism, went out of use by disco^tinua^ce, The tradition
of the Apostles touching the sign of the cross, never altered. Fol 96. b*
Calf.
and giving the communion to infants was laufully abrogated, and put out of use
by the church of Rome, which you your selves are forced to follow. The
tradition for the use of the cross was never discontinued, never abrogated by
that church, nor ever taken away by any ordinary and laufull authority: and
therefore stands in his full force still. Which seeing you knew right well,
what vain toy came into your head to argue deceitfully in this sort? If the
sign of the cross has been used in baptism, and therefore is now to be had
in reverence, then honey, milk, and wine, shall be restored, in baptism, and
every infant receive the communion? For they were ones used? If you would have
dealed simply, and plainly, Mart.
as one desirous to further truth, you should have told the^ (according to
your own knowledge) that honey, milk, and wine were discontinued, and communion
used ones to be given to children in baptism laufully abrogated by the church
of Rome, but the use of the cross never. And then have made your argument: but
full wittely like a wise minister you knew that if you should first have
opened those particulers, and afterward have made that reason, every reasonable
man would have called for a bottel of hey to present, such an unreasonable
reader. And therefore you wrought more craftily. But as Solomon says: The
deceithfull man shall find no gain, Prouer. 12
his foot is taken in the snare which him self laid. He shall fall down in
his own destruction, and the simple shall possess his goods. Prouer. 28


When you had done with this subtle deceit of yours, and by some secret
inspiratio^ understood, that it would be espied, you thought it good to face
out the matter, and fare like a bedlem, and rail so boysterously, that no man
should withstand the bitter blast that malice blewe from your blessed mouth:
and therefore you have disgorged your stomach of a foul deal of fylth: which
I dare not repete, for fear of offending good Christian ears. Wherefore to
omit the vilanous terms, and blasphemous words which your virulent mouth,
and serpentine tongue uttered against the ceremonies used in baptism,
sacrament of confirmation, chrisme, holy orders, and priests, for eight leaves
together in your book, because they are to horrible to be repeted, and more
meeter to be written of a Celsus, Porphirie, or Lucian, that dispited the faith
of Christ, and mysteries of the Christians, than of a bachiler of divinity,
that should reverence them, and more worthy be heard of heathens, Turks and
painimes, than of such as reverence the name of Christ, and profess their
faith in baptism, where these ceremonies, and mysteries were used, let us come
to the principal point and talk soberly.

The cause why you and yours storm against those holy ceremonies, and
mysteries, is because they be not mentioned in the written scripture. Is it
not? If it be so, tell me I beseeke you, does not the scripture say, Joan. 20
that Jesus did many things that were not written. Does not the Evangelist
write, Joan 21. All things that Christ did are not written. Joan. 16.
that if all things which Jesus did, were written particularly, the whole
world were not able to receive the books that should be written? Did not
Christ him self tell his disciples, I have many things to say unto you, but
you can not bear them now? But when the sprite of truth shall come, he shall
teach you all truth? For he shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he
shall hear, he shall speak, and declare unto you, and tell you those things
that are to come? Is not this scripture M. Calf? And learn you not by this,
that the Evangelists did not put in written scripture, all that Christ did?
Learn you not that Christ would not tell his disciples many things, because at
that time they could not understand them? Learn you not that the holy Ghost
should teach them all truth, and show what was to come after? Learn you not
(I say) all this? If you have learned it, why require you authority of written
scripture for all that Christ did? See you not by S. John, that all that Christ
did was not written? See you not that Christ left many things to be told of
the holy Ghost? Answer M. Calf.
and that according to Christ's blessed will the holy Ghost did tell his
disciples afterward those things, which he had to tell them before, but left
untold, because of their infirmity? And I beseeke your maistership where are
those things written that Christ had to tell his disciples, and left to the
holy Ghost to be told? Where are they I say, why speak you not? In what
Evangelist? In what Apostle shall we find them? They were Christ's words:
they were necessary to our salvation: otherwise Christ would not have spoken
so carefully of them, nor have put his disciples in mind of them, nor have
left them to be told by the holy Ghost? Let us have your advise. Where shall
we seek them? In the Evangelists? they treat only of the doings of Christ
before his passion and ascensio^. In the acts of the Apostles? Note us the
chapter. In S. Paul's epistles? Assign us the place. In the works of S.
Peter, James or Jude, Note the sentence. In the epistles and revelations of S.
John? Repete us the words, and remember well that you find, Multa, many
things, Such as none of the Evangelists specified, neither covertly, nor
expressly. And when ye have found them, prove unto us by express scripture,
that they are those, multa, that Christ had to tell his disciples, and yet
would not tell them, but lef them to the holy Ghost to be told.

Further where S. Paul says to the Corinthia^s: All other things will I
dispose when I come, 1. Cor. 11. The order that s. Paul prescribed the
Cori^tia^s not found in scripture. 2. Cap. 2.
Let us understand of your wisdom in what written scripture we shall find
those dispositions and orders of S. Paul. They are not to be neglected. Again
he willed the Thessalonians to stand stoutely and keep the traditions which
they had learned, whether it were by epistle or by word of mouth. If your
learning have found what traditions, he commended unto them in his sermons,
and talk, show in what written scripture they are to be seen: help at a
pynch, make a book of the orders and dispositio^s, that he left to the
Corinthia^s, and traditions which he willed the Thessalonia^s to keep: bring
out your written scriptures, and purchase your self immortal fame, by showing
that which never man yet could find in the scripture. If you can find no
place in scripture, where they are written, No absurdity to build a doctrine
upon traditions.
and yet most certain it is that certain orders and traditions S. Paul left
to be observed, the^ think it no absurd thing to beleaue more than is
contained in scripture, nor inconvenient to build a doctrine upon the
traditions of the Apostles unwritten. But you will say, how shall I know that
these are the traditions of the Apostles? For answer, ask your self how, a
man shall know that the Gospel of S. Mathewe, Mark Luke, The church that
approves the written scripture, approves unwritten traditions.
and John, Acts of the Apostles, epistles of S. Paul and others, be canonical
scripture? And if you find the authority of the church to be a sufficient
reason to prove them to be scripture, and perceive by dryft of reason, that you
must take them to be scripture, because the church has allowed and approved
them for scripture: So think the authority of the church to be sufficient to
prove those to be traditions of the Apostles: and because the catholic church
has received the^, and used the^ from time to time until this present day,
think that every Christen man that will be a member of the church, must also
receive them, and use them as the church commands. For as S. Basile
(talking of ecclesiastical ordinances written in scripture, and others not
written, but delivered by tradition of the Apostles, in mystery) says: Both
have like force to piety, Cap. 27. de Spiritu sancto. Traditions.
and no man does gain say them, that has any mean experience in the laws of
the church. But you have gain said them M. Calf. ergo your skill in the laws
of the church is very simple.

And that it may clearly apeare to all the brethren that boste you so bravely,
your self give plain evidence. M. Calf. ignorant in the scripture.
First in saying that we delight in odd numbres as all inchau^ters have done
of old: next in denying the seuenfold grace of the holy Ghost: For if you
understood the scriptures, and knew what mysteryes the holy Ghost had hid, and
ancient fathers observed in numbres, and knew, that we delight in the^ no
otherwise, than the church taught by the learned Doctors, you would not have
found fault with odd numbres, nor likened us to inchaunters. But you spoke
according to your knowledge. Fol. 103 a b Aug lib 2. quest. Eua^g. cap. 6 The
mystery of Three. Et in Psalm. 49. Five. August in Psalm. 147. Seven. In Psalm. 78
In Psalm. 118. Prouer 24
In the number of three, the blessed Trinity, is signified, and the spiritual
part of man, because we are commanded to love God, with all our heart, and
with all our soul, and with all our mind. In the number of five, the
continence of our five sense is understood: because, by them, as by five gates,
things enter into the soul. And whosoever does not suffer corruption to
enter, by the five gates unto his soul, is rekoned amongst the five virgins,
who signify all faiethfull souls, that shall enter into the kingdom of God.
By the number of seven, Plenitudo significari solet, fulness is wounte to be
signified says S. Augustine, be it either in reward, or in punishment. In
another place he says: Numerus iste solet esse vniuersitatis indicium. This
number is wont to be a token of universality, as when Solomon said: The just
man shall fall seven times in a day, and rise again, he means, that the
just man humbled all manner of ways never perishes. For this phrase: Septies
cadet, he shall fall seue^tymes, is put for all kind of tribulation by which he
is abased in the sight of man. Again he says: Libr. 4. quaest sup Nu. cap. 33
Eleazar was commanded to springle blood seven times toward the face of the
tabernacle of witness, because that number of seven, pertains to spiritual
clensing. The seven churches, seven candlesticks, the seven stars, seven
seals, that S. John speaks of in his revelation, the seven barley lofes that
our savior multiplied in the ghospel, the seven washings of Naaman the Siria^,
in the river of Iordane, Seven pillars builded, by Solomon, be not without high
and secret mysteries, Vide Cypria. Ser. de spiri. sancto.
not such as inchaunters and co^iurers use (as M. Calfhil pretends) but such
as it pleases the holy Ghost to use, to express deep and profounde
secrets, to who^ the scripture commends, and the church knows this number
of seven to be dedicated. August. li. 5. cap 5 de genes ad liter.
The like might be said of fyftene, xxi. and diverse other odd Numbres, in
which, if we delight, we delight not as co^iurers, and inchaunters, as this
quarreller says, but as true Christians, that have learned, Aug lib. 1 cap
15^* quaest super Gene.
numbres to be very holy and full of mysteries in scriptures, which if our sir
James divinity could have foreseen, although he denies the seven sacraments,
yet he would never have denied the seue^fold grace of the holy Ghost, nor
vpbrayed the papists with corrupting, and falsifying the word of God, and
set them so scornefully to schole, Fol 10^. b M. Calf. sets the Catholics
to schole, to tell seven as Tom fool told his geese.
in their old age, to learn to tell seven, as Tom fool told his geese. But
his clerckly skill could not direct his sharp sight so far, nor make his
rolling eyes see the wood for trees.

To tell the seven graces of the holy Ghost mentioned of Esaias was no long
labor. It might have been don without an auditour, or Tom fool, that told his
mothers geese, but seeing this good calculer in telling of seven, misseth one,
let us reckon together and make a score, lest for fear of forgetting, so great
a number, Cap 11. Seven gifts of the holy ghost in Esai.
we be forced to begin again. The prophet Esaias says: There shall come
forth a rod out of the rote of less, and a flower shall spring up out of
his rote, and the spirit of our lord shall rest upon him, the sprite of
wisdom, there is one. Keep store M. Calf. understanding, there is two,
counsel, there is three: strenght, there is four: knowledge, there is five:
Godlynes, there is syxt: the fear of our lord, there is seven: how say you
sir? Have you the just number? If you have not let us call for some of the
Queen's auditors, and tellers out of the exchecker, or if they be to much
incombred with odd reckominges, and old accounts, let us find some other to
reckon for us. S. Clement, S. Clement Epist. ad Iul. and Iulia To. 1. council.
S. Cyprian, Origin, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome and S. Augustine,
and see how they reckon. S. Clement says: All men must haste without delay,
to be borne, again, and signed of the bishop, that is, receive the seuenfold
grace of the holy Ghost, he keeps just tale. S. Cyprian says: By the
benefit of this ointment, both wisdom, and understanding is given us from
God, Sermon. de vnct. Christi. S. Cypria.
counsel, and strenght slydeth into us from heaven, knoweledg, godlynes, and
fear, by heavenly inspirations are poured upon us: there is another tells
seven. Origin in his third homily of seven women, upon Esaias the prophet,
considred diligently, Origin.
what women those seven were, and what was the ignomine which they sustained,
and found, that those seven women, were but one. For they were the spirit of
God, and this one is seven. For the spirit of God, is the spirit of wisdom,
and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and strenght, the spirit of
knowledge and godlynes, the spirit of the fear of our lord: This wisdom
sustayneth ignomine of many false wisdoms, risyng up against it. This true
understanding sustayneth obloquie, of many great understandings. This great
counsel is sclaundred of many evil counsels: This strenght is misreported of
another, which being no strenght nor virtue, yet accompteth her self a virtue.
This knowledge abides injury, of a false pretensed knowledge, which takes away
her name. This godlynes is vpbraied of that which vau^teth her self to be
godlynes, and is in deed i^pietie, and instruction of the ungodly. This fear
suffers vilanie of that which is thought to be fear. Here is another that
keeps just reckoning and tells seven. Chrysostom. says, Chrisost. Homil de
sanct and ado^ando spiritu.
as S. Paul called the holy ghost, the spirit of life, the spirit of
charity, the spirit of virtue, the spirit of temperance, the spirit of
promise, the spirit of faith, the spirit of mekenes, the spirit of adoption
of of sons: So the blessed prophet Esai says, A root shall come forth out
of the root of Iesse, and a flower spring out of it, and the spirit of God
shall rest upon him. Here is the name of the nature of the spirit him self:
afterward folloe the gifts, the spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the
spirit of counsel, and stre^ght, the spirit of knoweledg, Lib. 3. cap. 2 de
sacra. S. Ambro. Mark M. Calf. The holy Ghost is given at the invocation of
the priest.
the spirit of Godlynes the spirit of the fear of our lord. This auditour
keeps just acco^pte with the rest, and finds seven. Come to S. Ambrose, he
says, The spiritual seal follows, which you heard read this day, because
after baptism it remains that there be a perfection made, when at the
invocation of the priest, the holy ghost is infused. The spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and strenght, the spirit of
knoweledge and godlynes, the spirit of the fear of God, seven as it were
graces of the holy Ghost. Here is an other, that misseth none of the number.
Cap. 11. S. Hiero.
S. Hierome upon Esai, keeps the same tale and says, It is to be noted that
spirit of God, wisdom, and understanding, counsel, and strenght, knoweledge
and godlynes, and fear of our lord (that is to say, the seventh number, which
are called in Zachary seven eyes, in one stone, does rise out of the root of
less, and so consequently, out of the stock of David. Cap. 3.


S. August. Lib. 11. ca. cap. 31. Libro 12. cap. 15. In Psalm. 49
Here is an other goes iumpe with the rest. S. Augustine in his work, de
ciuitate Dei, in his book against Faustus the Manichee, in his tteatise upon
the psalm, and diverse other places of his works keeps the same recko^ing,
with all other christians, and makes special mention of the seuenfolde grace of
the holyghost. But what? In comparison of our Sir James, and respect of the
profounde knoweledg which his mastershippe has gotten in divinity, they were
evil auditors, not learned to reckon seven, Fol. 103. b
they were falsifiers of scripture, nor expert in their textes, but very Tom
fools, scarce able to tell, their mothers geese. O pride intolerable? what
ear can hear, what heart can abide this Lucifers sprite? Such ancient
fathers, such learned doctors such wise bisshops, such virtuous prelates to
be sclandred as falsifiers of scripture, to be reputed as unskillful idiots,
not able to tell seven, to be esteemed as ignorants, that must learn to tell
seven, An objection.
as tom fool told his mothers geese? What spiteful malice and raging fury,
is this? Satan author of all lies, to establish his kingdom has scarce a
viler practice. But M. Calf. will say he follows the truth of the Hebrew, and
therefore finding no more, but six graces of the holy Ghost mentioned in that
text, durst boldly, Fol. 103. b
presume to term us falsifiers, and say there were but six, Fol. 103. b The
answer.
and return the seventh (which is godlynes) to us, as our own. For answer we
say. S. Hierome, ten thousand times better learned in the Hebrew tongue, than
this prating parrat, and all the protestants, laboring for his life to
translate the old testament so faithfully according to the truth of the Hebrew
text, as was possible, reckons up seven gifts of the holy Ghost, and piety
for one, which was to cumbrous for heretics cumpany, and therefore no marvel,
if they cast him out of the text, and turn him over to Catholics. Now if he
translating the Bible according to the truth of the Hebrewe, because the Jews
should not insult against the christians, and say it was not so in the Hebrew,
and have the like starting holes to flee unto, when they were pressed with
scriptures, as some smattring Hebrew protestants have now, did shuffle in one
word more in to the scripture than the true text had, he should have given the
Jews just occasion to cavil, and him self have had great grudge of
conscience for adding to the scriptures, contrary to Gods ordinance, The
septuagintes, reckon 7. graces of the holy Ghost. Oration. ^a^aenet. ad gentes.
In what estimation the fathers had the septuagints. Lib. 3. cap. 25. Ireneus.
Origin. Epist. ad Africa, vide Eusebius. li^. 6 cap. 23. histo. Cirill Hieros.
Cathechesi. 4 Chrisost. homi 5 in 1 Matthew. S. Hiero. De doctri, Christ li. 2.
cap. 15. S. August.
which had been too gross an oversight, for so wise, learned, and godly aman,
as S. Hierom was.

Again the septuagintes whom Ptolomeus king of Egypt had to Jerusalem, to
translate the scripture into Greek, being as Justinius Martyr records, men of
excellent wisdom, well learned in the Greek, and Hebrew tongue, translating
this place of Esai, reckon up these seven graces of the holy Ghost, and piety
for one, which M. Calf. would have cast out. And that the world may
understand, how maliciously he sclandreth the Catholics with falsifying the
scriptures, because they follow S Hieromes translation, and the septuagints
also in this, I will declare in what estimation the septuagints, that
translated the old testament, were with our forefathers. Irenaeus says: The
scriptures were interpreted of the seventy elders per aspirationem Dei, by the
inspiratio^ of God, and declares in the end of the chapter, that the self
same spirit, that did foretell in the Prophets, what and after what sort the
coming of Christ should be, did interpret very well in the elders, those
things which were well prophesied. Origin says: that only is to be counted
true in scripture, which the septuagints did translate. Cyrillus Archbisshop of
Jerusalem says: The interpretation of holy scripture was made of the holy
Ghost. Chrisostom writes thus: To make credit of a true translation, the
septuagints are of right, worthier then all other.

S. Hierome in his prologue upon the Paralippomenon, says: The septuagints
full with the holy Ghost, did translate those things which were true. S.
Augustine has those words: The authority of the seventy interpreters
excels, touching the old testament. In all churches, of great learning and
skill, they are said to have translated with such present assistance of the
holy Ghost, that those seventy men had but one mouth. Hilarious, In Psalm. 2. S.
Hilarie in psalm. 118 S. Luke. S. Paul. Orige. in epist. ad Rom lib. 10. cap.
15.
counted their authority, Perfecta^ and religiosam: perfect and religious. To
be short, S. Luke, an holy Evangelist, both in his Gospel, and Acts of the
Apostles cites testimonies out of the old testament, according to the
translation of the seventy interpreters, and not out of the Hebrews. S. Paul
an Hebrew borne and well seen in the law, keeps the translation of the 70.
almost in all points. Which being so it follows that neither they were
deceived in translating this place of Esai, nor we falsifiers in following
those learned men, that interpreted the old testament by the inspiration of
God, and assistance of the holy Ghost.

If this quarreller will yet say, they had no sight in Hebrewe, he shall prove
him self a stark liar and a very Tom fool. For they were (as I proved before
out of Justinius Martyr) very well learned in Greek, and Hebrewe. If he say,
their translation was corrupted, I will not contend: but it was corrupted most
(as the said Justinius reports) by the Jews, whose special purpose was to
improve the mystery of Christ's incarnation, and not the seuenfolde grace of
the holy Ghost. If he say that S. Hierome found fault with them, we will him
to understand, that Ireneus, Origenes, Cyrillus, Augustinus, Hilarious, do
highly commend them, as men full of the holy Ghost. Yea S. Hierome him self,
(as is a fore said) who having the misliking of the septuagintes leyed to his
chardg, as a fault by Ruffinus, Apolog. 2. co^t Ruff.
said for his purgation, non damno, non reprehendo Septuaginta, I reprove not,
I condemn not the Septuagints: But I do boldly prefer the Apostles before
them all. Which places must have a reconciliation, before he be proved to be
enemy to the translation of the Septuagints. M. Calves. reason why there
should not be seven graces of the holy Ghost. Fol. 103. b Calf.


In the mean while hear M. Calf. his fine reason, why there should not be
seven graces of the holy Ghost. He says, Other places attribute of diverse
effects, diverse other titles to the holy ghost, nor the faithful are only
partakers of those which Esaias speaks of, but also of others, as chastity,
sobriety, truth holiness, which in like manner do flow from the same spring.
To thrust the power of Gods spirit, into such a corner, that it shall have
but seven holes to start to, is to straight a compass, and can not contain
him. By this he shows him self as wittles as the Tom fool that he spooke of
even now, Mart.
that could not tell his mothers geese. For if wit had served, or Arithmeticke
feyed, he might have seen, that the lesser number is always included in the
greater. As the merchant that has ten pownde and a purse, the famer that has
ten horse and a carte, the parson that has ten kyne and a calf, has seven.
And so understanding, that there be more gifts of the holy ghost than seven,
he should never have denied that there be seven. If he fansied, that by the
seuenfold grace, we say therbe no more gifts of the holy Ghost but seven, he
shows his head to be but a sphere of fancies, and void of all lerning. For
if he had spent but a small time in divinity, he might well understand, that
the fathers, by saying there be seven graces of the holy Ghost, exclude not all
besides seven. S. Ambrose says: There be seven graces of the holy Ghost, and
all graces pertayne to the holy ghost: but these are as it were the chiefest,
these are as it were the principalst. Lib. 3 cap. 2. de sacra. Cardinales
principales.
For what is so principal, as piety? What is so pri^cipal as the knoweledg of
God? What is so pri^cipal as the strenght of God? What is so pri^cipal as the
counsel of God? What is so principal as the fear of God? and so of the rest.
If the^ these be the pri^cipalst, and chiefest graces of the holy Ghost? and
all other are contained in them, he that says there be seven graces, means
not, that there be no more than seven, but means that in those seven all
other are comprised, as Chrysostom or the author of imperfect work joined
with him testifies, saying. As of Gods part, albeit there be many spirits of
power yet for all that, they are counted seven, Cap. 11. Prouer 9.
be cause out of those seven all spirits of virtue and power do proceed, the
which spirits, Esai does reckon up, and Solomon express in these words,
wisdom has builded her a a house and put seven pillars under it: So of the
devils part, although there be many spirits of sin, yet they are said to
be seven, Homil. 30 in 12. Mat.
because out of those principal vices, all other vice and sin does flow.

If M. Calfhills wisdom will say for excuse that he did not see so far in
these fathers, yet the note of ignorance shall stick on his cloak, as long as
this his dounghil of blasphemies, and lies shall remain unburned. For out of
Tullies offices, which he read being but a boy, he learned that liberality,
affability, modesty, patience, and constancy, are counted virtues, and yet
Cicero hi^ self, with other philosophers say, there be but iiij. virtues,
VVysedome, Justice, fortitude, and Temperance. Which might have given him to
understand, that they, in saying there be four virtues, minded not to exclude
all other virtues besides those four, but esteemed those iiii. as the chiefest
and principalst virtues, out of which, as out of fou^taynes, all other should
issue, and spring. And by that he might have learned to judge of the seven
graces of holy Ghost. But his head was so infatuated, that he passed not what
he said, so he said somewhat at the request of this brethren to deface the
Catholics.

To proceed, he trauaileth much to infringe the reasons that I brought, to
prove that the sign of the cross was used in consecrating the body and blood
of Christ, in the sacrifie of the Mass: and by the way like a venomous serpent
spetteth out his poison, and blasphemously calls that dredful sacrifice,
nothing else but the sacrifice of the devil. Fol. 106. a Blasphemy.
Which is a phrase, more meter, for a lymme of the devil and tormenter in
hell, than for a professor of Christ, and preacher of the gospel. For if the
true substance of Christ's body an blood were not there, Prayer and calli^g upon
the name of God is no thing with M. Calf. but a sacrifice of the devil.
after consecration, by the omnipotency of his words pronounced by the
priest, yet there is an oblatio^, and sacrifice of thanks giving and prayer
made for all states of men, yea with many of the same collectes, which of
force, they them selves have been compelled to borrowe of the church of Rome,
which maliciously they do malign. There is the epistle and gospel. There is
the very true word of God. The name of Jesus is called upon: the prayer of our
lord said, Gloria in excelsis, pronounced. The Creed repeted. The name of God,
with thrice repeting, Sa^ctus, holy, holy, holy, lord God of sabooth. And is
this, nothing, but a sacrifice of the devil? O horrible blasphemy? what days
are these? with heretics evil, is good, and good is evil. The devil is God,
and god is the devil: if holy Polycarp was wounte to say, when he heard any
thing sounding the dishonor of God: Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 20. histo.
O merciful God to what time have thou reserved me, that I hear these things?
How much more justly may we, that hear not only the body and blood of
Christ, but also the prayers of Christians, that have put on Christ in
baptism, and that trust to be saved by the merits of his passion to be
reckoned nothing else but a sacrifice of the devil? O merciful God to what time
have to reserved us? If the beast with seven heads, and ten horns, Apoc. 13.
that opened his mouth into blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and those which dwell in heaven, were come into the woorld, what
could he say more, to the dishonor of God, and shame of the Christians? To
God, who being a ieloous God, a God that gives the glory of his name to none
other, A God, that said to his Prophet, that men should offer in every place
from east, to west, a pure and clean sacrifice to his name, would suffer so
many priests, and bisshops, to sacrifice so many hundred years, in so many
cuntries, in so many free cities, so many towns, and so many villages, to such
and oughely dragon, and monstrous beast, as the devil is? To man, that being
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, and made a member of his mystical
body, would forsake so merciful a lord, and loving father, and honor his
deadly enemy, that wayteth for his destruction, and like a roaring lio^ seeks
to devour him, what I say, could he say more to the dishonor of God? I assure
you nothing. For it co^uinceth God to be untrue of his promise, that said in
thy seed all nations shall be blessed: and Christ vncarefull of his church,
which he so dearly ransomed, and promised to assiste with the presence of the
holy Ghost until his coming again: which is the greatest derogatio^ to the
glory of God that can be. Wherefore sir unless you will say that Christ,
saying behold I am with you all days to the end of the world, Matt. vlt.
failed in his promise, and sent not the holy Ghost to teach the^ all truth,
(as he said he would) or unless you will say, that the holy Ghost for this
xv. hundred years, was idle in the church, and suffered Christ's people that
were incorporate into his mystical body by baptism, to err and offer their
sacrifices of prayer, and thanks giving, at the celebration of the heavenly
mysteries done in remembrance of Christ's death, unto the devil, you can not
say that the mass is nothing else but the sacrifice of the devil. Wherefore you
may be ashamed, that so blasphemous a word passed your mouh. For if you should
be narrowly examined whom you have vpbraied, who^ you have blasphemed, against
whom you have exalted your voice, and lifted up your eyes on high, it would
appear to be: 4. Reg. 19.
Co^tra sanctu^ Israel? against the holy one of Israel.

As touching the principal point, you say nothing to the purpose. For whereas
I proved out of Albertus Magnus a learned man that lived iii. hundred years a
go, and was B. of Ratisbone, that Christ in his last supper taking bred in
his hands, Signo quoda^ manus benedixit, did bless it with a certain sign
of his hands, and for proof, that this word, benedicere, may be taken to
bless with the hand, brought certain places of scripture, as that Jacob with
his hands blessed Iosephes children, Genes. 48 Marc. 10 Luc. 14 Fol. 106 a
Christ leyed his hands upon children, and blessed the^, Christ lyfted up his
hands and blessed his Apostles, and that considered, asked a reason of the
protestants, why we might not say that Christ instituti^g the sacrament of his
body, and blood and taking bread into his hands, and blessing it, lyfted up his
hand and with a certain sign of the cross blessed it, specially, seeing the
ancient fathers do so often insinuate the same, and the holy Ghost, directing
the church in all her doyngs, has ever allowed this manner of consecration in
that mystery, and sacrifice, to all this you answer not one word, but prove
that which no man denies, that benedicere, is to say well, to speak well, and
give thanks, which is no more to my demand and question, than if one would
say, to him that asks why may not M. Calfhil, be a ministre and ministrel
also, Honey is good meat for my lords bears, and nuttes fine service for Jack
a napes.

Blessing given with the hand. Sermon. de venerat. crucis.
By conferring places of scripture, we learn, that blessing is given with the
hand. By S. Chrysostom we learn that the sign of the cross (which can not
be made but by the hand) is present every where, whether the mystical meat is
to be received, or any thing else to be done. By S. Augustine, that with this
sign of the cross which is expressed, with a light moving of the hand, and
calling upon the name of God, the body of our lord, and all other things that
are sanctified, are consecrated. By the same father we learn, that men make a
cross in celebration of Christ's sacraments. Tract. 118. in Joan. Tit. 20.
Panopl. These Authorities not ansvvered by M. Calf. This question not soluted.
By Euthimius that a cross with the hand does sanctify all things, to which
it is put, as the water of baptism, the oil and oyntme^t, the faces of the
faithful, the mystical bread, and holy blood. And all this I did put in my
book, and desired our new ministres to tell us, how all this could be done,
unless it be, as the church uses, by lifting up the hand, and making the
sign of the cross? but I have no answer. M. Calf. that has taken upon him to
answer, in the behalf of all the protestants, answers no word, neither to
this question, nor to these places of S. Chrisost. Aug. and Euthymius: whereby
you may perceive that he answers not directly to that which is propounded,
but uses slyghtes to shyft matters, that the ignorant may continue still in
error.

But because he braggeth so much of scripture, and thinks no catholic to
have so much skill in them, as him self, and and his masters, let us examine
the places which he brings, and see, whether benedicere, signifies nothing
else, but to speak well, and give thanks. S. Mathewe says: (...), which
words, you tell me, If I understand Greek, be these, Jesus taking the bread,
Matt. 26.
and giving thanks, brake it. But I tell you, if you interpret them so, you
understand neither Greek, nor the Evangelist. For to oppose you in your small
rules, be not (...) and (...), Fol. 106. a
participles of the second and first Aoristes? And to what has the first, and
second Aorist respect in your Lexicon and grammar? to the persent, or to the
perfect tense? If to the perfect tense, then ca^ not (...), signify taking,
nor (...), signify giving thanks, in the present tense. But (...) must
respect the time past, and signify, after he had taken, and (...), when he had
given thanks. And so, if you would needs refuse the old translation, and
follow the Greek precisely, you should have said: Acceptum Jesus panem fregit
quum benedixisset, Jesus broke the bread taken into his hands, after that he
had blessed it. Or else this: Acceptum Jesus panem and benedictum fregit, Jesus
brake the bread taken into his hands, and blessed it. Which kind of
translation, by the participle of the preterperfecte tense, they that be more
skillful in Greek than you or I, Sir James, take to be most aptest to
express the nature of the participles of the active Aoristes. But that sense
could not like your melancholy humor, because it proves that the bread was
blessed of Christ, and co^uinceth that (...) and (...) signifies more than
speaking well, and giving thanks: which you like not.

In the words of S. Mark you commit the like error. For you interpret
(...) taking in the present tense, which signifies, after that he had taken,
in the preterperfect tense. But to the purpose. S. Mark says, Accepit Jesus
panem and benedicens fregit. Jesus took bread, and giving thanks brake it,
after your translation. Tell us sir to whom did Christ give thanks in this
place, to God the father? that apeareth not by scripture. For it is evident by
the evangelist S. Mark, that Jesus took bread, blessed bread, and brake bread,
as the Greek Aorist (...) and (...) governing in that place an accusative,
does plainly show. And whether it be gratiarum actio, aut benedictio, giving
of thanks, or blessing, it must as well be applied to the bread, as taking, and
breaking. For Christ blessed that which he took, and that which he took he
brake, which is easy to he seen in S. Mathewe, who joins those words,
taking bread, and blessing with a conjunction copulative, which shows, that
there is a liknesse, between that which went before, and that which came
after. But to end this controversy, and put all out of doubt, S. Paul has an
evident place in his epistle to the Corinthians, where he says (...)? The cup
of blessi^g which we do bless, 1. Cor. 10.
is it not a communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we
break is it not a participation of the body of our lord? Because, we being
many, are one bread, and one body, all that be partakers of one bread and one
cup? Here S. Paul refers blessing to the cup, and gives us to
understand that albeit the Evangelists do not clearly express it, yet they
meant that the blessing should be also referred to the bread. Both the bread
and the cup are of like holiness, blessed in the last supper and not thanked
of Christ, as our young master minister by the Etymology of his (...) would
made such as him self beleaue. But to talk with him plainly, how say you sir,
Fol. 107. a
does it evidently appear by the word of God, to all reasonable creatures
that it is all one to bless, and to give thanks, as you teach in your book?
If it be so, construe the words of S. Paul, and make a reasonable man
beleaue it. He says, (...)? Construe it I beseeke you in Greek, as it lies.
Calf. (...), the cupp, (...) of blessing, (...), for the which we give thanks,
(...), is it not, (...), the co^municatio^, (...), of the blood af Christ?
Mart. Yea young man, will you ever more falsify the scripture? where find
you that particle (for) which you shufle in, to help your purpose? There is no
such word in the text. Construe, it again, and remember, that, o, in Greek
is the accusative case, governed of the verb, and answers to the question
whom or what, Go to be not afraied. Calf. (...), the cup, (...), of
blessing, o, the which, (...), we bless, (...), is it not, (...), the
communication, (...), of the blood of Christ?

Mart. Well said, I am glad that at lenght you can see the truth. By S. Paul
then, it is plain, that we bless the cup of benedictio^: and so plain that
you ca^ not say, we give thanks the cupp of benediction, or we speak well the
cup of benediction. For that is an vnprope phrase of speech, nor yet, that
we give thanks to the cup of benediction. For thanks are due to God only,
nor yet that we speak well the cup of benediction, nor give thanks only for
the cup of benediction. For the words do not import so much, nor employ
that sense, The bred and wine blessed.
but infer a plain blessing of the bread and wine. Whereby, if you be one
of the reasonable creatures that your self mentioned even now, you may see by
the word of God, that to bless, and give thanks, is not all one. The very
places of scripture which you allege, prove against you. For when five lofes
and two fishes mentioned in S. Mathewe, Mark and Luke, Matt. 14*
were blessed, it is vnpropre, to say, that Christ said, well bread, well
fishes, Marc. 6. Luc. 9.
or gave thanks to the bread, and thanks to the fishes, or for the fishes,
but as S. Matthew says: He blessed and brake, what M. Calf? the bread
forsoothe? S. Luke says: Benedixit illis, He blessed them. Marc. 8.
Likewise S. Mark: Habebant paucos pisciculos and ipsos benedixit, They had a
few fishes and he blessed them.

Here blessing is not thanks giving, nor speaking well, but a sanctifying of
those creatures, a giving a virtue and power unto them to multiply, and
increase, to set forth the glory of God in feeding so many persons. Likewise
when Christ lyfted up his hands, and blessed his disciples, you can not say,
that Christ said, well disciples, nor that he gave thanks to his disciples.
But benedixit eis, he blessed them, Perchance pouring into them a stre^ght,
which should ward them, Theophilact. in 24. Lucae.
until the coming of the holy Ghost. Perchance instructing us, that when we
go far from home, we should comme^d the people under us, to the blessing of
God says Theophilact.

Thus you see that blessing and thanks giving is not all one. And albeit it
follows in S. Luke, that the Apostles came into Jerusalem, benedicentes
Dominum, praising God, yet shall blessing, and thankesgeuing, be diverse, as
long as there is man to bless, or thing to be blessed.

And because you seem to be ignorant, what blessing is, and ca^ not epsy a
difference between, blessing, thanks giving, and speaking well, I will upon
hope that you will bless more oftener, thank more frendlyer, and speak more
honestlyer, note what is blessing, thankesgeuing, and speaking well. Benedictio
est sancticationis traditio, Did 28. cap presbiterum. Genes. 2. What is
blessing.
blessing in that sense that we talk of now, is a giving of sanctification,
as when God blessed the seventh day, he gave a sanctification to the seventh
day, and made it holy, and would have men, to cease from labor, and beasts
from work, that his holy name might be honored that day. Likewise when he
blessed Noe and Abraham, and other patriarchs, he gave them a sanctification,
Genes. 9. 1. Reg 9.
and made them holy in his sight. Samuel, blessed the sacrifice and made it
holy and meet to be offered unto God: In the new testament, the virgin mary
was, benedicta in mulieribus, blessed amongst women, that is sanctified above
al other women, made an holy and sweet tabernacle to receive the eternal son
of God. Christ in his last supper blessed bread, that is gave it a
sanctification, and by the omnipote^cie of his word, made it his own fleash,
saying. This is my body, which shall be given for you in remission of sins, and
so likewise, of the cup, this is my blood of the new testament which shall be
shed for many in remission of sins. And that you may not think this to be my
private opinion, diverse ancient fathers speak notably of this sanctification
and consecration of the outward elements and visible creatures of bread and
wine, especially Justinius, Martyr, S. Cypria^, S. Ambrose, Eusebius Emisenus,
Apolog. 2. de coena domini. De ijs qui myster. cap. 9. Homil. 5. de Pasch.
Epist 59. quest. 5. Thanks giving. De gratia and gratitu. quest. 106
and S. Aug. as all that are desirous to seek may find in the places quoted in
the marge^t, which for fear of tediousnes I omit.

As for thankesgeuing it is defyned, thus. Gratiarum actio est quaedam gratiae
recompensatio, that is to say, thanks giving, is a certain recompense, of
grace, and benefit bestowed upon us. As when the poor beggar gives the rich
man thanks, for his alms, his thanks is a certain recompense for his alms.
In like manner when we give our heart, our soul and mind, to God, when we have
compassion of the poor, when we fast, and pray, when we renew the memory of
his passion, when we set forth the glory of his name, and give him high
commendations, and sovereign praises for the benfites of our creation, for the
abundance of all things, appertaining to our sustenance, for the kinds of
things, for the variety of time, yea for persecution, adversity, and trouble,
and so forth, Just. Mar. Apol. 2.
then give we thanks to God, then do we so far forth as we may recompense,
his goodness toward us, and after the benefit is bestoued, give thanks, and
when the good turn is done, make recompense, and in consideration of his
merciful promise make him debtor unto us. For as master Calf. alleges out of
Chrysostom: Qui benedixerit debitorem illum facit maioris benedictionis: He
that blesses, and gives thanks to God, Fol. 116. a Homil. 29 in 9. Gene.
makes him debtor of a greater blessing. Which blessi^g is no thanks geui^g
M. Calf. For God gives us no thanks, we must give thanks to him. And for our
poor thanks, perceding of a pure heart, he gives us an infinite treasure,
that is the fruition of him self in glory. By this we se that to give thanks
to God, is to recompense his goodness, and benefits toward us, so far forth
as we may, by rendering our hearts, souls, and minds, unto him, and giving
him high commendations, and sovereign praises for our creation, as is before
said: but that Christ in such sort only, gave thanks to God the father, at
the institution of his supper, the words of the Gospel do not import, for
(...) in S. Mathewe, (...) in S. Luke, (...), in S. Paul have relation to the
bread and wine, What did Christ bless in the supper M. Calf? Answer.
and answer to the question whom or what, as if you would ask what was it,
that Christ took, what was it that Christ blessed, your answer must be, he took
bread, and he blessed bread, and not he thanked bread, or said well bread, or
gave only thanks for the bread. Thanks in such only sort, as you protestants
mean, were given after supper, when they sange their hymn, and went up into
the mount olyuet. And that you may not cauil, in saying that thanks were
given after supper in such only sort, as you mean, I put you to understand,
that we deny not, that Christ lifting up his eyes to heaven gave thanks to
God the father before, to instruct us, that before and after the celebratio^ of
the mysteries, we should praise God, and give him tankes, for his tender mercy
toward us: but we say, that Christ besides giving of thanks, blessed the
bread, and gave it a sanctification, and made it holy, even his own body and
blood, and both by his example taught, and with his word commanded us to do
the like whenever we would celebrate the memory of his passion, that is, to
take bread, and bless it, and pronounce those holy words, by which through
the omnipotency of his power, the visible creatures are sanctified, and
hallowed and turned into the substance of his body and blood.

He meant not only, that when we came, to the mysteries of the lords supper, we
shhould bless only, that is as M. Calfhils interpretation expounds it, Fol.
106. a
Be thankful for them. For which exposition of his, because he alleges. S.
Chrysostom, and will leth me, to set him against my Alberte, I will examyne the
place of that ancient father. And to the end you may the better understand his
words, I will note a place, In 1. Cor. cap 10 homil 24. Homi. 60. Christ does
sanctify the creatures of bred and wine and change them.
where he proves that the creatures of bred and wine were consecrated by
Christ in the supper. In his Homily to the people of Antioche, talking of the
sacrament he says, The works set forth, are not wrought by the virtue of
man: he that then made them in that supper, makes them also now. we keep the
place of ministres. It is christ him self that does sanctify them and change
them. Here he declares, that Christ in the supper did more then give thanks,
he sanctified the creatures, and changed them. And so must we that are his
ministres do. If you ask into what he changed those visible creatures, S.
Chrisostom shall tell you out of the same Homily upon the epistle to the
Corinthians, Hom 24. in 1 Cor. cap. 10. The creatures of bred and wine
changed into the body of Christ. Mark M. Calf the body of Christ is seen
upon the aultor
whence M. Calf. has picked his half sentence. There he says, Christ gave us
his flesh, that we might be filled with it, by which he allured us into a
marvelous great love of him. That fleash was Christ's body. That body the wise
men adored in the manger, But you do not see that in the manger, but in the
altar, not a woman holding in her armies, but a priest present, and the holy
Ghost plentifully diffused upon the sacrifice there proposed: neither do
thou see that simple body, but thou see also his power, and know all the
order and doing of it. Further he says. If thou desire blood, do not
springle the alter of idols with slaughter of brute beasts, but springle my
altar with my blood. Quod est in calice id est quod a latere fluxit, and
illius sumus participes. That which is in the Chalice, is that which flowed out
of his side, and of that we are, partakers. By which every man that has not
his senses corrupted with fancies, may see, that the true body, and blood of
Christ, are in the sacrament, and that it is the true substance of his fleash
into which the creatures of bread and wine are changed.

This considered let us see the place, that M. Calf. alleged. And that
Chrysostomes meaning may more clearly appear, I will repete the words that
go before, and come after. Streit upon those words of S. Paul, he says:
What say thou O blessed Apostle Paul, when thou will as^onnie the hearers,
and make mention of of the dreadful mysteries? Do thou call that cup
fearful and full of dread, the cup of blessing? I do so in deed. For it is no
small thing that is spoken. Siquidem quum benedictionem dico, Eucharistiam
dico, and quum Eucharistiam dico, omnem benignitatis Dei thesaurum aperio. For
when I speak of blessing, I speak of thanks giving, (as M. Calf. translateth
it) and when I speak of thanks giving, I open all the treasure of the goodness
of God, and rehearse those great gifts of his. For with the cup we add the
unspeakable benefits of God, and whatsoever we have obtained. So we come unto
him, we communicate with him, thanking him that he has delyured man kind,
from error, that when we had no hope, and were wicked persons, he admitted us
brothers, and companions unto him self. With these and such other rendringes
of thanks we come unto him. Hitherto M. Calf. and as though he had found a
great proof for his gay fancy, he says: Fol. 106. b
Here you see, what Chrisostom took blessing to be. It follows a little after
in Chrysostom: The cup of blessing which we do bless, is it not a
communication of the blood of Christ? By these words specially, What S.
Paul calls the cup of blessing.
he made him self to be credited, and also to be dreaded. The sense and meaning
of those words is this, that which is in the chalice, is that, which flowed
from his side, and of that we are partakers. He called it the cup of
blessing, because when we have that cup before us, with admiration and
certain honor of that unspeakable gift, we praise him, giving him tankes
that he shed his blood, that we might not remain in error, but have made us
partakers of it.

Thus Chrysostom there: Now gentle M. Calf. what means Chrysostom by
blessing? thankesgeuing as you say? If it be so? Then thanks giving is all the
treasure of the goodness of God, thanks giving is that which flowed out of the
side of Christ, thanks giving is the table of our Lord, thanks giving, is
animae nostrae vis, The blessing that Chrisost. mentions in the Place
alleged by M. Calf
nerui mentis, fiduciae vinculum, fundamentum, spes, salus, lux, vita nostra.
The strenght of the soul, the synowes of the mind, the bond of faith, the
foundation, our hope, our health, our light and our life. For benedictio, and
eucharistia, that S. Paul mentioned, have all these properties applied unto
them in the very self same place of Chrysostom. Read the whole chapter and
see: and after view of the place, let us understand whether thanks giving
(which is an action of ours) never of it self acceptable, in the sight of God,
for our unworthiness, can be compared to any of them. If after mature
deliberation, you find it not only great impiety and ungodliness, but also
cursed blasphemy and abominatio^ to conceive any such thing) think the^ no
vnreasonahle men, that make a difference between blessing, and thanks giving,
and mislike your rashness for alleging, that out of Chrysostom which you
understand not. The thanks giving or Euchariste, which he mentioned, is the
body and blood of Christ, called of S. Paul the cup of blessing, What is
Thanks giving mentioned of Chrisost.
because, when we have that cup before us, we praise God with admiration, and
honor, giving thanks that he shed his blood, for us, and suffered us not to
remain in error. With that cup we remember the unspeakable benefits of
God, we come unto him, we communicate with him, and praise him, for redeming us
out of thrauldom. By this you see that first we must have the cup of blessing
before us, and then give thanks, not that we may not give thanks without the
cup, but because our thanks giving with that cup of blessing is a more
acceptable sacrifice in the sight of God. Wherefore it behooves us to seek,
how we may come by this cup of blessing. A mean must be had: if it may be
gotten by only thanks giving, or by being thankful, then every man may make
this cup of blessing. For every man can give thanks, at the mysteries of our
lords supper, and be thankful for them: but if none ca^ make that cup, but
such as be specially called, to who^ it was said: Make this in my
remembrance, it will follow that some special thing is required, more than
thanks giving, as taking, blessing, and consecrating, with those words, which
Christ spoke, when he instituted this sacrament, and said: Take, eat, this is
my body: Drink ye all of this, This is my blood of the new testament, which
shall be shed for many in remission of sins, which appartayneth not to all. As
for speaking well, Speaking well.
it is either a giving of gentle words in familiar talk, or a reporting well
of our even Christians, or a copious and eloquent setting forth of an oration
by voice and gesture, or a teaching in right order. And none of al these was
principally meant of our savior Christ in his last supper.

To conclude therefore, seeing I have disproued, M. Calfhils assertion, that by
the nature of the word, the judgment of the Evangelists, and testimony of S.
Paul, to bless and give thanks is not all one thing, and declared that
Christ in his last supper, did not only give thanks, but bless the bread and
wine, and gave them a sanctification, and made them holy, that is, turned them
in to the substance of his body and blood, and proved that blessing which
Chrysostom speaks of, ^. Cap. 10.
in the x. chapter of S. Paul to the Corinthians is not our bare thanks
giving, but the very blood of Christ it self, and further noted, that in
celebration of Christ's sacraments, there must be a consecration, and
sanctification of the visible creatures, by pronouncing the words of Christ,
and calling upon his holy name, and making the sign of the cross, which
manner of consecration the church learned of Christ, and has continued ever
since, which custom and use of the church, S. Augustine thought a good way
to understand the scripture, we may boldly say with that learned father Albertus
Magnus, that Christ blessing the bread, Signo quodam manus benedixit, Epist.
59. quest. 5. ad Paul.
Blessed it with a certain sign of the hand, and then pronounced these words,
this is my body etc. and this interpretation of his, and assertion of mine, all
the wit of M. Calfhils head, and lerning in his English Doctors, will never
be able to prove to be frivolous.

His iarring still, like a blind harper upon one string, that it is not
material, Calf. Fol. 107. a
what rite or ceremony was received after, and that it is not sufficient to
say, it was once so, but it must be proved that it was well, so, Mart.
I have answered before. And say further here with S. August. that as we must do
all that, which the authority of scripture commands: So likewise, if the
catholic church through out all the woorlde does use any of these rites, and
ceremonies, we must also use them and do as the church does. Epist. 118. ad
Ianua. Epist ad Pomp.
For to reason whether this should be done in such sort, or no, it is a point
of most insolent madness. The place of S. Cyprian, which he him self allows,
vnde est traditio etc. Whence is this tradition, does it descend from the
writings and commau^dements of his Apostles, makes nothing against us. For
this rite and ceremony of making the sign of the cross, came from the
tradition of the Apostles, and so consequently from, their commandment, as it
is proved before. If you bid us show scripture for it, we bid you show us in
what scripture all Christ's doings, All the Apostles preched, but all their
precepts are not written, yet to be follovved.
and all the Apostles co^mandeme^ts were written. All preached, all gave
commandments, to the Christians, where they preached, and yet have we not
writings of all. And because al their commandments were not written, shall we
think that the commandments which they gave to their people, and they to
their aftercummers successively, by tradition unto this present, are to be
contemned? No. S. Paul commands the contrary, and bids us keep
traditions, that we learned by his epistle and word of mouth S. Cyprian him
self urges earnestly the tradition of Christ, for mingling water with wine:
Libro 2. epist. 3. Sermon. de vnctio.
like wise the anointing w^h Chrisme to be instituted, and yet neither this nor
that tradition* is written, neither in the Evangelists, nor in the Acts of the
Apostles, nor in any of their epistles. VVherby you may understand, that he
asking for tradition, asked as well for such as were unwritten, and sealed in
the hearts of men, by the commandment of the Apostles, as for those which
were written i^ the Evangelists, epistles, or Acts, of the Apostles.

Wherefore, Fol. 107. b
in saying that S. Cyprian would not be bound to admit any thing which was
not written in the Evangelists, Acts, Epistles, or other writings of the
Apostles, S. Cypria. sclaundered. Heretics denying traditions deny the
scripture. August* epist. 118.
you scla^der that holy father, and deceive the readers, with abusing his
authority, and wresting his words. And whiles you will not be bound to the
observance of traditions without proof of scripture, deny the authority of
scripture, which commands traditions to be kept, although they were delyured
without scripture. You break the ordinances of the Apostles, and
determinations of general counsels, from whom all traditions generally used
in the catholic church are commended unto us. So little pass you either for
scripture, counsels, or fathers, when they make against you.

But to proceed: where I proved that the sign of the cross is used in
matrimony, penance, and extreme unction, because they are sacraments of the
church, which are made (as S. Augustine says) with the sign of the cross,
M. Calf. having little to say, finds fault where none is, and says: Calf.
Fol. 107. b
I am abused in my own conceit, for esteming the sign of the cross, to be a
thing of such necessity, as that the sacraments can not be made without it.
Mart.
This for lack of better stuff he infarced, ones or twice in his book
before, but the oftener he repeteth it, the more is his shame. For all that
have eyes to see, and ears to hear, and wit to judge, may well perceive
that this is, a very cauillation. In all my treatise I maintain no such
position, but mistrusting, lest some malicious momes should mistake my
meani^g, I put in a clause in the 52. leaf of my book, to declare that no
sacrament lacked his operation, effect, and virtue, if by negligence, or
forgetfulness the sign of the cross were omitted. And this quareller could not
chose, but see it before he came to this place, if he were not blind or druncke
with an hasty zeal to answer that, which came after, before he understood
what went before, which is a foul shame. Where such practices are used, there
is small hope of upright deali^g. That done he says, that I leave out the
calling upon the name of God, Fol. 107. b
as though Christen men taught that any sacrament could be made with a bare
sign, without the calling upon the name of God, and pronouncing the words of
Christ. The lawyer says, all that is spoken in the preface or beginning, is
presupposed to be repeted in that which follows. Wherefore, albeit in every
place, I put not in all the doctors words, nor talk particularly of the
calling upon the name of God, yet seeing that was: Primum in intention, first
in intention, as I professed in my preface, and so well known of all men, that
he is an heathen that doubts of it, a charitable reader, and good Christian,
would ever think that to be pri^cipally understood: but we may learn be this,
what good opinion this our good adversary co^ceaueth of us. When he
preaches, and for one halfhower speaks against the Pope, for another against
the Cardinals, for another, against the enormities of the clergy, for
another, agai^ft the studie^ts of Louayne, would he think any of his brothers
wife, if he said, to his reproach. M. precher spoke never a word of faith in
all his sermon, nor of the name of God? No: His charity (I fear me) would be
chafed with it. And yet he deals so with me: and because I did not expressly
talk of the calling upon the name of God, he says, I leave it out: and when
he had left such a sinistrous suspicion of that in his brethrers ears, he
armed him self and went in have to prove that matrimony, penance, and extreme
unction be no sacraments, and whereas S. Ambrose, Augustine, and Leo call
matrimony, a sacrament, that makes no matter, quoth M. Calf. For Ambrose
calls the words, Fol. 108. a Calf.
and works of Christ a sacrament. Augustine has nothing more familiar in him
than, Sacramenta scripturarum, the sacraments of scriptures. VVisely by S.
Mary, and like a clearke. Mart.
I ever thought before this, that you had learned, that sacraments in their
propre and true signification, (as the church takes them) be signs of an
holy thing, that is of an invisible grace, What signs Sacraments are.
given of God in the visible elements, and not naked signs only, but signs
that are effectuous, signs, that contain grace, and be the cause of grace,
and bring to pass that which they signify. Signs that put us in remembrance
of that which is past, present and to come, as baptism puts us in
remembrance of the passion of Christ that is past, of present grace, that is
remission of sins, given in that sacrament and the glory to com, to which we
have entry by baptism, this I say, I though, you had learned, and could have
judged that in this sense, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and Leo take matrimony to
be a sacrament, and not as the works of Christ, and parables of scripture, be
counted sacraments: but I perceive you are worse, and worse: eueryday more
ignorant, than other. Every sacrament is a sign of an holy thing: but every
sign of an holy thing, is not a sacrament. You forgett your rules of
reciprocation. Albeit, Aristotle said, every horned beast lacks teethe in
the upper iawe, yet you know right well, that whosoever lacks teethe in the
upper iawe is not an horned beast. And so may you think of signs and
sacraments.

But that is not the matter that you stick so much upon. You think if it be a
sacrament it must be a sign, ordained of God for us, Calf Fol 108. a
to confirm our faith, and seal the promise of grace within us. This is a
strange definition of a sacrament. I beseeke you in what scripture, Mart.
doctor, or council, shall we find it? If in none, then give us leave, not
to beleaue it. By this definition, we are like to have never a sacrament left.
For baptism was not principally ordained to confirm our faith, but to wash
away our sins, as S. Peter said: Let every one of you be baptized into
remission of sins. Acto 2.
For such as were of age, it was necessary, that they should (be confirmed in
their faith, and beleaue in Christ before they were baptized, as it is written:
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. As for infantes the faith of the
church suffiseth for them, Marc. 16.
to baptism, to purge them from original sin. The sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, was instituted to be a meat and food of the soul, in this
warfare of ours, and before we can be partakers of it, we must not only be
confirmed in faith, but also have such discretion and judgment, which comes
not, but after certain years, that we may be able, as S. Paul says, 1. Cor.
11.
to try our selves, and examine our consciences, whether we be worthy to be
partakers of that holy meat, before we presume to come to that dreadful table
of our lord. And more sacraments then these the protestants do not
acknoweledg. So whiles M. Calf. proves Matrimony to be no sacrament, by his
new devised definition coined of Calvin in Geneua, M. Calf. of two
sacraments, by his nevve definition leueth never a one. Fol. 108. b Calf.
and of seven cutteth of five, of two he has left his fellows newer a one,
which is an evil kind of Aritmeticke. Such diminutions make poor treasures.

Another reason why Matrimony should be no sacrament, is this. We have for
baptism, who so ever beleaueth and is baptized shall be saved: for the supper,
Take, eat, this is my body, drink ye all of this, this is my blood, which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. But we have not for matrimony take
a wife, and thoue shall be saved. Take a wife and thy sins be forgeuen the,
ergo matrimony is no Sacrament. A propre reason, and meet for such a reader.
Mart.
To answer briefly, I deny that argument: for it is not necessary that every
sacrament have a promise of remission of sins, albeit some have. If it may be
showed that it is a sign of invisible, grace, Every sacrament has not a
promise of remission of sins annexed. Joan, 20.
in such sort as I said before, it is sufficient to convince, that it is a
sament. But what if Matrimony had such a promise annexed unto it, would this
old bachiler and young minister, acknowledge it to be a Sacrament? No No:
Penance has an express promise of remission of sins, by Christ him self,
saying. Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ^e remytte are remytted them.
Likewise extreme Unction has a promise of remissian of sins, by the holy
Ghost in the blessed apostle S. James, saying, Cap. 5. Penance and extreme
vnctio^ have a promise of remission of sins, yet M. Calf denies the^ to be
Satraments.
Is any man sick amongst you, let him bring in the priests of the church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name of God: and the
prayer of faith shall heal the sick, and God shall ease him, and if he be in
sins, they shall be forgiven him: yet amongst protestants they ca^ be no
sacraments. Their definition must stretch as far, and be coarcted, as short,
as pleases their fancy: Yea rather, than they would confess these
sacraments to be comprised in that definition, which them selves make, they
will send that to Geneua, and seek an other in Gehenna. But let us go forward.

A third reason they have learned of Calvin their brutish Bassa upon the words
of S. Paul: who writing in Greek called it a mystery and not a sacrament. but
as I answered in my treatise before, So I answer now again, that baptism and
the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, are called by diverse ancient
fathers, mysteries, and yet notwithstanding they be sacraments. For every
sacrament is a mystery, and this word Sacrament and mystery do not so far
differ, but that, that which is a mystery, may also be a sacrament. Mary every
mystery, is not a sacrament in the propre signification: So that if matrimony
must be no sacrament, because it is a mystery, then baptism and the sacrifice
of the body and blood of Christ be no sacraments: for they are mysteries, and
so we shall have (as I said) never a sacrament left shortly. Such is the drift
of the devil. To this answer, this quareller made no replye in the world, but
thought it best to scoff it out, Fol. 109. a
and like a minstrell make men laugh, with a merry mariadg solennised by the
vicar of S. Fools, between Maukyng and Daukin etc. M. Calves. scoff of Maukin
and Daukin ansvvered.
But if Sir James, Calfhil, will be such a calf still, as to follow Calvin, then
Calfhil, and Calvin, A Calf with a carrin, may dance before Satin and like a
dolt, and a dawkin, meet with Luther and his katrin, and simul and semel by
the vicar of saint Folly, be married to a fury, without sacrament or mystery.

The fourth reason why matrimony should be no sacrament is, Fol 109 a Calf.
says he, because it conferreth no grace. For he that is married, is not, in
that respect more the child of God, than if he were unmarried, he that is
married has no peculier promises, that for his marriage sake, his sins are
remitted him: and yet these are requisite in a sacrament. For answer, I say,
where I declared in my book, Mart.
that in matrimony there is an invisible grace (that is to say) a gift of God,
by which, they (that are married) are made more stronger to suffer adversity,
more wiser to instruct their children, and better able to resist all
corruption, and uncleanliness, you should (sir) first have disproued these to be
graces, and gifts of God, and than, have said, that in matrimony, there is
no invisible grace, given to the man and wife: but that was to hard meat for
your sucking teethe. Homi 20. in Genes*
S. Chrysostom, counted it a great mystery, and unspeakable wisdom, for a
man to forsake his father that begotte him, his mother that with pain brought
him into the world, Invisible grace given in the sacrament of matrimony.
and cleave fast to a woman, which perchance he never saw before: and dare
you say it is no grace? Again every honest man so tenderly loves his wife, as
his own fleash, and joyfully contenteth him self with her company, all days
of his life, and departed his body to none other. Is this no grace? Besides in
all adversity, he contynueth with her, in all sickness he cherishes her, and
from all injuries defends her, and so likewise the woman for her part to the
man. Is not this a special gift of God? If it be given in matrimony (as none
have that specially, but those that are united together in matrimony) why is
there no grace conferred in matrimony?

Furdermore, saint Paul says in this place, Heb. 13.
that matrimony is honorable in all things, and the bed undefiled. In an
other place: The womam shall be saved by bringing forth of children, 1. Tim. 2.
if they continue in faith. Now if matrimony has not a grace of God annexed,
how can the woman have her salvation? Take away matrimony, the act is
unclean, use it in matrimony, as God has ordained, it has his reward, and
why? because God has given it his special grace. To be short, when God joined
our first parents together, the scripture says, benedixit illus Deus, ac
dixit, Genes. 1.
Crescite and multiplicamini. God blessed them, and said, increase and
multiply. What was that? thanks giving, praising or saying well, according to
your etimologie, M. Calf.? No: but Gods blessing, was a sanctyfying of them,
and giving of a spiritual grace: which ceased not in them, but flowed into
all, to whom this precept of his increase and multiply may extend. In S.
Mathewe it is said, whom God has joined let no man separate. Cap. 19.
By which we may perrcaue that the man and wife, that come to gether in the
fear of our lord, are joined by God. And such is his mercy, whom he joins,
he replenisheth with his grace: wherbie it is evident that matrimony has an
invisible grace of God annexed unto it. But M. Calf says, he that is married
is no more the child of God in that respect than if he were unmarried. It is
true: what then? Is Matrimony therefore no sacrament? or has it no grace
annexed unto it? It follows not. For like as if the Queen's Majesty should
give to the lord mayor of London, an hundred pounds by the year, her
liberality should be always counted a singular favor, and special grace
albeit in that respect, he be no more the Queen's subject than he was before: So
is matrimony an holy sacrament, although the married is not in respect of his
marriage more the child of God than if he were unmarried. For as the prince
extends not her liberality to the lord Mayor, to make him more her subject
tha^ he was before, but to encoradge and able him, to do her grace better
service, in that vocation: So God ordained not this sacrament of matrimony, to
make the married man more the child of God, than, when he mas unmarried, but to
able him by his grace to live in that state honestly, and serve to the increase
and generation of children to the honor of God, so long as he would have men
to live upon the earth.

Calf.
Again to prove that matrimonye is no sacrament M. Calf. says, he that is
married has no peculier promise, that for his mariadg sake his sins are
remitted, and yet these things are required in a sacrament: Maat.
where note good readears that he paseth not what he says, so he blind men's
eyes with some gay colored words. For what if those things be required in a
sacrament? ergo be they required in all sacraments? It is no good argument. For
albeit baptism has a promise of remission of sins annexed unto it, yet it
is not necessary that every sacrament have that promise. It is sufficient that
according to their diverse effects, Where has the supper of our lord a
promise of remission of sins M. Calf.? Joan. 6.
they have diverse graces of the holy Ghost, always following. If every
sacrament has a promise of remission of sins annexed, and that can not be a
sacrament, which has not the promise of remission of sins annexed, what
shall we say of the supper of our lord? Where will the protestants prove in
all scripture that a promise of remission of sins is annexed to this
sacrament? If they tell us out of S. John: If a man eats of this bread, he
shall live for ever, we will say unto them out of S. Paul: He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own judgment not discerning the
body of our Lord. So that remission of sins is not promised to a man, because
he is made partaker of this sacrament: his sins must be remitted before, and
he him self in favor with God, before he presume to come, to this Sacrament,
otherwise he shall not only not have remission of sins, but he shall have a
terrible judgment also, and greater heap of damnation. And if there be a
remission of sins, the^ is it a sacrament propitiatory, M. Calf. proves the
supper of our lord no sacrament.
contrary to your own doctrine. If it be not, then have you found a sacrament
that has no promise, of remission of sins annexed unto it, and so
consequently make it no sacrament. For if that be no sacrament which has no
remission of sin promised unto it, as baptism has, certes, this can be no
sacrament: and so of two sacraments by this reason the protestants will leave
them selves but one, and not that neither, if their definition of a sacrament
may stand, as I said before. Thus they faulle from error to error, from
absurdity to absurdity, whiles they forsake the true determination of Christ's
catholic church.

As for the five absurdities which M. Calf. has noted in popish doctrine,
touching matrimony, I differ to speak of the^ here, only this I say, he
has as absurdely demeaned him self in treating of them as the ass did in his
lions skin. In the last of them he sclaundreth the church, and co^trolleth
that which never honest man thought worthy of reprehension, and mayntayneth a
notable error, by which the whole state of commonweals shall be disordred,
that is, that a man may put away his wife for fornication and the woman refuse
her husband, Fol. 111. a Apositio^ of M. Calf^ contrary to scripture. Matt. 19.
Vide Augu. de adulter. co^iug. ad Polle^t. 1. Cor. 7.
upon like cause, and yet marry an other: which is expressly against the
Gospel of Christ, and preaching of the holy Ghost. For Christ says:
Whosoever forsakes his wife, except it be for fornication, and marieth
another, he commits adultrie: and he that marries the woman that is so
forsaken committed adultrie. The holy ghost teaches by S. Paul, that neither
the man must forsake his wife, nor the wife go away from her husband. If she
fortune to go away from her husband (which is never permitted, but in case of
fornicacion) S. Paul wills her: Manner innuptam aut reconciliari viro. To
continue unmarried or else to be reconciled to her husband: which being true,
how can he that deuorceth an adulterous person, He that puts away an
adulterous person ca^ not marry another while she lives. Acto. 10.
marry another? S. Paul says if the woman forsake her husband (which she can
not do but fornication) she is commanded by god, either to remain unmarried,
either to be reconciled to her husband, and if the woman being giltlesse, and
innocent, is bound by the law of God not to marry, if she forsake her husband
for fornication, shall not the man be bound in like sort to continue
unmarried, if he put away his wife for like occasion? Is God, Acceptor
personarum? An acceptour of persons? Shall the weaker and frayler vessel be
bound to co^tynue unmarried, and shall the man whom reason and wisdom should
more rule, be set at liberty? No M. Calf: There is no reason in it. The law
that binds one, binds the other. But we may see how lewdly you wrest the
scriptures, to mayntaine the sensual lusts of some fleashlie brothers, but
let us go forward.

That you will have penance, to be no sacrament, that you follow Calvin and
count it blasphemous and abominable to have it called the second table after
shipwreck, Fol. 111. a
and so consequently the author of that doctrine, a blasphemous and an
abominable man, In cap. 3. Esai. and epist. ad Demetri.
who was no worse, than S. Hierome, what shall I say? When S. Hierome
translated the epistle of Epiphanius against images (as you think) and gave no
signification that he misliked it, then S. Hierome was a Cardinal, and a
saint Canonised, now he calls penance the second table after shipwreck, M.
Calf. acco^pteth S. Hiero. a blasphemous and an abominable man.
he is a blasphemous and abominable man. Alas sir how has S. Hierome offended
you, that you should prefer Caluins judgment, and your own before his? If
penance be not the only way and mean to raise us up again, when we fall,
after baptism, tell us how we shall rise? We sin daily, and therefore we
must have some mean to wype away our sins, and reentre into favor with God
daily? Fol. 118. a
Are we bound to call our baptism to remembrance, whenever we sin, that
by the promise exhibited in baptism, the sinful soul may be refresshed and
penance out of it gathered, as you say, thereby to exterminate the sacrament
of penance? Where is this in scripture? If it be necessary to salvation,
some Apostle or Evangelist must needs have specified it after your doctrine?
Some thing necessary to salvation not found in scripture, by the protestants
doctrine.
Christ that so tenderly loved us, the holy Ghost that so wisely inspired the
Apostles, to instruct us, would not omit so necessary a point of doctrine.
If it be no where to be found in scripture, and yet in the protestants
fancies necessary to salvation, then by their own position, there is some
thing necessary to salvation, and yet not to be found in scripture, but alas:
Aspis a vipera mutuatur venenum. Calfhil has sucked, this dragges out of
Caluins drugges, as far wide from all scripture, and reason, as east from
weast, and North from South. God by the Prophet cried unto the sinful people:
Joel. 2.
Turn unto me in weeping and wayling. Christ him self cried: Do penance the
kingdom of God is at hand. Matt 4.
S. John Baptist in like sort preached, Matt. 3.
and willed us to do the works and fruictes of penance, and not to say we
have Abraham for our father. Likewise the Apostles cried: Poenitemini, repent.
Acto. 3. Cap ^.
S. John the Evangelist in his Apocalypse, willed the angel of Ephesus to
remember whence he fell and to do penance, and work the works that he did
first. And what is it to do penance? to call our baptism to remembrance, as
M. Calvin and Calfhil say, minding thereby to exterminate the sacrament of
penance? A propre definition nor found in scripture, council, nor ancient
father, these fouretene hundred years, but wicked and heretical, and therefore
worthy to be contemned, with the authors of it. Other things, you bring
against this sacrament.

As that absolution should be the sacrament, Calf. Fo. 112* a. b
and not penance, that confession is to no purpose, that contrition of heart,
suffiseth to remission of sin, that the church should teach that every
thief, murderer, and adulterer has clear remission of his sins although he
never repent, that it requires a visible element, but so far unlike a
divine, Mart.
and one that pretends skill in the fathers, that wisemen, think it more
meter to laughe at you, than answer you. To talk of all those requires a
large treatise, which I omit because it is not incident to my purpose. They
that are desirous to see it largely handled, may read Hosius confession, and
other late writers.

That which you speak of extreme Vnctio^, Fol. 113. a
as that oil ca^ not enter into the soul, How fond is it? You might as well
require it to be proved that water enters into the soul in baptism. For as
remission of sins is given in baptism, as soon as the water has washed the
body, and the minister pronounced Christ's words: So is remission of such
sins as Christ would have remitted by virtue of this sacrament given, as soon as the body is anointed. Again that priests anoint every sick body, Calf.
Fol. 113. a.
and none are the better, that bisshops (who are priests) have not commission
to cast ont devils, to cure diseases, to cleanse lepres and to raise the dead.
That priests mock the holy Ghost, and make the body the gresier for the grave,
that we come not by our wills to the sick until the last gasp, that we
admit but one alone, or none but priests when the sacrament is ministered, Mart.
what vain lies be these? All that are of any experience can controlle you of
untruth in all these, and diverse others as shall apeare hereafter?

Fol. 114 b Galf. Mart.
Where you conclude, that extreme vnctio^ is no sacrament, because it is not a
ceremony instituted of God, and delivered us, nor has a promise of grace that
concerns us, Let me ask you this question. Protestants denying extreme
vnctio^ to be instituted of God, deny the holy Ghost to be God. Cap. 5.
Is the holy Ghost God, or is he not? If he be God, then was this sacrament and
ceremony of extreme Vnctio^ instituted of God. For the holy Ghost infused
plentifully upon the Apostles, and speaking nothing, but that which he heard
of Christ, did ordain by the blessed Apostle. S. James, that sick me^ should
be anointed by the priest, and have prayer made over the^. Examine the words:
S. James says, Is any man sick amongst you? Let him bring in the priests of
the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil: Is not here a
plain institution and ordinance of the holy Ghost? Is not inducat, let him
bring in, the imperative mode, which bids and commands? and does not
(orent) let them pray, signify also a commandment? What reason have you to
the contrary? Show it if you ca^. As for the promise of grace, A promise of
grace.
does it not follow streitwayes? And if he be in sins, they shall be for given
him? Is not remissioa of sins a grace with you M. Calf? Be not these the
words of the holy ghost in the Apostle S. James? If you acknoweledge them to
be the words of the holy ghost, and confess the holy ghost to be God and
allow remission of sins, to be an invisible grace of God, then must you
grant, that extreme unction is a sacrament instituted of God, and has a
promise of grace annexed unto it?

Calf.
Touching your fancy that S. James would have it to be te^porall, Mart.
and not pass the present state, we tell you, that the express commandment
of God, may not be illuded with such fond surmises. We have it put
indefinitely, as a precept to continue for ever, without all lymitation of
time. If you will have it but temporal, show us the commadement? Show us as
good evidence out of scripture against it, as we show you for it. Or if you
have no scripture in store, show us some general counsel: some ancient
father: some decre of the Sea Apostolik.

If you can show none, (as I am assure you can not) why crake you so
impudently, that you have reason, Calf.
and scripture for you, Fol. 114. b
with the learned and sound determination of more fathers of the church, Mart.
than were at the council of Florence and Synod of Trent? You have not
alleged so much as one council, nor one father: nor have any to allege, but
friar Luther that married Mouncke, and Calvin that lousie Lorrell, of Geneua,
and such Apostatats as have followed the^ and kept their co^spiracies against
the church and spoiled it, as apeareth in a little oration, made against the
insurrectio^s and outrages of heretics and lately translated in to English.
Wherefore what shall prevail? scripture, or no scripture? Gods word, or
men's wills? True counsels, or false co^spiracies? holy fathers, or rennegate
friars? Catholic bishops, or violent usurpers? fond talk or sad proof? If
all the durtie terms which friar Luther used were leyed in a heap, and all
the filthy words that baudy Bale disgorged, were brought together, and all
the vilanous phrases, slanders, Tauntes, that Melanchto^, Illiricus, and
Montanus, and all the rabble of such raging rufflers had often in their mouths,
were conveyed with a glister pype into your railing breaste M. Calf., you
should never be able to disgrace that honorable council, which was kept of
late in Trent. It was summoned by the head of Christ's church in earth. The
counsel of Trent.
It was kept by true and laufull bisshops. It was assisted by the Emperor, and
mightiest kings in Christendom. It was honored with the Legates, and
Ambassadors of al catholic princes. The fathers there assembled out of
Italy, France, Spain, Portugalle, Pole, etc. Fla^dres, Brabant, Henalt and
Artois, were learned bisshops, well nigh to the number of 2. hundred, besides
many Doctors of Divinity, and law, diverse of the society of Jesus,
generals of all religions, men profoundly learned in the deep points of
Divinity, and not be witched, Fol. 115. a
with the sorcerie of Cyrce, nor called, to a trough of draffe, (as it pleases
such a well nurtered gentleman to term it) but required to come together to
debate these controversies of religion for the stay of Christen people, and
suppression of heresy, and being there assembled, they examined the growndes
that all heretics build on, and tried them to the utter most. And because
all protestants should have access thither, and dispute freely, and propounde
what they could, for mayntena^ce of their new religion, Safe conduicte offered
the protestants
they gently required them to be present, they offered safe conduict to come,
and go, to tarry, return when they would? yet not one of all your sect durst
apeare, and show his face, no, not your great idol of Geneua, and that as the
world may well judge conscientia imbecillitatis, for conscience of their own
imbecillitie and weakness.

When they could not procure any protestants thither to defend their
positions, they assigned some, who after the manner of all schools, should
dispute for both parts, and after long and mature deliberation, they concluded
by the assistaunce of the holy Ghost, whose presence and grace Christ promised
to al such companies, assembled in his holy name, the decrees which you see.
Matt. 18.
Amongst which this is one, that there be seven Sacraments in Christ's church,
as Baptism, Confirmation, the Supper of our Lord, Sessio 7. Can. 1.
holy Orders, Matrimony, Penance, and extreme Unction. VVithal they accursed
all that defend and maintain the contrary. Which curse will light upon you,
make as light of it as you can. For Gods words must be true, spoken to Peter:
Matt. 16.
Quic quid ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in coelis. Whatsoever thou
bindest in earth, shall be bound in heaven. They have tied you in the terrible
band of excommunication upon earth, doubt you never a deal, but ye are tied.
They are the body of Christendom, the Pope is the head: They both make one
church, and besides this church, there is no other church: Mat. 18.
if you hear not this church, Christ says: You are an Heathen and Publican,
and so consequently an heretic. Wherefore in contemning the church, and
dispising the orders of general counsels, if there were nothing else, you
show your selves to be heretics. In all ages and all cuntries hetetikes ever
more, and none but heretics, have refused to yield to the general counsels,
quoru^ saluberrima in Ecclesiis est authoritas. Whose authority is very
wholesome in the church, says S. Augustine. August. epist. 118.
The Arria^s refused the council of Nice. The Macedonia^s the counsel of
Constantinople. The Eutichians the council of Chalcedon. None but heretics
refuse general counsels The place of Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinit. applied to
heretics.
Image breakers, the seventh of Nice, and you the councils of Florence, and
Trent. Wherefore the saying of Hilarious, against Auxe^tius, may welbe applied
unto you. For as he kept conuenticles against Hilarious, so do you against the
church. As he called him heretic, so do you the catholics. As he purchassed
him the displeasure of noble men, so do you labor as much as you ca^, to bring
us in hatred, with the prince. As he despised the council of Nice: So do you
not only contemn the council of Florence and Trent, but that of Nice also, and
al other general cou^cells that were ever kept in such points as they make
against your errors. You have reuyued diverse heresies that they condemned.
Therefore, as he said: Diabolus est quia Arrianus est, he is a devil because he
is an Arrian: So we may say he is a devil, because he is a Caluinian. For as
they conte^ned the church, and rebelled against God: eue^ so do you. That
saying of Hilarious, many there are which fayning a faith, are not subject to
faith, and rather do apoynte them selves a faith, than receive a faith: puffed
up with the sense of much vanity, whiles they savor those things, as they
list, and will not savor those things that be true: whereas this is the truth
of wisdom, some times to savor those things, which thoue would not: but the
talk of folly follows this will wisdom. For necessary it is, foolishly to
be vttred, that folishly is understood, That I say, may woorthely be returned
upon you, and all protestants. Heretics feign a faith unto them selves.
For you are they that feign unto your selves, a faith never heard of before
Luther, and his disciples began to spread it abroad, for his bellies sake:
because he and his conuentual brothers could not be preachers of a pardon.

You are they that will be subject to no faith, no not to your own, made at
Augusta, by the arche heretics and chief apostatats of your religion. One faith
must be preached at Wittenberg: an other at Zuriche an other at Lipsia, and
other at Basile, another at Geneua: so many Apostatats, so many Christ's, so
many cities, so many faiths, so many co^gregations, so many gospel. You are
they that appoi^t your selves a faith, and receive not that which your fathers
received of their elders, and taught you. You are they that are puffed up with
the sense of humane vanity. You will beleaue no councels, nor ancient fathers.
No man knows the scripture, no man has the interpretation of the word of
God, no man has the right sense and meaning of the gospel, and holy write,
but you. The fathers were men and did err, as men, you are Saints and
Angels: you ca^ not err, you ca^ not tred a wrye. The spirit does so
inspire, that all that you say is as true as steel and light of the gospel.
This is your opinion of your selves. As for the fathers, these thirtene hundred
years, you say they erred, they refused, the simplicity of godds word: Fol.
96. a
Christ had no church until a few renegate friars, and lecherous mou^ckes
came and restored it again. And whiles your hearts are infatuated with this
aroga^cie, and pride, you savor what please your selves, and mislike what ye
list, you will not understand, those things that be true, which is the
occasion that your talk is so foolish, your doctrine so diverse, and your
preaching so dissolute, and your writings so sclanderous, your books so
blasphemous.

As for the Catholics they have neither feigned nor made the^ selves a faith,
they continue in that which they received of their forefathers, and can prove
to come from Christ, by succession, and lyneal descent, even from S. Peter and
Paul, to Pius the fyfth that sits now by the merciful providence of God
in the Apostolic see of Rome. They be neither disobedient to faith, nor to
their laufull bisshops. They varye not in the principalle points of their
religion and faith. In all churches, Cities, patriarchs, and bisshops, there is
one uniform conce^t, through out the world, wheresoever Christ's, catholic
church has dispersed her light. Wherefore, if you will rightly apply Hilarious
his words, and to good purpose, as he did, apply them to heretics, whose
talk and pestiferous doctrine, should range and rage against the sownde of
Gods word: 2. Tim. 2.
And creep like a canker, to the rote of the soul. Apply them as he did to
such as you are your selves: Homines mente peruersi, and professione fallaces,
and spe inanes, and sermon viperei. Me^ corrupt in mind, deceythfull in
profession, vain in hope, and adders in talk, men which force us, of
necessity to gain say your positions, because under color of religion, you
teach the simple people (falsas doctrinas, and morbidas intelligentias, and
corruptas voluptates. Lib. 8 de Trinit. in princip. ^
False doctrine lewd understanding and corrupt fancies. For of such, he
speaks in the place whence you had those words.

THAT THE APOSTLES AND FATHERS OF THE PRIMITIVE CHVRCHE BLESSED THEM SELVES,
etc. THE FIFTH ARTICLE.
IF it were granted to be true that the Apostles and fathers of the primitive
church did bless them selves with the sign of the cross, and counseled all
Christen men to do the same, and that in those days a cross was set up in
every place convenient for it, Fol. 115. b
M. Calf. supposes that it would not hurt his cause: yet because we shall
understand that he, who sometimes came in silks, veluetes, and great bravery
to Paul's cross, when he was but a green minister of this new divinity,
lacks now no humility, he abaseth him self to point-makers craft, Fol.
116. a M. Calves. humility
and takes in hand the trying of three taglesse points, as he says. Which
is a bold enterprise of so young a prentise, never brought up in the
faculty. His cunning will appear by his workmanship. The first point that he
counts taglesse is this. That the fathers of the primitive church blessed
the^ selves with the sign of the cross, for the term of blessing (says he)
is evil applied to the signinge in the forhead. Fol. 116. a Calf.
For benedicere, to bless, is to speak well, and to live well. And that is
the nature of the word: in that sense it has be^ taken of old. Mart.
Here is one evil point to begin with all. Craft increases daily I see
well. If to humility in abasing him self to poyntmakers craft, he had joined
simplicity in streatching out his leather, this point would have been strong
enough and lacked never a tagge. For benedicere, as I have proved before is
streatched further, Article 4. Benedicere. 3. Reg 21. Job 2.
and applied to other significations in the scripture, and doctors, than to
those three which master Calf. mentions. It was laid to Naboths chardge that
benedixit Deum and Regem. Satan, said to God when he would further plage Job,
Cast thy hand upon him, touch his face, and his flesh, and then thou shall
see, that, in faciem tuam benedicat tibi. What is benedicere here, to speak
well, live well, profess well, as master Calf. says? No, it is quite
contrary: to banne, to blaspheme, and to curse God.

It is written in Genesis, that God benedixit diei septimo. David says:
Genes. 2. Psalm. 84.
Benedixisti domine terram tuam. How shall this be Englished? In which of the
significations that master Calf. devised? Shall we say thus: God said well to
the seventh day? Or thus, God professed well to the seventh day? or thus, God
lived well to the seventh day? or, God gave thanks for the seventh day? And so
in the other, Shall we say, God spoke well the earth? or God professed well the
earth? or God lived well the the earth? or God gave thanks for the earth? or
what shall we say? Our new poyntmaker says, that benedicere, is to speak
well, profess well, and live well, and streatcheth his leather no further, for
fear of breaking in te midst? shall we take his points? no, they be taglesse,
and made of rotten calves skin. We must stretche it out a little further, and
find another signification for benedicere. Christ taking little children in his
arms, Marc. 10. Luc. 24.
and leying his hands upon them, benedicebat eos. Ascending up to heaven, in
the sight of his Apostles, lifting up his hand benedixit eis. What is
benedicebat here? Shall we translate it and say, Christ spoke well the children,
or Christ professed well the children, or Christ lived well the children, or
Christ gave thanks for the children? and so likewise in the other? No: these
are impropre speeches, and phrases not agreeable to the letter, nor savoring of
any good sense in that place. Wherefore benedicere, must be streatched on ynche
further to another signification, besides master Calfhils, speaking well, living
well, and professing well. And that is, Christ did bless the children, Christ
did bless his Apostles, yea, Christ did bless with his hands. Theophil. in
24. Luc.
eleuatis manibus, with hands lifted up) that is to say) Christ lifted up his
hands and blessed his Apostles: Perchance pouring (says Theophylact.) into
them grace and strenght that might guard them, until the holy Ghost came,
perchance also instructing us, that when we go far from home, we commend
those that are under our government, to the heavenly benediction. By which it
is evident, that benedicere has another signification in the scripture,
besides to speak well, profess well, and live well, and that is to bless with
the hand as Christ did. Wherefore he does injury to the estimation of his own
lerning to say, that this is a new found signification: Fol. 116. a
and wrong to think that we borowe this phrase and manner of speech, either
of old mother Mawkin, or of a foolish custom. For benedicere, in this
signification, is as old as Jacob, who with his hands a cross blessed
Joseph's children, and as Autentick, as the Gospel of S. Mark and Luke, who
said that Christ leyed his hands upon children and blessed them, and lifting
up his hand blessed his Apostles.

But if it had been a common custom to use that phrase, and we had borrowed
that manner of speech of custom, it is no point of wisdom in M. Calf. to
acco^pte, that custom foolish; and hold them fools that follow it. As wise
as a man he is, said. we must speak as the common sort do, and think as
the wise. And that custom is to be followed, a better poet than he is divine
tells us, saying: Multa renascentur quae iam cecidere, cadentque,
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet vsus:
Quem penes arbitrium vis est and norma loquendi.
Many words that wythered be shall flourish as the spring.
And such as stand in high degree, vade as each feigned thing.
If Lady Custom does ones take the exchange in to her hand.
For custom has a mould to make words current in each land.


Wherefore seeing in this treatise I labored to profit the multitude, which
is miserably deceived by these new ministers, it was most necessary, for me
to use the terms which common use had made most familiar in their ears, and
most lively represented the thing it self unto them. And albeit the old
fathers do not commonly use to say, To bless with the cross. and sign him
self with the cross is all one.
benedicebant se signo crucis, they blessed them selves with the sign, but
signabant se signo crucis, they marked them selves with the sign of the
cross, yet do not I, very ill, (as M. Calf. says) in applyinge it, to the
Apostles time and primitive church. For in effect they are all one, and as I
may say, Synonima: For he that after the use of a Christen man, marketh him
self with the sign of the cross, Lib. 2. histor. Apostolic. Lib. 3.
blesses him self, and he that blesses him self, marketh him self with the
sign of the cross. Wherefore saying Abdias reports that S. Paul crucis
signo se muniens, arming him self with the sign of the cross, held out his
neck to the hangemam, and that S. Andrew, singulis manus imponens and
consignans cruce, Lib. 5.
leying his hands upon every one, and signing the^ with the cross, suffered
them to depart, and that S. John, Armauit se signo crucis, Armed him self
with the sign of the cross, no wise man can take it otherwise, than that they
blessed them selves, with the sign of the cross, nor think contrary but that
this crossebiter is very quarreling, who knowing the thing to be one, will yet
contentiouslie jar about the word. But like doctor, like Doctrine. He is
always denying the authority of the fathers, when he has no cauille in store
to shift it away: but seeing he says no more here against Abdias, than he did
before, do ye credit him no more than ye did before. Semel malus semper
praesumitur malus, he that is ones evil, is presumed to be always evil (says
the law,) unless the contrary be proved, Denying authorities M. Calves best
refuge. Fol. 116. b
and that will not M. Calf. do. For lying ad denying must be his best defense,
and Ajax shilde in this skyrmish. Even in the last sentence, Abdias was denied,
as a very liar and forger of fables, now that which is brought out of S.
Clement, is refused as an authority that has no credible author to supporte
it. Ibidem.
So bring what ye can, either the author shall be refused, or his work denied.

As for S. Clement that he is an author sufficient to supporte him self, and
writer of the Apostles constitutions, the preface set before his work, does
sufficiently prove to any reasonable man, neither all the wit that M. Calf.
has, is able to convince it of forgery: That he will not fully beleaue S.
Clement, Ibidem.
because he succeeded not immediately, after S. Peter, according to his
appointment, but suffered Linus and Cletus to occupy the room before him, and
scoffeth at his modesty in that behalf, I meruail not. A lesser cause than
that, will make him beleaue, as a great many protestants did, and let not to
put in print, that S. Peter was never at Rome. But what matter is it if he do
not beleaue, nor fully, nor in part? It hi^dreth this cause no more tha^ the
in credulity of Caiphas, and lack of faith in Pilate, did hinder the verity
of Christ's incarnation in earth, an equality with his father in heaven. The
Evangelists them selves if we take the bare letter do not agree exactely in
the hour, that Christ suffered death. Yet being well understood they agree both
in the time, and the manner of it. So albeit all the fathers that have written,
do not agree of the manner and order of bisshops, that succeeded S. Peter, yet
the truth is confessed by all, and not withstanding, S. Clement did of
humility and modesty yield the prerogative, to Linus and Cletus, whiles they
lived, yet do they acknowledge that S. Clement was ordained by S. Peter to be
his successor. As he that lists to see the truth of this, may read, Damasus
of the bisshopes life's and Baptist Platina that wrote of late.

Where M. Calf says that, the fact of S. Anthony, S. Martin, Fol. 116. b
and Donatus of Euoria Epiri, blessing them selves with the sign of the
cross, being men of great holiness and virtue, and so high in favor with God,
that in their life time, they did many miracles, Fol. 117 a
and the example of Paula a most godly woman be not presidents to enforce
imitation, it were to be wished that some good phisitio^, would feel his
pulse, and try his humor, that we might know of whom he would have
preside^ts to be taken, Heb. 6. Examples of virtue to be taken of holymen.
if not of holy me^. S. Paul writing to the Hebrews, whysseth the^ not be
slouthful followers of the^, that shall inherit the promises. By which it is
evident that the holy Ghost, would have the examples of holy men to be
followed, as directories to virtue, and as presidents to force an imitation in
godliness of life.

As for blessi^g with the cross I did not teach, that the examples of those
holy fathers did force an imitation, but only showed that thy did so, and that
it is lauful for us by their examples, being holy me^, and in great favor with
God, to bless our selves, and use the sign of the cross, in temptations and
other dangers, as those holy fathers did, and that the contempt thereof is
abominable: Fol. 116. b
And albeit it pleases m. Calf. to term these histories, but tales, and
condemn S. Hierome, Sulpitius Seuerus and Sozomenus, as reporters of idle
tales, and not writers of true histories, yet I doubt not but the indifferent
of his own sect, will blame his impudency, for so judging of such learned and
reno^med writers.

Calf.
Mart.
Where he says: The devil delited in the cross, and feigned him self to be
a fraied of it, that the Eremite might run to that sorry succor, and men put
more affiance in it, it is to childish for little coknells that run up and
down the streates, The devil fayneth not fear at the sight of the cross but
fears in deed.
with tu^brells and rattles. That the devil prete^deth not fear, but is a
frayd in deed at the sight of the cross, I haued declared before, but further
to add somewhat, when Julian the Apostata had by virtue of that sign, driven
the devils away, the coniurer understanding it blamed him for it. And whereas
Julian for excuse signified that he was in great fear, and woundred at the
virtue of the cross, the sorcerer said unto him: do not think Sir, that they
feared as you say, but they disdained this sign rather, and so departed: The
gentiles as Lactantius tells, perceauing that the Christians, imposito
frontibus signo, putting the sign of the cross to their forheades, drove
their Gods away from their sacrifice, said, that their Gods fled away, non
metu, sed odio: not for fear, Lacta^. lib. 4. cap. 17. de vera sapient.
but for hatred. Master Calf. agreing with the^ in one point, says: That the
devil flees not away at the sight of the cross for fear, but whereas the
coniurer said that the devil fled away for disdain, and the gentiles said
that he fled away for hatred, he knowing more of his counsel then either the
coniurer or gentiles, says, that he flees away, as it were for love or
delight that he had in the cross, thereby to allure men to use it: M. Calf.
shows him self more privy to the devils counsel, than the coniurer or the
ge^tills.
which is a strange case and much like to the comicall poets fancy, where he
says: Credo quia misera prae amore hunc exclusit for as. I suppose, poor
woman she shut him out of doors for love. If one that loves music well, and
deliteth to hear me^ singe, and play upon musical instruments should come
in place, where there is a sweet noise, and suddenly run away, when the best
melody is made, would any wise man think that he ran away for love that he
bears to music, or delight that he has in musical instruments? No I
suppose. Every thing likes to be where it loves, and never flees that in
which it deliteth. For it is natural. Wherefore if the devil loved the sign
of the cross, and delited to have it made, as M. Calf. says, Fol. 117. a
he would be still where it is, and not always flee away, when it is made,
albeit he might sometimes pretend a flight, to do it, for a further mischieffe,
but be he Jew, be he Turk, be he a Iulia^, or be he a Judas that makes the
cross, unless God gives him up to the devil as a pray, the devil flees
away still, whenever he sees it, much less he makes it (as this
quarreller blasphemouslie reports, a cause of further sickness, Fol. 117. a
a stone of offense, a stumblinge block to fall at.

S. Anthony, of whom we talk, knowing the subtiltes and crafts of the devil,
and withstanding them all, Fol. 117. a
and so withstanding them that he vpbraied, the wicked sprites with their
weakness against him, Athan. in vita S. Anthonij.
said boldly (as Athanasius reports) unto them all: If ye are able to do
any thing, if our lord has given you power against me, behold here I am,
devour me, being granted unto you. If ye can not, why do ye labor in vain?
For the sign of the cross, and faith in our lord is an inexpugna^ble wall
for us. In the same place, in the very next sentence it is written, that the
devils treathning many things against S. Anthony, did gnashe their teethe
because their temptations had no effect, but were made vain illusions. Where
it is to be noted that the devil tempted not S. Anthony to make the sign of
the cross in his forhead. For if he had don so, then had his temptations taken
effect: but Athanasius says, it was a great torment to the devil that: No
effect followed their temptation.

If M. Calf. will not beleaue this saying of so learned a father, Let him beleaue
the devil him self, confessing the same. It so came to pass that certain
wicked sprites were raised up, and commanded by a co^iurer, called Theodas, to
tempt a young prince to the lusts of the flesh, but they prevailed not. When
the coniurer Theodas understood that, he said unto them. O ye weak and
wretched caytiffes, Damasce. in histor. Barlaa^ and Iosaphat.
how are ye ouercomed of one boy? The wicked sprites forced by the power of
God, made answer, against their will and said: we were neither able to abide,
nor behold the power of Christ, and banner of his passion, which they call the
cross. Illo enim signo rediuimus eneruati, etc. For we returned weakened with
that sign, and all the princes of the air, and rulers of darkness fleing away
are burnt with it. Before the young man was perfitely signed with that sign,
we cumming furiously upon him did disquet him. But as soon as he had called
Christ to his help, and armed him self with the sign of the cross, he
persecuted us with anger, and made unto him self a most sure defense. Here is a
plain testimony of the devils, that they fear the sign of the cross, and
are weakened with it, and forced to flee away at the sight of it. And this they
confess not of them selves, thinking as M. Calf. does to deceive us: but they
confessed, diuina virtute compulsi: compelled by the power of God, they
confessed it, inuiti against their wills, and that which they confessed was the
truth. Wherefore it has no appearance that the devil deliteth in the sign of
the cross, or fayneth him self to be a frayed of it, but he is a frayed in
deed, and trembles, and quaketh at it, and flees away for very fear. But
you see what a patron the devil has. Martialis writes that the cross is a
buckler beating back the darts of the enemy. S. Augustine that it is, Epist
ad burde gal. Ser. 19. de sanctis. Libro 4. cap. 12. Demonst. co^t. Gent.
a let or stay against the enemies. Damascene that is, a sign that the
destroier touch us not. S. Chrysostom, that is, a destruction of the devil,
a bridle of wicked sprites, and bitte for contrary powers. A sign of much
blessinge, and a wall of all kind of security, and yet M. Calf. is not ashamed
boldly to asseuere, without authority, and reason that the devil deliteth in
the cross, and makes it a cause of Sickness, a stone, of offense, Fol. 117. a
and stumblinge block to fall at.

Diogenes was wounte to say unto him, that talked busely of heavenly matters:
Quando de coelo venisti? Ah Sirrah when came you from heaven. In like sort we
may ask of our adversary, that talks so certainly of the devils practisses,
Quando de inferis redijsti, when came you from hell sirrah? For none but such
as have been of privy counsel in Satan's court, can tell these secrets. The
learned fathers never knew any such practice of his: yet had they as many
conflictes with him, and as much experience of his subtilties, as any in this
later age. And that might M. Calf. well understand, if he would have read the
life of S. Anthony written by Athanasius, and other ancient fathers. But he
will not: and therefore what shall we say of him, but as S. Augustine said of
the like, Evil men ar enemies to them selves, by not understanding how they
may live well: not because they can not, In Psalm. 35
but because they will not. For it is one thing, when every man endeavors to
understand somewhat, and through infirmity of the fleashe can not, and an other
thing when the heart of man deals somewhat frowardlie, against him self: in
so much that he can not understand, that which he might understand, if he had
a good will, not because it is hard, but because will is wilful and against it.

Where he says, that not withstanding, Fol 117. a Calf.
if in the doings of elder age there were no such offense, yet considering
how things in time have grown to abuse and superstition, such as have been
tolerably received, must now of right, and conscience be condemned, We tell
him that if things, good of their own nature must be taken away and
condemned, because of the abuse, we shall have nothing left to our comfort in
earth. Iron is abused to murder, fire to burning other men's houses, The thinkge
that is good, must not be taken away for the abuse.
water to unlawful drowning, the name of Jesus to sorcery, the Pater noster to
witchcraft, and making payles go amilking as he told us before) and nothing so
holy but the wickedness of man does profane, and abuse. Shall the things
therefore, be taken away? No M. Calf. The abuse ought to be amended, and the
thing suffered to remain. Or if it be expedient to have the thing it self taken
away, let it be done in such order as it ought to be done, and of such persons
as the decree of Stephen (which you your self mention) require, who are as I
proved before the bisshops of Rome, to whom God has given the chardge and
government of his church on earth. But where you say, that the cross has been
abused, and show no evident proof of it, we tell you that you most
impudentlye belie, and sclander the church of God, and therein show, that your
conscience (is cauteriata, feared with a hot iron, and has no sense at all.
Nevertheless, if any should abuse it, the abuse should be taken away by lauful
authority, and yet the sign suffered to remain.

Fol. 117. b The place of Epiphanius ansvvered.
As for the place, cited out of the epistle which you say: Epiphanius wrote to
the patriarch of Jerusalem, and S. Hierome translated, what if we should
deny that Epiphanius wrote that epistle? What if we should say it is not be
found in his Greek copies, and for a probable conjecture, and vehement
presumption tell you that all the bisshops in Greece, that were image breakers
never alleged any such epistle of Epiphanius, which had been a great,
oversight, if either the epistle had been his, or the place so manifestly
oppugned the use of images, as you pretend? Yea further, what if we should
deny that S. Hierome did translate the epistle, and say as you do for
disproufe of other authors, that the style sauoureth nothing of S. Hieroms
eloquence? How would you be able to prove it, or justify this work, in which
ye triumph as though you had gotten the victory? You have no antiquite for
it. You have no other testimony in all his works, to prove that he misliked
the use of images. In all his books against heresies, he accompteth the having
of images to be no heresy.

And where you say on the contrary side, Fol. 78. a
that he discoursinge upon the sects of heresies accompteth them for none that
condemned images, there is good cause why. For in his days there were no
heretics, that condemned images. Image breakers were not then out of their
shell. But if they had, he being a learned man, and skillful in the scripture,
both understanding that no text through out the Bible does inhibite the having
of images, and also knowing that from the Apostles time, Christen men had the
images of Christ and his saints, and the Catholic bisshops never inhibited
the use of them, he I say would vndoubtdly have reported them, as condemned
for wicked and accursed heretics, that condemned the use of images, if any
such had been either in, or before his time.

In the seventh council of Nice every man that can read and understand may see
that not only images were in churches in Epiphanius time, Actio. 6. Nice. 2. A
church a builded in Epiphanius name and decked with images.
but also that his disciples builded a church to God in his name, and adourned
the same with images and pictures: which they would not have done, if either
their master had taught them that it had been heresy, or the fathers, and
bishops of that age had judged it derogatorie to Christ's religion. Which
being so, it is evident that Epiphanius did neither mislike the having of
images, nor write any thing that improued that doctrine. But let this epistle
which you brag so much of be Epiphanius own writing, let the translation be S.
Hieroms? What makes it for you? Will you say Epiphanius, cut a veil: habe^s
imaginem quasi Christi vel sancti cuiusdam, having the image as it were of
Christ, or of some saint, ergo he was an enemy to the image of Christ, and his
saints (as you note in your marge^t?) I think your wisdom will be better
advised: Fol. 117. b
or if you must of necessity say so, or else conclude nothing of that notable
place of Epiphanius against images, tell us, how holds this argument, My
Lord chamberlyn coming into the chamber of presence, and finding one sitting in
the princes seat, under the clothe of estate, quasi reginam, as it were the
Queen, thrusts him out, and puts him in prison, for his traiterous
presumption, ergo my Lord chamberlyn is an enemy to the true Queen that should
sit there in deed? Let us have your answer speadelie. And if you think this
argument naught, So think of your own. For they be both like. The veil rent
of Epiphanius had not the image nor of Christ nor any Sai^ct.
The image that was in the veil rent by Epiphanius was not a true image of
Christ, nor of any saint. It was, quasi imago Christi vel sancti alicuius, as
it were the image of Christ or some saint. Perchance the image of Iuppiter,
or Hercules, or some man that lived in those days, as it pleased the painter.
Epiphanius, remembered not whose image it was, but sure he was that it was not
the image of Christ, or any saint, but, quasi Christi vel alicuius sancti, as
it were the image of Christ, or some saint.

VVherfor in renting and tearing that false image, he did the duty, of a
learned, wise, and grave bishop, as the lord chamberlyn did the part of a
true, faithful, and trusty subject. He was no more enemy to the true image of
Christ and his saints, tha^ the other was to his sovereign lady, and
natural princess. For as he thrust the traitor out of the royal seat, that
presumed to fit there, Quasi regina, as it were the Queen: So did Epiphanius
re^t the veil that had, imaginem quasi Christi, the image as it were of
Christ: and not the image of Christ in deed. As he bore faithful heart to his
true sovereign lady: So did Epiphanius to the true images of Christ and his
Saints, as I declared before, which the word Quasi, as though, if nothing
else might have made your wisdom conceive.

2 Cor. 6.
S. Augustine to make his hears understand these words of S. Paul, In Psalm.
48
Quasi tristes, semper ante gaudentes, as it were ever sad but always merry,
says: Our sorrow has always, Quasi, an as it were, our joy has not a,
Quasi, an as it were, because it is in sure hope. Why has our sorrow a,
Quasi, an as it were? Because it passes away as sleep: Your charity knows,
he that tells a dream, adds, Quasi an as it were. Quasi dicebam, quasi
loquebar, quasi prandebam, quasi equitaba^ quasi disputabam, Totum quasi, qui
cum euigilauerit, non inuenit quod videbat. Quasi the sauru^ inueneram dicit
me^dicus, si quasi non esset, mendicus non esset, sed quia quasi erat, mendicus
est, I said as it were. I spooke as it were, I dyned as it were, I ryd as it
were, I disputed as it were. All is as it were, because when he awaketh, he
fyndeth not that which he saw: the beggar says, I found, a treasure as it
were. If as it were, were not, he were no beggar. But because there is, an as
it were, he is a beggar. So to make you to understand this place of Epiphanius,
we tell you, Si quasi no^ esset, Christi imago fuisset, sed quia quasi erat
Christi imago no^ fuit, if there had not ben, an as it were, it had be^ the
image of Christ, but because there was an as it were, it was no image of
Christ, and being no image of Christ, nor saint, Epiphanius did well in
re^ting, and tearing it, and nothing against the true images of Christ and his
saints. the contrary whereof is not to be seen in all his work.

Concerning S. Hieroms translation, seeing the whole epistle understood
according to Epiphanius mind, contains no doctrine contrary to the Catholic
faith, no marvel if he translated it out of Greek into Latin. He had such an
earnest zeal, and desire to profit the church of God, that he spared no
pains, neither to translate out of Hebrewe, nor Greek. But if there had been
any unsound doctrine in that epistle, his translating does not argue a liking.
Many a good man may translate a work at his friends request, out of one
language into another that contains not all to gither sound doctrine, and
yet be far and wide from allowing that doctrine. S. Hierome him self, and
Ruffinus translated diverse works of Origens, yet do they not allow those
errors, which are objected against him. Wherefore, seeing there is nothing in
Epiphanius that makes against the images of Christ, and his saints, seeing
S. Hierome interpreting that epistle never found fault with that place, seeing
the image breakers assembled in Constantinople, never espied that place, or if
they did epsy it, thought it not worthy to be objected against the having of
images, seeing the three hundred and fifthye Catholic bisshops assembled at
Nice for discussing the controversy moved against images, affirmed plainly
that there is nothing in Epiphanius, writings that gain says the laudable
manner of the church for the use of images, your triumph is lost. Paula. Fol.
118. b
The fact of Paula can not be set against, the fact of Epiphanius (as you would
have it). There is no co^traritie in them. She did nothing but that which
beseemed a virtuous matrone. He no more than was sitting for an holy bishop.
Ephiphanius.
She made the sign of the cross in her forhead: So did he, and confessed that
with the sign of the cross, Lib. 1 co^t. Hebr. 2.
and holy water, inchauntements, and devils are driven away. She prostrated her
self before the image of the cross, he never cut the veil that had the
image of Christ, or any Saint upon it. She being learned and taught of S.
Hierome, did according to reason worship the cross, as S. Hierome him self
did, Apol. 3.
as you may se in his epistle to Marcellina, and in his Apology against
Ruffinus. He never condemned it, nor knew any religion, or scripture to be
contrary unto it. Therefore I will still urge the fact of Paula, until you
prove out of Epiphanius by better evidence then you have showed yet, that he
would have no cross, Fol. 119. a
no crucifix, nor image in the church: And this is my judgment of your place
brought out of Epiphanius.

Calf.
Where you tell me that I reckon a sort that used of devotion to make the
sign of the cross in their forheades, but make no mention of them that used
it not, in zeal as good as they, Mart.
and in number more, I beleaue verelie that there was never Christen man, of
pure zeal, and sincere mind, that ever refused to bless him self with the
sign of the cross. Read all the au^cie^t fathers that ever wrote sythe^s
Christ's incarnation, keep your Cale^der as warely as you ca^, make as perfect
a register as possible may be, and if you find any of them, say that this
man, A Calender to be made of Christen men that refused to cross the^ selves
and this man was a perfect Christian, as fervent in zeal, and as good as
Epiphanius, S. Anthony, S. Hiero. and S. Augustine and did refuse to bless
him self, or sign him self with the cross, or make the sign of the cross in
his forhead. Put him in your Cale^der, and when you have found out a number,
bring them to light, show them forth, as I have done: name the authors that
mention them, note the books, and chapiters where we shall find them, and we
shall say, ye have kept your promise. But before you have found many such,
boast not of a number nor crake of antiquity, lest if you find none, (as I am
sure you shall not till you come to frontike Fox his lying Calender) ye be
found a jack bragger, and vain boaster.

Your position, non viuendum exemplis, sed legibus: me^ must not live by
examples, but by laws, which you say takes place in religion if any thing
does, is not all together true. Fol. 119. a
And if I should require you to find it in scripture, you would be long in
seeking, and in the end return the write and say, 1. Tim. 4. The examples of
holy men to be follovved. Cap. 2. Cap. 5.
non comparet. S. Paul writing to Timothe, said unto him: Be an example of
the faithful, in word, and conversation, in charity, in faith, in chastity.
Likewise to Tite: In all things show thy self an example of good works. S.
James bids us take the prophets for an example of suffering adversity, and
patience. To be short, S. Peter says: Christ has suffered for us, leaving you
an example that you follow his steps. And I pray you M. Calf. to what end
did the holy Ghost require Timothe and Tite to be an example of good works
to the faithful, if he would not have the faithful to take example of them
and frame their life according? To what end has Christ left us an example, but
that we should follow his steps, and frame our lives as nigh as we can to
his? If only laws must be followed, and not examples, why said S. Paul: Lex
iusto non est posita, 1. Tim. 1.
sed iniustis? The law is not made for the just man, but for the unjust and
disobedient? How shall he live? must he not take example of Christ, and his
Apostles, and other holy me^ that trodde in the pathe of holiness before him,
and come by imitatio^ as nigh unto them as he may? If it be so, then is your
assertion vain, folish, and frivolous. For we must live in some cases, as well
by examples as by laws. For where there is no express law there examples
must prevail.

The lawiers (of whom you borrowe this rule, altered at your pleasure) say: Non
exemplis iudicandum, sed legibus: Men must not judge by examples, but by laws,
yet where the case is not determined, nor decided by the law, they allow
customs and examples. Examples and custom to be follovved l. de quibus ff. de
l. The custo^ of the city of Rome a refuge where laws fail
For proof whereof, we have this law. De quibus causis scriptis legibus non
vtimur, id custodiri oportet quod moribus and consuetudine inductu^ est, etc.
As for the causes, in which we have no written laws to use) that must be
observed, which was brought in by custom and manner: And if in any thing that
fortune to lack, then that must be kept which is next, and like unto it, If
that apeare not, then the law which the city of Rome used, must be observed.
An ancient custom is not unworthily observed for a law: And this is the law,
which is said to be received by the custom, and manner of those, that use them.

Here is order taken that when there comes a strange case for which there is
no law written, it must be decided by custo^ and manner, and for defect of
custom, the judge must proceed by likelyhodes, and if they fail, he must stand
to the laws and customs of the city of Rome. By which you may learn that
for many cases there is no law written, and that when there is no law
written, men must judge according to custom. And if justice can not be
ministered, nor judgment given in wordly matters, for certain cases, but by
the customs, examples and presidents of other that went before, surely in
spiritual matters, where there is no express law in scripture, the church of
God can not be mayntayned, unless we follow the customs, and presidents of
other, and live as our holy fathers did before us.

Luther your first father was so far wide from this fond opinion of yours,
that he said, a prince might better rule by the instinct of nature, In cap.
Babylo. epist ad Pragens.
than by orders and laws. And in diverse places of his works, it appears
that the would have the liberty of the gospel, to put away al princes laws.
In which although he means as wickedly, as you do fondly, yet you being but
an ympe of his branch pretending unity in doctrine, should not have revolted
from that your Apostata, and upon no ground of scripture, Fol. 119. a
doctor, or reason have concluded that in religion we must not live by
examples, but by laws. For every wise sees, that where there is no law, the
custom, manner, preside^ts and examples of others must stand for laws. But to
what purpose would master Calf. think you (good readers) have this his
position take place? Forsoothe, that when he had concluded that we must no live
by examples, but by laws, he might make simple souls beleaue, that they ought
not follow the examples of their holy forefathers, in blessing them selves,
but to have the name of the law in their mouths and do nothing less tha^
that the law bids them to do. And to bring that to pass see how he
vvrangleth. Calf.


The fathers taught other things more often, and more earnestly, than the use
of the cross. As Tertullian taught that it was a wickedness to fast on the
Sunday, or to pray on our knees. Besides, in his time oblatio^s were made at
birth days. milk and honny was given to the children at christenninge. In S.
Augustines time, infants received the communion, Because we do not observe all
these ceremonies that are out of use, M. M. Calf. vvil not keep that which is
in use. Mart. 1. Cor. 11. By M. Calves reason S. Peter and S. Paul must not be
credited.
and diverse such ceremonies were commanded, which are now abrogated, and
because we do not observe al those ceremonies, that these and other fathers
specify, they will not follow this that they speak of the cross: which has
no reason. For if the disvse of some ceremonies used of old time for good
purposes, does derogate authority in all other from the fathers, that make
mention of any ceremonies, S. Paul must not be credited in apoynting order
for the supper of our lord, for he makes mention of a ceremony then used,
that men should not pray with their heads covered, nor women with their
heads uncovered, which is now gone out of use. For men pray with night
cappes, on their heads, and women come open faced to church, and maids in
their hear, in some places, especially when they be married. S. Peter, yea
and all the Apostles must be disauthorised. For they made a law that non
should eat bluddings, or styfled meat: for it is now gone out of use, no
man account them selves bound to the observance of it, thought the Apostles
all together assembled did make that law. But be not deceived, although the
foresaied ceremonies that S. Paul spoke of, be gone out of use, and the decree
of Peter and the Apostles be broken, yet stands their authority full and
perfect in the dispensatio^ of Christ's mysteries, and every man is bound to
follow it, and so likewise in the fathers. For the church has authority to
abrogate ceremonies and laws, for orders and discipline, as the diversity of
time, place, and men require.

And although one or two be altered, the rest must not be contemned, because the
church has not so decreed, which prerogative if heretics had, Heretics have
no authority to alter ceremonies.
their alteration and changing of ceremonies, had some colorable show of
piety, but seeing they have no church, no laufull bisshops, no duly called
ministres, they ought not to alter the lest rite, and ceremony in Christ's
church. But if they would be as they pretend followers of Christ, they should
keep the unity of his church, and not seek occasion to condemn all that is
used, because some things are disused that in old time were used.

Were it reason in a common state of a city, for private men to alter this
and that statute, of the whole corporation at their pleasure? Or were it
reasonable for some one citizen to say, he will not keep this statute, because
they keep not another statute, that was made an hundred years before, and now
abrogated? or gone out of use? No, as wise men think: And if it be not
permissible, in a city, much less is it to be suffered in the church and whole
body of Christendom.

Furdermore, whereas, M. Calf. refuses, to beleaue, Tertullian, Ephrem, Fol.
119. b Fol. 120. a Fol. 120. b
Chrysostom, S. Hierome, Augustine, Cyrillus, and Prudentius, and other
fathers, because they had their errors and imperfections, and like a wicked
Cham discouererh that which he knows, against them, and for lack of errors
obiecteth undoubted truths against some of them (as shall appear hereafter)
and yet would be seen to reverence the^, it is to be thought that he is so
busied with his Geneuian doctors, that he has not so much as viewed the
treatise of Vincentius Lirinensis, against heresies. For if he had, he might
easily have seen, how and in what sort, we are bound to follow the
doctors: but because the book is so chardgable that he can not bye it, and so
long that he has no leisure to read it, I will for his further instruction
declare his judgment, which all the church follows presently in this case.
He instructing a you^ge scholar to avoid heresies, moves certain questions,
and answers them. One is this.

What if some new infection sekeeth to corrupt, not one little part only,
Vince^tius Linnensis counsel against heresy.
but the whole church? The catholic (says he) must provide that he stick
to antiquity, which can not altogether be seduced with any deceithfull
nouelitie. An other question is this: What if in antiquity it self, the
errors of two or three men, or else of a city or province be found? Then he
must procure that he prefer, the decrees of the universal church, which were
generally received of old time. The third question is this: What if some
such question rise, that we can find no antiquity, How the au^cie^t fathers
must be credited.
nor decree of the universal church for it? Then he shall imploye all
diligence that he may, to consult and ask the judgment of the forefathers, and
compare them together, those especially, who although they lived in diverse
ages, and places, yet continuing in the unity and faith of the catholic
church, were good masters and teachers, and whatsoever he knows, that not one
or two, but all together with one consent did hold, write, and teach, openly,
commonly, and continually, let him understand, that he must without all
doubtyng, or staggering, beleaue that: And for more clearer evidence of the
same, I will add another sentence of his. In the same work, he has these
words.

When the rottenness of any evil error begins to break out, and steal
the words of the holy law, and expound them craftily, and deceithfully to
the mayntenance of it, soorth with (says he) the expositions of the
forefathers are to be gathered to gether, for understanding of those
scriptures, by which, that what soever it is, that shall spring up, The
expositions of the fathers to be gathred for the understanding of scripture.
being new, and therefore prophame, may both be discovered without
circumsta^ce, and also condemned without all retractation and delay: but the
expositions of those fathers only are to be conferred, who living holily,
teachinge wisely, and continuing stoutely in the faith, and unity of the
Catholic church, deserved either to die faithfully in Christ, or to be
martired happily for Christ. Whom not withstanding we must creditte with
this condition, that what soever either all, or the most part have affirmed,
with one assent, plainly, commonly, and continually, as it were by an agreing
council of their masters, by receiving, keeping, and delivering, With what
co^ditio^ we must creditte the fathers.
the same we receive and follow, as most undoubted, certain, and true. And
whatsoever, any man be he never so holy, be he bishop, confessor, or Martyr,
Private opinions must be rejected.
shall presume to mayntaine otherwise, than all the rest do think, contrary to
all other, that must be divided from the authority of the common, public, and
general sentence, and be adnumbred amongst propre, secret, and private
opinions. Thus much Vincentius a zealous father, more than a thousand years a
go. By which we understand that the doctrine which the holy fathers, or the
most part of them taught generally with one consent, is to be embraced, and
followed. And that if any of the^ had any private opinion, contrary to the
truth, which was generally received, that is no cause why they should not be
received in other things, where they agree with the test.

Seeing then in the matter of the cross, nor Tertullia^, nor any other Catholic
author varieth from the rest of the fathers, nor teaches any other thing than
his elders delyured, and our forefathers taught ever sithe^s, plainly,
commonly, and continually with one consent and vmformitie, there is no cause
why either he, or any other doctor should be refused, because they had other
private opinions. Protestants discredit the fathers.
And certes where you refuse to follow their judgment, in such matters as
they all agree upon with one accord, and are received generally of the
church, ye discredit them, as men that knew not the scripture, and true
interpretation of the same, ye like a judge sitting magnificallye in your throne
of arrogancy disauthorise them, as ignorants that knew not light from
darcknes, verity from heresy, true religion from vain superstition: you
justify your selves, and prefer your own judgments before theirs. Ye
establish your traditions, and distroye theirs. Ye make men believe that they
transgressed the commandment of God, to bring in a custom, and devise of
their own. For the which you shall never lack the shameful note of pride and
singularity. For Vince^tius (of whom I spooke even now) proving that no man
ought to contemn the holy and catholic consent of the blessed fathers by
the place of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
where he says: God placed certain in his church, first Apostles, them
Prophets, and then doctors, preachers, and pastors to the edifying of the
church until his coming again, says: Whosoever despises these, placed and
appointed of God, in the church, as the times and place required, agreing and
consenting together upon one thing in Christ, he despises not man, but God,
He that despises the fathers appointed by God, despises God.
who is no author of dissension, but of peace, (that is to say) he is not God
of him, which shrinketh away from the unity of consent, but of such as abide
constant in the peace of unity and consent.

Wherefore seeing you are faulty, in refusing the authority of the ancient
fathers, in such points as they with one uniform consent agree upon, no
marvel if ye be reputed heretics and scismatikes: Such as despise not men, but
God, not the church, but Christ, whatsoever reason you and your fardle of
fancies, your patch of old errors, your pack of heresy, and lump of lies,
The Apology of the nevve church of England.
for a faier name called the Apology of the church of England, ca^ pretend
for your schism and separation. For one of the greatest reasons and causes
which it prete^deth for your going from the church, is the wicked life of the
governors and rulers. And whosoever forsakes the church for any such
considerations, violateth the commandment of Christ, who telling his
disciples, that Scribes and Pharisees sat upon the chair of Moses, said:
Matt. 23.
Whatsoever they shall say unto you, keep all, and do all, but do not as
they do.

Were he not an evil soldier that being commanded upon pain of his princes
displeasure to serve under a captain, would forsake the ca^pe because his
captain lives vitiously? Were he not an evil mariner that being in the
midst of the sea would leap out of the ship, because the pilote or master
is naught? were he not an evil citizen that being required to continue in the
city on peril of his life, would run out because the maiot and other
officers live not as they should? Ye as verily, and so are they that forsake
the church. For God being king of al kings has, placed diverse capitaynes in
his church (which is acies ordinata, Cant. 6.
a battle set in good array) and a general over al. As long as we live in
this warfare he has required us to obey these capitaynes. His church is as a
ship upon the sea, We must never forsake the church.
a city builded upon a mountain, he has willed us to continue in that ship
as long as we are on the sea, and remain in the city as long as we will be
citizens. And if any be so wilful, that he will run from the camp, leap out
of the ship, and for sake the city, besides that, he breaks his masters
commandment, he falls into the hands of his enemies, and puts him self
in undoubted danger of drowning. For as S. Hierome says: If a man be not in
the Arck of Noe, Epist ad Damas.
While the fludde rages, he shall be drowned. Which if the master of the
Apology had considered, his reason might have told him that the church is
not to be forsaken, for the evil life of the rulers.

The holy Martyr S. Cypria^ having to do with certain that broke the unity of
the church for the same cause that you do, said unto them: Libr. 3. epist. 3.
Albeit there be cockell seen to be in the church, yet for all that, our faith
and charity ought not to be let, that because we see cockell in the church, we
should depart from the church. We must only labor that we may be good
corn, that when the corn shall begin to be leyd in our lords barn, we may
have reward for our labor and pains. By these words S. Cyprian keeps us in
the house of God, by these words he may bring us peaceably to the catholic
peace and unity, says S. Augustine, Lib 2. co^t. Cresco. cap 30.
that you being offended with other men's faults, be they true or be they
false, might not object such great mischiefs against the church, fructifying
and increasing in all the world with the scripture, that ye might not blame
the wheat for the cockell, that ye might not for sake the corn for the
chafe, that ye might not remain without the great house for the foul and
filthy vessels. For so to do, it is, as the said, S. Cyprian testifies, What
it is to forsake the church.
superba obstinatio, and sacrilega presumptio. A proud obstinacy and a wicked
presumption: from which S. Augustine exhorts us, saying, when either by
negligence of rulers either by some inexcusable necessity, either by privy
obreptions we find evil men in the church, whom by ecclesiastical
discipline we can not correct, and punish, then let not that wicked and
dangerous presumption, De fide and oper. ca 5.
by which we think that we should be separated from them, that we be not
infected with their iniquities, Aug. ad Cresco. grain. lib. 3. cap. 3.
come into our hearts. If thou desire good corn, moorne in the travel of
the field, reioise in hope of the barn, suffer the evil, in the communion of
Christ's sacraments, lest by breaking the net before you come to the banks
side, you be that which you would not suffer. Thus both by reason, and
authority of S. Cyprian, and S. Augustine you see, that no Christen man
should forsake the church for the wickedness of the governors. If this content
you not, learn of your own dear dearling and master John Calvin. In the 4.
book and fifte chapter of his institutions, he says.

Horrible are those discriptio^s wherein Esaias, Hieremie, Joel, Calvin.
Abacuc, and the other Prophets do lament the sickness of the church of
Jerusalem. In the common people, in the magistrate, in the priests, all
things were so corrupt, that Esaias doubted not to match Jerusalem with Sodom
and Gomorrha: religion was partly despised, partly defiled. In their manners
are commonly reported theftes extortio^s, breaches of faith, murders and like
mischiues, yet therefore the prophets did neither erect to them selves new
churches, nor build new altars on which they might have several sacrifices,
but whatsoever manner of men they were, yet because they considered that God had
left his word with the^, and ordained ceremonies, whereby he was there
worshipped, in the midst of the assembly of the wicked, they held up pure
hands unto him. Truly if they had thought that they did gather any infection
thereby, they would rather have died an hundred times, then have suffered them
selves to be drawn there unto. Therefore nothing withheld the^ from departing,
but desire to the keeping of unity, but if the prophets thought it against
conscience to estrange the^ selves from the church, for many and great wicked
doings, not of one nor two men, but in manner of the whole people, then we take
to much upon us, if we dare by and by depart from the communion of the church,
where not al men's manners do satisfy either our judgment, yea or the
Christian profession. No offense greater tha schism. Libr. 2. epist. 1. Lib.
1. co^t. Donat. cap. 13. Tract. 6. in epist. Joan ca. 4 In Psalm. 54


Here your own doctor, your own patriarcke, and idol of Geneua condemns
your presumption for separating your selves from the church, for that cause
which your Apology most vehemently urges. He had learned out of S. Cyprian
that there is no greater, offense, than to break the unity of the church,
and espied in S. Augustine, that immanissimum est separationis scelus. The
fault of separation is most heinous, and that he has no charity that
breaks unity, and that he which forsakes the unity of all nations and
remains in a part, Polluit testamentum Christi, difileth the testament of
Christ, yet he had not the grace to follow it. Wherefore his damnation is
the greater. But you say, Calf. Fol. 121. a
we are the enemies of God, and his church, and therefore you separate your
selves from us, and join with the church of Christ. Mart.
These are sweet words but full of poison, if all men that live evil, be Gods
enemies, the^ are we and you also gods enemies: for neither of us lack
infirmities, and sins. But if they be Gods enemies that know his will, and
wilfully break it, Who be Gods enemies properly. Matt. 13. Psalm. 65. Psalm.
73. Matt. 16. Joan. 21. Matt. 18. Heretics sovve upon the corn that the
Apostles sowed.
that come after that his seed is sowed, and sow cockel over it, that in the
multitude of his power lie unto him, that have maligned and done evil in his
sanctuary, and blasphemed his holy name, then are you the enemies of God. For
you know that he gave the keys of heaven to S. Peter, and made him chief of
the Apostles, and ruler of his church in earth, yet you wilfully deny it. Ye
know that every Christen man is commanded to hear the church, yet you
contemn it. You know that the seed which was first sowe^, was the true
seed of our lord, yet have ye sowed cockel over it, and taught that these
thirtene hundred years me^, yea tht chief pillars of the church varied from the
sincerity of the gospel.

Lib. 4 co^t. Marcio.
You know with Tertullia^, that that is truest which is first, that is first
which was from the beginning, that was from the beginning which was delyured of
the Apostles, and that was delyured of the Apostles, which was holy and well
observed in their churches, Heretics refuse that which was holy in the
Apostles churches.
yet the most part of things that were holy and observed in their churches you
refuse to follow. You know that Christ in his last supper said, This is my
body, This is my blood, yet ye lie unto hi^, and to his, in the multitude of
his pouer, and say it is not his body, it is not his blood, but a sign of his
body, and a sign of his blood only. You know that he went by his divine
power through the doors fast shut into his disciples, Joan. 20. Heretics
lie unto God.
yet in the multitude of his power, ye lie unto him, and to his, and say, he
went not in through the doors fast shut, but by a chincke, by a wycket, or
some such thing. You know that his sanctuary is an holy house and a place of
prayer, yet have ye plucket many a hundred down to the ground, Heretics
profane and spoil churches.
turned diverse into stables and slaughter houses, destroyed the aulters,
broken the baptisteries, and made it a place of desolatio^. Ye know that God
tempts no man, to evil, yet ye write that he is author of evil: and affirm
that the treason of Judas, and cruelty of Manlius was the work of God,
Heretics blaspheme God.
as well as the conversion of S. Paul, which is horrible blasphemy, and yet
one of the least, with which ye blaspheme his holy name.

If you were Gods friends, and so holy as ye pretend, ye would never have
done such vilaine to his church as ye do. But to let, all those pass, and
come to your separation and schism, I will say unto you with S. Augustine, In
Psalm. 40
Si ad membra Christi pertines introeas ad caput etc. If thou appertain to the
members of Christ go into thy head: bear with the cockel, if thou be wheat:
bear with the chafe, if thou be good corn. Bear with evil fisshes within
the net, if thou be a good fish. Why did thou flee away before the time
of wynnoi^g? Why have thou plucked up good corn before the harvest? why have
thou broken the net, before thou came to the ba^ckes side? Christ says, ye
shall be my fre^des if ye do those things which I command you. The end of his
commandment is charity: if the^ you will be christ's fre^des, Joan. 15.
you must have charity, if you have charity, you must have unity, if you
have unity you must have one God, one faith, one baptism, and one church, and
one chief head of that church, and that one head must be S. Peter's
successor, even whom you so maliciously impugn the bishop of Rome. For
Christ (says S. Chrysostom) shed his blood, that he might gather unto him
those sheep, Quarum curam tum Petro tum successoribus Petri committebat. Lib
2. de sacerd. The charge of Christ's church committed to S. Peter and his
successors. Lib. 2. de consid. ad Euge.
The charge of whom he committed both to S. Peter and to S. Peter's successors.

And other successors of S. Peter, that do co^tynewe, you can show none, but
the bisshops of Rome, as both the succession from Peter to Pius the fifth, does
plainly convince, and S. Bernard writing to Eugenius does manifestly show.
For he says: Go to, let us search out more diligently as yet, who thou
art, what person thou bear for the time in the church of God: who art thou?
Sacerdos magnus, summus Pontifex, Tu princeps episcoporu^, tu haeres
Apostoloru^, etc. A great priest: The bishop of Rome Peter's sucessour.
an high bishop, thou art thou art the chief of Bisshops: thou art the heir
of the Apostles: If heir of the Apostles, ergo successor of the Apostles, if
successor of the Apostles, ergo endued with all the rightes, titles, and
prerogatives that his predecessors had. As Peter then was, so must his
successor be, aedificandae ecclesiae Tertull. de prescri.
petra: magnum fundame^tum Ecclesiae, Origin. ho. 5 super Exodus
solidissima perta: Apostolorum princeps: Chriso. ho 29. in epist. ad Romans
Antesignamus, coripheus, Ide^ ho. 1. in epist. ad Romans
vertex, caput August. quest. 75. ex nouo testam.
eorum, caput Marcellus epist. 1. and Chrysostom. ho. 55. in Mat.
totius ecclesiae, fidei Hippol. Oration. de consum. mundi.
petra, firmamentum Ambro. in. 5. Luc. De quest. noui and ve ter. testa. quest.
110. Shevve us your church M. Calf. and prove your succession. August in Psalm.
15.
ecclesiae. The rock of the church that was to be builded: a great foundation
of the church: a most sound and strong rock: the prince of the Apostles: the
chief captain, the head and top of all: the head of all the whole church,
the rock of faith, and ground pillar of the church. Wherefore if ye will be
Christ's friends (as ye pretend) have charity: keep unity, love his church:
obey his officer, and vicar on earth, whom he has made ruler of his church.
As for that church, which you call the church Christ, with which you flatter
your selves, and say ye join unto, is no church, but a synagog of Satan, often
overthrown, and manytimes invisible, by your own confession, a co^ue^ticle of
Apostatats, and co^spiracie of libertines. For S. Augu. calls the church that
disturbeth, the order begone in S. Peter, and continued by order of Bisshops
succeding one after another to the present time, which was the order of the
bisshops of Rome, Cathedram pestilentiae, the Chayer of pestilence.

If your church be (as you make the simple beleaue) a catholic and universal
church, dispersed through out the world, show us where it is now: and where
it has been the fiftene hundred years: prove your succession: name your
bisshops. The church of Christ has always ben visible, as a city placed upon
an hill: It has always had (as he ordained) Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors,
and Pastors: In sole posuit tabernaculum suum, hoc est sanctam ecclesiam suam,
etc. He has placed his tabernacle in the sun, that is his holy church: he
has put it in an open place to be seen, and not in covert, and secret
corners, not that it should lie privy, not that it should be covered, that
happily it might not be covered, as the conspiracies and conuenticles of
heretics are. That we may know your church show us the tabernacle, where
it was placed as in the sun: Show us the open place where it was planted as
in the light of the world, and if ye can not (as most certain it is you can
not) then brag no more that your church is catholic and universal. The
church of Rome founded of Christ by his blessed Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul, which we presently follow, The church of Rome alvvayes visible, and
sincere in faith.
and are able to give the name of every bishop that succeeded in that see
euersithens, has continued in the light and face of the world, always
visible, always seen, always resorted unto, always vncorrupt both in
doctrine of faith and doctrine touching ma^ners, always undefiled, always
firm and stable in the faith, always counted the head of the universal
church, always mother of faith, and rock, that hell gates could never
break. Wherefore sir you neaded not require us to make it a catholic church,
Fol. 121. b
and a follower, and furtherer of true religion. It was proved before, and now
for your further instruction, I will repete somewhat of it again.

To be with Cornelius (who was bishop of Rome) idem est quod cum Ecclesia
Catholica co^municare, Cip. lib. 4. epist. 2.
is the very self same thing that it is to communicate with the Catholic
church. To allow and firmly hold the communion of Cornelius, est catholicae
Ecclesiae vnitatem, pariter and charitatem probare, and firmiter tenere, is to
allow and firmly hold both the unity and charity of the Catholic church.
Libr. 4. epist. 8.
To be one of the Catholic bishops, est cum Ecclesia Romana conuenire, is to
agree with the church of Rome. S. Cyprian says, The church of Rome has
been, Ambros. de obitu fratris. Libr. 1. epist. 3. Lib 3 ca. 3 epist. ad Damas.
and is the only Church to which infidelity and unfaithfulness could never
have access. Irenaeus says, in the church of Rome that tradition which came
from the Apostles was always kept. S. Hierome says, Amongst the Romans
only, the authority of the fathers remains vncorrupt. Ibi cespite terra
soecundo dominici seminis veritatem centeno fructu resert, there the ground
with her fertile soil, brings forth the truth of our lords seed with an
hundred fold increase. The church of Rome the Catholic church.


By this you might have seen that the church of Rome is the Catholic church,
or at the least the mother, rote, spring, and head of the Catholic church,
never defiled with heresy, idolatry, superstition or any error in matters of
faith. But peradventure you read not so far. Wherefore in Gods name see it
now, and if you will be a membre of the Catholic church, be with the chief
bishop of the Catholic church. You may learn by S. Cyprian that the bishop
is in the church, and the church in the bishop: Lib. 4. epist. 9.
and that if any man be not with the bishop, he is not in the church: and
that they flatter them selves in vain, who having not unity and peace with
the priests of God, creape up, and beleaue that they secretly communicate with
some, whereas the church, which is one, and catholic, is not cut, nor
divided. You may learn by S. Augustine that they who go from the whole to a
part, from the body to a wound, from life, to a division, shall pass hence
into the pit of corruption: and that they that die in frowardnes, In Psalm. 54
and schism, shall be humbled of God in damnation, because they were advanced
up in dissension? To be short, you may learn that he cries woe to them that
hate the unity of the church and make them selves parts in men, wherefore as
ye tender your own health, Tract. 12. in Joan.
read and regard. And if ye shall find no unity nor perfect truth out of the
church of Rome, then return again from whence ye departed, into the unity
of the church of Rome.

Where you object against me, that speaking of custom, I make a lie and
falsify Tertullian, Fol. 123. a
you must pardon me, if I tell your mastershippe, sir reverence according to
your custom you make a lie. These are my words. Custom increaser,
confirmer, and obseruer of faith, taught us this use of the Cross. His words
out of which I gathred this position, in latin are these. De coro. militis.
Harum and aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules scripturarum,
nulla legis traditio tibi praetendetur. Autrix consuetudo, confirmatrix and
fidei obseruatrix. If thou require a law of scriptures for these and other
obserua^ces, no tradition of law shall be pretended unto the. Custom author,
co^firmer, and obseruer of faith shall be pretended unto the. These words find
I in Tertullian printed of Frobenius at Basile in the year of our lord 1521.
in the month of July. The very same words find I in Tertullian printed of
Frobenius at Basile in the year of our lord 1528. in March. And the very same
may you find in Tertullia^, if it please your worship to look upon any of
the said printes. Wherefore seeing I followed my printed book viewed by learned
men before it came to the prime, and received of learned men in the same sense,
in which it is alleged, after it came from the printe, especially out of
Basile where your religion raygneth, I am not to be counted a falsifier of the
author, for alleagi^g him as I find hi^ in print, but you an infamous
scla^derer, for so reporti^g of me before you had consulted diverse printes,
and impressions, and seen upon what ground I builded. But we may see that you
are glad to take every light occasion to discredit us, and shyft away the
matter which ye take in hand to impugn. But it is a foul shift to make a
lie, and sclander your neighbor.

Let your newest Basile printe, and the last of Paris, read that saying of
Terrullia^ in this sort: Haru^ and aliaru^ disciplinaru^ si legem expostules
scripturaru^, nulla^ inuenies, traditio tibi praete^detur autrix, co^suetudo
co^firmatrix, et fides obseruatrix: that is, For certain ceremonies tradition
and custom suffice for scriptures.
if thou demand a law of scriptures for those and other obseruances,
tradition shall be pretended unto the as author, custom co^firmer, and faith
obseruer of the^, it makes quite against your positions, who will have nothing
but scripture. You see that tradition may be author of a ceremony in Christ's
church. For so have your new printed book, autrix, and not auctrix, author
and not increaser. How be it if we had not to do with wranglers, both might
signify one. You see that to the curious that ask for scriptures, Good
Christians observe traditions.
tradition and custom are pretended, and that the faith of true Christians
observes that, which tradition delyured and custom confirmed.

You take much pains to prove that which no man denies, Fol. 123 b Fol. 123. a
that traditions not written should be reasonable, and agreeable to scripture,
as though the Apostles and fathers after them, delyured any thing by tradition
that was unreasonable, and contrary to scriptures: or the catholic church
would maintain any thing, contrary to reason and scripture. Again you would
have the use of the cross proved to be a reasonable tradition, Calf. Fol. 123.
b
agreeable to God, furthering to discipline, and profitable to salvation, and
then ye would yield unto it, Mart.
but if there had been such modesty, and honesty in you, as is required in an
obedient child, you would never have doubted, but that the Apostles having
the holy Ghost, did all things agreeable to God, furtheri^g to discipline, and
profitable to salvation, and consonant to reason, albeit they gave not
presently a reason why and wherefore they did it. Hom. co^t. Sabel. Tradition In
2 ad ad These. Hom. 4
Whensoever any tradition might be alleged, S. Basile said: Te pacatum
reddat traditio. Let tradition make the quiet. S. Chrysostom says: Tradition
est, nihil quaeras amplius. It is a tradition, seek for no more. Wherefore
seeing Tertullian and S. Basile tell you that it is a tradition to use the sign
of the cross, and bless our selves with it, that might have made you quiet,
and taught you to beleaue that it was of God.

Leo an holy father was wounte to say, that it was not to be doubted but that
every thing which was retained of the church into custom of devotion, came of
the Apostles tradition, or doctrine of the holy Ghost. Sermon. 2 de ieiunio.
pe^tecost. The general customs of the Catholic church come from the Apostles
and doctrine of the holy ghost. Lib. 2. cap. 7 de bapt. cont Donatist.
Likewise because many ceremonies were used through out the universal church,
and not sound in scripture, nor council, S. Augustine thought that they were
delivered and commanded of no other, but of the Apostles, and if they being
holy and learned fathers, thought the universal custom of the church a good
cause, and sufficient reason, to propue that the ceremony used, was delyured
of the Apostles, what wisdom is there in your singular head to require other
proof for the tradition of the cross, than the general observation and
common custom of the catholic church? Are you wiser or better seen in the
scripture, or more zealous to set forth the honor of God then they were? No no
M. Calf. There was, more wisdom lerning, and devotion in the meanest of them,
than in all the protestants heads that ever were, or shall be. Wherefore seeing
you know it to be a tradition, braule no more contentiously against it. Say
with S. Basile, Me pacatu^ reddet traditio. Tradition shall make me quiet. Say
with Chrysostom: Traditio est nihil quaera^ amplius. It is a tradition, I will
seek no further. Say with Leo and S. Augustine, it is received into custom of
devotion, and general use through out the catholic church, therefore it
comes from the tradition of the Apostles, and doctrine of the holy Ghost: so
shall your self be most at peace and quiet. The further ye venture, the more ye
fall in danger. The distinction, which you make of three kinds of traditions,
that some are necessary to be retained of all Christians as necessarily
inferred of the scripture, Fol. 124. a and b. Three kinds of traditions
mentioned by M. Calf.
As that a woman in the congregation should not be bare headed, that in the
congregation she should keep silence, that the poor should labor with their
own hands and get their living, other direct contrary to the word, As Latin
service, worshipping of images, vowing of chastity, and communicating under
one kind, Other indifferent, neither utterly repugnant to the word of God,
neither necessarely inferred of it, so sauoreth of ignorance that it is like to
disgrace the estimation of our lerning amongst the whottest puritanes in all
London. For first to put you in remembrance of the great vanity made in the
title of your book, that the vanities of men should disproued by the undoubted
word of God, and the dreams and dotages of others controlled by the godly
fathers of the church, and conspiracies ouerthrowed by laufull counsels, M.
Calves distinction of traditions not to be found in the fathers nor schole men.
I beseeke tell us in what scripture, father, or council you find this
distinction? We admit all for scripture, that you reject out of the Canon.
Besides S. Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, Gregory, and other ancient fathers,
we will receive S. Thomas, Gaietan, Alexander de Ales, Martin de Magistris,
Bonauenture, and all other schole men with their gloses in this case, we will
not refuse the simplest provincial counsel that was assembled by any lawful
bisshops these thirtene hundred years. Go to therefore bring us one text of
scripture, one father, one council, and canon, where this distinction is made.
Why speak you not? Are your scriptures so tied to the paper, that they can
not be loosed? Are your fathers so to the less that they can not speak? Are
your counsels so conceived that no canon ca^ appear? What a strange ease is
this? Find some for shame, let not all the world see that great crake of
scriptures, fathers, and counsels to be turned into a dream dotage, and
fancy of your own. If they do, you are shamed for ever. For either men will
esteem you, but for an arrogant fool, for making such a great brag, or a very
idiot for so folishly exemplyfying your distinction. For what ignorant, but you
would, say that these are traditions necessarily inferred of the scripture,
and so proved out of the scripture by S. Paul, that a woman should not be bare
headed in the church? that in the congregation she should keep silence?

That is necessarily inferred of scripture which being not in express
scripture is by drift of argument, and necessary sequel of reason, Inferred
of scripture. 1. Cor. 11.
inferred of some place of scripture. As for the tradition that women should
cover their heads in the church, it is taught in express words, and
commanded in S. Paul, and not inferred of any scripture. There is one lie:
and if that place of S. Paul were not, there were no scripture in all the
Bible to prove it. Fol. 124. b
Again where you say, that S. Paul did not obtrude this of his authority,
but by the scripture prove it, there is another lie. For S. Paul bri^geth no
text, nor sentence of scripture to prove it necessary that women should be
covered, in the church: but as he was an apostle endued with the holy Ghost:
So he gave that precept.

Further who but such a blind batfouler, would say, that Latin service,
woorshipping of images, vowing of chastity, and receiving under one kind were
direct contrary to the word of God? Whereas there is no express precept of
any one tongue in scripture, nor any commandment against images, vowing of
chastity, or receiving under one kind. Last of all, who but such a wise man
would say: that in traditions of such things as are indifferent, Fol. 124. b
we must follow the order of the church with a limitation, and not absolutely?

Every wise man knows that we should not prescribe order to the church, but
the church prescribe order unto us: we obey the church, and not the church
obey us. Your self say within few, Fol 124. b
lines, that the church must still retain her right, to be judge and
determiner of such traditions, either to bear with them, or abolish them, as
may best serve for edification. If that be true, how will you excuse your self
of co^tradictio^? If the church has a right to be judge and determiner of
traditions, then the church must see whether they be profitable, the church
must see whether they be to edificatio^, the church must see whether they be
tolerable, and not we, I mean such private men as you and I are. If the
church command them, we must obey, yea absolutely: and not with a limitation,
unless for not obeying the church, we will be alienated absolutely without al
lymitation from Christ, The church must be obeyed absolutely without
limitation. Matt. 18.
and made of Christians heathens and publicanes. Christ, wills him that
hears not the church to be counted an heathen and Publican. But sir in
which of the three kinds of traditions, will you place those that S. Basile
mentions, to wit, the signing and blessing of Christen men with the sign of
the cross, praing toward the east, the words of invocation whiles the
Sacrament is showed, hallowing the water of baptism, the oil of inunction,
and the man that is baptized? be they necessarely inferred upon scripture or
direct contrary to the word of God? Or indifferent, neither repugnant to the
word, nor necessarely inferred of the word? Seeing our controversy was of the
tradition of the cross specially, which both Tertullian, and S. Basile
mention, reason would you should have placed them in one of your three rancks,
that we might by your good advise have known, whether it be a tradition or
necessarely inferred upon scripture, or direct contrary to the scripture, or
indifferent, nor repugnant to scripture, nor necessarely inferred of scripture.
But you thought it not good for your purpose, lest if happily you had adumbred
it amongst such traditions as are indifferent, Fol. 125. a The fathers
acco^pte the cross to be a tradition and yet M. Calf. vvil have it to be none.
your own rule would have forced you to retain it, because the church has
taken order for it, and universally received it, through out all christendom.
Wherefore to aduoice that, you say, that in this number we can not iustlely
co^prise the cross: which is a strange case. Tertullian, S. Basile, Leo S.
Augustine, au^cie^t and learned fathers, and all the whole church of Christ take
these and such like traditions to be at the least, things indifferent, and
yet your wisdom can not see, it. Whence comes this? Of humility, or
arrogancy? of modesty, or singularity? Flater your self as well as you can,
S. Augustine) as I told you before) counts it not omly arrogancy, and
singularity, but insolentissimam insaniam, most proud madness. Epist. 118.


Where you say, that although of some fathers it has been accounted such,
Fol 125. a Calf.
yet we must remember that they did not always build gold and silver, but
somtymes hay and stuble upon Christ (which words being mea^t of manners you
wrest falsely to doctrine) and that every thing which is pretended to be the
fathers writi^ges, Mart.
is not by and by theirs, I answer that albeit some fathers in searching
reasons to convince Heretics arguments had some private opinions, yet there is
no reason why their authority should be refused when they agree with all
other fathers and bisshops of Christ's church. Likewise albeit some false
books, and bastard babes have been fathered upon some fathers, by bastards,
Apostatats and heetickes, yet is it not convenient that therefore we should
condemn the true books and works of the fathers, Or refuse to follow the
custom of catholic church. Therefore we say unto you as S. Basile having to
do with such a wicked heretic as you are, and almost in a like case, S.
Basile. Lib. 1 co^t. Euno. Reverence dew to the au^cie^t fathers.
said ones. What say thou man? Shall we not give more to antiquity? Shall
we not reverence the multitude of Christen men, as well those that live
presently, as those that lived ever since the Gospel was preached? Shall
we have no regard of their dignity who florisshed in all spiritual grace, for
whom thou have lately devised this envious way of impiety? But shutting the
eyes of our hearts, and abandoning the memory of every holy man, shall we
yield our minds now quiet, and void of fancies to thy sophistry and
cauillation? Suerly thy power is great, if those things shall be at thy
commandment which the devil him self with his manifold craft, could never
attain: For we being persuaded of thee, shall prefer your wicked
imaginations and thoughts before the tradition of faith, which in all ages
past, has prevailed under most holy men, which were no safetye. Wherefore
utter all the vemine that you can against the fathers, of blessed memory:
turn up their ashes: disclose their infirmities: show their errors, spend all the eloquence that you have against the^, you shall never hurt them, nor drive
any Christen man from reuerencing that, which the church has allowed in them:
Tradition shall make us quiet. We will say with S. Basile. Dominus it a
docuit, Apostoli praedicauerunt, Hom. co^t. Sabell.
patres obseruauerunt, confirmauerunt martyrs, sufficiat dicere, sic edoctus
sum. Our Lord has so taught: the Apostles have so preached: the fathers have
so observed: the martyrs have confirmed. As for you and yours we leave with the
Arians, who would not vouchesafe to compare any of the old fathers to them
selves, Lib. 1. cap. 14 Tripar. The pride of heretics.
nor to be equalled to the scholemasters of whom they were instructed, nor
think any man comparable to them selves in measure of wisdom, but imagined
that they only were wise, they only had those things reveled unto them, which
were known of no man under the sun besides. We lean you to Nestorius, Lib.
12 ca. 4 Tripar.
who having a little eloquence, disdained to read the books of the old
interpreters, and thought him self better then all. It shall suffice us to say,
we have been so taught.

Your long discourse made to prove, Calf. Fol. 125. b
that whatsoever has been delivered, and otherwise esteemed Apostolic, is not
to be observed, that for diversity of ceremonies men are not to be contemned,
and that traditions varied often, Mart.
to the end that you might not be contemned, for refusal of the like, I have
answered before: and say further, that there is nothing more reasonable, than to
have every thing dissolved by the same means that it was tied: every law to
be abrogated by the same means that it was first ordained. Seeing then
traditions were delivered unto the church by the Apostles, and bisshops, who
had the dispe^satio^ of Christ's mysteries, it is reason that if there be cause
why they should be abrogated and refused, Prove your church to be Apostilike
and Catholic and your vocation Lauful M. Calf.
they should be abrogated by the Apostles successors, and bisshops, that have
the dispensation of Christ's mysteries, and governance of his church committed
unto them. As for you, prove your church to be Apostolic, and Catholic, your
vocation to be lauful, that ye are rightly according to Christ's ordinance
called to the dispensatio^ of his mysteries, that you have true bisshops in
your church, before you challeng unto you, the alteration, of any ordinance,
tradition, or ceremony in Christ's church.

Hitherto I have spoken of the two points which you like an evil point maker
have knocked long to make taglesse, and break a sunder: But thanks be to God
the leather was so good and your hammer so vnhamsom that they be both whole
yet. Now let us se how you tugge at the third point: videlicet, that a
cross was set up in every place etc. To Martialis one of the 72. disciples
that said: Crucem domini in mente, in ore and in signo tenete: Keep the cross
of our lord in your mind, in your mouth, and in a sign, Martialis vvorte
denied and words wrested. Fol. 127 a Calf. Mart.
you say nothing, to any purpose: but as the property of al heretics is,
deny his work, and wreste his words, and say: We may have the cross in a
sign according to Christ's words in his last supper, do this as often as ye
do it in remembrance of me, though we have not the sign of the cross.

Here it is to be noted, how wittely this wiseman dissenteth from the rest of
his brethren. For whereas they say, that in the supper we have the body of
Christ in a sign, he to have a singular fancy from all the rest, will not
rest upon that, but says, we may have the cross at the supper, in a sign,
to wit the passion of Christ in bread and wine, which is but a new devised
to ye, to shyft away an old truth. Certain it is that by the celebration of
Christ's supper, we are put in remembrance of Christ's passion. But because it
was done then, but privily in some secret place, it is to be thought that the
author requiring us to have the cross of Christ in our minds, in your
mouths and in a sign, mea^t that, seeing our mature is so dull and heavy, that
we could not always think and speak of Christ, unless we had some external
mean to excite our memory, nor be ever at the supper to celebrate the
remembrance of his passion, we should have the sign of the cross before our
eyes in our churches, houses, parlours, chambres, high ways, and else where,
that whethersoeuer we turned nor face, the cross might be seen, and put us in
remembrance of Christ. Certain it is that Martialis was no signifier with
Swinglius, nor meant that the supper of our lord is a naked sign. His words
in the same epistle testify the contrary: for he says, That which the Jews
through envy sacrificed, thinking to abolish his name out of the earth, An
altar hallowed. An argument for the presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
we for our healths sake, set forth in the hallowed altar. upon which
words we may buld this argument. That is upon the hallowed altar which the
jews crucified, but the jews crucified Christ's true body, and not a naked
sign of his body. Ergo his true body and no naked sign of his body is set
upon the altar: which being true, it can not be, that he willing the
Burdegalensians to have the cross in a sign, meant that they should have a
sign of our lords body at our lords supper, but the sign of the cross in
our churches, chambres, and high ways.

To the place of Athanasius that said: Crucis certe figuram ex duobus lignis
componentes adoramus, we certes making the figure of the cross of two pieces
of wood, do adore and woorship it, you answer nothing, but as you did before
sclanderouslie report of me, Quest. 38. ad Antio.
that I falsified Tertullian: So with like impude^cie, and less honesty you
say here, that I falsyfie Athanasius. Athanasius not falsified.
But what truth is in your words let the readers judge. I allege the
words simply and plainly as I find them in the author. Athanasius printed
at Lions in Melchior and Gaspar Trechsels shop, the year of our lord 1522,
has one and fourth ye questions to Antiochus, and in the answer to the 38.
question has these words. Crucis certe figuram ex duobus lignis componentes
adoramus, we certes making the figure of the cross of two pieces of wood, do
adore and worship it. The same Athanasius printed at Argentine, (a town of our
own gospel) in March the year of our lord 1522. by Knoblouch has all the
same questions to Antiochus, and the very same words in the answer to the 38.
question. Like wise the same Author printed at Colonie the year of our lord
1548. in the printe house, of Melchior Monesiany, reads as before, as every
man that will take pains to look in them, may see, and are less to be
suspect, of corruption than your late Basile print. Which being undoubtedly
true, judge (good raders) whether I alleging Athanasius words as I found
them, in three diverse printed books, have deserved to be accused for a
falsifier, or he condemned for a sclaunderer, I for a liar, or he for a false
accuser.

But to return those three lies unto hi^ self again, you shall understand
that where he says: that I suppressed a piece of Athanasius, Fol. 127. b.
saying of the spear, reed and spo^ge, that thy are holy as the cross,
whereas the author said, they are as holy as the cross, that is a lie of
his. For I suppressed it not, my written copy is yet able to show the contrary.
In deed the printer has omitted it, by oversight, but his negligence is not to
be abused to my hinderance. In so small a matter a gentle reader would have
borne with such a escape, seeing it was printed in a strange country, but seeing
he grateth so nigh, to spy a fault, you shall pardon me, if hereafter I drive
him to the printer for excuse of ouersights.

The word Adore. in Athanasius text.
Where he says: the word adore is not in the text, there is a false lie.
For all the three printes which I alleged before have this word: Adoramus we
do adore, and are better to be credited than his newest impression. Again in
saying that there be not xxxix. questions, that is another lie. For if he tell
them, as tom fool told his geese, 41 questions of Athanas. to Antio.
he shall find fourthy and one in the books of the said printes, which if it
might have pleased his mastership to have vievved with other circumstances
before he pronounced so rash a sentence, and condemned me of falsifying those
authors, this infamy had not rebounden back upon him. But let us consider
the words, which he alleges out of his newest printe. Quest 16 ad Antio.
Calf. Fol. 127 b
They are these: Quare credentes omnes ad crucis imagine^ cruces facimus,
Lanceae vero sanctae, aut arundinis, aut spongiae, figuras nullas conficimus,
quum tamen haec tam sint sancta, quam ipsa crux. Responsio: Figuram quidem
crucis ex duobus lignis compingentes conficimus, vt si quis infidelium etc.
Why do all beleauers make crosses after the image of the cross, but make no
figures nor likeness of the spear, the reed, or the sponge, whereas not
withstanding, they are as holy as the cross it self? The answer, we make in
deed the figure of the cross by putting of two pieces of wood together, that
if any of the infidels reprove that in us, that we woorship wood, we may by
separating those two pieces of wood, and taking away the sign of a cross,
account them as unprofitable wood, and persuade the infidel, that we woorship
not woodd, but crucis typum, the thing represented by the cross, quoth M.
Calf. which in the spear, spo^ge and reed, we neither ca^ do nor show. Mart.
But what has he adunataged his cause by this? Or what has he hyndred mine?
Is it not plain, that all Christen men made crosses to the likeness of the
cross of Christ? What will he make of those words omnes credentes? Al
Christen men made crosses.
all beleauers? and conficimus figuram crucis ex duobus lignis? We make the
figure of the cross, of two pieces of wood? If he construe them, must he not
say: All we Christen men make a figure of the cross of two pieces of wood?
yeas I trow, and that the you^gest puine in Paul's schole having learned, but
Esops fables of bayard and the Ass, the egle, and the Betell can tell him. If
it be so, then have we found, that in Alexandria in Athanasius time all
Christen men made crosses, like the cross of Christ, and that Athanasius him
self archbisshop of Alexandria was one of those Christen men spite of M.
Calfhils balde ministers beard.

But (he says) there is not any word or half word for woorshipping. Calf.
Fol. 127. b Mart. Veneror veneraris etc. is not latin to vvoorship with M.
Calf. Athanasius corrupted
No sir? Is not veneror veneraris etc. Latin in your Dictionarie to worship?
And have you not that word twice in the same sentence? non veneremur lignum,
sed veneremur crucis typum? That we worship not the wood, but we worship the
figure of the cross? O merciful God what frontitck frenzy inueigled your
wits that you durst make so open a lie? and interpreting the authors words
corrupt his sense? Is typus crucis, the thing represented by the cross? or the
figure of the cross? Examine the place better, call your wit to court,
assemble your learned counsel, and make a conference, of the brotherhode. Or
if it be to chardgable, for you to be at such a cost, consult master Copers
Dictionarie and see whether, typus be not Latin for a type, figure, shadow, an
example, a form, a likeness, and Crux Latin for a cross? and when you have put
them both together, ask some learned man, whether typus crucis, be not a figure,
a form an example and likeness of the cross, and not the thing figured by the
cross. In the mean while we will be so bold as to score up the three lies,
Three lies
one for that you said: there was no word no half word in that sentence
for worshipping. Another because you say: Typus cruris signifies the thing
represented by the cross. maki^g no difference between the figure of the
cross, and Christ him self. The third that you say the spear sponge and reed
should be as well woorshipped as the cross. For the very words and meaning of
the author is against it. He says: we make crosses, that if the infidels
would lay to our chardg that we woorship wood we might break those pieces of
wood, and persuade the infidel, that we woorship not the wood, but Typum
crucis, the sign, form, figure, and likeness of the cross, but we can neither
do the like, nor show the like in the spear, The spear and the spo^ge not to
be vvoorshipped as the cross. An imitation of M. Calves Rhethorique. Fol. 128.
a.
sponge, and reed, and therefore we woorship it not as we do the cross, which
is Athanasius true meani^g, or else the question propounded, remains as yet
vnsoluted: which were absurd to think.

Wherefore to use his own Rhethorike: Ah see (good readers) with what a sotte,
we have to do with all, that condemns him of falsifying authors, who
alleges their words as he finds them in their books of diverse printes,
more ancient than his, and more likely to be true than his of the newest
print? See with what a Calf. we are enco^bred that understands not his own
book, that falsely translateth the words of his author, and makes lies as
he list? And because me^ should not think that the crosses which Athanasius
and other Christians made in his time were set up in private and public
places, asks, Fol. 128. a.
whether any wise man when he has a new garment proclameth it in the market,
or hang the counterfect of his friend upon a pole to beseene? And wills us as
we judge of one so to imagine of the other? Which has nor wit, nor reason in
it. For as every wise man that makes him a new cote makes it to were on his
back, and not to proclaim in the market: So they that make crosses, and images
of saints, and counterfectes of their friends, make them because they should
be seen. To have them seen is not to ley them up in a cole house, but to set
them in some open place, where they may be seen. And albeit, M. Calfhil,
thinks it a foul inconvenience, for a man to hang the counterfect of his
friend upon a pole to be seen, yet he can not deny, but that every man that
has the counterfect of his friend, or ha^geth it upon a nail against some
wall, or sets it in some windoe, where he him self and others may see it,
and remember his friend. For that is the only end, why he makes the counterfect
of his friend.

To your brable about Serapis, I answered before: that may suffice. For the
sinistrous suspicion and lewd surmise which of the fact of Tyrannus an heathen
and idolatrous priest, you labor to rere, and leave in men's heads of all
Catholic priests, of the new law of Christ, and his gospel, God that
knows the secrets of all hearts, judge you for it, and reward that
malicious mind of yours, who for the lewdnes of a few, sclander the whole
order: But where find you, that any priest blamed laufull mariadg, as you say?
Fol. 129. a.
Where find you that they count it a life dissolute? Where find you that
they take it a satisfying of lusts of the fleash? The places that you alleged
before in the fourth article when you spoke of matrimony out of Innocentius,
and Syricius, speak only of priests and deacons, that vowed chastity, and made
a solemn promise to God, 110. a b Distin. 82. cap. propo suisti. Distin. 82.
cap. qu^a. The mariadg of priests condemned.
that they would live a sole and single life: and for them to marry and break
their vows, for them to take women, and undo their promise made to God, not
only Innocentius, and Siricius and all other Catholic bishops and priests,
but all godly lay men that are learned in the scripture, or otherwise zealous in
the setting forth of Gods honor, count it, all to gether unlawful, a life
dissolute, and satisfying of carnal lusts, and that worthily. For both the
word of God, decrees of Emperors, and statutes of princes do condemn it for
such.

In our realm of England you have a law against the unlawful mariadg of
priests, standing still in his full force to all effects at this present,
which condemns all your married mounkes, friars, and Apostatats of
disobedience to God, and their prince for their unlawful marriadgs. If you
have no better proof than these decrees of Innocentius, we may score up three
lies more. For first we blame not lawful marriadg, but the marriadg of
priests, which is altogether unlawful. Secondarely we think it a life
dissolute in none, Three lies.
but in priests and such as have vowed chastity. Thirdly we account it a
satisfying of the fleash in none but in priests as before, and seeing we esteem
it only unlawful in them, what honesty is there in you to say indefinitely,
Fol. 129. a
that we blame lawful marriadg? What charity to affirm that al we soole
lived priests practice, al for the most part adultrie? and use viler
shyftes, than Saturnus, the idolatrous priest? how prove you it? how
justify you it? what evidence have you for it? if you have none in store,
find some I advise you, the time may come when you shall be dryue^ to show your
proufes.

Fol. 129. a
You appeal to my conscience whether I know it to be so or no, and I answer
before God, in my conscience I do not know it to be so, nor ever did.
Whatsoever enormitie or fault was severely punished in VVynchester at my
aboode there (as many were both by me, and their discrete, sober, and virtuous
schole master at that time, I proteste before God, I know no other that taught
them any evil, than he that teaches men all wickedness and evil, that is
Satan the author and deviser of all iniquity and evil. For my own behavior
there, I will say nothing for avoiding of vanity. Let the world judge, and the
scholars and their friends, for whose sakes, I took that tedious pains of
enducation witness, and say of me as they know.

Fol 129. a
Where you threaten bluddely that you will vnripp the life's of our popish
doctors, and of our selves, I beseeke you say what you can. When all your
venomous blastes are blown, when all the poison of your serpe^tine tongue is
spet out, when all the rancored malice, and festred hate of your evangelical
stomach is disgorged, you shall hurt our cause no more, than other heretics
did the Catholic faith, by like railing and sclau^dring the fathers in those
days. And seeing our savior and M. Christ was called a Samaritane, a man that
had a devil, Joan. 8. Matt. 11. Act. 26. Act. 17. Just. Mar. in Apol 2.
a friend of Publicans, a wine bibber, and S. Paul a madbrayne, a word sower,
a preacher of devils, The Apostles dronckardes, the Christians that followed
them, eaters of men's fleash, wicked adulterers, and cursed Atheists, and in
other ages other sclaunders have been raised upon the catholics, as S. Greg.
Nazian. in Monod.
Basile was sclaundred to have had a woman in his chamber, Libr. 2. ca 24.
Tripart.
Eustachius that he had a son by an harlot, Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 18. hist.
Athanasius that he ravished a woman, cut of Ibidem.
Arsenius arm, used sorcery, stirred a Lib. 4. ca. 17. Tri.
sedition in Alexandria, deceived poor men of Li. 4 c 19 Tripart.
corn sent from the Emperors, and burnt the holy books, and so likewise
diverse other, certainly it shall nothing greaue us to hear the heap of
sclaunders and venomous words that you shall falsely lay to your charge, and
have learned of Martin Luther and friar Bale. That confortable saying of our
savior Christ: Beati eritis quum maledixerint vobis, mentientes propter me:
Ye shall be happy, when they shall speak evil of you, lying for my sake,
shall be our preservative against all our poison. Begin when ye will: Li. 4.
ca. 24. Trip.
he that shall feel hi^ self guilty in conscience, shall have occasion thereby
to lament his sins, and do the worthy fruictes of penance, and if he take it
patiently, have merit by your mischief.

As for my self, when you have said all that you can, I trust if all the
world turn into protestants, and they all refuse me, yet he that shall judge
them and all the world, will receive me, who as Chrysostom says, speaks
these confortable words of the sinner. Licet omnes homines, Matt. 5. Ho. 21.
ad pop. Anti.
licet daemones cum diabolo constituti ipsum accusent de turpissimis and
occultis criminibus, non reijcio, non abhominor, sed ab accusatoribus ipsum
liberans, and ab iniquitate absolue^s, sic ad certamina duco. Albeit all men in
the world, albeit all the sprites with the devil in hell, accuse him of most
fylthie and privy faults, I do not reject him, I do not abhor him, but
delyuering him from his accusers, and absoluing him from iniquity, I bring him
in such sort to fight. When the woman accused of the Jews to our savior
Christ for adultrie was rigorously exacted to punishment after the laws of
Moses, Christ said unto them, let him that is without sin amongst you,
cast the first stone at her. Joan 8.
So say I to you M. Calf. if you think your self faultlesse, prepare your
sling, let flee your stones, our pauice is ready, and shield prepared, to
receive your strokes.

In Psalm. 36 A comfortable saying against the railing of heretics.
Against that famous libel of yours come, I will desire all Catholics to arm
them selves with patience. I will say unto them, as S. Augustine said to his
people: Let them speak against us what they will. Let us love them against
their will. For we know dearly beloved brethren, we know their tongues.
VVherefor let us not be angry with the^, have patience as well as we have. For
they see that they have no aduantadge in the cause, and they turn their
tongues against us, and begin to speak evil of us: many things which they
know, many things which they do not know. Those things that they know, are
our offenses past. For we have been, as the Apostle says, folish, and
incredulous, and unwilling to all good works, we have been doting, and
madding in perverse error, we deny it not, and in as much as we deny not our
infirmity past, so much do we praise God that has pardoned it: and if they
reprove us, do you contemn it.

In Psalm. 36 To M. Calf.
And to you sir with the same holy father I say: Quid ergo haeretice dimittis
causam and is ad hominem? Quid enim ego sum? Quid sum? nunquid ecclesia
catholica ego sum? etc. Why do thou o heretic forsake the cause, and go
to the man? For what am I? Am I the Catholic church? Am I the heritage of
Christ, dispersed through out the world? It suffiseth me that I am in it. Thou
do reprove my offenses past: what great thing do thou? I am more severe
in my own offenses then thoue art. That which thou reprouest, I have
condemned. O, would to God thou would follow, that thy error might also at
lenght be past. VVithall, to the reader I say out of the same father, If we be
good men, we be wheat in the church: To the reader.
If we be evil men we be chafe in the church, yet for all that, we go not
from the flooer. Thou that fleest away with the wind of temptation, what art
thou? wheat? If thou were wheat, the wind should not drive the from the
flooer. Wherefore by the place where thou art, agnise and acknowledge what
thou art. What we are he knows to whom we make our moan.

Matt. 23.
Of evil men it is said, scribes and pharisees have sat upon the chair of
Moses. Do what they say, but do not what they do: by which you see, that in
the chair of Moses, for which the chair of Christ succeeded, evil men
sit, and yet for all that by saying well hurt not their hearers. Wherefore
do thou then forsake the chaier for evil men? O man Redi ad pace^, redi ad
concordiam quae te non offendit, etc. Return to unity, In Psalm. 36
return to peace and concord, which has not offended the. If I say well, and
do well, follow me. If I do not as I say, thou have the counsel of our
savior Christ, do as I say, but do not as I do. And for all this, go not away
from the Catholic chair, from the unity of the church. Embrace the truth,
who so ever speak it. This I thought good to admonish the gentle reader out of
S. Augustine, not because my conscience is witting of any of those horrible and
heinous crimes which that wicked Neronist by his lewd surmise would make men
suspect, but that thoue may understand that no Christian man ought to
discredit the truth, nor forsake the church, for the lewdnes of the rulers
and gourenours.

Now you shall see what a bone he gives me to pick out of Chrysostom.
Whereas he speaks of houses, marketts, Fol. 129. b Fol. 130. a Calf.
wildernesses, high ways, seas, ships, Garments, Parlours, walls windows,
armor, and such other things, where the cross should be, only he says
not (quoth M. Calf.) that he cross was in the church. Reckoning up so many,
would he have forgotten the chief, if any such order had been received then?
It is not credible. This is M. Calfhils bare bone, Matt.
bare I say, because it has no honesty nor truth in it. For Chrysostom
speaks in the very same place of the cross in the church, these are his
words: In demo^st co^t. Genti.
All men sign them selves often times with the cross, by printing of it in
the noblest part of our body. For it is figured and made daily in our
forheades. So it shines in the holy table. So it shines in the consecrating
and ordring of priests. So it shyneth again with the body of Christ in the
mystical suppers.

This Chrysostom there, within three lines, before the other words recited,
by M. Calf. The cross in the church mentioned by S Chrysostom.
And if the cross were in the holy table was it not in the church? Where
was the holy table, but in the church? In Chrysostoms time, Churches were not
dentie. Every city had them honorably adorned for the use of Gods service. Is
it credible then that where he says, The cross was in the holy table, in the
body of Christ, in the mystical suppers, that he said, it was not, in the
church? What reasonable man would think so? None, but M. Calf. He that
says this or that is, in the holy table, says that it is in the church.
For none or very few holy tables, were without the church at that time: but
you see good people, what a strong pillar you have to lean unto, and what a
wise minister to be your reader, that must face out so evident, so manifest and
plain a truth with such a shameful lie.

Ser. 130. de Temp. de cruce and latro. Fol. 130 a
If his lessons, and sermons be no truer than his assertions in this book, you
may harken long, and hear many a lie before you shall hear any truth.
Wherefore unless your ears, ytche with hearing lying vanities, spend no more
time in heari^g such vain liers. His drift is naught else, but either with gay
colored words to blind you, or with destroying one truth with an other to
deceive you.

Where S. Augustine saice: Before the cross was a name of condemnation, now
it is made a matter of honor, before it stood in damnation of a curse, now it
it is set up in occasion of salvation, M. Calf. says: That S. Augustine
speaks not here of a mystical or material cross, but of the passion of
Christ. Wherein with a lewd breath he makes a loud lie, and yet in some
thing tells a true a tale. For that S. Augustine speaks there of the
passion, it is true. That he speaks not of the material cross, it is most
false. And that it may, the better appear, judge your selves. In this very
place S. Augustine making a difference between the cross of the old law, and
the cross of the new law, and comparing them together says,

The cross in the old law and the cross in the nevve law
Before (that is to say in the old law, before the passion of Christ) the
cross was a name of condemnation, but now (it) what is that (it) M. Calf? The
Cross which was before the name of condemnation, is made a thing of honor.
Before (it) that is to say the cross which was before a name of condemnation,
stood in damnation of a curse, to wit as a cursed sign of da^natio^, now it,
what is that (it) M. Calf.? forsooth the cross that was before, the name of
condemnation, is set up in occasion of salvation. If then the cross which in
the old law was a name of condemnation, and set as a cursed sign of
damnation, was a material cross, certes the cross in the new law, made a
thing of honor, and erected in sign of salvation, must as S. Augustine there
means, be a material cross: and not only the passion. For otherwise his
comparison can not stand. And this my guess is more agreeable to S. Augustines
mind, than all the assurance, that M. Calf. has to the contrary. Wherefore
my collection, made of S. Augustines words, that as then the material cross
was a name of ignominy, so now the material cross is a thing of honor, is
not vain, as M. Calf. says, Fol. 130. a.
but his fancy very fond, who because the scripture do not account the wood
of which the gallows was made accursed, thinks that in this place of S.
Augustine, there is no material cross mentioned. VVherebie ye have some
trial of your ministers wit, but such wit, such wisdom, such knowledge,
such assurance.

To another place of S. Augustine following immediately in my book, where
express mention is made also of an external sign of the cross, he says
not as much as one word. By like his lips were tied. Li. 3. de vita Consta^.
Likewise to the place of Eusebius who declared that Constantine the great,
made the sign of the cross in his forhead, and painted it in a table and set
it up on high at his court gate, he says naught in effect, Fol. 130. b.
but that he did repose no holiness in it, nor ever brought it into any of the
churches, which he builded, and for proof of it brings not so much as one
word out of scripture, council or ancient father as full gloriously he
bragged in the first front of his book. Wherefore since his sight in the Greek
is so slender, that he knows not how to translate the Aorists truly, since
his ignorance understands not the fathers writings, seeing he refuses
ceremonies, customs and traditions, which the Apostles deliured and
commanded, and the Catholic church hitherto never abrogated, nor he nor his
are to be thought other then false Apostles, co^te^ners of their ordinances,
despisers of their traditions, discrediters of the ancient fathers, and
disauthorisers of their learned works, for all their glorious words and
shameless crakes.

THAT DIVERSE HOLY MEN, AND WOMEN GOT THEM LITTLE PIECES OF THE HOLY CROSS,
and enclosed them in gold, etc. THE SIXTH ARTICLE.
AGAINST this Article M. Calf. brings nothing worthy of answer. In the
beginning he alleges a mangled place of Tertullian, Fol. 131. a De velandis
virg.
to prove that Christ called not him self custom, but truth: against which
no person, no space of time, no maistershipe of men, no privilege of cuntries
can prescribe: Which seeing every Christen man grants, that idle allegation
might well have been spared. In the next page he proves that the fathers of
the old and new Testament, are not to be drawn always for example, and for
that he alleges a place of S. Lib. 2. co^t. epist. Gaude^tij ca. 23
Augustine, which in deed in the sense that the author means is both godly
and true. For disputing there against the Donatists murdering the^ selves,
because they would be Martirs, and defending their willfulnes by scripture, and
the example of Razias that killed him self, because he would not come into
the hands of his enemies, that would murder him, he says more largely, and
otherwise than our M. minister has recited. Non itaque debemus quicquid etiam
Dei testimonio laudatos homines fecisse legerimus, consentiendo approbare, sed
considerando discernere, adhibentes iudicium non sane nostrae authoritatis, sed
scripturaru^ diuinarum atque sanctarum etc. We must not therefore allow by
consent whatsoever we read in scripture that men commended by God him self
have done, but we must discern with discretion, not taking the judgment of
our authority, but of divine and holy scripture, which does not permit us
neither to imitate, nor to commend, the factes of those men, who in the
scriptures have good testimony, if any thing were done otherwise than well of
them, or not convenient for this time: as you must not follow, nor comme^d
Razias that killed him self, 2. Mac. 14.
David that committed murder, and adulterye, nor Salomo^ that departed his
body to so many Concubines, nor Peter that denied his M. and ventered to
waulke upon the water, alhoughe each of these men have their special
commendation in scripture. And why must we not follow those holy men? Because
in those things they did naught, and contrary to scripture. And this is the
meaning of S. Augustines rule, full wide God wott from M. No man to be
forbidden to follow the virtuous examples of the au^cie^t fathers.
Calfhills purpose. For if they, or any other man did any thing agreeable to
scripture, convenient for the time, or profitable to edifying, no man is forbid
to follow them. Yea it is against all reason that any man should be inhibited
to imitate the^. Wherefore unless this our adversary and enemy of Christ's
Cross, had first proved that Helena, Paulinus, Gregorius, who got little
pieces of the cross, and set them in gold or silver, had done evil and against
the express scripture, he should never have alleged that place of S.
Augustine. For as every wise man knows that he ought not to follow the
factes and misdoings of the old and ancient men in evil: So no man is so
ignorant, How fa^ forth examples may be follovved
but understands that it is laufull for him to follow their examples in all
works of verity, so far forth as the time will serve, and their habilitye
bear. But he had forgott that, and thought it enough to say: They had a
zeal, but not according to knowledge, and call Helena superstitious, and S.
Fol 132 a He^ena superstitious. S Gregory fabulous.
Gregory and Nicephorus fabulous, until some good sage father Bizias had
told him, that S. Hierome reproved the having, and enclosing of pieces of the
cross, and willed him to seek for it in his commentaries upon S. Mathewe.
Then as though he had gotten a great pray, Half a sentence out of S. Hierom
mangled and wrested. Matthew. 23.
in he lays half sentence of S. Hierome, and triumphs as though he had
won the field. But that you may see how he mangleth the Doctor and
wreasteth him for his purpose, I will repete S. Hieroms words that go before.

Expounding these words of the Gospel, Dilatant enim philacteria sua etc.
For they set abroad their philacteries, or brood gardes of their cootes,
and so forth, he says. VVoe be unto us miserable men to whom the faults of
the Pharisees are come. When God had given the commandments of the law by
Moses, at the last he said, Thou shall tie them in thy hand, and they shall be
immovable frrome thy eyes, and this is his meaning, let my commandments be
in thy hands, that they may be fulfilled in deed. Let them be before thy eyes,
that thou may muse on them day and night. The Pharisees not well construing
this, wrote the x. commandments in parchement, foolding them, and tying them
in their foreheades, The pharisees under stood not Gods commandment.
and making as it were a garlonde for their heads, that allwaies they might be
moved before their eyes, which the Indians, Persians, Babylonians, do at this
present: and he that has this, is cownted religious amongst the people, and
so forth, much in that sense. At le^ghte to come nere to our purpose, he
says: Those frontlettes, or filletts in which the precepts of the law were
written they called philacteries, because whosoever had them, had them, as it
were for a safegarde, or defense of them selves. Where the Pharisees
understood not that the commandments were to be carried in the heart, and
not in the body. For otherwise studies and chestes have books, and have not
the knowledge of God. This do superstitious women at this day with us in
little Ghospells, and pieces of the Cross, which have the zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, strayning a knatt, and swallowing a camel.

The superstitious of the pharisees and women that S. Hiero^ mentioned in a
manner alone.
Thus much S. Hierome complaining of the iniquity of the time, and hypocrisy
of men that do in manner as the Pharisees did, get the word of God, bear
it in their hands, and leye it in their windows, but did not lodge it in
their hearts. Further as the Pharisees having the skirts and hems of their
cotes leid with scripture, thought them selves defended sufficiently with the
bare characters, although they had none in their hearts: So in S. Hieroms time
some superstitious woeme^ got lite Ghospells, and pieces of the cross, and
as the Pharisees did (for so says the text) Hoc faciunt, they do this, that
is to say, hanged it about their necks, and thought them selves well armed
with them, although they had not the inward faith in their minds, as the
Pharisees had not the commandments in their hearts. For which only S. Hierom
calls them superstitious, and women that have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge. He co^pareth not the pieces of the cross to the Pharisees
philacteries. He thought it no fond thing to be enclosed, carried about, or
woorshipped of any: for he him self says: S. Hierom vvoorshipped the cross.
Apolog. 3. co^t. K^ff Incunabula^.
When will that day come that it shall be laufull for us to go into the den of
our savior, to weep in the sepulcher of our lord with the sister, to weep
with the mother, and afterward to kiss or lick the wood of the cross? Again
in another place he says: By and by I returned in all have to my Bethlehem, I
adored the manger, and the swathling clothes of my savior. By which it is
manifest that S. Hierome thought it no fond thing, nor to have, nor to keep,
nor to worship, nor to adore the sign of the cross. But he misliked such
superstitious women, In Maatt. 23. ho. 43.
as had little Ghospells and pieces of the cross, as the Pharisees had the
commaundeme^ts in their philacteries, that is without faith in their minds,
and good works in their hearts. And so does Chrysostom in the place
alleged. For he says: How can the Ghospels hanged about ones neck save
him, whereas being heard of some they profit them nothing? Again, where is the
virtue of the Gospel? In the figures of the lettres or in the understanding
of the sense? If it be in the sign of the lettres, then well do thou hang
them about thy neck. If in the understanding, then would it profit more,
reposed in they heart than hanged about thy neck.

By this it is evident that in his time, What priests Chrysostom rebuked.
some priests were as full of hipocrise as the Pharisees, and would hang the
Gospel about their necks, and not have it in their hearts, and have a
piece of Christ's coat and hear thincking to be helped more by that, than by
the worthy receiving, of Christ's body. Those Chrysostom blamed, those he
called folish priests: of them he says: O impietatem, O what impiety is
this. He did not absolutely condemn the hanging of Ghospels, pieces of
Christ's cote, and hear about them, but he condemned their folly and
hiprocrisie in thinking more virtue to be in it than in true faith and the body
of Christ it self. When two things are to be done, Christ said: Mat. 23.
Luc. 11.
Haec oportet facere, illa non omittere. These things you must do, and not
omit those. On like if either those women that S. Hierome spoke of or these
priests that S. Chrysostom mentions, would needs have kept little Ghospells,
pieces of the cross, Why S. Hierom and Chrysostom rebuked those that
enclosed pieces of the cross etc. Fol. 132. b
and relics of our lords cote, and hear, they should not have omitted the
other which was the most chiefest and principalst, that is, true faith and
virtuous life: But because they did so, and put to much affiance in those
outward things. S. Hierome and Chrysostom did reprove the^, not because it
was evil of it self, but with such a circunstances as they used, most wicked,
and intolerable.

Thus have I laid down all affection as you requested me, and spoke out my
conscience of these places of S. Hierome and Chrysostom, and showed that they
make nothing against me, nor condemn any error of mine. For I maintain none,
but aduouche most undoubted truths, which I have received of the Catholic
church. S. Hierome a learned man, has nothing contrary to Helena, Fol. 133. a
a silly woman, S. Hierome a received doctor has nothing in this place
against Nicephorus a suspected writer, Ibidem. Ibidem.
as you say. S. Hierome a Cardinal has nothing contrary to Paulinus a
bishop. S. Hierome a saint canonised, has nothing contrary to Gregory, a
saint also canonised. Chrysostom also has nothing against the having of such
pieces of the cross, as may well apeare by his work against the gentills,
where he declares that the Christians in his days were very desirous to have
pieces of the cross, and for a great treasure enclosed them in gold or silver.

Fol. 133 a Calf. Mart.
But quoth M. Calf. it is not to be thought that Chrysostom spooke that is a
praise of the parties, but a practice of time. Full wisely, God wotte, and like
a profounde clerk, well seen in Chrysostom. In all his discourse there, he
does so highly commend the virtue of the cross, so ofren repete it, and with
such words inculcate the same, that no wise man can see, but that he
speaks all that is spoken in commendation of the cross, as a praise of the
parties that used it, and commended the fact to be laufull, and not only a
practice of the time as he fansieth. Chrysostom co^me^deth the having of
crosses enclosing of them in gold. The cross every where.
For example, when he said, This accursed, this abominable, this sign of
extreme punishemennt (that is the cross) is made more briter than princes
crowns and coronets, spoke he that as a practisse of the time, or a praise of
the thing? speak M. Calf. when he said, every man seeks the cross, we see
it with princes, with subjects, with men and women, we may se the cross every
where, in houses, market places, high ways etc. All men so gredylie, take unto
them this wonderful gift? Spoke he that for a practisse of the time only or
praise of the parties? Answer Master Calf. when he said, No Christen man
ashamed of the cross.
This is a marvelous grace, no man is confounded, no man is ashamed, thinking
that it was a token of a cursed death, but all men are more adourned with it,
than with princes crowns or ouches set with precious stone, or chains of
Gold, and it is not only not shunned, but it is desired, it is loved, all men
are hoofull for it. Spoke the that as a practice of the time, only, or as a
praise of the parties? when he said to the gentil, If thou think this to be
nothing, but remaynest impudent as yet, and set they self against the
truth, and art blind in the clear light, learn by an other argument, what
manner of thing this is and of what virtue. Tell me from whence comes so great
zeal, and care of it, that it is so desired of all men, and worthier to be
desired tha^ al things? All Christen men desire the cross.
Why do all the world so earnestly desire to have that wood in which the holy
body of our lord was set, in so much that whosoever have a little piece of
it, enclose it in gold, as well men as women: and make it meet for their
necks, by that rightly honested, and honored, defended, and guarded, although
sometimes it was the wood of condemnation? spoke he that as a practisse of the
time only, and not as a praise of the parties, and for the laufulnes of the
fact? Lay down all affection and to condemn your own error, speak out
your conscience, does he not labor to prove unto the pagane the virtue of the
cross, because al men did honor it, all men desired it, all men were glad of
it, yea all the world labored earnestly, to have it, and when they had any
piece of it enclosed in Gold, and kept it as a treasure, and though them
selves honored, and defended with it? And if their fact had been wicked, and
the having of it a shame to the Christians, would so eloquent a preacher, and
writer as Chrysostom was, have used no other reason, but such as afterward (if
yower sayings were true) might turn him to perpetual shame? If only some
private men had used that of zeal (as you fancy,) would so holy a father
have made so impudent a lie? and said, No man is ashamed of it, No man is
confounded with it, No man blusheth at it? But all men desire it, all men love
it, all men are glad of it, all the world did earnestly labor to have it? No
sir, No: you take the mark amiss. The virtue of Chrysostom, and so impudent
a lie can not stand together.

Wherefore unless you have some other shifte, you may put up yower Pipes.
This is too gross to say. All the Christians in those days were will
worshippers. All the Christians desired willinglye and wittinglye that which
turned to their shame. All the world was deceived, and wandered in errors,
vanities, and idle toys. For it is plain that S. Chrysostom does not talk
of the fact of a few private men, but of all the woorlde, if Totus Orbis in
yower Calepine be all the world. Other thing there is none in all the Article,
worthy of answer, but a few lies, of which you shall hear more hereafter.

THAT A CROSS WAS BORNE AT THE SINGING OR SAYING OF THE LITANIE: etc. THE 7.
ARTICLE.
HERE upon light occasion M. Calf. makes an extrauagant discourse of litanies
and processions, and like a true man makes three notable lies one after
another: One that processio^s came first from ge^tilytie. Fol. 138. b
Another that never Christen men used processions before the Montanistes and
Arrians, as he read. The third that Papists degenerate from all good order.
That processions came from Gentilitie to the Christians, Ibidem. Fol. 139. a
it is utterly false. They came to us from the traditions of the Apostles, and
doctrine of the holy Ghost, ergo not from Gentilitie. The antecedent I prove
after this sort. Processio^s a tradition of the Apostles, and doctrine of the
holy ghost.
Whatsoever is retained of the church into custom of devotion, comes of the
tradition of the Apostles and doctrine of the holy ghost, but processio^s have
be^ retained in the church into custom of devotion, ergo they came from the
tradition of the Apostles, and doctrine of the holy ghost. The Mayor is Leo his
positio^ in his second sermon of the fast of Pentecost, and S. August. doctrine
in his hundred and eightene epistle: the minor is, manifest by the au^cie^t,
and continued practisse of the church vnco^trolled to this present: All that
come from gentilitie must not be condemned.
which being true, the conclusion must of necessity follow, that it came not
from gentilitie, but from the first professors of Christianity. but be it
that procession came, from Gentilitie: Will M. Calves wit, serve him to
condemn it for that? Because the liberal sciences came from the gentills, and
the learned Philosophers who did not woorship God, shall we condemn the
liberal sciences? Because diverse policies and laws came to us from the
Gentills, shall we condemn those policies and laws? That were pieuish policy
and lawless liberty. And yet so do our new masters, and especially this
crossebiter. For he says, images come from gentilitie, crosses from gentilie,
processions from gentilie, ergo images crosses, and processions must be
condemned: but how fond it is consider by that I said before.

The Manichees vpbraied the catholics of old, that they retained many
customs and manners of the Gentills, as this our good new master minister
does us at this present, but as S. Augustine answered those wicked heretics,
so do we this pieuish protestant not knowing, what he says. Seeing (says S.
Augustine) the just man lives of faith, Lib 20 ca. 23 contra Faust. Ma. Rom 1.
1. Tim. 1. 1. Cor. 13. Diversity of faith hope, and charity, makes a
diversity of ma^ners
and the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, good
conscience, and unfeigned faith, and those three, faith, hope, and charity
remain, to confirm the life of the faithful, how can it be, that he should
have like manners and customs with any man that has not these three faith,
hope, and charity like with him? For he that beleaueth otherwise, hops
otherwise, and loves otherwise, must neades live otherwise. And if the use of
certain things be like between us and the gentills, as of meat, drink,
houses, garments, wasshings, marying and having of wives, for them that will
follow that kind of life, begetting of children, bringing them up, and
purchasing of lands for them, yet for all that, he uses these things far
otherwise, that refers the use of them, to another end, and he otherwise who
for them gives thanks to God, of whom he beleaueth no sinistrous nor evil
thing. For as you in your error, whereas ye eat the same bread that other men
do eat, and live with the same fruict and water, and are clothed with lynnen
and woollen as other men are, and yet for all that, in these things esteem not
your life equal, not for eating and drinking any other thing, nor for having
any other apparel, but by thinking and beleauing otherwise and referring these
things to another end: So we both in those things, and other which we take
in like, do not live in like with the Gentills, referring the same things to
one like end, but to the end of the commandment of God, to charity issuing
out of a pure heart, good conscience, and unfeigned faith: from which some men
wandering, have been turned into vain babbling. In which you bear the bell, not
seeing nor considering, that in doing and having of like things, it is
sufficient only to make the life to be different, if the faith be diverse. Thus
much S. Augustine. So that if we had received images, crosses, and processions
of gentilitie, yet because we use them otherwise than the gentills did, we
refer them to another end tha^ they did, neither are we to be blamed, nor the
things them selves condemned no more than liberal sciences because they come
from the heathen Philosophers, nor yet policies, and laws, because they came
from the gentills.

That the Christened never used processions before the Montanistes, and Arians,
Tertul. li. 2 ad vxor. Eusebius lib. 6 cap. 8. Ecclesias. histor. Ceremonies of
the Christians in Tertullia^s time.
neither does it apeare by Tertullian nor Eusebius in these places noted by M.
Calfhill in the margent. Tertullian writing to his wife tells her, (being a
Christian woman) that if she mary after his death with a ge^til, she shoud not
observe the orders and ceremonies of the Christians, as their stations,
fastinges, visitation of the sick, meetings in the night, watching in the
church at Ester, resorting to our lords banquet, visiting the prisonners,
washing holy men's feet, kyssing of the bretherene, and making the sign of the
cross: but as for any ceremony or odre of procession or other that the
Montanistes and their prophetisses used, he speaks not so much as one word.
Eusebius in the 7. chapter of the sixth book talks of one Narcissus, bishop
sometime of Jerusalem, who at the solemn feast of easter, Water turned in to
Oil by miracle to serve for light in the church.
whereas they lacked oil for their lights commanded water to be filled and
brought unto him, and when the water was brought, orauit and benedixit aquam,
he prayed and blessed the water, and when he had so done the water turned into
oil, and gave a more clearer light, than ever it did before: this was done in
the reign of Seuerus, a hundred years before Arius began his heresy.
Wherefore unless, he had better prouf for this negative, we will enrroll him
amongst the negative doctors of whom the common rule, Plus potest asinus
negare etc. may be truly verified.

Concerning the third lie that papists degenerate from all good order in
procession, (for so he means there) you shall see how fond it is. Cap 33.
The council of Mentes, kept viij. hundred and thirtene years after Christ,
made this decree. Our will is that the greater Litanie be observed of all
Christians three days: Sicut legendo reperimus, as by reading we find (which
words, M. Calf. leaves out) and our holy fathers ordained, not ryding nor
having precious garments on them, but bare foted, in sack cloth, and ashes,
unless infirmity do let. This Canon speaks of the procession, which the
fathers used in the rogatio^ week before ascension day, In cap. 7. 1. ad Cor.
Processio^ in S. Ambrose time. Cap. 29. Fol. 138. a
between easter and witsontide: of which S. Ambrose who lived in the year of
our lord 380. makes mention calling them Dies processionis, the days of
procession, and the first council kept at Orleance, in the year of our lord
515. calling them Rogationes, Rogations, and yet M. Calfhil says we read not
of processions, before Agapetus days, in the year of our lord 533. Whereby
you may see what a diligent studient, and great reader he is.

In those processions riding, precious apparel, as well of men as women,
Ecclesiastical, as secular, were forbidden. And the Canon was ever observed
nisi infirmitas impedierit, unless infirmity did let: we ride not in
procession: we put not on our best apparel: we were no copes. Wherefore albeit
in other processio^s at home in Cathedral churches on high days, for more
solennitie and honor of the feast, the church uses copes, yet do we not
degenerate from all good order, we do not contrary to that Canon. For that
Canon inhibited riding and precious apparel in the rogation week, and not
copes in other solemn and high feasts. Women Sclaundered.
And if some women have for vain glory, and ambition contended to have the
higher place in procession, yet every woman and every wife have not stryued for
it, nor showed them selves so immodest and past all woma^ly shame, that they
were ready to scratch one an other by the face, Fol. 139. a
as M. Calf. says, for goi^g next the cross. This lie might have be^ spared,
It makes nothing to the sole^nitie of a processio^. Although you sclandered
me^, yet so fine a chamber knight and carpet gentleman, should not have
slaundred every woman, and every wife, and made them little better than mad
furies, that for a trifle will be ready to flee in their neighbors face: and
scracthe out their eyes. But you may see in what follies he falls, while he
seeks to quarrel against the truth. And that not in one place or two, but
generally in all his book.

Where Sozomenus declared that the Catholics passed the Arria^s in nu^bre of
me^, and sole^nitie of processio^, and to prove that, said, Argentea crucis
signa vna cum cereis accensis praecedebant eos, Before the Catholics went two
silver crosses, with tapers or torches burning, this wise merchant devised an
other folly: as where I translated, Argentea crucis signa, two silver crosses,
he says: Calf. Fol. 140. a Mart.
Crucis signa, may be as well many silver signs of the cross as one. Is not
this an high point of new divinity? well sir, whether you will have it silver
signs of a cross, or silver crosses, must it not signify more than one, I
beseeke you? Is it not the plural number? And does not the plural number
signify many? And if it signifies many, does it not signifies two at the
least? Answer M. Calf. If that be true the^ in tra^slating Arge^tea crucis
signa, two silver crosses, Fol. 141. a
I did not (as you say) make a lie. For in many two are comprised, and the
geater number ever contains the less: but let that ignorance be pardoned.
Why trifle you still? As though this were not folly enough, to ridiculous for
a cocknel with bean in a bladder, you faulle into a worse then all the rest.
Fol. 139. b Fol. 240. a
For you say: Arge^tea crucis signa, be not silver crosses, nor silver signs
of a cross, but certain cross pieces of silver, a staf torch, or pole to
carry a cresset. And for proof of that, Ecclesia. hist. lib 6. cap. 8.
allege these words out of Socrates, excogitauerat argenteas cruces quibus
era^t impositae cereae faces accensae, and translated them thus: He had devised
certain cross pieces of silver, where upon were put burning tapers of wax.

Is not here a fine piece of skill? Surely if M. Cooper in augmenting. Sir.
Tho. Eliot. Significations of this word Crux devised by M. Calf. Fol. 7. b
his dictionarie had called you to counsel, he should have learned many
significations for this word Crux. which he has wittingly omitted, as a
gallows, a magical inchauntement, a sorcerous mace, a conquest against
Christians, an helmet of hell, a cross beam, a cross pillar, a candle
stick, a torche staf, a pole that carries the cresset, a cross piece. O what
a fruictfull vain and fertile soil, is this for so little a calves head? who
would have thought that such a doctorlike ministre could have fallen into such
doltish folly? To omit all the rest, is Crux (sir) Latin, for a
candlestick, a torche pole, or cross piece? You promised that the vanities,
dreams, dotages, Shevve us your scriptures, councils and fathers M. Calf.
and co^piracies of men, should be disproued and controlled by undoubted
scriptures, holy fathers, and laufull counsels. We must desire your
mastership to show us one sentence out of scripture, one evidence out of some
holy father, one place out of some laufull council, where Crux, is taken to be
a candlestick, a torche pole or a cross piece, or else your glorious title
will convince you to be but an egregious fool.

If your play schole play, you must not make your instance in the present, but
let us grant you that liberty, do Argenteae cruces, signify cross pieces
of silver? Which is the word that signifies cross? Which is the word that
signifies piece, which is the word that signifies silver? Argentea
signifies of silver, and Cux signifies cross: where is piece, M. Calfhil?
How patch you that on? Either do it finely, or your folly will so apeare, that
all your fynesse with the best stitche that all the minister taylours have in
England, will not excuse your grossness. Crux Latin for a cross piece, a
candelsticke, and torche pole? O the faith of God and man? What a fine deviser
is this? All the grammarians, makers of Calepynes, obseruers of phrases, and
noters of proprieties in words could never find out these significations,
their wits were to gross, their capacities to dulle their judgments to
blind. Crux a cross piece a candle stick a torch pole? Does any wise man
think that M. Calf. means as he writes? If he do, I would gladly understand
what authority and reason he has for it. M. Calfhils is stark naught. For if
those crosses were candlesticks, or cross pieces, for candels, because candels
were set on them, then in like manner must the gentleman's hand be a miewe for
his hawk, his servants back a deske to write, and the ladies bed be a kenell
for her hounde, because the hawk is set upon the gentleman's hand, the paper is
laid somtymes upon the servants back, and the little hounde cast upon the
ladies bed.

The crosses that Chrysostom devised, were (as Sozomenus and Socrates report)
made of silver, which argues that they were not candelsticks, or cross
pieces, for candles. Silver was not so plentiful in those days, that men
would make cross beams, cross pieces, torche stafes and candelsticks of it.
Again if those crosses had been made only to bear candels, and give light in
the night season, what neded Chrysostom to devise about the matter? Was it
so hard a matter in such a great city as Constantinople was, to have lynkes,
torches, and cressets, to give light? But must crosses be turned into
Candelstickes? Was there no man to devise that? No wisema^ beleaueth it M.
Calf. Wherefore in so much as Chrysostom. devised these crosses of silver, and
made supplication to the empress to bear the chardge, it is not so be
presupposed that making his supplication, to the empress, he said, as he
must, A supplication to the Empress.
(if your saying be true) if it please your most excellent Majesty, the
Catholics lack Candelstickes to bear their Candels in the night time, when
they should go against the Arians, and singe the hymns that I have made for
them. Therefore if it please your most excellent Majesty, I have devised a way
to make them candlestickes, that is to say, I have devised that they shall have
ij. cross pieces of silver, Fol. 140. b
and set candels upon them, that the lights glymmering there upon, might make
a beautiful and goodly show. Wherefore my humble, suit and request to your
most excellent majesty is, that it may please you to bestow so much silver
upon me, as may serve for the making of these candelstickes, and cross pieces.
Were not this a worthy request for so wise a bishop as Chrysostom was? were
it not a mete supplication to be made to such a famous empress as Eudoxia
was? If that be not presupposed to be true, then it is not to be thought that
Cruces Argenteae, and argentea crucis signa, are cross pieces of silver, or
silver signs of a cross piece, or candelsticks of silver, or a torch pole.
The words bear it not, the sense give it not, the authors mean it not. To
childishe is that fancy, and to gross for a bacheler of divinity. Study
your Calepine beter, and read M. Coopers dictionarie with more judgment for
shame, that me^ may not cry, fie of your ignra^ce, for taki^g cruces arge^teas,
to be latin for cross pieces of silver.

The Magdeburgenses your own doctors, protestants of the newest Relligion,
never espied this shifte. But confess plainly that Chrysostom used crosses of
silver, and burning tapers, vt res abiret in superstitionem, The Magdeburgenses
against M. Calf. Centu. 5. cap. 6 page 650. Candells were set upon the
crosses, ergo the crosses were candel sticks, it is no good argument M. Calf.
that the thing might go into superstition: which was not like to proceed of
bearing cross pieces for candelstickes. If you ask me why candels were set
upon them, if they were Crosses, It may be answered, that Candells were set
upon them to give light. And yet for all that they are never a whit the more to
be reputed for cross pieces or Candelsticks. The butcher when he kills a
Calfe, somtymes puts his knife in his mouth, The scholar as he writes
sometimes puts his pe^ne in his ear, yeat neither is the butchers mouth a
sheate for his knife, nor the scholars ear a case for his pen. So is it in
the crosses that had Candles stickte, or set upon them.

Sozomenus said Argentea crucis signa vna cum cereis accensis praecedebant
eos. Silver signs of a cross or two silver crosses went before them together
with burning tapers. Which words seeing I alleged out of Sozomenus, it had
been reason that you should have answered them, and not opposed an other place
out of Socrates, who although he says, tapers were set upon the Crosses, yeat
he varieth not in the chiefest point from the other: that said they went
together with the Crosses. For both confess that they were crosses, and
crosses of silver, not Candelstickes or Cross pieces of silver. But you
thought in this night of darkness to have some advantage by the glimmering
light, of Socrates words, and make a goodly and bewtifull show: but thanks
be to God, it is turned into a foul driseling mist, and vpleasant savor of a
stinking Candlestick.

Fol 141. b
Now how justly he chardgeth me, with four lies, consider I beseeke, the
(good reader). I said they carried two silver crosses. Ibidem.
That is a lie, (quoth M. Calf.) For there is no number mentioned. Does he not
grate hard to make this a lie? Sozomenus says, Arge^tea Crucis signa
precedebant eos. Silver signs of a Cross or silver crosses went before them.
Socrates says, excogitabat argenteas cruces, He devised silver crosses. Both
signa and cruces, signs and crosses, are the plural number, which ever
signifies more than one, and when it compriseth least, it compriseth twoe, yet
because I said, there were two where no certain number is mentioned, he
accompteth it for a lie, whereas being in the plural number, it must signify
twoe at the least: and seeing he says that I make a lie where none is made,
Lies returned upon M. Calf.
let him go which way he will, we may return it to him again and say that
he is a liar. The^ that they should be carried in procession. That is a lie,
quoth M. Calf. For it was only in processu, Ibidem.
in their marching foreward. Is not this far sought and foolishly brought, to
convince one of a lie? It was carried in processu, ergo not in procession? what
Tom fool, that had wit to tell his mothers geese, would make such a
reason? Is not processus, Processus and processio.
and processio all one? Does not he that marches forward go forward? and he
that goes forward, march forward? An high matter in a low house. After that
the Catholics were marched forward, and gone forth, did they not go still
the most part of the night, until they met with the Arrians? And all while
they went, had they not the Crosses with them? Read the story: and when you
find the contrary, then say it is a lie. In the mean season seeing they were
carried in processu, all the while they were goinge in processio^, it is no lie
for me to say, that they were carried in procession, but it is a lie for him
that said, they were not carried in procession, because it was in processu, in
the marching forward.

The third lie (as he reckons) is because I say the crosses were carried in
the churches, for it was in the streats, Ibidem.
quoth M. Calfhil. As though he that said, The Cross was carried at a general
procession in Paul's church, made a lie, because it was carried in the church
yard, when processio^ was used. The cross was first carried in the church, and
afterward in the streates, and then brought into the church again. And as the
clergy of Paul's then began their procession in the church, and went into
the streate, so it is most likely, that the catholics in S. Chrysostomes
time, repaired all together to the church, and there made their prayer first to
God, and sange their himnes, and from thence went with their crosses into the
streates, singing the same. There is no mention that they repaired together to
the bisshops palace, nor any one Catholics house, and yeat together they
came, and seeing it is so, what other meter place could there be for it than the
church? None as wise men think. The case the^ standing so, and my assertion
being probable, agreing to reason, I am not to be condemned of a lie, but he
that imputes it to me, must have it revolted to him self, and so is it where
it should be.

The fourth lie is, That they were carried as ours are in the day time. And this
is a lie in deed, and a Notable lie, but none of mine: it is his own:
therefore I beseech you let him have it. In all my book I have no such word.
Try it, and you shall find it. So while he has labored to control an other
of iiij. lies, he is found to be a vain liar him self, in every one of the
said four, besides other hu^dreds as shall apeare hereafter. To the four
mentioned before, he adds twoe more in the Margent with great letters,
because every man shall see the^. The one is, Fol. 141. a
that the matter alleged out of Sozomenus history makes nothing for me.
The second that I gather this conclusion out of Sozomenus, that we must carye a
candlestick in stead of a Cross, in procession, which I referr to the
indifferent reader to judge, whether they be twoe Notable lies or no. Fol. 142.
a M. Calves. reasons against tapers in the church. Fol 141. b. The first. Cap.
34.
My self having to talk of other matters more necessary, will not stand
triflinge about it.

M. Calf. notes in the Margent that there must be no tapers upon the lords
table, because a decre of a Council called Elibertinum, general (as he
says, but provincial in deed), forbids us to light candles in the
church yard in the day time. The words of that provincial council are
these. Cereos per diem placuit in caemiterio non incendi, It has pleased us,
that tapers be not lighted in the day time, in the church yard, here is no
mention of the church, nor lords table. Wherefore it is to be seen, that he
means not plainly. For reason wills that he that cites a law, cite it
truly as it is, and not leave out the chief part of it. This Canon inhibited
not tapers to be lighted in the church, nor upon the lords table, but in
caemiterio, in the church yard. This word (church yard) M. Calf.
suppresseth, The cano^ of the Elibert: council falsely alleged.
and makes the council say indefinitely, that we should not light candles
in the day time, quite contrary to the meaning and words of the council.

An other reason why there should be no tapers upon the lords table, The second
he brings out of Lactantius, and begi^neth with half a sentence. For where
describing the superstition and vanity of the Gentills, he said, Mactant
igitur opimas and pingues hostias Deo quasi esurienti, profundunt vina tanquam
sitienti, Lib. 6 cap. 2. de ve^o Cultu.
accendunt lumina tanquam in tenebris agenti, etc. They kill the best and fat
sacrifices to God, as though he were hungry, they pour forth wine as though
he were a thirste, they light up candels as though he dwelt in darcknes, the
last words of this sentence M. Calf. snatcheth, and lets the other alone,
which expound the meaning of the author. For Lactantius perceauing the gross
and most absurd error of the Gentills who attributed to their Gods no
heavenly, but an humane sense, and thought that they needed meat, drink,
clothes, and light, as well as we did, reproved this fond opinion, and fancy
of theirs, and seeing God is author of all light, thought it madness in them to
offer up ca^dles and tapers to him pro munere, for a present, or gift, The
ge^tils fancy of their gods
as though he lived in darkness, and neded light. Now because Lactantius
accounted it a madness to light candles and tapers to God in such wicked sort,
as the superstitious gentills did, our ministers mad brain serves him to
think it a madness in us to set tapers upon the table of our lord, Isido li.
2. cap. 1. de Ecclesias. officijs.
who know God to be the author and geuer of all light, and light not our
ca^dles to God, as though he needed them, or as though he dwelt in darkness, but
ad signum latriae demonstrandum, etc. To declare a sign of the high service
and worship that we owe to God, Why the Christians light candels in the
church. Joan. 1. Fol. 141. b The fathers that make mention of lights in the
church.
that under the shadow of that corporal light, that light may be
represented, of whom it was said, he was the true light, that lightnethe every
man that comes into this world. In which sense neither scripture, nor
Council, nor ancient father inhibite the lighting of tapers. And for
imagining the Catholics to thinck so of God, and light their candles in such
manner as the Gentills did, and have no president for burning of tapers, but
from the sacrifices of Saturnus, it is an extreme madness.

But let it be propre for heretics. Let them be better seen in the sacrifices
of gentilitie, than ceremonies of Christianity. Let us Christians retain
lights in the Church, of which we have so evident record, and witness, out
of Libro 6. cap. 7. Eccles. hist.
Eusebius, 6. epist. ad orthodox.
Athanasius, Orat. 4. in pasch.
Gregory Nazianzene, S. Contra Vigilant. In epitap. paulae,
Hierome, Ser. 7. de sanctis.
Augustine, 3. Natal. S. Foelicis.
Pauline and Libr. 2 cap. 1. de Ecclesia. officijs. Jeremy cap. 6. Fol. 142. b
Isidore. Let us keep that which the holy Ghost has continued in the church
these many hundred years and confirmed by miracle. Let us make no innovation to
the great injury of the dead: but let us tarry in those things which were
determined of our forefathers, and never abrogated by the church. So shall we
follow the counsel of the prophet, that commanded us to ask of the old
paths, which is the good way, and walk in the same. Where M. Calf. finds
fault that I said, our heretics now a days, will have no cross at the
singing of their lords prayer, because neither their lord nor they can abide
the sight of the cross, and thincketh that because they have no other lords
prayer than that which is written in the vi. of Mathewe, and xi. of Luke, I
might as well have said at the lords prayer, as at their lords prayer, I
wish with all my heart, that they had neither given me occasion so to write,
neither other men cause so to think: but seeing they have separated them
selves from the church, and whosoever is separated from the church, Cyprian.
tract. de simpl. praelato.
and joined to the adulterous and bastard church, is separated from the
promises of the church, and seeing non pertinet ad praemia Christi, qui
relinquit Ecclesiam Christi, alienus est, prophanus est, hostis est, he
pertayneth not to the rewards of Christ, who forsakes the church of Christ,
but is an alian, He is no Christian that forsakes the church.
a profane man, and an enemy, I could not but write as I did and call it
their lords prayer. For if Christ were their lord in deed, and for firmly
fixed in their hearts, as he is often in their mouths, they would not forsake
his church. For as S. Augustine says: Totus Christus caput and corpus, caput
ille saluator corporis qui ascendit in coelum, corpus autem Ecclesia quae
laborat in terra. In Psalm. 30 Conc. 1.
The head and the body is whole Christ. He the sauer of the body, who
ascended into heaven, is the head. The church that trauaileth in the earth,
is the body, and a little after that you may know (says he) quia vnus
dicitur Christus caput and corpus suum: That the head and his body is called
one Christ, he said when he spoke of mariade, They shall be twoe in one flesh.
Therefore now they are not twoe, but one flesh. And a little afterward.

Fit ergo tanquam ex duobus vna quaedam persona, ex capite, and corpore ex
sponso et sponsa etc. There is made therefore as it were one person of two, of
the head and the body, of the bridgrome and the spouse. For the prophet Esaie
commends the marvelous and excellent unity of this person. For Christ
speaking also in him, said in way of prophecy. He has tied a Miter upon me,
as it were a bridegroom, and adorned me as it were a spouse, with precious
attire, he called him self the bridegroom, and her the spouse, why did he call
him self the bridegome, and her the spouse, but because they are twoe in one
flesh. If they be twoe in one flesh, why not in one voice. Let Christ
therefore speak, because the church speaks in Christ, and Christ in the
church, the body in the head, and the head in the body. And whosoever
seperateth him self from the body, separateth him self from the head.
Which seeing heretics have done, although they brag lustely, and talk
busilye of Christ, Lib. 4. episto. 3. Reasons out of S. Cyprian that our
heretics are not in the church.
yeat are they not in deed true Christians but traitors and Apostatats. For as
S. Cyprian says. Christianus non est qui in Ecclesia non est. He is no
Christian man, that is not in the church, but an alian, a profane man, and an
enemy.

But peradventure some will say, It is not sufficient to tell us that the our
heretics have forsaken the church of Christ, it must be proved. And but
reason in good faith: harken therefore, and see how I prove it out of S.
Cyprian. He says. Quo modo autem potest ei cum aliquo conuenire cui cum
corpore ipsius ecclesiae, De simpl. Praelato.
and cu^ vniuersa fraternitate no^ co^uenit? that is to say, how can he agree
with any man that agrees not with the whole body of his church, and with the
universal brotherhoode? upon those words I reason thus: he that agrees not
with the whole body of Christ's church, and the universal brotherhode, is not
in the church: but these heretics do not agree with the whole body of Christ's
church, nor with the universal brotherhode. For they agree not with Italy
France, Spain, portugal, Polonia, Bauarie, Burgundy, Brabant and Flaunders
being in the church of Christ, nor with the bishopps, priests, and catholics
in these countries, and otherwise despersed, Ergo they are not in his church.
An other reason out of the same father is this. Qui aduersus sacerdotes Christi
facit, and se a cleri eius, vel plebis societate secernit non est cum Christo:
he that does against the priests of Christ, and separate him self from the
society of his clergy, and people, is not with Christ. But these our
heretics have done against the priests of Christ, and separated them selves
from the society of his clergy and people: Ergo they are not with Christ,
and so consequentlye not in the church.

That they have done against Christ's priests I prove by this reason out of S.
Heretics practisse against the priests of Christ.
Cypria^: Quisquis conte^ptis episcopis, and Dei sacerdotibus derelictis
co^stituere audet aliud altar, prece^ illicitis vocibus facere, dominicae
hostiae veritate^ per falsa sacrificia prophanare, contra sacerdotes Christi
facit: that is, whosouer co^te^neth the bishops, and forsaki^g the priests of
God presumes to set up another altar, to make an other prayer in an unlawful
tongue, to profane the truth of our lords sacrifice, with false sacrifices,
does against the priests of God: but our heretics have presumed in despite of
all the bishops, and priests of God, to set up a new altar, yea rather to
destroy al aultres, and set up a new skittish and whyrring table, never sure
settled in one place, but remoueable, from Corner to corner, from chauncell to
Bellfrey: They have presumed to make an other kind of prayer in an unlawful
tongue, they have presumed to profane the truth of our lords sacrifice,
offered in the Mass as he commanded, and the Catholic church has ever
taught, for the quick and the dead, The english communion.
by their single communion, which is nothing, but a bare thanckes giving, and
naked sign with a piece of bread, and reading certain places of scripture as
it were an history: Therefore they have done against the priests of God, and
so be not in the church, but traitors to the church, spurners against the
ordinance of God, enemies of the aulters, rebels against the sacrifice of
Christ, disobedient servants, and wicked children.

If you deny the minor proposition, and say that you have not contemned the
bisshops, and forsaken the priests of God etc. yower own doings shall
condemn you. The bishop of Rome contemned.
For first you have contemned, and forsaken the bisshope of Rome Peter's
successor and Christ's vicare on earth, the ruler of the house of God, the
heir of the Apostles, the head of the universal church, called to that
vocation by God. You have forsaken yower own lawful bisshops, and pastors,
Religion changed without consent of the bisshops.
you have altered the state of religion without their consent, you have brought
in a new kind of service, never heard of in the catholic church before yower
days, and now too rare, for the whole state of Christendom, if it had
pleased God not to suffer that horrible plague to light upon us. The case then
standing so, that you have forsaken the church of Christ, for exijstis,
discessistis. Ye have gone out, ye have departed away, it must needs follow
that ye are not Christians nor obedient servants that have Christ for their
lord, nor natural children, that have God for their father. For if ye had
Christ for yower lord, ye would have his spouse for yower mistress. If you
had God for yower father, ye would have the church for yower mother. For Christ
and his spouse, is but one body, God and his church one foundation, and
pillar of verity.

If they will object that they acknowledge one God the father, one God the
son, one God the holy ghost, as well as we do, we anwser them with S.
Cyprian, That Core, Dathan, Libr. 1. epist. 6 ad Mag.
and Abiron acknowledged one God with Moses and Aron, and living in the same
law and relligion that they did, worshipped God, which is to be adored and
worshipped, yet for all that, because they passed their ministry and
vocation, and challenged unto the^ selves license to sacrifice, Against Aaron
the high priest, they were stricken from heaven, and swallowed into the earth a
live, and so may they. S. Augustine has many notable sayings in this sense
able to make any man that looks for favor with God astonnied and a fraied.
In one place he says: If a man be separated from the catholic church, Epist
15. The wrath of God hangs over al schismatykes. He that breaks the
church denies Christ. Tract. ^ in epist Ioa^. cap. 4. In Psalm. 10. He
violateth the temple of God that breaks unity.
although he think him self to live commendably, for this only fault, that he
is separated from Christianity, he has not life, but the wrath of God hangs
over him. In another place he says: He denies Christ to become in fleash,
that breaks the church, which he assembled. In another place he says: He
breaks the temple of God that breaks unity, for he holds not the head by
which the body and head is joined and co^pacted together. God is in his holy
church which consists of many me^bres, doing every one his duty in their
vocation, which he breaks, Whosoever is separated from the catholic
society. A terrible case. and worthy to be considered of all that have fallen
into schism, that they may see in what miserable state they stand.

As for us, we are not to be counted Apostatats, we have not forsaken our
faith, we keep that which we received from the beginning. Non exiuimus, non
discessimus, mansimus apud eos qui fuerunt ex nobis. We have not gone out: we
have not flitted away: we have remained with them, who were of us: we have not
broken the unity of his church, but as the church has ever taught, so we
hold: we refuse not the lords prayer, but your schismatic service, your
single communion, and Geneuian lords prayer commonly called doctor Coxes,
Pater noster with such additions, as are neither to be found in the vi. of
Mathewe, nor xi. of S. Luke, this we detest, this is not of God. This is not of
Christ. This is not of the holy Ghost, but of your fancies, your dottages, and
your dreams.

Now as concerning your other imagination, that Luther should be no heretic,
Calf.
because Ephrem said: the cross is an expeller of heresy. For that he is
always pictured full deuoutely kneling before the cross, Fol 143. a.
and no Papist had the sign of the cross in more reverence tha^ he, Mart.
you must restrain your position, or fall into a lie. For he has not always
ben portrayted kneeling full deuoutely before a cross. My self have seen his
picture without any cross, before him: and many mo besides, that travail into
Germany. Luther and his nonne payncted together.
In some places ye may see in steed of a cross his sweet heart dame Katerin
bore a nonne of Nemeck and amorouse of VVittemberge, pictured with him: but if
it were so, for you to gather of the painters fancy an argument of no heresy
in Luther, was a marvelous policy, much like the devise of the knight of the
order. For your wit, if you were joined in commission with him, we should
have a pack full of policies able to be compared with Macheuell. But if a man
should oppose you, how would your mastership prove that no catholic had the
sign of the cross in more reverence than Luther? Surely very hardly: if you
can, save your small honesty, from an impudent lie: and in your next reply
make some demonstration of it. In the mean time it shall run with the rest:
for as friar Luther was an enemy to all good religion, and ceremonies of the
church, so was he also to images and the sign of the cross, Luther an enemy
to the cross and images.
and where he blamed Carolostadius archedeacon of VVittenberge for plucking
down of images in his absence, it was not for that he misliked, the doying of
it, but because he was not the principal author of it.

That saying of holy Ephrem: Crux est haeresium expulsatrix, The cross is an
expeller of heresy, is true in his sense. For it brings to all that can
abide the sight of it, and have holy meditations of Christ's passion, such
thoughts of humility, and obedience, that singularity can have no place, nor
pride prevail. If the devil tempt any with rebellion, against the church, by
sight of that it comes or at the lest it may come the sooner to his mind: How
Christ was obedient to his father even to death, Good thoughts may come to our
minds by (...) of (...) cross. (...) 2. 1. Cor. 2.
yea death of the cross. If he tempt him with vain glory, and would make him
conceive such opinion of him self, that he passes all other in knoweledg, and
learning, by sight of the cross, the humility of Christ so comes so to his
mind, that he resists the temptation, and says: I think my self to know
nothing, but Jesus Christ and him crucified: and in very deed if Luther had
locked upon the cross in such sort, heresy that comes of singularit e and
pride could never have prevailed against him and his. For it would have taught
him humility and obedience, mothers of all virtue: but that the devil could
not a bide. And therefore made him run out of his cloister and disobey the
general of his order, contemn the Popes Legate, set naught by the Emperor,
and rail most wickedly against the bishop and see of Rome, and to fall to
great disorder as the sequel has tried.

Touching Justinians constitution for crosses to be borne at the singing or
saying of the litanie, M. Calfhil thinks him self not bound to follow his
order in religion, Fol. 143. a
but in civil cases, and some matters of correction: vt quod pederastis virilia
confestim exsecari voluit, he does gladly admits, and we do not refuse.
Other constitutions he has also in civil cases and matters of correction,
Justinians laws of correction.
as that every man that contracteth any unlawful marriadg contrary to the law
of nature, should leese all his goods and dignities, and he sent into
banishment, and be bodily punished, if he were a poor knawe: what say your
married monukes to that? That the blasphemous man should be put to death, how
do you sanfie that? That the houses where heretics keep their conuenticles
should be confiscated and appropriated to the church, how like you that M.
Calf? and the heretics them selves abide the punishment of the law, what
say you that? Co^sti. 109.
Item that heretics should bear no office in the common weal. Admit ye
that? And that we should not be ignorant who be heretics, he says: All they
be heretics that be not members of the holy catholic, and Apostolic church
of God, in which all holy bisshops and patriarchs of the world, Who be
heretics
and the bisshops under them preach the Apostolic faith and tradition.

But these co^stitutio^s are to sharp, and therefore M, Calfhi did wisey in
admitting Justinians laws but in some civil cases and matters of correction.
For he knew, if all were admitted he and his should be condemned. If like
liberty might be permitted every where, and each man refuse the laws of the
Emperors, and princes, and be judged by none, but such as it pleases him to
admit, and understand at his own pleasure, murders, rouers, church robers,
lechers, heretics and pirates had purchased them selves great priuiledg, and
the virtuous and godly great damage and hinderaunce. Wherefore it must not be
so. Every man may not admit, and refuse what him lists: laws ones
established must have their force, unless by like authority they be
abrogated, or otherwise grown out of use. And albeit the laws of Iustinia^,
bind not us in England in all points because they were never generally
received, in our realm being an Island and kingdom of it self, yet do they
declare the use and manner of all Christendom in his time, and condemn all
heretics of vanity, in condemning the whole world, and bragging that they
follow the primitive church, and craking of antiquity: whereas in this
point, all the world may see that they swerve from the use of the primitive
church and all antiquity.

Now to come to holy Augustine our Apostle, M. Calf. Augustine. our Apostle.
because he will not acknowledge that we English men received our faith and
religion from Rome, and S. Gregory Bishop of that see, by Augustine and his
companions, Fol. 143. a. b. Calf.
tells us that ever sythens the time of Eleutherius of Rome and Lucius of
England, Christianity has be^ received, and never failed amongst us: and
that Ethelbert king of kent was meetely well instructed in the faith by a good
wife, that came out of France and a faithful hisshop that attended upon her.

How so ever it be if it came from Eleutherius in king Lucius days, it came
from Rome. For Eleutherius was pope of Rome. Mart.
If it came be Ethelberts wife, and the faithful bishop that was sent with her
out of France, it came from Rome. M Calf. forced to confess that we received
our faith from Rome
For France received the faith from Rome, and the French kings daughter and
bishop that atte^ded upon her, coming out of France had no other faith, nor
labored to plant any other faith than they received from Rome. So which way so
ever he turns, the truth forces him to say that we received our faith from
Rome.

But albeit the Brittons received the faith in king Lucius days, and Ethelbert
heard of the Christian religion by his wife, that came out of France, yet is
there no old history that mentions that those parts of England which king
Ethelbert and other possessed in that time, generally received and professed
the faith of Christ, before Augustine came from Rome. S. Bid testifies that
when he and his companions came to the king in the i will of Tenede, King
Ethelberts words to S Augustine our Apostle. Lib. 1. ca. 25. histo. Angl.
Cap. 26. Fol. 143. b
he said unto them, You give us fair words and promises: but yet for that
they are strange, and unknown unto me, I can not rashly assent unto them,
forsaking that ancient religion which this long time both I and my people have
observed. By which it appears that nor the king, nor his people were
instructed in the faith of Christ before Augustine came and preched. In the
next chapter Bid says: They began to express the very Apostolic order of
living of the primitive church, serving God in continual praying, watching, and
preaching the word of life, to as many as they could. And if they did follow
the order of the primitive church, and preche the word of life, they did not
pla^t superstition in place of idolatry, as M. Calf. says: For the word of
life is not superstition, M. Calf. nor the order of the primitive church a way
to induce me^ unto it, and the word of life they did preach and observe the
order of the primitive church, as Bede says, more worthy of credit than ten
hundred Galfrides.

Ibidem.
That holy Augustine should labor of an ambitious proud heart to pervert true
religion, it is a malicious sclaunder. For he was a man of an humble, and meek
spirit, far from al haftines and pride. His doings witness, and stories
testify, that his coming was to plant true religion, and not to pervert any.
All that you have to object against him is that he required subjection of the
mounkes of Bangor, Augustines requests, to the mounkes of Bangor thought
unlawful by M. Calf.
that he would have enjoined them to be come seruitors in preching of the
Gospel, to their mortal enemies the Saxons, and that he would have them keep
Ester as the church of Rome did, and use their ceremonies in ministration of
baptism. Now whether he that requires these things of others, myndeth to
pervert true religion, it is easy to be judged. If those seven bisshops, with
their archebisshop and mounkes of Bangor had been faithful, and learned prelates
(as you say) they would have considered, as reason and lerning taught them,
that the church of Rome was the rote and mother of all churches, sythens the
Apostles time: and that the bishop of that see, is head and chief governor
universally over all churches, and that Augustine being appointed and sent, as a
Legate from that see, required their obedience to that head and chief bishop,
and not unto him self, as you may see in S. Bid: Libr. 1. cap 27.
and that considered, knowing that humility is a godly virtue, and obedience a
sweet sacrifice, it had been their duty rather mekely to have yielded, than
stubbornly to have resisted. S. Augustine in this behalf, did but his duty, as
a faithful ambassador, would do for his prince in like case. And they in
repyning showed very little love to unity and charity, and lest of all to
perfect Christianity, when they refused to be seruitours in preching the
Gospel to their mortal enemies the Saxons. For Alas what true Christen man,
knowing that Christ has commanded us, to love our enemies, and that he him
self loved us so tenderly, when we were his enemies, that he gave him self to
death upon the cross for us, will refuse the preching of his gospel to a
whole nation, because they are his enemies? 1. Cor. 1^.
Charity is patient: gentle, it enuieth not: it does nothing wickedly: it is
not puffed up, it is not ambitious, it seeks not her own commodity: it is not
provoked: it thinks not evil: it reioiseth not over iniquity: It is glad
with the truth, and suffers all things. and certes if there had been any
sparcle of Christian charity in those men, Little piety or Charity in the
mounke of Bangor that M. Calf. prayseth so much. Jacob. 5.
they would never have refused to preche the Gospel, to the whole nation
under pretense of enemitie, knowing that he that makes a sinner turn away
from the error of his way, shall save his soul from death, and covers a
multitude of sins. Wherefore in refusing this condition (if there were
nothing else) they showed them selves nor faithful, nor learned prelates, nor
scarce good Christians. And if you had devised an argument to make an inuectiue
against them, you could have invented no better than this.

As for the keeping of Ester, and baptising after the manner of the church of
Rome, if they were but trifles (as you say) then were they very triflers that
would resist the authority of that church, from which they received their
faith, in trifles. If they were matters of great importance, Eusebius lib. 5 cap
23. histo. Nicepho. lib. 4 c 22
then were they not lovers of unity nor desirous to follow orders received by
general and prouincial councils, under Victor at Rome, under Narcissus at
Jerusalem under Irenaeus in France, under Palmas in Po^tus, under Bachilus at
Corinth, and other bisshops in other cu^tries: but declared them selves
willinger to follow the schismatikes of the East, than Rome, Afrike, Italy,
Egipte, Spain, France, Lybia, Cilicia, and all other Catholic churches of
the west. Which sauored little of the spirit of God.

Fol 143. b Calf.
That Ethelbert should stir up Ethelfrede, and the Saxo^ kings against the
Brittons, and mou^kes of Bangor, partly in Austens quarrel, and partly of an
old grugge of his own, It has no color of truth, Mart.
yea it is a most sclanderous lie. For Ethelbert being converted from
idolatry, and Christened, did seek, Beda lib 1 cap. 32. Ecclesiast. hist Ang.
and maintain the honor of God, as appears by the Epistle of S. Gregory
sent unto him. And would he seeking and mayntayning the honor of God, either
bare malice and rancour in his heart, or stir idolaters against the religious
that had professed Christ? It is not credible. S. Bid reports that they were
plagued by the secret woorking of Gods judgment, because they refused and
despised the wholesome counsel of perpetual life, Lib 2 ca. 2 hist. Ang.
offered unto them, which is more likelyer, than Galfrides tale. And if it might
have stood with the reverence of your woorship and honor of your person to
have beleaued a received author, before an unlearned friar, and remembered what
is spoken in commendation of Augustine, by S. Gregory him self you would never
have judged him to be ambitious, nor have imputed the murder of those mou^kes,
to his ambition, who died long before that murder was committed. But authority
prevails little with you, I perceive. He that speaks woorst of the
Catholics, is credited before the best, that writes the true histories. It
should not be so. The auncienter and worthier each writer is, So ought his
credit to be be preferred amongst the wise.

Where you note in the margent, that we differ from Augustine the mounke in
ceremonies, because, Fol 144. b Calf.
he brought but a bare cross, and we have not only a cross, but also a
crucifix graued thereon, he carried a picture paincted in a table, we have the
same carved and imbossed, Mart.
I marvel that you are not ashamed, to infarce such childish toys in your
writi^ges. What if their cross had no image of Christ graued on it? What if
they coming a thousand miles and more brought but a little table with the image
of Christ paincted in it? Will it follow that they misliked crosses having
the image of Christ engraued? or allowed not images carved and imbossed? your
lodgick fails, if you think that a good consequent. If a man should say,
you, and your felloe protestants differ from the Apostles, and being
demanded why, Answered: The Apostles forsook all that they had, you keep all that you have, The protestats vary from the Apostles.
they went bare foot and in sheep skynnes, you go some in buski^s, some in
great britches, some in woosteades, some in chamletts, some in silks, some in
unshorn velvet, they had no benefices, nor prebendes, you have both
benefices, and prebends, some four, some five and so forth: They went from
city to city a foot, if you go from city to city, most commonly you ride:
when they went to any town to preche, they received no money for sermons, you
unless you may have money, in some places will make no sermons, yea ye do
obtrude your selves to have the preferme^t of funeral sermons and such like.
They required no benevolence of their clergy, you, or at the lest, some of you
have required beneuole^ces of the clergy, they fasted often, you very seldom,
they prayed deuoutely, you very coldly, they lodged hardly, you very
delicately, they lived continently, you very licentiously, if I say a man
should make such an answer, to the said question, would you not reckon him but
a Calf. Ye as I dare say: And so do we you for the other.

It is manifest that the church in those days, had images, engraued, carved,
and embossed, and as we received the faith from the church of Rome: So in
time, we received images also with the church of Rome. And although he brought
none that were carved nor imbossed, Augustine never misliked carved and
embossed images.
yet does it not argue that he condemned those that were carved and embossed.
In all his prechings, in all the story that Bid mentions, there is no word
that imployeth any disconte^tatio^ or misliking with carved and embossed
images. Wherefore you may scrape out that note, and note in your margent that
you and yours differ, from the Apostles as well in manners as in time. For this
is more meater for that place.

Fol. 144. Calf.
Where you say, that if Augustins fact coming to the^ that never heard of
Christ and bringing a cross, and image of Christ, to feed them, that lending
him their ears, he might instruct their hearts, might he excused by the state
and condition of the country, yet can not we in our cross carrying have the
like pretense, and therefore ought not to use the like example, Mart.
I marvel that you forgotte to prove it by scripture, council or ancient
father, according to the large promise of your glorious title in the beginning
of your book. Your bare assertion deserves no credit. If I should desire you
to make good this argument. S. Augustine coming to an idolatrous nation that
never heard of Christ, had a good pretense to use the cross and image of
Christ, but the papists in their cross carrying have not the like pretense,
ergo they ought not to use the like example, it should be a long time before
you would justify it. If one should say we have not occasion, to use like
diligence in preaching as he used, for the conversion of infidels to the faith,
Ergo, we ought no use the like example of diligence in preaching, for the
preserving of Christen me^ in the faith, you would think it no sound reason.
The like sentence may you give of your own. How S. Augustine used the cross
and how we use it.
For they are like. S. Augustine used it as a mean to bring infidels to the
faith, we to keep Christians in the faith, he ta win men's hearts by sight of
it, we to contynewe these that are wo^ne in perpetual memory of it: he to
bring me^ from idolatry, we to keep them out of idolatry. He to make them
fix their minds on Christ that never heard of Christ: we to make them that
have fixed their hearts in Christ, never to remove their thoughts from
Christ. Wherefore albeit we have not (thanks be to God) like pretense to use
the cross, as S. Augustine did, yet is there no inconvenience, nor let, but
that we may follow his example, and use it, as he did. The lack of like
pretense may not infer a necessity to refuse old received fashions and
customs.

An other position of yours, is that the popish litanie, Calf. Fol. 145. a
virgin Mary pray for us is idolatrous, but where be your scriptures counsels
and fathers to prove it? Mart.
Forgotte you your promise so sone? That was a foul oversight. Hereafter or
promise less, or perform more. If you can say no more for it, than Luther
Calvin, and the Magdeburgenses have done, you may go lay up your harp with
blind Brown. All the wisdom in your head will never prove it to be against
scripture, council, or ancient father.

Your applying that saying of Tertullian Vos religiosi, Fol. 145. a Calf.
etc. you devout persons seek for salvation where it is not to be found, ye
ask it of the^ that ca^ not give it, omitting him in whose hands it is, nor
content with this, ye beat down those Christians which know to ask health,
which also be able to obtain it, Mart.
because they know how to ask it etc. to the Christians, which he spoke by
an ironie to the Gentiles, How we seek aid of Saints.
is very sclanderous and false. For we seek for salvation no where, but of
God, where it is to be found. We ask it of none, but of him that is able to
give it: we omit not him in whose hands it is. We say not Mary have mercy
upon us: Peter deliver us, Paul hear us, but lord have mercy upon us, deliver
us o Christ, The holy fathers prayed to Saints. Ser. de lau dibus Mart.
here us o most merciful father. When we say Mary pray for us, Peter pray
for us, Paul pray for us, we seek not aid of Mary, Peter, and Paul, but of
God, by mean of their prayers, and in so doing we have the examples of the
holy fathers to supporte us. Holy Ephre^ prayed in this sort to the holy
martyrs: De laudibus Paul.
O ye most blessed men, o ye most glorious martyrs of God, help me miserable
man with your prayer. S. Hierome prayed thus to Paula when she was dead: Fare
well o Paula, and with they prayers, help the old age of him that loved the. S.
Augustine prayed to all saints in this manner: Orate omnia agmina sanctorum
and vniuersi coetus beatorum, Lib. medita. cap. 24.
etc. O all ye companyes of saints and universal feloweship of the blessed
pray that we assisted wit your prayers and merits may deserve to com to the
haven of salvation, with a whole ship, and sound merchandise. Prudentius
prayed to S. Laurence in this wise: Lib. de coro. Mart.
O thou honorable and worthy servant of Christ, here a rude poet confessing the
offenses of his heart. Besides this, we have the pillar and foundation of
truth, the catholic church (I mean) to supporte us. She has taught us to
pray in this wise, The catholic church teaches us to pray to Sai^ctes.
Mary mother of God pray for us, Peter pray for us, Paul pray for us, O all ye
blessed companies of saints pray for us. By which we learn that it is no
derogation, to the honor of God so to pray. They were, all holy and learned men
well seen in the scriptures and true interpretation of the^, they were in life
and conversation godly and virtuous, not letting the fear of God depart from
their eyes: if it had been against scripture, by their great learning they would
have espied it, and if they had once espied it, for fear of Gods displeasure,
they would never have used it, nor the Catholic church these many hundred
years continued it.

If I wist ye were ignorant, that saints living in immortal glory in heaven
pray for us, besides those places recited, I would recite for your sake
certain out of S. Lib. 1. epist. 1. de habi. virg.
Cyprian, Sermon. de 40. Mart.
Basile, Ho. 41 in Genes. In Psalm. 50 homil. 2. In Matthew. hom. 27.
Chrysostom, Lib 22. de ciuit. Dei cap. 9 and 10. Tract. 84. in Joan. Lib. 4.
ca. 28. divine. institut. Calf. Mart.
Augustine, and diverse others, but if you be as, you would seem, expert or
conversant in the ancient fathers, you find this mentioned so often, that you
need not an Eubulus, to put you in mind of it.

Where you say that Papists are superstitious, because Lactantius, writing
against the Gentills, called them superstitious, who kept the memory of the
dead, and worshipped their fathers images, as their household Gods, and honored
the dead in steed of Gods, we tell you, that we Papists keeping the memory of
the blessed virgin Mary, Peter and Paul, and calling upon them and prayng to
them and other saints, do not retain the memory of the dead nor call upon
the dead, nor pray unto the dead. Mary is a live, Peter is a live, Paul is a
live, and all the holy saints be a live. Matt. 22. Luc. 20.
Remember you not that God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? He is not
the God of the dead but of the live, for all live unto him? Yy you do, why say
you that we ratayning the blessed memory of Saints, retain the memory of
the dead? Is not the blessed virgin Mary in heaven? Is not Peter in heaven? It
not Paul in heaven? Are not all the saints and blessed martirs in heaven? And
be they that are in heaven with God, dead with you M. Calf? Blasphemy.
What horrible blaspheme is this? Where is your sight in scripture, non est
Deus mortuorum, sed viuorum, he is not God of the dead, but of the living?
Could you being a reader daily occupied in scripture forget so manifest a
place, and remember to sclaunder your neighbor, with no less crime tha^
superstition? Alas what oversight was that? While you labored to prove us
superstitious, with the gentills, you have showed your self more sclaunderous,
and foolish than many of the wicked heathe^s: in so much that we may in manner
say with the Prophet Ezechiele: Cap. 18.
because he has sclaundred, and done injury to his brother, and wrought
wickedness in the midst of the people, behold he is dead in his own
iniquity. You are taken in the trappe that you laid for another. Fol. 146. a


The other note in the next Margent, That the material cross is no ensign of
Christ, has simple proof. The sentence alleged out of Carolus magnus book
against images is none of his: or if it be, show us some council or ancient
father, or allowed writer that fathered that book upon that worthy Emperor.
If you ca^ not, deceive not your self, and the world with a false fable. Let
it be Eliphili the man in the mones book, made by Calvin or Illyricus or some
such pieuish protestant, and printed the first time so suspiciously without any
printer mentioned, either in the beginning or in the end, and without mention
of the place where it was first found, that every man of mean experience may
well see, it was none of his. But to proceed, Acto. 4. Nica^. 2.
M. Calfhil understanding that the place alleged out of the seventh general
council, proved plainly, that procession with the cross was used in Caesarea
a notable city of Palestine, had no shift to put it away, but was driven to
run to a common place, Calf.
and say that a superstitious instrument was meetest to serve such a
superstitious effect: but that the cross should be a superstitious
instrument, Mart.
or the translating of relics a like effect he proves not, according to his
promise, neither by scripture council, nor ancient father, but says, that
Moses body was buried in a valley by an angel no man knows where: Calf.
Fol. 146. b Fol. 147. a
and that if the translating of dead bodies had made either for the glory of
God, or commodity of man, the relics of such a one as Moses was, should not
have be^ hidden. Mart.
And that he proves not neither, nor is able if he would. For what if Moises
was the greatest of all prophets, The not translati^g of Moses bones, no
cause, why the translating of other saints bodies should not be permitted.
Exodus 33. Romans 9.
faithful in all God^ house, to whom God spoke mouth to mouth? was it
necessary therefore that his body, should be shryned or his bones carried in
procession, or Chapel erected for him? Or because it pleased not God to have
his bones translated, was not the translating of other holy Martirs bones, for
the glory of God and commodity of man? what reason is this? did not God say,
Miserebor cui voluero, and cleme^s ero in que^ mihi placuerit? I will have
mercy upon whom I list, and be gentle to whom it pleases me? declaring that
if it be his blessed will to have this or that done, it shall be done, and if it
be not his will, it shall not be done? He loved Jacob and hated Esau, was there
therefore iniquity with God? No: God forbid: In like manner it was not Gods
pleasure that Moses body should be reveled and translated, as S. Peter's and
S. Paul's and other apostles and martirs were. Is the tra^slating of Saints
bodies therefore, Rom 9.
nor for the honor of God, nor commodity of man? What reason is there in
this? has not the potmaker as S. Paul says, power to make one vessel, to
honor and an other for reproach? May he not transfer Peter's bones, and let
Moses alone? May he not make Paul's body to be honored, and Joseph's obscured?
S. Stephe^s shrined, and Samuels interred? I thinck you will not deny it. And
if he being lord of all may do it, as it pleases his wisdom best, then is the
letting of one obscure and unknown no cause why the tra^slating of an other
should be either against the glory of God or the commodity of man.

Vigilantius a famous heretic was in like error, Our heretics agree with
Vigila^tius.
that relics of saints, and translating their bodies, was not sitting for
the glory of God, and therefore he accounted such as worshipped their relics,
or translated them, superstitious and wicked. But S Hierome said unto hi^.
Hier. co^t. Vigilant.
If they are wicked and ungodly who worship the relics of Martirs, then is
Constantine the Emperor wicked and ungodly, who translated the holy relics
of S. Andrew, S. Luke and Timothe to Constantinople, at which the devils rore,
and the inhabiters of Vigilantius do confess that they feel their presence?
The devils cry at the presence of Sai^ctes relics.
And now also is Arcadius who translated the bones of Samuel a long time
after out of jury, into Thracia, to be counted a wicked and ungodly man. All
bishopes are not only not to be counted wicked and ungodly, but very fools,
who have carried in a silken clothe, and golden case, a vile thing, and
dissolved Ashes. The people of all the churches that met the holy relics,
and received them with such great joy, as though they saw the prophet
present and alive, were very fools: which is very absurd to say or think.

Eusebius reports that the Christians gathered up Policarpes burnt bones, and
laid them up, preciosissimis gemmis chariora, Lib 4 cap. 15. histo.
and omni auro probabiliora per ignem facta, more dearer then the most
preciouse pearls that were, and made by the fire more pure than all gold. And
if it had been neither for the glory of God, nor for the commodity of man,
would the Christians among the midest of the ge^tills either have begged
Policarpe his body, either have gathered up his bones: or have thought them
more precious than the most precious pearls that were? It is not credible.
Calf.


And where M. Calf. thincketh that they made a right good excuse, that denying
the body of Polycarpe, said it should not be delivered, Ne Christo relicto
hunc. colere inciperent, least Christ forsaken, they should begin to serve
him, Mart.
You may understand good people that he has such malice against the church,
and such despite against the reverend ceremonies of the Christians, The Policy
of the devil co^me^ded by M. Calf.
and relics of saints, that he had rather commend the policy of the
devil, and practice of the Jews, then think reuerendly with Christ's
catholic church of saints, and their relics. For the excuse why
Polycarpus body should not be delivered to the Christians to be buried, was
devised by the devil, and made by the wicked Jews, enemies to Christ, and
all Christian religion: and yet his wisdom thincketh they made a right good
excuse: as though there were any goodness in the devil, or hope that he and
his should mean well to the Christians. The excuse which M. Calf. thinks
right good devised by the devil and vttred by the Jews.
That you may think this no feigned matter, and try more spedilie what
spirit rules in him, I will tell you what Eusebius says of this matter, in
the fourth book, and xv. chapter of his ecclesiastical history. When
Polycarpus was thruste through with a sword, he says: Ille aemulus totius
boni, and aduersarius iustorum, postquam vidit, etc. That enuier of all goodness
and enemy of all just men, after he saw that he was crowned both for the
glory of martyrdom, and virtues of his notable life, and had got the rewards
of immortality by death, he began to do as much as he could, Polycarpe
crowned for good works.
that no man should give the Christians his relics to burial, if they
desired them. VVherupo^ Nicetas Herod's father, and brother to Dalcas, were
earnestly provoked to go unto the judge, and desire him that he would not
give the body to be buried, least peradventure (quothe he) the Christians
forsaking him that is crucified, Nicetas Herodes father.
begin to woorshipe this man. These are Eusebius words.

Here you see plainly, that the grave counseler, and polityke practiser, who
labored that Polycarps body should no be buried, was Satan, the enemy of
all goodness and good men. You see that the promoter of the cause, that went to
the judge and required that it might not be buried, was a wicked Jew, yea
herodes father. And yeat M. Calf. yower reader and preacher, thincketh this a
right good excuse. Are not you happy that hear him preach with authority,
that thincketh that right good that was devised by the devil, enemy of all
goodness, and practiced by a Jew that maligneth Christ and all Christians? May
ye not rejoice that you have such a guide to direct yower souls? What shall be
evil with him, if the devils counsel be good? What shall be unholy if the
Jews requests against the Christians be holy? What shall be refused if their
advise be admitted? horrible is it to think. Beware therefore good people in
time, try the spirits that preach, 1. Joan. 4.
whether they be of God or no. And if you find that there is no communicatio^
between light, and darcknes, God and Baal, Christ and the devil, you may see
that there is little grace of the holy ghost, Little grace in him that thinks
the devils counsel against the Christians right good. The devil ca^ not abide
the relics of Saints. Hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch. ho. 5 de beato Job. De S.
Babila.
or sparkle of Gods spirit in him, that likethe the devils counsel, and
thinks that right good for the Christians, which the sworn and deadly
enemies of Christ gave in despite of the Christians.

But all this is because he will not allow the having of Saints relics. And
no marvel. For the devil him self can not abide them, as S. Hierome specified
before, and S. Chrysostom plainly affirms, sayi^g. I would be in those
places where the chains remain, and see the fetters, which the devils fear,
and tremble at, and Angels reverence. If I were disbourdened of
Ecclesiastical cares, and had a strong body, I would not refuse to take a
pilgrymage, that I might see the chains and prison where S. Paul was bound.
In an other place he says. Such is the power of Saynctes, that the devils
can not abide the Shadows and clothes of them that are alive, and as for the^
that are dead, they fear their tombs. Whosoever is desirous to see more of
Saynctes relics, let him read Chrisostomes oration upon the Martyr Babilas,
his commentaries upon S. Paul's epistles at the beginning: Epist. 85
S. Ambrose, de ciuit. Dei lib. 22 cap. 8. Sermon. 256. de temp.
Augustine, Hom. de S Bladina
Eusebius Emissenus, Sermon de S Barlaa^ Mart. and in Conc. Ma mertis mart.
Basil, and all the ancient fathers of the church. There shall he find such
evident proufes and auctoririties for the holy relics of Saints, that
unless he will be blind, and wander after such as thi^cke the counsel of the
devil, that ca not abide the to^bes of the Apostles, and relics of Saints,
to be right good, as M. Calf. does, he ca^ not chose but acknowledge that they
are of great virtue and pouer, by the goodness of God and merits of Jesus
Christ whose cross they carried, and whose faith they professed. Wherefore
seeing M. Calves. devise, sayi^g that the cross signifies a ca^delsticke, a
cresset, a torche pole, and torche staff, is proved to be foolish and
fantastical, seeing the laws of Justinian dedeclare the use of all
Christendom in his time, and although they bind not every man, as Emperors
laws, yet they show what the order of Christ's church was at that time, which
sithe^s by custom is growe^ into a law, Sei^g the fact of S. Augustine
cominge in with a cross, and featching in the relics of Anastasius with a
cross in like manner, declare that Christen men in those days used the cross
in procession, it remains that my proufes for having a cross at the singing
and saying of litanies be sufficient, and convince, that seeing it was the use
of the primitive church, continued until our time without any laufull
interruption, and never abrogated by any general council, or decree of the
head bishop of Christ's catholic church, we Christen men desirous to live
in obedience, and follow the stepps of the forefathers of the primitive
church, ought to continewe the same order in synging or saying our litanie, and
pray for all estates of men, and especially for the chief governor of his
church, vt dominus conseruet eum, viuificet eum, and beatum faciat eum in
terra, Psalm 40.
and non tradat eum in animam inimicorum eius. That our lord may preserve him,
give him long life, and make him happy in the earth, and not deliver him to
the power and will of his enemies.

THAT MANY STRAVNGE AND WONDERFVLL MIRACLES WERE VVROVGHTE BY THE sign of the
Cross. THE EIGHT ARTICLE.
THAT M. Calf. thinks, Fol. 148. b
miracles wroughte in these latter days to have been wroughte ofter by the
power of the devil, than by the spirit of God, it is no new thing to be
wou^dred at (good readers) it has been an old surmise of heathe^s and
heretics. The Jews objected to our Savior Christ that in Beelzebub prince
of the devils he did cast out devils. Matt. 12.
The Paganes said that he wrought his miracles by magic and inchauntements.
Augu. ser. 11. de verbis domini in Mat. Idem li. 21 cap 8. de ciuit. Dei. In
Praefa. Insti. ad Francis. Gall. Reg. Fol. 149. a Calf.
The heathens attributed those strange things that were done by the merits
of saints, to sorcery. Calvin a wicked Apostata cries that the miracles of
saints are frivolous, ridiculous, vain and false lies, done by Satan that
transfigureth him self into the angel of light. In like manner does M. Calf.
here: and further openly protest, that unless I will admit that witches and
wisserds must be consulted, that Berecinthia, Esculapius, Hercules, and
Proserpina, devils, or wicked spirits in hell must have sacrifice, because by
the devil they have done miracles, he will not grant the sign of the cross
to be admitted for any miracle, that has been wrought by it. Mart. M. Calf.
like to Pharao.
For which I may well compare him to Pharao who would not beleaue the true
miracles wrought of God by his servants, Moses and Aaron, because he
understood that his sorcerers and wisserders of Egipte were able to do the
like by incantations and inchauntmentes.

The miracles that were done by the cross (as I have alleged) were not done
of late years, Miracles done by the sign of the cross, done by the power of
God.
nor by inchauntementes, nor by sorcerie, nor by the power of the devil. They
were done by the power of God, more than a thousand years ago: for breuities
sake, consider but twoe of them with me. When Helena had found the cross, it
was leyed upon a gentlewoman in Jerusalem that had been long sick. As soon as it touched her, she recovered, and was made hole. Macarius bishop of
Jerusalem, an holy and virtuous man, to discern which was our lords cross,
willed all three to be brought unto him, Ruff lib. 1 ca. 7. and 8.
and said: God shall reveal it unto us. In his prayer he said: Tu domine
ostende. Show thou O lord which was the cross, that served to the glory of
Christ, that is, on which christ died. She at the touch of our lords cross
being revived, began to magnify the power of God. This was a great miracle
wroughte by the the power of God, at the touch of his cross. The enemies can
not deny it.

Paulinus in 10. Natali. Foelicis.
Further at Nola, when the religious house was set on fire, Christ preserved it
miraculouslye, and therefore Paulinus required his people to give thanckes to
Christ, and praises to almighty God. The mean whereby Christ wrought that
miracle, was a splinter of his cross, heald in the fire by the bisshope. He
said him self: Nec mea vox aut dextra illum, sed vis crucis ignem terruit.
Neither my voice, neither my hand, but the power of the cross made the fire
cease: By which it is evident that the said miracle was wrought of Christ by
a piece of his cross. Besides, the woman that Epiphanius speaks of, Lib. 1.
here is 30. Lib. 22. ca. 8. de ciuit. Dei.
was aided by the sign of the cross, and faith. Innocentia that S. Augustine
mentions, received health by the sign of the cross, and both these miracles
were wrought of God by the means of his cross.

Epiphanius says plainly: The woman received health, by the sign of the
cross and faith. S. Augustine says that Innocentia was admonished in her
sleep, to make the sign of the cross upon her breaste, and that she was not
warned so to do of any evil angel, Innoce^tia commanded of God to make the
sign of the cross.
but of God him self, it is easy to be gathered by S. Augustine. She was,
foemi na religiosissima, a most godly woman. She turned her self to god with
prayer in her extreme necessity, and whiles she prayed, she was heard, and
commanded to make the sign of the cross, but by whom I pray you? By the
devil, or some evil angel? No: S. Augustine says: She turned her self to
God, she prayed to God, and conforted she was, but by whom M. Calf? By the
devil? That were strange, that God should forsake the godly, and the devil
healpe. Christ not hear when we call, as he promised, and the devil be ready
to hear, and do good, before we call.

This case then standing so, M. Calf. ca^ no more refuse the cross tha^
Christ's doctrine because vvounders have been done by coniurers. Joan. 14.
that these miracles were wrought through the almighty pouer of God by the
cross, should any man refuse the cross, because he finds in profane
histories and other authors false wounders, illusio^s, and signs wrought by
the devil and his angels? by Sorcerers and witches? There is no reason in it,
unless we will forsake our faith, and beleaue none of Christ's doctrine
confirmed with miracles, because we read that the Sorcerers of Egipte, Simon
Magus, and other inchaunters have wroughte great wounders by help of the
devil. Christ him self did many miracles whiles he lived on earth: and told
his disciples that he that beleaued in him should do those works, that
Christ did. And according to this promise of Christ, not only the Apostles
have wrought more miracles than be expressed in the scripture or acts of the
Apostles, but diverse holy men have done strange things, as are reported
unto us in old histories, and ancient monumentes of the fathers.

Now if we in this latter age, shall not beleaue those miracles that were done
of old time, because the like to outward show may be done by the devil,
either we must be driven to say that since the Apostles time, Absurdities.
there were no good men in earth that had faith in Christ or if they had faith,
that Christ did not keep his promise, and give them power to work miracles:
or if Christ gave them power to work miracles, that the old histories and
ancient fathers report unto us the deeds of devils and sorcerers, for
miracles of Saints and holy men. For certain it is that miracles were done
at the first planting of Christ's faith in all nations, and the name of God
glorified by wonderful strange things, and some notice made of holy men in
writing for the benefit of the posterity.

If they must now be but tales, idle fables, and illusions of the devil, and
wicked works of sorcerers (as M. Calf. lewdly surmiseth) Alas in what in what
case are we? whom shall we believe? The ancient fathers that said, they were
true miracles, or new frontick protestants that say they are false illusions?
The fathers that said the were done by the power of God? or protetestantes that
say they were done by the power of the devil? The fathers that say they were
done by holy men? or frontike and Bedlem ministers that think they were done
by wicked sorcerers? If we will follow God we must beleaue our elders, for he
says: Deuteronomy. 32. God wills us beleaue our elders.
Ask thy father, and he shall show the, ask thy elders and they shall tell
thee. And when God bids me ask my father does he not bidd me beleaue my
father? when he biddethe me ask my elders? does he not bidd me beleaue my
elders? yes verelye. Wherefore seeing Ruffinus, Epiphanius, Paulinus, and Saint
Augustine tell us expresselye, that these miracles of the cross were done by
God, and Sulpitius Seuerus, Eusebius, Sozomenus, Orosius, and Eutropius report
the like of other, if we will follow the commandment of God, and beleaue our
forefathers, and throughlye persuade our selves that Christ according to his
promise gave those that did beleaue, power to work miracles, we must (I say)
think that these miracles which they have reported unto us were true miracles
wrough by God, and not false illusions showed by Satan, especially seeing the
church who has authority to discern true miracles from false, has allowed
these records for true, and condemned none of the said miracles as false.
Neither has M. Calf. any scripture, counsel, or ancient father that teaches
hi^ to discredit true miracles wroughte by God, because some false wounders
and illusions are wrought by the devil, or not to admit the sign of the
cross, by which God has done miracles because Sorcerers, wisserders and
witches by some inchauntmentes have done strange things. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Fol.
150 a


That which he alleges out of S. Paul that the wicked man shall be revealed,
whose cominge is by the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying
wonders, is to be referred to Antichriste, in the latter end of the world,
before whose coming (says S. Paul) there shall be discessio, a goinge away, a
separation from Christ, and the unity of his church and See of Rome. The
miracles that Epiphanius, Paulinus, Ruffine, and S. Augustine speak of, were
done in the primitive church within four hundred years after Christ. The
other place of scripture brought out of S. Math. Cap. 7. Fol. 150. a
that many shall say in the latter day, Lord, lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name, have we not done many miracles, Ho 25. in 7. Matt. Faith only does
not Justify.
etc. proves as S. Chrysostom says that, Fides absque operu^ sanctitate
nihil valet, etc. Faith without holiness of works avails nothing, and that
not only faith, but neither the working of miracles it self shall profit him,
if he do them without possessions of virtues, and that neither faith, neither
miracles shall help if good life assist not. It declares also that evil men
do miracles by the gift of God, which they received to the edifyng of
Christians and furdering the Gospel: and as Sacraments lack not their virtue
and effect, because they are ministered by evil men, so miracles done to the
honor of God lack not authority, although they be done by the wicked.

The words of S. Augustine, Si Angeli etc. Lib 10 de ciuit Dei cap. 16.
If angels require sacrifice to be done unto them, and work signs with all,
and contrary wise some other testify that sacrifice must only be made to God,
and yet do no miracles, we must believe these and not them, those I say make
nothing against me, for they speak of such as would derogate honor from God,
we talk of miracles done to the honor of God, and commanded by God him
self. M. Calf. should first have proved that miracles wrought by the sign of
the cross, and catholics of old, were as great derogation to Gods honor
and glory, as the request of an angel, desiring sacrifice to be done unto
him, before he had objected this saying of S. Augustine, or the other spoken
against the Manichees, Fol. 150. b
a cursed kind of heretics, who if they had been able to have done miracles,
would have done the^ to the destroying of Christ's faith, and his Gospel, and
not to further any truth, or glorify God. For it runs against such, and not
against us.

Fol 190 b
Where he says: that wicked sprites lurk in shrines, in Roodes, in crosses,
and images, tell him to his face (good readers) that if he had any sight in
the old fathers he would never utter so fond and blasphemous a lie. Ho 7. de
Natiuit. Machab.
Chrysostom tells us, that devils and wicked spirits which are in deed
the capitaines and masters of theaues, where they see the hodies of glorious
martirs shryned, run away by and by, Lib. vno co^t ge^till.
and flee for fear from that place. Again he writes that when the body of
Babilas was brought to Daphnis where Pithius Apollo, gave oracles, out of a
great idol, He made the devil dumb, and impotent, not able to do any thing
in the world: and at lenght, The devils fear the relics of Saints. Hom.
55. in Matt. Quest. 38 ad Anthioch.
Daemonem ipsum exegit, Drove away the devil him self. For such is the power
of saints, that the devils cannot abide so much as the shadows, and garments
of those that are a live, and fear the shrynes of those that are dead.

Besides for the cross he says that the devil flees away whenever he see
it: and so does Athanasius and diverse other fathers, as I have declared
before, which if M. Calf. had fore seen, he would never have been so impudent
as to have made so vain an assertion and blasphemous a lie. But we must bear
with him: his great zeal infatuateth his little wit. In deed S. Cyprian
talking of the vanity of idols writes: Tract. de vanitate idolorum
That devils were in pillars and images of their false gods, and that being
there, they gave oracles, and inwrapped truths in falsities, disquieted me^ in
their sleep, distorted their members, took away their health, and such like.

Nor Shryns nor rodes, nor crosses mentioned in S. Cyprian.
As for shrynes, roodes, or crosses, or woorking miracles, S. Cyprian speaks
not so much as one word, but to your confusion that think, our miracles to be
wrought by the power of the devil, he says of those wicked spirits that
lurked in idols: These wicked sprites adjured by the living God, yield by and
by to us, and go away and depart out of the possessed bodies. Ye may see them
yield secretly, at our voice and prayer, to be burned with fire, to cry out, to
lament, to vanish away, as the faith of the patie^t helps, or grace of the
man that cures, does aspire. In like manner Athanasius declares, Lib. 2. de
Incar.
that before Christ came, the devils did much molest and trouble men with
diverse fantasies and sights, and took up for a dwelling place, fountaynes,
ryuers, stocks, and stones, and by vain slyghtes deceived the simple, ^iuels
driven away by the sign of the cross.
but when Christ was ones come, their pomp perished: for man using only the
sign of the cross, drives away all their subtilitie. And for more evident
proof of the virtue of the cross, he says: Let him come hither that seeks
to learn experience of these things, to wit, of the devils pomp, of deceith
of inchauntment, and wounders of sorcery, The virtue of the cross.
vtatur signo vt illi dicunt ridiculae crucis: Let him use the sign of the
foolish cross (as they say) naming only Christ, he shall see the devils to be
put to flight by it, soothesaying to cease, magike and poisoning destroyed. If
the devils fear the cross and be put to flight, and driven away with the
cross, Our miracles not to be ascribed to Satan and witches.
then do they not lurk in crosses: if magike, inchaunteme^ts and sorcery be
distroyed by the cross, and good men calling upon Christ, and his holy name,
then are not their miracles, to be ascribed, to the woorking of Satan, witches,
and wissers.

Athanasius to prove that miracles were not done by a dead man, as the Gentills
cauilled, used this reason: Virtues wrought by the sign of the cross.
If by the sign of the cross all magical art is driven away, all poisoning
is taken away, all idols forsaken, all sensual pleasure stayed, and all men
made look up from earth to heaven, Who can say that Christ doing such things,
is but a dead man? In like manner may I say, if the devils and wicked sprites
tremble and quake at the shrynes of martirs, if they complain of their
presence, flee away at the sight of the cross, and vanish away when it is in
presence, who can think that they lurk in shrynes, crosses, or images? Who
can think that miracles wrought by the sign of the cross were wrought by the
devil? None but such as have forsaken the church and must seek vile shifts
to color heresy, and further the work of the devil.

As for this position of his, Fol 150 a Calf.
That it is not a sufficient proof to make a thing good, to say that miracles
were wrought by it, Mart.
I would feign learn what he means by this word (make:) if he takes it to
make, as the poticary makes his confectio^, and goldsmith a ring I will not
contend: True miracles done by a thing, declare the thing to be good. Matt. 9
Luc. 6. Mar 8. Act 19. Euse. li. 7. cap 14 histor lib. 6. cap 41. Tripart.
but if by that word (make) he means to declare consider with me a while
gentle reader, how little truth it has. Christ wrought miracles by his divine
power in earth: were not those miracles a sufficient proof to make us beleaue,
that his power was of God? The hem of Christ's coat cured a woman of a bluddy
flix. Was it not a sufficient proof to make us beleaue, that the he^ of
Christ's cote was holy? S. Paul's Napkins healed diseases, was not that healing
a sufficient proof to make us think that those napki^s, had a virtue by
touchi^g his body? the herb that growed at the foot of our saviors image in
Caesarea Philippi, did many strange cures, in so much that it was called
medicame^tum omnium passionum and aegritudinum, a medicine of all passions and
sores: was it not a sufficient proof to declare that herb to be good?

In like manner God wrought diverse miracles, by the coats, napkins, August.
lib. 22. Cap 8. de ciuit. Dei. Fol. 150 a Calf. M Calves miracles.
ashes of martirs, and sign of his cross, Is not this a sufficient proof to
decare that the coats, napkins, and ashes of Martirs and sign of the cross
be good? No quoth M. Calf. God does abhor adultrie, yet by the act of it, he
suffers a miracle to be done etc. God is offended with theft, yet does he
suffer stolen bread to feed us, which is only the power of his secret and
miraculous working, Now if you gather, that the use of the cross is
comendable, because of miracles done, by the same reason the adulterer and
thief may defend and mayntaine their unlawful doings, because as great or
greater miracles are wrought by them.

Mart.
Is not this a worthy Paradox for so profounde a divine? But in what, scripture
council or father does he read that a miracle is wrought by adultery and
stolen bread? Is the begetting of a child either in laufull matrimonye (which
God ordayneth) either in adultery (which he abhors) or the feeding of a man
with stolen bread any more myraculous than all other ordinary and common
works of nature are? Be they not both done by the common course of nature such
as in all ages, in all countries have been done from the beginning, and may
continue to the worlds end? Yes verily: and yet no miracles, otherwise then the
generation of all other creatures, and the feading of birds in the air, and
beasts in the field. When I spoke of miracles, I spoke of such as were far
passing the capacity of man, and common course of nature. I spoke of such as
were wrought by the mighty power of God contrary to all nature, as the
examples may particularly declare. And M. Calf. to make silly souls beleaue
that a thing is not commendable because of Miracles done by it, varieth
grossly in his answer. Fol. 150. a How M. Calf. varieth in his answer.
For where every wise man should frame his answer, to the question, and
reasonne, Secundu^ subiecta^ materia^, according to the matter that is treated,
he flees from that: and where mention was made of miracles done above the
common course of nature, he tells us of such as were done by the common
course of nature. And where mention was made of miracles done through the
mighty power of God, to his honor and glory by the cross, he tells us of
miracles done by adultery and theft to his great dishonor, which is extra
oleas, far wide from the purpose God knows.

Miracles done through the omnipotency of God for the advancement of his
glory, are a sufficient proof, to declare that the thing by which (as a
mean) those miracles were done is comendable, as I proved before. Miracles
done by heretics not able to commend a thing.
VVounders and signs done by adulterers, and thieves, by sorcerers, and
inchaunters, by heretics and Apostatats, to the dishonor of God, and
subversion of his faith, seem they never so great, are not able to make the
thing commendable, whereby they work their miracles. Neither can the
adulterer and thief defend their unlawful doings, because great miracles by
wrought by them, as we can defend the cross because miracles were wrought by
it, unless they or some new divine for them, can prove, that adultery and
theft is as good as the cross of Christ, Three reasons of M. Calves why
mirac^^s ^ake not for the cross.
or that the adulterers and thieves were commanded to commit adultery and
theft, as we can show that men and women were commanded to use the cross,
and wrought in deed true miracles by it. Which seeing you deny, and bring
three reasons why miracles make not for the cross, I will first examyne your
reasons, and then consider your answers to the authorities, that prove miracles
to have been wroughte by the sign of cross.

Before you bring your three reasons you ask this question, why the durte of
the streate (seeing Christ wrought a miracle by it) should not as well be
honored as the cross of the altar? A question of M. Calves. Fol. 151. a
To which a brief answer may serve: It is a durtie question, mete for a
durtie divine. The answer.
The cross was an instrument by which all the world was saved, the durte a
mean by which one only man was healed. The Cross a lively representation of
Christ's death. The durte but a memory of one man's health. The cross
effectuous ever since. The durte never effectuous but then. The cross
commanded of God to be made and used, by diverse revelations from heaven. The
dirt never mentioned to any such purpose, nor of God, angel, nor man. The like
may be said to that which you talk of Moses bushe, Fol. 158. a. b.
Aarons rood, the wood of Marach, the brazen Serpent, the water out of the
rock, Gedeons fleese, Sampsons Iawe bone, Elias Cloak, Naamans washing, the
hem of Christ's garment, the shadow of S. Peter, Napkins of S. Paul, and such
like.

Fol. 151. a The first reason. Calf.
The first of yower reasons is made by this interrogation, why should not such
external means as Christ and his Apostles used, and the scripture mentions,
be had in admiration, rather then the idle devise of man, of the which there is
no lawful president, If any external means whereby strange wonders have come
to pass, Mart.
be to be had in admiration? For answer we say, that it is most reasonable
that all such external means as Christ and his Apostles used, and the
scripture mentions be had in admiration so far forth as is behofull for us,
rather than the idle devise of man whereof there is no laufull president. And
with all we tell you that the cross is no idle devise of man, The cross no
idle devise of man.
but a doctrine of the holy Ghost, and tradition of the Apostles. For which we
have laufull presidents and sufficient record. This to yower interrogation
set out for a reason may suffice* until you confirm by scriptures counsels,
and fathers, that the cross is an idle devise of man, whereof there is no
laufull president. The second reason is this: Fol. 151. a The 2. reason. Calf.
If miracles were done by the sign of the cross, yet were they not done only
by the sign of the cross, and therefore the cross only should not according
(to my treatise) without the rest be magnified. In deed M. Calf. Christ
works all miracles: Mart.
Christ healed the sick woman at Jerusalem: Christ preserved the fair
damsel from rape in Syciria: Christ preserved the religiouse house from
burninge in Nola: Christ healed Innocentia of her cancker in Carthage: but
quibus medijs, by what means? by faith, prayer, and sign of the Cross: and
as I find the stories in the authors so do I report the^ in my treatise,
and not say they were done as you falsely imagine, by the cross only, without
Christ and faith in his passion, nor conclude that the Cross without the rest
should be magnified, as you heathenishly imagine, and make sely souls beleaue.

The third reason is this. Fol. 151. a The 3. reason. Calf.
If it were true that such miracles were done by the sign of the cross, yet
this can be no reason why the cross should now be had in estimation, unless
you will have all means and instruments of wounders heretofore wroughte, as
the hem of Christ's garment, the spetle and the claye, the shadow of Peter,
and Napkins of S. Paul to be likewise honored and esteemed of us? Mart.
If you had proved by scripture, council, or father, that we can not worship
the cross and honor it, unless we honor and worship the hem of Christ's,
garment, spetle, and claye, Shadow of S. Peter, and Napkins of S. Paul, this
last reason of yowers, should have had some color of reason, but seeing you
asseuere it only without any reason, I will count it, but a vain assertion. A
captain may be revvarded although every soldier be not revvarded.
I beseeke you may not a captain that has gotten a great victory be
rewarded of his prince unless all the pety capitaynes and soldiers be
rewarded also? May not the Mayor of London be privileged to wear a collar of
gold, unless every citizen be licensed to wear the like? May not some whote
puritanes of the new clergy be dispensed with for wearing of a long gown,
square cap, and satte^ tippet, unless al be dispe^sed with all? I thinck you
will gladly subscribe to these: and if the foresaid be laufull, why may not the
cross of Christ be honored, The cross may be vvoorshipped although other
instruments of Christ's death be not vvoorshipped.
worshipped, and esteemed, unless all other means and instruments heretofore
wroughte, be esteemed of us? Show yower reason to the contrary in yower next
replye. In the mean time understand that we honor, worship, and esteem the
cross, as the chief and principal instrument of our redemption, because of
all other it does most lively set before our eyes, the death and passion of
Christ. The hem of Christ's garment, spetle, and clay, if we had them, we
would honor, worship, and esteem them, for his sake whose pretiouse body they
touched. And as a true louier will highly esteem a ring, napkin, or other
jewel sent from his louier, be it never so small: So would we for the love
that we bear to Christ, for his infinite mercy toward us, both highly esteem
the very dirt that he touched, if we might happily come by it, and for his sake
reverence S. Peter's shaddowe, S. Paul's parletts, and S. Stephens bones, and
all other saints relics, because they were Gods friends, and most specially
his cross. Now to your answers against the authorities that prove miracles to
have been wrought by the sign of the cross. And first for the virtue of the
Lady Helena, what mean you to diminish her credit, and impair her good name
as much as in you lies, Fol. 151. b
by calling her a concubine to Constance? have you not read, that it is:
Impium morderee mortuos? A wicked and ungodly part to bite the dead? The Poet
Horace could have told you, Lib. 1. ser. satyr 4.
that absentem, qui rodit amicum hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caueto, he is a
man without al honesty, that gnaweth and biteth at his friend that is absent, o
thou that art a Romayne and true gentle man, beware of this man: he does not
only bite at his friends that are absent, but at Gods friends living with
glory, in heaven. Fol 101. b Fol. 103. a Saints sclaundered.
Fabian an holy martyr he calls infamous, S. Cypria^, proud and blasphemous.
Helena superstitious, and concubine to Constance. If this thing were true, is
not this a part of cursed Cham? If a man should bring a fact of S. Peter, S.
Paul, Mary Magdalene, king David, or Solomon to confirm a truth, were it the
duty of a Christian man to say (by your leave) S. Peter was a traitor? S.
Paul a persecutor? Mary Magdalene a harlott? Dauida man kyller, and adulterer?
Salomo^ a fornicatour? and keeper of co^cubines? No. God that suffered the^ to
fall, raised them up again, and made them glorious in his sight. And whom
has glorified we must not discredit, in such things as they did after
penance done for their sins, when they were in favor with God, when they
were washed, when they were sanctified, 1. Cor 6. The virtue of Lady Helena
when they were justified in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, and spiritie of
our Lord God. As for lady Helena, the histories and ancient fathers say, that
she was a woeman Ambro. de olitu Theod.
Sanctae memoriae Ruff. in lib. 1 cap. 7. histo.
incomparabilis fide, and religione animi, and magnificentia singulari,
religiosa foemina, Paulinus epist 11. ad Seuerum.
fidelis mulier, regina venerabilis, spiritum sanctum per affectum pium meruit,
foemina virtutibus omnibus Suidas.
ornatissima, of holy memory, pearlesse for faith and devotion of mind, and
singular magnificence and liberality, a holy matrone, a faithefull woeman that
deserved to have the holy Ghost, through her good affection, a woeman
plentifully adourned with all kind of virtue, not superstitious (as it
pleases master Calf. to say, nor gaddi^g) as he spitefully says, to
Jerusalem on pilgrimage of a singular fantasy, but going of great devotion
inspired of God.

S. Ambrose says: Insudit ei spiritus vt lignum quereret, De obitu Theod. The
holy ghost moved Helena to go to Jerusalem. Epist 11. ad Sever.
certam indaginem spiritus sanctus inspirat, lignum infuso sibi spiritu
reuelauit. The holy ghost did put into her heart to seek the wood, The holy
ghost does inspire that diligent search unto her, by the holy ghost, with
which she was inspired, she found out the wood. Paulinus writes, that she
obtained of her son to purge the places, and build a church where our
Savior Christ had trodd, diuino inspirita consilio, inspired by the counsel
of God, and when she was at Jerusalem, and by diligent inquisition advertised
of the place, she set me^ a digging, vrgente sine dubio conceptae revelations
instinctu, Ibidem.
the instincte of the conceived revelation vndoubtely driving her thereunto.
Ruffinus says that, she admonished by revelation from God, went to
Jerusalem, Lib. 1. cap. 7 histo.
and found three crosses when she came to the place, revealed unto he by some
heavenly token or vision. Macarius in his prayer declares that in these latter
days, God inspired the heart of his hand maiden to seek that blessed wood
of the cross.

Now judge good readers, whether the lady Helena Constantines mother called a
woema^ of blessed memory, pearlesse for faith, devotion, and liberality, a
woman both holy and faithful, adorned plentifully with all kind of virtues,
and endued with the holy ghost, is to be esteemed otherwise than virtuous?
Judge whether she whose heart God inspired, whom the holy ghost admonished
and warned by visions from heaven to go to Jerusalem, and seek the cross
of Christ, is to be counted superstitiouse, driven by woemanishe curiosity,
or foolish zeal, as M. Calf. says? Judge whether this yower new minister
has dealed either charitablie toward the dead, that to blemishe her good
name and impair her credit, callethe her a concubine? or faithfully to you
that are alive, who calls her superstitiouse, whom the blessed and holy
fathers S. Ambrose, Paulinus, Ruffinus, Macarius, and Suidas testify to have
been inspired with the holy ghost, and commanded of God to seek the cross
as she did? An honest man having such plain and evident testimonies out of so
many, so ancient, and so holy fathets, for the honesty of that virtuous
lady, besides the judgment of the church, that she is a blessed Saint in
heaven, would never so impudently have assured him self, that she was
superstitious, nor confidently have avouched it to his readers with out
sufficient proof. But you may see what rotten stakes you stick unto.

He promised that the vanities of men should be disproued in this answer, by
the undoubted word of God, true and godly fathers, ad laufull counsels, but
where is the word of God? where are the godly fathers? where is the lawful
council that say, M Calves. impude^cie.
Helena was superstitious? See you not how he deceaueth you, and for
scriptures, counsels, and fathers, obtrudeth his own impudent, vain and
arrogant assertions? See you not that contrary to the evident testimonies of so
many ancient and holy fathers, he justifies him self, to maintain his
heresy? If you beleaue not me, ye that have eyes, see, and read: ye that have
ears, harke^ and learn. The places are quoted: the books easy to be had. And
as you find his assertion true, in this case, so beleaue him in others. For my
part saying his heart is so malitiouse, his mouth so venomous, his pen so
sclau^derous, that he spares not the blessed saynctes in heaven, I little
esteem the boisterous blastes of his spiteful breath, whatsoever words of
reproach, either he has, or shall breathe out against me, or any Catholic
hereafter.

Furthermore where to deface Helena, he tells you out of S. Ambrose, that she
was a woeman brought up in as hostrie, Fol. 151. b
If it might have pleased him to have dealed faithfully, he might also have
reported the words that follow in S. Ambrose He says, De obitu Theodotij
S. Ambroses co^me^dation of Helena.
She was a good hostrie woeman that sought so diligently the maunger where our
savior was borne. A good hostrie woeman that knew right well the master of
the hostrie, that cured his wounds, that was wounded of theaues. A good
hostrie woema^ that passed not to be reputed durte to win Christ, and
therefore Christ advanced her from an hostrie to an Empire. But if all this
should have been reported with the rest, it should have convinced him a
shameful liar, and proved Helena to have been virtuous, and not superstitious,
and an honorable lady, albeit she lived some times in a poor hostrie. As for
his chardgyi^g me with belying Eusebius, because it was noted in the margent of
my book Eusebius libro 10. cap. 7. and 8. Ecclesiasticae historiae, and
Eusebius has not the storye, but Ruffinus in his first book and seventh
Chapter, In deed I must confess an ouersighte in the printer for setting
Eusebius for Ruffinus: But is this a shameful lie with you M. Calf? and
worthy so bitter a note in the margent? If you will adiudge it so, let it be
so: and be not angry if you be served with the same measure again. I shall
have place to discourse of yower lies in time, and then let the indifferent
reader judge between us who is the most shameful liar.

Yower long wendlesse about the varitie of the time in the history, Fol. 153
a. b Fol. 152. a
for the invention of the cross makes a man almost breathless to read it,
and spend much labor to little profit. For what if authors vary in the
circumsta^ce of time, and yet agree in the principal? Are they by and by to be
discredited as reporters of untruths? or disauthorised as full of repugnancie
and contradiction as youer marginall note signifies? Fol. 153. a Marc. 15.
That were enough to condemn the Gospel of Christ. S. Mark says: The
Jews crucified Christ hora tertia, at the third hour. S. John says: Cap.
19.
It was the preparing day of Easter, about the sixte hour, and Pilate said
to the Jews, behold yower king: They cried away with him, away with him,
Crucify him. Pilate said, unto them, shall I crucify yower king? The hye
priests answered, we have no king, but Caesar: Then he delivered him to them
to be crucified. And they took Jesus and lead him away, and he bare his
cross, etc. By which it apeareth that it was about the sixte hour that
Christ was condemned of Pylate, and delivered to the Jews to be crucified.
Authors not to be discredited for a little aparant diversity in time. Cap. 17.
And shall we now because of this variety in time, say there is a
repugnancie and co^tradictio^ in the Gospel? Shall we refuse S. Mark and
follow S. John? or refuse S. John and follow S. Mark? or suspecte them
both, because they agree not in the hour of Christ's passion? No M. Calf. To
vary appara^tly in time and agree upon the thing among divines, is no
sufficient cause to disprove the truth. S. Mathewe writing of the
tra^sfiguratio^ of Christ in the mount says: and after six days Jesus
took Peter, James and John his brother, and led them into a hie hill and was
tra^sfigured before them. S. Luke says: It chaunched allmoste eighte days
after, etc. Here in these words seems also an apparent variety in time, but
an accord and agreement in the thing: and shall we for a little apparent
diversity of time, which may be gathered by the bare words) disauthorise the
Gospel? God forbid. It were Jewish folly. So albeit some say that the
cross was found when Eusebius governed the church of Rome, other some in
Syluesters popedom, yet do they all agree in the consequent, that is was
found by Helena, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, and revelation from
heaven. And this being agreed upon by all writers that discourse of
antiquities, and affairs of the church, what folishe curiosity, or curious
follye is it to beat about the bushe, and hu^t after hours, days, years,
and for a little diversity of time co^de^ne a true storye.

But peradventure M. Calf. understanding by some advocate of his, that testes
singulares non faciunt plenam probatione^, Cap. cum dilectus ex de elect. Panor
c. bonae memoriae, ex. de elect.
and that they are, singulares that agree not in time, because they that depose
of diverse times, depose of diverse factes, and for a full proof twoe must
depose of one fact, thought he should improve the truth of the history, if
he could show that the authors that witness it, did not agree in time. But
if he or his lawier had any such fancy, they were both deceived. For in
historiographers there is another consideration, than in witness. The case of an
historiagrapher and witness far diverse Bart. and dd. in l 1. ver. Celsus ait
ff. si certu^ Petat.
For the law gives credit to an history thought one only wrote it, such
credit I mean as the author commonly in all cuntries deserves, else no
history were laufull, except twoe men at one time wrote it, yea and nothing,
but that they saw both together at ones. If another come and write, that it
was not done, he that is of better credit is beleaued, but if he write that it
was done, as the first writer did, but differs in time, it is to be beleaued
the more, that it was done. For both agree in that: but now there is a
greater doubt in deed of the time, then if the last had held his peace.

Therefore we must beleaue him that is of greater authority, touching the time.
Item him that brings best reason. When authors vary in time wi^h is best
to be credited.
Item him that lived nearer the time when the thing was done. Item where
public regesters or other writers prove one time rather then another, with
such other circumstances: which I would teach M. Calf. for his learning, if he
would be my scholar in law, as long as he has been Caluines in heresy. But
if no such circumstances could be found, yet must not we conclude, that the
thing was not done, but rather confess the contrary: and stand still in
doubt of the time, never discrediting the authors for erri^g in time, but
rather excusing them as the law does, especially in reporting things of
antiquity, the knowledge of the precise time whereof, can not be easily gotten:
Quia labilis est hominum memoria circa tempus. Man's memory fails often in the
^ust time.
Because the memory of man is slipper about the time.

In some cases the law is content, contrary to common rules, in witnesses to
have testimony de auditu alieno, of the hear say, of other men: As if he say,
I know he boughte that house for an hundred years ago, because I heard my
grandfather say so, this wittnes proves. And if that be true, how much more
shall we bear with an historiographer in forgetting, or misreporting the time,
when there is no doubt of the thing done? As for example, it is manifest that
Wiat with a great company of the evangelical brethren rebelled against their
sovereign lady and Queen: it is certain that he came to Ludgate, and when he
could not have it opened, departed thence, and was apprehended and after a time
beheaded, like a traitor. Now if one would write the history of this
rebellion, and say he came to Ludgate the 4. of May, and another writing the
same, say he came the xij. of March, should this variety of time prove a
contradiction in the the thing, and argue that Wiat stirred no rebellion at
all? Or should men an hundred years hereafter say that both those writers
were to be discredited? To schole sir James to schole: you had need begin
yower A.B. C. again, if your secret store, be not better furnished, than that
which youer freash pedlers pack shows at the top: But perhapes you will
say, the apparent contradiction in the Evangelists is reconciled by S.
Augustine, and others, but this it not. It is true. I grant: but if I had
yower spirit, and would say: The doctors were but men, they had their
errors, they varied from the simplicity of the Gospel, and urge the bare
text, and words of the Gospel, and beleaue nothing that is alleged,
because it is not in the written scripture, what had yower maistership to say?
How should the places be reconciled? Let us have yower judgment, and
hereafter as occasion serves, I will send you mine, for the reconciliation of
such authors, as vary about the time of finding the Cross.

Fol. 152. b
Furthermore your brable about that saying of Ruffinus: Titulus non satis
euidenter dominici prodebat signa patibuli: The title did not show euidentlye
the sign of our lords gibbot, And this of S. Ambrose: Titulo crux patuit
salutaris, By the title, the healthful cross was known, is to no purpose.
When you have al said a simple Logitian will prove unto you, that in those
twoe sayings there is no co^tradictio^. And where I say in my treatise, Fol.
99. b
that neither by the title that Pilate set up in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin,
neither by any other means they could discern which was the cross that bare
our savior, I mean they could not discern it by any ordinary means, satis
euidenter, evidently enough, as Ruffinus says: And this comment for fear of
yower gross cauillation I make, that in youer next replye you may not have
such idle extrauagants and vain digressions.

Yower lewd and shameful lie that no ship or hulke of greatest burden is able
to carry the pieces of the holy cross, Fol 153. b A Shameful lie.
if they were gathered together, I remitte to the master of the game to stand
your friend for the whetstone. The talk of the nails wherewith all Christ was
crucified, Calvin.
I omit as impertine^t. The disprouing of Calvin I refer to learned in
France, where his adulteries, his sacriledges, his murder, leyed to his charge
by Seruetus, his treasons, his extorsions, and tyranny, and lousy evil are
better known. Calf.
Where you say of the miracle done at Nola by the cross, and reported by
Paulinus, that miracles were not made to establish a worshipping or having of a
cross, but to confirm a faith in the crucified, and teach us not to do the
like, but to beleaue the like, Mart.
The one we grant: the other we deny: we grant that they were done to
confirm a faith in the crucified, we deny that they were not done to
establishe a worshippi^g and having of the cross, and desire you to prove it
according to yower promise, by scriptures, counsels, and holy fathers. Fol
155. a Miracles that teach us to believe the like, teach us sometimes to do
the like, if we may.


In that you say, they teach us not to do the like, but to beleaue the like,
I pray you tell me, Does not he that teaches one to beleaue that alms
couerethe sins, teach him also, to give alms? Does not he that teaches one
to beleaue, that by worthy receiving the Sacrament he receaueth life
everlasting, teach him also to receive the Sacrament? Does not he that
teaches one to beleaue that by baptism he shall have remission of sin,
teach him also that he must be baptized? In like manner, if miracles done by
the cross teach us to beleaue the like, that is that the like may be done by
the cross, through the mighty pour of Christ, do they not teach us, when
like occasion serve to do the like if we may? And if it pleases God to have
his glory showed by like miracles unto us, as he did at that time to Paulinus
in Nola, by his cross, is it not reason that we should conceive a strong faith
and assured hope in Christ's mercy, and venture to do the like? And if we may
venture to do the like, Paulinus kept and reuere^ced the cross.
why may we not have such a piece of the cross as he had to do the like? Let
us have yower advise: he was an holy man, and learned bishop: he keapte it: he
reverenced it: he worshipped it, and made a singular jewel and preciouse
treasure of it. If you tell us that there is more fear of idolatry now, than
there was then, youer own words shall convince you of untruth. For you say
we have the Gospel amongst us more commonly than they had, and the truth
more sincerely preached tha^ it was in those days. And where that is, there is
less fear of idolatry.

Fol. 155. a
Where you say that I have heaped up many tales, as that a woman, was
preserved from rape and withcraste by the cross etc. I would marvel why you
are not ashamed to call true histories tales, True histories counted tales.
and judge Epiphanius, Palladius, S. August. Sozome ne, Sulpitius, and Osorius
to be tellers of tales, rather tha^ reporters of true histories, saui^g that, I
perceive, you are past shame, and most shamefully conte^ne the fathers, where
they make against you. But with the indifferent I trust the foresaid authors
shall have their worthy credit and you yower just deserte. As for your
affirmation that those miracles prove not my cause, because (as you say) It is
no good reason, Fol. 155. a
to say, The sign of the cross has done this or that miracle, ergo the sign
of the cross must be set up and honored, we reiecte as frivolous, nakedly
asseuered and nothing proved. When according to promise you bring
scriptures, counsels and holy fathers to disprove it, then shall you have an
other answer. In the mean time we tell you that it is a sufficient testimony
to convince against all he retikes, that it should not be hackte, hewed and
contemptuouslye abused. And that you may not ru^ne at riot and hu^te after
owls in the midde day, What M. Calf has to prove in his next book.
we tell you that the thing which you must prove in your reply, is that
miracles wrought of holy men, by the sign of the cross, at the commandment
of God, as some of those were, to the comfort of his people, and glory of his
holiee name, is not a sufficient reason to prove that the sign of the cross
shoud be had, keapt, set up, and honored.

In the examining of it, you shall discover your own folly, and see that
albeit miracles done by heretics, Sorcerers, Nigromancers and devils, are to
be rejected with the doctrines, and positions, which they would confirm with
feigned miracles, yet miracles wrought by good men, to confirm the doctrine and
faith of the Christians, are not to be contemned, nor the doctrine and faith
refused, which God confirmed with those miracles. That considered, you shall
further see that it was some phrontike fury or devilish spirit that made you
say, that you would not only have to sign of the cross, Fol. 157. b A strange
fancy meet for a nevve brother.
but the sign of the devil, if miracles may commend a thing. Was not the
faith of Christ commended by miracles, and so commended that unless he had
done those miracles, the gentills would not have beleaued? And will you
because miracles did commended the faith of Christ, have not only the faith of
Christ, but the faith of the devil? what a strange fansye is this in yower
Evangelical mind? Joan. 10 and 14.
Christ willed the Jews to beleaue his works, if they would not beleaue his
words: and will you not beleaue them because miracles did commend them? I
never heard of Christen man that in like case said, Fol 157. b
we may have as well the sign of the devil, or any sign of idols, as the
sign of the cross. And certes unless the devil had possessed your heart,
this blasphemy would never have been vttred.

You tell us how in the raygne of Tarquine the proud, Fol. 157. b
the image of madness hanged before men's doors delivered the household from al
dangers: It is very like that madness it self, has taken her flight from all
those doors, and lighted upon such a pale faced minister as you are, and
dryueth you to esteem the sign of an idol and devil, as well as the sign of
the cross: for remedy whereof the worst that I wish you, is some holy, and
learned exorcist from Italy, An exorcist for M. Calf.
or Spain, that is able with prayer, and other means that the church uses,
to expel that sprite of madness that possesses your heart.

To the place of Epiphanius, that said: A gentle woman blessed her self in the
name of Christ, because she was a Christian, and was preserved, you say, that
the sign of the cross was no cause of her preservation, Fol. 155. b
but witness of her faith that did preserve her. But how vain it is that
you say: Let the reader judge of Epiphanius own words. Lib 1 To. 2. here is. 30
He says: Per signaculum Christi and fide^ mulier auxilium percepit, etc. By
the sign of Christ and faith, the woman received help: neither did the force
of the inchauntement avail, where the name of Christ, and sign of the cross
was. What do these words, the woman received help by the sign of Christ
and faith signify? Do they not signify that by them, the woman was preserved?
A vvoma^ helped by the cross.
Construe it M. Calf. and tell me what is percipere auxilium per signaculu^
Christi? to receive help by the sign of Christ (which is the cross as
apeareth by the words that follow) if it be not to be preserved by the sign
of the cross? And if she received help by the cross, was not the cross one
cause of her preservation, one I say, because the passion and goodness of
Christ was the principal, and faith and the cross the mean by which she was
preserved?

If the cross were no such cause, why does the author join: Signaculum
Christi and fidem? The sign of Christ and faith together with a conjunction
copulative? Is that in vain? His skill is very simple that thinks so. Nor
do I say, that the sign alone did preserve, the woman (as M. Calfhil
imagines) but join the cross and faith together, as Epiphanius does, and
say, by the sign of the cross of Christ, and faith, the woman received help.
But let us see how M. Calf. proves that the sign of the cross was but a
witness, of her faith that did preserve her. Epiphanius (says he) testifies
this, for he says: Signauit se in nomen Christi, Calf.
vt quae Christiana esset, she signed her self into the profession and name, of
Christ, as who was a Christian woman. Mart.
But is not this good readers a new devised translation? to say, M. Calf. a
fine tra^slatour.
Signauit se in nomen Christi. She signed her self in to the profession and
name of Christ, as who was a Christian woman? The gentle woman was a Christen
woman long before she came into the bath, as our sir James confesses here: and
did not there begin to sign her self into the profession and name of Christ:
but because she was a Christen woman (as Epiphanius says) before, and knew
that the Christians used the sign of the cross, against all temptations,
therefore she signed her self in the name of Christ, and not as M. Calf.
foolishly tra^slateth it, into the profession and name of Christ. For that
signing was past. She had professed the faith and name of Christ in baptism,
there she was signed into the profession, and name of Christ. Here she did but
sign her self in the name of Christ, and in that showed her self a Christen
woman, and made not a new profession.

Where you say, Calf. Fol. 155. b
The end why God used this miracle was to show the virtue of belief in
Christ, and to convert an heathen man, that could not see the secret faith,
that so prevailed against inchauntment, and therefore stood in need of an
outward sign, Mart.
I marvel much why you labor buselie to deceive yower readers, and destroy
one truth by an other, and separate, that which Epiphanius knitteth together
with a copulative? He says, The force of inchauntement prevailed not, where
the name of Christ and sign of the Cross was, This copulative (and) declares
that faith in this case prevailed not without the sign of the cross, but that
by the sign of the cross, The sign of the cross concurred with faith.
and faith together the miracle was wrought. And albeit faith be able to
resist the force of incantation without the cross, yet it pleased not God so
to dispose it at that time, but made the sign of the cross concur with
faith, both to deliver the gentlewoman from violence, and also to convert the
gentill to the faith. For Epiphanius says in deed, hoc tertium instructionis
ad fidem opus Iosepho contigit. This third work of instruction happened to
Joseph to bring him to the faith: which few words how falsely M. Calf. has
translated, shall apeare when I come to treat of his false translations.

In the mean time we desire to learn of his wisdom, why God wrought that
miracle by the sign of the cross rather tha^ by any other external mean?
And whereas God notwithstanding preaching used the sign of the cross to
convert an infidel, I would gladlye understand, why we that are Christians
may not use, notwithstanding preaching, the sign of the cross, to keape those
in memory and meditation of Christ's passion, Josephus used the sign of the
cross. Ibidem.
who are converted already? This Josephus of whom we talk being made
afterward a perfect Christian man, used the sign of the Cross, and reuere^ced
it. For as Epiphanius reports, the Jews by incantations went about to
hinder his buildinges: and so wroughte by their sorcery, that his wood would
not burn to make lyme, and brick. Of which when he was advertised, he went to
the place, and commanded water to be brought thither, Water blessed with the
sign of the cross.
and when it was brought: Magna voce crucis signaculum proprio suo digito vasi
imposuit, etc. with a great voice he made the sign of the cross upon the
vessel with his own finger, and when he had called upon the name of Jesus, he
said: In the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom my fathers have crucified, and
all theirs, who stand here about, let there be virtue in this water to the
destruction of all inchauntmentes and sorcery, Virtue in water blessed with
the sign of the cross against inchauntements.
which these men have made, and strenght of power to make the fire burn, to
perfect the house of God. And so he took the water, into his hand, and
sprinkled every keele with part of the water, and the inchauntments were
dissolved, and the fire made burn. Which done the very heathens acknowledged,
that he was only God, that helped the Christians. Constantinus after he was
converted, notwithstanding he had much preaching, used the cross, and so have
all good Christians that were converted to the faith, and so ought we, unless
we will degenerate from them.

Fol. 155. b Calf.
Where you say, that the outward fact by which the inward purity is
notified needed not now to be the sign of the cross, since we live not
among Turks and Sarazins, but all men without it, know of whom we hold, in
whom we do beleaue, I would feign learn how a Portugalle, Mart.
or one of the new converted Islands of India coming by chance in to England,
of which he never heard before, How may one of the nevve Indians know that
we hold of Christ M. Calf?
and seeing nor aulters, nor images, nor roode in the church, nor cross in the
streate, nor high ways, and none to bless the^ selves with the cross in the
forheade, feign would I learn (I say) how this man should know of whom we
hold, and in whom we beleaue? Will you have him harken to yower preachers?
He can not understand them. Will you have him inquire of marchantes or some
learned men? What if neither the merchant nor the learned man understand his
language, neither he have any sight in the learned tongues? What shall he do
the^? But depart as ignorant as he came, and think that he has been rather
in a coaste of jury tha^ in a land that professes Christianity. And albeit
we dwell not (blessed be God) amongeste Turks or Sarazins, but amongst
Christians, yeat because strangers of all countries have access into our
realm, and happily some may come out of Greece, Constantinople, Jury and India
to our coasts, we should both to make us think oftener of the passion, and
also to signify our faith unto the heathens, have the sign of the cross in
churches, chapells, and high ways, and by the outward sign make them
understand of whom we hold, and in whom we beleaue, seeing by preaching we
can not.

Thus your answer to Epiphanius is confuted, and by this you may learn, never
to build yower own fancy, upon an holy fathers authority, and wreast it to
a sense which neither the plain words of the text, neither the circumstance
of the place can infer. I think a man should have much to do with you, if
you could show any such evident places out the fathers, that there were no
miracles done by the cross, and that we ought in no case to have the cross.
In all the rest that follows I see nothing worth the answering, but certain
sclaunders, and lies, of which I will speak hereafter. Now to the Ninthe
Article.

WHAT COMMODITY EVERY CHRISTEN MAN HAS, OR MAY HAVE BY THE SIGN of the
Cross. THE NINTHE ARTICLE.
IN THE beginning of this Article this our cross quareller sir James, fares
as a man sick of a pestilent fever. For as he through the abundance of the
cholerike humor, does loathe the savor and taste of wholesome meats: So this
man through the corruption of heresy not only lotheth, but also refuses the
authorities of the seventh general Council, and condemns their doings,
Augustine. epist. 118.
quoru^ saluberrima est authoritas, whose authority is most wholesome: and that
he might seem to do it, with authority, he takes example of S. Ambrose, who
said of the council heald at Ariminum, Fol. 163. b
Illud ego concilium exhorreo, that council I do utterly abhor. But how
evil he imitateth S. Ambrose, The counsel of Ariminu^ a private and wicked
council.
judge (good readers) The council keapte at Ariminu^ was a private council,
unlawfully assembled by heretics, without the authority of the bishop of
Rome contrary to the great general council of Nice, and never confirmed. It
made Christ the soon of God a creature, which the gentills and Jews did
easily acknowledge. Saint Ambrose a catholic bisshope, acknowledging
obedience and subjection to the Popes holiness, and a follower of the decrees of
the Nicene council, understanding that, said like a stout prelate: Illud ego
co^cilium exhorreo, that council I do utterly abhor. The 2. counsel of Nice a
general and Lauful council.
The council keapt at Nice against image breakers, was a general council kept
by Catholics, laufully called and duly confirmed. It apeased the great
schism, that image breakers had raised against the church many years. It
decreed nothing against Christ and his holy scriptures, as the other did.

Wherefore if M. Calf. would have imitated S. Ambrose, he should first have
proved that to have been a private Synod keapt of heretics, unlawfully
assembled and never duly confirmed. He should have showed that the fathers
there decreed things contrary to scripture, and derogatorye to Christ.
Otherwise there is no more likeness in the case, nor reason why he should say
with saint Ambrose: Illud ego concilium exhorreo, I utterly abhor that
council, tha^ there is cause why the thief condemned at the Kings bench for
felony, should say to the (...), my lords, as that worthy gentleman my
master, tal^^ (...) of the tumultes and sedition in Northfolke, said, I
utterly abhor that tree of reformation: So do I utterly abhor this place of
judgment, and with all my heart refuse this authority, and condemn the
verdit of these twelve men, and sentence of this judge. For as capitaines
Keetes tree of reformation was a conuenticle of rebels, so was the council of
Ariminum, a conspiracy of heretics. As that was against their laufull Prince:
So was this against the true church. As that was against the commandment of
Christ: So was this to the dishonor of God. Wherefore M. Calf. could not take
example of S. Ambroses fact in abhorring the council of Ariminum, to refuse
and condemn the second council of Nice, unless with the Ariminians he will be
an Arrian, and forsake the council of Nice. Or with the thief forsake the
laufull Justices, because the good gentleman his master abhorred the practice
of rebels.

But let us hear what he says against them. Where Germanus a learned father,
and worthy bishop of Constantinople said, The images of holy men are a lively
description of their stoutness, Actio. 4. Nice. 2.
a representation of their virtues, a dispensation of grace given them, etc. It
was (quoth M Calf. Fol. 1642 Calf.
) a vain allegation of Germanus: for I beseech you (says he) what stoutenes
and virtue is described, what holiness and grace is dispensed by them? when the
saints were alive, their virtues could not be discerned, with eye, they
rested in their mind, their propre subject. And shall they now beseene in
their dead images, which have neither mind neither sense, to hold the^? This
is as just as Germans lips: Mart.
It was not for naught that Tertulian did forbid disputation with heretics,
bring what you can, either they will falsely wrest it, or shamefully deny it.
For proof whereof we need not seek far: In this very thing we have
experience of both in our sir James. He denies not only the saying of a
learned bisshope, but also the authority of a general council. Fol. 163. b
Fol. 164. a
The decrees of the one he calls impudent vanities, and the saying of the
other a vain allegation. Which how sitting it is for so young a divine, and
simple minister, you that are men of wisdom judge.

His wreasting Germanus words is so shameless, that unless with heresy he
had put on impude^cy, his pale face would blush to hear it. That you may
better understand his forgery, consider that holy bisshopes words, he said:
The images of holy men are a lively description of their stoutness, Germanus
words wrested.
and a representation of holy virtue, and despe^sation of grace, given unto
them. Now comes our sir James, and asks what holiness and grace is dispensed
by the^? As though the author meaned that images of saints were a
dispensation of holiness, and grace, which is absurd and contrary to his mind.
For he means as the very words do importe, that images of saints do
describe unto us the stoutenes of holy men, What images represent unto us.
and represent the holy virtue and grace that God dispensed unto them. As for
example, the image of S. Peter martired upon the cross, the image of S. Paul
beheaded with the sword, the image of S. Stephen stoned, Bartholomewe fleied.
S. Laurence broyled and diverse such, do represent unto us, that hold of
Christ, their stoutenes in contemning death, their patience in suffringe
torments, and grace that they had to persevere constant in the faith and love
of Christ until the end. Here is no mention that grace is dispensed by
images: M. Calf. falsely tra^slateth Germanus words.
nor Germanus says (as M. Calf. falsely tra^slateth) that an image is a
dispe^sation of holiness, but sanctae virtutis et dispe^sationis figuratio, a
figuryng or representatio^ of holy virtue, and dispe^satio^ (that is) of grace
given unto the saints. The word dispensatio^ which Germanus used in the
genitive case, Calf. turns into the nominative case, which is forsoothe no
falsitie nor dishonest dealing amongst heretics. And whereas the author said:
An image is a representation of dispensation. This false quarreler says: an
image is a dispensation of holiness. And as though he had dealed honestly,
asks this pieuish question, what holiness is dispensed by them? and shows
him self as wise as VValtams caulfe.

His reason that follows, sauoreth of the same pasture. For he says: the
virtues of Sai^ctes could not be discerned with eye, Calf.
They rested in the mind their propre subject, ergo they could not be seen in
their dead images, which have no sense to hold them: Here the antecedent is
stark false? Mart.
For albeit the mind is the propre subject of virtue, yet does it not so
closely keep it self there, but that some times it shows forth her fruictes.
Faith the chiefest virtue in a Christen man is showed by good works. The
Apostle S. James said, Faith shevved by Good works Cap. 2.
ostendam tibi ex operibus fidem meam, I will show the my faith by good
works. S. Peter commands us to labor to make our vocation known by our
good works. And this would neither S. James have said, nor S. Peter have
commanded, 2. Petr. 1.
if our faith and virtue might not be known by the outward works. But seeing
it is so, that faith and all other virtues may be showed forth by good works,
although they rest in the mind as their propre subject, it stands with
reason that they may be set soorth to the eye, by images. As the obedience of
Abraham, and redines to offer his son Isaac at Gods commandment, may be and
is set forth by pictures: likewise the constancy of the Apostles, and
patience of Martirs, and charity of all, may in like sort be set forth.

If M. Calf. deny this, let us ask him how it comes to pass, that albeit
the faith and other virtues rest in the mind as their propre subject, yet they
may be set forth by ynck and paper, as the faith and holiness of the Apostles,
is set forth in the acts, If the virtue of saints may be set forth in ynck
and paper, why not in pictures? answer M. Calf. Ser. de 40. Mart. Noble
faicts set forth by pictures.
and ancient histories? If he find, that by yncke and paper they may be set
forth to the carnal eye, to be read, and by reading conveyed in to the
mind, Let him give a good reason out of scripture, council, and ancient
father, why a picture ca^ not set a thing forth to our eyes, and by outward
sight conueye it unto the mind. S. Basile commending the fourthy Martirs,
told his people, that he would endeavor to set forth their noble acts to
them all, quemadmodum in pictura, as it were in a picture. For both writers of
histories and also payncters do set forth very lively noble feats of arms:
the one by eloquence, the other by garnishing and setting it forth by tables:
both stirring many to imitate the like valiantnes, and cowrage. For whatsoever
the vtteraunce of the historye proves by induction, the same does a still
picture set forth by imitation.

But what if in way of reasoning, we granted M. Calf. his antecedent, that
the virtues of Saynctes could not be discerned with eye, for that they rested
in the mind, their propre subject? How does this conseque^t follow, Ergo
they could not be seen in their dead images, which have neither mind, nor
sense, to hold them? As just as Germaynes lips. May not all London laugh at
it, and think they have a pieuish minister for a learned reader? A propre
reason for a nevve minister.
Consider his reason I beseech you. In effect he says thus. Dead images of
Saynctes have no mind, nor sense, to hold their virtues, ergo their virtues
can not be seen of me^ that have wits, and sense to behold them. Is not this
true dealing, and a token of profounde learning? Might not one by a like
argument prove that we can not see the power of Christ, and virtue of the
Apostles, M Calves reason condemns the scripture as well as images.
in scripture? how say you to this argument? The yncke and paper wherein the
scripture is written have no mind nor sense, to hold the pour of Christ,
and virtue of the Apostles, Ergo the power of Christ, and of the Apostles ca^
not be seen in the scripture? If M. Calfhils be good this is good. For they are
both like. And if you will say with him that the virtues of Saints ca^ not be
seen in images, because images have no mind nor sense to hold them, you must
say in like sort that we can not see the power of Christ and virtue of the
Apostles in scripture, because the paper and yncke, have no mind nor sense, to
hold the^. And by like reason as he condemns images, condemn the scripture.

But be not deceived. As by reading the scripture written in yncke and paper,
the heart conceaueth the power of Christ, and virtue of his Apostles: So by
seeing images of Saynctes made of insensible things, the mind conceaueth the
virtue of Saynctes. And as the ear by hearing, gives understanding to the
soul: So the eye by seeing does give light to the mi^de. VVherby it comes to
pass that although images have nor mind, nor sense to hold the virtues of
Saynctes, yeat we that have minds, wit, reason, and sense, may behold the
virtues of Saynctes in images, and glorify God for them. But to proceed.

When I see an image gorgeouslye decked, with spear, sword, Fol. 164. a
or book in the hand, an other with a box or babe i^ her arms, Fol. 164. a
what reason can tell me whether Mars or S. Georg, Venus, or the virgi^ mother
of Christ be erected, quoth M. Calf? Mart.
Forsooth if you be a Christen man, and live amongst Christians, and have any
reason in your head, it may tell you that ever since Christ conquered the
devil, the Christians have forsaken all idols, of Mars, Venus, Apollo, and
such like: Idols destroyed by the Christians.
and utterly destroyed them, as the prophets did foretell, and suffered none to
remain amongst them. It might further tell you that the Christians neither
have nor can abide to have any other image to be honored in the church than
the image of Christ and his saints. Which being true, and none so simple
amongst the Christians, but is well assured of that, little reason might serve
to make you to think that, when you see an image with a sword, or child in the
arms, it is nor Mars nor Venus, nor Mercury, nor Momus, unless by heresy
you have be^ made so very a Mome, that you know not amongst whom you dwell
nor of whom you hold. Fol. 146. b


It is a great argument of yours that images teach pride, avarice, Fol. 165. b
wantonness and nothing else. And for proof of it you bring the example of
Cherea in Terence, and Venus Gnidia in Lucian, two worthy Doctors to confirm
such a truth. Scriptures, counsels and fathers failed, when these were thought
worthy to be alleged. But I pray you sir what if some wanton maidens learn of
the image of Mary Magdalene, the lusts of vanity, Fol. 164. b
what if the covetous man seeing an image fair gilded, wish it in his purse?
what if the careless and desperate man think with himself, Fol. 174* b
what shame is it for me to hang, seeing our God was so served? Ibidem. What
co^ consequution is this M. Calf. Some may have evil thoughts by sight of
images, Ergo images must not be suffered. Gene. 19. Gene. 30. Osee 1. Mat 25.
Luc. 19. Matt. 18.
What if all this were true, what will you infer upon it? Shall images
thefore be condemned and thought unlawful? Then by your wisdom we shall
shortly condemn the scripture: VVanton maidens hearing the chapter read
where it is declared how Loths two daughters made their father drunk, and
went to bed unto him, may learn some lewd lusts of vanity, evil women
hearing how Rachel gave Jacob her husband leave to begette children of his
maiden Balam, may have wicked imaginations: Men hearing how the Patriarchs had
diverse wives, may think that laufull for them. Some hearing those words that
God spoke to his Prophet Osee: Go thy way, take a harlot to thy wife, and
beget children of fornication, may think wickedly of committing fornication.
Some hearing that Christ said to the servant: Thou should have put my money
to the bank that I returning might have received it with usury, will imagine
that it is laufull to give money to vsurye. Some hearing that he said: If I thy
eye offend thee, pick him out, if thy hand or foot be offense unto the, cut
them of, and cast them from the, may take occasion, as some have done, to
ma^gle them selves and cut of their members. And so all wicked men may take
occasion of some other places of scripture to be naught and like the spider
turn all into poison, as our sir James does. Shall the scripture therefore be
contemned, and thought unlawful? Shall all men be forbid to read it, because
some take occasion of hurt by it? No: there is no reason, why the lewdnes of a
few should prejudice a multitude, and the iniquity of some lewdly disposed,
imbarre the commodity of many well affectioned. As therefore the scripture is
not to be rejected because wicked men by certain histories, and textes
misunderstode may take occasion of evil: So are not images to be condemned
because wanton maids and covetous persons conceive light affections at the
sight of them. Many have holy meditatio^s and great commodities by them, and
more good men and women by sight of Mary Magdalene payncted mornefully, Mary
Magdalene not want only pai^cted.
and not wantonly (as you say) take occasion to repent for their sins, and
lament their wantonness past, than to fall into the lusts of vanity. More by
seeing the gilded images, think of the ioies of heaven, and bliss that they
have there, than of having it in their purse. More seeing Christ hanging on
the Cross, thank him, for his passing love toward us, than think hanging
no shame, because their lord and master was hanged: and they for the lewdnes
of a few that are naught, are not to be bereued of a commodity that does
turn them to good.

The examples of Ezechias, Josias, and Solomon, Fol. 164. b Fol. 165. a The
fact of Ezechias destroying the serpent makes not against our images. 4. Reg.
18.
are brought to no purpose against images amongst Christians. The cause why
Ezechias destroyed the brazen Serpent, is declared in the text: Siquidem, vsque
ad illud tempus filij Israel adolebant ei incensum. For until that day the
children of Israel did offer incese to it. And in deed, the people of Israel
being very prone to idolatry, did oftentimes offend the goodness of God with
their wickedness and abomination, which the virtuous prince Ezechias
understanding did destroy the brazen Serpent. Amongst us that are Christians,
there is no such mistrust of idolatry. No man knows the secrets of an others
heart, nor is able to say, this man or that man commits idolatry, or
burns incense to idols, as the Israelites did. Wherefore the fact of Ezechias
is vnfytly alleged, against images. The law says: Cessante ratione legis
cessat and ipsa lex. The reason of the law ceassing, the law it self
ceasseth. Seeing them there is no idolatry, committed, as there was in his
time, seeing the people direct their hearts, and offer their prayers to God,
and whensoever they set their eyes on the image, they have their mnydes in
heaven with God, the destroying that Ezechias used, should also cease, and no
image now be throwe^ down, unless there were like apparent cause of
idolatry, as there was in Ezechias and Josias reign. For whose fact also this
answer for avoiding tediousnes shall suffice.

Fol. 165. 3. Reg. 11. Solomon not abused by images but by women.
As for Solomon, he was not, (as M. Calf. says, contrary to the word of God)
abused by images. The text says, Auerteru^t mulieres cor eius, deprauatum est
cor eius per mulieres, vt sequeretur deos alienos, women turned away his heart:
by women his heart was corrupted, that he followed strange Gods, as you for
having and pleasing of your women, are brought to heresy. To these women he
was inueigled, Ardentissimo amore, with most hot and fervent love. That he was
abused by images, or by suffering his wa^ton paramours, to bring their idols
into his court, the scripture makes no mention. The lively images of his
paramours the wanton continaunces of his concubines and niceness of his
ladies, were the Idols that corrupted him, and not the images which he knew,
to be but stocks and stones. And albeit he was permitted to like his own
lusts, and follow strange Gods, which were but stocks and stones, yet will it
not follow that he was perverted, and abused by those stones. The scripture
must be true, deprauatu^ est cor eius per mulieres, his heart was depraved by
women to follow strange Gods, and not by any affection to false images, to
follow idols. If you thinck this true, then tell, your minister that he has
made a foul and shamefully lie. If you think him an honest man, not
withstanding this shameful lying, and co^trarying the scriptures, all wise men
may think, 2. Tim. 4.
that the time is come of which, S. Paul spoke to Timothe: There shall be a
time, when they shall not abide wholesome doctrine, but having ytching ears,
shall heap unto them selves masters after their own desire, and turn away
their hearing from truth, and turn to fables.

Fol. 168. a Calf.
Where he alleges this place out of S. Chrysostom, Animo desperato, nihil
peius, etc. nothing is worse than a desperate mind. Although he see signs,
Although miracles be wrought, yet he stands still in the same self will
frowardnes, Mart.
to prove that obstinate sinners have small or no conforte by the cross, ye
shall understand good readers, that S. Chrysostom speaks, there of the Jews
that crucified Christ, Hom. 54. in 8. Joan.
and of such hard hearted and obdurated men, as Pharao was. Amongst them Christ
wrought a great number of miracles. In his passion he leyed them flat upon
the ground, and took away their sight, and yet they (that is to say the
Jews) did not beleaue. Now because the Jews were obstinate in their
wickedness, and would not beleaue, although they saw signs and miracles, is
there any honesty in this master minister to refer that to the Christians
that was spoken of the wicked Jews? and to say they who have received the
faith of Christ, being now estraunged by abundance of impiety and sin, can
not by signs and miracles, and sight of the cross be turned to Christ again,
because the Jews, that crucified Christ, and Pharao that of malice and hardness
of heart, Learn M. Calf. to make a difference when an author speaks of a
jew and when he speaks of a Christian.
opposed him self against God, could not be converted by miracles and signs?
The case is far different between a Jew and a Christian, a Pharao and a
faithful. The one knows that by Christ he may have salvation, the other
supposed it a vain illusion. The Christian understands that Christ, will
receive him to mercy if he turn unto him. The Jew can not conceive that there
is any such Christ to have mercy upon him. Therefore no marvel if small
comfort arise to the like that S. Crysost. spoke of, that is the Jews and
Pharaonites, when the cross, is brought unto the^. For they never believed in
Christ crucified. But being brought to a Christian (of who^ we talk and not of
Jews, and Pharaonites M. Calf. Comfort to Christians by sight of the cross.
) there may rise great comfort unto him. For by the sight of it, he may come
into remembrance of the passion of Christ, and consider, that as he died for
sinners, so he will save sinners, if they turn unto him, and repent, and fall
into such holy meditations as I declared in my treatise.

Neither does this authority, and example brought out of S. Chrysostom
condemn me, as M. Calfhil supposes, Fol 116. a
but shows him, to be gross, and ignorant, that can not see, when an author
speaks of a Jew, and a Christian, of an infidel, Fol. 168 a
and faithful: and declare that his lying sprite passes not what he writes,
so he may color his craft for a time. Or if this be not evidence enough,
marcke what a shameful lie follows strayte upon the back of this? A
shameful lie. Fol. 168. a Calf.
( Athanasius says he:) In the place by you alleged how the wounted
affections be taken out of harlotts hearts, murderers keep their weapon no
longer, fearful men conceive courage, barbarous men lay away all immanitie,
does not ascribe the effects to the cross, but wholly and solely to the faith
of Christ? Mart.
Now whether this be a most impudent and shameful lie, judge your selves.
Athanasius words be these: Who has so taken out of men's hearts their wounte
affections, that harlotts would live chaste, murderers keep their weapons no
longer? Fearful men conceive courage? who has persuaded barbarous people,
and other nations, to ley away all immanitie in their own cuntrie, The virtue
of the cross.
and muse only upon quietness and peace? nisi Christi fides and signaculum
crucis? But the faith of Christ and sign of the cross? And is it not plain
that he says here, The faith of Christ and sign of the cross took the
wounted affections out of men's hearts? The faith of Christ and sign of the
cross made harlotts live chaste? the faith of Christ, and sign of the cross
made murderers, cast away their weapon, and the fearful conceive courage, and
the barbarous ley away their immanitie? And in saying that the faith of Christ
and sign of the cross made all this, does he not ascribe all these effects
to the faith of Christ and sign of the cross? And if it be so, then does he
not ascribe those effects, Wholy and solely to the faith of Christ, but to
the faith of Christ and sign of the cross together, not that faith is unable,
to do it, without the cross, but because we might understand that God would
have the sign of the cross, concur with faith, and work the said effects
by faith and the sign of the cross, to confound the gentills that imagined
Christ, to be but a dead man, and wrought us no benefit by his cross.

M. Calf. his fancy, saying that Athanasius joined the sign of the cross to
faith, that the one might be testified by the other, has no sure grownde to
stay upon. He has according to his promise, alleged nor scripture, nor
council, nor father to prove his guess. It is manifest to all that will read
the whole discourse, which Athanasius makes there, that he talks much of
the virtue and power of the sign of the cross, Athanasius speaks much of
the virtue of the sign of the cross.
as that it drives away devils and destroys inchauntments and sorcery, as I
have specified before, and for declaration that it has further power and
strenght to the benefit of Christians, he ascribes the aforesaid effects to
faith and the sign of the cross together: for so signify his words: Fides
Christi and signaculum crucis. The faith of Christ and sign of the cross. And
albeit it be granted to be true that M. Calfhil says, that the manner of
that time, was for the christians by this kind of sign to show their
profession, being conversant amongst, infidels, yet does it not prove that the
aforesaied effects be ascribed wholly and solely to faith. For by that sign,
they might both testify, their faith, and with faith in the merits of
Christ's passion, and that sign of the cross, have the effects before said
wrought, as Athanasius plainly declared, when he said, who taught all these
things, nisi Christi fides and signaculum crucis? But the faith of Christ and
sign of the cross? Which being true, I can not see with what face M. Calf.
could, say that Athanasius in that place ascribed those effects wholly and
solely to the faith of Christ maki^g faith and the cross vary as it were, and
not able to concur on with the other, unless he had determined to out face
the truth wholly and solely with lies.

As he has faced this: So has he made an other, The Parisiens approve not
Erasmus Censure etc. Fol. 172. b
that the Parisiens, that is the faculty of divines commonly, called the
doctors of Sorbon in Paris, approved the judgment and ce^sure of Erasmus,
denying the book, de visitatione infirmorum to be S. Augustines work. For
there is no word, nor syllable there that makes mention that the said
censure set before the work was approved by the Parisiens, except M. Calfhils
wisdom will say, it was printed at Paris, ergo it was allowed by the Parisiens.

Nor content with this, to show more feats of his art, he fayneth of S.
Cyrill that he having to do with Julian the Apostata (who entwited the
Christians for having, and setting up of crosses before their doors) did
excuse the order of the Christians in his time, and cover their fault, Fol.
172. b Fol. 173. a
which is an impudent lie For Cyrillus acknowlegeth no fault in the order of
the Christians of his time, Cyrillus acknovvlegeth no fault in the Christians
for making of crosses, and therefore excuses it not Libr. 6. co^t. Iulia.
for making and setting up of crosses, and therefore neither excused them, nor
covered any fault of theirs. He was so far from all such imaginations, and
thinking it a fault to have, or make the sign of the cross upon, either their
doors, or for heads, that whereas Julian said that they were wretches that
made crosses, he said: Absque labor demonstrabimus eiusmodi sermones a malis
cogitationibus profectos, extremam sapere imperitiam, we will prove without any
great travail, that these words coming of wicked thoughts, savor of
extreme ignorance. And so reckoning the benefits of Christ's passion he
says: Haec omnia recordari nos facit salutare lignum. The healthful woodde
does make us remember all these things. Further he says: We make the cross
of the precious wodde in remembrance of all goodness and virtue.

Now if Cyrillus a learned bishop judged the talk of Julian the Apostata
agreing with our heretics, for vpbraydi^g the catholics with having and maki^g
the sign of the cross, to proceed of wicked thoughts, and savor of extreme
ignorance, it is not to be presupposed that he thought it a fault in the
Christians to have the^ neither judged it a wicked thought in an other to
reprove the having of the^. But would rather have taken it as an aduertisme^t,
to warn the christians to forsake it, lest they should be an offense and
sclau^der to the Ghospel. But in all his works there is no sentence to declare
that he exhorted the Christians to leave the making and setting up of crosses
before their doors. But the contrary apeareth very evidently in this place.
For he says with great indignation to that wicked Apostata. Lib. 6. co^t.
Iulia. The cross brings us in remembrance of al goodness.
VVilt thou, that we cast away the wood that brings us in remembrance of all
goodness, and set forth thy toys to women and children? No, we will not.
Herepon I make this reason. Where there is no fault, there neadeth no excuse:
There was no fault (in Cirillus judgment) to make the sign of the cross.
Therefore it neded not to be excused, as a fault. If any wrangling heretic
deny the second proposition, let him consider Cyrillus words alleged
before: and if he has common sense, he can not choose but prove it
sufficientlye out of that place: To avoid tesdiousnes I leave it to the
indifferent readers deduction, Notes of M. Calves. considered.
and by the way consider certain notes that M. Calf. has gathered out of an
other place, of Cyrill in the same book against Julian. As for example.

Where Cyrillus said that Numa king of the Romans builded certain temples
in the which nullum erat simulachrum, there was no false or forged image, The
first Note. Fol. 173.
because he learned of Pithagoras that God lacks form and shape, he makes
this note in the marge^t, Cyrillus allows no images in churches, and makes
this argument. There can be no likeness of God made, therefore not of Christ
unless we deny him to be God? Corcerning the first, consider how wisely it
is inferred upon that holy fathers words. Cyril tells us that Numa a good
king (as Julian said) had no forged and feigned images, in his temples, ergo
Cirill allows no true images of Saynctes in churches. Is not this beggarly
logic, A like argument to M. Calves.
and pelting divinity? Consider it by a like. The prophets and Apostles tell
us, that the ge^tills had no true manner of worshipping the true God in their
temples, Ergo the prophets allowed not the true worshipping of God in Christian
churches. That Cyrill did not disalowe images in the church, it apeareth first
by his earnest reply against Julian that vpbrayded the Christians with having
the sign of the cross, and thought it an extreme ignorance, to think it
unlawful to have the cross. Next by his not reproving neither the fathers
that were before his time, neither those that lived in his time, for suffering
images in churches.

S. Basile before his time allowed images in the church, as apeareth in his
sermon upon Barlaam the martyr. There he cries to the painters in this sort.
Go to now, S. Basile allows images in churches.
o ye notable paincters of noble faictes, set forth with yower art the
mutilate image of this captain, making him noble with the colors of yower
industry, whom I have somewhat obscurely described and crowned. I will
depart as ouercommed with the image which you make of the co^flictes and
victories of the martyr. I will rejoice that by yower dexterity and fynenesse
I am conquered with such victory. And in the same book, in the end he says:
Pingatur in tabula vna, et certaminu^ agonotheta Christus: Let Christ the
healper of those conflictes and victories be paincted also in a table with him,
to whom be glory world without end, Amen. Thus much S. Basile, and would he
have required them to paincte the image of the martyr, and our savior Christ,
if it had been unlawful to have the images of martirs and Christ in the
church? VVoulde he have desired it in his sermon before the face of all the
people, in the open audience, and show him self to rejoice in it, if it had
been against Gods commandment? No: His knowledge in the scriptures was
greater, and zeal to the honor of God more feruenter, than that either he
could be ignorant in such a matter, or would be wilful to commit such an
offense.

Athanasius allows images in churches.
Likewise Athanasius allowed images before Cyrillus time, as apeareth in the
storye, which he declares of the image of Christ crucified at Berithus. There
he says: The faithful Christians and disciples of Christ were warned of the
holy Ghost to depart from Jerusalem, and to go to the kingedome of
Agrippa, twoe years before Titus and Vespasianus destroyed the city: Qui
egressi ab vrbe, omnia quae ad cultum nostrae religionis vel fidei pertinere
videbantur secum auferentes, in has regiones transtulerunt. Quo tempore etiam
icona cum caeteris rebus ecclesiasticis deportata vsque body in Syria
permansit. Who departing from the city, taking away with them all things
that seemed to apertayne unto our religion or faith, transported them into these
cu^tries. At what time also this image being carried away with other things of
the church, has continued unto this present day, in Syria. Here it is to be
seen euide^tlye that in those days, even at the beginning, images were
adnumbred amongst those things that appartayned ad cultum nostrae religionis,
to the furnishing and settinge forth of our religion, and cum caeteris rebus
ecclesiasticis, with other things of the church. Oration. in lauds Theodor
Mart.
Gregorius Nissenus, In mira. S. Stepha.
Euodius, In Felice
Paulinus. De consensu. Eua^gel. lib. 1 cap 10. Libr 22. co^t Faust. Manich.
cap 73.
S. Augustine, In Cassian.
Prudentius, or in Cyrill^^ time, or very little before his time, speak in like
manner of images amongst Christen men. And if Cyrill had disalowed images in
churches, either he would have reproved the fathers that before his days, or
those that lived in his days, and had images in their churches, but no such
thing apeareth in all his works. Wherefore M. Calf. can not justly say
that Cyrill allows no images in the church.

The other argument that we can make no image of Christ unless we will deny
him to be God, The 2. Note.
because God lacks form and shape, is as vain as the first, and so simple
that M. Calf. is driven to featche a proof for it, out of an heathen
philosopher in stead of scripture, council, and ancient father. Christ our
Savior, God and man, taking upon him the nature and shape of man lived here on
earth and died on the cross like a man. And seeing it pleased his infinite
Majesty to apeare unto us in the form and shape of man, I would gladly see
M. Calfhils scriptures, counsels, doctors, and fathers that prove we can not
paincte the image of Christ as man, unless we will deny him to be God? We
esteem not his own assertion, neither the doctrine of Ely Phisi, nor sansie
of the Magdeburges so highly that it shall be worthied of authority for
scripture, council, or doctor. How fond this sansie is, I have sufficiently
declared in the preface.

An other note is, that if the cross was used in Cyrills time, The. 3. Note.
yet there was no picture upon it. And that is but his guess. If it were
denied, he would hardely prove it. Last of al, Fol. 173. b The 4. Note.
that he condemns the foolish superstition of Christians in giving worse
names unto their churches, then he did to the Temples of his idols. For he
called them all the Temples of faith giving thereby the glory to God. VVheras
we call them S. John's church, S. Mary's church, and such other like. This
note is so fine that all men may note him for a very Calf. that noted it. Nor
Numa nor his vvritings can co^de^ne us for building of churches.
Numa Pompilius was the next king to Romulus who lived many hundred years
before Christ, and never dreamed of Christ nor the Christians, and therefore
could not condemn them of superstition. If he say his monumentes and writings
condemn us, albeit him self did not, I answer, the writings of none can
condemn us in matters of religion, but theirs whom we are bound to follow,
as the scriptures, counsels, fathers, and prelates of the church. We take
not our religion of Numa, nor learn of him, and the gentills the manner of
buildinge or dedicatinge churches. Christ is our Master, under him the
bisshops and prelates of his church are our spiritual fathers and guides: Of
them we must learn our faith, of them we must take instruction how to honor
God and serve him. They have builded churches and called them by the name, of
S. Peter, Paul, John, and Marie, Stephen and such like, and yet were never
condemned of any for superstitious, but of heretics.

Athanasius writes that after the great miracle was wroughte by the image
which the Jews crucified, the Metropolitan of Siria being requested by those
that were converted and baptized, converted their Sinagoge into a church, and
consecrated it in the honor of the savior of the world. Afterward being
required to convert other Synagoges and hallowe them in honor quorundam
beatorum Martiru^, Lib. de passion. imag.
in the honor of certain blessed Martirs, Dei iuuauime fretus cuncta expleuit
deuotus, having confidence in the help of God, he fulfilled all that they
required of him like a good devout man. Here the good Metropolitan that
dedicated churches in the honor of Martirs, is not called superstitious, but
devout, not allured with foolish zeal, but inspired with an holy spirit.
And if it were of any accounted (as M. Calf. imagines) a foolish superstition
of the Christians, to build churches in honor of saints, and call the^ their
names, why does he not lashe out his scriptures, bri^ge in the cou^cells, and
prove it by the holy fathers? Thincketh he that it is a sufficient discharge of
his gloriouse promise, to bring, in so weighty a matter, against the
Christians the only authority of an heathen, infidel, and one that never knew
christ, such as Numa and Pythagoras were? No, we have to many examples to the
contrary, of elder age. And to many presidentes of holy men since, and
authorities of counsels and fathers to maintain it. And if M. Calf. were as
well conversant in S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Hierome, Gregory, and other
ancient fathers, and writers of Ecclesiastical histories, as he is in his
Esopes fables and in his new peltinge doctors, he would be ashamed that ever
he let such a fond sentence, escape his mouth. For in S. Ambrose he shall
find a church called by the name of Geruasius, Libr. 10. epist. 85. Lib. 22.
de ciuit. Dei cap. 8. Ibidem. cap. 10. Co^t Vigilant. ad Ripa. Lib. 3. dialog.
ca. 26.
and Protasius, and another of S. Fausta, an other of S. Felix, and Nabor. In
S. August. a memory of S. Stephen, and aulters in honor of Martirs. In S.
Hierome, basilicas Apostolorum Prophetarum, and Martirum, churches of the
Apostles, Prophets and Martirs. In Gregory a church called by the name of S.
Paul, and so in all other writers and historiagraphers almost as thick as
hail.

And certes such holy fathers, such learned doctors, such famous writers,
such true historiographers could have discerned true religion from vain
superstition. And if they had thought it only a will worship or service
unacceptable to God, they would never so willingly, so gladly, and so deuoutely
have dedicated those churches, and called the^ by the name of Saynctes. Thus
much of his notes: where it is to be noted that he had rather follow Numa
Po^pilius, that reigned over the Romans, the^ the holy ghost that governed
the holy fathers: heathe^s and philosophers, tha^ Christians, and true
Catholic doctors. As for his negative arguments, Paul says, not,
Quaecu^que picta sunt, Fol. 166. a.
sed quecunque scripta sunt, what so ever things are payncted, but what
things soever are written, are written for our instruction, Paul says not
that by images or gasinge stocks, but through patience and comfort of the
scriptures, we may have hope, Paul says not all pictures, but al scripture
inspired of God is profitable to teach, to reprove, to instruct, that the man
of God may be perfect, ergo images and pictures be not profitable to teach,
ergo Images and pictures be to no use, I leave, with a great many more, to the
logisioners and determiners in the schools. The meanest and symplest of the^ al
knows, that nothing can be truly concluded of negatiues. Certain lies and
sclaunders are contained in this Article, and as yet not touched. Ye shall
hear of them in their place. Now to the tenth Article.

THE ADORATION AND WOORSHIP OF THE CROSS ALLOWED BY THE Ancient fathers. THE
TENTH ARTICLE.
IF YOU craked less master Calf. in the overthrowing fundations that are to
strong for your weakness, and did lay forth before the face of the world
weightier proufes, men would think their labor better bestowed in reading
your writings. But you are so full of crakes, and no deeds, that you do men
great wrong to troble them, with so many words without substance of matter.
Parturiunt montes: The hills trauaill, as though they lay in child bed, but
after long expectation of a fair baby, out comes a foul and foolish mouse
from the hills side, that gives all that see it occasion of laughter. Calf.
Fol. 175. a. b.
You say: it had hen reason that I should have proved an adoration of the
cross by some testimony of scripture, which in Gods matters only and
sufficiently do take order. Mart. Protestants prove not al their doctrine out
of scripture.
As though God had so tied him self to the written lettre of the scripture,
that nothing can be taken for truth, but that which is had in written
scripture. It is no where found in written scripture that baptism ministered
by an heretic after the manner of the catholic church should be allowable:
yet the church allows it. Philip Melanchton an old friend and master of yours
having to prove the baptism of infants against the Anabaptists, Article 10
was compelled to allege the custom of the universal church, because he had
no express scripture for it. Friar Luther your great idol denied S. Paul's
epistle to the Hebrews, and S. James and S. Iudes epistles to be scripture. If
a man should require you to prove by scripture that those epistles are no
scripture, I think you would be as void of al scripture to confute your
masters assertion, as you would have the world think that we are for the
adoration of the cross.

In your late Synod you made a distinction of the books of scripture. Some ye
call Agiographall, some Apocriphall, some Canonical: but are you or they able
to prove this distinction by any express testimony of scripture? Tu^ble and
toss the Bible, search your wits, ask counsel of the superintendents, and
let us have your resolution. You may study as many years as VValtams Calf went
miles, and prove your self as wise as he, before you find it there. You say:
Fol. 175. b
I saw the scripture direct against me. But how could I see that, seeing the
catholic church by whose only tradition and authority we have received the
scripture is evidently and plainly with me.

Touching the ignorant paynter that drew a cock evil fauoredly, and commanded
his boy, Ibidem. The paincters Cock
to keep the quick cocks away to cover his fault, it could never come in
better time. For you are the ignorant paynters that have drawn an evil favored
cock, that is, a new platte of religion, Promotours sent to the havens to
keep out the catholic books.
depending of heresy and lies. And because certain of our books do lively set
forth the truth, and vnplume the fylthy feathers of your evil favored cock,
you have sent abroad your spies, our promotours, your searchers and your
ministers, that none of the lively cocks should be brought into the realm to
crow against your evil favored painted cock.

Where to shift away the authority of the fathers that speak for the
adoration of the cross, you say, Fol. 175. b
they have ouershotte themselves in terms, I beseeke your mastership tell us,
were those ancient fathers, Athanasius, Chrysostomus, Lactantius, Augustinus,
Paulinus, Damascenus, and the fathers of the sixth general council in
Constantinople, so ignorant that they could not tell how to use their terms?
Were they so unwary of their words, that in a matter of great weight, wherein
if they should ouershote them selves in terms they might train the people to
idolatry, they would speak they knew not what, and give other occasion by
following their guess to roue far from all godlynes? The fathers to wise to
ouershote the^ selves in their terms.
No M. Calf. Their wisdom was greater, and lerning more sounder, than so
fondely to ouershote them selves in terms. But how do you prove this wicked
sclaunder that you lay to their chardge? By Gods evident and plain
commandment? Take heed, you promise no more than you are able to perform.

Calf. Fol. 175. b
Before you bring forth Gods evident, and plain commandment, you say: If I
had proceeded according to the rule of skill, I should have showed what adoration
and woorship is, and then have applied it to the cross. Mart. Every term is
not to be defyned,
As though a man were bound by the fantastical rule of your unskillful skill,
to define every term that falls in talk: and nothing were presupposed to be
known among Christen men. You have talked in your book of God, but in all
your talk where have you defyned what God is? You have talked of the devil,
but where have you defined what the devil is? If you should presuppose nothing
in talk as known, but would be so precise in your unskillful skill, that
nothing should escape vndefyned, when would you make an end of any matter which
you take in hand to debate? Never whiles you live: But seeing the rule of your
unskillful skill does so lead you to define every thing before you can
proceed, and to presuppose that the word of adoration and woorship were not
known among good Christen men, before you made your deductio^ out of the
Hebrewe and Greek, and describe it, by bowing down, prostrating your self, or
by bowing he knee, and putting of the cappe, which you say, can in no sense be
given to an image or to a sensebesse thing, At this time as I am well contented
with the former part touching your explication of adoration and woorshippe:
Even so do I much marvel that you being so often in the court do not forbid
men to put of their cappes to the Queen's Majesty's cloth of estate, which is
both a senseless thing, and a dead creature? Can you that are of so hot a
spirit of reformation, hold your peace, and see such idolatry committed (if
your own rule be true? By M. Calves rule no man may put of his cappe to the
Cloth of estate etc.
) If you were ever served with a privy seal, or stood by when other were
served, I think either you did put of your cappe, or see other that did. If it
be idolatry, why have you done it your self? Why have you not preched against
it? Ca^ you find fault with them that put of their cappes to the cross,
and find none with them that put of their cappes, when they receive the Queen's
Majesty's lettres, which are as senseless as the cross? I pray you good sir
be as favorable master to the cross on which our savior Christ died for us
all, as you are to the cloth of estate or the privy seal, or the Queen's
Majesty's lettres, which are never able to be the instruments whereby any such
benefitt may be wrought unto us.

In the rehearsal of Gods evident and plain commandment out of Exodus, Cap.
20.
I marvel much that you did not rehearse the former part which does utterly
forbidd (as some of you were wo^t to preach) the having of any graue^ woork or
similitude, which is in heaven above or in earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth? Why spooke you not against paynting, imbrodering, and silk
works? peradventure the Queen's Majesty's arrises, noble men's arms, and
gentle men's recognisances, of dragons, egles, owls, horses, fawkons, dogs,
Apes and such like stayed your pen. Or perchance your wives amorours image,
persuaded you to allow the having of such images, and search a gentle
interpretations of Gods plain and evident commandment. If the case stand so,
Gods commandment in Exodus touches not our images.
then let us desire your clarkship with as good reason to search out some
gentle understanding in the second part of the said commandment, at the old
ancient fathers request, who saw right well that all the places that you
allege, against us, touched not the images allowed by the Catholic church,
but are all referred against, the idols of the gentiles. Which being so, reason
would, that you should have proved that the places of scripture which you
alleag, had utterly forbidden the images of Christ and his saints: Then had
they ben to some purpose. But because that passed your capacity, you did as
wisely in omitting it, as you did folishly in alleging scriptures to the to
the purposes they served not.

The images against which the prophets cry Esa. 46. Esa. 2. Number. 22. Osee.
10. Amos. 5. Cap. 7.
The idols of the gentills against whom the prophets do so earnestly write,
are no where found in all scripture to be the images of Christ, and his
saints: But the images of Bell and Nabo, and the images of Molewarpes, and
reremise, and the images of Baal, the images of Moloch, and Remphan, whereof S.
Stephen speaks in the acts. These and such other are the idols, and images
against which the prophets speak: And do not you think M. Calf. that S
Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Epiphanius, Chrysostomus, Damascenus, Cassiodorus,
Euthymius, and other fathers did understand what the prophets meant by the
idols against which they cry, as well as you, or rather better than you? Your
arrogancy is great, yet I think you will not imagine your self able to match
with these men. If you do, we can but lament the arrogancy, and fond opinion
conceived of our own wit, little lerning, and less discretion.

S. Ambro. De obitu Theodos.
S. Ambrose does witness, that Helena lyfted up the cross in the head of
kings, that the cross of Christ should be adored in kings. How like you
this saying of S. Ambrose? Because he said, the cross should be adored, will
you say, he ouershots him self in his terms? S. Augustine.
if you do, what will you say to S. Augustine upon whose authority evil
understood you grownde many of your heresies? He taking of the cross how
honorablye it was placed in the forheads of Christen men, has those words.
There was nothing at that time more intolerable in the flesh, there is nothing
now more glorious in the forhead: what keeps he for his faithful servant
that gave such honor to his punishment? Finally it is not now used amongst
the Romans in punishing the condemned. For where the cross of our lord was
honored men thought that the guilty person should have been honored, Tract. 36.
in Joan. In Psalm. 36
if he were put to death upon the cross. How like you this? S. Augustine
teaches that Christ made his cross honorable and that the Romans honored
it, and forbore the punishing of malefactors upon the cross because the
people for the honor which they did bear unto the cross, were likely for the
cross his sake to honor theaues and murderers, if they were put to death upon
the cross. If you spare him, as I trust you will reverence his age, lerning,
and plentiful graces of God in him, I trust you will be as good M. to S. Hier.
who was somewhat elder, and very well learned in terms, Latin, Greek and
Hebrew, S. Hierom
and not lay to his chardg that he ouershotte him self in terms. He writes
of the grave and sad matrone Paula in this sort. She went about to every
place with so great and fervent desire, that she would not depart from the
first places, In epitaphio Paulae. Pilgrimage.

A cross. Adoration before the cross.


save that she made haste to go to the rest, and she lying prostrate before
the cross, (awake M. Calf.) as though she had seen Christ hanging upon the
cross, she did adore. She having entered into the sepulcher did kiss the stone
of resurrection, and the very place where our saviors body did lie, she
licked, and kyssed with her faithful mouth. Hitherto S. Hierome.

Here you hear of Paula his pilgrimage, from one holy place to another, you
hear there was a cross, and how she lay prostrate before the cross, and
made adoration as though she had seen Christ hanging there before her face.
What will M. Calf. object against these three ancient fathers? Will he call
the^ idolaters? That were to gross. Will he say they ouershotte them selves
in terms, as he said of Chrysostom, Athanase, S. Basile and the rest? That
were to arrogant? What shall be his refuge then, if one say unto him, he may
woorship and honor the cross as these and other holy men did? Forsooth he will
say, avoid Satan. By which you may note how fynely he can apply scripture.
Christ spoke those words to the devil. Scripture finely applied.
And can any wise man think that the cross which S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, and other fathers, whom I mentioned before, would have to be
honored should be so odious to a Christen man, that it should be as great
horror to fall down before it, as it is to fall down before the devil? No
suerly, except it be our sir James, who is not ashamed to say, that the holy
fathers did ouershote them selves in terms, and yet is so blind him self that
he knows not how to use his terms. For writing in prose, Fol. 176. b
he talks of a wooden tree, as though there were such difference of matter in
trees, that unless he had put in that epitheton, we should have imagined that
he had spoken of some horned graff and or leade^ tree. But you may see his
wit.

Now let us mark how wisely he wringeth the scripture that our Savior
alleged against the devil to be understood of the cross: he says: It is
written, Thou shall woorship thy lord thy God, Matt. 4. Calf. Fol. 176. a
and him only shall thowe serve. Now woorshippe and service so jointly do
concur together, that the one can not be without the other. If only we must
serve God, him only we must woorship. It is true sir, what conclude you of
this? That we may not woorship the cross? Mart. By M. Calves rule we must not
honor nor serve our parents. Eccle. 3.
What mean you to imagine such sophistical arguments as these are? I must
honor none but God, whom I must serve, ergo by your wise rule, I must neither
honor my father, mother, nor serve the^. And yet the scripture bids me do
both, and makes the honor of my father and mother agree with the honor of
God without any repugnancie. He that fears God, does honor his parents, and
serve the^ that begatte him, as Lords. Now M. Calf. as the only service that
men owe to God does not repugne against the service that good children owe to
their parents, and as the honor dew to God does not impugn the honor dew
unto our parents, but both may stand: Even so the honor that is dew unto
God, is nothing contrary to the honor that is done unto the cross. If M.
Calves wisdom had proved that there is as great contrariety between Christ
and his cross, as there is between God and the devil, then he might have
concluded his purpose, somewhat likely out of that place of scripture alleged
against the devil. But S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine have leyed
such a beetel in his way, that he shall have a knock in the head like a Calf.
if he attempt it.

If a man would deny that principle of his, that seruise and woorship do so
concur together that one can not be without the other, and require him to
prove it by scripture, council, or doctor, Article. 9.
I think he would be found for all his lusty hot bedlem sprite, as deuoyd
of all authority and reason, as an Ass is to seek of a good amble. Might not
a man lay to his chardg out of his own declaration of adoration and woorship,
I may vvoorship him, whom I do not serve.
that I may bow my knee or put of my cappe to diverse men, whom I purpose
never to serve? And because woorship consists, in part, of bowing the knee or
putti^g of the cappe, prove that seruise and woorship do not so concur
together, but that one may be without the other? The common course of our life
declares it. We must serve God only, I grant: that is we must serve no
other God but hi^, nor any other before hi^, or abowe hi^ or contrary to him.
But he has not proved, God only to be served, and how.
that the cross has been taken of any for God, nor that the adoration and
woorshippe of it, is a thing contrary to the seruise of God: nor shall be able as
long, as S. Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and other holy fathers say the
contrary. This argument being rotten before it came out of the shell, he flees
to another as childishly as though he had forgot the rules of his unskillful
skill. Thus he says.

In the epistle to the Hebrews S. Paul proves Christ more excellent than the
angels, because they woorship Christ. Heb. 1. Fol. 176. a An addition not in
S. Paul
Which I grant: but then he adds upon his own head, but they are not
woorshipped again. For it is not in S. Paul's epistle that the angels are not
woorshipped again. And there he pleyeth a cast of ligier demayne to bleare the
ignorants eyes. If he means, that angels woorshippe Christ, and that Christ
does not woorship the^ again, as in some sense it is true, even so it makes
nothing to his purpose to subvert the adoration of the cross. For what kind
of reasoning call ye this? The angels woorshippe Christ, but Christ does not
worship the^ again, A fine reason.
acknowledging them to be his equals or superiors: Ergo we may not woorship an
angel? where was this sophistry learned? at VValtam belike. And as though he
had made sure work, forth he goes, if angels have not this adoration, what
adoration M. Calf? Mean you that Christ does not adore them? If it be so, then
as it is very true: So is it far from the purpose. If you mean that we must
not exhibit this adoration which is only propre to God to any angel, Angels
not forbidden in S. Paul to be vvoorshipped, as Christian men do vvoorship the^.
that is true, but as far wide from this purpose, as the other. If you mean
that S. Paul says: We ought to give no kind of adoration to angels, that
is false, and no where found in that epistle of S. Paul. Which you must make
good, or else you ca^ not not proceed with this argument against the adoration
of the cross, by taking away the adoration of angels, which is not mentioned
in S. Paul to the He brues. Wherefore you may put that argument in your purse.
It will not follow: If angels have not this adoration, shall a vile stock,
Fol. 176. a
or a cold canckred, corrupt piece of metalle have it? Therefore what talk
you of a vile stock, or a cold, canckred corrupt piece of metal? Our reasoning
is of the adoration of the cross, and not of a vile stock, nor corrupt metal,
be it canckred or cold. Damascene makes a plain difference, between the
matter, be it metal or wood, and the sign of the cross. Why are you so
ignorant to take the one for the other? Lib. 4. ca. 12. de fide.
Why make you such a fond argument: We may not adore the metal nor wood,
ergo we may not adore the sign of the cross? which is in the metal or wood?
The sign of the cross vvoorshipped, and not the matter whereof it is made.
Know your folly by Damascene: We adore, says he, the figure of the
precious and the life working cross, though it be made of another matter, not
woorshipping the matter for God forbid that, but the figure as the sign of
Christ. Hitherto Damascene: by whom you may learn to make a difference between
the wood and the sign, the metal and the figure, and leave to range like a
lavish hounde that knows not his game. The catholics, when the figure is
blurred out, or the image broken, pass as little for the wood and the cold
canckred corrupt metal, as the most spritish puritan and pieuish protestant
that lives.

Act. 10. The fact of S. Peter. lifting up Cornelius
The fact of S. Peter lifting up Cornelius that fell at his feet and
woorshipped him, saying: Rise up, for I my self am a man, makes nothing
against me. For both S. Peter might do that of humility toward Cornelius who
was placed in good authority, giving him to understand, Article 10
that as he saw him that was his master sent of God, little pass for any such
glory of the world, even so he should in the whole trade os his life use
humility, and not esteem the honor and glory that might be given him. August
de praedest. sanct. lib. ^ cap 7. 1. Cor. 4.
Further he might do it to instruct Cornelius, who was but yet very young in
the faith, and had but a little glimpse of it, that he should yield no other
kind of honor to him, than was dew to the minister of God, and faithful
dispenser of God his mysteries, not taking the ministers to be the principal
workers and geuers of grace, but as the delyuerers of those holy mysteries,
which he received at Gods hand. For although S. Peter spoke those words, for
the better instruction of Cornelius (who had already done his adoration both
inwardely in heart, and outwardely in bodily gesture by falling down at his
feet, no doubt without all idolatry by the special aid of God, who would not
suffer him at his first cumming to Christianity to commit idolatry, whose
prayers and alms deeds he had so well allowed before), yet did he never
reprove him for doing that act of adoration, as M. Calf falsely says, nor
ever refused to have the honor, as a thing unlawful, that was dew by the very
saying of our savior Christ unto him as an Apostle. Matt. 10.
For Christ said, he that receaueth you, receaueth me, and he that despises
you despises me. God is honored, God is despised, God is loved, God is
persequuted in his servants. Pri. Reg. 20. 3. Reg 1. David suffered Abigail, and
Natha^ the prophet to adore him.


Further to make the matter more plain, that M. Calf. may see his blindness.
We have examples in the old testament, that Abigail adored David lying
prostrate at his feet, entreating for her husbands pardon. Nathan the prophet
lying groueling on the grownde adored king David also. And if this kind of
adoration had been idolatry, neither would so good a king as David was, praised
of God him self, have suffered Abigail to have fallen flat to the grownde,
neither the Propher Nathan to have adored him. Seeing then this adoration that
Cornelius did, was no idolatry, there is no cause why S. Peter might not have
suffered it to be done unto him as David fuffred it to be done unto him by
Abigail and Nathan the prophet.

Apoc. 19. and 22. The places of the Apocalipse, make not against the adoration
of the cross.
Touching the places of the Apocalypse, where the angel refused to be
woorshipped, when the Evangelist fell down at his feet, if we should follow
the notable declaration of worship and adoration which he made in the beginning
of this Article, the Evangelist had done his adoration, before the Angel did
forbid him. For he says: Cecidi, I fell down, I prostrated my self, before
his feet. By which it apeareth that the adoration was actually done, if by M.
Calves declaration, it consists only in the prostration of the body, bowing
of the knee, or putting of the cappe. And if the adoration was actually done,
gone, and past, how could the angel forbid it? It follows in the text vt
adorarem, that I might adore, ergo notwithstanding the prostration of the
body, and falling down at the angels fete, the adoration was not done, and
so consequently it appears that adoration stands not only in the bowing or
prostrating the body, What vvoorship the angel did forbid the Evangelist.
but may be separated, as this text imports. The angel forbade the Evangelist
to give him woorship, not that worship which was dew unto him as to an angel,
but he would none of that absolute woorship and adoration which is dew to God
only. Therefore he told the Evangelist, who might have been deceived in taking
him to be God him self, and so might have given the adoration dew to God, to
the angel, that he was but a servant of God, as the Evangelist was.

But what of all this? Because angels refused to be adored and woorshipped as
God, shall we refuse to give that honor and woorshippe that may be given to an
angel, or any other creature, as the image that represenreth unto me Christ,
and the cross that leyeth before mine eyes the merits of his passion? By what
reason can M. Calf. make this good? Suerly I know not. If he brings it to
the schools, he shall sooner have the noise of a goose, than praise of a scholar
for it. We may license him like a lord in his own du^gehill, to call the
image of Christ, a foul block, Fol. 176. a b. Blasphemy.
a vile stock, a cold, canckred, corrupt piece of metal, a post forbidden to
be made, accursed to be used, a dumb God, and a dead devil, and use such fine
eloquence, as he has learned of Martin Luther and friar Bale: and of a lusty
courage, Article 9.
and vain singularity to prefer him self, before S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and other fathers of the church, The images of angels,
oxe^, Lions and such like in Salomo^s temple, and the tabercle by the
apoyntment of God. What adoration is given to images.
who commend images and the woorship of them unto us. But until he answer to
the Cherubins that God commanded Moses to make to cover the propitiatory, to
the brazen serpent, to the Lions, oxen and other images in Salomons temple,
which are as far against the commandment, as the crucisix, the cross, and
the image of Christ, I will never acknowledge that the scriptures are against
me. Nay as long as he, and his, do neither answer the places which we bring
out of scriptures, and fathers, nor prove that the whole catholic church has
erred in admitting images into the church, and worshipping them, Dulia, with a
mean and reverent kind of adoration and honor, such as has been given to
creatures, and we commonly give one to another, I will boldly say, and
stoutely affirm that the scriptures are with me: and prove it as need shall
require. but to proceed.

He finds fault with the seven auctorities, which I alleged out of the
fathers and counsels for the adoration of the cross, and in effect says
nothing more than he said before. Wherefore you shall expect no other answer
than I made before: If it may please you to look back to that which went
before, you shall see every one of his cauills to the said places detected.
Where he says that I brought but seven auctorities in all, Fol. 176. b
I must tell his worship that I brought not those seven auctorities only,
because I had no more to bring, The seue^tene auctorities brought by M. Calf
examined.
but because I was loath to cumbre the readers with more auctorities than was
necessary. If the avoiding of tediousnes hinder me not, He may before I make
and end, hear more auctorities perhaps, than will stand with his honesty. He
braggeth hard of seuentene for seven, that my blind ignorance, or wilful
obstinacy may the more apeare, as he says.

And S. Clement is the first which he alleges. S Clement speaks no word
against the cross and images of Saints.
But where does S. Clement speak against the image of Christ, and the cross,
M. Calf. or any other image used in the church? If you bring me not that in
express terms out of S. Clement, or so frame your argument out of his
authority that men may as well see that he spoke against the cross, as he did
against the idols of gentilitie, you shall bring nothing against me and the
Catholics. We condemn and abhor as well as you, all the idols of
gentilitie, which the paynims took to be very Gods, giving that adoration of
supreme dominion unto them, which is due only to God him self, as apereth a
little before, in the same place of S. Clement which you allege. For they
against whom S. Peter speaks, confessed by way of talk, that there was one
God lord of all: but thy would needs have diverse other gods also, that
should have equal honor with him, and rule the world under him, as the
Emperor has diverse, Officers, Lieutenants, Consulls, Tribunes and such like.
Against whom S. Peter reasons by their own example, of the Emperor and his
officers.

You (say quoth he) that God is compared to the Emperor, and that all the
other Gods may be compared to his judges, and other officers: keep the^ the
example of Caesar the Emperor, Lib. 5. recog. S. Peter's talk to the ge^tils.
which your selves have set forth, and know ye, that as it is not laufull to
geaue Caesar's name to any of his judges, officers, and lieutenants, otherwise
as well he that takes it upon him, as they that do give it, shall be put to
death: Even so touching this matter, your duty is to understand, that if any
do give the name of God, to any other besides him, and the other do also take
it upon him, they shall have one condemnation and death much worse than
Caesar's officers. For he that pleyeth the traitor against Caesar, suffers but
temporal death: but be that commits treason against the one only true God,
shall suffer pains eternal. And well worthy because he has shamefully against
alright abused the singular name of God that can be verified but in one:
although this word God, The word God abused te^deth to the injury of God
him self.
be not the name of God, but a word which is given men for the while as it
were, for his name, which not withstanding as I said, where it is spitefully
used, tends to very injury of his very true name. Hitherto S. Clement of S.
Peter's talk. Now M. Calf. you may open your eyes, and see that here is no
word against the cross, against the image of Christ and holy sanctes, but
only against the idols of gentilitie, which the Paynims adored and honored as
very Gods, and said that such were rulers of the world under God.

Their idols had in them selves nor any divine power nor represented any thing
that had any such divine power, or excellency above the common creatures, yea
they were worse tha^ the basest creatures of all, because the devils gave
their oracles out of them to deceive the people. They woorshipped, Apis the
ox, the goat, the serpent, Ibis the foul of Egypt, oynions, The idols of the
gentiles against which S. Clement spoke.
priuies, fyestes, fartes, the ague: and of every one of these they made a God,
and gave the^ no less honor than they should have given to God him self.
Against the honor that is given to these you may bring in S. Cleme^ts
authority: but against the honor that is given to the cross of Christ, at
the which the devils do tremble, against the image of Christ set up, in part,
to condemn the Manichees heresy that denied Christ his incarnation and
humanity, against the picture of our blessed lady his mother and other
saints, against the image of Christ's own face that he gave to Veronica, and
sent to king Abgarus, there is not so much as one word in S. Clement: but this
is there, that this word God is not the very propre name of God. For there is
no one word, nor all the words of honor in all the world able to express
the very propre name of God, but he says: It is given men for the while for
his name: And if it be spitefully abused, it tends to the injury of his true
name.

If then by S. Clement, this word (God) be not the propre name of God, but a
name delyured for the time to the dull capacity of men that are not able to
understand his very true name, and yet the abusing of this word (God) which is
but a sensible word to the ear, as the image is a sensible work to the eye,
tends to the injury of God his true and propre name, why did not M. Calf.
and his cumpanye perceive that the abusing of the cross of Christ, The abusing
of the cross tends to the despite of Christ.
in the image where his body rent and torn for our redemption is represented
unto us, tends as well to the despite of Christ, as the abusing the word
(God) tends to the injury of God his true and propre name? May there be
spite done in words that we hear, and can there be none done in things
subjects to the eye? I think M. Calf. is not so far past al grace, but when
he precheth he puts of his cappe, and the people make courtesy, when he
names the sweet name of Jesus Christ, and yet the name of Jesus that is named
at sermons, or written in books is not Jesus him self, As our ears call upon
us to bow our knees at the name of Jesus So do the eyes at the sight of the
crucifix. Galat. 3.
but his name, and a word that vanishes into the air as soon as it is
spoken. And if we may do honor to the name of Jesus, which is but a sou^de
rebownding in their air, and not Jesus him self, by bowing the knee, and
putting of the cappe, why should we not honor the image of Christ, and sign
of his cross, by which his bitter passion is represented unto our eyes. S.
Paul writing to the Galathians, says, that Christ was painted before their
eyes. For so does Erasmus translate the Greek word, (...) ante depictus,
paincted before, as the word does bear and signify. If then our ears do
call upon us to bow our knees, and adore the name of Jesus, when it is
pronounced, because S. Paul said that every knee should bow in that name,
Philip. 2.
Why should not our eyes call upon us to bow down our knees, and adore the
crucifix and image of Christ, who as S. Paul says is paincted and crucified
before our eyes.

Out of this place of S. Paul, let it be taken howesoeuer M. Calf. will,
either he must say that the crucifix was verily painted before the Galathians
eyes representing the passion and murdering of Christ as lively, as it was in
a manner done maliciously by the Jews, or else S. Paul must mean that they
carried the image of the cross, and how Christ his body was rent and torn
in their minds always. And if it were laufull for them to have the image of
Christ's bitter passion suffered upon the cross, always in their minds as
painted before their eyes, why is it not as laufull to have that image painted
in a fair table to be represented unto our bodily eyes, as it is to carry the
image of Christ's cross in our minds? Speak M. Calf? Answer if you can?
Will you allow the having of the image of Christ's cross within our soul,
where if it be an evil thing, it will do more harm? and will you inhabit the
having of the self same image to be represented to our bodily eyes? Where if
it be evil, it may do you less harm?

The common order of nature planted for the understanding of things by God his
special providence in man, Lerning comes by the senses.
has so his beginning of the senses, especially of the sight and of the
hearing, that no ma should ever understand, or conceive ought in the inward
part of his soul, but the first occasion thereof rises (as Aristotel and
other learned philosophers say) of the very senses. Their intent that take away
sensible things, that move devotion.
And they that go about to take away the sensible things that move men to
devotion by the eyes and the ears, do naught else, but reprove the common
order, that God has planted in man's creation to come to learning, and do the
best they ca^ to make al christian me^ beleaue, they have souls without bodies,
and seem to pass little upon the article of resurection.

Your last injunctions take order that all the people should kneel at the
receiving of the communion after your schismatic order: and yet according to
your doctrine, Kneeling at the communion.
there is no tra^ssubstantiatio^, of the bread and wine into the body and blud
of our savior Christ. To whom do ye kneel? to the bread and wine? that were
idolatry, by your declaration of adoration and worship out of Hebrew and
Greek. Does the bread and wine which you see, put you in mind to kneel to
Jesus Christ? Christen men may kneel before the cross as well as before bred
and wine at the english communion.
If that be your answer, why may not Christian people kneel before the cross,
and thereby be admonished to render their adoration and worship to Jesus Christ,
as you are by bread and wine? Search the crooked corners of your wit M. Calf.
and when you have put of your brazen face let us have a true answer. And seeing
S. Clement talks there of the idols of the gentills, give us a good cause why
you do liken the images that represent the triumphs of Christ and his Saints
unto such idols.

We read in the scripture that holy men, judges, and magistrates, were called
Dij Gods, by participation and resembling God his authority in the execution
of their office. But that the idols of the gentiles or they that were
represented by them, were ever called by that honorable name, to their praise
as the other are, it is no where to be seen. But Dij gentium daemonia, the
Gods of the gentills are devils. VVherfere to conclude concerning this place S.
Clement, we do abhor both the Aegiptia^s and their dumb beasts which they
made their Gods, settling their adoration in them. We defye their ox, their
got, their serpent, their Ibis, their cat, their dog, and all their idols:
and all those that worship the things that never lived, Christen men have
not to do with the images that S. Clement talks of.
making the perfect end and full resting place of their adoration in them: And
if you be ignorant, we tell you that we have nothing to do with those idols
that S. Clement mentions, we do not worship them, we do not adore them, we
do not reverence them. Further we tell you, that it is to childish a practisse,
and folish toye, to bring that against our images, and woorshipping of them
which was spoken of the gentills idols, which they woorshipped as Gods.

Where you bring another place of S. Clement declaring that the devil says
by the mouth of other. We to the woorshippe of the invisible God woorshippe
the visible images. Calf.
And this is most certainly false, for if ye will truly woorship God his image,
ye should being beneficial to man, woorship the true image of man in him, I
tell you as I told you before, that S. Clement speaks thereof the Gentills
idols, Mart.
such as the church never used. Who did ever set up a drawght, a iakes, a
fart, a fyeste, Images of idolatry mentioned by S. Clement.
a cat, a dog, a serpent, an ox or a Calf. to be woorshipped? Such are the
images of idolatry against whom S. Clements place serves, and not the images
of Christ and his saints. Therefore you did well to bid the reader mark, that
S. Clements place proves, that it proceeds of the suggestion of the devil,
that men for Gods honor will woorship, such images: And in mine opinion you
shall do wisely to call upon all those that set their delight upon belly chere,
and make that their God, as some of the Egiptians did, of whom S. Clement
speaks, and have vnleaded many a church and pilled many a poor man, to
maintain that, and have made fine galeries, trymme priuies, and brave iakes
for such purposes as the Egiptia^s did, and tell the^ that S. Clement speaks
against them, for serving so foul a god, or thinking that by honoring such
fair images of such sluttish offices, they honor the invisible God.

Among other things which you keep in England yet not reformed, one is to
take, an oath upon a book. Article 10
Wherein you are very liberal, before you are desired. Swearing a kind of
adoration
Now you know that to swear is a plain act of adoration, whether it be
given by simple contestation, or by execration for the delyuering of some
creature to the maledictio^ of God, if the thing be found otherwise than is
contained in the oath. Here I must ask you, why you do exhibit to God this
high and excellent kind of seruise and adoration, by a material book, which
the printer printed, or the scriuener wrote in paper or parchment? If you may
exhibit the high act of adoration by an oath upon a book, which is a du^be,
visible, and senseless thing, why may not we as well exhibit to Christ the
high act of adoration, and thanks giving for his benefits given us by his
death on the cross, by casting our eyes upon his image, where the dullest man
that is, Adoration may be given to God by sight of an images, as well as by
taking an oath upon a book.
if he be a Christen man may lively see in the twincle of an eye what torments
our savior Christ suffered for us? Have you any better reason to save him from
idolatry that takes an oath upon a dumb visible, and senseless book, than
we can render for him that kneeleth before the crucifix? No. Look what shyft
you can make for the book, the same will we make for the crucifix: look what
defectes you lay to the crucifix, the same we will lay to your book.

S. Clement as hard as in your opinion he makes against images, Lib. 5. recog.
grau^teth in plain terms that we may woorship the image of God in man: and
if we may woorship the true image of God in man, The image of God vvoorshipped
in man.
then I trust you will grant that the true image of God is in man, and that
we may worship that image by some external act of the body, and that the
external act with which we shall worship that image is no idolatry. And if
you grant this, what reason is there why you should not grant, that we
seeing the image of Christ, and his saints, and thereby calling, to
remembrance that they were men, and in the shape of men upon the earth, endued
with the lively image of God, may not with some external act worship them,
and commit no idolatry in worshipping God, and his lively image in them? Let
us have a reason at your next replye. In the mean time the gentle reader may
both understand, that this place of S. Clement makes nothing against the
images of Christ and his cross, and also perceive that your cauillations
against the cross are but vain and folish, and by this sufficiently discried.

The rest of the old fathers which you allege, speak nothing in express
words nor against the cross, nor against the images of holy saints. Nor
there is any thing whereby it may be substantially gathered, that they boore
any such hatred to the cross, as you do bear the world in hand. The images
that they speak against are the idols used of the gentiles, as the place of
Clement of Alexandria does declare, The images against which the sathers
speak.
and not the cross and crucifixe. They were the images of Diana, of Isis,
Pluto, Mercurius, Bacchus, Serapis, Castor, Pollux, Hercules, Osiris,
Ganimedes, Iuppiter, Juno, Cupido, Venus, Saturnus, Neptune, Ceres, Proserpina,
and such like idols. Of these the fathers speak. Master Calf. for his life can
not find one place against the cross and image of Christ, do the best he
ca^. Therefore the words of Clement asking whether they be not monstrous men
that woorshippe stones, Clemens Alexandrinus.
must be understood of those idols, and those Gentills that woorshipped them as
Gods, as apeareth by the words that follow. And though you master Calf.
blinded with pride, and heresy, can not see what the cross is better tha^ a
stone, yet as long as Damascene and other fathers of the church do put so
plain a difference (as I told you before) betwixt the sign and the metal,
the figure and the matter, I trust every good Christen man, will see it to be
much better than a stone, in respect of him whose sign and figure it bears.
As for the stones that Clement speaks of, what they are I have told you
alredye, and whosoever worship such, they are mo^struous in deed. Words
shufled in, that be not in the author. Fol. 177. b
But as for our images, you shall never prove to be such, as long as you live:
and seeing Clement speaks not of them what honesty is there in you to shufle
in these words crosses and crucifixes, among his, where as he has no such
word? What honesty is there in you, that repeti^g those words that follow
corrupted the author and left out some of his words, and where he said:
Adorant autem hij qui deos faciunt, non deos and daemones, They who make goods
do not woorship Gods and devils etc, Why left you out these words, qui deos
faciunt? they that make Gods? why used you such vile corruption? Thought you
that the book should not be conferred, and the place considered?

If you did, we pity your folly and as Clement had compassion upon the
gentills that were so mad as to honor senseless things, with divine honor
dew to God: So have we compassion of your blindness, ignorance, and malice,
that imagine the Christians to give divine honor to senseless things, and
woorship idols as gentills did. As for the places of Irenaeus, Ireneus
Tertullia^.
and Tertullian, they have nothing to your purpose but that which is contained
in the commandment Exodus 20. they are answered in the preface.

The place of S. Cyprian would have expounded it self, S. Cypria^.
if you had not as a false heretic corrupted the place, and left out his
words. For whereas speaki^g against the ge^tills that woorshipped their idols
as Gods, he said, Quid te ad falsos deos humilias et inclinas? why do thou
humble and bow they self to false Gods? you because the simple should not see
that S. Cyprian spoke of those that woorshipped idols, and false images as
Gods, leave them out, and infer your own fancy, that to bow, to kneel,
Fol. 178 b Calf.
to show any sign of reverence to an earthly counterfeict* is contrary to
nature and against the dignity of our creation, and a wicked worship. And if
that be simply true, Mart.
the^ by your doctrine it is contrary to nature, and against the dignity of
our creation, and a wicked woorship, By M. Calves doctrine it is contrary to
nature to shevve any reverence to the cloth of estate etc. Fol. 179. a
to put of our cappes to the cloth of estate: for there is an earthly
counterfeict of a lion, a dragon, a greyhounde, and flower de Luice. Then it is
contrary to nature, and against the dignity of our creation, and a wicked
woorship to show any sign of reverence when we receive the princes lettres or
broad seal. For there is an earthly counterfeict of an horse, and a harnest
man, of a prince of a septer of a swoorde. And if you think it true, preach it
at the court.

Your illation upon Origens words, That whatsoever our mi^des are, our bodies
must not bow to any cross or creature, is as folish as the other. For who but
you would say, we may not worship the idol of Iuppiter, Juno, Venus: Ergo we
may not worship the image of Christ. We may not bow our knees, nor put of our
cappes, to the images of Mercury, Ceres, Proserpina, and such like, Ergo we
may not bow our knees nor put of our cappes to the cross of Christ? May not a
man put of his cappe to his friend, Origin speaks against the ge^tils idols.
humble his body to his better, give reverence to the cloth of estate, bow
the knee to the prince, and kneel at your cu^munio^, whatsoever his mind be?
This is a strange positio^, worthy to be preached at the court. Or if that
place be terrible for so malepert a minister, you may go to the ale benche,
and tell the^ that king David did stark naught when he suffered Abigail to lie
prostrate before him. And if your Eua^gelicall sprite will serve you, tell the^,
the prophet Nathan was an idolatour because he bowed his body to David: tell
them that Jacob that bowed his body to Esau committed idolatry, tell the^
that they that kneel down and ask their fathers blessing, humble their
bodies to the prince, and kneel at the communion do naught. For what soever
our minds are, our bodies must not bow to any cross or creature. As for the
woorshipping that Origin mentions there, we condemn and ever did. And
unless you were maliciously set, you would never allege it. Do you not see
that he speaks there of the gentiles idols, and woorshipping and adoring the^?
And seeing we never had to do, nor ever allowed the^, or any woorship done unto
them, why do you bring his authority in that point against us? If you lack
better stuff hold your peace for shame. Origin speaks there no more against
the cross of Christ, than he does against a Calves. head in a man's body or an
ox tail in an asses face.

Arnobius
The like may said of Arnobius, and all that you bring out of him. For as the
title of his book gives, he speaks all to gether against the gentills, with
whom we have no communion: unless you will compare Christians to gentills and
our images, Fol. 82. a Lib. 8. co^t. gentes.
to their idols: which you ca^ not. Before, in the 3. article, you brought this
place out of Arnobius, Cruces nec colinus nec optamus, we neither woorship
crosses nor wish for them: but if I should deny them to be Arnobius words,
and require proof of them, and authority that Arnobius made eight books
against the Gentills, you would never justify it: But I willl not conte^de
about it. I allow the words, and tell you as Arnobius says, that we
neither worship, nor wish for crosses, in such sort as the Gentiles did. We
make no Gods of them: we acknowledge no divine power in them: we honor them
not as Gods, like as the Gentills did their idols: and therefore in that sense
that Arnobius spoke those words, we say also that we neither worship nor wysh
for crosses.

Where you say that you will deal no further with Arnobius, and affirm, Calf.
that all his eight books contain nothing else but confutation of our image
heresy, and cross shame, In mine opinion, as you do wisely to deal no
further with him, Mart.
because he makes nothing for your purpose: So you lie shamefully, when you
say that his eight books contain nothing else, but the confutatio^ of our
image heresy and cross shame. For first we have no image heresy, nor cross
shame. The doctrine of the cross no heresy
The doctrine of images that we teach is catholic, and good, founded upon
the Prophets and Apostles and Jesus Christ, the corner stone, who is one body
with his spouse the church. And whatsoever he speaks by her mouth, The cross
no shame to Christians.
he speaks in his own person. The cross is no shame of ours, but of
Gentills, heretics and heathens. It is our honor, glory, and triumph. And
we desire to live no longer than we may say with S. Paul: God forbid that I
glory in any thing, but in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ.

As for Lactantius, Lacta^tius.
what opinion he had of the cross of Christ I declared before. This place that
you allege here, speaks of the Gentills that feared them, whose
counterfectes they had in stocks and stones, and could not lift up their eyes
to heaven, and consider the creator of heaven and earth, and lord of all.
Therefore he quarrelled with the^, because they would look to stocks, stones,
and waulles, and not lift up their eyes to hea^^^. And if you knew any such
amongst the Christian, the^^ might you have justly alleged this place of
Lactantius against them, but if you did not, then are you, but an heathenish
quareller against the Christians, and one that could not follow Lactantius
counsel, and lift up your eyes to heaven, and consider how vou are fallen,
from humility to pride, from truth to heresy, from honesty to impudency,
from heaven to hell, from God to the devil. From God by forsaking the unity of
his catholic church, to the devil by furdering his policies, and impugning
the religion of Christ, and his church. In which this saying of Lactantius:
Flecte genu, lignumque crucis venerabile adora, Bow down thy knee and
woorshipp the reverend wood of the cross, shall be admitted when all your
heresies shall have their overthrow, and be condemned with their authors: and
that adoration and worshipp which we give to the sign of the cross shall
stand, when all the woorship of the gentiles idols that Lactantius speaks of
shall be confounded, and the idols of heresy men's imaginations, and fancies
shall be destroyed.

It was neither absurd nor impious for Lacta^tius to counsel the Christians
to bow to the cross.
Wherefore to end with Lactantius, it is neither absurd nor impious (as you say
M. Calf.) to condemn the Gentills for turning their eyes to stocks and
stones, and charging the Christians to bow the knee to the reverend wood of
the cross. For the Gentills rested, their thoughts in their idols and could
not lift their eyes no higher. The Christians lyfted up their hearts to God,
and would not rest there as the Gentiles did, but by that were stirred more
often to fix their minds in heaven. The Gentills feared their idols as though
they had some divine power: The Christians knew the images to be void of
sense, which difference between the Gentills, and Christians, seeing Lactantius
being a profounde learned man knew right well, there is no reason, but that he
might right well condemn the Gentills for turning their eyes to earthly
creatures, and charge the Christians to bow their knees to the sign of the
cross, and yet be neither absurd nor impious.

Athanasius
Concerning Athanasius, what his opinion was for the woorshipping of the cross,
I have also in part declared before. For this present place, Fol. 180. a
where M. Calf. says that, in his sermon co^tra Idola, against idols, he has
nothing more frequent than that such honor to creatures is accursed, I beleaue
it and allow it right well: and confess with Athanasius, that all honor done
to creatures, as Gods, in such sort as the Gentills did honor to their idols
is accursed, abhorred, and detested. But that we Christen me^ do, or ever did
any such honor to creatures, none but Gentills, Turks, and Jews, and such as
favor their religion, and follow accursed, abhorred, and detested heresies,
will ever say: but because we should not think that those sermons of
Athanasius, concern the Gentills idols, Calf. Fol 180. a
and touch not our images, master Calf. will come nere and go to the nature of
the word general adoration. And as one not fully awaked out of his drowsy
dream, Mart.
he lays forth a place of Athanasius against the Arrians, Sermon. 3.
not understanding that the said father both in other places and also in the
same place gives him a foul fall. One creature may adore another after a
sort.
For taking the word Adoration in his nature general, he confesses that one
creature may adore another, when he says that such as are of servile
condition do adore their lords and masters: but Athanasius drifte against the
Arria^s is, to prove that the Angels do not only adore our savior Christ,
for the greter glory they see him in, for then it would follow that all other
inferior creatures would bow down them selves in that kind of adoration to
their superiors, which they do not, but that the Angels do their adoration
to Christ, as unto God who knows no superior nor equal. And in this kind of
adoration, Solius est numinis adorari. Adoration dew to God.
It appartayneth to the only Godhead to be adored. None must be acknoweledged
to have supreme dominion but he, none honored as lord and God but he.

But what makes this against the cross? Is this a wise argument trow you?
Christen men may not make the perfect end, and full resting place of their
adoration in the visible cross, ergo they may in no case put of their cappes,
nor bow their bodies to the cross? or this? God only must be adored as Lord,
and supreme governor of all: Ergo I must not adore my prince, by kneeling unto
her grace, by bowing my body or putting of my cap to her cloth of estate? If
they be naught, you may easily see that you have gained nothing by alleging
Athanasius against the superstition of the Gentills or heresy of the Arrians
to impugn the cross. If Athanasius had taken the cross to be so vile a thing
as he took the idols of the Gentiles, he would never have reported so
honorably of the image of Christ, that Nicomedus made, and Jews crucified in
Berithus as he did. As for his words in his questions to Antiochus I tell you
again, you shall find them there in his sort: Sermon. de imagine. Quest. 39.
Epiphanius
Crucis figuram ex duobus lignis componentes adoramus, we making a figure of
the cross of twoe pieces of wood, do adore it, as I declared before.

The words of Epiphanius which you rehearse after a miserable kind of
ma^gling neither declaring upon what occasion he spoke them, nor to what end he
wrote the^, might be answered in few: to wit, That he condemns those in
that place that forsook the living God, and woorshipped his creatures as God,
and speaks no word against the Christians, who acknowledge him, fear him,
and serve no creature as God, but him, nor woorshippe the image of Christ or
sign of his cross with any such honor as is dew only to him. But that your
ignorance and malice may apere, I will declare the circumstances that you have
omitted, Heretics despisers of our Lady. Lib. 3. To. 2. co^t. Antidocomari.
her. 78.
and show what Epiphanius meant in that place. There were certain heretics
called Antidicomarianites, that bore such malice to the blessed virgin Mary,
that to diminish the honor and glory that God gave her, said: She had carnal
copulation with Joseph after Christ was borne: at the which heresy Epiphanius
marueleth considering therein, how busye men are to seek out things not
necessary, showing therein their great folly in leaving out things necessary,
falling for lack of faith to blasphemy, and to deface as he says the saints
honor: which heresy being no less malicious against the blessed virgin than
yours is, who were wont contemptuously to compare her to a saffron bag,
Epiphanius refuteth by diverse other women, who were never called to that
honor that the blessed virgin was, and yet because they had ones promised to
keep their chastity for Gods sake, they never broke their promise, as diverse
Apostatats, mounkes, friars, and priests do in these days. Virginity vowed
and kept. Lib. 3. To. 2. cont. Collyria. here is. 79.
For if they that promised chastity, kept it unto their dying day, how much
more ought we to beleaue that our blessed Lady, says he, who was called to
greater honor, and kept in her heart all the words that ever Christ spoke,
kept her self a virgin all days of her life?

Another heresy there was which by indiscreet zeal, and unbridled affection
toward the virgin, gave that honor unto her which was neither meet nor
convenient. For certain women took upon them at a solemn time of the year to
set forth a square chayer or chariot, covered with lynen cloth spread abroad,
and there to set forth bread, and make a sacrifice of it, in nomen Mariae, in
the name or honor of Mary, and so afterward all that were present took part of
it. Epiphanius for confutatio^ of this heresy, wherein women took upon the^ to
do sacrifice uses a long process declaring that it was never allowed that
women should do sacrifice nor in the old testament, nor in the new, How ca^
they then be heads of the church?
nor do any ordinary act in the church of God. For if there had been (says
he) any commandment, that a woman should make sacrifice to God, or execute
any ordinary or regular act, or office in the church, it should have been more
reason that Marie mother of Christ, should have done sacrifice to God. But it
pleased God to give her no such authority, no not so much as to baptize. For
then would he have chosen rather to have been baptized of her than of S. John.
These women then in taking upon them authority to sacrifice, did quite
contrary to the law of God, as Epiphanius says, wherein he choketh both
Luthers heresy, Luthers heresy condemned.
and yours that say: Every woman and gyrle are priests, and have as good
authority to do sacrifice as the priest.

Another point, wherein those woomen offended was in that they offered up
sacrifice to the virgin Marie without al consideration, purposing to make her a
God as Epiphanius says in his epistle to the Arabia^s, doing sacrifice unto
her in bread as unto God, which is wicked and abominable, because many were
deceived, not (says he) because the holy saints are cause that these women
are thus deceived, but because their thoughts never quieted them selves, But
would be overthrown by wickdnes. For whether the holy virgin be dead and
buried her sleeping is in honor, her death in chastity, and her crown in
virginity. Or whether she were taken up, as it is written, The sword shall
pass through her soul, her glory is among the Martirs, and her holy body by
whom light spra^ge unto the world in praise, or whether she tarried. For
nothing is impossible to God, who does all things that please him: her end is
known to no man. It is not convenient to worship saints more tha^ is
meet. But we ought to honor their lord. Let the error therefore of the
deceived, and of the deceauers make ones an end. For Marie is neither God, nor
has her body from heaven, but by co^ception wrought by man and woman,
according to promise disposed as Isaac. And no man may offer sacrifice to her
name, for thereby he destroieth his own soul. No sacrifice to be done to the
virgin Mary.
And on the other side no man may rail at her, dishonoring and defacing the
holy virgin, God forbid that, for she never knew carnal copulation neither
after, nor before the birth of our savior. Hitherto Epiphanius.

By these places of this old father, men may know if they list, that neither
he in all respects condemned images, nor the honor given to saints: But in
that only respect that women did sacrifice that had no authority at all, and
that they did offer up sacrifice to the virgin as to God, which kind of
adoration by sacrifice, Epiphanius co^te^t that our Lady be honored.
is dew to none but to God only. Touching the worship to be done to the
virgin, he is well contented that she be honored like a Martyr, and her holy
body to be honored with praises. Now to come to the very point, as he
wllleth al men to refrain railing at the virgin: Even so he wills all men to
refrain the doing of sacrifice unto her appartayning only to God, and
forbids the images that were set up for that sacrifice, or to her, as though
she were God. Whereupon in the same place that M. Calf alleges against
images, he says In very deed the body of Marie was holy, yet for all that it
was no God. In very deed the virgin was a virgin and honored, but not given us
to be adored, The adoration that Epiphanius means.
but she adoring him which was borne of her flesh touching flesh. And in this
kind of adoration by sacrifice Epiphanius might right well proceed with proof
that neither Elias nor, John, nor the virgin, nor the angels are to be adored,
nor any other mortal creature or seen with eye, or conceived in heart, or
expressed by images, if it be advanced to be in degree as high as God. For it
were as badde as the fornication of an harlot, that offreth her self equally to
be abused of many, if any would be so mad as to erect any image of a mortal
creature, that the thing thereby represented, should be adored with sacrifice as
God. This is the right meaning of Epiphanius, nothing against the image of
Christ or any saint, as they are used amongst us, and allowed in the
catholic church, as may apeare by diverse sentences of his, and this among
the rest. Sit in honor Maria, Let Mary be in honor, that is, let Mary be
honored. Let the father, and the son and the holy Ghost be adored, No man
may (after this sort) adore Mary. This mystery is dew only to God, nor the
angels do take such a glorification.

Now (sir) if you had marked these and other places of Epiphanius, and compared
them together, you might sone have seen that it made nothing for your purpose,
to allege this place. For here you may see that a woman can offer up no
sacrifice to God, and yet I think you can not find in all the scripture but
that a woman may offer spiritual and inward sacrifices. Some external
sacrifice.
Therefore it must follow that there is some external sacrifice in the church,
which women may not offer, for lack of authority, which overthrows your
heresy that deny the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood to be offered in
the Mass. No woman ca^ be head or governor of the church.
And where he says that no woman may execute any ordinary office in the
church, there is another of your articles overthrown, that No woman ca^ be
head or supreme governor of the church, be cause she can not speak in the
church, nor execute any regular or ordinary office in the church. But this
liked you nothing, and therefore no marvel if you did not so soon epsy it.

At the second council of Nice, certain heretics alleged Epiphanius against
images. But as the council did answer then, that the book was none of his,
but some Manichees, that abhorred images (as you do) Even so does one
Epiphanius in the same council clear this elder Epiphanius to be none of them
that abhorred images. Touching the later place of Epiphanius which you allege:
Non dominabitur nobis antiquus error, etc. The old error shall not prevail
over us, to leave the lyuig, and worship those things which are made of him,
for they have worshipped the creature besides the creator, and became fools,
VVherin he alludeth to the place of S. Paul's epistle to the Romans, Cap. 1.
the younger Epiphanius answers you plainly, that it is to be understood to
be written against the idols of the Gentiles. For as much as the Apostle speaks
there, of the images of fleing things, of four footed beasts, of serpents,
and creping worms, and not a word against the image of Christ, and his
saints as the Christians use. Which being so, what wisdom was it for you to
cite him, who besides that he proves an external sacrifice, and that no woman
can be head of the church, speaks also for the cross and makes against you?
Epiphanius against M. Calf. De vitis propheta.
For Hieremie the prophet (says he) prophecing of the second cumming of
Christ, says in this manner. Et hoc aduentus indicium ipsius erit, quando
gentes vniuersae ligno supplicabunt. And this shall be a token of his cumming,
when all nations shall make their supplicatio^s to wood. Here of force you must
confess that either all nations do well, to kneel before the the cross, and
making their prayers there to God, or else grant that the cross of wood,
whereunto all nations shall make their supplications, can be no good token of
Christ his coming. Or if the prophet by the wood should mean the matter it
self, then were it an error of gentilitie, from which Christ by coming into
the world delyured al nations. Wherefore the wood which the prophet speaks
of, must needs be the sign of the cross, before which all nations that
woorshippe Christ, make their supplications to God.

S. Ambro.
Where S. Ambrose says of Helena, that: Regem adorauit, non lignum, She
adored the king and not the wood, because it is an error of the Gentills, and
a vanity of the wicked, It is to be understood that she adored not the wood as
the gentiles did: but she did bow her body, and prostrate her self deuoutely
before the cross, and worship that which was represented unto the eyes of her
heart by the cross, that is the king that redeemed us upon the cross. S.
Ambrose means not that it was unlawful either to humble the body, or to
bow the knee, or to put of the cappe, or show such reverence as the
Christians do unto the cross. He says in the same oration, that Helena (as
I said before) lyfted up the cross in the head of kings, vt crux Christi in
regibus adoretur, that the cross of Christ might be adored in kings. He
says: Ferro pedum eius reges inclinantur. Reges adorant, Crux remedium
immortalitatis, Sacramentu^ salutis.
and ^otiniani diuinitatem eius negant? Kings are bowed to the iron of his
feet. Kings do adore it, and do the Fontinians deny his divinity? He
says: Ecce clauus in honor est. Behold the nail is in honor. He says:
Helena hastened to touch, remedium immortalitatis: The remedy of immortality:
she feared to tread upon sacramentum salutis, the sign of our salvation. By
which it is evidently seen, that S. Ambrose allows a kind of adoration,
honor, and reverence to the cross, and nails of Christ, albeit he declares
that Helena did not worship the wood of the cross, as the error of the
Ge^tills, and impiety of the wicked had forced diverse to adore their most
accursed idols. Yea as it apeareth in the acts of the Nicene council, he with
other fathers of the church, has a plain testimony for the adoration of the
cross. For he says: Nunquid quum diuiuitatem and carnem adoramus, Christum
diuidimus? Actio. 2. Nicae. 2. The cross adored and Christ therefore not
divided. S Hierome. The images that he spooke against.
Number qua^do in eo and diuinam imaginem and crucem adoramus, ipsum partimur?
Absit. When we adore the divinity and flesh of Christ, do we divide Christ?
When we adore in him both his divine image, and cross, do we separate him?
God forbid: So that as you see, M. Calf. has no advantage by S. Ambrose: for
he makes clean against him. The next doctor that M. Calf. brings for his
purpose against us, is S Hierome upon the third of Daniel, where how he
deceaueth the readers note I beseeke you. S. Hierome talks there of
Nabuchodonosars Gods, and the golden image that he would have to be adored, and
says: That the woorshippers of God should not adore that image. Further he
says, that the judges and princes of the world, which adore the pillars and
images of Emperors, may understand, that they do that which the three
children refusing to do, pleased God. Then he infers these words that
master Calf. alleges: Notanda est proprietas, etc. The propriety of the
words is to be noted, that Gods are worshipped, and an image adored, whereof
neither is convenient to the servants of God. By which words S. Hierome
declares that it is inco^uenient for the servants of God to worship false
Gods, with the ge^tils and Jews, and the golden image of Nabuchodonasar, with
the judges and princes of the earth. As for the cross and image of Christ or
any saint, No word in S. Hierome against worshipping of the cross.
S. Hierome speaks not so much as one word, neither in that chapter, nor in
the 6. and tenth of Jeremy, to which M. Calf. refers us, to see plainly,
that no woorship nor adoration should be given to so vile a thing as the
cross is.

How vile a thing so ever the cross seems to you, it forces not. That S.
Hierome would have adoration and reverence given unto it, Adoration of the
cross allowed by S. Hierom
and to such earthly things, that put us in remembrance of Christ, and his
saints, he declares upon the 98. Psalm, where he says: There be diverse
opinions about this foot stool, but the prophet takes it here for our
lords body in which the majesty of the Godhead stands, as upon a footstool. Which that it should be adored, the Apostles declared at his ascension
up to heaven, when they returned adoring unto Jerusalem. These also are to be
referred to our Lords cross, Acto. 1.
and to his holy soul. Here S. Hierome takes the foot stool which the
Prophet David willed us to worship to be our Lords body, his cross, and
his soul, and wills them to be adored and worshipped. In another place he
says: I returned by and by as fast as I could to my Bethlehem, Apol. 3. co^t.
Ruff.
adoraui praesepe and incunabula Saluatoris. I adored the maunger, and
swathlinge clothes of our savior. And if he did adore (as he says) the
maunger and poor clothes that Christ was wrapped in, is it likely that he
found fault with them that worshipped the cross on which he was crucified?
Not in wise men's judgments I suppose. But M. Calf. has purchassed a placket to
make them say what he lists, and to turn that to the Christians, which they
spoke against the heathens, paynims, Jews and their idols.

Where S. Augustine speaks against idolaters and the idols of Iuppiter, S.
Augustine.
Juno, Venus, Ceres, Bachus, and not one word against the cross or any image
of Saints, he abuses that holy fathers authority, and makes the simple
believe that he speaks against the cross of Christ, and adoration of it,
which is very fond and vain. But what S. Augustine thought touching the
respective re adoration of the cross, I have declared before. Where M. Calf.
says, Fol. 186. b Chrysostom. Joan. 11.
that Chrysostom in any work of his dissenteh not from the rest, tell him
that as Cayphas saying, It is expedient that one die for the people, said
true, and truer than he was ware: So in this case, he says true, and truer
than him self wist, but not in the sense that he imagines. For Chrysostom in
very deed in all his works dissenteth from none of the fathers in this point.
But as they all condemned the Gentills idols, and wicked worship done unto
them: So does he. As they spoke nothing against the adoration of the cross in
such sense as the Christians adore it: So does he say, not one word. But both
tells us, how Christen men did bless them selves, and woorshippe the
cross, and also gives testimony by his writings that he exhorted his people
to worship the cross.

For the first, talking of a folish custom that some had to dawke their
childrens heads with durte thinking thereby to preserve them from witchraft, he
said, Hom. 12. in 1 ad Corinth. Chrysostom allows the adoration of the
cross.
It is to be lamented that this ignominy, preuayleth amongst them, quicrucem
adorant: who adore the cross, and communicate the secrets mysteries. Therefore
he will led them to leave it, and to teach their children to bless them selves
with the cross. And if the children were not of age able to do it, he willed
the parents to do it for them, For the second, that he exhorted all his people
to worship the cross, it apeareth by his sermon made de veneratione crucis of
the woorshipping of the cross. There he says, Because this day, is appointed
to the woorshipping of the precious cross, come hither, Let us with fear and
desire embrace it. By these plain words out of his commentaries upon. S.
Paul to the Corinthians, and out his sermon translated truly after the Greek
copye, and not after friar Perio^s fancy (as M. Calf. supposes) it is evident
that his people did adore, and worship the cross, and he him self allowed
and commended that adoration and worship which they did unto the cross.

This saying of his. Adorare creaturae, adorari non creaturae, sed domini est.
To adore belongs to a creature: to be adored belongs to no creature, but to
hi^ that is lord of the creature, is true in the sense that Chriso. there
means: for expou^di^g those words of the gospel, Joan. 4.
vos adoratis quod nescitis, etc. Ye woorship that which you know not, but we
worship that which we know, he talks there how both the manner and place
which the jews and gentiles had to worship God, should be altered, and
changed, and god worshipped in spirit and truth. And in that sort no
creature must be worshipped but worship, no creature be adored, but adore his
creator and lord, Cyrillus. Lib. 2. ca. 1
both as Chrisosto. here, and Cyril in his books of treasure and al other
Christen me^ acknowledge. But that absolute and perfect kind of adoration with
which God must be adored, and woorshipped only, will not let but that creatures
may be adored as creatures, otherwise how will M. Calf. justify this
argument, I must adore and worship God only, Ergo I must not humble my body,
put of my cappe, bow my knee nor show any reverence or to my prince, or to
her letters, or to her cloth of estate? If he think that an unlawful argument
then must he confess that neither Chrysostom, nor Cyrill, make any thing for
his purpose. For the adoration which they speak of, is the high and absolute
adoration dew only to God, and not that which one creature may give unto
another. And this answer may suffice for the places which he brings out of S.
Gregory. S Gregory.
For the adoration which he forbideth to be done to images, is the absolute
adoration dew unto God, and no other as you may see by that which I have
declared in the preface, and by his whole epistle to Secundinus. Libr. 7.
epist. 53.
For there it is declared, that he kneeled and prostrated him self before the
image of Christ not as before the divinity it self, but as before an image
that represented Christ, God and man whom he adored.

Alfonsus. Fol 181. a
Now to Alfonsus de Castro: He reports (says M. Calf.) that one Claudius,
bishop of Taurino forbadde al in his jurisdiction the adoration and woorship
of our Lords cross. True it is he does so. But is there all that Alfonsus
says M. Calf? Does he not tell you that the said Claudius was an heretic?
and declare that the prohibiting of adoration to our lords cross was an
heresy? Yes verily, and why did you omit that sir? Could you so subtillie
see the one, and be blind in the other? Could you allege a workman of our
occupation (as you term him) and could you not see the iugler of your own
occupation? That was not well spied of you. Your case is miserable when you must
allege accursed heretics to defend your Eua^gelicall doctrine. Your Claudius
was a wicked heretic, he endeavored to raise not only the heresy against the
worshipping of images, but also, the heresy of Vigilantius, and Eustatius. If
you discredit it, see what Jonas bishop of Orleance has written against him.
My self will say no more, but that it is an evil cause that has no better
pillars to mayntaye it, than canckred heretics, amongst whom Alphonsus
discoursing of heresies reckons M. Calfhils Claudius: and condemns his
inhibiting the people to worship the cross of Christ, to be a wicked heresy,
and so shows his opinion concerning the adoration of the cross, that if M.
Calf. had diligently viewed it, he would never have numbered him amongst such
doctors as prohibit the worshipping of the cross. For there he does plainly
approve it, and in another work of his most evidently declare, that it is the
devil that makes me^ destroy the cross of Christ, Lib 1. cap. 16. de iusta
punitione hereticor.
and images of saints. For talking of certain duties that the devil
requires of some lewd persons that commit them selves unto him, he says:
He that is ready to profess this art, when he is brought before the devil,
must deny his baptism, A precept of the devils to destroy images.
and forsake all the principles of Christ's faith: He must contemn all the
sacraments of the church. He must throw down the cross, and image of the
blessed virgin, and all holy saints, and tredde the^ under his feet, and
beware that he call not upon the name of God nor make the sign of the cross,
because he can not abide it, but flees away at the sight of it. But either M.
reader had not read so far, or else he was not disposed to utter Alfonsus
opinion truly, lest the people should understand that it is a counsel and
precept of the devil to destroy the images of saints, and prohibit me^ to
make the sign of the cross: but there is little sincerity in such dealing. As
for the book which you ascribe to Carolus Magnus, it is but a fond fable, as
I declared before. Your opprobrious words calling the second Nicene council a
doltish conspiracy dissembling at Nice, Fol. 182 a
declare that you are but an arrogant, doltish, and dissembling, fool. For you
venture to condemn that which all the catholic church has allowed to be a
sound, learned, holy, and general council. These seuentene auctorities thus
recited, he draws to a conclusion, and before he enters to it, he says in
his own person: Calf.
Thus have I slightly past over not all that I could recite, but as many as I
though expedient for clear disproufe of your ungodly purpose, Mart.
and where he thought to have a triu^phe, as though the field were wo^ne, he
has lost the victory, and confessed so much against him self as would in any
court in England condemn him of extreme folly. For he says: He has
slightly passed over these authors, M. Calves slighte dealing.
and so in deed he has both slightly, and craftily: nor weighing their
words perfitely, nor considering the circumstances narrowly, nor comparing
what they said in other places wisely, not putting a difference between the
image of Christ and idols of Gentilitie. To slightly God woott, for the weight
of the matter and instruction of the reader. But such slight dealing is not
vnwounte to such slight heretics, that use all the sleightes they can to
deceue the simple people: and certes unless M. Calf. had been wilful in
contempt of antiquity, singular in his own fancy, puffed with vain glory,
impudent in forging of lies, and careless in deceauing the reader, he would
never so slightly have passed over so many fathers, and reported never a one
of their sayings in the true and propre sense that they mea^t. But let it be
his slight.

Why finds he fault with me for acknowledgi^g the adoration and worship
which the fathers gave unto the cross to be an inferior kind of reverence,
such as may be given to creatures? May not every man be best interpreter of his
own meaning? Thought he that when the fathers spoke of the adoration and
worship of the cross, they did not understand what adoration and worship was
dew unto God as creator and lord of al? and what was dew to the cross as a
creature and sign of health unto us al? Thought he because the perfect, and
absolute adoration and worship, by which we serve god only acknowleging hi^ to
be supreme lord, and governor of al, only worthy to be adored in spirit and
truth, that there is no adoration, no worship, no inferior reverence dew
unto creatures, as to our prince, to our parents, to our elders, to the cross
of Christ? If he do, he is foully deceived. For that we may given a kind of
adoration, worship reverence, and honor to creatures by humbling the body,
bowing the knee, putting of the cappe, kyssing and such like, I have declared
both here and in the preface. If M. Calf. knew this, what phre^sie forced him,
to account them bablers, who made their distinction, between (...) and (...)?
that is service dew to God, (...).
and service dew to man? They are both gathred out of scripture, and used of
no worse doctor than S. Augustine, expressing by the one, adoration, worship,
service, and honor dew only to God, Libr. 15. co^t. Faust. Manich. cap. 10.
and lib. 10. Cap 1. de ciuit. Dei. Calf. Fol. 183. b Mart.
and by the other, adoration, worship, service, and honor dew unto man or any
other creatures.

Thought he with a fond and doltish tale of? woe horses put in one stable, to
eat at one rack, and reach to one maunger, not served yet a like, because
they have a bar betwixt them, to scoff out the matter, and irride the holy
fathers that used that distinction? That was not Christian like, nor
ministerlike. No bedlem in his fury could have spoken more irreverently. For
the one part of his tale of two horses set at one manger, he applies, to the
adoration of God, and the other to the adoration of the cross, which
application is blasphemous. But you see how M. Calf. improuing the cross, and
adoration of it, is driven to run to Jews, to Turks, to coniurers, to idols
of Gentills, to heretics, to horses, to stables, to mangers, and rackes, for
defense of his heresy, and yet all will not serve: The distinction of (...)
and (...), stands sound and good, and the maynteners of it as wise and
learned fathers, and not vain and doltish bablers as this our sir James
imagines. And if he had been so wise as he makes him self, he might have seen
it in our common life. We bow our bodies to our prince, we kneel unto her
grace, we put of our cappes to her cloth of estate, and at the receipt of her
broad seal, and this bowing, kneeling, putting of the cappe, is a ki^de of
adoration (as him self proves) out of Greek and Hebrewe, but this adoration is
not done unto the prince as to God, kneeli^g to the prince is no idolatry, M.
Calf, and yet a kind of adoration.
and yet it is a kind of adoration. Wherefore as it must be different from
that which is dew unto God: So it must have a different term to be known by:
and seeing no Latin word does so well express it, as the Greek, our forefathers
have called it (...), and therein in the judgment of all learned men did right
well, and were never co^trolled of any until our young master sir James that
will turn al vpsi down ventred to call them bablers. But that will not serve
his turn, nor save his honesty.

If M. Calf. should tell a simple man, that has but a mean wit, that this is
the image of Christ, he would know by and by that the honor which he uses in
kneeling before the image, may not have his full rest, and principal end in
the image, but in our savior Christ, represented by the image, and not worship
the material image in the church, but Christ, his merciful lord and savior in
heaven. Wherefore to conclude seeing the seuentene authorities that M. Calf.
alleges, speak either against the idols of Gentills, and wicked worship done
unto them as Gods, or of the perfect and absolute adoration which may be given
to no other, but unto God only, and utter not one word against the images of
the Christians, and the inferior adoration, Words used of the fathers to
declare that they vvoorshipped the sign of the cross.
reverence, and woorship that may be given to them as to the creatures of God,
there is no cause why any Christen man should beleaue his seuentene witness,
that speak nothing for him, before the seven that in evident, plain, and
express words, justify this cause that I have in hand, or think that S.
Basile, Athanasius, Chrysostomus, Lactantius, Paulinus, Augustinus, Damascenus,
and the fathers of the sixth general council of Constantinople in Trullo,
using these words, honorare, adorare, venerari, veneratione dignu^ arbitrari,
honorem habere, adorationem tribuere: To honor, to adore, to worship, to
think worthy of woorship, to give honor, to attribute adoration, to declare
a kind of adoration, honor and worship dew unto the cross, were liers and
idolaters, me^ that ouershot the^ selves in terms, or meant better than they
wrote. Because the right woorshipful M. Calf. mounted into the hill of pride,
and set in the seat of singularity, with out all honesty, reason, or
shame, has condemned them for such.

Where he notes these words in the Marge^t of his book, Fol. 183. b
A strange proof that no man may fear idolatry in a papiste, know ye good
readers, that unless that strange wit of his, had been estranged with strange
fancies, and idle toys, he would never have thought the reason that I made for
it to be a strange proof. To the end you may understand it, and his strange
capacity conceive it, I will bring it into a fillogistical argument. It is
this. No man ought to judge evil of another. etc.
No man ought by the Law of God to judge evil by any curious surmises or
suspicious fancies of any Christen man that is baptized, and beleaueth in one
God for doing of any act that is commonly praised and allowred of many as well
done, unless the contrary be proved. But to kneel down in the church before
a cross, to put of our cappes, and bow the body, is an act that is commonly
praised, and allowed of many, videlicet of the whole Catholic church, as well
done: Ergo no man ought to judge evil by any curious surmise, or suspicious
fancy, of a Christen man kneeling before a cross, and think that he
commits idolatry. The Mayor depends of the law of God. Nolite iudicare.
Judge not, Matthew 7.
and you shall not be judged. The Minor is evident by the practisse of the
Catholic church, and proved by authorities brought before out of the old
fathers, Greeks and Latins. The argument is good: ergo the conclusion, that you
may not judge men idolaters by curious surmises, or suspicious fancies until the
contrary be most evidently proved, must needs be true. And if we may not judge
evil of them, then may we not think evil of them. And if we may not think
evil of them, then may we not fear when we see them kneeling before a cross,
and prostrate before the crucifixe that they commit idolatry. For if we be
Christians, and know them to be Christians then must we think of them like
Christians, and not suspect and fear the woorst, like Antichristians. Charitas
non cogitat malum: 1. Cor. 13.
Charity thinks not evil.

Where you labor M. Calf. to prove by force of my argument that all
protestants be good Christians, I wish with all my heart that you would prove
it true in deed, Fol. 184. a
by some fruictes of penance worthy of Christians. But as long as you
continewe in your Apostasy, like obstinate heretics out of the unity of the
church, you will never be able to prove your selves good Christians. Tertullian
makes this argument: Hereticus est, ergo non est Christianus. De prescr.
Tract. de simpl. prae lat. and li. 4. epist 2. Contra Auxent.
He is an heretic, ergo he is no Christian. Saint Cyprian makes the like:
Est segregatus ab Ecclesia: He is separated from the church. Ergo prophanus
est, alienus est, hostis est, therefore he is profane man, he is an alien, he
is an enemy. S. Hilarie makes this argument: Arrianus est, ergo diabolus est.
He is an Arrian, ergo he is a devil. The scripture makes this argument: No^
audit Ecclesia^, ergo est Ethnicus and Publicanus. He hears not the church,
Ergo he is a Heathen and a Publicane. Wherefore for all the fair crakes of
your Christianity, the truth will try, that you be no true Christians and by
consequent have not learned effectually that commandment to have no other God
but him, nor to beleaue in any other God but in him, nor to serve any other God
but him.

Seco^darely where you say, that we are to blame in deming amiss of
protestants, Fol. 184. a We judge not evil of heretics for doing any act
allowed by the church in such sort as they should.
understand I beseeke you, that we judge not evil, nor deem amiss of you,
upon any curious surmises or suspicious fancies, for any act that the
catholic church has allowed, as it has allowed the adoration and worship
of the cross. If we did, we did very evil: but your tongues utter such
blasphemies, your hands, write such heresies, your selves practisse such
vilanies, and show such affinity in your doings with the old canckred,
corrupt, and wormeaten heretics, that all Christian realms not infected with
your corruption, may account you for such. And seeing we have evidence of your
factes, we do not amiss in judging of you, as we do.

Thirdly where you say, that all Christians (by force of my reason) can not
sin, Let us understand of your worship, how this argument holds, Christen
men that have but one God, beleaue but in one God, and serve, but one God,
contynuing Christen men can not commit idolatry, ergo they can not otherwise
sin. And if you find that the gross and wicked idolatry of the Gentills
that woorshipped stocks and stones, which we talk of, was taken away by
Christ, and so taken away that every Christen man knows it, and abhors it,
Idolatry taken away by Christ.
most of all other faults, you may well think that albeit sin may otherwise,
by frailty raygne in us for a time, yet idolatry can not enter into our
hearts, especially that gross idolatry of the Ge^tills to worship stocks and
stones. I told you before that the Christians said to the Jews, thinking that
they would forsake Christ, and woorship Polycarpe, as you do that we will
forsake God and woorshippe stocks and stones: The answer of the Christians to
the Jews. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. histo.
The wreched men know not, that we can never forsake Christ who suffered death
for the salvation of the whole world, nor woorshippe any other. And the same I
tell you now again, and give you the same cause that they did, the Jews:
Quoniam verum Deum and qui solus colendus sit nouerimus, Because we know the
true, God and him who is only to be woorshipped, and love and worship the
martirs, as the disciples of our lord, etc. Wherefore notwithstanding after
Christendom and faith received, many be murderers, theaues, adulterers, and
such enormous sinners, Yet no true Christian that has received the faith, can
fall to the gross idolatry of the Gentills, and forsake the true and living
God, and for him woorship a stock and stone. So that it bideth still for all M.
Calves blind reason, that there ca^ be no fear or mistrust of idolatry in
Christian men adoring and woorshipping the cross. And that they do most
wickedly in affirming us to be idolatours. For they judge of our hearts, they
judge of our minds, they judge of our inward thoughts, which no man can do,
but God only, that knows the secrets of all hearres.

Where you say that God is not contented if a man inwardely Fol. 184. b Calf.
with heart acknowledge him, but also severely does exact, that by our outward
profession we testify to the world, that his disciples we are: for upon none
other condition but this, he does admittevs into the society and fellowship of
his ki^gdom, Mart.
I marvel that you did not remember your positio^ and doctrine of only faith.
For if only faith justifies, and good works help nothing to our
justification and salvation, the^ does not god severely exact that we testify
by outward profession, that we are his disciples. For that we ca^ not do but
by good works. M. Calf. condemns his own doctrine of only faith
And if God admittevs into the feloship and society of his ki^gdome upon no
other condition, but this, that is, except we testify to the world by our
outward profession, (that is by our good works) that we are his disciples
(for to profess Christ is a good work) then unless we do good works we
shall not come into heaven, have we never so much faith, able to transfer
mountains, and force us to give our bodies to the fire to be burnt. Wherefore
my counsel is that seeing God admits us into the feloship and society of
his, kingdom upon none other condition but this, that we testify our faith by
outward profession which can not be but by good works, that you leave your
preching of only faith, and fall to good works. For upon none other
condition God will admit you into the society of his kingdom.

Where you say that there is no true faith before God, but the same engenders
a true confession before men, I ca^ not see to what purpose you bring it
against me in this matter. A man might cast a beetle in your way out of S.
John's gospel, where it is said, Cap. 12. A faith and yet no confession
before men.
Many of the chief rulers believed in him. Here is a true faith: but for the
pharisees they did not confess him that they might not be cast out of their
Synagog. Here is no confession. So you have a true faith, unless you will say
the scripture is false, and yet it engendered no confession before men. But, put
case it be true, what makes it against me? Do not we confess our faith
before men that we profess inwardly to God? Let our works try.

Fol. 185. a
Concerning the two kinds of idolatry which you mention, as I deny them not:
So am I glad to hear that you do confess once in your life that there are
two kinds of honor dew unto God, One spiritual resting in the heart: Two
kinds of idolatry. Two kinds of honor dew unto God.
Another corporal consisting in outward gesture. Certes if there be a
corporal honor dew unto God, we may think that God not withstanding he is a
spirit, is delited when we honor him by the corporal service and gesture of
our body: and that our kneeling, knocking, holdi^g up the hands, yea before
an image, do nothing abase our estate, nor show us to be any others servants
tha^ Jesus Christ that redeemed us, and has brought our holy fathers to his
kingdom in heaven, that kneeled, and held up the hands, yea before images in
his church in earth. But Calf. says that because we kneel we knock, and hold
up the hands before an image, we defile our bodies with sacriledg, Calf. Fol.
185. a.
we attaynt the^ with idolatry, we have the^ subject to the devils service.
Here are bloody words. But where are the scriptures, Mart.
councels, and fathers to prove this? yea where is any reason to make this his
argument good? we kneel we knock, we hold, up our hands before an image: ergo
we defile our bodies with sacrilegd and attaynt them with idolatry, and make
them subject to the devils service? If kneeling, knocking, and holding up the
hands yea before an image, be a sufficient cause, to prove me^ idolaters, how
will he excuse him self, and his brethren that kneel before the prince, kneel
before bred and wine at the communion table, and peradventure upon remorse of
conscience knock their breasts with the publicane? how will he excuse them
that in Cathedral and parish churches, Protestants knele before images, and
creatures.
hold up their hands, and turn up the eye, yea before the images in the
glass windoes, when they here the name of Jesus, or pray with the minister?
How will he excuse the prentises, and dentye dames, that at Poules cross,
hold up their hands, and turn up their face to the element, and when the
precher talking against the papists, says, the Lord confound them, answer
Amen? They kneel before creatures, they hold up their hands before images,
they lift up their eyes to wards the sun and elemente: and if M. Calves.
sophistry be true, they delfie their bodies with sacriledg, they attaynt them
with idolatry, they have them subject to the devils service.

The excuse that M. Calf. makes for his brethren serves for the Catholics.
If he excuse his brethren from gross idolatry, because their intent is good,
and minds are in heaven, although their bodies bow in earth, the same excuse
shall serve for us. Four our intent is good: our minds are in heaven with God:
our knees bow to him: our hands are lifted up to him, our breasts are knock
to testify a compunctio^ of our heart, for offending him, and to stir us to
more devotion, and sorrow for our sins. We set not our adoration in the
image: but in the represented by the image. We adore not the image, as it is
an earthly thing, but we adore it, for that it represents unto us Christ or
his saints.

Further, where M. Calf. says, that God his eternal will, requires, and
reason conuinceth that we with bodily service should glorify and honor him,
and affirms corporal honor to consiste in outward gesture, Fol. 185. a
either he must acknowledge, that God is glorified and honored by kneeling,
knocking holding up the hands, yea if it be before images (for wheresoever any
kneel, knock, or hold up the hands, he must do it before some visible
creature, for the which he may be as well suspected of idolatry, as for
kneling, knocking or holding up the hands, before an image), Or else he must
declare in what other outward gesture the corporal honor, wherewith we must
glorify God, does consiste. For some there must needs be, and few besides
these he will find that shall like him.

Fol 185. a Outvvard things condemned by protestants.
Outward ceremonies he calls masking and external pomp. Comely apparel is
compted the rags of Rome, and God thought to be so delited in brood hattes,
turkey gowndes, rownde cappes, long beardes, polde heads, barreld breaches,
pinckt buskins, and courtlike ruffes, that it is an high offense to forsake
them, and obey the prince and Metropolitan that have commanded them to be no
more used of the ministry. Fasting from meats to punish the body is little
esteemed: chastity is thought impossible: and the vowing of it an ordinance of
the devil: the setting up of images before our bodily eyes, to stir the
mind to remember Christ, is an heathnish obserua^ce, praying is lip labor,
rising at midnight, voluntary, beggerye, going in vile, and base apparel,
visiting holy places, going on pelgrimage, be ordinances of the devil: becking,
bowi^g, nodding, and such like, tend to the observance of some part of the
law, as he says, and so by their ordring of the matter, we shall have little
outward gesture left for the bodily honor of God.

To disprove our kneeling and bowing before the cross: M. Fol. 185. b
Calf. says, God to express the peculiar note of his faithful servants,
says of them, that they bowed not the knee to Baal. But what is this to the
cross? Have I not showed a plain difference between, the cross and images of
the Christians and Baal, and other such idols of the Gentills? Do not the
doctors of the church allow the one, and cry out upon the other? If he could
cite any such sentence out of any catholic writer, that allows the kneeling
before Baal, as I have for kneeling before the cross, he might match the
cross and Baal together, but he can not, nor all his, be their malice never so
great. He says: it is the peculiar note of Gods servants, not to bow their
knee to Baal. If he means the idol that the scripture calls Baal, how many
thieves, murderers whoormou^gers, extorsioners, A mad peculiar note to know
a Christian.
usurers, co^iurers, sorcerers, heretics, harlottes, church robbers,
poysoners, and Apostatats are there among you that never kneeled to that idol
Baal? And yet if your rule be true, that not to bow the knee to Baal, be the
peculiar note, that God expresses to be the mark of his faithful seaua^ts,
all those that I mentioned before, by your peculiar note must be taken for Gods
faithful servants. For they never bowed their knees to Baal. And then have
you done them wrong to punish them: But deceive not your self, and the simple
M. Calf. It is one thing to be a note of Gods servants, and another to be the
peculiar note of Gods faithful servants. The peculiar note of Gods faithful
consists not altogether in negatiues, as this does. It has some
affirmatiues, but your negative religion must stand upon negatiues, and deny
you to have any peculiar note of Gods faithful servants.

M. Calves rule to discern an idolater.
By our capping, knocking, kneeling, and other outward gesture, and adoration,
he makes a sure rule to discern a mere idolater. Will he then never give us
leave to put of our cappes, to knock, to bow, to kneel? Or is it possible for
us in any open or secret place to show any kind of adoration by like gesture,
though there be no cross, nor image before us? If it be possible where there
is no image, why should it not be possible where there is an image?

If the curious heretics will suspect evil, they may say, that men kneling in
their naked churches, at the communion table, kneel, bow, and cappe, to the
bread and wine, to the walls, to the glase windoes, to the forms, to the
tables, to the sun, to the moon, and practice M. Calves rule, to discern and
try them mere idolaters. Did M. Calf. never put of his cappe, kneel down
upon the grownde, and ask his fathers blessing? If he did, shall we by his
own rule discern him and try him a mere idolater? I would feign learn his
answer.

Esa. 45.
Again, every man puts of his cappe, when he takes an oath upon a book. And
the taking of an oath rightly, upon a book is an high adoration of God, as
apeareth by his own words set before, in the place of Esai, which he him self
alleges: Viuo ego, mihi flectetur omne genu, and omnis lingua iurabit mihi. I
live says the Lord. Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear
to me. And if swearing be taken by the prophet Esai, to be as high an
adoration of God, as kneeling is, why does he and his brethren suffer the
people rather to swear upon a book with their capps in their hands, which is
a corporal thing, subject to many casualties of corruption, than to kneel
before the cross in doing of their adoration to God? Let him answer if he can.

Fol. 185. b A lie.
But I will have neither good nor badde adjudged by gesture, quoth M. Calf.
Either let him tell me where I say so, or I will say, though it be to the
derogation of his honorable person, that he lies, I never said it, nor was of
any other mind, nor in writi^g nor in saying, but that he that would kneel
and do his adoration to the idol of Baal, Iuppiter, Venus, Juno, or any such
rather than to our savior Christ, before his cross, might by that external
act and outward gesture be discerned to be an idolater. The doing of our
adoration to Christ before the cross, is not of that nature, and therefore the
thing being lawful, you do but show your suspicious head, and malicious
nature to judge any that does it, a mere idolater. My saying was that there
could be no fear or mystrust of idolatry in Christian men worshipping and
adoring the cross. And when I spoke of Christen men, I meant such, as love
God, No fear of idolatry in true Christen men.
serve God and woorship him in spirit and truth, as other Christen men do.
And these you can not discern to be idolaters by their kneeling, knocki^g,
cappi^g, bowi^g, or any such outward gesture. Id potes quod iure potes, you ca^
do that which you may do by the law. And that which you may not do by the
law, you can not do. Wherefore seeing Gods law does forbid you to judge of
other, as long as they do that which is laufull, and do as other Christian
men do, and have done before them, you can not judge them to be idolaters by any
outward gesture and act of theirs.

Twoe excuses you make for us of very goodwill no doubt: one, Calf. Fol. 185. b
A lie. Fol. 186 a Mart.
that we know the image or Cross to be but a piece of metal. etc. Another
that we affirm that an image or a cross is nothing. But where is the license,
where is the proxye that auctorised you to make those excuses for us? show
your mandatu^ or if you ca^ not, show us how it ca^ stand that the cross can
be a piece of metal, and yet be nothing? Is a piece of metal nothing? Ca^ me^
bye and sell nothing? Metal is bought and sold, and if the cross metal were
nothing, how were the poor goldsmithes deceived that bought many a silver
cross? Did they bye nothing? and give great sums of money for nothing? Look
out those bedle^s I beseeke you, that say, a cross is nothing: No bedle^
says, A cross is nothing.
we never told you that a cross is nothing nor ever will. You would gladly make
us say of the cross, as S. Pauld said in his own person, and not in the
person of the Cori^th. (as you say) of an idol, Scimus quia idolu^ nihil est,
we know that an idol is nothing. Because as Origin says, Orig. ho. 8. in 20.
Genes.
it represents nothing that ever was or shall be in nature, as a horse head
joined to a Man's arms, and a snakes tail in one body or such like. But no
man without horrible blasphemy can say so of the cross M. Calf. It
represents the passion of Christ that was some what, truly done here in
earth. It represents Christ that had a true, and natural body, unless you
will be come a Manichee, and say there was never no such in nature as Christ was:
and therefore you can not wrest S. Paul's place to prove your purpose, nor match
it with the sacrifices that were done to idols, No Christian so simple but
knovveth what is meant by the cross.
as you would gladly. But it passes your skill, nor all the wit in your head
is able to prove that any Christen man is so simple that he will deem any
great virtue to be in the bare sign considered as, a piece of wood or metal
not withstanding he sees wise men give adoration unto it. God be thanked the
people are sufficiently instructed to know a difference between an image and
the represented by the image, between the cross, and the crucified. Yea I
beleaue there be none that have mean natural wits, that will think as you
imagine, or have such a fiction that if the body called the heart unto
account, A fictio^ of M. Calves. Fol. 186. a
the heart should be condemned of misgouerneme^t in the chau^cerie. For the
heart calls the body to account, and sits in judgment of his doings, as
the worthier and excelle^ter part in man, and conde^neth the body of
disobedience. As for the body it has no jurisdiction, nor superiority over
the heart, and therefore ca^ not call the heart to an account. If you have such
affia^ce in the cause that you think the heart should be condemned by the
body of misgouerneme^t in the chau^cery, I beseke you propou^de these
questions to the learned of that court: Questions to be propounded by M. Calf in
the chauncery.
whether the body gouerth the heart, or the heart governs the body. Ite^,
whether the body calls the heart to an account, or the heart calls the
body to an account. Ite^ whether, the body condemns the heart, or the heart
conde^neth the body. And when you have their resolutions, try further whether
the evidence of a Christen ma^s fact, kneling, knocking, holding up his hands
in the church, or else where, yea before the cross, or any other image, make as
you say, a sufficient probatio^ of idolatry, and is to good a witness of a
misdemeaning mind.

Again for your further instruction, learn how this argument holds. Christen
men kneel, knock, and hold up their hands in churches before the cross of
Christ, and image of his saints: ergo they are idolaters, and have
misdemeaning minds. If by lerning, and conscience it be examined in the
chauncerie and found to be full of ignorance and folly, then may you think
your self to be an ignorant fool for talking so absurdely and judging so
rashly. In king Ezechias matter if I had been advocate to impugn his deed, for
breaking the brazen serpent, Of Ezechias fact breaking the brazen serpent.
I would never have tried the case of injustice against him. I would never have
disallowed his doing. For Ezechias was able to make just proof of a crime. He
was able to convince them of idolatry both by their deeds, and also by their
own words. The scripture says: 4. Reg. 18.
The people burnt incense unto the brazen serpent until that present time.
Which God had forbidden, they made them selves images, woods, groves, an did
sacrifice after the manner of the Gentills, feceruntque verba pessima
irritantes dominum, 4. Reg. 17
and they spoke most wicked words, provoking God: and that not privily, but
verbis no^ tectis, in plain and evident words. They were so prone to
idolatry, that they worshipped the idols of the paynimes, and kept it not
pryuie in heart, but said openly: Sequamur deos alienos, Let us follow
strange Gods: Hij sunt Dij tui Israel. These are thy gods o Israel: And by this
you may understand that Ezechias had manifest proof of their idolatry, both
by word and deed, and seeing he saw so much evidence of their wickedness, and
had besides this, the secret instruction of God, that he should not fear to
break that brazen serpent, there needs no lawier to defend his fact: It
defends it self sufficiently.

Marry as for you (sir) what like evidence have you of any fact or idolatrous
deed in any christian? No evidence of any idolatrous fact in true Christians.
Who did ever burn ince^se to an image, as unto God? Who ever said:
Sequamur deos alienos? Let us follow strange Gods? Who ever said to any
cross, crucifix, or image, Ecce dij tui Israel? Behold thy Gods o Israel?
Speak, thowe accuser of thy brethren, thowe condemner of the Christians,
thowe iudger of other men's servants. Speak for shame. What Christian ever
beleaued so? Either make an instance, or we will condemn the for this rash
judgment, and misdeming of Christians, and say that thowe do, use the fact
of Ezechias to no purpose against us.

Daniels co^panio^s.
Touching Daniels companions, if they had feed you, or me, or any advocate
besides, whatsoever you or any other could say for them, they should have been
accused of idolatry, If they had bowed their knee, to the image, which the
king commanded them to worship. For it was a mere wicked idol, taken and
reputed for God, and worshipped for God. To such no man boweth the knee, but
with suspision of idolatry. But that the cross or crucifixe is, or has been
taken, for such, and as unlawful to be worshipped, as that was, you should
first have proved, and the^ triu^phed: but because you knew your weakness in
that behalf, you use a common sophistication called, Petitio principij, and
like a folish sophister you presuppose, that to be proved, which you were never
able to prove, nor shall be as long as scriptures, counsels, fathers, reason,
and common sense shall be of any authority with men. To proceed, I said.

When you see men praying, in my poor judgment it is a good consequent to
say: They be Christen men. Therefore they serve God in spirit and truth: Calf.
Fol. 186. b
This is a poor judgment, quoth M. Calf. that because god is worshipped in
spirit and in truth therefore me^ falling before a piece of wood, knocking the
breast, and holding up the hands, may not in any wise be thought idolaters.
Mart.
But how poor his judgment and honesty also is, judge, I beseeke you. I
talked of men that were baptized in Christ, and beleaued in God, and served him
in spirit and truth, and said, whenever they pray, wheresoever they kneel,
whatsoever gestures they use, they give al honor and praise to god. Now
comes M. Calf. and speaks indefinitely of me^, which may be referred to
Heathens, Pagans, Turks, infidels, and such like as well as to Christians, and
because men, that is to say some men, as Turks, Jews, Heathe^s, Pagans,
infidels, may be judged to be idolaters by kneeling, knocking, or holding up
their hands to any of their idols, he concludes against us, that Christen men
may for like gesture before the cross of Christ and his image, be adjudged for
such. But that is a vile furmise and most wicked suspicion contrary to the
commandment of God, saying, judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Wherefore
because M. A vile furmise and wicked suspicion.
Calf. takes va^tage of that which I spoke in way of humility, I will now
therefore stoutely say unto him, sir, when you see me^, that is to say, men that
are baptized, me^ that believe in god, praying, yea before any image, and
holding up their hands and knocking their bereasts, it is a good co^seque^t to
say: A good Co^seque^t
They be Christian men, ergo they serve God in spirit and truth: and we may not
judge the contrary. For we can not enter into their hearts, and minds where
God is served. We can not co^de^ne the^ for their outward gestures by which
they give their corporal honor to God. Try this in the court of Chauncery,
where conscience is examined, where you think the body will co^de^ne the heart
of misgouernement. And if it be not found a good argument, return it to me,
and I will justify it. In the mean time we tell you, that wicked surmises and
vain suspicions are contrary to the gospel. Further we never sought by Roodes
and images to plant any opinion of holiness and divinity to rest in dead
things. But as we have known God, so have we glorified him, so have we ben
thankeful unto him, and not become vain in our imaginatio^s, we have not had
our hearts full of darkness, concerning the knoweledg of the only true, and
almightye God. The adoration of the cross stands with the glory of God.
We have not given the glory of his name to other. The worship and adoration
which we exact to be given to the cross, stands with the glory of his
name, as well as your kneeling at the communion table, your putting of your
cappe to the cloth of estate, your vayling the bo^net to the princes lettres,
your bowi^g your bodies to the Queen's majesty, your kissing of the book when
you take an oath, and such reuere^ces that may be done to creatures stand with
the glory of God. Wherefore in chardging us with idolatry, or any dishonor
to God in this behalf, you show more malice than reason, and declare that your
tongue is more sclaunderous, than your heart is wise.

Calf. Fol 187. a
Drawing toward an end, you say: Thus have I answered your ten Articles using
more words in disprouf of them, than the cause requires, or any man of
indifferency, would look for at my hands. Mart.
But how well you have answered, let the indifferent that read this
examination of your answer judge sincerely. In deed I acknowledge that you have
used more words in disproufe of them, tha^ the cause requires or any man of
indifferency would look for at your hands. For the cause being a most certane
and undoubted truth, such as has continued in all ages amongst Christen men,
ever since the Apostles time, all faithful men that love the cross of
Christ should embrace the sign of their salvation, and neither revile it nor
blasphemously abuse it, nor utter any words to the disproufe of it. No man of
indifferency looked for at your hands, that you should liken the cross of
Christ, to a gallows, to the helmet of hell, and to the coniurers Mace, No man
of indifferency looked, No man of indifferency looked for such stuff of M. Calf.
that you should call it, a Magical inchauntement, am heathnish observance, a
superstition of gentills, or conquest against Christians, No man of
indiffere^cie looked that you should say: it was a dumb God, a dead devil, a
scholemaster of error, and impiety, and God in the Roodelofte. No man of
indifferency looked that you should so falsely wrest and corrupt the
scriptures, so untruly allege, and mangle the fathers, so fondly reiecte and
contemn the ancient doctors, so maliciously report of holy saints,
bisshops, Emperors, and empresses, and so conremptuosly condemn and abhor
the general counsels, and prefer an assemble of most wicked and accursed
heretics before them. No man of indifferency looked for so many extrauagant
and idle discourses, so many impudent blasphemous, and sclaunderous lies, so
many false allegations, so many evil translations, and so many foolish
contradictions, as you have vttred in this your answer as shall particularly
hereafter apeare.

And because you will co^tynewe like your self, eue^ in the very end you make
an impudent lie to help your credit. For you say, An impudent lie. Calf. Fol
187. a
that you have turned over leaf by lease, and perused each line and word
that had any reason in it, annexing a sufficient and the same abundant
confutation of it. Which is most false. Mart.
As for the sufficiency of your co^futation, Let the readers judge. As for the
turning over of leaf by leaf, and perusing each word that had any reason in
it, Well nigh thirthy places vnansvverd.
it shall apeare that you have omitted well nigh thirtye places alleged out of
Clement, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Cornelius, Melchiades, Origin, Chrysostom,
Cyrill, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, S. Ambrose, S. August. S. Hierome,
Eusebius, Leo and Euthymius, who were learned men and like to have reason in
their sayings, and annexed no confutation unto them at all, much less any that
was sufficient and abundant.

My conclusion in deed you deal not withal, I blame you not. It is to hard
meat your for weak teethe. If it be but an heap of lies and sclaunders (as
you say) it had been more for your honesty to answer them, My conclusion not
touched.
than with silence to pass the^ over. But you saw more weight and pith in it,
than you and all yours are able to improve with like authority or reason. And
therefore you thought it best to answer with silence. But that silence we take
for confession. For whosoever keeps silence when he should speak, the matter
whereto he should answer tending to his prejudice or hurt, seems to consent.

Thus have I examined the chief points and effect of your answer, to the
treatise of the cross, and so discovered your corruptions, errors, and
falsities, that each man may see the weakness of your cause, and perceive
manifestly that the cause which I took in hand stands too fast to be battred
with your feeble assaults. Wherefore I desire the gentle reader to do no more
but read and regard, and judge indifferently, and beware of these deceithfull
workmen, and lying lips. And whereas M. Calf. has determined if his slight
dealing and shameless lies should be detected by me, and set in print to the
vie we of the world, to contemn such a lewd adversary, Fol. 187. b
and give place to other that with more freedom of speech, and derogation to
their persons might answer accordingly, my request is, that some friend of his
tell him politikely, that, seeing he sustayneth such and honorable personage, it
shall be great derogatio^ to his person to give over this quarrel to another
that has neither such impudency to deny the aun^^nt fathers, nor such
immodestie to abhor general counsels, nor such unhonesty to falsify and
wreast the scriptures, nor such sleightes to abuse the doctors, nor such
inventions to shyft away truths, nor such gloses to color lies, nor such
sclaunderous words to rail against bishops, princes, and saints, nor such
vilanous terms to inueigh against Christ's church and his sacraments. For if
it be not workemanly done, it shall be great derogation to his person. But seeing
he has determined to contemn me as a lewd adversary, and for fear lest it
should be a derogation to his person, says he will not answer that which I
shall put in print, I require him to auouche that which he him self has
setfoorth in print, and prove those his parodoxes, positions and assertions, by
the plain and undoubted word of God, by the true and godly fathers of the
church, and by laufull counsels, provincial or general, which I have
gathered out of his book, and set in the beginning of this book, or else being
convinced with the force of truth, acknowledge them to be impious and
blasphemous, contrary to the plain and undoubted word of God, contrary to the
true and holy fathers of the church, contrary to the determination of
prouincial and general counsels, and confess his ouersights, errors, and
heresies, and in humility of heart and meakenes of spirit, embrace the truth,
and return to the unity of Christ's catholic church, and do the worthy
fruictes of penance for his wicked abominations, and horrible blasphemies,
which God grant, Amen.

TO M. CALFILL.
Non meliora meis, sed quae pro tempore nosti,
Impius impertis: exegi, hijs vtere mecum.


