A Fine Companion. Acted before the King and Queen at WHITE HALL, And sundry
times with great applause at the private House in SALISBVRY Court, By the
Prince his Servants.

Written by SHAKERLEY MARMYON.

-- lectori credere mallem,
Quam spectatoris fastidia far superbi.
Hor: LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for Richard Meighen, next to the Middle
Temple gate in Fleetstreet. 1633.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, and his Worthy Kinseman in all respects, Sir RALPH DVTTON
SIR,
We have great cause to triumph over the iniquity of the times, that in all
ages there wants not a succession of some candid Dispositions, who (in spite
of malice and ignorance) dare countenance Poetry, and the Professors. How such
an excelcellent, and divine part of Humanity should fall under the least
contempt, or arm the petulancy of Writers to declaime against her, I know not:
but I guess the reason, that having their souls darkened, and rejoicing in
their errors, are offended at the luster of those Arts that would enlighten
them. But the Fates have not so ill befriended our studies, as to expose them
to contempt, without the protection of such, whose ability of judgment can
both wipe off all aspersions, and dignifie desert. Amongst the worthy Patrons
of Learning, that can best vindicate her worth, you are not the least; And
because custom and respect to noble friends, gives a privilege to dedicate
our Endeavors where they may find admittance, I have made bold to present this
piece unto you. It has often pleased, and without intermission. If you shall
second that applause by your kind favor, it shall not aspire to be more
honored.

By him that is yours in all observance, SHACK; MARMYON.

Dramatis Personae.
Aurelio, An elder Brother dis-inherited. Careless, His Brother, the Fine
Companion. Dotario, An old Gentleman, their Uncle. Fido, Their Friend. Spruse,
A young Gallant. Littlegood, An Usurer. Fondling, His wife. Lackwit, Their
Son. Valeria, Their Daughter. Aemilia, Their Daughter. Crotchet, A Clown.
Whibble, A Captain. Stern, A Lieutenant. Tailor. Sempster. Haberdasher.
Hostess. 4. Wenches. Fiddlers. Boy. Attendants.
PROLOGVE.
Critic, Author. Crit. ARe you the Author of this Play?


Auth. What then?


Crit. Out of this Poetry, I wonder what
You do with this Disease, a seed of Vipers
Spawnd in Parnassus poole, whom the world frowns on,
And here you vent your poison on the Stage.

Auth. What say you sir?


Crit. Oh you are deaf to all
Sounds, but a Plaudite, and yet you may
Remember, if you please, what entertainment
Some of your Tribe have had, that have took pains
To be contemned, and laughed at by the Vulgar,
And then ascribed it to their ignorance.
I should be loath to see you move their spleenes
With no better success, and then with some
Commendatory Epistles fly to the Press,
To vindicate your credit.

Aut. What if I do?


Crit. By my consent I Will have you
Banished the Stage, proscribed, and interdicted
Castalian water, and Poetical fire.

Aut. In that you wrong th'approved judgments of
This noble Auditory, who like a Sphere
Moved by a strong Intelligence, sit round
To crown our Infant Muse, whose caelestiall
Applause, she heard at her first entrance.

Crit. This way of Poetry has deceived many;
For it is not every one that writes a Verse,
Has washed his mouth in Helicon, or slept
On the two topt Parnassus, there is great difference
Betwixt him, that shall write a lawful Poem,
And one that makes a paper of loose Verses,
To court his looser Mistress; there is much air
Required to lift up the Dircaean Swanne,
When he shall print his tracts among the clouds:
Not as your ignorant Poetasters use,
In spite of Phoebus, without Art or Learning,
T'usurpe the Stage, and touch with impure hands,
The lofty Buskin, and the Comic style.

Aut. This I confess; but when the prosperous gale
Of their auspicious breath shall fill our sails,
And make our high-borne thoughts swell like a tide:
And when our bolder Muse shall put on Buskins,
And clap on her Talaria on her feet,
Then like swift Mercury, she may aspire
To a sublimer Region, with that force,
And bear that weighty burden on her wings,
That she shall fear to crack her pincons.

Crit. It Is this licentious generation
Of Poets, trouble the peace of the whole Town;
A Constable cannot get his Maid with child,
A Baker nor a Scrivener loose his cares,
Nor a Justice of Peace share with his Clerk;
A Lord cannot walk drunk with a torch before him,
A Gallant cannot be sufferd to pawne's Brecches,
Or leave his cloak behind him at a Tavern,
But you must jerke him for it.

Auth. In all ages
It has been ever free for Comic Writers,
If there were any that were infamous,
For lust, ambition, or avarice,
To brand them with great liberty, though I
Disclaim the privilege; no impure language,
As Stygian mud stird up with Charons oar,
Never belcht so foul an air, shall ever mix
With our ingenious mirth, nor need we fear,
Any their foul aspersions; whilst the wise,
Sit to control and judge, in whose clear eyes,
As we deserve, we look to stand or fall,
Passing prophaner people, and leave all
To be determined as you censure. Boy
Go and subscribe it quickly what I say.

Crit. He Is grown contemptuous, and flings away
In a rapture; for this, when I am in,
If I cannot laughed at's play, I Will laugh at him.

A Fine Companion.
ACTVS I.
SCENA I.
Aurelie, Valeria. Aur. It Is true indeed, our love is like our life,
There Is no man blessed in either, till his end.
And he whom Fate points to that happiness,
A thousand passions mock his doubtful hopes,
Till Virtue that can never be extinct,
Shall rise above their rage, and call down Hymen,
Attended with as many several joys,
To triumph in the circle of our brow.

Val. But that the fatal union of our hearts,
Should breed such issues of extremity,
In both our fortunes, yet the greatest grief
I feel, is in your wrongs, not in my own.

Aur. Nere think of it; what though my father made me
A stranger to his loins, and cut me off
From my inheritance, because he thought me
A rival in his love, that fatal love
Whose jealousy prevayl'd so in a Woer,
That it killed al affection in a father.
These ill begotten thoughts he still maintayn'd,
And cherisht to his death, whose period
Of life, was the beginning of my mischief:
For he gave all the land unto my brother.
One less deserving, would I could report
That he had any worth, his il wrought mind,
Too apt for the impression of all vice,
As if he were to strive with his estate,
And had no other Enemy, would make
A conquest of his ruin. So negligent
Of what his father wrongfully bereft me,
That he spends all inryot, and so vainly,
As if he meant to throw it after him,
Only he has a foolish flashing wit,
Too weak to sustain, or prevent his fall,
But no solidity of mind or judgment.
And now imagines he can salve it up,
By being styled, A Fine Companion.
Let that entitle him to all my right,
Whilst I secure in my imputed crime,
Think thee a better portion; all my fault
Was honesty, and true affection.

Val. And those still envious fate insults upon.
But we will live together, and what ere
Shall interpose to poison our true love,
Still triumph over their malice.

Aur. Dear Valeria,
Had fortune pleased to place me in that means
My birth assured me, we had spent our life
Luld in the lap of peace, our days had run
Smooth as the feet of time, free from all tumults.

Val. And why not still?


Aur. It may do so, but I
Have not a fortune equal to your virtues,
And to support the title of your worth.

Val. My mind was never yet ambitious.
And there is nothing but your company,
Can satisfy, or limit my desires.

Aur. I love you better then to iniure you.
I will resign you to some richer heir,
Whose heaps of wealth left by his greedy father,
Untouched as is your goodness, may advance you,
And make you happy, think on it, be not cruel
To your own self.

Aur. On how have I deserved that you should think
So ill of me? you may divorce the luy,
The Vine from her embraces, me you can not.
Where is the care you wont to have of me?
What is my fault? you can be well without me,
And I shall please you best when I am absent.

Aur. Nay my Valeria do not weep so sore,
Thy grief adds more to mine, it is enough
I part from thee, my heart with drops of blood,
Pays tribute to the Ocean of thy tears:
This treasure of thine eyes, if spent for those,
That lie unterr'd, wanting their funeral rites,
And restless walk upon the Stygian strand,
So long as fate has limited their curse,
Would send them over to Elisium.
One grain of that same grief which clogs her heart,
Would lie in balance against the universe.
The joy and happiness of all mankind,
Are given to me in her, and she was borne,
T'upbrayd the world, and tell them they are false.

Val. What shall I do when you are ravished from me?
Could Portia rather swallow glowing coals,
Then burn with a desire of her lost Brutus?
Shall the example of those times descend
To shame my love? Could the Egyptian Queen,
Rather endure the poynant stings of Adders,
Then that of death which wounded Antony*
And must I then surviue you? can I live,
When you that are my soul are taken from me?
Oh it is not now as when Penelope
Could stay ten years the coming of her love,
And span a tedious web of foolish thoughts,
In expectation.

Aur. Faith that fled to heaven,
And truth, that after once men's hearts grew cold,
Would go no longer naked, now again
Are come to dwell with mortals. Here Is a woman,
In whose comparison all wealth is sordid.
And since she proves so constant, fate it self
Shall not be blamed for me that I for sooke her.

Actus I.
Scena. II.
Enter Littlegood. Lit. Are you so well resolved? but I may cross you.


Val. Oh me my father, I am quite undone
I am no body.

Lit. Yes, you are the wickedst,
The most ungracious child, that ever lived
Under so good a government, but that
Shall turn to tyranny, since your discretion
Can not distinguish of the difference.
Have I, what should I say? cherisht you up,
With tenderness, and costly education,
To have you made a Sacrifice to beggary,
To one that is cut off, disinherited,
The son of the people?

Aur. Pray sir forbear,
My wrongs do not permit you to abuse me.

Lit. Sir it is most basely done of you, to use
The charity, and freedom of my house,
Thus to seduce my daughter: but for that
If you can keep her as well from your mind,
As I can from your sight, you may in time,
Learn to forget her. You were best go travel,
Repair your self by some new found plantation,
Not think to supplant my issue. This place,
Is moraliz'd with thrift and industry,
Suites not with men of your condition,
That have no stock but their gentry. Get you in,
And for your part sir, know my house no more,
I Will provide her a husband. So farewell.

Aur. How ere I speed, comfort attend thee still,
And so my best Valeria farewell.

Actus I.
Scena. III.
Careless, Fido. Car. Nere tell me on it, a Gentleman must show himself to be
a Gentleman.


Fid. I so he must sir, but in you there is small resemblance of one.


Car. Come you are an importunate Ass, a dull heavy fellow, and I must bear
with you must I? by this light I will not live out of the blaze of my fortunes,
though it last but a minute, to linger out a tedious siege of adversities.


Fid. Yet you may live with more credit, at a competent rate as your land will
allow you.


Car. Land? there was my unhappiness to have any, I was borne to none, 'twas
merely thrust upon me, and now I can not be quiet for it; it is like a wife that
brings a thousand impediments, I must take an order, I can not walk the
streets in peace, your Magnifico stops his great horse to salute me, an other
treats of marriage, and offers me his daughter, your Advocate racks me with
impertinences, and to free my land from encumbrances troubles me ten times
worse, what with friends and Counselors, fellows that seem to me of an other
species I could resign my interest.


Fid. All this sir is a grace to you, if you conceive it.


Car. I Will sell all, twere a sin to keep it. When did thou know an elder
brother disinherited, and the land continue with the issue? now for me to live
thriftily upon it, were no otherwise then to mock fate and contemn providence.


Fid. But now you know the danger, you may prevent it.


Car. What should I dote upon casualties, trust Scriveners with my money,
fellows that will break, and all the wit in Town cannot solder them up again?


Fid. You may scorn my advice, but when it is too late --


Car. I tell thee, I Will keep no Land, not no houses, candle rents that are
subject to fire and ruin, I cannot sleep for fear of them; there is no danger
in coin, twill make a man respected, drink, and be drunk, wear good
clothes, and live as free as a Parthian.


Fid. But when all is gone, where is your respect, and gentility then?


Car. Where is it? why in my blood still, we will both run one course nere out of
the vain I warrant thee.


Fid. If you can hold in this vain it is more lasting then a mineral.


Car. Prithee good honest, old patcht piece of experience, go home and wear
thy self out in contemplation, and do not vex me with problemes, they can
do no more good upon me, then a young pitiful Lover upon a Mistress, that
has the sullens.


Fid. Well sir, I could willingly wait upon you in the way of honor and
reputation.


Car. No no, you shall not need my homo frugi, go about your business, and
though men of my quality, do seldom part with any thing, for good uses, for
Gamesters and Courtiers have but little charity, yet for this once, I will
trespass against custom, and here is something to put you into a fortune, I
could wish it more, but you know how my man has used me, and my occasions.


Fid. I see yet in his good nature a reluctancie against ill courses, he has
not quite shak'd off his humanity, there are hopes to reclaim him; if not sir
gallant, when all is spent, the return of this money will be grateful; and so
farewell.


Exit Fido. Car. Adieu, and commend me to my Uncle, tell the Mechanics
without, that I vouchsafe them admittance. I will not spend all in whoring and
sack. I will have some clothes of value, though they be but to pawn in a
vacation, for this purpose I have sent this morning to consult with the
authentiall judgments, of my Tailor, Sempster and Haberdasher; and now am I
studying with what state I shall use them.


Actus I.
Scena 4.
Careless, Tailor, Sempster, Haberdasher. Car. Come in fellows, I sent for
you together, because you should receive your instructions: I am to make me a
suit, and I would have you determine, about the form and the accoutrements,
for the fitting of the points and the garters, and the roses, and the colors
of them. Nature is much beholding to you, though there be a difference in the
accidents, yet you can reconcile them, and make them suit handsomely together.
I am a Gentleman, and would not be disgraced for my irregularity.


Tail. You say well sir.


Care. I tell you my disposition, I am wholly addicted to rarities, things that
are new take me; new plays, new mistresses, new servants, new toys, new
fangles, new friends, and new fashions, and these I deal with, as in a
quarrel I would not be behind hand with any of them.


Semp. Sir you shall command our endeavors.


Car. I thought fit to take your advise, and you are beholding to me, you are
the only men in the world that can rule me.


Hab. Sir for curiosity we have the maydenheads of all the wits in Europe,
and to your service we will employ both our art and our industry.


Car. I am informed of your qualities, I hear you are men of intelligence, by
this light I wonder the state is not afraid of you.


Tay. We hope they have no reason for that sir.


Care. Yes, you are dangerous follows, and have plots and devices upon men's
bodies, and are suspected to be sorcerers, that can transform a man into what
shape you list.


Tail. It pleases you to be merry sir.


Care. Nay by this hand, it is given out, that you are great scholars, and are
skild in all the habitual Arts, and know their coherences, and that you are a
kind of Astrologers, observers of times and seasons, and for making of Matches,
beyond all the gallants in the Kingdom.


Tay. We would match things as near as we could sir.


Care. And besides that, you are proud of your knowledge, for when you have
once got a man's good name, you make what account you list of it.


Hab. Not so sir.


Care. Yes, and presume upon it, and think what ever injury you do a man, you
can be saved by your Book This is true, and care not a pin for the Law, for
you hold good Custom to be far beyond it.


Semp. We would be loath to give any Gentleman distaste sir.


Care. I must commend you, in that you are not partial, for you make the like
reckoning of every man. Well, to the purpose.


Tay. You Will have your suit of the Spanish fashion?


Car. What with two wallets behind me, to put up faults and abuses, or else I Will
cashiere my men, and they shall serve me for attendants, hangers on, ha? No by
this air, I am too good a gentleman to have my arms trickt up with such
gewgawes.


Tail. Sir, you must be conformable.


Care. Well, I am content to be persuaded: when shall I have them?


Tail. You shall not miss within these three days, and what else is
requisite, ttust to my care to apply it.


Care. Well I am satisfied, and hereafter believe me, as I believe thee.


Enter Boy Boy. Sir, Master Spruse is come to visit you.


Car. Master Spruse? prithee bid him come up. Well, there is a Gentleman, of all
I know, can justly claim admiration, for his complement, his discourse, his
habit, his acquaintance, and then for profering of courtesies, and never doing
any; I may give away all I have, before I shall arrive at the grace of it.


Hab. Pray sir, when did you see the noble Captain?


Car. Who Captain Whibble; Mass now think on it thou shall go seek him out,
and entreat him to meet me at the Hors-shooe Tavern at dinner, I love that
house for the signs sake, it is the very print of the shoe that Pegasus wore,
when he broke up Helicon with his hoof, and now in relation of that, your
Poets and Players, still haunt about the brinkes of it. Sirrah tell him
withal, that Master Lackewit the Citizens son will be there, and other
good company, and we will have music and wenches, go thy vvayes, and you
Master Snip, meet me about three a clock to take up these commodities, so now
I have done with you.


Actus I.
Scena V.
Careless, Spruse, with one garter untied, and a black Box at his girdle.
Spru. Save you Master Careless.


Care. Master Spruse you have much honored me with your presence.


Spru. I met with a disaster coming up, something has ravished the tassell of
my Garter, and discomposed the whole fabric, 'tvvill cost me an hours
patience to reform it; I had rather have seen the Common wealth out of order.


Care. Sure it was not fast tied to your leg.


Spru. As fast together, as the fashion is for friends now adays to be tied,
with certain knots of complement, which the least occasion dis-joynes. I Will
only tucke it up, and when my better leisure permits, reduce it to perfection.


Care. What box have you there?


Spru. A conceit, a conceit, a rare invention one of the happiest that ever my
wit teemed withal.


Care. Bless me with the discovery.


Spru. You shall swear to be silent then.


Care. As close as that covering.


Spru. Then look you, I will participate the mystery; this petty fogging box
promises that I have great suits in law, this is to delude the world now: But I
must tell you I am a kind of a Solicitor, an earnest suitor to every wench I
see.


Care. Very pretty, proceed.


Spru. What do you think I have in this box then?


Care. I know not.


Spru, A bundle of blanke love letters, ready pend with as much vehemence of
affection, as I could get for money, only wanting the superscription of their
names, to whom they shall be directed, which I can instantly, and with ease
indorse upon acquaintance.


Care. And so send them to your Mistress?


Spru. You understand me. I no sooner fall into discourse with any Lady, but I
profess my self ardently in lone with her, and being departed, return my Boy
with one of these Letters, to second it, as I said passionately deciphering how
much I languish for her. Which she can not but deeply apprehend, together
with the quickness and promptitude of my ingenuitie in the dispatch of it.


Care. I Will practice this device. Prithee let me see one of them, what is here?
To the fair hands of --


Spru. I there wants a name, they fit any degree or person whatsoever.


Care Let me see this then. To the Lady and Mistress of his thoughts, and
service.


Spru. There wants a name too. They are general things.


Care. I Will open it by your favor sir, what is here? Most resplondent Lady, that
may justly be styled, the accomplishment of beauty, the Seat and mansion of
all delight, and virtue, in whom meet the joy, and desires of the happy. Some
man here perhapps might fear, in praising your worth, to heighthen your
disdain, but I am forced though to the peril of my neglect, to acknowledge
it: For to this hour my curious thoughts, and wandering, in the Sphere of
feminine perfection, could never yet find out a subject like your self, that
could so detain and command my affection.


Spru. And so it goes on: How do you like it?


Car. Admirable good, put them up again.


Spr. Nay I have so strange a wit, few men do jumpe with it.

All my delights are steept in Elegancie,
And censured by an Arbitration,
Before I do approve them; I have searched
The dust of antiquity to find out
The rare inventions that I am verst in,
My several Garbes and Postures of the body,
My rules for banqueting, and entertainment:
And for the titillation of my laughter,
Buffoones and Parasites, for I must tell you,
I still affect a learned luxury.

Car. You have a very complete suit on too me thinks.


Spr. It Is as fresh as the morning, and that's the grace on it, a new Play, and a
Gentleman in a new suit, claim the same privilege, at their first presentment
their estimation is double.


Car. And whither now do your employments direct you?


Spr. I took your lodging by the way, I am going to dazell the eyes of the
Ladies with my apparition.


Car. I am not so conformable as I could wish, or else I would attend you. I
took up a new man, for pitties sake, some three days since, to wait upon me,
which foolish sin I will abandon whilst I live for it. He ran away with two
hundred pounds, the remnant of a morgage, and since that I was put to a new
perplexity to supply me.


Spr. By this hand, if you had spoke but yesterday I could have furnished you.


Car. Why what a rare way is here now, to engage a man for nothing? I must
study it.


Spr. How does your brother digest the loss of his inheritance?


Car. Very well sure, for sometimes he has nothing else to digest; and he has
enough of that too: it sticks in his stomach worse then a Surfeit. Alas we
landed men are but fools to him, it makes him sober, and wise, very temperate.


Spr. There Is Valeria a foolish peevish thing that he calls Mistress, good for
nothing but to whet a man's wit, and make a Whore on, I cannot believe there is
any real love between them.


Car. Has she received any of your Letters?


Spr. Yes twenty, and nothing will prevail. I have sought to corrupt her any
time this twelve month, and can do no good on her, her father gives me
opportunity out of pretense of good will, but I use it clean contrary; for
alas, I can not love any wench farther then to lie with her. I can not
fashion my tongue to speak in any other Character. I would not willingly loose
all this time and labor. I Will make short of it, either work her to obedience,
or do her a mischief.


Car. It Is well resolved, and there is her sister Aemilia. She will glance
sometimes affectionately upon me; were it not a mad thing, when I have sold all
my Land to her father to get her into advantage? I think that will be the end
of it.


Spr. Me thinks Lackwit her brother might stand thee in some stead for the
conveyance.


Car. Well it is the truest spaniell that, I put a hundred jeers upon him, and
yet he loves me the better, I can pawn him as familiarly as my cloak.


Spr. The time calls upon me.


Car. I Will dismiss you, will you present my service to the Ladies and excuse me?


Spr. I shall be proud to make my tongue the Organ of your commands sir.


Car. I will hold you no longer from your happiness, but I shall envy the
intercourse of your mirth.


Exeunt. Actus I.
Scena. VI.
Dotario. Fido. Dot. Then he is past hope?


Fid. He has no sense of his misery, a strong stupidity, a lethargy has
possessed him: his disease is infectious, it has caught hold of his estate, and
brought that into a consumption.


Dot. No means to reclaim him?


Fid. I know not what to apply, when remedies are hurtful, give him good
counsel, and you poison him.


Dot. I would my brother had been better advised, then to give his Land to a
Prodigal.


Fid. Fitter indeed the right Heir should have had it: you might do well to
turn your compassion upon him: a poor injured Gentleman, and stands equal in
your blood.


Dot. No I Will marry a wife, and get an heir of mine own, I have made a motion
to Master Little good the Usurer, about one of his daughters, and we are
partly agreed, I am going to ask her good will in it.


Fid. Look you sir. Pray stand by, here he comes with his train.


Enter Careless, Captain, Lieutenant. Car. Is it not well resolved Captain?


Cap. Yes by the soul of Hercules, it is a good foresight, to sell all and
prevent misfortunes. The world's full of uncertaineties: Land may be barren,
servants deceitful, make money I say, and what a man spends with his friends,
shall never perish.


Lieu. I say by the heart of valor, that man lives best at ease, that has no
money at all.


Car. What shall he do then Lieutenant?


Lieu. By the faith of a soldier, for the exercise of his wits he may do any
thing: if all trades fail he may turn Pimpe, it is a noble profession to live
by, if he can perform that office well, he need ask no more of his Genius.


Capt. Body of me, nor no better preferment.


Lieu. As I am a sinner it is a good science, a mathematical mystery of
undermining holds, and when the breach is open, be the first man that shall
enter.


Car. But I think there be so many of them, they can hardly live one for an
other.


Lieu. As I am virtuous it is grown into credit, and you have very good men that
study it. Good Knights and Squiers that have thriu'd by it.


Capt. Stab me, what sullen Saturn is that, looks so oblique upon us, as I am
Martial I will confront his aspect.


Car. Good Captain be appeased, it is my Uncle, I can not avoid him: let me
entreat your absence for a while, meet me at the Horse-shooe.


Cap. Fire of my blood you shall rule me: come Lieutenant.


Exeunt Cap. Lieu. Actus I.
Scena. VII.
Dotario, Careless, Fido. Dot. Shall I speak or hold my peace?


Car E'ne which you please, good Uncle.


Dot. I it is all one to you, for any impression I shall make: would I could
refrain to take notice of thee, but still nature over swayes me, and affection
breaks out into counsel but to no purpose.


Car. Troth uncle youth will have his swing.


Dot. I upon a Gallows, if you hold on, that will be the end of you. That I
should live to see my brothers goods so misspent, the life of his labors sucked
out by such Horseleaches.


Car. Horseleaches, do you know what you say? no, you do not apprehend the
worth that dwells in these men: to see how a man may be mistaken in the
distinction of virtue.


Fid. Nay sir, it is as I told you, you may as soon recall an arrow when it is
flying, or a stone from praecipice, as reclaim him.


Car. Oh uncle, that you should thus carpe at my happiness, and traduce my
Camradoes, men of such spirit and valor.


Dot. Yes, Captain and Lieutenant, how a vengeance came they by these titles?
fellows that have been only flesht in the ruin of black pots, and glass
windows, the very skum of all rudeness.


Car. Have you any money about you?


Dot. What to do?


Car. Bribe me to keep counsel: you are but a dead man if they know on it: you
have pust out your soul in their calumnies.


Fid. Hang them fellows so sordid, that no disgrace can stick upon them, they
are choice company; for there is hardly the like of them. A man cannot discern
the ground of their discourse for oaths, unless you were divorced from all
reason, you would not be wedded to such acquaintance.


Car. Why how now mungrell, are you barking? by this air it is an indignity to
my discretion, that is so happy in the election of their virtues: the only
prime wits in town, things come so rarely from them, a man is kept in a
perpetual appetite. I would not let them stay to offend you, neither can I
endure their reproach. Farewell uncle.


Exit Careless. Dot. Well I will not trouble my self any more to look after
him, I Will marry, and thrust him out of all, that is the conclusion.

Desinit Actus primus.


ACTVS II.
SCENA I.
Spruse, Littlegood, Valeria. Spr. But are you certain of it?


Lit. I oreheard it.
When she did plot her own destruction,
And sealed it with her hand, and kissed upon it.
You know Aurelio?

Spr. Yes sir, was it he?


Lit. That Beggar, that undone thing.


Spr. Let me alone
To fetch her off the quicksands, and then I Will board her,
And steer her my self.

Lit. That I were so happy
To know she loved you. Huswife do you hear?
Here is a Gentleman has Land and means,
And wit, and beauty, more I wis then the other:
Make much of him, and what he says, be ruled by him.

Spr. Let me alone, I warrant you.


Lit. I leave you.


Exit Littlegood. Spr. Now all the powers of love assist me in it,
To counterfeit a Passion and Dissemble.
All my delight's to fool them, and then leave them.
I serve your women, as the Hollanders
Do by some towns they get; when they have won them,
They slight them straight. Now I address my self.
Lady how fare you? you are melancholy.

Val. If you do know it so well, why do you ask me?


Spr. It Is from the tender care I have of you:
But an ill fate pursues my true endeavors,
To have them still misconstrued: It Is not well done,
To lay the burden of your cruelty
On my affection, and to make that faith,
The passive subject of your dire disdain,
That is so active in obedience.

Val. Pray let me counsel you.


Spr. Counsel, what is that?
Not Phoebus with his art, or all the drugs
Of Thessaly can ease my grief; the Sea
Knows no such straight as I now labor in.

Val. Why what is the matter?


Spr. Oh my heart, my heart.
Would you would rip it up, that you might see
Your self enthroned, and all my faculties
Paying their homage to your memory.
I think I do it indifferently.

Val. All this and more, Lovers can speak at pleasure.


Spr. Propose a course how I might win belief:
Were there a way to it, as deep with danger,
As to the Center, I will search it out.
When I have nothing else to do.

Val. Your thoughts have found such easy utterance,
That I suspect their truth, they seem to savor
Of art, more then of passion. I have heard
Great griefs are silent, neither do I find
Those Symptoms of affection in your looks.
You change no color, and your joints are stedy.
Your eyes appear too full of petulancy,
As if they did reflect with inward scorn,
T'upbrayd your falsehood.

Spr. Now by all my hopes,
By all the rites that crown a happy union,
And by the rosy tincture of your cheeks,
And by your all subduing eyes, more bright
Then heaven.

Val. Hold there.


Spr. I prize you above the world.
What should I say, when vows cannot prevail:
If you persist, and still so cruel be,
I Will swear there is no plague like loves tyranny.
And all this while I do not care a pin for her.
Aside,
Val. I have engagd it to your friend already.


Spr. But love makes no distinction.


Val. If you say so,
I must debar my heart the knowledge of you.

Spr. This will not do, I must be more lascivious.
Come my fair Venus, sit by thy Adonis.
What do you start? are you afraid of love,
That is all fair, and from whose brightest heaven,
Are blown away all swollen clouds of despair?
His brow is smooth, and all his face beset
With banks full of delight, a golden Chain
Of wanton smiles hangs round about his neck;
And all his way before him strewn with roses.
Come let us sit and dally, taste those pleasures.
Love is no niggard, we may eat and surfeit.
And yet our dainties still remain as fresh,
As they were never touched.

Val. Is It come to that?
I thought whither you tended. I am unskilful:
Untaught in those deep, but ill mysteries.

Spr. I Will teach you all, and lead your wandering steps,
Through all those ways, where to find the way
Will be to loose it.

Val. I am very sorry,
The times disease has so prevailed upon you.
It Is the perfection now of complement,
The only end to corrupt honesty.
To prostitute your oaths, and win our hearts
To your belief, is the Court eloquence.

Spr. These are harsh tunes, and ill become your beauty:
Whose proper passion should be wantonness.
Why should you loose the benefit of youth,
And the delights? give freedom to your will.
When age and weakness mortifies your thoughts,
You may correct this looseness.

Val. Sir I cannot
Hear you with safety.

Spr. I must dye then, I am slain, unless
Those words, and smiles, that wounded me, do heal me.

Val. Had I known that, I Would have condemnd them both,
To silence and obscurity.

Spr. You had then,
Robbed nature of her best perfection.
And that had been a sacrilege. Nay sweet,
Your beauty is a thing communicable,
And though you do impart, you may retain it.

Val. Sir I have summed th'accounts of all your cares,
And I do find their number more then weight.
Things but of custom with you, and your vows
Are but a cloud of wind, and emptiness;
Forced by the storm of lust. When it is over,
And your thoughts calmed, then you will love that virtue,
Which as a tie and Anchor did withhold you,
From driving to destruction. So I leave you.

Exit Valeria. Spr. That ever any woman should be virtuous;
I have enclosed a fire within my breast,
Will burn this frame of nature into cinders,
Her beauty has surprised me, I am caught
In love; by this light, twere a mad jest now
If I should turn honest, and woe her so:
If she persists, I must do so beleeu't,
And hate my self, as long as I live for it.
Well I have played so long about the candle,
That my wings are singed with it, she is honest
I see it, and that something in this age.
Out of these doubts some strange thing will arise,
A strong disease must have strong remedies.

Actus II.
Scena II.
Littlegood, Crochet. Lit. Crochet where are you?


Cro. I am here sir.


Lit Crochet you know, that I am determind to marry my other daughter Aemilia,
to old Dotario the Citizen.


Cro. Yes sir, and then she and I shall be both in one predicament.


Lit. How so man?


Cro. Why sir, for ought that I can perceive, she is like to have but a cold
reversion, and that's the ordinary allowance for men of my function, there is not
so much left of him, as will satisfy a Ladies appetite for once, he is picked
to the very bones with age, and diseases.


Lit. It Is no matter so long as his purse is well crammed.


Cro. His purse that she looks after is lanke enough I vvarrant it, it
greiues me to the heart, that such a young beginner as my Mistrisse, should
have no better hopes of trading.


Lit. Belike thou think that Nature is uncharitable in him, no he has
benevolence in store for her; what because he is old, I am old my self, man.


Cro. And if he were older, tvvere no great matter.


Lit. If I were older knave?


Cro. No sir, if he were older.


Lit. Why what then?


Cro. His death would the sooner make her honorable: for having one foot in
the bed, and the other in the grave, if she be ruled by me, it is but her
giving him a lift, and the next turn marry with a Lord.


Lit. Say thou me so?


Cro. Yes sir, a Citizens wife no sooner casts her rider, but one of your Court
gallants mounts her presently.


Lit. The knave is very pleasant.


Cro. Why sir, your Citizens widows are the only rubbish of the kingdom, to
fill up the breaches of decayed houses.


Lit. What Is her preferment then, Crochet?


Cro. Why then sir, she shall be made a Lady at the least, and take place of
her mother. She shall have clyents wait at her gates with presents, and yet
have their servile offices pass unregarded, she shall manage her husbands
estate, and advise him in his office.


Lit. Is that all?


Cro. No sir, she shall have more privileges then that, to be as proud as she
list, and have new ways to express it, she shall ride up and down in her
Litter, and have a Coach, and four Horses follow after, full of Gentlemen
Vshers and waiting women.


Lit. And yet the foolish girl will not perceive it.


Cro. Alas sir, though you and I have so much wit to look into these things,
how should my young Mistrisse be capable of it, when her husband that shall be
is not able to put the case to her?


Lit. Go, fetch her hither, I Will advise my self.


Exit Crot. O these perverse girls, that are led with nothing, but fancy
foolish things, and yet have wit to be obstinate, if they set upon a toy, they
must have it because they are wilful, then they are as changeable in love as a
Camelion, and think they can live by the air of it. They will venture to sell
their fathers fortunes and their own, for a nights lodging.

Actus II.
Scena III
Little good, Aemillia, Crochet. Lit. Come Aemilia, these showers are
unseasonable. They will extinguish the torch, that should burn bright before
thy unptiall; be not dismayed, you are young and so is Aurora, she looks fresh
every morning: yet disdaines not to kiss her old Tithou, and lies all night
with him, and when she rises, betrays with her blushes, the wanton heat of
her paramour.


Aemi. Good sir, think your power may command my duty, but not my affection.


Lit. Tempt not my patience, I would not willingly use the authority of a
father to command, what I had rather win by entreaty.


Aemi. You know sir, the incovenience still happens to these forced matches,
they never come to good, and if you compel me to like of him, you must expect
the same issue, you shall never make me any other president.


Lit. Not when I entreat you?


Aemi. I shall never love him.


Cro. And you know sir, what an ominous thing it is, when a woman does not love
her husband, she will either cuckold him, or poison him, and so be burnt for a
Martyr in wedlock. a Lit. She must fashion her self to love him, I have
undertook it.


Cro. And then I Will undertake for the the other.


Lit. Will she have her liberty restrained? will she renounce my protection?
shall not I dispose of her? if not, let her use her pleasure, betray her self,
like her other sister to beggary, be like Scylla, cut the purple hair of my
life, and then turn Monster, let her.


Aemi. Oh me, what shall I do? would my life were a sacrifice.


Lit. I Will tell you what you shall do, be advised; refuse not a good offer,
think of old Dotario, think how to love him, think of his wealth, think of
his honor, think of me, think of your self, think what will come after,
if you be stubborn.


Cro. And what ere you think to do, say nothing Mistress.


Lit. Well Crochet, I Will leave thee to persuade her whilst I fetch the old man
to confime it


Exit Littlegood. Aemi O my distracted thoughts, and the rash counsel
Of lone and hatred, when they are opposed
By avarice of parents, that confine
Their childrens fancies to there sordid mind.
Were the bright sun their of spring, they would join him,
Unto the earth, if gold might be engendered.
We in our selves have no part, if debard
The election of our love, and our condition
Is worse then beasts, whose will acknowledges
No check in that; the Turtle takes her mate
Without compulsion, and in Summers prime,
Each bird will choose out her own Valentine.

Cro. Well, Mistress you do not apprehend the good you may have, by marrying
of an old man.


Aemi. Prithee what good?


Cro. First, besides the honor he shall conferr upon you by his age, you shall
not find him so fiery, and unruly as commonly your youths are, and thereupon
being cold of his tempter, you may the easier manage him.


Aemi. Thy mirth comes importunely on my grief.


Cro. Then you shall be his darling, and he shall dote upon you, and though he
strives to please you never so much, he shall lament, that he can do it no
better, and acknowledge his weakness, that he comes short of your desert, and
what he desires, and be sorry, that all he has, is too little for you.


Aemi. I perceive it well enough Crochet.


Cro. The only thing that you need fear him for, is his tongue, for they say
old men are great talkers, but you will match that member well enough, and for any
other part about him, you will have but little to do withal.


Actus II.
Scena IIII.
Enter to them Littlegood, Dotario. Lit. Look you here comes the old Leacher,
he looks as fresh as an old play new vampt, pray see how trim he is, and how
the Authors have corrected him, how his Tailor, and his Barber have set him
forth; sure he has received an other impression


Aemi. I think the fool will be tedious.


Lit. Well, now I have brought you together, here I Will leave you, when lovers
parley, Parents are no fit Auditors; see that you use the Gentleman
respectively, and though sir, she seem coy and deny you, impute it not to
perversenes but modesty. Mayds in their first assaults consult with shame, in
the next with weakness. So I leave you,


Exit Lit. Dot. Fair Mistress, I would ask you a question, if you please to
answer me.


Aemil. No Mistress of yours Sir, yet if you ask nothing but what I please to
answer, you may.


Dot. I would first demand your opinion of me.


Aemi. Truly I have no skill to make any conjecture by the outward appeareance,
but by the Title page of your face, I should judge you to be somewhat ancient.


Dot. Take my word for it, the Index is false printed, if you please to turn
to the book, you shall find no such thing written.


Aemi. O it is worm eaten, time has cankerd it, besides there be so many dashes,
my understanding will not serve me to read it, and a woman has no use of her
Clergy.


Dot. But love has renewed it sweet Lady, and this is another edition.


Aemi. How long is it since the copy has been altered?


Dot Let it not seem strange to you that I have felt this transformation, your
form has wrought a miracle upon me, the pulchritude of your feature, that is
able to extract youth out of age, and could make Aeson young again, without
the help of Medea, it has put a fire into me, and I must impute it neither to
Herbs, nor Philtrums, but to the influence, and power of your beauty.


Aemi A fire, it is a foolish one, that leads you without the precinct of your
gravity, I strange, a man of your judgment should talk so preposterously.


Dot. Why sweet Lady?


Aemi. Sweet Lady, what a petulant word is there, for a man of your beard? a
Boy of fifteen would not have spoke it without blushing, and there is a smile
able to turn my stomach. I wonder you will make your self so ridiculous.


Cro. If this be the best language she can afford him, 'twere safe for me not
to hear it. I may be called for a witness.


Dot. Stay Crochet, whither go thou?


Cro. I Will come presently sir, I Will come presently.


Exit Crot. Aemi. Now you are alone, I Will tell you what I think of you, you are
an old doting fool, one that twenty years since, has drunk the Lethe of
humanity, and forgot of what sex thou were, worn out of all remembrance of
thy self, thou have a body, that a fever cannot heat, nor poison work upon,
a face more rugged then winter, thy beard is moss, and thy skin so hard, that
the perpetual dropping of thy nose cannot soften it.


Dot. These indignities are not to be endured, her abuses are more monstrous,
then the prodegie she would make of me.


Aemi. And yet you would be in love forsooth, whom Cupid with all his strength
is not able to pierce, you have not one pore open to let in an Arrow, more need
have a cordial to comfort you.


Dot. Rank injuries, mock me to my teeth.


Aemi. If you had any.


Dot. I would your father heard you: he left no such thing in your Commission.
How dare you do it?


Aemi. Yes and if I marry you, I Will use you accordingly, I Will have no mercy on
thy age, I tell you before hand, that when it happens, it may not seem strange
to you.


Dot. Well she may play with the line, I Will give her scope enough, but when I
have her fast, I Will twitch her, and draw her as I list to me.


Aemi. Do but hear what I say to you, and it shall fall out, no
Prognostication like it.


Dot. Sure it is some fury, it cannot be a woman she is so impudent.


Aemi. When I am your wife, if you are so hardy to venture on me, your whole
study shall be to please me, and yet I will not grace it with acceptance; I
will live as your Empress, lie a bed, and command you, and your servants, and
you shall not dare to anger me.


Dot. Not dare to anger you.


Aemi. No if you do, I will fill the house with noise, and deaf thee with
clamours.


Dot. Sweet heart you shall have all content, I love a life these spirited
wenches, that are all fire and motion, they stir a quickness in a man, in
fuse an activity.


Aemi. He will not be put off, I must terrify him farther: and for your
estate, you shall not meddle with it, I Will take up your rents for you, and
dispose of them, as I think fit; only I Will allow you to carry some farthings
in your pouch to give to Beggars.


Dot. And what will you do with the rest sweeting?


Aemi. For the rest, I Will spend it upon my self in bravery: there shall not be
a new fashion, but I Will have it. I Will look after nothing else; your house shall
be a mart for all trades. I Will keep twenty continually at work for me; as
Tailors, Perfumers, Painters, Apothecaries, Coach-makers, Sempsters, and
Tire-women. Besides Embroyderers, and Pensions for intelligencers.


Dot. She Will waste all I have in a month: the expenses of an Army will not
maintain her.


Aemi. Besides, I will have acquaintance with all the Ladies in Court, and
entertain them with banquets, yet for all that I will make my complaint of you
to them, traduce your infirmities, and they shall conspire against you, and
pity me.


Dot. I had rather be under twenty Executions, then the lash of their tongue.


Aemi. Then you shall kiss me very seldom, and when I vouchsafe you the
favor: and you shall do it not as a husband, but as a father, not a smacke of
lasciviousness.


Dot. What a sanctified creature shall I enjoy?


Aemi. I will lie with you the first year once a month, as a Parson uses to
instruct his Cure, and yet not be questioned for neglect, or non residence:
marry the next year, if you live so long, once a quarter shall suffice you.


Dot. The next year if I live so long? she thinks of my death already.


Aemi. These are the least of your evils. I will have one to cuckold you, and
you shall take it for a courtesy, and use him the kindlier for it.


Dot. Oh me, I can endure it no longer, that word strikes cold to my heart:
were I an enemy, and she had vanquished me, I would not yield to such
Articles. I Will propose these conditions to her father, and see if he will allow
them in all conscience to be reasonable.


Exit Dotario. Aemi. Master Careless promised to be here instantly. I Will tell
him what a fine youth he has to his Uncle.


Enter Careless drunk. Car. Here is the Gulf that I wallowes all my Land:
And to this desperate Whirlepit am I reeling.
And there is the smooth stream that must guide me to it.
Were I as provident, as was Ulysses,
That Siren there might sing me to my ruin.
Save you fair Lady.

Aemi. Save you Master Careless.


Car. Will you hear me speak any wise sentences?
I am now as discreet in my conceit,
As the seven Sophyes of Greece, I am full
Of Oracles, I am come from Apollo,
Would he had lent me his Tripos to stand upon;
For my two legs can hardly carry me.

Aemi. Whence come you, from Apollo?


Car. From the heaven
Of my delight, where the boon Delphicke God,
Drinks sack, and keeps his Bacchanalias,
And has his incense, and his Altars smoking,
And speaks in sparkeling prophesies; thence do I come.
My brains perfumed with the rich Indian vapor,
And heightened with conceits: from tempting beauties,
From dainty Music and Poeticke strains,
From bowls of Nectar, and Ambrosiacke dishes:
From witty Varlets, fine Companions,
And from a mighty continent of pleasure,
Sails thy brave Careless. Where Is your father Lady?

Aemi. I thought I had been worthy salutation.


Car. These Ceremonies are abolisht with me.
I kiss none but my Punke, but in this humor,
I Will kiss any body. I Will marry thee;
But not a penny jointure.

Aemi. Where I love,
I will not stand upon conditions.

Car. I would accept this invitation,
But thy father is a Usurer, a Jew.
And if I marry in his tribe I shall thrive,
And I hate thriving. I am come to morgage,
To pawn, or sell Lady.

Aemi. Do you want money?


Car. Do I want money? let me conster this.
It Is a good promising question, and requires
A sober politic answer, yes I want money.

Aemi. I have not ready coin; but there is a jewel
Will fetch you twenty pound.

Car. But do you dare trust me?


Aemi. I give it freely.


Car. Then I say thy father,
In getting thee has redeemed all his sin.
She has confirmed my love, and I will marry her.
Let me survay it well, it is an Amethist.

Aemi. Why do you ask?


Aemi. Because they say that stone
Has secret virtue in it to recover,
A man that is intoxicated, and I do find
That I am not so drunk, as I was.

Aemi O Master Careless here has been your Uncle
A woing to me.

Car. What that piece of stockfish,
That has kept Lint thus long, would have young flesh now.

Aemi. If he could get it.


Car. It Is such a rank Goat.


Aemi. I made such sport with him, and terrified him, how I would use him if I
were his wife,
That he is frighted hence.

Car. It Is well done of you, he upbrayded me to
That he would marry, but I Will cross his worship.
We Will vex him ten times worse yet, I have plots
Maturing in my head, shall crown thy wit,
And make him desperate, that he shall dye,
And leave us nothing. I would not be troubled,
With any of his wealth, no not so much,
As to mourn for him, but I cannot stand
Now to relate it. Come Aemilia.
I have declared my mind, but when i will do it,
I Will in, and sleep, and dream upon it, and tell thee.

Actus. II.
Scena. VI.
Enter Littlegood, Mistress Fondling. Fond. Bring me to that, and i will yield to
any thing.


Lit. Nay, good wife hear me.


Fond. You shall pardon me: he is my son I hope, as well as yours, and he
shall be fashioned after my humor: why, should you think to hinder my
prospect from looking to him? I say he shall rank with the best, spend his
money and learn breeding.


Lit. Do, make a Gallant of him or a Gull, either will serve, he may ride up
and down, and have his Coach wait for him at Plays and Tavernes, take up
upon trust, consort with wits and swordmen, be afraid of Sergeants, and spend
more for his Protection then would pay the debt: he may be a Stickler for
quarrels, and compound them at his own charge: reele every night to his
lodging, and be visited in the morning with borrowing Letters, dice at
Ordinaries, and lend on all hands.: seal at all hours, or be beaten to it.
These are gifts in a son, beyond art or nature, for a father to be proud of,
or else he may run away with all he can get, and when it is gone, lie at a
neighbors house till his peace be made.


Fond. No you shall keep him still at home with you; he shall not dare to
enlarge his Charter, to have any more wit then his father, let him sit in the
shop with nere a pair of cuffs on his hands, and play at Fox and Geese with
the foreman, entertain customers, with a discourse as moatheaten as your
cloth, and not be able to look upon a Lady, but court some filly creature of
his own tribe, with speeches out of books, ten times worse then any remnant;
and after supper steal abroad and be drunk in fear, this you can be content
with. Well, when he was a child, it was the prettiest talking thing, and the
wittiest withal, the neighbors took such delight to hear it. There was a
good Knight lay in my house then was so kind to him, but you nere knew the
reason, since you have clean marred him that is apparent.


Lit. I Will do any thing wife that you will have me.


Fond. Yes when it is too late; and the custom of rusticity is grown into an
other nature with him, when his mind is settled upon the Lees of it, and the
edge of his humor quite taken off, when learning has brought down his spirit,
then you will repent his restraint; has he not a pretty ingenuity?


Lit So much the worse, when it is corrupted: mark me what I say, give him the
reins, and if Fiddlers sleep in a week, Tavernes keep their doors shut, the
Constable sit on a stall in peace, or wenches walk the streets for him (if he
be like his father) nere credit me again.


Fond. So much the better, I would have it so, give him means to perform it,
show your self a loving father, and be true in your prophecy.


Lit. I must yield to her for my quietness sake, was ever man thus tied to a
Chymera, thus vexed with that should be his happiness. I have married with
tumult, and begot my affliction, not one of my generation will be ruled; and
for my wife, she has a tongue will run post sixteen stages together, and
nere tire for it; with that she can work me to any agreement. Well take your
son to your charge, do what you list with him: but for the wenches, I Will
either choose them husbands, or else they shall trudge without any other Dowry,
then what nature has bestowed on them, that is certain.


Fond. Within there, call your young Master hither Crotchet, he has been all
this day at his study, makes the boy mopish with his scholership, for want of
better exercise; as revelling, courting, feasting, and the like, be stands
plodding and musing as if his eyes turned with a wire, it has poysond his very
complexion, he is grown fallow with it, I know not what would become of him,
if I did not sometimes put money in his purse, and send him abroad, to sin
for his recreation.


Lit. Sweet wife be pacified.


Fond. No, I Will teach you what it is to anger a woman that brought a Dowry with
her.

Enter Crotchet, Lackwit. See what a Picture of formality you have made of him,
come hither son Lackwit, what book have you there?


Lack. This is a book of Heraldry forsooth, and I do find by this book that
the Lackwits are a very ancient name, and of large extent, and come of as good
a Pedigree, as any is in the City; besides they have often matched themselves
into very great families, and can quarter their Arms, I will not say with
Lords, but with Squiers, Knights, Aldermen, and the like, and can boast their
descent to be as generous, as any of the Lafooles, or the John Dawes whatsoever.


Fond. What be the Arms son?


Lack. The Lackwits Arms, why they are three Asses rampant, with their ears
prickant, in a field Or, and a Rams head for their crest, that is the Arms.


Fond. Well said son, stand for the credit of the house.


Lack. Nay, I will uphold it besides, though my father be a Citizen, yet I am a
Gentleman's son by the mothers side.


Fond. I that he is i will be sworn, the Fondlings are as good Gentlemen, as any
be in the City, the boy has a Parlous head, how should he find out this I
marvel?


Lack. Find it out, as if I were such a fool, I did not know my own Coat.


Fond. Yet husband, I never saw you wear one in my life.


Lit. Not a fools coat, but I shall have one of your Spinning very shortly.


Lack. I Will tell you father if I lift now; I can go twenty degrees back like a
crab, to find out the tracke of our gentility.


Fond. Lo you there, can you be content thou man perverse to all reason,
having a son of so large and prosperous hopes, that might stand up the glory
of his kindred, of such pregnancie of wit and understanding, so rich in the
qualities that can bear up a Gentleman, to let him sink, and not cherish him
with those helps that might advance his gallantry. You have had your
flourishing season, and are now withered, your blossoms of beauty are blown
off and therefore must be content out of that dry stalk to afford some sap to
maintain his succession; pray how many young Gentlemen have you in this Town,
that go in plush, and their fathers to plow in the country? shall we have
worse Presidents in the City? impart I say, and give him twenty pieces, and
when they are gone give him twenty more.


Lit. What to do?


Fond. Will you disparadge him, as if he knew not what to do with it? do you
think that Fencers, Dancers, Horsematches (I Will have him verst in all these,
and omit nothing that may demonstrate his breeding;) besides Mistresses, and
implements that belong to them require, nothing?


Lit. Was ever any mother in this humor? that should reclaim her son from
his ill courses, to animate him, and supply his riot: let her enjoy her
follies, smart for them, and then repent; here hold, there is twenty pieces, I
am sure all thrown away, they are in a consumption already, and will be dead,
and drawn out by to morrow. What think thou Crotchet?


Crot. Nay sir they are condemned, that is certain, you have past your
judgment upon them, and my young Master must execute it.


Lit. I give it lost Crotchet, I give it lost; but stay, my daughters; I had
need have Argus eyes to look about me, or the Dragons that watched the
Hesperides: I am beset on all hands; my daughters are wily, my wife wilful, my
son I know not what, with the fear of my money, do so distract me, that my
wits are disioynted amongst them, all the remainder of my hopes is, if Valeria
have prooved tractable to Mr. Spruse, and that Dotario has received comfort in
his Aemilia. I labor with expectation till I go in, and be delivered.


Exit Littlegood. Fon. Stay husband, I Will go with you: but hark you son
Lackwit, do you know to what purpose this gold was given you?


Lack. To no purpose at all, but I know, what I purpose to do with it.


Fond. What is it?


Lack. I purpose to make a medicine of it.


Fond. A medicine.


Lac. Yes I will dissolve it into Aurum potabile, and drink nothing but
healths with it.


Fond. Then you are right.


Lac. Nay I will domineer, and have my humors about me too.


Fond. Do any thing, for the improuement of your discipline. Come Crotchet.


Exit Fondling. Lac. Stay Crotchet, do you perceive nothing? you dull animal
look here.


Cro. I sir, I hope you mean to give me one, or two of them.


Lac. No, I will not give, nor lend a friend a penny, there is no such
confutation of a man's being a Gentleman; but when I am drunk, and have my wine
and my whores about me, I Will spend twenty or thirty shillings upon you, but I
will not give you a penny Crotchet.


Crot. Then farewell sir.


Lac. You know where to come to me, you shall find me in my pentificalibus.

Desinis Actus secundus.
ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
Aemilia, Valeria. Aemi. COme sister, though our liberty be straightned,
Our mind stands free, without compulsion,
There Is none can make a rape upon our will.
Well if they understood a women truly,
They would not seek to curb so, whose nature
Rejoices like a torrent, to make way
Spite of impediments. Now if their wisdom
Should let us alone, we might perhaps our selves
Find out the inconvenience, and prevent it,
Which they like a false perspectiue would seek,
To multiply upon us.

Val. I shall never
Recall that faith, which I have plighted once
To my Aurelio. I Will run all hazards,
And violent attempts, to throw my self
Into his arms.

Aemi. I would not have you leave him,
Nor yet turn desperate. Now would I rather
Get him by some devise, I love a witty
And an ingenuous trick above my life:
And should take more delight to overreach them,
Then to enjoy my purpose.

Val. But I dare not
Play with my fortune so, nor trust adventures,
If Fate would be so gracious to present
An opportunity.

Aemi. Come fear it not.
You see what a man they would put upon me,
Might be my father. H' has less vigor in him,
Then any Catamite. There Is not reserved
So much as one masculine grain in him.
A fellow that is as bald, as a Lookinglasse,
And whose diseases are beyond Arithmeticke:
Not a joint of him free, a gowty numnesse
Has seized his feet and fingers, and there is all
The stiffenesse he has left: and were I married
I must spend all my life in rubbing of him
With hot woollen clothes, and applying Plasters,
And Cataplasmes, and trenchers to his belly;
Must undergo the person of a Surgeon,
Not of a wife: and yet I am not terrified:
It moves me not, I make a jest of it;
Because I mean to abuse them all, and choose
Where I like best.

Val. It is a happy spirit,
That rules in you, I would I had one like it.

Aemi. Like me; thou have not studied thy self so well:
Nor have that season of thy mother in thee.
Observe her fashions, take example by them:
Although her husband be penurious,
Hard as the mettle, that he dotes upon.
Yet she can make him mallemable, and work him,
And turn, and hammer him, and wire-draw him,
And rule him with as much correction,
As one would wish to govern. For my part;
When I have stretched my brains, made all the shifts,
The wit of woman can be pregnant of.
And showed my love by such experience,
As shall outstrip belief, all for his sake
That shall enjoy me, which is Master Careless.
And when he has me, if he shall presume,
On former passages of my affection,
To oversway me in the least desire,
To contradict, and tempt my patience,
I Will shake off all obedience, and forget it.
I Will slight him, yet prevail.

Val. Alas my heart is
Tender, and violable with the least weapons,
Sorrow can dart at me.

Aemi. You are a fool,
And every one that will can make you so:
When was your sweet heart Master Spruse here with you?

Val. But lately, and presented such a Scene
Of protestations, and then varied it,
So cunningly, that love and lust together
Were interwoven with such subtle threads,
That I could scarce distinguish them.

Aemi. Take heed,
What ere he speaks, it tends but to corrupt you,
I Would join commerce of language with a Sphinx,
Ere I Would daigne to answer him. Master Careless
Told me his humors, seems he boasted of it,
He gave his character, the most perfideous,
And love abusing creature in the world;
That all his vows were treacherous: his smiles,
His words, and actions, like small Rivulets,
Through twenty turnings of loose passions,
At last would run to the dead sea of sin.

Val. What ere he says, I resolve nere to trust him.


Aemi. Be wise, and constant, and then govern fate:
And in the interim, how ere matters fall,
We I find a trick wench, how to cheat them all.

Actus III.
Scena. II.
Valeria, Aemilia, Spruse. Val. See here he comes again.


Spr. I come sweet Lady,
To rear the trophies of your conquest up.
And yield my self the greatest.

Val. What Is the matter?


Spr. Your looks have taken me prisoner. I am captived,
Bound with the golden chain of your loose hair,
And on your frowns depends my destiny.

Val. It Is about the old matter; you may save
This labor, or go seek some new devise.
In faith these stale exordiums can not take me.

Val. Indeed my sister, and I, know you well enough.


Spr. But Lady since my change you do not know me.
I am now Metamorphis'd, and that fancy
That roved, and was rebellious, by her power
Is brought within command.

Val. I so you told me.


Spr. Here I present a sad oblation.
A heart that brings its own fire with it,
And burns before your beanties diety.
Offered up with as much devotion,
As ever true love sacrifised any.

Val. Well you may jest with mortals, but I am not
So blind, but I can see through all your mists:
Were I a goddess, as you term me one,
Sister to Phoebus, or armd like Minirva,
I would transform you straight; and fix you up
A monument, for your Hypocrisy.

Spr. Now by that sacred shrine, brighter then Venus.
To whom I pay my Orizons: that form
That fair Idea, that rules all my thoughts,
Thy self I mean, that spotless seat of pleasure:
The continent of all perfection,
This spring of love, that issues from my soul.
Runs in a stream as pure, as are your virtues,
Full fraught with zeal, immaculate and free
From all adulterate mixtures.

Val. On my life.
I cannot frame me to believe one word.

Aemi. Hold thy own there wench, and I warrant thee.


Spr. Phoebus, how have I angered thee, to lay
Cassandra's curse on me that was not trusted:
When she spoke true and most prophetically?

Aemi. Sir, he that is accustomed to deceive.
Gains this reward by it when he speaks truth,
Not to be credited.

Spr. Observe me Lady.
And mark the harmony, does it not sound
Upon the string; as if my heart kept touch?

Val. And so it sounded first to the same tune.


Spr. That was ill set, this is a different passion.


Val. But it is all show; and nothing serious.


Spr. You can not judge by former evidence.
It is not fit proof to confirm this motion,
This is a true text, that a false gloss of it.

Val. But I shall never so interpret it.


Spr. What can I say more, then to swear I love you.


Val. But should you now dissolve your eyes to tears,
Were every accent in your speech a sigh,
And every gesture, every motion in you,
An Hierogliphicke to comend that love:
Had you the spells of it, and magic charms
Set round about the circle of your arms,
To draw me to you, I would seal my ears,
Deaf as the sea, to shiprack't mariners:
And so I leave you to your better fortunes.

Exunt Valeria, Aemilia. Valeria looses her ring in a paper. Spr. Am I
despised, and slighted? foolish girl,
The have lost thy self, that which is best in nature,
Turns to the worst corruption, my scorned love
Shall now convert to hatred. It Is decreed,
Fraud and revenge shall be my counselors;
What Is here, a ring? she lost it now. I know it,
The same Aurelio, wont to wear on's finger;
He sent it as a gift, it is so, the poesy.
In love I write
All my grief, all my delight.
The very same. Were I best poison it,
And send it back to her? No, it shall serve
To poison her good name; there is no foul fact,
That Love, when it is injured, dares not act.

Exit. Actus III.
Scena III.
Aurelio, Fido. Aur. Come honest Fido, thy best love supplys,
Part of my hoped fortunes. That's true freindship,
Misery cannot shake, which crowns thy merit.

Fid. Sir, could my power produce forth any thing
Worthy your acceptance, or my service,
I would with hazard of my life perform it.
So much I owe your virtues, so much pity
Your injuryes; but this poor task so easy,
Consisting more of policy, then danger,
Gives not my love an equal testimony.

Aur. You could not do an office more deserving,
Or grateful to my soul, then to bring tidings
How my love fares, each syllable she spoke,
Though by an echo I receive the voice,
Is able to inspire new life into me.
How does she? is she well? and mindful of us:
Speak it a thousand times; never did sound
Touch a more gladsome ear.

Fid. By all curcumstance
I could conjecture, I read in her looks
A strange disturbance. When I gave the ring,
A Letter to her, as if joy and fear,
Had run on several arrants, and returned,
Swift as her thoughts, and spoke her love in silence.

Aur. The have seen the treasury of my happiness.
Speak, am I rich or no?

Fid. She is a Mine,
A storehouse of all beauty, all content:
Her brow a bank of pleasure; her bright eyes
The chief and only moouer of your love,
So multiplied their flames, that they appeared
To me most like a firmament of fires,
Yet chaster then the Vestall; and below
Clouded with sorrow, which dropped pearls for you,
And does enclose a soul richer then it,
Wherein is locked the wardrope of all virtues;
Yet sure that soul had left her mansion,
But that she stays to bid you welcome thither.

Aur. And why should I be staid from going to her?
Why should a couetuous eye watch ore that wealth
That is my right, I will go claim my due,
And justify the seizure. Why should parents,
That can give to their children, neither minds,
Nor yet affections, strive to govern both?
It Is not justice: yet where should I complain?
Love has no bar to plead at, nor no laws
To rule us by, nor Court to judge our cause.

Actus III.
Scena IIII.
Enter Captain Whibble. atshe hat interrupts our quiet sorrow? Fid. Sir, this
is Captain Whibble, the Town stale,
For all cheating employments: a parasite
Of a new sect: none of your foothing Varletts,
But a swearing Sycophant, that frights a man
Into a belief of his worth; his Dialect
Is worse then the report of a Cannon,
And deafes a stranger with tales of his valor,
Till his conclusion be to borrow money.
His company is a Cipher in the reckoning,
'That helps to multiply it: your dear brother
Admires his discipline, and will swear to it.

Aur. Is this one of his comrades?


Fid. Sir, this is
His prime associate. I Will lay a hundred pound,
I guess by his physiognomy his business,
He is either trudging now unto a broaker,
Or to invite some new heir to a breakefast,
To seal for the commodity; or else
Wandering abroad to skelder for a shilling
Amongst your bowling alleyes; most commonly
There lies his scene: or perhapps man some whore,
A province that he usually adornes.

Aur. Prithee good Fido, go and baffull him:
Put an affront upon him, if his valor
Prompt him to make resistance, I Will step out
And second thee.

Fid. His valor? it is the least
Thing to be feared, he has not one spark in him
To kindle a true anger.

Fido instles him Cap. Sulphur of Styx,
Can you not see? Death where be your eyes?
You Would have me wash them in the channel, would you?

Fid. Yes very feign sir, if you durst attempt it.


Cap. Heart, do you stem me? and he had a beak
He might have split me: body of Jupiter,
He ran me athwart the midships. Spirit of fury,
I think that he has sprung a planke in me.

Fid. Then you may lie by the Lee, and mend it.


Cap. Horror of man, lay a Captain aboard.
A man of war, and not cry amain to him?

Fid. How, you a Captain? I rather believe
That you are one of those that upon service,
Were seen to carry Tomkins in your Gunnes,
And made a shift to discharge a league of:
Was it not so? that might take up your bullet,
And shoot again, and do no hurt with it.
You a man of war?

Cap. S'life do you question it?
I Will tell thee Slave to thy astonishment,
I have been styled, the rock of Pirates, I;
I have plowd up the Sea, till Bosphorus
Has worshipped me; I have shot all the Gulphes,
And seen the navell of the world, you stinkard.

Fid. How slave, and stinkard, since you are so stout,
I will see your Commission ere I part.

Cap. Strength of my brains, see my Commission?
I Will blow thee up like a deck. Son of Neptune,
Off or i will fire thee.

Fid. I am grapled with you,
And will hang by your side, till you be calmer,
And be so, or I Will lay my trident on you.
Come to your tacklings.

Cap. It Is a bold active boy,
I see there is nothing to be got but knocks by him.
Give me thy hand old Rover, hoise up thy top Sail,
And go in peace.

Fid. Sir this will not appease me,
I must have satisfaction.

Cap. Reach me thy fist,
And be reconciled: what thou do not know me:
Though I am valiant, yet it is out of the road
Of my humor, to disgrace any man.

Fid. This will not satisfy me.


Cap. I say again,
Give me thy wrist. Know me, and my lodging;
I Will give thee a Supper: there is a good plumpe wench,
My Hostess, a watermans widow at the sign
Of the red Lettice in Southwarke, shall bid thee welcome.

Fid. But I must have you leave your swearing first,
And be temperate.

Cap. Hear me honest Trojan.
As I am virtuous, as I love my friends,
That I may swear.

Fid. No, not as you are virtuous.


Cap. Why then on my word, i will give thee a supper.
What? I will not offend thee my good drumsticke;
I Will conform my self, come to me at night,
And i will be as good as my word, old Bracer.

Fid. But if I come, and loose my labor, what follows?


Cap. Then Teucer, in pure zeal and verity,


Fid. I Will belabour you the next time I meet you.


Cap. What Scufler, do thou think i will fail my friends?
No Hector I scorn it. I Will pawn my cloak first.
Farewell Actorides.

Exit Captain. Enter Aurelio. Aur. What is he gone?


Fid. I, and as glad he has escapt from me,
As from the Syrtes.

Aur. How he bore it out
With impudence?

Fid. Yes did you observe him?
There Is nothing can discountenance him, still
This is his posture, he were excellent,
To venture at a Lottery.

Aur. Why mischief?


Fid. I do not think he would ever draw a blank.


Aur. We must pursue the project. Sup with him
At any hand.

Fid. The jest is behind to see,
In what a miserable perplexity,
He will be put to entertain us.

Aur. Come.


Exeunt. Actus III.
Scena. V.
Dotario, Littlegood, Aemilia. Dot. You know father, for I must still call you
so, how you charged your daughter to use me respectively.


Lit. Yes marry did I: and to show a double duty, as might suite with the
reverence of your age, and honor of her husband.


Dot. Well, and as soon as you were gone, she had no more regard to me, then
if I had been an old horse, or an old Servingman.


Lit. Why it is impossible she should transgress in such a high point of
humanity.


Dot. Else there was some fury in her shape that did so. I am sure she shapt me
out to be the ridiculousest old ass in Europe.


Lit. Her modesty would not permit it in her.


Dot. If my words have any weight in them; she set as light by me, as by the
least feather in her Fan.


Lit. Why is this true Aemilia?


Aemi. No indeed sir.


Dot. How no indeed; do you deny it? O palpable, she reckond up a whole
Catalogue of abuses, and malicious practices, that she would assault me with,
if I were her husband, the least of which were above all patience.


Aemi. Do you think sir, if I intended any such thing, I would have
forewarned you?


Lit. No it is not likely.


Dot. That you had but heard the disgrace she put upon me, in calumniating the
vigor, and ability of my person.


Lit. I cannot believe it.


Dot. And then terrified me, that the wind of her humor should be still
against me, to cross me in every thing I desired, yet the course of my destiny
should be more impetuous then before.


Aemi. The old Gentleman did but dream so.


Dot. Nay more, she said I was an old dry stumpe, that had not the least drop
of moisture in me, yet by the virtue of her humidity, she would make my
temples so supple, that they should sprout, and bud a fresh.


Lit. Come she would not say so.


Dot. Yes, and that all my estate should be too little, to maintain her in
prodigality, and invite acquaintance.


Aemi. Alas good Gentleman, I told him how other women used their husbands,
but I would conform my self to obedience.


Lit. I, that you might know what a blessing you had in her.


Dot. Oh was it so? I cry you mercy, I mistook you. Here take this Pearl for
amends; I am sorry I have sinned against so sweet a simplicity.


Lit. Come I knew you were in an error.


Dot. Then to avoid all cavillation hereafter, see what I have provided.


Lit. What have you there?


Dot. I have here a Syngraphus, a writing with articles, that must be drawn
between us, before there can be any copulation.


Lit. Wherefore, did you so?


Dot. Look you sir, I was in a little suspense of her behavior, and therefore
in relation of that, which I thought she objected, yet has since proved to be
otherwise: notwithstanding these rules, which may so much conduce to my
happiness, and have been so much advised upon with deliberation, I would have
established.


Lit. Pray lets hear them.


Dot. They are only some sew propositions, and exceptions to be observed on
her behalf, for the better security of my quiet, when I shall be married to
her.


Lit. Now I conceive you, read them out.


Dot. First, that after Hymen has once joined us together, she shall admit of
no man whatsoever, to entitle him with any suspicious name of friend, or
servant: do you mark me.


Lit. Well proceed.


Dot. Next* if any of her old acquaintance come to visit her, as Nurses,
Midwifes, and the like, creatures of secrecy, she shall return them word, she
is not within, or otherwise accommodated.


Lit. Very good.


Dot. I Will have it written so upon the doors.


Lit. You may perceive by her silence, she will consent to any thing.


Dot. Then to avoid alloccasions of writing Epistles, she shall receive none,
nor have any Paper, Pen, Ink, or Wax in her closet.


Lit. That Is somewhat hard.


Dot. She shall not have any masculine bawdy Picture hang in her Chamber, but
shall take it down, and sell it away as a thing unprofitable, and an
inticement of fantasy.


Lit. That in my conceit is very reasonable.


Dot. She shall bid no man to dinner, but I will invite them, and when they are
set, she shall not cast amorous glances upon them, nor drink to them, nor
lick her lips at them, nor show her teeth when she laughs, nor her tongue when
she sneezes.


Lit. For all these, i will engage my self.


Dot. Besides, she shall not take upon her, to contrary me in any thing, nor
seem more or less wise then my self.


Lit. That Is not much amiss neither.


Dot. She shall send no Hierogliphicks, nor meat cut in Characters, nor tread
upon any man's foot under the Table, nor when they are risen, give them her
hand to kiss, or open her palm to have her fortune told her, nor yet show
them her ring, or receive any of theirs, and read the poesies.


Lit. Is this all?


Dot. She shall know no language but her own, nor speak any equivocating word.


Lit. In my mind now these laws are very consonant to a good disposition, and
if I were to marry my self, I Would propose the like.


Dot. And for her religion, she may pray to any innocent goddess, as Diana and
the graces, but if she have any thing to say to Mars, Mercury, or Apollo, she
shall acquaint me with it, and I will present her devotions.


Lit. Have you done now?


Dot. Last of all, when she is ready to go to bed, she shall not put out the
candle to walk up and down in her smock, and shake her body in the dark,
and if she be content, I take her as my own.


Lit. All these she shall subscribe to, if she be my daughter.


Dot. Why then we will proceed to the Church?


Lit. Are you agreed or no?


Aemi. Pray let me speak one word with him in private.


Dot. Yes what you-please sweet Lady, it is granted, were it a hundred pound to
buy pins and petticoats.


Aemi. It Is not a thing Sir, of that dear expense:
Though you were pleased to tax me for that crime*
It Is only this, time was, I could not love you;
Though reason since, has rectified my judgment,
And cleared my eyes, that I can see my good.
Then I confess I made a solemn oath,
None should enjoy my love; but he that durst
Attempt to steal me; this is not intended,
For any peril to you, but for safeguard
Of my first vow, which I must needs perform.
Now if you please to come at a set hour,
None but your self, and fetch me, I will yield
To go with you, whither you shall command.

Dot. It Is done bright Hellen, I will be thy Paris,
And fetch thee, though thou were at Lacedemon,
And care not a pin, for all the power of Greece.

Lit. What are you agreed?


Dot. Yes, we are both agreed.
Some few ceremonies, and then we have finish.

Exunt. Actus III.
Scena VI.
Aurelio Fido. Aur. Fido, I am now advised upon a plot,
If it succeed, shall crown my invention.

Fid. Something about the Captain.


Aur. Hang him Kastrill.
I scorn to loose a thought on him; my brains
Repine at his memory. It Is a new devise,
The issue of extremity. It Is thus,
I will turn a desperate Gamester in love,
And venture all upon one cast.

Fid. Take beed sir,
There may be plots, but little policy,
Fortune and love, are insolent, and ticklish.

Aur. Come I Will do it. I Will send thee with a letter
Unto my Mistress, that shall make her mad.

Fido. How, make her mad, what do you expect from that: what can you gain by
the loss of her wits?


Aur. I shall gain my desire.


Fido. And do you prize
The satisfying of a lewd desire
So much, to rob your Mistress of her senses?
Can you accuse her of inconstancy?
Or tax her of dishonesty? Or will you
Prove false to her? what miscief do you intend?
What hopes can you conceive, that may secure
So great a sin from Heavens just punishment?
Have you a drug or incantation,
And think to make her senseless of her grief,
With the privation of her understanding?

Aur. Not any of these.


Fido. If you do, you must employ
Some other messenger. Let me advise you
Keep her in her right mind while you have her:
Love of it self is an illusive spirit,
And will enough distract her without help.

Aur. She shall seem mad but in appearance Fido;
And with that feigned frenzy move a pity
From all, that must impute it to her sufferings.

Fid. Twere a mad jest: but is this all your plot?


Aur. No, this is not the maine one, there is another
Of greater consequence, and secrecy,
For a sound mind to bear, and it is a burden
Worthy thy care and honesty: Think not
I am so desperate and heady, to launch forth
Into those dangerous Seas without a Pilote,
And I have chose thee for my Palinurus.

Fid. You never knew a man of less experience,
I do not kenne one Rock, or Shelfe, and Love
Has many.

Aur. It Is no matter, thou and I
Will sink a Paean to loves victory.

Desinit Actus tertius. ACTVS IIII:
SCENA I.
Careless, Captain, Lievtennant, Lackewit, four Wenches. Care. COme my
voluptuaries, my sons of comfort,
That know no sorrow, sing like Grasse-hoppers
And fear no winter, nor no poverty;
Lead on my moving pillars of delight,
My Alchymists of pleasure, that convert
All like your selves: can make old Cato dance,
And turn Fabricius to an Epicure,
Should he behold you.

Cap. Thou say right Telemachus;
It Is wine, and mirth that breed these raptures in thee.
Body of Jove, there is nothing but a rabble
Of lean and stary'd imaginations
Accompany sobriety: Some wine there,
That I may court my Cockatrice.

Care. Good Captain
Bid our noble friend welcome.

Cap. You know my humor,
To men of ordinary pretense, I seldom
Use to debase my self below the Nod
Of salutation, but for your sake
I receive him as a man deserving.
Give me thy hand Cadmus.

Lack. I desire sir to incorporate my self into your acquaintance.


Car. It Is well said, do the like noble office to our friend here sweet
Lievtennant.


Lieve. Sir he shall command my heart and hand on his occasions, I Will as soon
draw in his quarrel, as to piss against a wall.


Care. These are the mirrours of the time old boy, that shall show you how to
adorn your behavior, that you may pass in all company with confidence of
approbation.


Cap. And not err the breadth of a nail.


Liev. He shall be able to pass through the needles of all occurrences.


Lack. And they would but learn me to swear and take Tobacco, it is all I
desire.


Care. Come they shall do it, and I must tell you, these suggestions in you
are arguments of a generous disposition, whence do they flow I wonder?


Lack. That mother wit that put them in my head, has put money in my purse, and
as far as that money will lead me, I will be bold and wise: I have my
humors, and I scorn the pollution of the Mechannicks.


Care. How do you like these replies Captain?


Cap. Very well, by the faith of a soldier, excellent well, they are good
rellishing answers, and express an ebullition in his nature, swelling to
conformity.


Lack. What, I will bear my self like a Gentleman.


Cap. I, and the way to bear your self like a Gentleman, is sometimes not to
be able to bear your self at all. Lievetennant, what say you?


Liev. I say by Hermes, he that has a fortune,
And power to acquaint the world with his perfections,
And seeks to smother them, let him dye wretched.

Care. You have no other way then this, to render you worthy of society.


Cap. What, he may turn stinkard, and live in the Country with roots and
bacon, and not drink a cup of good wine in a twelve-moneth, nor know how the
year goes about, but by observation of Husbandry. He may keep two couple of
dogs and a Sparrow-hawk, and level his discourse by them. He may be styled a
civil Gentleman, ten sphaeres below a fool: He may marry a Knights daughter,
a creature out of fashion, that has not one commendable quality, more then to
make a corner pie and a sallad, no manner of courtship, but two or three
dances, as old as Mounsier, and can play a few Lessons on the Virginalls that
she learnt of her Grandam: besides she is simple, and dull in her dalliance.


Care. He tells thee right my brave Frisker, they are lumpish girls, heavy in
their sport, and cannot move with art.


Cap. There Is a wench, has her Suburb tricks about her I warrant you: hold
there Bellerophon, take thy Ocyrois, and mount her like Phlegon.


Lack. Now do I want some two or three good oaths, to express my meaning
withal.


Liev. Captain, what think you, shall he be a brother?


Care. Yes he deserves it, let him be a brother.
Give him the principles of the brotherhood.

Cap. Are you resolved to be a brother sir?


Lack. Any thing I, you shall make a blowing horn, or what you list of me.


Cap. Nothing can be suddenly perfect, but must aspire by progression, he must
be practiced in certain duties, before he can be an ingrafted member of the
fraternity.


Care. He shall do any thing that is requisite.


Cap. Well then, for the first two months we must dine every day at a Tavern,
where it shall be lawful for any brother to bring his shadow with him; and
besides the full income of wine and provision, to bespeake any superfluous dish
that he affects: but that which shall most commend the discretion of your
worth, is, that after the dissolution of the Feast, no man besides your self
must know what is to pay, or take notice of the reckoning.


Lack. I must pay all, must I?


Cap. You understand me rightly, and I applaud your capacity; from thence, we
must have a Coach attend at the door, to carry us to a Play, and at night to a
Bawdy House.


Lack. And all at my charges?


Cap. What else? And if any brother need a Cloak, or a Suit, or so, you must
not stay till he publish or intimate his wants; but presently, by the strength
of your own Minerva, pick out the meaning, and take order to supply him: have
you any credit with the Tradesmen?


Lack. Yes, I have a Tailor that will trust me for any thing that I Will have him.


Cap. That Tailor shall have custom, tell him so; and one thing more, now
brother, for so I must call you, we must have all things in common, no
difference in the possession of any thing.


Lack. Pray explain that rule to me, I do not understand you.


Cap. Why thus; this Hat is mine, and that yours, as you conceive now, but they
are neither mine nor yours upon the premises: but may be transferred upon
occasion to either, as thus, do you conceive me? It Is usual amongst us.


Lack. It Is very well, is this all?


Cap. I Will make but one experiment more of your apprehension, and have done.
Look you.

They shift cloakes.
Lack. O I shall do this to a hair, and by the same consequence I shall be a
Captain sometimes: shall I not?


Cap. Yes, when the date of your task is accomplished, you shall be any thing.


Care. It Is enough, this once a week will render him exact. Shall's have a song
and a dance Captain?


Cap. Hang a Song, you see what little room we have for our mirth, and you
would fill it up with air, would you?


Care. Nay, but by that air, I hold a Song very delightsome, the very place,
as a man would say, and superficies of pleasure.


Cap, Prithee let it alone, by that element it charms me into melancholy.


Lack. Then good Captain let us have a Dance, for these Gentlewomens sakes;
besides there be many that come to see nothing else.


Cap. Why can you dance?


Lack. What a question is there to a man of quality? Yes I can dance, and that
some that are here shall see and feel before we part; for I mean to shake my
heels with that fervor, that it shall strike them into a fit of my love,
shall be worse then any ague to them.


Cap. Say you so? We Will try that in faith. Come on Squeakers, rack up our feet
and ears to your Instruments.


Lack. What tune Captain?


Cap. Play us the fine Companion.


The Dance. Well said my efteminate Varlets, this was auspiciously performed.

Lack. I am afraid this dancing will breed spavins in my legs, this caper has
put me in remembrance of a clicke in my back, I got at my last vaulting.


Cap. No thou art deceived my noble Hyacinth, it is a mystery will exalt thee
Hylas, 'twill make thee rise I say, and put gold in thy purse, thou shall
follow the Court like a Baboone, when a thousand proper fellows shall sherke
for their ordinary; 'twill make thee conversant with Ladies, and they shall
give thee Diamonds to pawn, and thou shall ride up and down in thy foot-cloth
my little Dolphin Some wine there Tony: I called for wine an hour ago, and
could get none.

Enter Drawer. Fill out sirrah. What Is here the Epitome of a glass? By the
womb of Bacchus, a score of them are too little for a draught.


Lack. O Lord Captain, nine such hornets are able to sting a man to death.


Liev. By Saint George he that dies so, dies valiantly.


Cap. What my bold Bravo, be not afraid, and thou were dead 'twere nothing, I Will
come but with a troop of Wenches: and a noise of Fiddlers, and play thee back
like Orpheus. What Is to pay Drawer?


Draw. Sir you have built a sconce since you came in of thirty pounds, and
before you have any more, my Master intends to be satisfied.


Cap. What money have you brother?


Lack. Who I? O Lord brother Captain, I have not the third part of it.


Cap. No matter, I nere think upon such transitory reckonings: come, lets have
a health, and my brother Lackwit shall begin it. Reach three Joint stools
hither Drawer.


Lack. What to do Captain?


Cap. I Will show you, you shall ascend here, and be Captain of this Fort: I Will
insconce you; come entrench your self, and play from your Battery, and so
every man round, there take your Lintstocke in your hand, and give fire, now
every man as far off as he can from the command of his Ordinance. Farewell
brother.


Exeunt. Lack. Why Gentlemen, I hope you will not use me so, (...) your
brother, why Gentlemen.


Cap. There Drawer, take him for a pawn, tell him when he has no money he must
be served so, it is one of his chief articles.


Enter Crotchet. Cro. How now, what are you preaching ore your cups? Now you
are in your Pontificalibus indeed.


Lack. Good Crochet help me down, I shall break my neck else.


Cro. How came you there?


Lack. I know not, an ill hour of the brotherhood, I Will after them with a
vengeance.


Draw. You must stay and pay the reckoning first, besides the Musicians expect
something.


Lack. Who I pay the recknoning? 'Slight I came but now in.


Draw. That Is all one, you were all of a nest, they are flowne away, and
there is none left but your self.


Lack. God's Death the Captain is gone away with my Hat, and my cloak too, I tell
thee I Will pay no reckoning.


Draw. It Is all one to me, if you can satisfy my Master so.


Lack. What shall I do Crochet?


Cro. Give him what you have, and if he will take your word for the rest, I Will
excuse your Hat and cloak, and say you lost them in a skirmish; you must
scratch your hands in half a dosen places with a pin.


Lack. I so I will, come sir, I Will go in and talk with your Master.


Cro. Besides, I have another business I came to tell you of, that you and I
must do together, you shall reap the whole credit on it your self, if you
can manage it handsomely, 'twill gain you that reputation with your Father,
that you shall never loose your self while you live again.


Lack. What is it Crochet?


Cro. Go in and I Will tell you.


Exeunt. Actus IIII.
Scena II.
Aurelio, Spruse. Aur. You much amaze me.


Spr. Sir perhaps I might
With better judgment, and more thanks conceal
So great a wickedness, but my true love to you
Could not withhold it, you have read some stories,
And these are things not unheard of in nature,
No newness at all, the self same lust and pride,
As well rules her that treads upon the flint,
As her that rides upon the necks of slaves.

Aur. Stay let me pause awhile; she is a woman,
Whose age and form might tempt me to distrust her,
But yet her manners forbid me to believe it.

Spr. Beleev't? She is a close Adulteress,
Of most strange exercise, a Fricatrice
Insatiable: and has she none but you,
That she can find to bayt with her allurements,
To cover her lewd projects? This moved me,
I Would not have meddled else.

Aur. O do not wrong her,
Good sir do not wrong her, it cannot be.

Spr. You have bin still kept ignorant, for my part,
I never yet expected better from them
I count them but as ordinary chances,
Trivial, and drawn out from the lap of Fortune.
Believe me sir, there is no day so holy,
That ceases to betray a woman's falsehood,
My medicine works, I shall be even with her.

Aur. I sought at first to make her mad in jest,
But now I Will make her mad in earnest: yet
It Is not good to be too credulous; a word sir.
I must have better proofs then your bare word,
To justify this accusation;
Her virtue must not stumble at a straw.

Spr. Sir it is not threats that can extort from me,
More then I list to speak: I see you troubled,
And therefore will not leave you in suspense;
Know that I made my self experiment.
He shows the Ring. For all let this confirm you: this she gave me
Upon the premises.

Aur. O I shall burst:
Here is a sight to make the Sun run backward;
Good sir forgive me, that I pressed you so,
Consider't as your own case: were you he,
That put your confidence, your happiness,
All in a woman's love, and found her false?

Spr. I must confess I think it would afflict me:
I Will leave you sir, I have discharged my conscience.
But of more ill, then she has goodness in her.

Exit Spruse. Actus IIII.
Scena. III.
Fido, Aurelio. Fid. How now what Planet struck? how do you sir?
This it is to be in love: what alterations
It breeds? it makes a man forget his friends.
Come sir be merry, your project has took.
She fell into her fit, soon as she read it,
And tore the papers and talked idly, and showed
The symptoms of the prettiest lunacie.
What have you lost your speech? those folded arms,
And rownes, express a sorrow, more then love.
His eyes, though fixed upon their object, show
The wandering sphere of his disturbed mind,
Is whirld about in error. Pray look up sir.

Aur. I am not dumb, I have a care within me,
Speaks to my troubled soul.

Fid. Why what is the matter?


Aur. O hear it then, and witness it for ever.
When ere thou feast a woman, in whose brow,
Are writ the characters of honesty,
And calls the gods to justify her truth,
Swear she is a Siren, and a Crocodile.
Conclude her false, it is enough she vows,
And speaks thee fair, the winds wait on her lips,
Straight to disperse her oaths.

Fid. You do but jest sure


Aur. There is not one of them, that is the same
She would appear to be; they all are painted.
They have a Fucus for their face, an other
For their behavior, their words, and actions.

Fid. Come come, these are but qualmes of jealousy.


Aur. Give no faith to their brow: for in that green
And flourishing field of seeming virtue, lurkes
A Snake of lust, in whose voluminous wreaths,
Are folded up a thousand treacheries,
Plots, Mischiefs, and dissimulations,
That man nere thought of. For in wickedness,
The wit of woman was nere yet found barren.

Fid. I think he means to be mad himself too:
Your reprehensions are too general:
For by these words your own Valeria suffers.

Aur. Why there is the sum of all that I have spoke,
The abstract of all falsehood. It Is a name, will
Blister the tongue of fame, in her report
Is drowned the memory of all wicked women.

Fid. Is your Valeria false?


Aur. Once my Valeria, but now mine no more,
(For they are perished that have lost their shame)
Is fallen from virtue past recovery.
The golden Organs of her innocence
Are broke, not to be solderd

Fid. In my conscience
You wrong her, this is nothing but the abundance
Of love; will you go and sup with the Captain?
And drive away melancholy.

Aur. O no, my heart
Is shut against all mirth.

Fid. Then I Will go seek
Your brother out, and he shall go along with me:
I Will show him with a perspectiue in faith,
What a brave Captain he has: he shall be
In a disguise, as my Companion,
Then if he will maintain a Paradox,
That he is either valiant, or honest,
I Will be made the scorn of their company.

Aur. But my fate guids me to the contrary:
For if my Mistress do not honest prove,
She has put a period to my life and love.

Actus IIII.
Scena IIII.
Lackwit, Crotchet. Crot. Come, be not dismayed, what ere you say,
I Will swear it: you must affirm you lost your hat
And cloak in a skirmish.

Lack. So I will Crotchet.
Mass thou were not with us at the first neither.

Crot. Why what if I had sir?


Lack. Thou might have carried
Away two or three of the Captains oaths with thee.

Crot. I can coin them my self without any treason I warrant you.


Lack. Oh Crotchet, I am thinking now, how bravely i will live, when my father is
dead.


Crot. Yes, pray let me hear you.


Lac. I have drawn the map of it already: I Will go every day in my cloak lind
with plush, and my bever hat, I Will keep my whores, and my running horses, and
i will maintain thee in as good a pyed livery, as the best footman of them all
goes in.


Enter Littlegood. Lit. You will sir, what ungratious villain could have said
this? where is your cloak and your hat? yes you shall have money to spend an
other time.


Enter Fondling. Fond. How now what is the matter?


Lit. Look you, do you know this Gentleman?


Fond. How comes this about?


Crot. Nothing but the fortune of the wars forsooth: my young master has
been in as stout a fray as ever the Genius of Fleetstreet trembled at.


Fond. How was it son?


Lack. Let Crochet relate. I scorn to be the trumpet of mine own valor, I.


Fond. Do, tell the story, Crochet.


Cro. Indeed he made them all run away, that I am certain of.


Fond. Nay but show us the manner of it.


Cro. Why forsooth I came at the latter end of the feast, and the beginning of
the fray, and there my young Master was got above them all, and stood upon his
Guard, and held his weapon in his hand so dreadfully, as it he would have
powered down his fury upon any man that should come near him.


Fond. And will you be angry with him for this? 'twas well done, take no wrong
of them, better loose all the clothes off from his back, then to keep a
cloak for his cowardice.


Cro. Now is the time to move the other business.


Lack. Well mother, if you will give me twenty pound more, I Will do you such a
piece of service, that you shall thank me for it as long as you live.


Fond. What is it son?


Lack. Nay you shall not know, before it be done: the conclusion shall crown
it.


Fond. Well husband, give it this once, and I Will urge you no more, lets see how
the Boy will employ it.


Lit. Yes, send one arrow after an other and loose both.


Fond. Nay, but give it him for my sake, I am confident he has a good project;
you have example for it in your trade. How many have you, that break daily,
and yet their friends set them up two or three times one after an other?


Lit. Once more you shall prevail with me. Here hold, but if this miscarry,
nore ask me for a penny again.


Lack. I warrant you, come Crochet.


Fond. Must Crochet go with you?


Lack. Yes, it is a business that can not be done by one alone*


Cro. Well Mistress, pray throw an old shoe after us.


Actus IIII.
Scena V.
Fido, Careless disguised, Captain. Cap. Gentleman you are very welcome. What
Hostess, come hither good Hostess.


Enter Hostess. Fid. You have a good handsome Hostess, I perceive Captain.


Cap. She is cleanly and good condition'^ ^hats my comfort, and by the power of
beauty, if a man were combusti^le, he might find in her eyes, that would
kindle a conflagration.


Host. What Gentlemen be these Captain?


Cap. Peace good Hostess, I would not willingly proclaim their disgrace: one
of them is a Gentleman, that I bastinadoed the other day; and now he is come to
give me a Supper, to be reconciled to me, but take you no notice.


Fid. Captain here is a friend, that I would willingly commend to your
acquaintance.


Cap. Sir as I am a true soldier, I embrace your love in him, and that's as
much as I can say. Hostess these are not ordinary guests with you; therefore
you must be respectfull: and faith if you say the world Gentlemen, one of these
nights, we will every man procure as many of our acquaintance as we can, and be
merry here at Supper for crowns a piece. What think you?


Fid. This is not the business we come about sir.


Cap. I know it well enough. Hostess, prithee good sweet, honey Hostess, step
and buy us a joint or two of good meat, and a Capon, and lay it to the fire
presently.


Host. Where Is the money?


Cap. Death to my honor, do not question it, but do as I bid you.


Host. I have not sixpence in the world, the Cobbler had all I had, for mending
of your boots.


Cap. Go you must make shift, and get more then.


Host. Why if these Gentlemen come to bestow a Supper on you, let them give me
money aforehand.


Cap. Speak lower woman, art mad?


Host. I tell you I have not a penny in the house.


Cap. Speak lower I say. Go borrow it of thy neighbors, I Will see it paid.


Host. Yes and turn me behind the door for my reckoning; You have served me
so I know not how often, no I have trusted you too much already: you have not
paid me a penny for your lodging, since you came to my house, besides what I
have lent you out of my purse.


Cap. Bane to my credit, you will exile me beyond the confine^ of ^eputation:
go pawn some Pewter, or one of thy brass pots. S'light do not disgrace me,
do any thing rather, take the sheets off from my bed.


Host. Yes, you care not what becomes of any thing. Why can you not ask them
for money?


Cap. S'life, a man may plot till his heart ache, and you still seek to cross
me, you will undo me in my designs.


Host. You have more signs in your head, then hang at all the Alehouses in
town again.


Cap. Prithee woman, hear me what I say. I know they come to spend upon me,
and will crouch, and do any thing, yet when I out of my nobleness, and beyond
expectation, shall use them so courteously, 'twill be such an engagement, that I
can borrow ten or twenty pieces of them at my pleasure.


Host. I tell you I can not do it, nor I will not.


Exit Hostess. Cap. Faith Gentlemen I must entreat you to excuse me, my
Hostess is not very well she tells me, and I think she is not so well
stored with necessaries to entertain you, as I could wish; and indeed she has
nere a spitt in the house, therefore we will deferr it till to morrow night, when
'twill be more convenient at a Tavern.


Fid. Well sir, your excuse shall prevail, we are not inexorable upon
extremity.


Cap. In his you have won me to your observance for ever.


Fid. Captain I have another thing to propound to you, here is a friend of
mine has lately received injury from one Master Careless, and upon debatement
of the matter, this Gentleman is so apprehensiue of his disgrace, that he can
not possible put it up with safety of his reputation, and therefore desires to
have it determined in plain field. Now as he is informed, his adversary
accepts of it, and has chosen you for his patron in the quarrel.


Cap. By the shine of Phoebus, I wonder what strange impudence has possessed him.
As I am a man to honor, I have brought him successively off from a hundred of
these, to the perrill of my life, and yet am daily obnoxious to new assaults
for him.


Fid. Then you disclaim to have any hand in the action.


Cap. By the passion of valor, Gentlemen I Will tell you, I love a noble
employment with my life, but for such a pitiful, drunken, shallow coxcombe, I
hate to be seen in such a business.


Fid. Do you think no better of him, Captain? if he be so unworthy, I would
advise you not to meddle with him.


Cap. By the faith of a Soldier, if he have any care of his credit, let him not
deal with him, he will but defile himself with such an abject: I hold him to
be so poor conditioned, I would not enter a Country Gentleman upon him.


Fid. Yet you keep him company, Captain.


Cap. I confess I have done, and my intendments were good in it; I saw him so
raw, and young, I was induced to believe there might be some hopes of him: but
after much impulsion, when I found him so unapt, and indocile in his own
nature, I gave him lost, and so I esteem of him, by my life.


Careless puts off his disguise. Car. Oh thou treacherous villain, do thou
betray me to my self, and belie me to my face? how many quarrels have you
brought me off from?


Cap. Never none by Jove.


Car. I will not rail at you, but I will cudgel you, and kick you, you man
of valor.


Cap. Hold as thou art a man of renown, thou will strike thy foot into me
else, my body is as tender as a bogg.


Car. Thou cowardly perfidious rascal: have I for this made thee my associate,
paid for thy swaggerings, and breaking of Tapsters, and Ostlers pates, fed thee
at a charge a man might have built an Hospital; drencht thee with Sack, and
Tobacco, as thy face can witness?


Cap. Oh hold as thou art worshipful.


Car. Come sir surrender your robes, that you have polluted with cosenage. Here
Fido, take this hat and cloak: I will not leave him a covering for his
knavery: these are the trophies of your treachery, these.


Cap. Nay good sir do not pillage me of all, stay till I get my own again.


Car. If Lackwit will restore them he may, else you must resolve to go
bareheaded before your right worshipful fortune, with a truncheon in your hand
like a Verger, and so I leave you. Come Fido now for my Mistress.


Cap. Well, those good qualities that are bred in a man, will never out of him
that's my comfort.

And since I am the scorn of Captains made,
I Will seek a better and more thriving trade.

Actus IIII.
Scena. VI.
Aurelio, Spruse. Aur. Come sir, now I have found you, not the power,
And strength of fate, shall pull you from my vengeance.
And though I know thy life too mean a ransom
For the redeeming of the pricelesse loss
Of her abused honor, Yet what Nature
Enables thee to pay, I Will take in part,
And leave the execution of the rest
Unto Hels justice.

Spr. What do you intend sir?


Aur. Look you: to unfold your heart sir with this sword,
And read the falsehood that is written in it.
Come I must know the truth, and reason too,
If there be reason for a wicked act.

Spr. You mean about Valeria?


Aur. The same.

Still an ill conscience will betray it self,
And sends forth many a scowling, fearful look,
To descry danger; if he stand confident,
And justify it to the face of terror,
Then she is false.

Spr. I hear she is run mad.


Aur. Is, and the cause of her distemperature
Is the reproach you put upon her honor.

Spr. The wound then is too deep, and an ill Fate
Has driven the shaft of my intended malice
Beyond the scope I aimed at.

Aur. Was it malice?
That word has struck me both with joy and anger,
Both in suspense, which should weight down the scale
Of my deep burdned mind. What horrid baseness
Durst so attempt to profane innocence?

Spr. It was my love to her.


Aur. What is his hate,
Whose love has proved so ominous?

Spr. That love
Being wronged, begot that hate.

Aur. Thou have done ill.
And like a foolish and young Exorcist,
Have conjured up a spirit of that fury,
Thy art cannot allay.

Spr. Repentance may.
I only meant to give her name a gash,
That might be healed again without a scarre,
Or any spreading plaster of wide rumor,
With help of her compurgators, but only
To vex her.

Aur. What Is the offense that did provoke
This imputation? Did she ever wrong you?
Malign your wit? Disgrace you before your Mistress?
Disparage your behavior? Had she done so,
Yet this revenge were disproportionate.

Spr. Urge me no more, I cannot look on her
Without such a reflection of my crime,
As must give shame a luster; there is no man
But once in's life may sin besides his nature,
Nay perhaps contrary: this is a deed
I must abhor to justify.

Aur. You have given
Almost a satisfaction.

Spr. It Was a scandal,
Arose from my repulse, and has no witness
Besides your ears; if it were silenced there,
The world were ignorant of it; I hear
She is run mad upon the grief, I am sorry
Her punishment has outstript my desires.
I Will undertake, what ere you shall propose,
For the recovery of her wits, or honor.

Aur. And I Will make use of your kind profer sir.


Spr. I will resign her where she most affects,
And give you all assistance to obtain her.

Aur. You speak honestly, I shall employ you;
I know you have that credit with her father,
You may advise him in a thing that reason
Shall seem to second; bring but this to pass,
You have made requital for all injuries.

Spr. Show me the way, I Will do it; be you the mover,
I Will be the instrument.

Aur. You are my Genius,
My hope, my opportunity, my Fate;
And in effecting this you cannot err,
To make me happy, and recover her.

Desinit Actus quartus ACTVs V.
SCENA I.
Lackwit with a Headpiece and a long sword, Crochet, Careless disguised like
Dotario. Lack. HOw do I look now Crochet?


Cro. Very dreadfully: like a Citizen in a fray, as fear full as Priapus in a
garden.


Lack. Well, and thou art sure there is but one of them, and he comes disguised
like Dotario, to steal away my sister?


Cro. Yes sir, and this is the old Gentleman himself, and somebody has stole
away his habit to abuse him.


Lack. That man that has done so shall think of me and this place as long as
he lives for it: Go and give warning Crochet, that no man withstand me,
unless he be weary of his life.


Cro. If any man be so hardy, let him take his chance.


Lack* Let him expect my fury Crochet. I will batter any man that shall come
near me, my fist is like a Sling, my head like a Ram, and my whole body an
Engine, and I will make any man toothlesse that shall offend me.


Cro. Then you will make his mouth as unserviceable as your fathers gumm'd
velvet.


Lack. I long to exercise my puissance: thou art sure there is but one of them?
stand by a little, and let me flourish with my sword, to animate my spirits;
now whatsoever he is, that comes in my way, I pronounce him to be a miserable
mortal.

Crochet pulls out 3 or 4 Napkins. What have thou there Crochet.


Cro. I imagined there would be a great deal of blood spilt in the skirmish,
and so I brought these to wipe the wounds, nothing else sir: look you here
they come.


Enter Dotario, Aemilia. Lack. Give by Crochet, till I question them: it
behooves a wise man to deal with words, before he descend to blows: what
arrant knight are you sir? and whither do you travel with that Damsel?


Cro. Press that point home.


Dot. O brother Lackwit, how came you so accoutred? or were you set here for a
watchman to guard us?


Lack. No sir, I do not guard, nor regard any man, and yet I Will stand upon my
guard, and this is the point I Will maintain.


Dot. What do you mean brother Lackwit?


Lack. How, I your brother? No, I scorn to have affiance with such a
conny-catcher: you sir Nessus, deliver up your theft, or I will play the
Hereules with you.


Dot. I am going to marry her, my name is Dotario, and this is your sister
Aemilia.


Lack. I, she is my sister, but you are a counterfeit, and have stolen her away.


Cro. Seize her for fellons goods, she belongs to the Lord of the soil.


Lack. Thou villain, do thou not know, if I were dead, and her other sister,
she would be next heir, and then thou might be hanged for her?


Dot. But I had her consent, and her fathers, my name is Dotario your
neighbor, that have fed you with custard and apple-pie a hundred times.


Lack. I, this Gentleman has, but you have abused him, and took his wrong name
upon you.


Dot. I am the same.


Cro. He lies, beat him for lying, what do you stay for?


Lack. I am considering with my eye, which part of him I shall first cut off.


Cro. Let Us bind him fast, and then lay him upon his back, and geld him.


Lack. A match. Let Us lay hold on him; what is he gone? how finely might my
father have been cheated, and all we now, if I had not been: that is some
roguing Servingman disguised I Will lay my life on it; if I be not fit to be
chronicled for this act of discretion, let the world judge of it. Well Crochet,
when I have married her to the right party, if my father does not give me forty
pounds more, he shall marry the next daughter himself.


Cro. You must not be too sudden now in the opening of your plot, after you
have married them.


Lac. Advise me good Crochet.


Cro. Why before you reveal your proceedings, you shall present your self
with a great deal of confidence, and promise of desert; walk up and down,
with a joyful agony, and a trembling joy, as if you had escapt from a breach,
or redeemed your country: then when you see them sufficiently filled with
expectation, you may draw the curtain of your valor, and stound them with
admiration.


Lack. So I will Crochet, come let us to the Church.


Exeunt. Actus. V.
Scena. II.
Littlegood, Spruse, Fondling, Fido. Spr. Come Master Littlegood, be comforted,
I have as great a share in the misfortunes
Of your distracted daughter, as your self.

Lit. O do not say so, she was all my joy.


Fido. Then men begin to understand their good,
When they have lost it, and an envious eye
Seeks after virtue when it is extinct,
That hated it alive.

Lit. You have reason
To pity me the more, and lament for her,
Because I destined her in marriage to you.

Spr. And I had well hoped to have been made happy
In her affection, a true Lovers griefs
Transcend a parents.

Lit. No, you are deceived,
A parent is confined, and his joys bounded,
And only limited to such a subject,
And driven from thence, have no where else to rest on:
For if his children be once taken from him,
Which are the cause, then his delight and comfort,
That are the effects, needs must vanish with them:
But in a Lover it falls otherwise,
Such as your self, whose passion, like a deaw,
Can dry up with the beams of every beauty
That shall shine warm upon you, need not prize
The loss of any; you have no alliance,
Nor natural tie commands you to love any,
More then your fancy guides you; and the winds
Have not so many turnings, nor the Sands
So many shiftings, nor the Moon changes.

Fido. Sir you speak truth, upon my knowledge that,
He is as slippery, as an Eele, in love,
And wriggles in and out, sir, at his pleasure;
He can as easily dispense with vows,
As swear them; and can at a minutes warning,
If an occasion serve, supply himself
With a continual, and fresh entertainment
Of a new Mistress.

Spr. Troth I must confess,
I have been a little faulty that way.

Fon. And why would you sir, knowing this before,
Suffer your daughter to be abused by him?
Now by my life, I think, and 'twere not for me,
You Would wind your self into such Labyrinths,
You Would not know how to extricate your self.

Lit. Peace good Wife, since there is no remedy.


Spr. Do not despair, there is yet remedy;
I know a scholar, a great Naturallist,
Whose wisdom does transcend all other Artists,
A traveller besides, and though his body
Be distant from the Heavens, yet his mind
Has pierced unto the utmost of the Orbs,
Can tell how first the Chaos was distinguished,
And how the Sphaeres are turned, and all their secrets,
The motion and influence of the stars,
The mixture of the Elements, and all
The causes of the Winds, and what moves the earth,
And then he has subjected to his knowledge
The virtues, and the workings of all herbs,
And is an Aesculapius in Physic,
No grief above his art.

Lit. Can he heal mad folks?


Spr. Were they as mad as Ajax Telamon,
That slew an Ox in stead of Agamemnon,
He Will warrant them.

Fond. How should one speak with him?


Spr. I brought him with me, he is at the door.
Prithee go call him Fido, you shall hear him,
And as you like his speech, so credit him.

Enter Aurelio like a Doctor. Lit. Is this the man?


Spr. This is the Doctor sir.
I am bold to make relation of your skill here
To this old Gentleman, who has a daughter
That is suspected to be mad.

Aur. Suspected, is she no otherwise?


Lit. She is stark mad.


Aur. It came by love?


Lit. Yes sure, what think you on it?


Au. An ordinary disease, and cure, in some things
I am of an opinion that Stertinius
The Stoic was, who held all the world mad.

Fond. As how, good Master Doctor?


Aur. Thus I prove it;
What is ambition, and covetousness,
Or luxury, or superstition,
But madness in men? and these reign generally.
Your Lawyer trots, and writes, as he were mad,
His Clyent is madder then he; your Merchant that marryes
A fair wife, and leaves her at home, is mad:
Your Courtier is mad to take up silks and velvets
On ticket for his Mistress; and your Citizen
Is mad to trust him.

Fido. Nay he is a rare man,
And has done many and strange Cures sir.

Aur. I have indeed.


Fond. Pray relate some of them.


Aur. To satisfy your Ladyship, I will.


Fond. Yes good Sir, let us hear them.


Aur. Then I Will tell you. There was once an Astrologer brought mad before me,
the circulations of the Heavens had turned his brains round, he had very
strange fits, he would ever be staring, and gazing, and yet his eyes were so
weak, they could not look up without a staff.


Spr. A Jacobs staff you mean?


Aur. I, and he would watch whole nights, there could not a star stir for
him, he thought there was no hurt done, but they did it, and that made him look
so narrowly to them.


Fond. How did you heal him sir?


Aur. Only with two or three sentences out of Picus Mirandula, in confutation
of the act; and as many out of Cornelius Agrippa, for the vanity of it.


Fond. That was excellent.


Aur. The next was a Soldier, and he was very furious; but I quieted him, by
getting his arrerages paid, and a Pension for his life.


Fond. You took a hard task in hand, Mr Doctor.


Aur. But the most dangerous of all was a Puritan Chandler, and he ran mad with
illuminations, he was very strangely possessed, and talked idly, as if he had had
a noise of bells in his head; he thought a man in a Surplesse to be the Ghost
of Heresy, and was out of love with his own members, because they were called
Organs.


Fond. O monstrous!


Aur. I and held very strange positions, for he counted Fathers to be as
unlawful in the Church, as Plato did Poets in his Commonwealth, and thereupon
grounded his conclusion for the lawfulness of whoredom; for he said that
marriage, as it is now used, was the only ringleader of all mischief.


Fond. How did you heal him sir?


Aur. Why Lady with certain pills of sound doctrine, and they purged his ill
humors.


Lit. That was very speedy.


Aur. Then there was a Musician that run mad with Crochets, the fit was so
violent upon him, that he would nothing but sound perpetually.


Fond. How did you with him sir?


Aur. I served him as Hercules served his Master Linus, broke his Fiddle about
his pate, and sent him away without ere a penny, and that brought his head in
tune.


Fond. I Will remember this in faith.


Aur. Then there was a Huntsman that was very wood, he would nothing but hoope
and hollow, and was wonderfully in love with an Echo.


Fond. How did you reclaim him?


Aur. Why I served him in his own kind, he had a very handsome wench to his
wife, and while he was playing the Cephalus abroad, and courting his Aura, I
turned him into an Actaeon at home, set a fair pair of horns on his head,
and made him a tame beast.


Fond. Husband that was exellent, was it not?


Aur. I cured a poet too, and indeed, they are a generation that are little
better then mad at all times: I was feign to give him over, because himself,
and others took such delight in his fury. I could not tell what to make of
him, his disease was so pretty and conceited, and he was no sooner well, but he
would presently fall into a relapse. I could make relation of a thousand such,
as Painters, Alchymists and the like, but it would be tedious.


Lit. Nay sir, we are confirmed of your skill. Will you have my daughter
brought forth to you sir, that you may see her in her fit?


Aur. No by no means, 'twill spend her spirits too much. I Will take her home
with me, and anoint her brows with a little Helleborum, and some other
receipts that I Will give her, and I Will warrant you, I Will bring her safe too in
three hours, and well recovered.


Spr. Sir, you will do an office, that will not more deserve honor then
reward.


Aur. Sir, I shall desire nothing but my pains for my satisfaction.


Fond. Good sweet Fido conduct him in, and go along with him, that if any
hereafter shall be so averse, in his ignorance, to all goodness, as to
question this miracle, you may be produced as a witness.


Lit. And what will you do sweet wife?


Fond. Why I Will stay here, and expect my son Lackwit, with his project. He
sent me word he would come presently, and see where he enters.

Enter Lackwit, Crochet.
Lack. Crochet, bid them stay without, till I call for them. Make room there,
and let such produce there Game, that have good cards to show.


Fond. How now son Lackwit; whither away so furious?


Lack. I am sure all the wit and valor I had, was at stake for it.


Lit Why what is the matter


Lack. There was old shuffling and cuting amongst them, and I had not spied
their knavery they might have put a trick upon us, faith.


Fond. Why were you at cards son?


Lack. No, I was at dice. I came the Caster with some of them I think, and I
had like to have made their bones rattle for it. There was a Rooke would have
gone at In and In with my sister, if I had not made a third man, he would have
swept all away, and wiped our noses when he had done.


Fond. Tell us how was it son?


Lack. No matter how; but if I have not played the wise man now, and done an act
worthy of applause, let me be hist off for my labor.


Lit. Letts hear, what is it?


Lack. If it be no more thanks worthy, I Will tell you at my leisure, when you
have prepared your understanding.


Lit. What is it Crochet?


Lack. Peace sirrah, I Will have no man tell it but my self, because the praise
of it belongs wholly to me; and I could but effect half a dozen more such
exployts, I Would write my own Commentaries.


Fond. You put us too much into a longing, son.


Lack. Well I am content to open the sluses of your happiness^; let them in
Crochet, but take heed you be not too greedy of it, lest the sudden joy
overwhelme you.


Enter Careless, Aemilia, Crochet. Lit. What Is here, Master Dotario, and my
daughter Aemilia, hand in hand, and married together? Nay then it is as I would
have it. The boy has done well, and I must applaud him for it.


Lack. O must you so sir? Well, there they are Bark and Tree, but as I am a
hairy beast, if I had not been, they had been as far a sunder, as Temple
bar and Algate.


Fond. How so son?


Lack. Why I Will show you. there was an other Changling as like to him in shape,
as Jupiter to Amphitrue, nay if I should say, as I am to, let me see what?


Cro. To a fool.


Lack No, to my self.


Cro. It Is all one.


Lack. That would have married her in his stead, and carried her away, if I had
not prevented them.


Enter Dotario. Whether it be a shadow or a ghost, that haunts him in his own
proper form, I know not, but there he comes again.

Lit. Why, how now son Dotario, you have made haste to beget one so like you
already.


Dot. O sir, it is I am cheated, guld, and abused, and which is worse, by one
that says he is my self too.


Lit. Why what are you?


Dot. O sir I am that old Gentleman, that should have married your daughter,
and there is an Asmodeus, a devil in my habit, that has beguild me of her.


Crot. Come sir uncase, your self; it is no glory for you to lurk any longer
under the person of such a wretch.


Careless puts off his disguise. Dot. Who is here, my Nephew Careless? nay
then it is ten times worse then I thought of: my disgrace will be as common as
Conduit water, the very Tankard-bearers will mock at me, I shall be made their
laughter at Tavernes, the table talk at Ordinaries.


Car. Nay good Uncle do not think so ill of me, abrace of thousands shall
chain up my tongue, that you may live as concealed as you please.


Dot. O sir you have proved your self to be a fine Companion.


Lit. Nay hold up your head sir, this was your devise, your master piece of
wit, and valor? nay you may brag of it, the credit belongs to you.


Lack. Crotchet I would thou were a post, that I might beat out my brains
against thee.


Enter Fido, Aurelio, Valeria. Fid. Save you Gentlemen.


Spr. Look you sir; here is the Doctor, and your daughter already.


Lit. Well there is some comfort yet to make amends for the rest.


Fid. Come down on your knees sir.


Aurelio uncases. Lit. How now what are you?


Aur. Lately the Doctor, but now your son Aurelio.


Lit. What more gulleries yet? they have cosend me of my daughters, I hope
they will cheat me of my wife too: have you any more of these tricks to show,
ha?


Aur. No more sir, if we may obtain your favor for these, and think good sir
what love may do; you have been young your self.


Lit. Troth and so I have, and been as waggish as the best of you. Well Master
Dotario, what shall we do? the boys have out stripped us, there is now no
remedy, and my affection relents.


Dot. So does mine too, and I would do any thing, if I might be freed of this
ignominy, that it might not be known what a fool this love has made of me.


Fid. I Will undertake for that sir if you will yield to a motion.


Dot. Any thing upon these terms.


Fid. Then thus: you are rich, and your Nephew Aurelio here is poor, yet he
was borne to an inheritance; now do you but confer something presently upon
him, and assure him the rest after your death, and I Will promise they shall
observe you with as much obsequiousness, as you desire.


Dot. And what shall my Nephew Careless do?


Fid. Why Master Littlegood shall give him his Land again.


Dot. If he will do one, I Will do the other.


Fond. That he shall, I Will see that done upon my word.


Lit. I Will not stand against a good motion at any time.


Dot. Why then boys be happy in your Mistresses.


Car. Sir this speech from you is more comfortable then if Hymen had spoke it:
and for my brother Lackwit I Will take him to my protection, and stand in his
defense against all machinous Engines that shall be planted for the battery of
his wit and fortune.


Crot. Pray sir will you get him his cloak and hat again that he lost in the
skirmish.


Car. I so I will; Fido shall restore them to him.


Lack. Well I would know, how all these things had come to so good perfection
but for me now.


Crot. Nay, if fortune should not favor such as you and I are, she would
leave her old wont.


Enter Captain like an Host, Lieutenant with a Judge and glass, Hostess.
Car. What Is my old Reformado come again?


Cap. Nay you need not fear me now, I am as mild as my beer: I am her husband
and your Host till death.


Car. What turned Host?


Cap. Yes, and I thought it my duty to present you with the first fruits of my
profession. Fill out a glass Tapster, that I may drink to this good company.
Gentlemen you are all welcome.


Fid. Is this your Tapster Captain?


Cap. Yes, and does he not suit well with his function? he has learnt already
to run up stairs and down stairs, as nimble as a Squirill, and can answer
to any man that shall call him, as loud and peremptorily as the best of them.


Car. That's a good entrance.


Cap. He is a little out of countenance at the first, but when you come to my
house, you shall hear him speak in a big accent, what is to pay in the Lion?
what is to pay in the Dragon? be not dismayed Tapster, be not dismayed.


Car. Well I perceive we must keep Holiday: there is nothing angers me now, but
Master Spruse is disappoynted of his Mistress.


Spr. Take no care for that, I have more Mistresses then I can tell what to do
with.


Car. Sir I have a sister, though she had no part in this business, yet for her
beauty, virtues, and Dowry, may well deserve you: if you can like of her, I Will
do what I can to obtain her for you.


Spr. Sir you shall command me in what you please, and my thanks for your
love; and here I vow never to dissemble any more in this kind, but to be truly
and sincerely affectionated to whom soever you shall commend me.


Car. Nay if you would not do so, you were unworthy of her.

To gain a woman's love thus all may strive,
But wealth shall be put back, when wit shall thrive.

FINIS.

