WHAT YOU WILL.

By John Marston.

Imprinted at London by G. Eld for Thomas Thorppe. 1607.

What you will.
INDVCTION.
Before the Music sounds for the Act: Enter Atticus, Doricus, and Phylomuse,
they sit a good while on the Stage before the Candles are lighted, talking
together, and on suddeine Doricus speaks. Enter Tier-man with lights. Dor. O
Fie some lights, sirs fie, let there be no deeds of darkness done among us. --
I so, so, pree thee Tyer-man set Sineor Snuff a fire, he is a chollerick
Gentleman, he will take Pepper in the nose instantly, fear not, fore Heaven I
wonder they tolerate him so nere the Stage.


Phy. Faith Doricus, thy brain boiles, keele it, keele it, or all the fatt's
in the fire: in the name of Phoebus, what merry Genius haunts thee to day, thy
lips play with Feathers.


Dor. Troth they should pick straws before they should be idle,


Atti, But why, but why do thou wonder they dare suffer Snuff so near the
Stage?


Dor. O well recald, marry Sir sineor Snuff, Mounsieur Mew, and Caualiero
Blirt, are three of the most to be feared Auditors that ever --


Phy. Pish for shame, stint thy idle chatte.


Dor. Nay dream what-so-ere your fantasy swimmes on Phylomuse, I protest in
the love you have procured me to bear your friend the Author, I am vehemently
fearful, this threefold halter of contempt that choakes the breath of wit,
these aforesaid tria sunt omnia, Knights of the Meaw will sit heavy on the
skirtes of his Scenes, if --


Phy. If what? believe it Doricus his spirit,
Is higher blouded then to quake and pant
At the report of Skoffes Artillery;
Shall he be creast-falne, if some looser brain,
In flux of wit vnciuely befilth
His slight composures? shall his bosom faint
If drunken Censure belch out sower breath,
From Hatreds surfeit on his labors front?
Nay say some half a dozen rancorous breasts
Should plant themselves on purpose to discharge
Impostum'd malice on his latest Scene
Shall his resolve be struck through with the blirt,
Of a goose breath? What imperfect borne?
What short lived Meteor? what cold hearted Snow
Would melt in dolor? cloud his mudded eyes
Sinck down his jaws, if that some iuicles husk
Some boundless ignorance should on sudden shoot
His gross knob'd burbolt, with that's not so good,
Mew, blirt, ha, ha, light Chaffy stuff?
Why gentle spirits what loose wauing fane?
What any thing would thus be skru'd about
With each slight touch of od Phantasmatas?
No let the feeble palseid lamer joints,
Lean on opinions crutches, let the --

Dor. Nay, nay, nay, Heavens my hope, I cannot smoth this strain,
Wits death I cannot, what a leaprous humor
Breaks from rank swelling of these bubbling wits?
Now out vp-pont: I wonder what tite brain:
Wrung in this custom to mainetaine Contempt
Against common Censure: to give stiff counter buffes
To crack rude skorne even on the very face
Of better audience. Slight is it not odious,
Why hark you honest, honest Phylomuse
(You that indeauor to indeere our thoughts,
To the composers spirit) hold this firm:
Music and Poetry were first approved
By common scence; and that which pleased most,
Held most allowed pass: not rules of Art
Were shapt to pleasure, not pleasure to your rules,
Think you if that his scenes took stamp in mint
Of three or four deemed most iuditious,
It must enforce the world to current them
That you must spit defiance on dislike?
Now as I love the light were I to pass
Through public verdit, I should fear my form
Least ought I offered were vnsquard or warped,
"The more we know, the more we know we want
"What Bayard boulder then the ignorant?
"Believe me Phylomuse: in faith thou must
"The best best seal of wit, is wits distrust.

Phy. Nay gentle Doricus.


Dor. I Will here no more of him, nay and your friend the Author, the composer:
the What you will: seems so fair in his own glass, so straight in his own
measure that he talks once of squinting Critickes, drunken Censure,
splay-footed Opinion, iuicles husks, I ha done with him, I ha done with him.


Phy. Pew nay then --


Dor. As if any such unsanctified stuff could find a being monge these
ingenuous breasts.


Atti Come, let pass, let pass, lers see what stuff must cloth our ears:
what is the plays name?


Phy. What you will.


Dor. 1st Commedy, Tragedy, Pastoral, Moral, Nocturnal or History.


Phy. Faith perfectly neither, but even What you will, a slight toye, lightly
composed, to swiftly finished, ill plotted, worse written, I fear me worst
acted, and indeed What you will.


Dor. Why I like this vain well now.


At. Come, we strain the spectators patience in delaying their expected
delights. Lets place our selves within the Curtains, for good faith the Stage
is so very little we shall wrong the general eye else very much.


Phy. If you will stay but a little I Will accompany you, I have engaged my self to
the Author to give a kind of inductiue speech to his Commedy.


At. Away: you neglect your self, a gentleman --


Phy. Tut I have vowed it, I am double charged, go of as't it will, I Will set fire
to it.


Dor. I Will not stand it, may chance recoile, and be not stuffed with
salte-peeter, well mark the report, mark the report.


Phy. Nay pree thee stay, slid the female presence; the Genteletza; the women
will put me out.


Dor. And they strive to put thee out, do thou endeavor to put them.


Atti. In good faith if they put thee out of countenance; put thou them out of
patience; and hew their ears with hacking imperfect utterance.


Dor. Go stand to it, show thy self a tale man of thy tongue, make an honest
leg, put off thy Cap with discreet carriage: and so we leave thee to the
kind Gentlemen, and most respected Auditors. Exeunt, remanet tantum Phylomusus.


PROLOGVS.
NOR labors he the favor of the rude,
Nor offers sops unto the Stigian Dog
To force a scilence in his viperous toungs:
Nor cares he to insinuate the grace,
Of loathed detraction, nor persues the love
Of the nice Critics of this squeamish age,
Nor strives he to bear up with every sail
Of floting Censure: nor once dreads or care's
What envious hand his guiltles Muse has struck,
,,Sweet breath from tainted stomachs who can suck:
But to the fair proportioned loves of wit,
To the just skale of even paized thoughts:
To those that know the pangs of bringing forth
A perfect feature: to their gentle minds,
That can as soon slight of, as find a blemish,
To those as vmbly low as to their feet
I am obliged to bend: to those his Muse,
Makes solemn honor, for their wished delight:
He vows industrious sweat shall pale his cheek,
But heel gloss up sleeke objects for their eyes:
For those he is ashamed, his best's too badd,
A silly subject too too simply cladd
Is all his present, all his ready pay,
For many many debts. Give further day
I Will give a Proverb, Sufferance gives ease:
So you may once be pai'd, we once may please. Exit.
ACT. 1.
SCAE. 1.
Enter Quadratus, Phylus following him with a lute, a Page going before
Quadratus with a torch. Phy. O O I beseech you Sir reclaim his wits,
My masters mad, stark mad, alas for love,

Qua. For love? nay and he be not mad for hate,
It Is amiable fortune; I tell thee youth
Right rare and geason: strange? mad for love,
O show me him I Will give him reasons straight.
So forcible so all invincible,
That it shall drag love out: run mad for love?
What mortally exsistes, on which our hearts
Should be inamored with such passion?
For love? come Phylus; come I Will haung his fate,
In steed of love I Will make him mad for hate.
But troth say what strains his madness of?

Phy. Fantastical.


Qua. Immure him, skonce him, barrecadoe him int,
Fantastical mad, thrice blessed heart;
Why hark good Phylus: (o that thy narrow sense,
Could but contain me now) all that exsists,
Takes valuation from oppinion:
A giddy minion now: pish, thy taste is dull,
And can not relish me, come where is Iacomo.

Enter Iacomo unbraced and careless drest' Phy. Look where he coms: O map of
boundles woe!


Iaco. You gleame is day, darkness, sleep and fear,
Dreams, and the ugly visions of the night
Are beat to hell by the bright palm of light,
Now romes the swain and whissells up the morn:
Deep Silence breaks: all things start up with light,
Only my heart, that endless night and day,
Lies bed-red, crippeld by coy Lucea,

Qua. There Is a strain law.
Nay now I seee he is mad most palpable,
He speaks like a player, hah! poetical.

Iaco. The wanton spring lies dallying with the earth,
And powers fresh blood in her decayed veins,
Look how the new sapt branches are in child
With tender infants, how the Sun draws out,
And shapes their moisture into thousand forms
Of sprouting buddes, all things that show or breath,
Are now instaur'd, saving my wretched breast,
That is eternally congeald with Ice
Of froz'd, despair. O Celia, coy, to nice.

Qua. Still saunce question mad?


Iaco. O where does Piety and Pity rest?


Qua. Fetch cords he is irrecouerable, mad, rank mad,
He calls for strange Chymeras, fictions
That have no being since the curse of death
Was thrown on man: Pity and Piety,
Whole daine converse with them? alas vain head,
Pity and Piety are long since dead.

Iaco. Ruin to Chance, and all that strive to stand,
Like swollen Colosses on her tottering Base.
Fortune is blind --

Qua. You lie, you lie,
None but a mad man would term Fortune blind,
How can she see to wound desert so right?
Just in the speeding place: to girt lewd brows
With honored wreath; ha? Fortune blind? away,
How can she hud-winkt then so rightly see,
To starve rich worth and glut iniquity?

Iaco. O Love!


Qua. Love? hang love,
It is the abject outcast of the world,
Hate all things, hate the world, thy self, all men,
Hate knowledge, strive not to be ouer-wise,
,,It drew destruction into Paradise,
Hate Honor, Virtue, they are baits,
That tice men's hopes to sadder fates,
Hate beauty, every ballad-monger,
Can cry his idle soppish humor
Hate riches, wealths a flattering Jack,
A dors to face, mewes hind thy back.
He that is poor is firmly sped,
He never shall be flattered*
All things are error, dirt and nothing,
Or pant with want or gorged to lothing,
Love only hate, affect no higher
Then praise of heaven, wine, a fire.
Suck up thy days in silent breath,
When their snuffs out come Sinior death.
Now Sir adieu run mad and twilt,
The worst is this my rimes but spilt.

Iaco Thy rimes are spilt who would not run rank mad,
To see a wandering French man rival, nay
Outstrip my suit. He kissed my Celias cheek,

Qua. Why man I saw my dog even kiss thy Celias lips,

Iaco. To morrow morn they go to wed,

Qua. Well then I know.
Whether to morrow night they go.

Iaco. Say quick.


Qua To bed


Iaco. I will inuoke the triple Heccate,
Make charms as potent as the breath of Fate,
But I Will confound the match,

Qua Nay then good day,
And you be coniuring once I Will slink away, Exit Quadratus.

Iaco. Boy could not Orpheus make the stones to dance?


Phy, Yes Sir.


Iaco. Bir Lady a sweet touch: did he not bring Euridice out of hell with his
lute.


Phy So they say Sir,

Iaco. And thou chanst bring Celias head out of the window with thy Lute, well
hazard thy breath: look Sir hears a ditty.

It Is foully writ slight wit crossed here and there,
But where thou findst a blot, their fall a tear.
The Song.
Fie peace, peace, peace, it has no passion int.
O melt thy breath in fluent softer tunes
That every note may seem to tricle down
Like sad distilling tears and make: O God
That I were but a Poet now to express my thoughts
Or a Musician but to sing my thoughts
Or any thing but what I am, sing't ore once more
My greefes a boundles sea that has no shore.
He Singes and is answered, from above a Willow garland is floung down and
the song cease. Is this my favor? am I crowned with skorne?
Then thus I manumit my slau'd condition.
Celia but hear me execrate thy love.
By heaven that once was consious of my love
By all that is that knows my all was thine
I will perseu with detestation.
Thawart without stretched vehemence of hate
Thy wished Hymen: I will craze my brain
But all disceauer all: thy hopes unite
What rage so violent as love turned spite?

Enter Randolfo and Andrea with a supplication reading. Ra. Humbly complaining
kissing the hands of your excelence your pore orators Randolfo and Andrea
beseeches forbidding of the dishonord match of their Niece Celia Widow to
their Brother -- O twill do, twill do, it can not choose but do.


And What should one say what should one do now; vmph
If she do match with you same wandering knight
She Is but undone, her estimation, wealth --

Iaco. Nay sir her estimations mounted up
She shall be Ladi'd and sweet Madam'd now.

Ran. Be Ladi'd ha, ha, O could she but recaule
The honored Port of her deceased love;
But think whose wife she was, God wot no knights
But one (that title of) was even a Prince
A Sultane Sollyman: thrice was he made
In dangerous arms Venice prouidetore.

An. He was a Merchant, but so bounteous
Valiant, wise, learned, all so absolute
That naughts, was valewed praisfull excellent
But in it was he most praisfull excellent.

Iaco. O I shall nere forget how he went clothed
He would maintaine't a base ill used fashion
To bind a Merchant to the sullen habit
Of precise black, chiefly in Venice state.
Where Merchants guilt the top
And therefore should you have him pass the bridge
Up the Rialto like a soldier
(As still he stood a Potestate at sea)

Ran. In a black beuer felt, ash color plain
A Florentine cloth of silver Ierkin, sleeves
White satin cut on tinsell, then long stock.

Iaco. French pains imbroder'd, Gold-smithes work, O God!
Me thinks I see him now how he would walk:
With what a jolly presence he would pace
Round the Rialto. Well he is soon forgot
A straggling sir in his rich bed must sleep
Which if I can not cross* I Will curse and weep.
Shall I be plain as Truth, I love your Sister
My education birth and wealth deserves her
I have no cross, no rub to stop my suit
But Lauardur's a knight, that strikes all mute.

An. I there is the diuill, she must be Ladi'd now.


Iaco. O ill nursed custom no sooner is the wealthy Merchant dead
His wife left great in fair possessions
But giddie rumor graspes it twixt his teeth
And shakes it bout our ears. Then thither flock
A rout of crased fortunes whose crakt states
Gape to be sodderd up by the rich mass
Of the deceased labores, and now and then
The troop of I beseech and I protest
And believe it sweet, is mixed with too or three
Hopeful, well stockt, neat clothed Cytizens

Ran. But as we see the son of a Divine
Seldom proves Preacher, or a Lawiers son
Rarely a pleader, (for they strive to Run
A various fortune from their Ancestors)
So it is right geason for the Marchantes widow,
To be the Cytizens loved second spouse.

Iaco. Variety of obiectes please us still
One dish though nere so cookt does quickly fill.
When diverse cates the pallats scence delight
And with fresh fast creates new appetite
Therefore my widow she casheers the blackes
For swears turns of the furd-gownes, and suruaies
The bedrowle of her suitors thinks and thinks,
And straight her questing thoughts springs up a knight,
Have after then a maine the gam's a foot
The match clapped up, tut it is the knight must do it.

Ran. Then must my pretty peate be Fan'd and Coach'd.


Iaco Muffd Masked and Ladied, with my more then most sweet Madam,
But how long does this perfume of sweet Madam last?
Faith it is but a wash sent. My Riotous sir
Begins to crack Gestes on his Ladies front,
Touches her new stamped gentry, takes a glut
Keeps out, abandons home, and spends and spends
Till stock be melted, then sir takes up here
Takes up there, till no where ought is left.
Then for the Low Countries, hay for the French
And so (to make up rhyme) god night sweet wench.

Ran. By blessedness we will stop this fatal lot.


Iaco. But how* but how?


Ran. Why stay lets think a plot.


An. Was not Albano Beletzo honorable rich?


Ran. Not peer'd in Venice, for birth, fortune love.


An. It Is skarce three months since fortune gave him dead.


Ran. In the black fight in the Venetian gulf.


An. You hold a truth.


Ran. Now what a gigglet is this Celia?


An. To match so sudden so unworthily?


Ran. Why she might have --

An. Who might not Celia have?
The passionate mamord Iacomo.

Iaco. The passionate mamord Iacomo.


An. Of honored lineage, and not meanly rich.


Ran. The sprightfull Piso, the great Florentine,
Aurelius Tuber.

And. And to leave these all,
And wed a wandering Knight Sir Lauerdure,
A God knows what?

Ran. Brother she shall not, shall our blood be moungreld with the corruption of
a straggling French?


And. Saint Mark she shall not,

Iaco. She shall not fathers by; our brother souls.


Ran. Good day.


Iaco. Wish me good day? it stands in idle stead,
My Celias lost, all my good days are dead.
The Cornets sound a flourish. Hark Lorenzo Celso the loose Venice Duke,
Is going to bed* it is now a forward morn
Fore he take rest. O strange transformed sight,
When Princes make night day the day there night.

And Come we will peticion him,

Iaco. Away away,
He skornes all plaints makes jest of serious suit.

Ran. Fall out as't twill I am resolved to do it.


The Cornets sound. Enter the Duke coppled with a Lady, two cooples more with
them, the men having tobacco pipes in their hands, the women sit, they dance
a round. The Petition is delivered up by Randolfo, the Duke lights his tobacco
pipe with it and goes out dancing. Ran. Saint Mark Saint Mark.


Iaco. Did not I tell you, loose no more rich time,
What can one get but mier from a swine?

And. Lets work a cross, we will fame it all about
The French man's gelded.

Ran. O that's absolute.


Iaco. Fie ont away, she knows to well it is false,
I fear it to well. No no I hau't will strongly do it,
Who knows Francisco Soranza?

Ran. Pish, pish, why what of him?


Iaco. Is he not wondrous like your decea'sd kinsman Albano.


And. Exceedingly the strangest nearly like
In voice, in gesture face in --

Ran. Nay he has Albanos imperfection too,
And stuttes when he is vehemently moved.

Iaco. Observe me then, him would I have disguised,
Most perfect like Albano: giving out,
Albano saved by swimming (as in faith
It Is known he swome most strangely) rumor him,
This morn arrived in Venice, here to lurk
As having heard the for-ward Nuptials,
T'obserue his wifes most infamous lewd have
And to revenge --

Ran. I hau't, I hau't, I hau't, 'twill be invincible.


Iaco. By this means now some little time we catch,
For better hopes at least disturb the match.

And. I Will to Francisco.


Ran. Brother Adrian
You have our brothers picture, shape him to it.

And. Precise in each but Tassell, fear it not.


Ran. Saint Mark then prosper once, our hopeful plot.


Iaco. Good souls, good day, I have not slept last night,
I Will take a nap, then pell mell broach all spite. Exeunt.

ACTVS 2.
SCENA. 1.
One knockes: Lauerdure draws the Curtains sitting on his bed apparalling
himself, his trunk of apparaile standing by him. Laue. Ho Bydett Lackey.


Bid. Sinior? Enter Bydett with Water and a Towell.


Laue. See who knocks, look you boy, peruse their habits, return perfect
notice, la la ly to. Exit Bid. and returns presently.


Bid. Quadratus.


Lau. Quadratus, mor dieu, ma vie: I lay not at my lodging to night, I Will not
see him now on my soul, he is in his old Perpetuana suit, I am not within.


Bid. He is fair, gallant, rich, neat as a Bridegroom, fresh as a
new-minted sixpence, with him Lampatho Doria, Symplicius Faber.


Lau. And in good clothes.


Bid. Accoutred worthy a presence.


Lau. Vdes so: my gold wrought Wast-coate and Nightcap open my Trunck, lay my
richest suit on the top, my Velvet slippers, cloth of gold gamashes, where are
my cloth of silver hose, lay them. --


Bydet. At pawn sir.


Lau. No sir, I do not bid you lay them at pawn Sir.


Bid. No sir, you need not for they are there already.


Lau. Mor du garzone: set my richest Gloves, Garters, Hatts, just in the way of
their eyes, so let them in, observe me withal dutious respect, let them in.


Enter Quadratus, Lampatho Doria, and Simplicius Faber. Qua. Phoebus, Phoebe,
Sun, Moon, and seven Stars make thee the dilling of Fortune, my sweet
Lauerdure, my rich French blood, ha ye dear rogue, have any pudding Tobacco?


Lam. God morrow Sinior.


Sim. Mounsieur Lauerdure, do you see that Gentleman, he goes but in black
Satin as you see, but by Hellicon he has a cloth of Tissue wit, he breaks
a jest, ha, heel rail against the Courttil the gallants -- O God he is very
Nectar, if you but sip of his love, you were immortal, I must needs make you
known to him: I Will induce your love with dear regard. Sinior Lampatho heers
is a French Gentleman Mounsieur Lauerdure a Traveler, a beloved of heaven,
courts your acquaintance.


Lam. Sir I protest I not only take distinct notice of your dear rarities of
exterior presence, but also I protest I am most vehemently inamor'd, and very
passionately doat on your inward adornements and habilities of spirit, I
protest I shall be proud to do you most obsequious vassalage.


Qua. Is not this rare now: now by Gorgons head,
I gape and am struck stiff in wonderment,
At sight of these strange beasts. You Chamblet youth,
Symplicius Faber that Hermophrodite,
Party par pale, that bastard Moungerell soul,
Is naught but admiration and applause,
Of you Lampatho Doria, a fustie caske,
Deuote to moldy customs of hoard eld,
Does he but speak, O tones of heaven it self,
Does he once write, O Jesus admirable
Cries out Symplicius: then Lampatho spittes,
And says faith it is good. But O to mark you thing
Sweat to unite acquaintance to his friend,
Labor his praises and indeere his worth
With titles all as formally trickt forth,
As the Cap of a Dedicatorie Epistle,
Then sir to view Lampatho, he protests,
Protests and vows, such suddeine heat of love,
That O twere warmth enough of mirth to dry,
The stintlesse tears of old Heraclitus
Make Nyobe to laugh.

Lam. I protest I shall be proud to give you proof, I hold a most religious
affiance with your love.


Lau. Nay gentle Sinior:

Lam. Let me not live else, I protest I will strain my utmost sineus, in
strengthening your precious estimate, I protest, I will do all rights in all
good offices that friendship can touch, or amplest virtue deserve.


Qua I protest believe him not, I Will beg thee Lauerdure
For a concealed Idiot if thou credit him,
He Is a Hyena, and with Ciuitt scent
Of perfumed words, draws to make a prey
For laughter of thy credit. O this hot crackling love
That blaseth on an instant, flames me out
On the least puff of kindness, with protest, protest,
Catzo I dread these hot protests, that press
Come on so fast, no, no, away, away*
You are a common friend or will betray.
Let me clip amity, that is got with suit,
I hate this whorish love that is prostitute.

Lau. Horn on my Tailor, could he not bring home,
My Satin Taffeta, or Tissue suit:
But I must needs be clothed in Woollen thus.
Bydett, what says he for my Silver hose?
And Prim-rose Satin Doublet, Gods my life,
Gives he no more observance to my body.

Lam. O in that last suit gentle Lauerdure,
Visit my lodging: by Appollos front
Do but inquire my name; O straight they will say
Lampatho suits himself in such a hose.

Sim. Mark that Quadratus.


Lam. Consorts himself with such a doublet.


Sim. Good, good, good, O Jesus admirable.


Lau. La la ly to Sir.


Lam. O Pallas! Quadratus, hark, hark, a most complete phantasma, a most
ridiculous humor, pree-thee shoot him through and through with a jest, make
him lie by the lee, thou Basilisco of wit.


Sim. O Jesus, admirably well spoken, Angelical tongue.


Qua. Gnathonicall Coxcombe,

Lam. Nay pre-thee, fut fear not he is no edge tool, you may jest with him.


Sim. No edge-toole, oh!


Qua. Tones of heaven it self.


Sim. Tones of heaven it self.


Qua. By blessedness I thought so.


Lam. Nay when, when?


Qua. Why thou Pole-head, thou Ianus, thou poultron, thou protest, thou
Eare-wig that wrigglest into men's brains: thou durty cur that be-mierst with
thy fawning, thou --


Lam. Obscure me, or --

Qua. Synior Lauerdure, by the heart of an honest man, this Iebusite, this
confusion to him, this worse then I dare to name, abuses thee most
incomprehensibly; is this your protest of most obsequious vassalage, protest to
strain your utmost sum, your most --


Lam. So Phoebus warm my brain, I Will rhyme thee dead,
Look for the Satyr, if all the sower juice
Of a tart brain, can sowse thy estimate,
I Will pickle thee.

Qua. Ha he mount Chirall on the wings of fame.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse,
Look the I speak play scrappes. Bydet I Will down
Sing, sing, or stay we will quasse or any thing
Riuo, Saint Mark, lets talk as loss as air
Vn-wind youths coullors, display our selves
So that you enuy-starued Curre may yealpe
And spend his chappes at our Phantasticknesse.

Sym. O Lord Quadratus.


Qua. Away Idolater, why you Don Kynsayder
Thou Canker eaten rusty curre, thou snaffle
To freer spirits.
Think thou a libetine, am vngiu'd breast
Skornes not the shacklesse of thy envious clogges
You will traduce us unto public skorne.

Lam. By this hand I will.


Qua. A fuotra for thy hand, thy heart, thy brain,
Thy hate, thy malice, Envy, grinning spite
Shall a freeborn that holds Autypathy.

Lam. Antypathy.


Qua. I Antypathy.
A native hate unto the curse of man, bare-pated servitude,
Quake at the frowns of a ragg'd Satyrist
A skrubbing railer whose course hardened fortune
Grating his hide, gauling his starued ribs
Sittes houling at Deserts more battle fate
Who out of dungeon of his black Dispairs
Skoules at the fortune of the fairer Merit.

Lau. Tut Via let all run glib and square.


Qua. Vds futt he cogges and cheates your simpler thoughts,
My spleen's a fire in the heat of hate
I bear these gnats that humme about our ears,
And stinge blister our credit's in obscured shades.

Lau. Pewte bougra la, la, la, titt shaugh
Shall I forbear to caper, sing, or vault
To wear fresh clothes or wear perfumed sweetes
To trick my face, or glory in my fate,
TO abandon natural propensitudes
My fancies humor, for a stiff ioynted,
Tattr'd nasty taber faced, puh, la, la, ly to

Qua. Now by thy Ladies cheek I honor thee
My rich free-bloud, O my dear libertine
I could suck the juice, the sirrop of thy lip,
For thy most generous thought. My Elysium.

Lam. O Sir you are so square you skorne repoofe.


Qua. No sir should discreet Mastigophoros
Or the dear spirit acute Canaidus
(That Aretine; that most of me beloved
Who in the rich esteem I prize his soul
I term my self) should these once menace me
Or curb, my humors with well governed check
I should with most industrious regard,
Observe abstain, and curb my skipping lightness
But when an arrogant od impudent,
A blushles forehead only out of scence.
Of his own wants, baules in malignant questing
At others means of wauing gallantry
Pipht foutra.

Lam. I fail at none you well squared Syneor.


Qua. I can not tell, it is now grown fashion,
What Is out of railyng's out of fashion:
A man can skarce put on a tuckt up cap
A buttoned frizado suit, skarce eat good meat,
Anchoues, cauiare, but he is Satyred
And termed Fantastical: by the muddy spawne
Of slymie Neughtes, when troth, Phantasticknesse,
That which the natural Sophysters term
Phantusia incomplexa, is a function
Even of the bright immortal part of man.
It is the common pass, the sacred door,
Unto the prive chamber of the soul
That barred naught passes past the baser Court:
Of outward scence by it th'inamorate,
Most lively thinks he sees the absent beauties
Of his loved mistres.
By it we shape a new creation,
Of things as yet unborn, by it we feed:
Our ravenous memory, our intention feast
Slid he that's not Phantasticall's a beast.

Lam. Most Fantastical protection of Phantasticknesse.


Lau. Faith it is good.


Qua. So 't be fantastical it is wits life blood.


Lau. Come Sinior my legs are girt.


Qua. Phantastically.


Lau. After a spetiall humor a new cut.


Qua. Why then it is, rare, it is excellent. vds fut
And I were to be hanged I would be chokt
Phantastically, he can skarce be saved
That's not fantastical, I stand ferme to it.

La. Nay then sweet sir give reason, come on, when.


Qua. It Is hell to run in common base of men.


Lau. Have not run thy self out of breath bulley.


Qua. And I have not iaded thy ears more then I have tierd my tongue, I could
run discourse, put him out of his full pace.

I could poer speech till thou crid'st ho, but troth,
I dread a glut, and I confess much love
To freer gentry whose pert agill spirits
Is t'o much frost-bit numbed with il straind snibbes
Has tender-reach'd my speech. By Brutus blood
He is a turfe that will be slave to man.
But he is a beast that dreades his mistress fan.

Lau. Come all merth and folace, capers, healthes and whiffes
To morrow are my nuptials celebrate:
All friends all friends.

Lam. I protest --

Qua. Nay leave protestes, pluck out your snarling phanges. When thou have
means be Fantastical and sociable; go to, here is my hand and you want forty
shillings I am your Maecenas though not Atauis Edite regibus.


Lam. Why content and I protest --

Qua. I Will no protest.


Lam. Well and I do not leave these fopperies do not lend me forty
shillings, and there is my hand, I embrace you, love you, nay adore thee, for by
the juice of worm-woode, thou have a bitter brain.


Qu. You Simplicius? woult leave that staring fellow Admiration, and Adoration
of thy acquaintance wilt. A skorne out it is odious, too eager a defense argues a
strong opposition, and to vehement a praise, draws a suspicion of others
worthy disparigement.

Set tapers to bright day, it ill befittes
Good wines can vent themselves, and not good wits.

Sym. Good truth I love you, and with the grace of Heaven,
I Will be very ciuell and --

Qua. Fantastical.


Sym. I Will be some thing, I have a conceald humore in me and twere broachd twold
spurty faith.


Qu. Come then Saint Mark lett's be as light as air
As fresh and iocond as the breast of May:
I pree thee good French knight good plump cheekt chub
Run some French passage, come lets see thy vain,
Daunces, scenes, and songs, royal intertaine.

Lau. Petite lacque* page, page, Bydet sing
Give it the French ierk, quick spart, lightly, ha,
Ha hers a turn unto my Lucea.

Qua. Stand stiff ho stand, take footing firm stand sure
For if thou fall before thy mistres
Thy man-hod's damned; stand firm -- ho good, so, so.

The Dance and Song. Lau. Come now via aloune to Celia.


Qua. Stay take an old rhyme first though dry and lean
Twill serve to close the stomach of the Scene.

Lau. This is thy humor to berime us still,
Never so slightly pleased but out they fly.

Qua. They are mine own, no gleaned Poetry,
My fashions known, out rhyme takt as you list:
A fico, for the sower browd Zoilist.
Music, Tobacco, Sack and Sleep,
The tide of Sorrow backward keep.
If thou art sad at others fate,
Riuo drink deep give care the mate,
On us the end of time is come,
Fond fear of that we cannot shun,
Whilst quickest sense does freshly last,
Clip time about, hug pleasure fast.
The Sisters rauell out our twine,
He that knows littl's most divine.
Error deludes; whole beat this hence,
Naughtes known but by exterior sense,
Let glory blason others deed,
My blood then breath craves better meede,
Let twattling fame cheatd others rest,
I am no dish for Rumors feast.
Let honor others hope abuse,
I Will nothing have so naught will loose:
I Will strive to be nor great nor small,
To live nor die, fate helmeth all,
When I can breath no longer then,
Heaven take all, there put Amen.
How is it, how is it?

Lau. Faith so, so, telamant, quelamant, as't please Oppinion to current it.


Qua. Why then via letts walk,

Lau. I must give notice to an od pedant as we pass of my nuptials, I use him
for he is abscure and shall marry us in private, I have many enemies but
secrecy is the best evasion from envy.


Qua Holds it to morrow?


Lau. I firm absolute,

Lam. I Will say amen if the Priest be mute.


Qua. Epythalamiums will I singe my chucke,
Go on, spend freely, out on dross it is muck. Exeunt

Enter a Schole-maister, draws the curtains behind with, Battus Nows, Slip,
Nathaniell and Holifernes Pippo, schole-boyes, sitting with books in their
hands. All. Salve Magister.


Ped Saluete pueri estote salui, vos saluere exopto vobis salutem, Batte my
fili, fili mi Batte.


Bat. Quid vis.


Ped. Stand forth repeat your lesson with out book.


Bat. A nowne is the name of a thing that may be seen felt heard or understood.


Ped, Good boy, on on,

Bat. Of nownes some be substantives and some be substantives.


Ped. Adjectives.


Bat. Adjectives, a nowne substantive either is propper to the thing that it
betokneth.


Ped. Well to numbers.


Battus. In Nownes be two numbers, the Singular and the Plural, the Singular
number speaks of one as Lapis a Stone, the Plural speaks of more then one,
as Lapides stones.


Ped. Good child, now thou art past Lapides Stones, proceed to the cases Nous,
say you next Nous, where is your lesson Nous.


Nous, I am in a verb forsooth.


Ped. Say on for sooth say say.


Nous. A verb is a part of speech declined with mood and tence and betokneth
doing as Amo I love,


Ped. How many kind of verbes arthere?


Nous. 2. Personal and impersonall,

Ped. Of verbs personalls, how many kinds.


Nou. Five, Active Passive Neuter Deponent and Common. A Verb Active ends in
O and beetokneth to do as Amo I love and by putting to R it may be a passive
as Amor I am loved.


Ped. Very good child, now learn to know the Deponent and common: Say you slip.


Slip. Cedant arma togae, concedant lauria linguae.


Ped. What part of speech is lingua, inflecte, inflecte.


Slip. Singulariter, nominatiuo Hec lingua.


Ped. Why is lingua the Feminine gender?


Slip. Forsooth because it is the Femenine gender.


Ped. Ha thou Ass, thou Dolt, Idem per idem, mark it: lingua is declined with
Hec the Femenine, because it is a household stuff perticularly belonging, and
most commonly resident under the roof of Women's mouths. Come on you
Nathaniell say you, say you next, not too fast, say tretably, say.


Nath. Mascula dicuntur Monosilaba nomina quedam.


Ped. Faster, faster.


Nath. Vt, sal, sol, ren and splen: car, ser, vir, vas, vadis, as, mas,
Bes, cres, pres and pes, glis, glirens habens genetiuo,
Mos, flos, ros and tros, muns, dens, mons, pons.

Ped. Rup, tup, snup, slup, bor, hor, cor, mor: holla, holla, holla, you
Holifernes Pippo, put him down, wipe your Nose: fie on your sleeue, where is
your Muckender your Grandmother gave you? well say on* say on.


Hol. Pree Master what words this?


Ped. Ass, Ass.


Hol. As in presenti perfectum format in, in, in.


Ped. In what Sir?


Hol. Perfectum format in what Sir?


Ped. In what Sir in avi?


Hol. In what Sir in avi.
Vt no, nas, naui, vocito, vocitas, voci, voci, voci --

Ped. What Is next?


Hol. Voci, What Is next?


Ped. Why thou ungracious child, thou simple animal, thou barnacle. Nous snare
him, take him up, and you were my father you should up.


Hol. Indeed I am not your Father, O Lord now for God sake; let me go out, my
mother told a thing, I shall bewray all else. Hark you Master, my Grandmother
intreates you to come to dinner to morrow morning.


Ped. I say untruss take him up, Nous, dispatch what not perfect in an Ass in
presenty?


Hol. In truth I Will be as perfect an Ass in presenty as any of this Company,
with the grace of god law, this once, this once, and I do so any more --


Ped. I say hold him up.


Hol. Ha let me say my prayers first. You know not what you ha done now, all
the surrup of my brain is run into my buttockes and ye spill the juice of
my wit well, ha sweet, ha sweet, hunny barbary sugar sweet Master.


Ped. Sance tricks trifles, delays, demurrers procrastinations or retarations
mount him, mount him.


Enter Quadratus Lampatho Lauerdure and Simplicius. Qua. Be merciful my gentle
Sinior.


Lau. We Will sue his pardon out.


Ped. He is repriued: and now Appollo bless your brains Facundius and
Elaborate ellegance, make your presence gracious in the eyes of your Mistres.


Lau. You must along with us, lend private ear.


Sim. What is your name.


Hol. Holifernes Pippo.


Sim. Who gave you that name. Nay let me alone for sposing of a scholar.


Hol. My godfathers and godmothers in my baptism.


Sim. Truly gallants I am inamord on thee boy will thou serve me.


Hol. Yes and please my grandmother when I come to years of discretion.


Ped And you have a propensitude to him, he shall be for you: I was solicited
to grant him leave to play the Lady in commedies presented by Children, but I
knew his voice was to small and his stature to lo, sing, sing a treble
Holifernes; sing.

The Song. A very small sweet voice I Will assure you.


Qua. It Is smally sweet indeed.


Sym. A very pretty Child, hold up thy head, there, buy thee some plummes.


Qua. Nay they must play, you go a long with us.


Ped. Ludendi venia est petita and concessa.


All. Gratias.


Sym. Pippo's my page, how like you him, ha has he not a good face, ha.


Lau. Exceeding amiable; come away,
I long to see my love my Celia.

Sym. Carry my rapier hold up so, good child, stay gallants vmph a sweet face.


Lam. I relish not this mirth, my spirit is untwist,
My heart is raueld out in discontents,
I am deep thoughtfull, and I shoot my soul
Through all creation of omnipotence.

Qua. What art melancholy Lamp. I Will feed thy humor
I Will give thee reason straight to hang thy self
Marked marked: In heavens handiwork theirs naught
Believe it.

Lam. In heavens handiwork there is naught
None more vile, accursed, reprobate to bliss
Then man, and mong men a scholar most.
Things only fleshly sencitiue, an Ox or Horse,
They live and eat, and sleep, and drink, and die
And are not touched with recollections
Of things ore-past or staggerd infant doubts
Of things succeeding: but leave the manly beasts,
And give but pence a piece to have a sight:
Of beastly man now.

Sym. What so Lampatho, good truth I will not pay your Ordinary if you come not.


Lam. Do thou hear that voice. I Will make a parrat now,
As good a man as he in fourteen nights
I never heard him vent a syllable:
Of his own creating since I knew the use
Of eyes and ears? Well he is perfect blessed,
Because a perfect beast. I Will gage my heart
He knows no difference essential
Twixt my dog and him. The horeson sot is blessed
Is rich in ignorance, makes fair vsance on it
And every day augments his barbarism
So love me Calmnes I do envy him forts.
I was a scholar: seven useful springs
Did I defloure in quotations
Of crossd oppinions bout the soul of man
The more I learnt the more I learnt to doubt
Knowledge and wit faithes foes, turn faith about

Sim. Nay come good Sinior, I stay all the gentlemen here, I wood feign give my
prity page a pudding pie.


Lam. Honest Epicure.
Nay mark list delight, delight my spaniell slept, whilst I bausd leaves.
Tossd ore the dunces por'd on the old print
Of titled words, and still my spaniell slept.
Whilst I wasted lampoile, bated my flesh
Shrunk up my veins, and still my spaniel slept.
And still I held converse with Zabarell
Aquinas Scotus, and the musty saw
Of antic Donate, still my spaniell slept
Still on went I, first an sit anima
Then and it were mortal, O hold hold
At that they are at brain buffets fell by the ears,
A maine pell mell together, still my spaniell slept.
Then whether twere Corporeal, Local, fixed,
Extraduce, but whether't had free will
Or no, ho Philosophers
Stood banding factions all so strongly propt,
I staggerd, knew not which was firmer part.
But thought, quoted, read, observed and pried,
Stufft noting books, and still my spaniell slept.
At length he wakt and yawnd and by yon sky,
For aught I know he knew as much as I.

Sim. Dellicat good Lampatho come away. I assure you i will give but two pence
more.


Lam. How, it was created, how the soul exsistes
One talks of motes, the soul was made of motes,
An other fire, the other light, a third a spark of Star-like nature
Hippo water, Anaximenes air,
Aristoxenus Music; Critias I know not what,
A company of odd phrenetici
Did eat my youth, and when I crept abroad,
Finding my numnesse in this nimble age,
I fell a railing, but now soft and slow,
I know, I know naught, but I naught do know,
What shall I do, what plot, what course persew?

Qua. Why turn a Temporist, row with the tide,
Pursew the cut, the fashion of the age,
Well here is my Scholars course, first get a School,
And then a ten-pound Cure, keep both, then buy,
(Stay marry, I marry) then a farm or so,
Serve God and Mammon, to the Diuill go,
Affect some sect, I it is the sect is it,
So thou can seem it is held the precious wit:
And O if thou can get some higher seat,
Where thou may sell your holy portion,
(Which charitable providence ordained
In sacred bounty for a blessed use)
Alien the gleabe, intaile it to thy loins,
Intombe it in thy grave
Past resurrection to his native use.
Now if there be a hell, and such swine saved,
Heaven take all, that is all my hopes have craved.

Enter Pippo. Pip. My Simplicias Master.


Lam. Your Master Simplicius.


Pip. Has come to you to sent.


Lam. Has sent to me to come.


Pip. Ha, ha, has bought me a fine dagger, and a Hatte and a Feather, I can say
As in presenti now.


Company of Boys within. Quadratus Quadratus, away, away.

Lam. We come sweet gallants; and grumbling hate lie still
And turn Phantastique: he that climbes a hill
Must wheel about, the ladder to account
Is sly dissemblance, he that means to mount,
Must lie all level in the prospectiue
Of eager sighted greatness, thou would thrive,
The Venice state is young, loose, and unknit,
Can relish naught but lushious vanities
Go fit his tooth, O glauering flattery,
How potent art thou: front look brisk and sleeke,
That such base dirt as you should dare to reeke,
In Princes nostrils. Well my scene is long.

All within. Quadratus. Qua. I come hot bloods, those that their state would
swell,
Must bear a counter-face: the devil and hell
Confound them all, that is all my prayers exact,
So ends our chat, sound Music for the Act. Exeunt.

ACT. 3.
SCAE. 1.
Enter Francisco half dressed, in his black doublet and round cap, the the rest
rich, Iacomo bearing his hatte and feather? Adrean his doublet and band,
Randolfo his cloak and staff* they cloth Francisco, whilst Bydet creepes in
and observes them. Much of of this done whilst the Act is playing. Fran. For
God-sake remember to take special marks of me, or you will nere be able to
know me.


Adri. Why man?


Fra. Why good faith I scarce know my self already me thinks I should remember
to forget my self, now I am so shining brave. Indeed Francisco was always a
sweet youth, for I am a Persumer, but thus brave? I am an alien to it, would
you make me like the drowned Albano, must I bear't mainly up, must I be he.


Ran. What else man? O what else?


Iaco. I warrant you give him but fair rich clothes,
He can be taken, reputed any thing,
Apparail's grown a God and goes more neat,
Makes men of rags, which straight he bears aloft,
Like patcht up scar-Crowes to affright the rout
Of the Idolatrous vulgar, that worship Images,
Stand awed and bare-skalp't at the gloss of silks,
Which like the glorious Ajax of Lincolnes Inn,
(Suruai'd with wonder by me when I lay,
Factor in London:) lappes up naught but filth
And excrements, that bear the shape of men,
Whose inside every day would peck and tear,
But that vain skar-crow clothes intreates forbear.

Fran, You would have me take upon me Albano,
A valiant gallant Venetian Burgomasco,
Well my beard, my feather, short sword and my oath
Shall do it fear not. What I know a number
By the sole warrant of a Lapy-beard,
A rain beat plume, and a good chop filling oath,
With an odd French shrugge, and by the Lotd or so,
Ha leapt into sweet Captain with such ease,
As you would-feart not, I Will gage my heart I Will do it,
How sits my Hat, ha, Jack does my feather wagge.

Iaco. Me thinks now in the common sense of fashion,
Thou should grow proud, and like a fore-horse view,
None but beforehand gallants, as for sides*
And those that rank in equal file with thee,
Studdy a faint salute, give a strange eye,
But as to those in rere-ward O be blind,
The world wants eyes, it cannot see behind.

Fran. Where is the strumpet, where is the hot vain'd French,
Lives not Albano, has Celia so forgot,
Albanos love, that she must forthwith wed,
A runne-about* a skipping Frenchman --

Iaco. Now you must grow in heat and stut.


Fran. An odd phantasma, a beggar, a Sir, a who who who what you will, a
straggling go go go gunds, f f f f fut --


Adrian. Passing like him, passing like him, O 'twill strike all dead.


Pan. I am ravished 'twill be peerles exquisite,
Let him go out instantly.

Iaco. O not till twy-light, mean time I Will prop up
The tottering Rumor of Albanos skape.
And safe arrival, it begins to spread,
If this plot live Frenchman thy hopes are dead. Exeunt.

Bydet. And if it live strike of this little head. Exit.


Enter Albano with Slip his Page. Alba. Can it be? is it possible? is it within the
bounds of faith? O vilany.


Slip The clapper of Rumor strikes on both sides ringing out the French knight
is in firm possession of my Misteris your wife.


Alba. Is It possible I should be dead so soon?
In her affectes, how long is it since our shipprack?

Slip. Faith I have little arithmatique in me, yet I remember the storm made
me cast up perfectly the whole sum of all I had received, three days before I
was liquord soundly my guts were rinc'd for the heavens: I look as pale ever
since as if I had taken the diet this spring.


Alba. But how long is it since our shipwreck?


Slip. Mary since we were hung by the heels on the batch of Cycily to make a
iayle delivery of the sea in our mawes it is just three months: shall I speak
like a Poet? Thrice has the horned moan.


Alba. Talk not of horns. O Celia how often
(When thou have laid thy cheek upon my breast
And with laciuious petulancy sewed.
For Hymeneall dalliance marriage rightes)
O then how often with passionate protestes
And zealous vows have thou obliged thy love,
In dateles bands unto Albanos breast?
Then did I but mention second Marriage
With what a bitter hate would she inuaigh
Against retaild wedlockes. O would she lispe
If you should die, (then would she slide a tear,
And with a wanton languishment in-twist
Her hands) O God and you should die. Marry?
Could I love life; my dear Albano dead
Should any Prince possess his widows bed?
And now see, see, I am but rumord drowned.

Slip. She Will make you Prince, your worship must be crowned
O master you know the woman is the weaker creature,
She must have a prop: the maid is the brittle mettell
Her head is quickly cracked: the wife is queasie stomackt
She must be fed with novelties; but then what is your widdowe,
Custom is a second nature, I say no more but think you the rest.

Alba. If love be holy, if that mystery,
Of co-vnited hearts be sacrament?
If the unbounded goodness have infused.
A sacred ardor if a mutual love
Into our Speties, of those amorous joys,
Those sweetes of life, those comfortes even in death
Spring from a cause above our reasones reach?
If that clear flame deduce his heat from heaven?
It Is like his cause's eternal always one
As is the instiller of deuinest love
Vnchangd by time immortal mauger death.
But O it is grown a figment: love a jest:
A commick Poesy: the soul of man is rotten
Even to the core no sound affection.
Our love is hollow vaulted, stands on proppes,
Of circumstance, profit or ambitious hopes.
The other tissue Gown or Chain of pearl
Makes my coy minx to nussell twixt the breasts
Of her lulled husband, the other Carkanet,
Deflowres that Ladies bed: one hundred more
Marries that loathed blowze, one ten pound odds
In promised ioynture makes the hard palm'd sire,
Enforce his daughters tender lips to start
At the sharp touch of some loathed stubbed beard,
The first pure time the golden age is fled,
Heaven knows I lie it is now the age of gold,
For it all marreth and even virtues sold.

Slip. Master will you trust me and I Will.


Alba Yes boy I Will trust thee, babes and fools i will trust
But servants faith, wives love, or femalls lust,
A usurer and the diuill sooner. Now were I dead,
Me thinks I see a huff-cap swaggering sir,
Pawning my plate, my jewels, morgage? Nay
Selling out right the purchase of my brows,
Whilst my poor fatherless lean totterd son,
My gentries relics, my houses only prop,
Is sawed a sunder, lies forlorn, all bleake,
Unto the griefs of sharp Necessities,
Whilst his father in law, his father in Devil, or d d d d Diuill,
f f f father,
Or who who who who; What you will,
When is the marriage morn?

Slip. Even next rising son.


Alba. Good, good, good, go to my brother Adrian,
Tell him I Will lurck, stay, tell him I Will lurck, stay,
Now is Albanos marriage bed new hung
With fresh rich Curtains, now are my valence up,
Imbost with orient Pearl, my Gransires gift,
Now are the Lawne sheets fumed with Vyolets,
To fresh the pawld lascivious appetite,
Now work the Cooks, the pastry sweates with slaves,
The March-panes glitter, now now the musitions
Houer with nimble sticks ore squeaking crowds,
Ticling the dried guts of a Mewing Catt,
The Tailors, Starchers, Semsters, Butchers, Pulterors, Mercers, all, all, all,
now now now, none think a me, the f f f French is te f f f fine man, de p p p
pock man, de --


Slip. Peace, peace, stand conceald, yonder by all discriptions is he would be
husband of my Mistress: your wife hah meat hah.


Alba. Vds so, so, so, soul that's my velvet cloak.


Slip. O peace, observe him, hah.


Enter Lauerdure and Bidett talking, Quadratus, Lampatho, Simplicius, Pedante,
and Holiternes Pippo. Bidet. It Is most true Sir, I heard all, I saw all, I tell
all, and I hope you believe all, the sweet Francisco Soranza, the Perfumer is
by your rival Iacomo, and your two brothers that must be, when you have
married your wife, that shall be.


Peda. With the grace of Heaven.


Bidett. Disguised so like the drowned Albano to cross your suit, that by my
little honesty 'twas great consolation to me to observe them, passion of joy,
of hope. O excellent cried Andrea, passingly cried Randolfo; vnparraleld lispes
Iacomo, good, good, good, says Andrea, now stut says Iacomo, now stut says
Randolfo, whilst the ravished Perfumer had like to have waterd the seames of his
breeches for extreme pride of their applause.


Lau. Sest, I Will to Celia, and mauger the nose of her friends, wedde her: bed
her, my first son shall be a Captain, and his name shall be what it please
his Godfathers, the second if he have a face bad enough, a Lawyer, the third
a Merchant, and the fourth if he be maimd, dull braind, or hard shapt, a
scholar, for that's your fashion.


Qua. Get them, get them man first; now by the wantonness of the night, and I
were a wench I would not ha-thee, were thou an heir, nay (which is more) a
fool.


Lau. Why I can rise high, a straight leg, a plumpe thigh, a full vain, a
round cheek, and when it pleases the firtility of my chinne to be delivered
of a beard, 'twill not wrong my kissing, for my lips are rebels, and stand
out.


Qua. Ho but there is an old fustie Proverb, these great talkers are never good
dooers.


Lam. Why what a babell arrogance is this?
Men will put by the very stock of fate,
They Will thwart the destiny of marriage,
Strive to disturb the sway of providence,
They Will do it?

Qua. Come, you will be snarling now.


Lam As if we had free will in supernatural
Effects, and that our love or hate
Depended not on causes boue the reach
Of human stature.

Qua. I think I shall not lend you forty shillings now.


Lam. Dirt upon dirt, fear is beneath my shoe,
Dreadlesse of rackes, strappados, or the sword,
Mauger Informer and sly intelligence,
I Will stand as confident as Hercules,
And with a frightlesse resolution,
Rip up and lance our times impieties.

Sim. Vds so peace.


Lam. Open a bounteous ear for I Will be free,
Ample as Heaven, give my speech more room,
Let me unbrace my breasts, strip up my sleeves,
Stand like an executioner to vice,
To strike his head off with the keener edge,
Of my sharp spirit.

Lau. Room and good license, come on, when, when.


Lam. Now is my fury mounted, fix your eyes,
Intend your senses, bend your listening up,
For I Will make greatness quake, I Will tawe the hide
Of thick-skind Hugenes.

Lau. It Is most gracious we will observe thee calmely.


Qua. Hang on thy toungs end, come on pree-thee do.


Lam. I Will see you hanged first, I thank you Sir, I Will none,
This is the strain that chokes the theaters:
That makes them crack with full stufft audience,
This is your humor only in request
Forsooth to rail, this brings your ears to bed*
This people gape for, for this some do stare
This some would hear, to crack the Authors neck,
This admiration and applause persues,
Who cannot rail, my humors changed it is clear,
Pardon I Will none, I prise my joints more dear.

Bidet. Master, Master, I ha discri'd the Perfumer in Albanos disguise, look
you, look you, rare sport, rare sport.


Alba. I can contain my impatience no longer, you Mounsieur Cauelere, Saint
Dennis, you Caprichious Sir, Sinior Caranto French braule, you that must marry
Celia Galanto, is Albano drowned now? go wander, auant Knight, errant Celia
shall be no Cuck-queane, my heir no beggar, my plate no pawn, my land no
morgage, my wealth no food for thy luxuries, my house no harbor for thy
Comrades* my bed no bootye for thy lusts, my any thing shall be thy
nothing, go hence pack, pack, auant, caper, caper, aloun, aloun, pass by,
pass by, cloak your nose, away, vanish, wander depart, slink by away.


Lau. Hark you perfumer, tell Iacomo Randulfo, and Adrean, 'twill not do,
look you say no more, but 'twill not do.


Alba. What perfumer? what Iacomo?


Qua. Nay assure thee honest Perfumer good Francisco, we know all man, go
home to thy Ciuitt Box, look to the profit, commodity or emolument of thy
Mus-cats tail, go clap on your round Cap, my what do you lack sir, for in faith
good rogue alls discri'd.


Alba. What Perfumer? what Mus-cat? what Francisco, what do you lack, is it not
enough that you kissd my wife?


Lau Enough.


Alba. I enough, and may be, I fear me too much, but you must floute me,
deride me, scoff me, keep out, touch not my porche, as for my wife --


Lau. Stir to the door: dare to disturb the match, And by the --


Alba. My sword: menace Albano fore his own doors.


Lau. No not Albano but Francisco, thus, Perfumer, I Will make you stink if you
stir a; for the rest: well via via. Exeu^t Cest. Remanet Albano, Slip. Simp.
and Holif.


Alba. Jesus, Jesus, what intends this? ha?


Sim. O God Sir, you lie as open to my understanding as a Curtizan, I know you
as well --


Alba. Some body knows me yet, praise heaven some body knows me yet.


Sim. Why look you Sir, I ha paid for my knowing of men and women too in my
days, I know you are Francisco Soranza the Perfumer, I maugre Sinior Satin I.


Alba. Do not tempt my patience, go to, do not.


Sim. I know you dwell in Saint Marks lane, at the sign of the Mus-cat as
well --


Alba. Fool, or madd, or drunk no more.


Sim. I know where you were dressed, where you were --


Alba. Nay then take all, take all, take all --


He bastinadoes Simplicius. Simp. And I tell not my father, if I make you not
loose your office of gutter Maister-ship; and you be Skauenger next year
well: Come Holifernes come good Holifernes, come servant. Exit Sim. Holife.


Enter Iacomo. Alba. Francisco Soranza and perfumer and muscat, and gutter
master hay, hay, hay, go, go, go, gods f, f, f, fut; I Will to the Duke and I Will
so ti, ti, ti, ticle them.


Iaco. Precious, what means he to go out so soon,
Before the dusk of twilight might deceive
The doubtful priers. What holla.

Alba. Whop what diuill now?


Iaco. I Will feign I know him not, what business fore those doors.


Alba. What Is that to thee


Iaco. You come to wrong my friend Sir Lauerdure
Confess or --

Alba. My sword boy s, s, s, s, soul my sword.


Iaco. O my dear rogue thou art a rare dissembler.


Alba. See see.


Enter Adrian and Randolfo. Iaco. Francisco did I not help to cloth thee even
now
I would has worn thee Albano my good sweet slave. Exi. Ia.

Alba. See, see, Jesus, Jesus, impostors, connicatchers, Sancta Maria?


Ran. Look you, he walks he faines most excellent.


Adri. Accost him first as if you were ignorant
Of the deceit.

Ran. O dear Albano now thrice happy eyes
To view the hope-lesse presence of my brother.

Alba. Most loved kinsman praise to Heaven yet,
You know Albano, but for yonder slaves -- well.

Adri. Success could not come on more gracious.


Alba. Had not you come (dear brother Adrian)
I think not one would know me. Ulysses dog
Had quicker scence then my dull Countrymen,
Why none had known me.

Rand. Doubt you of that? would I might die,
Had I not known the guile I would ha sworn
Thou had bin Albano, my nimble couzning knave.

Alba. Whippe, whippe, Heaven preserve al Saint Mark Saint Mark.
Brother Adrian, be frantic pree-thee be
Say I am a Perfumer Francisco, hay hay
Is It not some feast day you are all rank drunk
Rratts ra, ra, ra, rattes knights of the be, be, be, bell, be, be, bell.

Adri. Go go proceed thou do it rare farewell.


Exeunt Adrian and Randolfo. Alba. Farewell? ha? is it even so? boy who am I?


Slip. My Lord Albano,

Alb. By this breast you lie
The Samian faith is true, true, I was drowned
And now my soul is skipt into a perfumer a gutter-master.

Slip. Believe me sir --

Alba. No no I Will believe nothing, no,
The disadvantage of all honest hearts
Is quick credulity, perfect state pollecy
Can crosse-bite even sense, the worlds turned Iuggler,
Castes mystes before our eyes Haygh pass re pass
I Will credit nothing.

Slip. Good Sir.


Alba. Hence ass.
Does not Opinion stamp the current pass,
Of each man's value, virtue, quality?
Had I engrossed the choice commodities
Of heavens trafike, yet reputed vile
I am a rascal; O dear unbelief,
How wealthy do thou make thy owners wit?
Thou train of knowledge, what a privilege
Thou give to thy possessor: anchorst him,
From floting with the tide of vulger faith:
From being damned with multitudes dear unbelief,
I am a Perfumer, I, think thou my blood,
My brothers know not right Albano yet?
Away it is faites, if Albanos name,
Were liable to scence, that I could taste or touch
Or see, or feel it, it might tice belief,
But since it is voice, and air, come to the Muscat boy,
Francisco, that's my name it is right, I, I,
What do you lack? what is it you lack right that is my cry. Exeunt

Enter Slip and Noose Trip with the trunchion of a staff torch, and Doite with
a Pantofle, Bidet, Holyfernes following. The Cornets sound. Bid. Proclaim our
titles


Doit. Bosphoros Cormelydon Honorificacuminos Bydet.


Holyf. I think your Majesty's a Welchman, you have a horrible long name.


Bydet. Death or scilence proceed.


Doit. Honorificacuminos Bidet Emperor of Crackes, Prince of Pages, Marquis of
Mumchance, and sole regent over a bale of false dice, to all his under
Ministers health, Crowns, Sack, Tobacco, and stockings vncrakt above the shoe.


Bydet. Our self will give them their charge, Now let me stroke my beard and
I had it, and speak wisely if I knew how: most vnconsionable, honest little,
or little honest good subjects, inform our person of your several qualities
and of the prejudice that is foisted upon you that our self may peruew,
prevent, and preoccupie the pustulent dangers incident to all your cases.


Doit. Here is a petition exhibited of the particular greeuances of each sort
of pages.


Bydet. We will vouchsafe in this our public session to peruse them, pleases
your excellent wagship to be informed that the division of pages is tripartite
(tripartite) or three fold, of pages, some be Court pages, others Ordinary
gallants pages, and the third-apple squiers, basket-bearers or pages of the
placket, with the last we will proceed first, stand forth page of the placket,
what is your mistres?


Slip. A kind of puritan.


Bid. How live you?


Slip. Miserably co^playning to your crack-ship though we have light Mistresses
we are made the Children and servants of darkness, what profane use we are put
to, al these gallants more feelingly know then we can lively express, it is to
be comiserated and by your royal insight only to be prevented that a male
Mounkey and the diminutiue of a man should be Synonima and no scence. Though
we are the dross of your subjects, yet being a kind of page, let us find
your Celsitude kind and respective of our time-fortunes and birthes abuse, and
so in the name of our whole tribe of empty basket-bearers, I kiss your little
hands.


Bidet. Your case is dangerous and almost desperate stand forth ordinary
gallants page, what is the nature of your Master?


Noose. He eats well and right slouenly, and when the dice favor him goes in
good clothes, and scowers his pinke color silk stockings: when he has any
money he bears his crowns, when he has none I carry his purse, he cheates
well, swears better, but swaggers in a wantons Chamber admirably, he loves
his boy and the rump of a crammed Capon, and this summer has a passing thrifty
humor to bottle ale: as contemptuous as Lucifer, as arrogant as ignorance can
make him, as libidinous as Priapus, he keeps me as his adamant to draw
mettell after to his lodging, I curle his perriwig, painte his cheeks, perfume
his breath, I am his froterer or rubber in a Hot-house, the prop of his lies,
the bearer of his false dice, and yet for all this like the Persian Louse that
eats biting, and biting eats, so I say sithing and sithing say my end is to
paste up a Si quis my Masters fortunes are forced to cashere me and so six to
one I fall to be a Pippin squire. Hic finis priami, this is the end of pick
pockets.


Bydet. Stand forth Court-page, thou lokest pale and wan.


Trip. Most ridiculous Emperor.


Bydet. O say no more, I know thy miseryes, what betwixt thy Lady, her
Gentlewoman and thy Masters late gaming thou may look pale. I know thy
miseries and I condole thy calamities, thou art borne well, bred ill, but die
worst of al, thy blood most commonly gentle, thy youth ordinaryly idle, and thy
age to often miserable. When thy first suit is fresh, thy cheeks clear of
Court soiles, and thy Lord fallen out with his Lady, so long may be heel chuck
thee under the chin, call thee good pretty ape and give thee a scrap from his
own trencher, but after he never beholds thee, but when thou squierst him with
a torch to a wantons sheets, or lights his Tobacco pipe. Never uses thee but
as his pander never, regards thee but as an idle bur that stickst upon the
nap of his fortune, and so naked thou camst into the world and naked thou must
return; whom serve you.


Holy. A fool.


Bydet. Thou art my happiest subject, the service of a fool is the only
blessedst slavery that ever put on a chain and a blew cote, they know not what
nor for what they give, but so they give it is good, so it be good they give:
fortunes are ordained for fools, as fools are for fortune, to play with all
not to use, has he taken an oath of alleagiance is he of our brotherhood yet?


Holy. Not yet right venerable Honorificac cac cac cacuminos Bidet: but as
little an infant as I am I will, and with the grace of wit I will deserve it.


Bydet. You must perform a valorous Virtuous, and religious exploit first in
desert of your order.


Holyf. What is it?


Bid. Cousen thy master, he is a fool, and was created for men of wit such as
thy self to make use of.


Holy. Such as my self. Nay faith for wit I think for my age or so, but on,
sir.


Bidet. That thou may the easier purge him of superfluous blood I will
discribe thy Masters constitution, he loves and is beloved of himself and one
more; his dog. There is a company of vnbrac'd vntrussd, rutters in the town,
that crinkle in the hammes swearing their flesh is their only living, and when
they have any crowns, cry god a marcy Mol, and shrugging let the Cockholds pay
fort: intimating that their maintenance flows from the wantonness of
Merchants wives, when in troth the plain troth is, the plain and the stand, or
the plain stand and deliver, delivers them all their living. These comrades
have persuaded thy Master that there is no way to redeem his peach color
satin suit from pawn but by the love of a Cytizens wife, he believes it,
they slout him he feeds them, and now it is our honest and religious meditation
that he feed us. Holyfernes Puppi.


Holy. Pippo and shall please you.


Bydet. Pippo it is our will and pleasure thou suit thy self like a Merchants
wife, leave the managing of the sequence unto our prudence.


Holy. Or unto our Prudence truly she is a very witty wench and has a
stammell petticote with three gards for the nonce; but for your Merchants wife
alas I am to little, speak to small, go to gingerly, by my troth I fear I
shall look to fair.


Bydet. Our majesty dismounteth, and we put of our greatness, and now my
little knaves I am plain Crack, as I am Bosphoros Carmelidon Honorificacuminos
Bydet I am imperious: honor sparckles in mine eyes; but as I am Crack I will
convey crosbite and cheat upon Simplicius, I will feed, satiat and fill your
panches: replenish, stuff or furnish your purses, we will laugh when others
weep, sing when others since, feed when others starve, and be drunk when
others are sober, this my charge at the loose, as you love our brotherhood,
avoid true speech square dice, small liquor, and above all, those to
vngentlemanlike protestations of indeed and verily, and so gentle Appollo
touch thy nimble string our scene is done yet fore we cease we sing. The
Song and Exeunt.


ACT. 4.
SCE 1.
Enter Celia Meletza Lyzabetta and Lucea. Celia. Faith sister I long to play
with a fether,
Pree-thee Lucia bring the shuttle-cock.

Melet. Out on him light pated Phantasticke, he is like one of our gallants at.
--


Lyza. I wonder who thou speak well of?


Mel. Why of my self, for by my troth I know none else will.


Celia. Sweet sister Meletza lets sit in judgment a little, faith of my servant
Mounsier Lauerdure.


Mel. Troth well for a servant, but for a husband (figh) I.


Lyza. Why why?


Melet. Why he is not a plain fool, nor fair, nor fat, nor rich, rich fool.
But he is a knight, his honor will give the passado in the presence to morrow
night, I hope he will deserve: Al I can say is as, as the common fiddlers will
say in their God send you well to do.


Ly. How think thou of the amorous Iacomo.


Melet. Iacomo why on my bare troth.


Celia. Why bare troth.


Melet. Because my troth is like his chinne tath no hair on it; gods me his
face looks like the head of a taber, but trust me he has a good wit.


Ly. Who told you so.


Mel. One that knows, one that can tell?


Celia. Whose that.


Melet. Him self.


Lyz. Well wench, thou had a servant one Fabius what have thou done with him.


Melet. I done with him? out of him puppy, by this fether his beard is
derectly brick color, and perfectly fashioned like the husk of a cheessnut,
he kisses with the driest lip; figh on him.


Celia. O but your servant Quadratus the absolute Courtier.


Melet. Fie, fie, speak no more of him, he lives by begging?
He is a fine Courtier flatters admirable, kisses
Fair Madam, smells surpassing sweet, wears
And holds up the arras, supportes the tapistry,
When I pass into the presence very gracefully and
I assure you.

Lucea. Madam here is your shuttle-cock


Melet. Sister is not your waighting wench rich?


Celia. Why sister why?


Melet. Because she can flatter: pree-thee call her not,
She has 24. hours to Maddam yet; come you
You prate in faith I Will toss you from post to pillar.

Celia. You post and I pillar.


Melet. No, no, you are the only post, you must support prove a wench and
bear, or elce all the building of your delight will fall --


Celia. Down.


Lyza. What must I stand out?


Melet. I by my faith til you be married.


Ly. Why do you toss then?


Melet. Why I am wed wench.


Celea. Pree thee to whom.


Melet. To the true husband right head of a woman, my will, which vows never to
marry till I mean to be a fool, a slave, starch cambrick ruffes, and make
candells (pur) it is down serve again good wench.


Luc. By your pleasing cheek you play well.


Melet. Nay good creature pree thee do not flatter me, I thought it was for
something you go casd in your veluit skabberd, I warrant these laces were nere
stich'd on with true stich, I have a plain waighting wench she speaks
plain, and faith, she goes plain, she is virtuous and because she should go
like virtue by the consent of my bounty she shall never have above two smockes
to her back, for that's the fortune of desert, and the maine in fashion or
reward of merit (pur)just thus do I use my servants, I strive to catch them in
my racket, and no sooner caught but I toss them away, if he fly well and have
good feaethers I play with them till he be down, and then my maid serves him
to me again, if a slug and weak winged if he be down there let him lie.


Celea. Good Mell I wonder how many servants thou have.


Melet. Troth so do I, let me see Dupatzo.


Lyxa. Dupatzo which Dupatzo.


Melet. Dupatzo the elder brother the fool, he that bought the half penny rib
and wearing it in his ear* swearing it was the duches of Millans favor, he into
whose head a man may travel 10. leagues before he can meet with his eyes,
then there is my chub my Epicure Quadratus, that rubbes his guts, clappes his
paunch and cries Riuo, intertayning my ears perpetually with a most strong
discourse of the praise of bottle ale and red Herrings, then there is Simplicius
Faber.


Ly. Why he is a fool.


Melet. True or else he would nere be my servant, then there is the cap cloakt
Courtier Baltazar he wears a double treble quadruple ruff, I in the summer
time, faith I ha servants inow and I doubt not but by my ordinary pride and
extraordinary cunning to get more. Mounsier Lauerdure with a troop of gallants
is entering.


Lyza. He capers the lascivious blood about
Within heart pantes, nor leapes the eye nor lips:
Prepare your selves to kiss for you must be kissd.

Mel. By my troth it is a pretty thing to be toward marriage, a pretty loving:
look where he comes ha ha.


Lauer. Good day sweet love.


Mel. Wish her good night man.


Lau. God morrow sister.


Mel. A cursie to you caper, to morrow morn I Will call you brother.


Lauer. But much much falls betwixt the cup and lip.


Mel. Be not to confident the knot may slip.


Qua. Bounty, blessedness, and the spirit of wine attend my Mistres.


Mel. Thanks good chub.


Sim. God ye god morrow heartely mistres, and how do you since last I saw you.


Qua. Gods me you must not inquire how she does, that's privy counsel, fie,
there is manners indeed.


Si. Pray you pardon my inciuility, I was som-what bold with you, but believe
me I Will never be so saucy to ask you how you do again, as long as I live la.


Mel. Square chub, what sullene black is that.


Qua. A tassell that hangs at my purse strings, he dogs me and I give him
scraps and pay for his ordinary, feed him, he liquors himself in the juice
of my bounty, and when he has sucked up strength of spirit he squeaseth it in
my own face, when I have refind and sharp'd his wits with good food, he cuts
my fingers, and breaks jests upon me, I bear them, and beat him: but by this
light the dull eyed thinks he dos well, dos very well, and but that he and I
are of two faithes -- I fill my belly, and feeds his brain, I could find in my
heart to hug him, to hug him.


Melet. Pree-thee persuade him to assume spirit and salute us.


Quad. Lampatho, Lampatho, art out of countenance, for wits sake salute these
beauties, how do like them?


Lam. Vds fut, I can liken them to nothing, but great men's great horse upon
great days, whose tails are trust up in silk and silver.


Quad. To them man, salute them.


Lam. Bless you fair Ladies, God make you all his servants.


Melet. God make you all his servants.


Qua. He is helped well had need of you, for be it spoken without prophanisme
he has more in this train, I fear me you ha more servants then he, I am
sure the Diuill is an Angel of darkness.


Lamp. I but those are Angels of light.


Qua. Light Angels, pree-thee leave them, withdraw a little and hear a Sonnet
pree-thee, hear a Sonnet.


Lamp. Made of Albanos widow that was, and Mounsieur Lauerdures wife that must
be.


Qua. Come leave his lips and command some liquor, if you have no Bottle-Ale,
command some Claret Wine and Bourrage, for that is my predominate humor sleeke
billid Bacchus, lets fill thy guts.


Lamp. Nay hear it, and relish it iuditiously.


Qua. I do relish it most iuditially. Quad. drinks.


Lamp. Adored excellence, delicious sweet.


Qua. Delicious sweet good, very good.


Lamp. If thou can taste the purer juice of love.


Qua. If thou can taste the purer juice, good still, good still.


Qua. I do relish it, it tastes sweet.


Lamp. Is not the metaphor good, is it not well followed?


Qua. Passing good, very pleasing.


Lamp. Is It not sweet.


Qua. Let me see it I Will make it sweet,
I Will soake it in the juice of Helicon.
Bir Lady, passing sweet, good, passing sweet.

Lamp. You wrong my Muse.


Qua. The Irish flux upon thy Muse, thy whorish Muse,
Here is no place for her loose brothelry,
We will not deal with her, go, away, away,

Lamp. I Will be revenged.

Qua. How pree-thee in a play? come, come, be sosiable
In private seuerance from society,
Here leapes a vain of blood inflamed with love,
Mounting to pleasure, all adict to mirth,
Thoult read a Satyr or a Sonnet now,
Clagging their ayery humor with --

Lam. Lamp oil, watch Candles, Rug-gownes and small juice,
Thin commons, four a clock rising, I renounce you all,
Now may I ternally abandon meat
Rust fustie you which most embraced disuse,
You a made me an Ass, thus shapt my lot,
I am a mere Scholar, that is a mere sot.

Qua. Come then Lamp, i will power fresh Oil into thee,
Apply thy spirit that it may nimbly turn,
Unto the habit, fashion of the age,
I Will make thee man the Scholar, enable thy behavior,
Apt for the intertaine of any presence:
I Will turn thee gallant, first thou shall have a Mistress,
How is thy spirit raised to yonder beauty?
She with the sanguine cheek, the dimpled chinne,
The pretty amorous smile that clips her lips,
And dallyes bought her cheek --
She with the speaking eye,
That castes out beams as ardent as those flakes,
Which singed the world by rash braind Phaeton,
She with the lip, O lips! she for whose sake,
A man could find in his heart to in-hell himself,
There Is more Philosophy, more theoremes,
More demonstrations, all invincible,
More clear divinity drawn on her cheek,
Then in all volumes tedious paraphase,
Of musty eld, O who would staggering doubt,
The souls eternity, seeing it has
Of heavenly beauty, but to case it up,
Who would distrust a supreme existence,
Able to confound when it can creale,
Such heaven on earth able to intrance,
Amaze: O I it is providence, not chance.

Lam. Now by the front of Jove me thinks her eye
Shootes more spirit in me, O beauty feminine!
How powerful art thou, what deep magic lies
Within the circle of thy speaking eyes.

Qua. Why now could I eat thee, thou do please mine appetite, I can disist
thee, God made thee a good fool, and happy and ignorant, and amarous, and
rich and frail, and a Satyrist, and an Essayest, and sleepy, and proud, and
indeed a fool and then thou shall be sure of all these. Do but scorn her
she is thine own, accost her carelessly, and her eye promises she will be
bound to the good abbearing.


Celia. Now sister Meletza do mark their craft, some straggling thoughts
transport thy attentiveness from his discourse, wast Iacomos or our brothers
plot?


Lauer. Both, both, sweet Lady, my Page heard all, we met the rogue, so
like Albano, I beat the rogue.


Sim. I but when you were gone the rogue beat me.


Lau. Now take my counsel, listen.


Melet. A pretty youth, a pretty well shapt youth, a good leg, a very good eye,
a sweet ingenious face, and I warrant a good wit, nay which is more, if he
be poor I assure my soul he is chaste and honest, good faith I fancy, I
fancy him, I and I may chance, well I Will think the rest.


Qua. I say be careless still, court her without complement take spirit.


Lauer. Were not a pleasing jest for me to cloth
Another rascal like Albano, say
And rumor him returned without all deceit,
Would not beget errors most ridiculous.

Qua. Meletza bella belletza, Madonna, bella bella genteletza pree-thee kiss
this initiated gallant.


Melet. How would it please you I should respect ye.


Lamp. As any thing, What you will as nothing.


Melet. As nothing, how will you value my love.


Lamp. Why just as you respect me, as nothing, for out of nothing, nothing is
bred, so nothing shall not beget anything, anything bring nothing, nothing
bring anything, anything and nothing shall be What you will, my speech
mounting to the valieu of my self which is.


Melet. What sweet --


Lamp. Your nothing light as your self scencelesse as your sex, and just as
you would ha me, nothing.


Melet. Your wit skips a morisco, but by the brightest spangle of my tier, I
vouchafe you entire unaffected favor, were this gentle spirit be not proud.

Believe it youth slow speech, swift love does often shroud.

Lamp. My soul's intranc'd your favor does transport,
My scence past scence, by your adored graces,
I dote, am rapt.

Melet. Nay if you fall to passion and past scence,
My breasts no harbor for your love, go pack, hence.

Qua. Vds fut thou gull, thou inkie scholar, ha, thou whoreson fop,
Wilt not thou clappe into our fashioned gallantry,
Could not be proud and skornfull, loofe and vain
Gods my hearts object, what a plague is this:
My soul's intraunc'd, fut could not clip and kiss,
My soul's intraunc'd, ten thousand crowns at least
Lost lost, my soul's intraunc'd, loves life O beast!

Alba. Celia open, open Celia, I would enter, open Celia.


Fran. Celia, open, open Celia, I would enter open Celia.


Alba. What Celia let in thy husband Albano what Celia.


Fran. What Celia let in thy husband Albano what Celia


Alba. Vds f, f, f, fut let Albano enter.


Fran. Vds f, f, f, fut let Albano enter.


Celia. Sweet breast you ha played the wag in faith.


Qua. Believe it sweet not I.


Melet. Come you have attired some fiddler like Albano to fright the perfumer,
there is the jest.


Ran. Good fortunes to our sister.


Melet. And a speedy marriage.


Adri. Then we must wish her no good fortunes.


Iaco. For shame, for shame straight clear your house; sweep out this dust,
fling out this trash, return to modesty your husband I say your husband Albano
that was supposd drowned is returned I and at the door.


Celia. Ha ha, my husband, ha ha.


Adri. Laugh you, shameless? laugh you?


Celia. Come, come, your plots discouerd, good faith kinsmen I am no skold: to
shape a Perfumer like my husband, O sweet jest.


Iaco. Last hopes all known.


Celi For penance of your fault will you maintain a jest now, my love has
tired some fiddler like Albano, like the Perfumer.


Lau. Not I by blessedness not I.


Mel. Come it is true, do but support the jest and you shall surfeit, with laughter.


Iaco. Faith we condescend, twill not be crosd I see,
Marriage and hanging go by destiny.

Alba. B, b, b, bar out Albano, O Adulterous impudent.


Fran. B, b, b, bar out Albano, O thou matchless g, g, g, gigglet.


Enter Albano and Francisco. Qua. Let them in, let them in, now, now, now
observe, observe, look, look, look.


Iaco. That sames a fiddler, shapt like thee, fear naught, be confident thou
shall know the jest hereafter, be confident; fear naught, blush not, stand
firm.


Alba. Now brothers, now gallants, now sisters now call a Perfumer a
gutter-maister, bar me my house, beat me: baffle me, skoffe me, deride me,
ha that I were a young man again, by the mas I would ha you all by the ears,
by the mas law; I am Francisco Soranza am I not gigglet: strumpet, cutters,
swaggerers, brothell haunters, I am Francisco, O god, O slaves, O dogs,
dogs, curres.


Iaco. No sir pray you pardon us, we confess you are not Francisco nor a
Perfumer, but even.


Alba. But even Albano.


Iaco. But even a fiddler, a miniken tickler, a pum, pum.


Fran. A scraper, scraper.
Art not ashamed before Albanos face,
To clip his spouze, O shamlesse impudent!

Iaco. Well said perfumer.


Alb. A fiddler a scraper, a miniken tickler, a pum, a pum, even now a
Perfumer, now a fiddler, I will be even What you will, do, do do, k, k, k,
kiss my wife be, be, be, be, fore.


Qua. Why would have him kiss her behind?


Alba. Before my own f, f, f, face.


Iaco. Well done fiddler.


Alba. I Will f, f, fiddle ye.


Fran. Do f, f, floute me.


Alba. Do m, m, m, mock me.


Fran. I Will to the Duke I Will p, p, p, paste up infamies on every post.


Iaco. It Was rarely, rarely done, away, away. Exit Francisco.


Alba. I Will f, f, follow, though I st, st, st, stut, i will stumble to the Duke in
p, p, plain language, I pray you use my wife well, good faith she was a kind
soul and an honest woman once, I was her husband and was called Albano before
I was drowned, but now after my resurrection I an I know not what indeed
brothers, and indeed sisters and in deed wife I am: What you will, do thou
laugh, do thou ge, ge, ge, gerne; a p, p, p, perfumer a fiddler, a Diabalo,
matre de Dios, I Will f, f, f, firk you by the Lord now, now I will. Exit Albano.


Qua. Ha ha it is a good rogue, a good rogue.


Lau. A good rogue ha, I know him not.


Celia. No good sweet love come come dissemble not,


Lau. Nay if you dread nothing happy be my lot
Come Via sest, come fair cheeks, come lets dance,
The sweetes of love is amorous dalliance.

Celia. All friends, all happy friends, my veins are light,

Ly. Thy prayers are now god send it quickly night.


Melet. And then come morning.


Ly. I that's the hopeful day*


Mel. I there thou hitst it.


Qua. Pray God he hit it.


Lau. Play.


The Dance. Iaco. They say there is reuells and a Play at Court.


Lau. A Play to night?


Qua. I it is this gallants wit,


Iaco. Is It good is it good?


Lamp. I fear twill hardly hit.


Qua. I like thy fear, well, it will have better chance,
There Is naught more hateful then rank ignorance.

Celia. Come gallants the table spread will you to dinner?


Qua. Yes first a maine at dice and then we will eat.


Sim. Truly the best wits have the bad'st fortune at dice still.


Qua. Whole Play, whole play.


Sim. Not I, in truth I have still exceeding bad fortune at dice.


Celia. Come shall we in, infayth thou art sudden sad,
Do fear the shadow of my long dead Lord.

Lauer, Shadow ha I cannot tell
Time tries all things well. well, well.

Qua. Would I were time then, I thought it was for some thing that the old
fornicator was bald behind; go pass on pass on.

Exeunt.
ACT. 5.
SCAE. 1.
The Curtains are drawn by a Page, and Celia and Lauerdure, Quadratus, and
Lyzabetta, Lampatho and Meletza Simplicius, and Lucea displayed sitting at
Dinner. The Song is sung, during which a Page whispers with Simplicius. Qua.
Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis,
Riuo here is good juice, fresh Burrage boy?

Lam. I commend, commend my self to ye Lady.


Melet. In troth Sir you dwell far from neighbors that are enforced to
commend your self.


Qua. Why Simplicius, whether now man, for good fashions sake stir not, fit
still, sit still.


Sim. I must needs rise, much good do it you.


Qua. Do thou think thy rising will do them much good, sit still, sit
still, carue me of that good Melletza: fill Bacchus fill.


Sim. I must needs be gone, and you will come to my Chamber to morrow morning,
I Will send you a hundred crowns.


Qua. In the name of Prosperity, what tide of happiness so suddeinly is
flou'd upon thee.


Sim. I Will keep a horse and four boys with grace of fortune now.


Qua. Now then in faith get up and ride.


Sim. And I do not? I Will thwack a Ierkin till he groan again with Gold lace:
let me see, what should I desire of God, mary a Cloak linde with rich
Taffata, white Satin suit, and my gilt Rapier from pawn, nay she shall give
me a Chain of Pearl that shall pay for all, good boy, good Sinior, good boy,
good Sinior.


Qua. Why now, thou speaks in the most embraced fashion that our time hugges,
no sooner a good fortune, or a fresh suit falls upon a fellow that would ha
been guld to ha should into your society, but and he met you he fronts you
with a faint eye, throws a squint glaunce over a wried shoulder and cries
twixt the teeth, as very parcimonious of breath, good boy, good Sinior, good
boy, good Sinior death: I will search the life blood of your hopes.


Sim. And a fresh Pearle-colour silk stocking o IIII, I Will go to the half
crown ordinary every meal, I Will have my Iuory box of Tobacco, I Will converse
with none but Counts and Courtiers -- now good boy, good Sinior, a pair of
massy silver Spurs, to a hatch short sword, and then your imbroderd hanger,
and good Sinior.


Qua. Shut the windows, darken the room, fetch whips, the fellow is mad,
he raues, he raues, talks idly, lunatique, who procures thy --


Sim. One that has eat fat Capon, sucked the boild Chicken, and let out his wit
with the fool of bounty, one Fabius, i will scorn him, he goes upon Fridaies in
black satin.


Qua. Fabius, by this light, a cogging Chetor, he lives on love of Merchants
wives, he stands on the base, of maines, he furnishes your ordinary, for
which he feeds scot-free, keeps fair gold in his purse, to put on upon
maines, by which he lives and keeps a fair boy at his heels, he is damned
Fabius.


Sim. He is a fine man law, and has a good wit for when he list he can go in
black Satin, I and in a cloak lined with unshorn Velvet.


Qua. By the salvation of humanity he is more pestilent then the plague of Lice
that fell upon Egypt, thou have bin knave if thou credit it, thou art an Ass
if thou follow it, and shall be a perpetual Idiot if thou pursue it, renounce
the world, the flesh, the Devil, and thy trust in men's wives for they will
double with thee, and so I betake my self to the sucking of the juice Capon,
my ingle Bottle-ale, and his Gentleman usher that squiers him red herring, a
fool I found thee and a fool I leave thee, bear record heaven it is against
the providence of my speech, God boy good Sinior.


Enter Slip Nows, Doite, and Bydet. Exit. Sim. Ha, ha, ha, God boy good Sinior,
what a fool it is, ha, ha, what an Ass it is, save you young Gentlemen, is she
coming, will she meet me, shal's encounter ha?


Bid. You were not lapt in your Mothers smock, you ha not a good cheek, an
enticing eye, a smooth skin, a well shapt leg, a fair hand, you cannot bring
a wench into a fools parradize for you?


Sim. Not I by this garter, I am a fool, a very Ninny I, how call you her? how
call you her?


Bid. Call her, you rise on your right side to day marry, call her, her name is
Mistress Perpetuana, she is not very fair, nor goes extraordinary gay.


Sim. She has a good skin?


Bid. A good skin? she is wealthy, her husbands a fool, she will make you, she
wears the breeches: she will make you.


Sim. I Will keep two men and they shall be Tailors, they shall make suits
continually, and those shall be cloth of silver.


Bid. You may go in beaten precious Stones every day, marry I must acquaint you
with some obseruances which you must pursue most religiously, she has a fool,
a natural fool waights on her, that is indeed her pander to him, at the first
you must be bounteous, what-so-ere he craves, be it your Hatte, Cloak,
Rapier, Purse, or such trifle, giu't, giu't, the night will pay all: and to
draw all suspect, from persuing her love for base gain sake.


Sim. Giu't by this light, I Will giu't, were, gain, I care not for her Chain of
Pearl, only her love; gain? the first thing her bou^ty shall fetch is my
blush color Satin suit from pawn: gain?


Bid. When you hear one wind a Cornet, she is coming down Saint Marks
street, prepare your speech, suck your lips, lighten your spirits, fresh
your blood, sleeke your cheeks, for now thou shall be made for ever (a
perpetual and eternal gull) Exit Bydet.


Sim. I shall so ravish her with my court-ship, I have such variety of
discourse, such copy of phrase to begin, as this; sweet Lady Ulysses Dog
after his Masters ten years travel, I shall so ticle her, or thus, Pure
beauty there is a stone.


Slip. Two stones man.


Sim. Called, it is no matter what; I ha the eloquence, I am not to seek I
warrant you. The Cornet is winded, Enter Pippo Bydet, Pippo attired like a
Merchants wife, and Bydet like a Fool. Sweet Lady Ulysses dog, there is a
stone called --, O Lord what shall I say.


Slip. Is all your eloquence come to this?


Sim. The glorious radient of your glimmering eyes, your glittering beauties
blind my wit, and dazzled my --


Pippo. I Will put on my mask and please you, pray you wink, pray you.


Bidet. O fine man, my mistress loves you best, I dreamt you ga me this sword
and dagger, I love your Hatte and Feather, O.


Sim. Do not cry man, do not cry man, thou shall ha them I and they were --


Bydet. O that purse with all the white pence in it, fine man I love you, give
you the fine red pence soon at night, he, I thank you where is the fool now?


Sim. He has all my money, I have to keep my self, and --


Slip. Poght.


Pippo. Sir the fool shall lead you to my house, the fool shall not, at night
I expect you, till then take this seal of my affection.


Within Qua. What Simplicius.


Sim. I come Quadratus, Gentlemen as yet I can but thank you, but I must be
trusted for my ordinary soon at night, or stay I Will -- the fool has unfurnished
me, but 'twill come again, good boy.


Within, Qua. What ho Simplicius?


Sim. Good boy, good boys, I come, I come, good boys, good boys.


Bid. The fool shall weight on thee, Now do I merit to be yclipped Bosphoros
Carmelydon Honorificacuminos Bydett, who who has any square Dice?


Pippo. Marry Sir that have I.


Bid. Thou shall loose thy share for it in our purchase.


Pippo. I pray you now, pray you now.


Bid. Sooner the whissell of a Mariner,
Shall sleeke the rough curbes of the Ocean back,
Now speak I like my self thou shall loose thy share.

Enter Quadratus, Lauerdure and Celia, Simplicius Meletza, Lyzabetta Lucea and
Lampatho. Pip. Ha take all then, ha.


Qua. Without cloak or hat or rapier figh,


Sim. Gods me, look yonder, who gave you these things?


Bid. Mistress Perpetuanos fool.


Sim. Mistress Perpetuanos fool, ha, ha, there lies a jest, Sinior the fool
promised me he would not leave me.


Bid. I know the fool well, he will stick to you, dos not use to for-sake any
youth that is inamord on an other man's wife, he strives to keep company with
a crimson satin suit continually, he loves to be al one with a Critique, a
good wit self conceited, a hawk bearer, a dog keeper, and great with the
nobility, he doates upon a mere scholar an honest flat fool, but above all
he is all one with a fellow whose cloak has a better inside then his
outside, and his body richer lined then his brain.


Sim. Vds so I am cosoned.


Pip. Pray you master pardon me, I must loose my share.


Sim. Give me my purse again.


Bid. You gave it me and I Will keept.


Qua. Well done my honest crack thou shall be my ingle fort.


Lau. He shall keep all maugre thy beardles chin thy eyes.


Sim. I may go starve till Midsomer quarter.


Qua. Fool get thee hence,


Pip. I Will to school again that I will, I left in Ass in presenti, and I Will
begin in Ass in presenti and so good night fair gentry.


Exit Pippo. Qua. The triple Ideotts coxcombe crowns thee,
Bitter epigrames confound thee.
Cucold be when ere thou bride thee,
Through every comic scene be drawn,
Never come thy clothes from pawn.
Never may thy shame be sheathed,
Never kiss a wench sweet breathed.

Cornets sound. Enter as many Pages with Torches as you can, Randolfo and
Adrian, Iacomo bare, the Duke with attendantes. Ran. Seace the Duke approaches
it is almost night,
For the Dukes up, now begins his day
Come grace his entrance; lights lights now ginnes our play.

Duk. Still these same bauling pipes, sound softer strains
Slumber our scence, tut these are vulger strains,
Cannot your trembling wiers throw a chain
Of powerful rapture bout our mazed scence
Why is our chair thus cushion'd tapistry
Why is our bed tired with wanton sportes?
Why are we clothed in glistring attiers,
If common bloudes can hear, can, feel,
Can sit as soft, lie as lascivious
Stut all as rich as the greatest Potentate,
Soul, and you cannot feast my thrifting ears
With aught but what the lip of common berth can taste,
Take all away your labors idly wast
What sport for night.

Lam. A Commedy, entitled Temperance.

Duk. What sot elects that subject for the Court,
What should dame Temperance do here, away,
The itch on Temperance your morrall play.

Qua. Duke, Prince, royal blood, thou that have the best means to be damned
of any Lord in Veince, thou great man, let me kiss thy flesh, I am fat and
therefore faithful, I will do that which few of thy subjects do; love thee,
but I will never do, that which all thy subjects do; flatter thee, thy humors
real, good, a Commedie?

No and thy scence would banquit in delights,
Appropriat to the blood of Emperors;
Peculier to the state of Majesty,
That none can relish but dilated greatness.
Vouchafe to view the structure of a scene
That stands on tragike sollid passion,
O that's fit trafick to commerce with birthes:
Straind from the mud of base vnble brains,
Give them a scene may force their struggling blood
Rise up on tiptoe in attention,
And fill their intellect with pure elixed wit,
O that's for greatness apt, for Princes fit.

Duke. Dare thou then undertake to suit our ears,
With such rich vestment.

Qua. Dare; yes my Prince I dare, nay more, I will,
And I Will present a subject worth thy soul:
The honored end of Cato Vtican.

Duk. Whole personate him.


Qua. Marry that will I on sudden without change.


Duk. Thou want a beard.


Qua. Tush a beard nere made Cato, though many men's Cato hang only on their
chin.

Suppose this flower the City vtica,
The time the night that prolonged Catos death:
Now being placed moung his Philosophers,
These first discourse the souls eternity.

Iaco. Cato grantes that I am sure, for he was valiant, and honest, which an
Epicure nere was, and a coward never will be.


Qua. Then Cato holds a distinct notion,
Of individual actions after death:
This being argued his resolve maintains,
A true magnanimous spirit should give up dirt
To dirt, and with his own flesh dead his flesh,
Fore chance should force it crouch unto his foe:
To kill ones self some I, some hold it no,
O these are points would entice away ones soul:
To breaks indenture of base prentisage, Enter Francisco.
And run away from's boddy in swift thoughts
To melt in contemplation lushious sweetes,
Now my voluptious Duke i will feed thy scence,
Worth his creation: give me audience.

Fran. My leidge my royal leidge, hear, hear my suit.


Qua. Now may thy breath nere smell sweet as long as thy loungs can pant for
breaking my speech, thou Muscouite, thou stinking perfumer.


Enter Albano. Duke. Is not this Albano our some times Courtier?


Fran. No troth but Francisco your always perfumer.


Alba. Lorenzo Celso our brave Venice Duke, Albano Belletzo, thy Merchant, thy
soldier, thy Courtier, thy slave, thy anything, thy What thou will, kisseth
thy noble blood, do me right or else I am canonized a cuckold, canonized a
cuckold, I am abused, I am abusd, my wifes abusd, my clothes abusd, my shape,
my house my all abusd, I am sworn out of my self, beated out of my self
baffled, geird at, laughed at, bard my own house, debard my own wife, whilst
others swill my wines, gurmandize my meat, meat, kiss my wife, O gods, O gods,
O gods, O gods, O gods.


Lauer. Who is it? who is it?


Celia. Come sweet this is your waggery in faith, as if you knew him not.


La. Yes I fear I do too well, would I could slide away invisible.


Duke. Assured this is he.


Iaco. My worthy leidge the jest comes only thus.
Now to stop and cross it with mere like deceit:
All being known the French knight has disguisd,
A fiddler like Albano too, to fright the perfumer, this is all.

Duke. Art sure it is true.


Melet. It Is confessed it is right.


Alba. It is right, it is true, right, I am a fiddler, a fiddler, a fiddler vds
fut a fiddler; I Will not believe thee thou art a woman, and it is known veritas non
querit angulos, truth seeks not to lurk under varthingalls, veritas non
querit angulos, a fiddler?


Lau. Worthy sir pardon, and permit me first to confess your self, your
deputation dead has made my love live, to offend you.


Alba. I, mock on, skoffe on, flout on, do do do.


Lau. Troth sir in serious.


Alba. I good, good, come hither Celia,
Burst breast, riue heart a sunder? Celia
Why startest thou back: see thou this Celia
O me how often with lascivious touch thy lip,
Has kissd this mark? how often this much wronged breast
Has borne the gentle weight of thy soft cheek?

Celia. O me my dearest Lord, my sweet, sweet love.


Alba. What a fiddler, a fiddler? now thy love.
I am sure thou skornst; it nay Celia, I could tell
What on the night before I went to sea,
And took my leave with Hymeneall rights
What, thou lispsd
Into my ear, a fiddler and perfumer now.

Adri. And --

Ran. Dear brother.


Iaco. Most respected Sinior,
Believe it by the sacred end of love,
What much, much wrong has forced your patience
Proceeded from most dear affied love,
Devoted to your house.

Adri. Believe it brother.


Iaco. Nay your self when you shall hear the occurrances will say it is happy,
commicall.


Ran. Assure thee brother.


Alba. Shall I be brave, shall I be my self now, love, give me thy love,
brothers give me your breasts, French knight reach me thy hand, perfumer thy
fist. Duke I inuit thee, love I forgive thee: Frenchman I hug thee, I Will know
all, i will pardon all, and I Will laugh at all.


Qua. And i will curse you all.
O ye ha interrupt a scene.

Duke. Quadratus we will hear these points discussd,
With apter and more calm affected hours.

Qua. Well, good, good.


Alba Wast even so in faith why then caprichious mirth,
Skip light moriscoes in our frolic blood,
Flaggd veins, sweet, plump with fresh infused joys:
Laughter pucker our cheeks, make shoulders shog,
With chucking lightness, love once more thy lips,
For ever claspe our hands, our hearts, our Creasts,
Thus front, thus eyes, thus cheek, thus all shall meet.
Shall clip, shall hug, shall kiss, my dear, dear sweet,
Duke will thou see me revel, come love dance,
Court gallants court; suck amorous dalliance.

Lam. Beauty your heart.


Melet. First sir accept my hands.
She leapes too rash, that falls in suddeine bands.

Lam. Shall I despair? never will I love more.


Melet. No sea so boundles vast but has a shore.


Qua. Why marry me.
Thou can have but soft flesh, good blood, sound bones.
And that which fills up all your bracks, good stones.

Lyzabet. Stones, Trees and beasts in love still firmer prove,
Then man, I Will none no hold-fastes in your loves.

Lau. Since not the Mistress, come on Faith the maid:

Alba. Ten thousand Ducats too to bote are laid.


Lau. Why then wind Cornets* lead on jolly ladde.


Alla. Excuse me gallants though my legs lead wrong*
It Is my first footing, wind out nimble tongue.

Duke. It Is well, it is well, how shall we spend this night*

Qua. Gulpe (...) Wine my liege* let our paunch (...)*
Suck merry Gellyes, preuiew but not prevent
No mortal can the miseries of life.

Alba. I home inuit you all, come sweet, sweet wife,
My liege vouchsafe thy presence, drink till the ground look blew, boy.

Qua. Live still springing hopes, still in fresh new joys,
May your loves happy hit in fair cheekt wives,
Your flesh still plumpe with sap'd restoratiues,
That Is all my honest frolic heart can wish,
A Fico for the mew and Envious pish,
Till night, I wish good food and pleasing day,
But then found rest so ends or slight writ play. Exeunt.


Deo op: (...) gratias. FINIS.

