PARASITASTER, OR THE FAWN, AS IT HAS BEEN DIVERSE TIMES PREsented at the
black Friars, by the Children of the Queens Majesty's Revels, and since at
Powles.

Written BY JOHN MARSTON.

And now corrected of many faults, which by reason of the Authors absence, were
let slip in the first edition.

AT LONDON Printed by T. P. for W. C. 1606.

To my equal Reader.
I Have ever more endeavored to know my self, than to be known of others: and
rather to be impartially beloved of all, than factiously to be admired of a
few: yet so powerfully have I been enticed with the delights of Poetry, and (I
must ingeniously confess) above better desert so fortunate in these
stage-pleasings, that (let my resolutions be never so fixed to call mine eyes
into my self,) I much fear that most lamentable death of him, Qui nimis notus
omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi. Seneca



But since the ouer-vehement pursuit of these delights has bin the sickness
of my youth, and now is grown to be the vice of my firmer age, since to
satisfy others, I neglect my self, let it be the courtesy of my peruser,
rather to pity my selfe-hindring labors, than to malice me, and let him be
pleased to be my reader, and not my interpreter, since I would feign reserve
that office in my own hands, it being my daily prayer, Absit a iocorum
nostrorum simplicitate malignus interpres. Marti(...)


If any shall wonder why I print a Comedy, whose life rests much in the Actors
voice Let such know, that it cannot avoid publishing: let it therefore stand
with good excuse, that I have been my own setter out.

If any desire to understand the scope of my Comedy, know it has the same
limits, which Iuuenal gives to his Satyrs, Quicquid agunt homines, votum,
timor, ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, Iuuenal
discursus, nostri farrago libelli est.


As for the factious malice, and studied detractions of some few that tread in
the same path with me, let all know, I most easily neglect them, and (carelessly
slumbring to their vicious endeavors) smile heartily at their selfe-hurting
baseness. My bosom friend good Epictetus makes me easily to contemn all such
men's malice: since other men's tongues are not within my teeth, why (...) let
this be printed, that of men of my own addiction, I love most, pity some,
hate none: For let me truly say it, I once only loved my self, for loving
them, and surely, I shall ever rest so constant to my first affection, that let
their ungentle combinings, discurteous whisperings, never so treacherously
labor to undermine my unfenced reputation, I shall (as long as I have being)
love the least of their graces, and only pity the greatest of their vices.

And now to kill envy, know you that affect to be the only Minion of Phoebus,
I am not so blushlesly ambitious as to hope to gain any the least supreme
eminency among you, I affect not only the Euge tuum, and Belle! it is not my
fashion to think no writer virtuously confident, that is not swellingly
impudent. Nor do I labor to be held the only spirit, whose Poems may be
thought worthy to be kept in Cedar chests, Heliconidasque Pallidamque Pyrenen
(...)seus.
Illis relinquo quorum imagines lambunt
Hederae sequaces. --


He that pursues fame shall for me without any rival have breath enough, I
esteem felicity to be a more solid contentment, only let it be lawful for
me with unaffected modesty, and full thought to end boldly with that of
Perseus. -- Ipse semipaganus
(...)seus.
Ad sacra vatum car^en affero nostrum.


Io: Marston.

REader, know I have perused this copy* to make some satisfaction for the
first faulty impression: yet so urgent has been my business, that some errors
have still passed, which thy discretion may amend: Comedies are writ to be
spoken, not read: Remember the life of these things consists in action; and for
your such courteous suruay of my pen, (...)onisba.
I will present a Tragedy to you which shall boldly abide the most curious
perusal.

Prologus.
LEt those once know that herewith malice lurk,
It Is base to be too wise, in others work.
The rest, sit thus saluted:
Spectators know, you may with freest faces
Behold this Scene, for here no rude disgraces
Shall taint a public, or a private name,
This pen at viler rate does value fame,
Than at the price of others infamy,
To purchase it: Let others dare the rope,
Your modest pleasure is our authors scope.
The hurdle and the rack to them he leaves,
That have naught left to be accounted any,
But by not being: Nor does he hope to win
Your louder hand, with that most common sin
Of vulgar pens, rank baudrie, that smells
Even through your maskes, vsque ad nauseam:
The venus of this Scene does loath to wear
So vile, so common, so immodest cloathings,
But if the nymble form of commody,
Mere spectacle of life, and public manners
May, gracefully arrive to your pleased ears,
We boldly dare the utmost death of fears
For we do know that this most fair filled room
Is Laden with most Atick judgments, ablest spirits,
Then whom, there are none more exact, full, strong,
Yet none more soft, benign in censuring,
I know there is not one Ass in all this presence,
Not one Callumnious rascal, or base villain
Of emptiest merit, that would tax and slander
If Innocence her self should write, not one we know it.
O you are all the very breath of Phoebus
In your pleased gracings all the true life blood
Of our poor author lives, you are his very graces.
Now if that any wonder why he is drawn
To such base soothings, know his play's; The Fawn.
Interlocutores.
Hercules disguised Faunus, Duke of Ferrara. Gonzago Duke of vrbin. a weak
Lord of a self admiring wisdom. Tiberio, son to Hercules. Dulcimel,
daughter to Gonzago. Philocalia, An honorable learned lady companion to the
princess Dulcimel. Granuffo, A silent Lord. Don Zuccone, A causlesly jealous
Lord. Donna Zoya, A virtuous, fair witty Lady, his wife. S. Amoroso
debile-dosso, A sickly knight. Donna Garbetza, his Lady. Herod Frappatore,
brother to Sir Amoroso and a vicious bragart. Nimphadoro, A young courtier, and
a common lover. Dondolo, A bald fool. Renaldo, brother to Hercules. Poueia Two
ladies attendants on Dulcimel. Do^netta, Two ladies attendants on Dulcimel.
Puttotta, A poor lau^dresse of the court that washes and diets footmen.
The Fawn.
ACTVS PRIMI
SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Hercules and Renaldo. Dat ve(...) Coruis censura (...).
Hercules. SEe yonder is Vrbin those far appearing Spires, rise from the
City, you shall conduct me no further, return to Ferrara, my Dukedom by
your care in my absence shall rest constantly united, and most religiously
loyal.


Renald. My Prince and brother, let my blood and love challenge the freedom of
one question.


Her: You hau't.


Renal. Why? in your stedier age in strength of life,
And firmest wit of time, will you break forth
Those stricter Limits of regardfull state
(Which with severe distinction you still kept)
And now to unknown dangers you will give up
Your self Ferraras Duke, and in your self
The state; and us. Oh my loved brother,
"Honor auoyds not only just defame:
"But flies all means that may ill voice his name.

Her: Busy your self with no fears, for I shall rest most wary of our
safety, only some glimses I will give you for your satisfaction why I leave
Ferrara, I have vowed to visit the Court of Vrbin in some disguise, as thus: my
son as you can well witness with me, could I never persuade to marriage,
although my self was then, an ever resolved Widdower, and tho I proposed to
him this very Lady, to whom he is gone in my right to negotiat: now how
cooler blood will behave it self in this business, would I have an only
testimony, other contents shall I give my self; as not to take love by
attorney, or make my election out of tongues, other suffisings there are which
my regard would feign make sound to me: something of much you know, that and
what else you must not know, bids you excuse this kind of my departure.


Re: I commend all to your wisdom, and yours to the wisest.


Her: Think not but I shall approve that more than folly which even now
appears in a most ridiculous expectation: be in this assured. " The bottom of
gravity is nothing like the top, once more fare you well. Exit. Ren.

And now thou Ceremonious souerainty
Ye proud seuerer statefull Complements
The secret arts of Rule, I put you off;
Nor ever shall those manacles of form
Once more lock up the appetite of blood.
It Is now an age of man, whilst we all strickt
Have lived in awe of carriage reguler
Apted unto my place, not has my life
Once tasted of exorbitant affects
Wild Longings, or the Least of disranct shapes.
But we must once be wild, it is ancient truth
O fortunate, whose madness falls in youth!
Well, this is text, who ever keeps his place
In servile station, is all low and base.
Shall I because some few may cry, Light, vain,
Beat down affection from desired rule,
He that does strive to please the world's a fool
To have that fellow cry. O mark him, grave,
See how austeerely he does give example,
Of repressed heat and steady life
Whilst my forced life against the stream of blood
Is tugged along, and all to keep the God
Of fools and women: Nice opinion:
Whose strict preserving makes often great men fools
And fools often great men: no thou world know thus
"There Is nothing free but it is generous.

Exit. SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Ninphadoro and Herod. Her: How now my little more then nothing, what
news is stirring?


Page: All the Citi's afire.


Nym: On fire?


Page: With joy of the Prince Dulcimels birth day, there is show upon show, sport
upon sport.


Hero: What sport, what sport?


Page: Marry sir to solemnize the Princes birthday, there is first Crackers
which run into the air, and when they are at the top, like some ambitious
strange heretic, keep a cracking, and a cracking, and then break, and down
they come.


Hero: A pretty crabbe, he would yield tart juice and he were squeezed.


Nym: What sport else?


Page: Other fire-workes.


Hero: Spirit of wine, I cannot tell how these fireworks should be good at the
solemnizing the birth of men or women, I am sure they are dangerous at their
begetting, what more fireworks sir?


Page: There be squibs sir, which squibs running upon lines like some of our
gawdie Gallants sir, keep a smother sir, with flishing and flashing, and in
the end sir, they do sir


Nym: What sir?


Page: Stink sir.


Hero: Fore heaven, a most sweet youth.


Enter Dondolo. Don: News, news, news, news.


Hero: What, in the name of prophecy?


Nym: Art thou grown wise?


Hero: Does the Duke want no money?


Nym: Is there a maid found at 24?


Hero: Speak, thou three legd Tripos, is thy ship of Fools a flote yet?


Don: I ha many things in my head to tell you.


Her: I, thy head is always working, it roles, and it roles Dondolo, but it
gathers no most Dondolo.


Don: Tiberio the Duke of Ferraraes son excellently horsed, all upon
Flaunders Mares, is arrived at the Court this very day, somewhat late in the
night time.


Hero: An excellent nuntius.


Don: Why my Gallants, I have had a good wit.


Hero: Yes troth, but now it is grown like an Almanake for the last year, past
date, the mark's out of thy mouth Dondolo.


Nym: And what is the Princes Embassage? thou art private with the Duke, thou
belongest to his close stool.


Don: Why? every fool knows that, I know it my self man as well as the best
man, he is come to solicit a marriage betwixt his Father the Duke of
Feraraes, and our Duke of Vrbins daughter Dulcimel.


Nympha: Pity of my passions, Nymphadoro shall loose one of his mistresses.


Her: Nay, if thou have more than one, the loss can nere be grievous since
it is certain he that loves many formally, never loves any violently.


Nym: Most trusted Frappatore, is my hand the weaker because it is divided into
many fingers? no, it is the more strongly nimble. I do now love threescore and
nine Ladies al of them most extremely well, but I do love the Princes most
extremely best: but in very sighing sadness, I ha lost all hope, and with
that hope a Lady, that is most rare, most fair, most wise, most sweet, most


Her: Any thing true but remember still this fair, this wise, this sweet,
this all of excellency has in the tail of all, a Woman.


Nym: Peace, the presence fills against the Prince approaches: Mark who enters?


Her: My Brother, sir Amoroso-debilidosso.


Nym: Not he.


Her: No, not he?


Nym: How is he changed?


Her: Why, grown the very dregs of the drabs cup.


Nym: O Babylon thy walls are fallen; Is he married?


Her: Yes, yet still the Ladies common, or the common Ladies servant.


Nym: How does his own Lady bear with him?


Her: Faith like the Roman Milo, bore with him when he was a Calfe, and now
caries him when he is grown an Ox.


Nym: Peace the Duk's at hand.


Cornets. Enter Granuffo, Gonzago, Dulcimell, Philocalia, Leia. Gone: Daughter,
for that our last speech leaves the firmest print, be thus advised; when young
Tiberio negotiates his fathers love, hold heedie guard over thy passions and
still keep this full thought firm in thy reason, it is his old Fathers love the
young man mooues, (is it not well thought my Lord, we must bear brain,) and
when thou shall behold, Tiberios life-full eyes and well filled veins,
complexion firm, and hayres that curles with strength of lusty moisture, (I
think we yet can speak, we ha been eloquent) thou must shape thy thoughts
to apprehend his father well in years,

A grave wise Prince, whose beauty is his honor,
And well past life, and do not give thy thoughts
Least liberty to shape a diverse scope,
(My Lord Granuffo: pray ye note my phrase.)
So shall thou not abuse thy younger hope.
Nor afflict us, who only joy in life,
To see thee his.

Dull: Gracious my father fear not, I rest most dutious to your dispose.
Consort of Music.


Gone: Set on then, for the Music gives us notice the Prince is hard at hand.


Tiberio with his train with Hercules disguised. Dull: You are most welcome to
our long desiring Father, to us you are come. --


Tib: From our long desiring Father.


Dull: Is this your fathers true proportion? Shows a picture.


Tib: No Lady, but the perfect counterfeit.


Dull: And the best graced.


Tib: The Painters Art could yield.


Dull: I wonder he would send a counterfeit to move our love,

Gone. Hear, that's my wit, when I was 18. old such a pretty ioying wit had I,
but age has made us wise (have not my Lord?)


Tib: Why fairest Princes, if your eye dislike that deader piece, behold me his
true form and liuelier image, such my Father has been.


Dull: My Lord, please you to scent this flower.


Tib: It Is withered Lady, the flowers scent is gone.


Dull: This has been such as you are, has been sir; they say in England,
that a far famed Friar had guirt the Island round with a brass wall, if that
they could have catched, Time is, but Time is past, left it hill clipped with
aged Neptunes arm.


Tib: Aurora yet keeps chaste old Titheus bed.


Dull: Yet blushes at it when she rises.


Gone: Pretty, pretty, just like my younger wit: you know it my Lord.


Dull: But is your Fathers age thus fresh, has yet his head so many hairs?


Tib: More, more, by many a one.


Dull: More say you?


Tib: More.


Dull: Right sir, for this has none, is his eye so quick as this same piece
makes him show?


Tib: The courtesy of Art has given more life to that part, than the sad cares
of state would grant my father.


Dull: This model speaks above forty.


Tib: Then does it somewhat flatter, for our father has seen more years, and
is a little shrunk from the full strength of time.


Gone: Somewhat coldly praised.


Dull: Your father has a fair Solicitor,
And be it spoke with virgin modesty,
I would he were no elder, not that I do fly
His side for years, or other hopes of youth,
But in regard the malice of lewd tongues
Quick to deprave on possibilities,
(Almost impossibilities) will spread Dulcimel and Tiberio confer privately.
Rumors, to honor dangerous.

Gone: What? whisper? I, my Lord Granuffo twere fit
To part their lips: men of discerning wit
That have read Pliny can discourse, or so,
But give me practice: well experienced age
Is the true Delphos. I am no Oracle
But yet I Will prophecy: well my Lord Granuffo,
It Is fit to interrupt their priuacie,
Is It not my Lord? now sure thou art a man
Of a most learned scilence, and one whose words
Have bin most precious to me, right, I know thy heart,
It Is true, thy legs discourse with right and grace,
And thy tongue is constant. Fair my Lord,
Forbear all all pruat closer conference,
What from your father comes, comes openly,
And so must speak: for you must know my age
Has seen the beings and the quide of things,
I know Dimensions and the termini
Of all existens: Sir I know what shapes
Appetite forms; but pollice and states
Have more elected ends: your fathers suit
Is with all public grace received, and private love
Embraced, as for our daughters bent of mind
She must seem somewhat nice, it is virgins kind
To hold long Out, if yet she chance deny,
Ascribe it to her decent modesty:
We have been a philosopher and spoke
With much applause; but now age makes us wise,
And draws our eyes to search the heart of things,
And leave vain seemings, therefore you must know,
I would be loath the gaudie shape of youth
Should one provoke, and not allowd of heat
Or hinder, or -- for sir I know, and so,
Therefore before us time and place affords
Free speech, else not: wise heads use but few words
In short breath, know the Court of Vrbin holds
Your presence and your embassage so dear,
That we want means once to oppress our heart
But with our heart: plain meaning shunneth art,
You are most welcome (Lord Granuff a trick,
A figure, note) we use no Rethorick. Exit Gone:

Remanent Hercules, Nymphad: and Herod. Hero: Did not Tiberio call his father
fool?


Nym: No, he said years had weakened his youthful quicknes.


Hero. He swore he was bald.


Nym: No; but not thick hayr'd.


Her: By this light, I Will swear he said his father had the hipgout, the
strangury, the fistula in ano, and a most vnabydable breath, no teeth, less
eyes, great fingers, little legs, an eternal flux, and an everlasting cough
of the longues.


Nym: Fie, fie, by this light he did not.


Hero: By this light he should ha done then: home on him, three score ann five,
to have and to hold, a Lady of fifteen. O (...) a tirannie equal if not
above thy torturing; thou did bind the living and the dead bodies together,
and forced them so to pine and rott, but this cruelty, binds breast to breast,
not only different bodies, but if it were possible most unequal minds
together, with an inforcement even scandalous to Nature. Now the layle deliver
me, an intelligencer, be good to me ye Cloisters of bondage, of whence art
thou?


Her: Of Ferrara.


Hero: A Ferrares what to me, came thou in with the Prince Tiberio?


Her: With the Prince Tiberio, what to that, you will not rail at me will you?


Hero: Who I? I rail at one of Ferrara, a Ferazes, noe? did thou ride?


Her: No.


Hero: Have thou worn socks?


Her: No.


Her: Then blessed be the most happy grauel betwixt thy toes I do prophecy
thy tirannising ytch shall be honorable, and thy right worshipful, Love shall
appear in full presence; art thou an officer to the Prince?


Her: I am, what a that?


Hero: My cap, what officer?


Her: Yeoman of his bottles, what to that?


Hero: My lip, thy name good yeoman of the bottles?


Her. Fawnus.


Nym: Fawnus? an old Courtier, I wonder thou art in no better clothes and place
Fawnus?


Her: I may be in better place sir, and with you of more regard if this match
of our Dukes intermarriage with the heir of Vrbin proceed, the Duke of Vrbin
dying, and our Lord coming in his Ladies right of title to your dukedom.


Hero: Why then shall thou oh yeoman of the bottels become a maker of
Magnificees, thou shall beg some od suit, and change thy old shert, pare thy
beard, cleanse thy teeth, and eat Apricocks, marry a rich widow, or a cracked
Lady, whose case thou shall make good. Then my Pythagoras shall thou and I
make a transmigration of souls, thou shall marry my daughter, or my wife
shall be thy gracious mistress. Seventeen puncks shall be thy proporcion. Thou
shall beg to thy comfort of clean lynnen, eat no more fresh beef at
supper, or save the broth for next days porredge, but the flesh potts of Egypt
shall fatten thee, and the Grasehopper shall flourish in thy summer.


Nym: And what do thou think of the Dukes ouerture of marriage?


Hero: What do you think?


Her: May I speak boldly as at Alleppo?


Nym: Speak till thy lungs ache, talk out thy teeth, here are none of those
cankers, these mischiefs of society, intelligencers, or informers, that will
cast rumor into the teeth of some Lalius Baldus, a man cruelly eloquent and
bluddily learned, no, what say thou Fawnus?


Her: With an undoubted breast thus, I may speak boldly,

Hero: By this night i will speak broadly first and thou will man, our Duke of
Vrbin is a man very happily madd, for he thinks himself right perfectly wise,
and most demonstratiuely learned; nay more.


Her: No more, I Will on, me thinks the young Lord our Prince of Ferrara so
bounteously adorned with all, of grace, feature and best shaped proportion,
fair use of speech, full opportunity, and that which makes the sympothie of
all equality, of heat, of years, of blood, me thinks these Loadstones
should attract the metal of the young Princes rather to the son than to the
noisome, cold, and most weak side of his half rotten father.


Her: Tha'rt ours, tha'rt ours now dare we speak as boldly as if Adam had not
fallen, and made us all slaves, hark ye, the Duke is an arrant doting Ass, an
Ass, and in the knowledge of my very sense, will turn a foolish animal, for
his son will prove like one of Balls priests, have all the flesh presented
to the Idol his father, but he in the night will feed on it, will devour it,
he will yeoman of the bottels, he will.


Her. Now gentlemen, I am sure the lust of speech has equally drenched us all,
know I am no servant to this Prince Tiberio.


Hero: Not?


Her: Not, but one to him out of some private urging most vowed, one that
pursues him but for opportunity of safe satisfaction, now if ye can prefer my
service to him, I shall rest yours wholly.


Hero: Just in the devils mouth, thou shall have place, Fawns thou shall,
behold this generous Nymphadoro a gallant of a clean boot, straight back, and
beard of a most hopeful expectation, he is a servant of fair Dulcimels her
very creature borne to the Princes sole adoration, a man so spent in time to
her, that piety (if no more of grace) must follow him when we have gained the
room, second his suite Hercules. I Will be your intelligencer.


Her: Our very heart, and if need be work to most desperate ends.


Hero. Well urged.


Her: Words fit acquaintance, but full actions friends.


Nym: Thou shall not want Fawnus.


Her: You promise well.


Hero: Be thou but firm, that old doting iniquity of age, that only eyed
lecherous Duke thy Lord shall be baffuld to extremest derision, his son
prove his fool fathers own issue.


Nym: And we, and thou with us blessed and enriched past all misery of
possible contempt, and above the hopes of greatest conjectures.


Her: Nay as for wealth vilia miretur vulgus. I know by his physiognomy, for
wealth he is of my addiction, and bid's a fico for it.


Nym: Why thou art but a younger brother, but poor Baldazozo.


Hero: Faith to speak truth, my means are written in the book of fare, as yet
unknown, and yet I am at my fool, and my hunting gelding, come, Viah, to this
feastfull entertainment.


Exeunt. rema. Hercu: Her: I never knew till now, how old I was,
By him by whom we are, I think a Prince
Whose tender sufferance never felt a gust
Of boulder breathings, but still lived gently fanned
With the soft gales of his own flatterers lips
Shall never know his own complexion.
Dear sleep and lust I thank you, but for you,
Mortal till now, I scarce had known my self
Thou gratefvll poison, sleeke mischief Flattery
Thou dreamefull slumber (that does fall on kings
As soft and soon as their first holy oil,)
Be thou for ever damned, I now repent
Severe indictions to some sharp styles,
Freenes, so't grow not to licentiousnes
Is gratfull to just states. Most spotless kingdom,
And men o happy borne under good stars.
Where what is honest, you may freely think,
Speak what you think, and write what you do speak,
Not bound to servile soothings. But since our rank
Has ever been afflicted with these flies
(That blow corruption on the sweetest virtues)
I will revenge us all upon you all
With the same stratagem, we still are caught,
Flattery it self, and sure all knows the sharpness
Of reprehensiue language is even blunted
To full contempt, since vice is now termed fashion
And most are grown to ill even with defense,
I vow to wast this most prodigious heat
That falls into my age, like scorching flames
In depth of numbed December, in flattering all
In all of their extremest vitiousnesse,
Till in their own loved race they fall most lame,
And meet full butte, the close of Vices shame. Exit.

ACTVS SECVNDVS
SCENA PRIMA.
Herod and Nymphadoro with napkins in their hands, followed by Pages with
stools and meat. Her: Come Sir, a stool boy, these Court Feasts are to us
Seruitors Court Fasts, such scambling, such shift for to eat, and where to
eat, here a Squire of low degree has got the carcass of a Plouer, there
Pages of the Chamber divide the spoils of a tatterd Phesant, here the Sewer
has friended a Country Gentleman with a sweet green goose, and there a young
fellow that late has bought his office, has caught a Woodcocke by the nose,
with cups full ever flowing.


Nym. But is not Faunus preferred with a right hand?


Her: Did you ever see a fellow so spurted up in a moment, he has got the right
ear of the Duke, the Prince, Princess, most of the Lords, but all the Ladies,
why he is become their only Minion, Usher, and Supporter.


Nym. He has gotten more loved reputation of virtue, of learning, of all
graces, in one hour, than all your snarling reformers have in --


Her: Nay, that's unquestionable, and indeed what a fruitles labor, what a
filling of Danaes tubbe, is it become to inueigh against folly, community
takes away the sense, and example the shame: no, praise me these fellows, hang
on their chariot wheel,

And mount with them whom fortune heaues, nay drives:
A stoycall sower virtue seldom thriues.
Oppose such fortune, and then burst with those are pitied.
The hill of Chance is pau'd with poor men's bones,
And bulkes of luckles souls, over whose eyes,
Their chariot wheels must ruthles grate, that rise.

Enter Hercules freshly suited. Nym: Behold that thing of most fortunate, most
prosperous, impudence, Don Fanus himself.


Her: Blessed and long lasting be thy carnation ribban; O man of more than
wit, much more than virtue, of fortune! Fawnus wilt eat any of a young spring
sallet?


He: where did the herbs grow my gallant, where did they grow?


Hero: Hard by in the City here.


Her: No, I Will none, I Will eat no City herbs, no City roots, for here in the
City a man shall have his excrements in his teeth again within four and
twenty hours, I love no City fallets: has't any Canarie?


Nym: How the poor snake wriggles with this sudden warmth.


Herod drinks. Hero: Here Fawnus a health as deep as a female.


Her: Fore Jove, we must be more indeer'd.


Nym: How do thou feel thy self now Fawn?


Her: Very womanly with my fingers, I protest I think I shall love you, are
you married? I am truly taken with your virtues, are you married?


Hero: Yes.


Her: Why I like you well for it.


Hero: No troth Fawn, I am not married.


Her: Why I like you better for it; fore heaven I must love you;


Hero: Why Fawn, why?


Her: Fore-heauen you are blessed with three rare graces, fine linen, clean
linings, a sanguine complexion, and I am sure, an excellent wit, for you are a
gentleman borne.


Hero: Thank thee sweet Fawn, but why is clean linen such a grace, I
prithee.


Her: Oh my excellent, and inward dearly approved friend, -- What Is your name
sir? clean linen is the first our life craves, and the last our death enioyes.


Hero: But what hope rests for Nymphadora, thou art now within the buttons of
the Prince: shall the Duke his Father marry she Lady?


Her: It Is to be hoped, not.


Nym: That Is some relief as long as there is hope.


Her: But sure sir it is almost undoubted the Lady will carry him.


Nym: O pestilent air, is there no plot so cunning, no surmise so false, no
way of auoidance?


Her: Have thou any pity, either of his passion, or the Ladies years, a
Gentleman in the summer and hunting season of her youth, the Lady met in the
same warmth, were not to be wept that such a saplesse chafing dish using old
dotard as the Duke of Ferrara with his withered hand, should pluck such a
bud, such a: Oh the life of sense!


Nym: Thou art now a perfect Courtier of just fashion, good grace, can not
relieve us?


Her: Ha ye any money?


Nym: Pish Fawn, we are young Gallants.


Her: The liker to have no money. But my young Gallants to speak like my self,
I must hug your humor. Why look you there is fate, destiny, constellations,
and Planets, (which though they are under nature, yet they are above women,)
who has read the book of chance? no, cherish your hope, sweeten your
imaginations, with thoughts of, ah why women are the most giddie, uncertain
motions under heaven, it is neither proportion of body, virtue of mind,
amplitude of fortune, greatness of blood, but only mere chancefull appetie
swayes them: which makes some one like a man, be it but for the paring of his
nales, viah, as for inequality, art not a gentleman?


Nym: That I am, and my benificence shall show it.


Her: I know you are, by the only word benificence, which only speaks of
the future tence (shall know it,) but may I breath in your bosoms; I only
fear Tiberio will abuse your fathers trust, and so make your hopes desperate.


Nym: How? the Prince? would he only stood cross to my wishes, he should
find me an Italian.


Her: How, an Italian:


Hero: By thy aid an Italian, dear Fawnus, thou art now wrigled into the
Princes bosom, and thy sweet hand should Minister that Nectar to him, should
make him immortal; Nymphadoro in direct phrase, thou should murder the
Prince, so revenge thine own wrongs, and be rewarded for that revenge.


Her: Before the light of my eyes, I think I shall admire, wonder at you. What?
ha ye plots, proiects, correspondences, and stratagems: why are not you in
better place?

Enter sir Amoroso. Who Is this Herod my eldest Brother sir Amoroso Debilidoso?


Her: Oh I know him, God bless thine eyes sweet sir Amoroso, a rous, a vin de
monte, to the health of thy Chyne my dear sweet Signiour.


Her: Oh no sir, he takes the diet this spring always, boy my brothers
bottell.


Sir Amor, Faith Fawn, an odd unwholesome cold, makes me still hoarse and
rhumatique.


Hero: Yes in troth a paltrie murre, last morning he blew nine bones out of
his nose with an odd unwholesome murre: how does my sister your Lady, what
does she breed?


Her: I perceive Knight you have children, oh it is a blessed assurance of
heavens favor, and long lasting name to have many children.


Sir Amor: But I ha none, Fawn, now;


Her: O that is most excellent, a right special happiness, he shall not be a
Drudge to his cradle, a slave to his child, he shall be sure not to cherish
another blood, nor toil to advance paraduenture some Rascals lust; without
children a man is vnclog'd, his wife almost a Maid: Messalina, thou cryedst
out, O blessed barrenness, why once with child the very Venus of a Ladies
entertainment has lost all pleasure.


Sir Amor: By this ring Fawnus I do hug thee with most passionate affection,
and shall make my wife thank thee.


Her: Nay my Brother grudgeth not at my probable inheritance, he means once to
give a younger brother hope to see fortune.


Nym: And yet I hear sir Amorosus, you cherish your loins with high art, the
only ingrosser of Eringoes, prepared Cantharides, Cullesses made of dissolved
Pearl, and brus'd Amber, the pith of Parkets and canded Lamstones are his
perpetual meats, Beds made of the down under pigeons wings and Goose-necks,
fomentations, bathes, electuaries, frictions, and all the nurses of most
forcible excited concupiscence he uses with most nice and tender industry.


Her: Pish Zuccoli, no Nymphadoro, if sir Amorous would ha children, let him
lie on a mattres, plow or thresh, eat onyons, garlic, and leeke porredge,
Pharaoh and his council were mistaken, and their devise to hinder the increase
of procreation in the Israelites, with enforcing them to much labor of body,
and to feed hard, with beetes, garlike, and onions, (meat that make the
orriginall of man most sharp, and taking) was absurd. No he should have given
barlie bread, lettice, mellones, cucumers, huge store of veale, and fresh
beef, blown up their flesh, held them from exercise, rould them in
feathers, and most suerely seen them drunk once a day, then would they at
their best have begotten but wenches, and in short time their generation
infeebled to nothing.


Sir Am: Oh divine Fawnus, where might a man take up forty pound in a
commodity of garlike, and onions? Nymphadoro thine ear.


Her: Come what are you fleering at? there is some weakness in your brother you
wrinkle at thus, come prithee imparte, what we are mutually incorporated, turned
one into another, biued together, come I believe you are familiar with your
sister, and it were known.


Hero: Witch, Fawnus witch, why how do dream I live? is it four score a year
think thou maintains my geldings, my pages, foote-clothes, my best feeding,
high play, and excellent company? no it is from hence, from hence, I mynt some
four hundred pound a year.


Her: Do thou live like a porter by the back boy?


Hero. As for my weak raind brother hang him, he has sore shinnes* dam him
Hetoroclite, his braine's perished, his youth spent his foder so fast on others
Cattle, that he now wants for his own winter, I am feign to supply Fawn,
for which I am supplied.


Her: Do thou branch him boy?


Hero: What else Fawn.


Her: What else? nay it is enough, why many men corrupt other men's wives, some
their maids, others their neighbors daughters, but to lie with ones brothers
wedlock, O my dear Herod his vile and uncommon lust.


Hero: Fore heaven I love thee to the heart, well I may praise God for my
brothers weakness, for I assure thee, the land shall descend to me my little
Fawn.


Her: To thee my little Herod? oh my rare Rascal, I do find more and more in
thee to wonder at, for thou art indeed; if I prosper thou shall know what.
Whose this? Enter Don. Zucc.


Hero. What? know you not Don Zuccone the only desparatly railing Lord at's
Lady that ever was confidently melancholy, that egregious idiot, that husband
of the most witty, fair (and be it spoken with many men's true grief) most
chaste Lady Zoya, but we have entered into a confederacy of afflicting him.


Her: Plots ha you laid? Inductions, dangerous?


Nym: A quiet bosom to my sweet Don, are you going to visit your Lady.


Zuc: What a clock is it, is it past three?


Hero: Past four I assure you sweet Don.


Zuc: Oh then I may be admitted, her afternoons private nap is taken, I shall
take her napping. I hear there is one jealous that I lie with my own wife, and
begins to withdraw his hand: I protest I vow, and you will, on my knees, I Will
take my sacrament on it, I lay not with her this four year, this four year;
lee her not be turned upon me I beseech you.


Her: My dear Don?


Zuc: Oh Faunus do know our Lady?


Her: Your Lady?


Zuc: No our Lady, for the love of charity incorporate with her, I would have
all nations and degrees, all ages know our Lady for I covet only to be
undoubtedly notorious.


Her: For in deed sir, a repressed fame mountes like Camomyll, the more trod
down, the more it grows, things known common and undoubted, lose rumor.


Nym: Sir I hope yet your conjectures may err; your Lady keeps full-face,
vnbated roundnes, cherefull aspect, were she so infamously prostitute, her
cheek would fall, her color fade, the spirit of her eye would die.


Zuc: Oh young man, such women are like Danaus tubbe, and in deed all women
are like Achillous, with whom Hercules wrestling, he was no sooner hurled to
the earth, but he rose up with double vigor, their fall strengthens them.
Exit Dondolo.


Don: News, news, news, news, oh my dear Don be raised, be Iouiald, be
triumphant, ah my dear Don.


Nym: To me first in private, thy news I pree thee.


Don: Will you be secret?


Nym: A my life:


Don: As you are generous?


Nym: As I am generous:


Don: Don Zuccones Lady's with child.


Her: Nymph: Nymph: what is it? what is the news?


Nym: You will be secret.


Hero. Scilence it self,


Nym: Don Zuccones Lady's with child apparently.


Her: Herod, Herod, what is the matter pree thee, the news?


Hero: You must tell no body:


Her: As I am generous --


Hero: Don Zuccones Lady's with child apparently.


Zuc: Faune what is the whisper, what is the fools secret news?


Her: Truth my Lord, a thing, that, that, well, I faith it is not fit you know
it?


Zuc: Not fit I know it, as thou art baptized tell me, tell me.


Her: Will you plight your patience to it.


Zuc: Speak, I am a very block, I will not be moved, I am a very block.


Her: But if you should grow disquiet (as I protest, it would make a Saint
blaspheame) I should be unwilling to procure your impatience.


Zuc: Yes do, burst me, burst me, burst me with longing:


Her: Nay faith it is no great matter, hark ye, you will tell no body.


Zuc: Not.


Her: As you are noble.


Zuc: As I am honest.


Her: Your Lady wife apparently with child.


Zuc: With child?


Her: With child.


Zuc: Fool.


Her: My Don.


Zuc: With child? by the pleasure of generation, I proclaim I lay not with her
this -- give us patience, give us patience.


Her: Why? my Lord it is nothing to wear a forker.


Zuc: Heaven and earth.


Her: All things under the Moon are subject to their mistress grace; horns,
lend me your ring my Don, I Will put it on my finger, now it is on yours again, why
is the gold now ere the worse in luster or fitnes?


Zucc: Am I used thus?


Her: I my Lord true, nay to be (look ye mark ye) to be used like a dead
ox, to have your own hide plucked on, to be drawn on, with your own horn,
to have the Lordshippe of your father, the honor of your ancestors, maugre
your beard, to descend to the base lust of some groom of your stable, or the
page of your chamber.


Zucc: Oh Phalaris thy Bull.


Sir Am: Good Don. ha patience, you are not the only Cuckold, I would now be
separated.


Zucc: Alas that is but the least drop of the storm of my revenge, I will
vnlegittimate the issue, what I will do, shall be horrible but to think.


Her: But Sir.


Zucc: But Sir? I will do what a man of my form may do, and-laugh on, laugh
on, do Sir Amorous, you have a Lady too.


Hero: But my sweet Lord.


Zucc: Do not anger me, least I most dreadfully curse thee, and wish thee
married, oh Zuccone, spitte white, spitte thy gall out, the only boon I crave
of heaven is -- but to have my honors inherited by a bastard, I will be most
tirannous, blooddily tirannous in my revenge, and most terrible in my curses:
live to grow blind with lust, senseless with use, loathed after, flattered
before, hated always, trusted never, abhorred ever, and last may she live to
wear a foul smock seven weeks together; heaven I beseech thee.


Exit. Zoya; Is he gone: is he blown of? now out upon him vnsufferably jealous
fool.


Enter Zoya and Pouea. Don: Lady:


Zoya: Did thou give him the famed report? does he believe I am with child?
does he give faith?


Don: In most sincerity, most sincerely.


Her: Nay it is a pure fool, I can tell ye he was bred up in Germany.


Nym: But the laughter rises, that he vows he lay not in your bed this four
year with such exquisite protestations.


Zoya. That Is most full truth, he has most unjustly severed his sheets ever
since the old Duke Pietro (heaven rest his soul.)


Don. Fie, you may not pray for the dead, it is indifferent to them what you say.


Nym: Well said fool.


Zoya. Ever since the old Duke Pietro, the great Devil of hell torture his
soul.


Don: O Lady yet charity.


Zoya. Why? it is indifferent to them what you say fool, but does my Lord rauell
out, does he fret? for pity of an aflicted Lady load him soundly, let him not
go clear from vexation, he has the most dishonourably, with the most
sinful, most vicious obstinacy, perseuered to wrong me that were I not of a
male constitution, twere impossible for me to survive it, but in madness
name, let him on, I ha not the weak fence of some of your soft-eyed whimpering
Ladies, who, if they were used like me, would gall their fingers with wringing
their hands, look like bleeding Lucresses, and shed salt water enough to
powder all the beef in the Dukes larder. No, I am resolute Donna Zoya; ha;
that wives were of my metal, I would make these ridiculously jealous fools,
howl like a starued dog, before he got a bit, I was created to be the
affliction of such an unsanctified member, and will boil him in his own
sirupe.


Enter Zuccone listening. Herc: Peace the woolfes ear takes the wind of us.


Hero: The enemy is in ambush.


Zoya. If any man ha the wit, now let him talk wantonly, but not baudily; come
Gallants who will be my servants: I am now very open hearted, and full of
entertainment.


Herc: Grace me too call you mistres.


Nym: Or me.


Her. Or me.


Sir Am. Or me.


Zoya. Or all, I am taken with you all, with you all.


Herc: As indeed, why should any woman only love any one man, since it is
reasonable, women should affect al perfection, but al perfection never rests in
one man; many men have many virtues, but Ladies should love many virtues,
therefore Ladies should love many men; for as in women, so in me^, some woman
has only a good eye, one can discourse beautifully, if she do not laugh,
one's well favored to her nose, another has only a good brow, the other a
plumpe lip, a third only holds beauty to the teeth, and there the soil
alters, some peradventure hold good to the breast, and then downward turn
like the drempt of Image, whose head was gold, breast silver, thighs iron, and
all beneath clay and earth, one only winkes eloquently, another only kisses
well, the other only talks well, a fourth only lies well: So in men, one
Gallant has only a good face, another has only a grave methodicall beard, and
is a notable wise fellow, until he speaks, a third only makes water well,
and that's a good provoking quality, one only swears well, another only
speaks well, a third only does well, all in their kind good, goodness is to
be affected, therefore they, it is a base thing and indeed an impossible for a
worthy mind to be contented with the whole world, but most vile and abject to
be satisfied with one point of the world.


Zoya. Excellent Faunus I kiss thee for this, by this hand.


Sir Am. I thought as well, kiss me to dear mistress.


Zoya. No, good sir Amorous, your teeth has taken rust, your breath wants
ayring, and indeed I love sound kissing. Come Gallants, who will run a Caranto,
or leap a Leualto.


He: Take heed Lady from offe^ding or brusing the hope of your wo^b.


Zoya. No matter, now I ha the slight, or rather the fashion of it, I fear no
barrenness.


Herc: O, but you know not your husbands aptness.


Zoya. Husband? husband? as if women could have no children without husbands.


Nym: I, but then they will not be so like your husband.


Zoya. No matter, thei'le be like their father, it is honor enough to my
husband, that they vouchsafe to call him father, and that his land shall
descend to them (does he not gnash his very teeth in anguish) like our
husband? I had rather they were vngroand for, like our husband? prove such a
melancholy jealous ass as he is: Does he not stamp?


Nym: But troth, your husband has a good face.


Zoya. Faith good enough face for a husband, come gallants I Will dance to mine
own whistle, I am as light now as: ah, She sings and daunces. a kiss to you,
to my sweet free servants dream on me, and adue. Exit Zoya.


Zuccone discouers himself. Zucc: I shall loose my wits.


Herc: Be comforted dear Don, you ha none to leeze:


Zucc: My wife is grown like a Dutch-crest always rampant, rampant, fore I
will endure this affliction, I will live by raking cockles out of kennels, nay,
I will run my Country, forsake my religion, go weaue Fustians, or roll the
wheele-barrow at Rotterdam.


Herc: I would be divorced dispite her friends, or the oath of her
Chamber-maide.


Zucc: Nay, I will be divorced in dispite of em all, I Will go to law with her.


Herc. That's excellent, nay, I would go to law.


Zucc: Nay, I will go to law.


Herc: Why that's sport alone, what though it be most exacting, wherefore is
money?


Zucc: True, wherefore is money?


Herc: What though you shall pay for every quill, each drop of Ink, each
minnam, letter, tittle, comma, prick, each breath, nay, not only for thine
own Orators prating, but for some other Orators scilence, though thou must buy
scilence with a full hand, it is well known Demosthenes took above 2000. pound
once only to hold his peace, though thou a man of noble gentry, yet you must
weight, and besiege his study door, which will prove more hard to be entered,
than old Troy, for that was gotten into by a wooden horse, but the entrance of
this may chance cost thee a whole stock of Cattle, Oues and boues and
caetera pecoracampi, though then thou must sit there thrust and contemned
bare-headed to a grograine scribe ready to start up at the door creaking,
pressed to get in, with your leave Sir, to some surly groom, the third son of
a Rope-maker; what of all this?


Zucc: To a resolute mind these torments are not felt.


Herc: A very arrant Ass, when he is hungry will feed on though he be
whipped to the bones, and shall a very arrant Ass Zuccone, be more virtuously
patient, than a noble.


Don. No Fawn, the world shall know I have more virtue, than so.


Herc: Do so and be wise.


Zucc: I will I warrant thee, so I may be revenged, what care I what I do?


Herc: Call a dog worshipful,

Zucc. Nay, I will embrace, nay I will embrace a Iakes-farmer after eleven a
clock at night, I will stand bare, and give wall to a Bellowes-mender, pawn
my Lordship, sell my foot-cloth, but I will be revenged, does she think she
has married an Ass?


Herc: A Fool?


Zucc: A Coxecombe?


Herc: A Ninny-hammer?


Zucc: A Woodcocke?


Herc: A Calfe?


Zucc. No, she shall find that I ha eyes.


Herc: And brain.


Zucc: And nose.


Herc: And Forehead.


Zucc: She shall in faith Fawn, she shall, she shall, sweet Fawn, she shall
in faith old boy, it joys my blood to think on it, she shall in faith; farewell
loved Fawn, sweet Fawn farewell, she shall in faith boy. Exit Zuccone.


Enter Gonzago, and Granuffo with Dulcimell. Gonz: We would be private only
Faunus stay, Exeunt. He is a wise fellow Daughter, a very wise fellow, for he
is still just of my opinion: my Lord Granuffo, you may likewise stay for, I
know you will say nothing, say on Daughter.


Dull: And as I told you sir, Tiberio being sent,
Graced in high trust as to negotiate
His royal fathers love, if he neglect
The honor of this faith, just care of state,
And every fortune that gives likelihood
To his best hopes, to draw our weaker heart
To his own love (as I protest he does)

Gonza* I Will rate the Prince with such a heat of breath
His ears shall glow, nay, I discovered him
I read his eyes, as I can read an eye,
Tho it speak in darkest Caracters I can,
Can we not Fawn, can we not my Lord?
Why I conceive you now, I understand you both:
You both admire, yes, say is it not hit?
Though we are old, or so, yet we ha wit.

Dulc. And you may say, (if so your wisdom please
As you are truly wise) how weak a creature
Soft woman is to beat the seidge and strength,
Of so prevailing feature, and fair language,
As that of his is ever: you may add,
(If so your wisdom please, as you are wise)

Gonz: As mortal man may be

Dull: I am of years, apt for his love, and if he should proceed
in private urgent suit, how easy twere,
To win my love, for you may say (if so
Your wisdom please) you find in me
A very forward passion to enjoy him,
And therefore you beseech him seriously
Straight to forbear, with such close cunning art,
To urge his too well graced suite: for you
(If so your Lordship please) may say I told you all.

Gonz: Go to go to, what I will say or so,
Until I say none but my self shall know.
But I will say go to, does not my color rise?
It shall rise for I can force my blood
To come and go, as men of wit and state,
Must sometimes feign their love, sometimes their hate.
That Is policy now, but come with this free heat,
Or this same Estro or Enthusiasme,
(For these are phrases both poetical)
Will we go rate the Prince, and make him see
Himself in us; that is our grace and wits,
Shall show his shapeles folly, vice kneels whiles virtue fitts.
Enter Tiberio. But see we are prevented daughter, in
It is not fit thy self should hear what I
Must speak of thy most modest wise, wise mind
For Tha'rt careful, sober, in all most wise. Exit Dull:
And in deed our daughter. My Lord Tiberio
A horse but yet a Colt may leave his trot
A man, but yet a boy may well be broke,
From vain addictions, the head of Rivers stopped,
The Channel dries, he that does dread a fire,
Must put out sparks, and he who fears a bull,
Must cut his horns off when he is a Calfe,
Principiis obsta; says a learned man
Who, tho he was no Duke yet he was wise,
And had some sense or so.

Tib: What means my Lord?


Gone: Lah sir, thus men of brain can speak in clouds
Which weak eyes cannot pearce; but my fair Lord
In direct phrase thus, my daughter tells me plain
You go about with most direct intreates
To gain her love, and to abuse her father,
O my fair Lord, will you a youth so blessed
With rarest gifts of fortune, and sweet graces
Offer to love a young and tender Lady,
Will you I say abuse your most wise father?
Who tho he freeze in August, and his calves
Are sunck into his toes, yet may well wed our daughter
As old as he in wit: will you I say
(For by my troth my Lord I must be plain)
My daughter is but young, and apt to love
So fit a person as your proper self,
And so she prayed me tell you, will you now
Entice her easy breast to abuse your trust,
Her proper honor, and your fathers hopes?
I speak no figures, but I charge you check
Your appetite, and passions to our daughter
Before it head, nor offer conference
Or seek access, but by, and before us;
What judge you us as weak, or as unwise?
No you shall find that Venice Duke has eyes; and so think on it.

Exeunt Gonzago and Granuffo. Tibe: Astonishment and wonder, what means this?
Is the Duke sober?

Her: Why ha not you endeuour'd
Courses that only seconded appetite?
And not your honor, or your trust of place,
Do you not court the Lady for your self?

Tibe: Faune thou do love me: if I ha done so
It Is past my knowledge, and I preethe Faune
If thou obseru'st, I do I know not what
Make me to know it, for by the dear light
I ha not found a thought that way; I apt for love?
Let lazy idleness filled full of wine,
Heated with meats, high fed with lustful ease
Go dote on culler, as for me: why death a sense
I court the Lady? I was not borne in Cyprus,
I love, when? how? whom? think, let us yet keep
Our reason sound; I Will think, and think, and sleep. Exit.

Her: Amazd, even lost in wondering, I restfull
Of covetous expectation: I am left
As on a rock, from whence I may discern
The giddie sea of humor slow beneath,
Upon whose back the vayner bubles floate
And forthwith break, o mighty flattery
Thou easiest, commonst, and most grateful venom
That poisons Courts, and all societies,
How grateful do thou make me? should one rail
And come to fear a vice, beware legge-ringes
And the turned key on thee, when if softer hand
Suppling a sore that itches (which should smart)
Free speech gains foes, base fawnings steal the heart,
Swell you impostumbd members till you burst
Since it is in vain to hinder, on i will thrust
And when in shame you fall, I Will laugh from hence,
And cry, so end all desperate impudence.
An others court shall show me where and how
Vice may be cur'de, for now beside my self
Possessed with almost phrenzie, from strong feruor
I know I shall produce things mere divine,
Without immoderate heat, no virtues shine
For I speak strong, tho strange, the dewes that steep
Our souls in deepest thoughts, are Fury and Sleep.

Exit. ACTVS TERTIVS.
Enter Faunus and Nymphador. Nym: Faith Faune it is my humor, the natural sin
of my sanguine complexion, I am most inforcedly in love with all women, almost
affeicting them all with an equal flame.


Her: An excellent justice of an upright virtue, you love all Gods creatures
with an impartial affection.


Nym: Right, neither am I inconstant to any one in particular.


Her: Tho you love all in general, true, for when you vow a most devoted love
to one you swear not to tender a most devoted love to another, and indeed why
should any man ouer-loue any thing, it is judgment for a man to love every
thing proportionably to his virtue. I love a dog with a hunting pleasure, as
he is pleasurable in hunting, my horse after a iourneing easines as he is easy
in iournying, my hawke, to the goodness of his winge, and my wench --


Nym: How sweet Fawn, how?


Her: Why according to her creation, nature made them pretty, toying, idle
phantastique imperfect creatures, even so I would in justice affect them, with
a pretty toying idle phantastique imperfect affection, and as indeed they are
only created for show and pleasure, so would I only love them for show and
pleasure.


Nym: Why that is my humor to the very thread, thou do speak my proper
thoughts.


Her: But Sir with what possibility can your constitution be so boundlesly
amarous as to affect all women of what degree, form or complexion soever?


Nym: I Will tell thee, for mine own part, I am a perfect Ouidian, and can with
him affect all, if she be a virgin of a modest eye, shame faced, temperate
aspect, her very modesty inflames me, her sober blushes fires me, if I behold
a wanton, pretty, courtly petulant Ape, I am extremely in love with her,
because she is not clownishly rude, and that she assures her lover of no
ignorant, dull, vnmouing venus, be she sowerly severe: I think she wittily
counterfeits, and I love her for her wit, if she be learned and sensures poets,
I love her soul, and for her soul her body, be she a Lady of professed
ignorance, oh I am infinitely taken with her simplicity, as one assured to find
no sophistication about her, be she slender and lean, she is the Greeks
delight, be she thick and plumpe, she is the Italians pleasure, if she be
tall, she is of a goodly form, and will printe a fair proportion in a large
bed, if she be short and low, she is nimbly delightful, and ordinarily
quick witted, be she young she is for mine eye, be she old she is for my
discourse as one well knowing, there is much amiablenes in a grave matron, but
be she young or old, lean, fat, short, tall, white, red, brown, nay even
black, my discourse shall find reason to love her, if my means may procure
opportunity to enjoy her.


Herc. Excellent Sir, nay if a man were of competent means, were not a notable
delight for a man to have for every month in the year?


Nym. Nay for every week of the month?


Herc. Nay for every day of the week?


Nym. Nay for every hour of that day?


Herc. Nay for every humor of a man in that hour, to have a several
Mistress to entertain him, as if he were Saturnine, or melancholy to have a
black hayred, pall-fac'de, sallowe thinking Mistress to clippe him: If
Iouiall and merry, a sanguine, light tripping singing, indeed a mistress
that would dance a caranto as she goes to embrace him, if choleric,
impatient or irefull, to have a Mistress withred hair, little Ferreteyes, a
lean cheek, and a sharp nose to entertain him. And so of the rest.


Enter Donetta. Nym. O sir this were too great ambition: well I love and am
beloved of a great many, for I court all in the way of honor, in the trade of
marriage Fawn, but above all I affect the Princes, she is my utmost end. O I
love a Lady whose beauty is joined with Fortune, beyond all, yet one of
beauty, without fortune for some uses, nay one of fortune without beauty for
some ends, but never any that has neither fortune nor beauty but for
necessity such a one as this is Dona Donetta. Here Is one has loved all the
Court just once over.


Herc. O this is the fair Lady with the foul teeth, Natures hand shook when
she was in making, for the red that should have spread her cheeks, nature
let fall upon her nose, the white of her chinne slipped into her eyes, and the
gray of her eyes leapt before his time into her hayer, and the yeallownes of
her haier fell without providence into her teeth.


Nym. By the vow of my heart, you are my most only elected and I speak by way
of protestation, I shall no longer wish to be, then that your only affection
shall rest in me, and mine onele in you.


Don. But if you shall love any other.


Nym. Any other? can any man, love any other that knows you, the only
perfection of your sex, and astonishment of mankind?


Don. Fie ye flatter me, go wear and understand my favor, this snaile slow,
but sure.


Nym. This kiss.


Don. Farewell. Exit.


Nym. The integrity and only vow of my faith to you, ever urge your well
deserved requital to me. Exit Donetta.


Her. Excellent.


Nym. See here is an other of -- Enter Garbetza.

Herc. Of your most only elected,

Nym. Right, Donna Garbetza.


Her: O, I will acknowledge this is the Lady made of cutwork and all her body
like a sand box, full of holes, and contains nothing but dust, she chooses
her servants, as men choose dogs, by the mouth, if they open well and full,
their cry is pleasing, she may be chaste, for she haz a badde face, and yet
questionles, she may be made a strumpet, for she is covetous.


Nym. By the vow of my heart, you are my most only elected, (and I speak it by
way of protestation) I shall no longer wish to be, then all your affections
shall only rest in me, and all mine only in you.


Herc. Excellent, this piece of stuff is good on both sides, he is so
constant, he will not change his phrase.


Gar. But shall I give faith, may you not love another?


Nym. An other, can any man love another, that knows you, the only perfection
of your sex, and admiration of mankind?


Gar. Your speech flies too high, for your meaning to follow, yet my mistrust
shall not preceede my experience, I wrought this favor for you.


Nym. The integrity and only vow of my faith to you ever vrgde, your well
deserude requital to me. Exit Garb.


Herc. Why this is pure wit, nay judgment.


Nym. Why look the Fawn observe me.


Herc. I do sir.


Nym. I do love at this instant some nineteen Ladies all in the trade of
marriage, now sir, whose father dies first, or whose portion appears most, or
whose fortunes betters soonest, her with quiet liberty at my leisure will I
elect, for that is my humor.


Enter Dulcimel and Philocalia. Herc. You profess a most excellent mystery
sir.


Nym. Fore heaven, see the Princes she that is.


Herc. Your most only elected too.


Nym. Oh I, oh I, but my hopes faint yet, by the vow of my heart you are my
most only elected and --


Dull. There Is a ship of fools going out, shall I prefer thee Nymphodoro, thou
may be masters mate, my father has made Dondilo Captain, else thou should
have his place.


Nym. By Jove Fawn, she speaks as sharply and looks as sowerly, as if she
had been new squeased out of a crab orange


Herc. How term you that Lady, with whom she houldes discourse?


Nym. O Fawn it is a Lady even above ambition, and like the vertical sun,
that neither forces others to cast shadows, nor can others force or shade
her, her style is Dona Philocalia.


Herc. Philocalia, what that renowned Lady whose ample report has stroke
wonder into remotest strangers? and yet her worth above that wonder, she whose
noble industries has made her breast rich in true glories, and vndying
habilities, she that whilst other ladies spend the life of earth, Time, in
reading their glass, their Jewels, and (the shame of Poesy) lustful sonets
gives her soul meditations, those meditations wings, that cleave the Aier,
fan bright celestial fires, whose true reflections makes her see her self and
them: She whose pity is ever above her envy, loving nothing less then
insolent prosperity, and pitittying nothing more then virtue destitute of
fortune.


Nym There were a Lady for Ferraraes Duke, one of great blood, firm age,
undoubted honor, above her sex, most modestly artfull, tho naturally modest,
too excellent, to be left unmatched, tho few worthy to mutch with her.


Herc. I cannot tell my thoughts grow busy,

Phi. The Princes would be private, void the presence. Exeu^t


Dull. May I rest sure thou will conceal a secret?


Phi. Yes Nadam.


Dull. How may I rest truly assur'de?


Phil. Truly thus, Do not tell it me.


Dull. Why, can thou not conceal a secret?


Phi. Yes, as long as it is a secret. but when tow know it. how can it be a
secret? and indeed with what justice can you expect secrecy in me that cannot
be private to your self?


Dulc. Faith Philocalia, I must of force trust thy silence, for my breast
breaks, if I confer not my thoughts upon thee.


Phi. You may trust my silence, I can command that, but if I chance to he
questioned I must speak truth, I can conceal but not deny my knowledge, that
must command me.


Dulc. Fie on these Philosophical discoursing women, prithee confer with me
like a creature made of flesh and blood, and tell me, if it be not a scandal
to the soul of all being proportion, that I a female of 15. of a lightsome and
civil discretion, healthie, lusty, vigorus, full and idle, should for ever be
shackled to the crampie shinnes of a waywarde, dull, sower, austere, rough,
rhewmy, threescore and four.


Phi. Nay, threescore and ten at the least,

Dulc. Now heaven bless me, as it is pity that every knave is not a fool,
so it is shame, that every old man is not, and rests not a widdower. They
say in China, when women are past childbearing, they are all burnt to make
gunpowder. I wonder what men should be done withal, when they are past
child-getting, yet upon my love Philocalia (which with Ladies is often above
their honor) I do even dote upon the best part of the Duke.


Phi. What Is that?


Dulc. His son, yes sooth, and so love him, that I must marie him.


Phi. And wherefore love him, so to marry him.


Dulc. Because I love him, and because he his virtuous, I love to marry.


Phi. His virtues.


Dulc. I, with him his virtues.


Phi. I with him, alas sweet Princes, love or virtue are not of the essence of
marriage.


Dulc. A jest upon your understanding, i will maintain that wisdom in a woman is
most foolish quality: A Lady of a good complexion, naturally well witted,
perfectly bred and well exercised, in discourse of the best men, shall make
fools of a thousand of these book thinking creatures, I speak it by way of
justification, I tell thee, (look that no body eauesdroppe us.) I tell thee I
am truly learned, for I proteigrance and wise, for I love my self* and
virtuous enough for a Lady of fifteen.


Phi. How virtuous?


Dulc. Shall I speak like a creatur of a good healthful blood and not like one
of these weak green sickness, leave tisicke, staruelinges: First for the
virtue of magnanimity, I am very valiant, for there is no heroicke action so
particularly noble and glorious to our sex, as not to fall to action, the
greatest deed we can do is not to do* (look that no body listen) Then am I
full of patience, and can bear more then a Sumpter horse, for (to speak
sensibly) what burden is there so heavy to a Porters back, as Virginity to a
well complectioned young Ladies thoughts? (look no body hearken) By this hand
the noblest vow is that of Virginity, because the hardest, I will have the
Prince.


Phi. But by what means sweet Madam?


Du. Oh Philocalia, in heavy sadness and vnwanton phrase there lies all the
brain work, by what means I could fall into a miserable blanke verse
presently.


Phi. But dear madam your reason of loving him.


Du. Faith only a woman's reason, because I was expressly forbidden to love him,
at the first view I likte him, and no sooner had my fathers wisdom mistrusted
my liking, but I grew loath his judgment should err. I pitied he should
prove a fool in his old age, and without cause mistrust me?


Phi. But when you saw no means of manifesting your affection to him, why did
not your hopes perish?


Dull. O Philocalia that difficulty only inflames me, when the enterprise is
easy, the victory is inglorious, no let my wise aged, learned, intelligent
Father, that can interpret eyes understand the language of birds, interpret the
grumbling of dogs and the conference of cats, that can read even silence, let
him forbid all enterviewes, all speeches, all tokens, all messages, all (as he
thinks) human means, I will speak to the Prince, court the Prince, that he
shall understand me, nay I will so stalk on the blind side of my all knowing
fathers wit, that do what his wisdom can, he shall be my only mediator, my
only messenger, my only honorable spokesman, he shall carry my favors, he
shall amplify my affection nay he shall direct the Prince the means the very
way to my bed, he and only he, when he only can do this, and only would
not do this, he only shall do this.


Phi. Only you shall then deserve such a husband, O love how violent are thy
passages!


Dull. Pish Philocalia, it is against the nature of love, not to be violent.


Phi. And against the condition of violence to be constant.


Dull. Constancy? constancy and patience are virtues in no living creatures but
Sentinels and Anglers: here is our father.


Enter Gonzago, Hercules and Granuffo. Gone. What did he think to walk
inuisibly before our eyes, and he had Giges ring I would find him.


Herc. Fore Jove you rated him with Emphasis.


Gone. Did we not shake the Prince with enargie?


Her. With Ciceronian Elocution?


Gone. And most pathetique piercing Oratorie?


Herc. If he have any wit in him, he will make sweet use of it.


Gone. Nay he shall make sweet use of it ere I have done, Lord what ouerweening
fools these young men be, that think us old men sottes.


Herc. Arrant Asses.


Gone: Doting idiots, when we God wot, ha, ha, las silly souls.


Herc. Poor weak creatures to men af approved reach.


Gone. Full years.


Her. Of wise experience.


Gone. And approved wit.


Herc. Nay as for your wit --


Gone. Count Granuffo, as I live this Faunus is a rare understander of men, is a
not Faunus? this Granuffo is a right wise good Lord, a man of excellent
discourse, and never speaks his signs to me, and men of profound reach
instruct abounda^tly, he begges suites with signs, gives thanks with signs
puts off his hat ley surely, maintains his beard learnedly, keeps his lust
privately, makes a nodding leg courtly, and lives happily.


Her. Silence is an excellent modest grace, but especially before so
instructing a wisdom, as that of your excellencies, as for his advancement,
you gave it most royally, because he deserves it least duly, since to give to
virtuous desert, is rather a due requital, then a Princely magnificence, when
to vndeseruingnesse, it is merely all bounty and free grace.


Gone. Well spoke, it is enough, Don Granuffo this Fawnus is a very worthy
fellow, and an excellent Courtier, and beloved of most of the princes of
Christendom I can tell you, for howsoever some seuerer dissembler, grace him
not when he affronts him in the full face, yet if he comes behind, or on the
one side heel leere and put back his head upon him be sure, be you two
precious to each other.


Her. Sir my self, my family, my fortunes, are all devoted I protest most
religiously to your service. I vow my whole self only proud, in being
acknowledged by you, but as your creature, and my only utmost ambition is by
my sword or soul to testify, how sincerely I am consecrated to your
adoration.


Gone. It Is enough, art a Gentleman Fawn?


Herc. Not oneminently disce^ded, for were the pedegrees of some fortunately
mounted, searched, they would be secretly found to be of the blood of the
poor Fawn.


Gone. It Is enough, you two I love hartelie, for thy silence never displeases
me, nor thy speech ever offend me: See our daughter attendes us, my fair, my
wise, my chaste, my dutieous, and indeed, in all my daughter, (for such a pretty
soul for all the world have I been) what I think we have made the Prince
to feel his error, what did he think he had weak fools in hand? no he
shall find, as wisely said Lucullus, Young men are fools, that go about to
gull us.


Dulc. But sooth my wisest father, the young Prince is yet forgetful, and
rests resolute, in his much unadvised love.


Gone. Is It possible?


Dull. Nay I protest what ere he feign to you (as he can feign most deeply)


Gone. Right we know it, for if you marked he would not once take sense of any
such intent from him, O impudence, what mercy can thou look for?


Dull. And as I said, royally wise, and wisely royal Father --


Gone. I think that eloquence is hereditary.


Dull. Tho he can feign, yet I presume your sense is quick enough to find him.


Gone. Quick, is it not?


Gra. Is It not Fawn, why I did know you fained, nay I do know (by the just
sequence of such impudence) that he has laid some second siedge unto thy
bosom, with most miraculous conueyances of some rich present on thee.


Dulc. O bounteous heaven, how liberal are your graces to my Nestor-like
Father.


Gone. Is It not so, say?


Dulc. It Is so oraculous Father, he has now more then courted with bare Phrases.

See Father see, the very bane of honor,
Corruption of justice and Virginity,
Gifts has he left with me, O view this scarffe,
This as he calde it most envied silk,
That should embrace an arm, or wast, or side,
Which he much fearde should never, this he left,
Despite my much resistance.

Gone. Did he so giu't me, I Will giu't him, I Will regiue his token with so sharp
advantage*


Dulc. Nay my worthy Father, read but these cunning letters


Gone. Letters? where, prove you but justly loving and co^ceiu me
Till justice leave the Gods, I Will never leave thee.
For tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain,
Where two hearts yield consent, all thwartings vain,
And dare thou then auerre this wicked write,
O world of wenching wiles, where is thy wit?

Enter Tiberio. Dull. But other talk for us were far more fit,
For see here comes the prince Tiberio.

Gone. Daughter upon thy obedience instantly take thy chamber

Dull. Dear father in all duty, let me beseech your leave, that I may but --


Gone. Go to, go to, you are a simple fool, a very simple animal

Dull. Yet let me, (the loiall servant of simplicity.)


Gone. What would you do? what are you wiser then your father, will you direct
me?


Dull. Heavens forbid such insolence, yet let me denounce my hearty hatred.


Gone. To what end?


Dull. Though It be but in the Princes ear, (since fit's not maide^s blush to rail
aloude.


Gone. Go to, go to.


Dull. Let me but check his heat.


Gone. Well, well.


Dull. And take him down dear father, from his full pride of hopes.


Gone. So, so, I say once more go in.
Exit Dulcimel and Philocalia. I will not loose the glory of reproof;
Is this the office of Ambassadors my Lord Tyberio?
Nay duty of a son, nay pity of a man.
(A figure called in art Gradatio.
With some learned Climax) to court a royal Lady,
For's master, father, or perchance his friend,
And yet intend the purchase of his beuty,
To his own use.

Tib. Your grace does much amaze me.


Gone. I, feign, dissembe, Las we are now grown old, weak sighted, alas any
one fools us.


Tib. I deeply vow my Lord.


Gone. Peace, be not damnde, have pity on your soul,
I confess sweet Prince for you to love my daughter,
Young and witty, of equal mixture both of mind and body,
Is neither wondrous nor unnatural,
Yet to forswear and vow against ones heart,
Is full of base, ignoble cowardice,
Since it is most plain, such speeches, do contemn
Heaven, and fear men (that is sentious now)

Tib. My gracious Lord if I vnknowingly have er'de,

Gone. Vnknowingly, can you blush my Lord:
Vnknowingly, why can you write these lines?
Present this scarffe, vnknowingly my Lord,
To my dear daughter? vm, vnknowingly?
Can you urge your suite, prefer your gentlest love,
In your own right, to her too easy breast:
That God knows takes too much compassion on ye,
(And so she praide me say) vnknowingly my Lord?
If you can act these things vnknowingly,
Know we can know your actions so unknown,
For we are old? I will not say in wit,
(For even just worth must not approve it self)
But take your skarfe, for she vows she will not wear it.

Tib. Nay but my Lord --

Gone. Nay but my Lord, my Lord.
You must take it, wear it, keep it,
For by the honor of our house and blood;
I will deal wisely, and be provident,
Your father shall not say I pandarizde,
Or fondly winkt at your affection,
No we will be wise, this night our daughter yeeldes
Your fathers answer, this night we inuit
Your presence therefore to a feastfull waking,
To morrow to Ferrara you return,
With wished answer to your royal father,
Mean time as you respect our best relation
Of your fair bearing, ( Granuffo is it not good?)
Of your fair bearing, rest more anxious,
(No anxious is not a good word) rest more vigilant
Over your passion, both forbear and bear,
Anexou e ampexou, (that's Greek to you now.)
Else your youth shall find,
Our nose not stuffed, but we can take the wind,
And smell you out, I say no more but thus,
And smell you out, what, ha not we our eyes,
Our nose and ears, what, are these hairs unwise?
Look to it. (...)bereo reads the imbroder (...) skarfs.
quos ego, a figure called Aposiopesis or Increpatio.
Exeunt Gonzago and Granuffo.
Tib. Prove you but justly, loving and conceive me,
Justice shall leave the gods before I leave thee:
Imagination prove as true, as thou art sweet
And tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain
When two hearts yield consent, all thwartinges vain.
O quick deuisefull strong braind Dulcimel
Thou art too full of wit to be a wife,
Why do thou love? or what strong heat gave life
To such faint hopes? O woman thou art made
Most only of, and for deceit, thy form
Is nothing but delusion of our eyes,
Our ears, our hearts, and sometimes of our hands,
Hypocrisy and vanity brought forth,
Without male heat, thy most most monstrous being
Shall I abuse my royal fathers trust,
And make my self a scorn, the very food
Of rumor infamous? shall I that ever loathede,
A thought of woman, now begin to love,
My worthy fathers right, break faith to him that got me
To get a faithless woman?

Her. True my worthy Lord, your grace is vere pius.


Tib. To take from my good father the pleasure of his eyes,
And of his hands, imaginary solace of his fading life.

Herc. His life that only lives to your sole good,

Tib. And my self good, his life's most only end.


Herc. Which O may never end.


Tib. Yes Fawn in time, we must not prescribe to nature, every thing: there is
some end in every thing.


Her. But in a woman, yet as she is a wife, she is
Oftentimes the end of her husband

Tib. Shall I, I say? --


Herc. Shall you I say confound your own fair hopes,
Cross all your course of life, make your self vain,
To your once steady grauenes, and all to second
The ambitious quicknes of a monstrous love,
That's only out of difficulty borne,
And followed only for the miracle,
In the obtaining? I would ha ye now,
Tell her father all.

Tib. Vncompassionate vilde man, shall I not pity, if I cannot love?
Or rather shall I not for pity love,
So wondrous wit in so most wondrous beauty,
That with such rarest art and cunning means
Entreates? what (I thing valules) am not,
Worthy but to grant, my admiration,
Are fathers to be thought on in our loves?

Herc. True right sir, fathers or friends, a crown,
And love has none, but are allied to themselves alone,
Your father I may boldly say, he is an Ass,
To hope that you will forbear to swallow,
What he cannot chew, nay e't is injustice truly,
For him to judge it fit, that you should starve.
For that which only he can feast his eye withal,
And not digest.

Tib. O Fawn what man of so cold earth
But must love such a wit in such a body,
Thou last and only rarenes of heavens works,
From best of man made model of the Gods:
Diuinest woman, thou perfection
Of all proportions Beutie, made when, Jove was blithe,
Well filde with Nectar, and full friends with man,
Thou dear as air, necessary as sleep,
To careful man: woman, O who can sin so deeply,
As to be cursed from knowing of the pleasures,
Thy soft society, modest amorousnes,
Yeeldes to our tedious life. Fawn, the Duke shall not know this

Herc. Unless you tell him, but what hope can live in you,
When your short stay, and your most shortened conference.
Not only actions, but even looks abstrude,
Cut off all possibilities of obtaining.

Tib. Tush Fawn, to violence of women's love and wit
Nothing but not obtaining is impossible,
Notumque furens quid foemina possit.

Herc. But then how rest you to your father true?


Tib. To him that only can give dues, she rests most due. Exit


Herc. Even so? he that with safety would well lurk in courts,
To best elected ends, of force is wrung,
To keep broad eyes, soft feet, long ears, and most short tongue.
For it is of knowing creatures the maine art,
To use quick hammes, wide arms and most close heart.

Actus tertii Finis.
ACTVS QVARTVS
Enter Hercules and Garbetza Herc. Why it is a most well in fashion affection
Dona Garbetza your Knight S. Amaros is a man of a most unfortunate back, spits
white, has an ill breath, at three after dinner goes to the Bath, takes the
diet, nay which is more, takes Tobacco, therefore with great authority you may
cuckolde him.


Gar. I hope so, but would that friend my brother discover me, would he wrong
himself, to prejudice me?


Herc. No prejudice dear Garbetza, his brother your husband right, he cuckold
his eldest brother, true, he gets her with child, just.


Garb. Sure there is no wrong in, right, true, and just.


Herc. And indeed since the virtue of procreation growed hopeles in your
husband, to whom should you rather commit your love and honor to, then him
that is most like and near your husband, his brother, but are you assured your
friend and brother rests entirely constant solely to you?


Garb. To me? O Fawn, let me sigh it with joy into thy bosom, my brother has
been woed by this and that and the other Lady to entertain the^ (for I ha seen
their letters) but his vow to me O Faw, is most immutable, vnfaining, peculiar,
and indeed deserved.


Enter Puttotta and a Page, Puttotta with a letter in his hand. Put. Never
entreat me, never beseech me, to have pity forsooth on your Master, M. Herod:
Let him never be so daringly ambitious, as to hope withal his vows and
protestations to gain my affection, gods my discretion? has my my sutlery,
tapstry, laundrie, made me be taken up at the Court, preferde me to a
husband, and have I adaunc't my husband with the labor of mine own body,
from the black guarde, to be one of the Dukes dru^mers, to make him one of
the court forkers? shall I that purefy many Lords and some Ladies ca^ tell who
wears perfumes who plasters, and for why, know whose a gallant, of a chaste
shirt and who not; shall I become, or dares your master think I will become,
or if I would become, presumes your Master to hope I would become one of his
common feminines? no let M. Herod brag of his brothers wife, I skorne his
letters, and her leauings at my heel, in faith and so tell him.


Page Nay costly, dear Puttotta, Mistres Puttotta, madam Puttotta O be
merciful to my languishing master, he may in time grow great and well graced
Courtier, for he wears yellow already, mix therefore your loves, as for
madam Garbetza his brothers wife, you see what he writes there.


Put. I must confess he says she is a spinie, green creature, of an
unwholesome barren blood and cold embrace, a bony thing of most unequal hyppes,
uneven eyes, ill rankt teeth, and indeed one, but that she hires him, he
endures not, yet, for all this does he hope to dishonest me: I am for his
betters, I would he should well know it, for more by many then my husband, know
I am a woman of a known, sound and upright carriage and so he shall find if
he deal with me, and so tell him I pray you, what does he hope to make me one
of his gils, his pu^cks, pole cats, flirrs and feminines?


Exit as Puttotta goes out she flinges away the letter, the page puts it up,
and as he is talking Hercules steals it out of his pocket. Page. Alas my
miserable master, what suds art thou washed into? thou art borne to be scornde
of every carted community, and yet heel out crack a German when he is
drunk, or a Spaniard after he has eaten a Fumatho, that he haz lain with that
and that, and the other Lady, that he lay last night in such a madonnas chamber,
the other night he lay in such a Countesses couch, to night he lies in such a
Ladies closet, when poor I know all this while he only lied in his throat.


Exit. Her. Madam let me sigh it in your bosom, how immutable and vnfainting
and indeed --


Gar. Fawn I will undo that rascal, he shall sterue for any further
maintenance.


Herc. You may make him come to the covering and recovering of his old dublets.


Gar. He was in fair hope of proving heir to his elder brother, but he has
gotten me with child.


Herc. So, you withdrawing your favor, his present means fail him, and by
getting you with child, his future means for ever rest despairefull to him.


Gar. O heaven that I could curse him beneath damnation, impudent varlet: by my
reputation Fawn, I only lou'de him, because I thought I only did not love
him, he vowed infinite beauties doted on him, alas I was a simple country Lady,
wore gold buttons, trunck sleeves, and flaggon bracelets, in this state of
innocence was I brought up to the Court.


Her. And now in stead of country innocence, have you got court honesty: well
Madam leave your brother to my placing, he shall have a special cabin in the
ship of fools.


Gar. Right, remember he got his elder brothers wife with child, and so
depriude himself of the inheritance.


Her. That will stow him under hatches I warrant you.


Gar. And so depriude himself of inheritance, dear Fawn be my champion.


Herc. The very scourge of your most basely offe^ding brother


Gar. Ignoble villain, that I might but see thee wretched without pity, and
recovery, well. Enter Herod and Nymphadoro


Herc. Stand Herod, you are full met sir.


Herod. But not met, full sir, I am as gaunt as a hunting gelding after 3.
traind sents, fore Venus fan I have been shaling of peascods, upon four
great Madonnas have I this after noone grafted the forked tree,


Herc. Is It possible?


Herod Possible? fie on this satiety, it is a dull, blunt* weary, and drowsy
passion; who would be a proper fellow to be thus greedily devoured and
swallowed among Ladies? faith it is my torment, my very rack.


Herc. Right Herod, true, for imagine all a man possessed with a perpetual
pleasure, like that of generation, even in the highest lushiousnes, he straight
sinkes as unable to bear so continual, so pure, so universal a sensuality.


Herod By even truth it is very right, and for my part would I were eunuch't
rather then thus sucked away with kisses, infeebling daliance, and O the falling
sickness on them all, why did reasonable nature give so strange, so rbellious,
so tirannous, so insatiate parts of appetite to so weak a gouernes a woman.


Herc. Or why O custom did thou oblige them to modesty, such cold
tempera^ce, that they must be wooed by men, courted by men? why all know, they
are more full of strong desires, those desires most impatient of delay, or
hindera^ce, they have more unruly passions then men, and weaker reason to
temper those passions then men.


Nym. Why then has not the discretion of nature thought it just, that
customary coins, old fashions, terms of honor and of modesty for sooth, all
laid aside, they court not us, beseech not us, rather for sweetes of love,
then we them, why? by Ianus women are but men turnde the wrong side outward.


Herc. O sir nature is a wise workman, she knows right well that if women
should woo us to the art of love, we should all be utterly shamd, how often
should they take us unprovided when they are always ready.


Herod I sir, right sir, to some few such unfortunate handsome fellows as my
self am to my grief I know it.


Herc. Why here are two perfect creatures, the one Nymphadoro, loves all, and
my Herod here eioyes all.


Herod. Faith some score or two of Ladies or so, ravish me among them, divide
my presents, and would indeed ingrosse me were I indeed such an ass as to be
made a Monopoly of: look sirrah what a vilde hand one of them writes, who
would ever take this for a. d. dearest, or read this, for only, only dearest.


Herc. Here Is a lie indeed.


Herod. True, but here is another much more legible, a good secretary my most
affected Herod, the utmost ambition of my hopes and only.


Her. There is one lie better shapte by ods.


Herod. Right, but here is a Ladies roman hand to me is beyond all, look ye,
to her most elected servant, and worthy friend, Herod Baldonzozo Esquier, I
believe thou know what Countesses hand this is, I Will show thee another.


Herc. No good Herod, I Will show thee one now: To his most elected Mistress and
worthy laundresse, divine mistress Puttotta at her tent in the wood-yeard, or
else where give these.


Herod. Prithee ha silence what is that?


Herc. If my tears or vows, my faithfulst protestations on my knees.


Herod. Good hold.


Herc. Fair and only loved laundresse.


Herod. Forbear I beseech thee.


Herc. Might move thy stony heart to take pity on my sighs.


Herod. Do not shame me to the day of judgment.


Herc. Alas I write it in passion, alas thou know besides my loathed sister
thou art.


Herod. For the Lords sake.


Herc. The only hope of my pleasure, the only pleasure of my hopes, be
pleased therefore to


Herod. Cease I beseech thee.


Herc. Pish, near blush man, it is an vncourtly quality, as for thy lying as
long as there is policy int, it is very passable, wherefore haz heaven given man
tongue but to speak to a man's own glory? he that cannot swell bigger then his
natural skin nor seem to be in more grace then he is, has not learned the
very rudiments or A.B.C. of courtshippe.


Herod. Upon my heart Fawn thou please me to the soul, why look you for
mine own part I must confess.

Enter Dondolo. See heeres the Dukes fool.


Don. A board, a board, a board, al manner of fools of Courteytie or country of
what degree sex or nature.


Herod fool.


Don. Herod.


Herc. What, are ye full fraughted, is your ship well foold?


Don. O'twas excellently thronged full, a Justice of peace, tho he had been
one of the most illiterat asses in a Country could hardly ha got a hanging
cabin. O we had first some long fortunate great Politicians that were so
sottishlie paradized as to think when popular hate seconded Princes
displeasure to them, any vnmerited violence could seem to the world injustice,
some purple fellows whom chance reared, and their own deficiences of spirit
hurled down, we had some courtiers that ore bought their offices and yet
durst fall in love, Priests that for-sooke their functions to avoid a thawart
stroke with a wet finger. But now alas Fawn, now there is space and place.


Her. Why / how gat al these forth, was not the warrant strong?


Don. Yes, yes, but they got a supersedeas, al of them proved them selves
either knaves or madd men, and so were all let go, there is none left now in our
ship, but a few Citizens, that let their wives keep their shop books,
some philosophers, and a few Critiques; one of which Critiques has lost his
flesh with fishing at the measure of Plautus verses, another has vowde to get
the consumption of the lungues, or to leave to posterity the true orthography
and pronunciation of laughing, a third has melted a great deal a suet, worn
out his thumbs with turning, read out his eyes and studied his face out of a
sanguine into a meagre spawling fleamy lothsomenes, and al to find but why
mentula should be the feminine gender since the rule is Propria quae maribut
tribuuntur mascilla dicas. These Philosophers, Critiques and all the maids we
could find at 16. are all our fraught now.


Herc. O then, your ship of fools is full.


Nym. True the maids at 17. fill it.


Don. Fill it quoth you alas we have very few and these we were feign to take
up in the country too.


Herc. But what Philosophers ha ye.


Don. O very strange fellows one knows nothing, dares not aver, he lives,
goes, sees, feels.


Nym. A most insensible Philosopher.


Don. An oher that there is no present time, and that one man to day, and to
morrow is not the same man, so that he that yesterday owed money to day owes
none, because he is not the same man.


Hero. Would that Philosopher would hold good in law.


Herc. But why has the Duke thus labord to have all the fools shipped out of his
dominions.


Don. Marry because he would play the fool himself alone without any rival.


Herc. Ware your breech fool.


Don. I warrant thee old lad it is the privilege of poor fools to talk before
an intelligencer, mary if I could fool my self into a Lordship as I know
some ha fool them selves out of a Lordeship were I grown some huge fellow and
got the leer of the people upon me if the fates had so decreed it, I should
talk treason tho I near opend my lips.


Her. In fatis agimur, cedite fatis, but how runs rumor what breath's
strongest in the Palace, now I think you know all.


Don. Yes we fools think we know all the Prince has audience to night, is
feasted and after supper is intertainde with no comedy mask or barriers but
with.


Nym. What I prithee?


Herod. What I prithee?


Don. With a most new and special shape of delight.


Nym. What for Jove's sake?


Don. Marie gallants, a session, a general council of love summond in the
name of Don Cupid to which upon pain of their mistres displeasure shall
appear all favor wearers, sonnet mongers, health drinkers, and neat in riches
of barbers, and perfumers, and to conclude all that can wy he or wag the tail,
are upon grievous pains of their back su^mond to be assistant in that Session
of love.


Herc. Hold, hold, do not paul the delight before it come to our pallat, and
what other rumor keeps air on men's lungs.


Don. Other egregiousnes of folly ha you not heard of Don. Zucone.


Nym. What of him good fool.


Don. He is separated.


Nym. Diuorcd.


Don. That salt that criticisme, that very all epigram of a woman, that
Analysis, that compendium of witness.


Nym. Now Jesus what words the fool has.


Don. We ha still such words but I will not vnshake the jest before it be ripe
and therefore kissing your worships fingers in most sweet terms without any
sense and with most fair looks without any good meaning I most courtlike take
my leave ba suus manus devostro Signioria.


Hero. Stay fool we will follow thee, for fore heaven we must prepare our selves
for this session.


Exeunt. Enter Zuccone pursued by Zoya on her knees attended by Ladies Zuc. I
will have no mercy, I will not relent, justice beard is shaven, and it shall give
thee no hold, I am separated and I will be separated.


Zoya. Dear my Lord husband.


Zuc. Hence creature, I am none of thy husband or father of thy bastard, no I
will be tyranous and a most deep revenger the order shall stand ha, thou Queen
I ha no wife now.


Zoy. sweet my Lord.


Zuc. Hence auant I will marie a woman with no womb, a creature with two
noses, a wench with no hair rather then remarie thee, nay I will first marry,
mark me I vvil first marry, observe me, I will rather marie a woman that with
thirst drinks the blood of man: nay, heed me a woman that will thrust in
crowds, a lady that being with child ventures the hope of her womb, nay gives
two crowns for a room to behold a goodly man three parts a live quartered,
his priuities hacled off, his belly launcht up. Nay I Will rather marry a woman
to whom this smoking, hideous, bloudful, horred, tho most just spectacles, are
very lust, rather, then reaccept thee, was I not a handsome fellow from my
foot to my feather, had I not wit, nay, which is more, was I not a Don. and
did thou Acteon me, did I not make thee a Lady.


Herc. And did she not make you a more worshipful thing, a Cuckold.


Zuc. I married thee in hope of children.


Herc. And has not she showed herself fruitful that was got with child
without help of her husband?


Zuc. Ha thou vngratful, immodest, unwise, and one that gods my witness I ha
loved, but go thy ways twist with whom thou will, for my part tha'st spun a
fair thread, whole kiss the now whole court the now, whole ha the now?


Zoy. Pity the frailty of my sex sweet Lord.


Zuc. No, pity is a fool, and I will not wear her coxcombe, I have vowde to
loath thee, the Irish man shall hate aquauity, the welsh man cheese, the dutch
man shall loath salt butter before I reloue thee, does the babe pule? thou
should ha cride before, it is to late now, no, the trees in autumn shall
sooner call back the spring with sheding of their leeues; then thou reuerse my
just irreuocable hatred with thy tears, away go vaunt.


Exit Zoya and the Lady. Herc. Nay but most of this is your fault that for
many years only upon mere mistrust seuer'd your body from your Lady and in
that time gave opportunity turn'de a jealous ass hired and some to try and
tempt your Ladies honor whilst she with all posible industry of apparent
merit diuerting your unfortunate suspicion.


Zuc. I know it I confess, all this I did and I do glory in it, why? cannot a
young Lady for many months keep honest? no, I misthought it, my wife had wit,
beauty, health, good birth, fair clothes and a passing body, a Lady of rare
discourse, quick eye, sweet language, alluring behavior, and exquisit
entertainment. I misthought it, I feared, I doubted, and at the last I found it
out, I praise my wit I knew I was a Cuckold.


Herc. An excellent wit.


Zuc. True Fawn, you shall read of some Lords that have had such a wit I can
tell you, and I found it out, that I was a Cuckold


Herc. Which now you have found you will not be such an ass as Caesar, great
Pompey, Lucullus, Anthony, or Cato and diverse other Romans, cuckolds, who all
knew it, and yet were nere diuorc'd upon it, or like that smith-God Vulcan who
having taken his wifetaking, yet was presently appeased, and entreated to make
an Armor for a bastard of hers Eneas.


Herc. No the Romans were asses* and thought that a woman might mix her thigh
with a strnager wantonly, and yet still love her husband band matrimonially.


Herc. As indeed they say many married men, lie sometime with strange women,
whom, but for the instant use, they abhor.


Zuc. And as for Vulcan it was humanitye more then humane; such excess of
goodness for my part only belong to the Gods.


Herc. Ass for you.


Zuc. As for me my Fawn I am a batcheller now.


Herc. But you are a Cuckold still, and one that knows himself to be a
cuckold.


Zuc. Right, that's it and I knew it not, it were nothing and if I had not
pursude it too, it had lain in oblivion, and shaddowed in doubt, but now I ha
blaz'de it.


Herc. The world shall know what you are.


Zuc. True, i will pockit up no horns, but my revenge shall speak in thunder.


Herc. Indeed I must confess I know twenty are Cuckoldes honestly and
decently enough a worthy gallant spirit (whose virtue suppresseth his mishap)
is lamented but not disesteem'd by it: Yet the world shall know --


Zuc. I am none of those silen Coxcombs, it shall out.


Herc. And although it be no great part of injustice, for him to be struck with
the scabbard that haz struck with the blade (for there is few of us but has
made some one cuckold or other)


Zuc. True I ha don't my self.


Herc. Yet. --


Zuc. Yet I hope a man of wit may prevent his own mishap or if he can prevent
it. --


Herc. Yet --


Zuc. Yet make it known yet, and so known that the world may tremble with
only thinking of it. Well Fawn whom shall I marie now? O heaven! that God
made for a man no other means of procreation and maintaining the world peopled
but by weome^, O that we could increase like roses by being slipped one from
another or like flies procreat with blowing, or any other way then by a woman,
by women who have no reason in their love, or mercy in their hate, no rule in
their pity, no pity in their revenge, no judgeme^t to speak, and yet no
patience to hold their tongues; ma^s opposite, the more held down; they swel,
above the^ naught but will, beneath the^ naught but hell


Herc. Or that since heaven has given us no other means to allay our furious
appetite, no other way of increasing our progeny, since we must entreat and
beg for asswagement of our passions, and entertainment of our affections, why
did not heaven make us a nobler creature then weome^ to show unto, some
admirable, deity of an incorruptible beauty that be worth our knees, the
expense of our heat, and the crinkling of our.


Zuc. But that we must court, sonnet, flatter, bribe, kneel, sue to so feeble
and imperfect, in constant, idle, vain, hollow, bubble, as woman is. O my face.


Herc. O my Lord look who here comes.


Enter Zoya supported by a gentleman vssher followed by Herod and Nymphadora
with much state, soft musik playing. Zuc. Death a man, is she delivered?


Herc. Deliuerd, yes. O my Don. delivered, yes Dona Zoya the grace of society,
the musik of sweetly agreeing perfection, more clearly chaste then ice or
frozen rain, that glory of her sex, that wonder of wit, that beauty more
freshy then any cool and trembling wind, that now only wish of a man is
delivered, is delivered.


Zuc. how

Herc. From Don. Zuc. that dry skalines, that sarpego, that barren drouth and
shame of all humanity.


Zoya. What fellows that.


Nym. Don. Zuc. your sometime husband.


Enter Philocalia. Zoy. alas poor creature.


Phil. The Princes prays your company. All but Hercules,

Zoy. I wait upon her pleasure. Zuccone* Herod, and Nim. depart.


Zuc. Gentlemen why hazard you your reputation in shameful company with such a
branded creature,


Herod Miserable man whose fortune were beyond tears to be pitied, but that
thou art the ridiculous author of thine own laughed at mischief.


Zuc. Without paraphrase your meaning.


Nym. Why thou woman's fool?


Zuc. Good gentlemen let one die but once.


Herod. Was not thou most curstfully madd to sever thy self from such an
vnequalde rarity.


Zuc. Is she not a strumpet? Is she not with Child?


Nym. yes with feathers.


Herc why weakness of reason, could not perceive all was faind to be rid of
thee?


Zuc Of me.


Nym. she with child, vntrodde^ snow is not so spotles

Herod. Chaste as the first voice of a newborn infant,

Her. know she grew lothing of thy jealousy,

Nym thy most pernicious curiosity,

Herc. whose suspicions made her inimitable graces motive of thy base ielousy.


Herod. why beast of man?


Nym, wretched above expression that snoredst over a beauty which thousands
desired, neglecst her bed, for whose enjoying a very saint would have sued.


Herc. defamed her.


Hero. suggested privily against her.


Nym. gave foul language publicly of her.


Herc. and now lastly don that for her which she only praide for, and wished as
wholesome air for, namely to be from such an unworthy.


Herod. senseles.


Nym. inuirious.


Herc. malicious.


Herod suspicious.


Nym mishaped.


Herc. ill languidg'd*

Herod. unworthy

Nym ridiculous.


Herc. jealous.


Herod. arch cox-combe as thou art. Exeunt Nym. and Herod.


Zuc. O I am sick, my blood has the crampe, my stomach or'eturnes; O I am
very sick.


Herc. why my sweet Don. you are no cuckold.


Zuc. that's the grief on it


Herc. that's, the grief ont that I ha wronged so sweet (and now in my
knowledge) so delicate a creature, O me thinks I embrace her yet.


Herc. alas my Lord you have done her no wrong, no wrong in the world, you have
done her a pleasure, a great pleasure, a thousand gentlemen, nay dukes will be
proud to accept your leauings, your leauings, now is she courted, this heir
sendes her jewels, that lord proffers her ioynters, the other knight proclaims
challenges, to maintain her, the only not beautiful, but very beauty of
women.


Zuc. but I shall never embrace her more.


Herc. nay that is true, that is most true (I would not afflict you, only think
how vnrelentles you were to her but supposed fault.


Zuc. O it is true, too true.


Herc. think how you scornd her tears,


Zuc. most right,

Herc. Tears that were only shed I would not vex you in very grief to see
you covet your own shame.


Zuc. Too true, too true.


Herc. For indeed she is the sweetest modest soul, the fullest of pity.


Zuc. O yes, O yes.


Herc. The softness and very courrtesie of her sex as one that never loved
any --


Zuc. But me.


Herc. So much that he might hope to dishonor her, nor any so little that he
might fear she disdaind him. O the graces made her a soul as soft as spotles
down upon the swans fair breast, that drue bright Cythereas chariot, yet think
(I would not vex you) yet think how cruel you were to her.


Zuc. As a Tiger, as a very Tiger.


Herc. And never hope to be reconcild, never dream to be reconcild, never

Zuc. Never, alas good Fawn what woldst wish me to do now?


Herc. Faith go hang your self my Don. that's best sure.


Zuc. Nay that's too good, for I Will do worse then that, I Will marie again; where
can pick out a morsel for me Fawn?


Herc. There is a modest matron like creature --

Zuc. What years Fawn.


Herc. Some four score wanting one.


Zuc. A good sober age, is she wealthy?


Herc. Very wealthy.


Zuc. Excellent.


Herc. She has three hairs on her scalpe and four teeth in her head, a browe
wrinckled and puckred like old parchment half burnt, she haz had eyes, no
woman's jaw-bones are more apparent, her sometimes envious lips, now shrink in,
and give her nose and her chin leave to kiss each other very moistlye; as for
her reverend mouth it seldom opens, but the very breath that flies out of it,
infects the fowls of the air, and makes them drop down dead, her breasts hang
like cobwebs, her flesh will never make you cuckold, her bones may.


Zuc. But is she welthy

Herc. Very wealthy,

Zuc. And will she ha me art sure?

Herc. No sure, she will not have you, why do you think that a waiting woman
of three bastards, a strumpet nine times carted or a hag whose eyes shoot
poison, that has been an old witch, and is now turning into a gib-cat will ha
you? mary Don. Zucone the contempt of women, and the shame of men, that has
afflicted, contemnd, so choice a perfection as Dona Zoyas.


Zuc. Alas Fawn I confess, what would ha me do?


Herc. Hang your self you shall not, marry you cannot, i will tell ye what you
shall do, there is a ship of fools setting forth, if you make good means and
entreat hard, you may obtain a passageman, be masters mate I warrant you.


Zuc. Fawn, thou art a scuruie bitter knave, and do flout Dons to their
faces, it was thou flatteredst me to this, and now thou laugh'st at me, do?
though indeed I had a certain procliuity, but thou made me resolute, do
grinne and gearne? O you comforters of life, helps in sickness, joys in
death, and preseruers of us, in our children, after death, women, have mercy
on me.


Herc. O my Don, that God made no other means of procreation but by these
women, I speak it not to vex you.


Zuc. O Fawn, thou have no mercy in thee, do thou leere on me? well, i will
creep upon my knees to my wife, do laugh at me? do gearne at me? do
smile? do leere on me, do thou? O I am an Ass, true, I am a Coxcombe,
well, I am mad, good: A mischeife on your cogging tongue, your soothing throat,
your oily jaws, your supple hammes, your dissembling smiles, and O the
graund Diuill on you all: when mischief favors our fortunes, and we are
miserably, tho justly vvretched

More pity, comfort, and more help we have
In foes professed, then in a flattering knave. Exit

Herc. Thus fevv strike sail until they run on shelfe,
The eye sees all things but his proper self,
In all things curiosity has been
Vicious at least, but herein most pernicious,
What madness is it to search and find a vvound,
For which there is no cure? and which unfound
Near rankles, whose finding only wounds
But he that upon vain surmise forsakes
His bed thus long, only to search his shame,
Gives to his wife youth, opportunity,
Keeps her in idlefull delitiousnesse,
Heates and inflames imagination,
Prouokes her to revenge with churlish vvronges,
What should he hope but this? why should it lie in women,
Or even in chastity it self (since chastiti's a female)
T'auoide desires so ripened, such svvetes so canded;
But she that has out-borne such mass of wrongs,
Out-dur'de all persecutions, all contempts,
Suspects, disgrace, all wantes, and all the mischeifs
The baseness of a cankerd churl could cast upon her,
With constant virtue, best fainde chastity,
And in the end turns all his iealousies,
To his own skorne, that Lady I emplore,
It may be lawful not to praise, but even adore.

Enter Gonzago, Granuffo, with full state. Enter the Cornets sounding. Gone. Are
our sportes ready, is the Prince at hand?


Herc. The Prince is now arriude at the Court gate.


Gone. What means our daughters breathles have?


Enter Dulcimel in have. Dull. O my princely father now or never let your
princely wisdom appear.


Gone. Fear not our daughter, if it rest within human reason I warrant thee,
no I warrant thee, Granuffo if it rest in man's capacity, speak dear daughter.


Dull. My Lord the Prince.


Gone. The Prince, what of him dear daughter?


Dull. O Lord what wisdom our good parents need, to shield their chickens
from deceipts, and wiles of kite like youth.


Gone. Her very phrase displayes whose child she is.


Dull. Alas had not your grace been provident, a very Nestor in advise and
knowledge, ha, where had you poor Dulcimel been now, what veins had not I
been drawn into?


Gone. Fore God, she speaks very passionately. Alas daughter, heaven gives
every man his talent, indeed virtue and wisdom are not fortunes gifts,
therefore those that fortune cannot make virtuous, she commonly makes rich,
for our own part we acknowledge heavens goodness, and if it were possible, to
be as wise again as we are, we would near impute it to our selves: for as
we be flesh and blood, alas we are fools, but as we are Princes, Scholars,
and have read Cicero de Oratore, I must confess there is another matter int,
what of the Prince dear daughter?


Dull. Father do you see that tree, that leanes just on my chamber window?


Gone. What of that tree? Enter Tiberio with his train.


Dull. O sir, but note the policy of youth, mark but the stratagems of working
love, The prince salutes me, and thus greetes my ear.


Gone. Speak softly, he is entered.


Dull. Although he knew, I yet stood wavering, what to elect, because though I
affected, yet destitute of means to enjoy each other, impossibility of
having, might kill our hope and with our hope desires to enjoy. Therefore to
avoid all faint excuses, and vain fears, thus he devised: to Dulcimels
chamber window. A well grown plain tree spreads his happy arms, by that in
depth of night one may ascend, (dispight all fathers iealousies and fears)
into her bed.


Gone. Speak low, the Prince both marks and listens.


Dull. You shall provide a Priest (quoth he) in truth I promised and so you well
may tell him, for I temporized and only held him off.


Gone. Politikely, our daughter to a hair.


Dull. With full intention to disclose it all, to your preventing wisdom.


Gone. I let me alone for that: but when intends he this invasion? when will
this Squirrile clime?


Dull. O Sir in that is al, when but this night?


Gone. This night?


Dull. This very night when the court revels had over wakt your spirits, and
made them full of sleep, then --


Gone. Then, verbum sat sapienti: go take your chamber, down upon your knees,
thank god your father is no foolish sotte but one that can foresee and see.
Exit Dulcimel. my Lord we discharge your presence from our Court.


Tib. What means the Duke?


Gone: And if to morrow past you rest in Vrbin, the privilege of an ambassador
is taken from you.


Tib. Good your grace some reason?


Gone. What, twice admonisht twice again offe^ding?
And now grown blushles; you promised to get into
Her chamber, she to get apriest,
Indeed she wished me tell you she co^fest it,
And there despite all fathers Jealous fears,
To consumate full joys: know Sir our daughter
Is our Daughter, and has wit at will
To gull a thousand easy things like you:
But sir depart, the parliament prepared
Shall on without you, all the Court this night
Shall triumph, that our daughter has escapt,
Her honors blowing up; your end you see,
We speak but short but full, Socratice. Exit.

Remains Hercules and Tiberio. Tib. What should I think, what hope, what but
imagine of these Enigmas?


Herc. Sure sir the Lady loves you
With violent passion, and this night prepares
A Priest with nuptial rightes to entertain you
In her most private chamber.

Tib. This I know,
With too much torture, since means are all unknown,
To come unto these ends, where is this her chamber?
Then what means shall without suspicion
Convey me to her chamber? O these doubts,
End in despair -- Enter Gonzago hastily.

Gone. Sir sir this plain tree was not planted here
To get into my daughters chamber: and so she praide me tell you
What though the maine arms spread into her window?
And easy labor climes it: Sir know
She has a voice to speak, and bid you welcome,
With so full breast that both your ears shall hear ant,
And so she praide me tell you: ha we no brain;
Youth thinks that age, Age knows that youth is vain. Exit

Tib. Why now I have it Fawn, the way, the means, and meaning, good Duke, and
it were not for pity, I could laugh at thee, Dulcimel I am thine most
miraculously, I will now begin to sigh, read Poets, look pale, go neately,
and be most apparently in love, as for --


Her. As for you old father.


Tib. Alas he and all know, this an old saw has bin,
Faiths-breach for love, and kingdoms is no sin. Exit.

Herc. Where are we now, Cyllenian Mercury?
And thou quick issue of Jove's broken pate
Aid and direct us: you better stars to knowledge
Sweet constellations that affect pure oil,
And holy vigill of the pale cheeckt Muses,
Give your best influence, that with able spright,
We may correct and please, giving full light,
To every angle of this various sense,
Works of strong birth, end better then commence. Exit.

Finis Actus quarti.
ACTVS QVINTVS*
Whilst the Act is a playing, Hercules and Tiberio enters, Tiberio climes the
tree, and is received above by Dulcimel, Philocalia and a Priest: Hercules
stays beneath. Herc. Thou mother of chaste dew, nights modest lamp,
Thou by whose saint shine, the blushing lovers,
Join glowing cheeks, and mix their trembling lips.
In vows well kiste, rise all as full of splendour,
As my breast is of joy- You Genitall,
You fruitful well mixed heates: O bless the sheets,
Of yonder chamber, that Ferraraes Dukedom,
The race of princely issue be not cursde,
And ended in abhorred barrennes.
At length kill all my fears, nor let it rest,
Once more my tremblinges, that my too cold son,
(That ever scorner of humainer loves)
Will still contemn the sweetes of marriadge,
Still kill our hope of name in his dull coldness,
Let it be lawful to make use ye powers,
Of human weakness, that pursues still,
What is inhibited, and most affects,
What is most difficult to be obtainde:
So we may learn, that nicer love's a shade,
It follows fled, pursude, flies as afraid,
And in the end close all the various errors
Of passages, most truly comicall:
In moral learning with like confidence,
Of him that vowde good fortune of the scene,
Shall neither make him fat, or bad make lean.

Enter Dondolo laughing. Dondol. Ha, ha, ha.


Her. Why do laugh fool, heeres no body with thee.


Don. Why, therefore do I laugh, because there is no body with me, would I were
a fool alone I faith, I am come to atte^d let me go, I am sent to the
Princes, to come and attend her father to the end of Cupids Parliament.


Her. Why, ha they sat already upon any statutes?


Don. Sat I, all is agreede in the nether house:


Herc. Why, are they divided?


Don. O Im Cupids Parliament, all the young gallantes are a the nether house,
and all the old signiors that can but only kiss are of the upper house: is
the Princes above?


Herc. Noe sure, I think the Princes is beneath, man, ha they supt fool?


Don. O yes, the confusion of tongues, at the large Table is broke up, for
see the presence filles; A fool, a fool, a fool my Coxcombe for a fool.


Enter Sir Amaros, Herod Nymphadon, Garbetza, Donella and Poueia. Herod. Stop
Ass, what is matter idiot?


Don. O gallants, my fools that were appointed to weight on Don Cupid. have
launcht out their ship to purge their stomachs on the water, and before
Jupiter I fear, they will prove defective in their attendance.


Herod. Pish, fool, they will float in with the next tide.


Don. I, but whens, that? lets see mine Almanacke or prognostication.


Sir Am. What, is this for this year?


Don. In true wisdom sir it is, Let me see the moon, fore pity, it is in the
wayne, what grief is this? that so great a planet should ever decline or loose
splendore -- full sea at-


S. Am. Where Is the sign now fool?


Don. In Capricorn, Sir Amoroso.


Gar. What strange thing dos this Almanac speak of fool?


Don. Is this your lady Sir Amarous?


S. Am. It is, kiss her fool.


Herod. You may kiss her now, she is married.


S: Am. So he might ha done before,

Don. In sober modesty Sir, I do not use to do it behind.


Herod. Good fool be acquainted with this lady to, she is of a very honest
nature I assure thee.


Don. I easily believe you sir, for she has a very vile face, I assure you.


Gar. But what strange things dos thy Almanacke speak of good fool?


Don. That this year no child shall be begotten, but shall have a true Father.


Sir Am. That's good news in faith, I am glad I got my wife with child this year,


Herc. Why Sir Amaros this may be, and yet you not the true father, may it not
Herod?


Gar. But what more says it good Fawn?


Herc. Faith Lady very strange things, it says, that some Ladies of your
hair, shall have feeble hams, short memories and very weak eye sight, so that
they shall mistake their own Page, or even brother in law, sometimes for their
husbands.


S. Am. Is that all Fawn?


Her. No sir Amaros, heeres likewise prophesied a great skarsitie of Gentry to
ensue, and that some Bores shall be dubbed Sir Amoroso. A great scarsitie of
Lawyers is likewise this year to ensue, so that some one of them shall be
entreated to take fees a both sides.


Enter Don Zuccone following Dona Zoia on his knees. Zuc. Most dear, dear
Lady, wife, Lady, wife, O do not but look on me, and ha some mercy.


Zoya. I will ha no mercy, I will not relent.


Zuc. Sweet Lady.


Zoya. The order shall stand, I am separated, and I will be separated.


Zuc. Dear, my love, wife.


Zoya. Hence fellow, I am none of thy wife, noe I will be tyrannous and a most
deep revenger, the order shall stand, I will marry a fellow that keeps a fox
in his bosom, a goat under his arm holes, and a polecat in his mouth, rather
then reaccept thee.


Zuc. Alas, by the Lord Lady what should I say? as heaven shall bless me --
what should I say?


Herod. Kneel and cry man.


Zoya. Was I not handsome, generous, honest enough from my foot to my feather,
for such a fellow as thou art?


Zuc. Alas I confess I confess.


Zoya. But go thy ways and wiue with whom thou will for my part, thou have
spun a fair thread, whole kiss thee now? whole court thee now? whole ha thee
now?


Zuc. Yet be a woman -- and for Gods sake help me.


Herod. And do not stand too stiffly.


Zucc. And do not stand too stiffly, do you make an Ass of me? but let these
raskals laugh at me, Alas what could I do withal? it was my destiny that I
should abuse you.


Zoya So it is your destiny that I should thus revenge your abuse: No the
Irishman shall hate Aquauitae, the Welshman cheese and the Dutchman salt butter
before i will love or receive thee, dos he cry? dos the babe pule? it is to late
now, thou should ha cried before, it is to late now, go bury thy head in
silence, and let oblivion be thy utmost hope.


The Courtiers address themselves to dancing, whilst the Duke enters with
Granuffo, and takes his state. Herc. Galla^ts to dancing, loud music, the
dukes upon entrance

Gone. Are the sportes ready?


Herc. Ready.


Gone. It Is enough, of whose invention is this Parliament?


Herc. Ours.


Gone. It Is enough, this night we will exult, O let this night
Be ever memorizd with prouder triumphs,
Let it be writ in lasting Character,
That this night our great wisdom did discover
So close a practice, that this night I say,
Our policy found out, nay dashed the driftes
Of the young Prince, and put him to his shifts,
Nay past his shifts, (fore Jove we could make a good Poet)
Delight us, on, we dain our princely care
We are well plesd to grace you, then skorne fear.
Cornets playing. Drunkenness, Sloth, Pride, and Plenty leads Cupid to his
state, who is followed by Folly, war, Beggary and Laughter. Stand it is
wisdom to acknowledge ignorance,
Of what we know not, we would not now prove foolish.
Expound the meaning of your show.

Herc. Triumphant Cupid that sleeps on the soft cheek
Of rarest beauty, whose thron's in Ladies eyes,
Whose force writhed lightning from Jove's shaking hand,
Forced strong Alcides to resign his club.
Plucked Neptunes trident from his mighty arm,
Vnhelmed Mars, he (with those trophes borne,
Led in by Sloth, Pride, Plenty, Drunkenness.
Followde by Folly, War, Laughter, Beggary,
Takes his fair throne, sit pleased for now we move,
And speak not for our glory, but for love.

Hercules takes a bowl of wine. Gonz. A pretty figure, what, begins this
sessio^ with ceremony?


Herc. With a full health to our great Mistress Venus,
Let every state of Cupids parliament, Hercule drinks (...) health.
Begin the session, quod bonum faustumque sit precor.

Gone. Giu't us, we will pledge, nor shall a man that lives,
In charity refuse it, I will not be so old,
As not be graced to honor Cupid, giu't us full,
When we were young, we could ha trold it off.
Drunk down a Dutchman.

Her. It Is lamentable, pity your grace has forgot it: Drunkenness, O it is a
most fluent and swelling virtue, sure the most just of all virtues, it is
justice it self, for if it chance to oppress and take too much, it presently
restores it again. It makes the king and the peasant equal, for if they are
both drunk alike, they are both beasts alike: As for that most precious light
of heaven Truth, if time be the father of her, I am sure drunkenness is
oftentimes the mother of her, and bringes her forth, Drunkenness bringes all
out, for it bringes all the drink out of the pot, all the wit out of the
pate, and all the money out of the purse.


Gone. My Lord Granuffo, this Fawn is an excellent fellow.


Don. Silence.


Gone. I warrant you for my Lord here.


Cupid Since multitude of laws are signs either of much tirannie in the
prince, or much rebellious disobedience in the subject, we rather think it fit
to study, how to have our old laws thoroughly executed, then to have new
statutes comborously invented.


Gone. Before Jove he speaks very well.


Her. O sir, oue is very eloquent, makes all men good Orators, himself then
must needs be eloquent.


Cup. Let it therefore be the maine of our assembly, to suruay our old laws,
and punish their transgressions, for that continually the complaints of lovers
ascend up to our deity, that love is abusde, and basely bought and sold,
beauty corrupted, affection fainde, and pleasure her self sophisticated. That
young Gallants are proud in appetite, and weak in performance, that young
Ladies are phantastically inconsta^t, old Ladies impudently unsatiate: wives
complain of unmarried women, that they steal the dewes belonging to their
sheets: and maids exclaim upon wives, that they unjustly ingrosse all into
their own hands, as not content with their own husbands, but also
purloyning that which should be their comfort: Let us therefore be severe in
our justice: And if any of what degree soever have approuedly offended, let him
be instantly impartially arrested and punished, read our statutes.


Herc. A statute made in the five thousand, four hundred, threescore and three
year of the easefull reign of the mighty potent Don Cupid Emperor of sighs,
and protestations, great king of kisses: Archduke of dalliance, and sole lou'de
of him, for the maintaining and releeuing of his old soldiers, maimed or
dismembered in love.


Don. Those that are lightly hurt, shame to complain; those that are deeply
struck, are past recovery.


Cupid. On to the next.


Herc. An Act against the plurality of Mistresses.


Cup. Read.


Herc. Whereas some over amorous and unconscionable covetous young gallants
without all grace of Venus, or the fear of Cupid in their minds, have at one
time engrossed the care or cures of diverse mistresses, with the charge of
Ladies, into their own tenure or occupation, whereby their mistresses must of
necessity be very ill and insufficiently served, and likewise many able
portly Gallants, live unfurnished of competent entertainme^t to the merit of
their bodies: and whereas likewise some other greedy strangers have taken in the
purlues, outset land, and the ancient commons of our sovereign Liege Don
Cupid, taking in his very high ways, and enclosing the^, and annexing them to
their own Lordships, to the much empouerishing and putting of diverse of Cupids
true hearts and loiall subjects, to base and abominable shifts: Be it
therefore enacted by the sovereign authority and erected ensign of Don Cupid,
with the assent of some of the Lords, most of the Ladies, and all the Commons,
that what person or persons soever, shall in the trade of honor, presume to
wear at one time two Ladies favors, or at one time shall earnestly court two
women in the way of marriage, or if any under the degree of a Duke, shall keep
above twenty women of pleasure, a Dukes brother fifteen, a Lord ten, a knight
or a Pentioner, or both four, a gentleman two. shall ipso facto, be arrested
by follies mace, and instantly committed to the ship of fools, without either
bail or maine-prize, Millessimo centesimo, quingintesimo, quadragesimo nono.
Cupidinis semper vnius. Nymphadoro to the bar.


Nym. Shame afolly, will Fawn now turn an informer? dos he laugh at me?


Her. Domina Garbetza, did he not ever protest, you were his most only
elected Mistres.


Gar. He did.


Her. Domina Donella, did he not ever protest you were his most only elected
Mistress?


Don. He did.


Herc. Domina Poueia, did he not ever protest, that you were his most only
elected Mistress.


Pou. He did.


Nym. Mercy.


Cup. Our mercy is nothing, unless some Lady will beg thee.


Ladies. Out upon him, dissembling perfidious liar.


Her. Indeed it is no reason Ladies should beg liers.


Nym. Thus he that loves many if once known, is justly plagued to be belou'de
of none. Exit.


Herc. An act against counterfeiting of Cupids royal coin, and abusing his
subjects with false money. To the bar Sir Amaros. In most lamentable form
complains to your blind celsitude, your distressed Orators, the women of the
world, that in respect that many spend thriftes, who having exhausted and
wasted their substance, and in stranger parts have with empty shows,
treasonably purchased Ladies affections, without being of ability to pay them
for it with curra^t money, and therefore have deceitfully sought to satisfy
the^ with counterfeite mettell, to the great displeasure, and no small loss of
your humblest subjects. May it therefore with your pitiful assent been
acted, that what Lord, Knight, or gentleman soever, knowing himself
insufficient, bankerout, exhausted and wasted, shall traitorously dare to
entertain any lady, as wife, or mistress, ipso facto to be severed from all
commercement with women, his wife or mistress in that state offe^ding, to be
forgiven with a pardon of course, and himself instantly to be pressed to sail
in the ship of fools, without either bail or main-prise.


Herc. Sir Amarous is arrested.


Sir Amar. Judgment of the court.


Her. I take my oath upon thy brothers body, it is none of thine.


Amor. By the heart of dissemblance, this Fawn has wrought with us as strange
Tailors work in corporate cities, where they are not free all inward, inward,
he lurkt in the bosom of us, and yet we know not his profession: Sir let me
have counsel?


Her. It Is in great Cupids case, you may have no counsel.


Sir Amor. death a justice, are we in Normandy, what is my Ladies doom then?


Cup. Acquitted by the express parol of the statute, hence and in thy ignorance
be quietly happy, away with him. on.


Her. An Act against forgers of love letters, false braggarts of ladies
favors, and vain boasters of counterfeit tokens.


Herod. It Is I, it is I, I confess guilty, guilty.


Herc. I will be most human and right courteously languaged in thy
correction, and only say, thy vice from apparent here, has made thee an
apparent beggar, and now of a false knave, has made thee a true fool: Folly
to the ship with him, and twice a day let him be duckt at the mayne-yeard.


Cup. Proceed.


Herc. An Act against slanderers of Cupids liege ladies names, and lewd
defamers of their honors.


Zucc. It Is I, it is I, I weep and cry out, I have been a most co^tumelious
offender, my only cry is misercre.


Cup. If your relenting Lady will have pity on you, the fault against our
Deity be pardoned.


Zuc. Madam if ever I have found favor in your eyes, if ever you have thought
me a reasonable handsome fellow, as I am sure before I had a beard, you might.
O be merciful!


Zoya. Well, upon your apparent repentance, that all modest spectators may
witness, I have for a short time only thus faynedly hated you, that you might
ever after truly love me, upon these cautions I reaccept you: first you shall
vow.


Zuc. I do vow, as heaven bless me, I will do.


Zo. What?


Zuc. What ere it be, say on I beseech you.


Zo. You shall vow.


Zuc. Yes.


Zo. That you shall never.


Zuc. Never.


Zoya. Feign love to my waiting woman or chamber maid.


Zuc. No

Zoya. Never promise them such a farm to their mariadge.


Zuc. No.


Zoya. If she will discover but whom I affect.


Zuc. Never.


Zoya. Or if they know none that theil but take a false oath; I do, only to be
rid of me.


Zuc. I swear I will not, I will not only not counterfetlie love your women,
but I will truly hate them an't be possible, so far from maintaining them
that I will beggar them, I will never pick their trunkes for letters, search
their pockets, ruffle their bosoms, or tear their foul smocks, never, never.


Zoya. That if I chance to have a humor to be in a mask, you shall not grow
Jealous.


Zuc. Never.


Zoya. Or grudge at the expense.


Zuc. Never, I will eat mine own arms first.


Zoy. That you shall not search, if my chamber door hinges be oyld to avoid
creaking.


Zuc. As I am a sensible creature --


Zoy. Nor ever suspect the reason why my bedde-chamber floor is double matted.


Zuc. Not as I have blood in me.


Zoya. You shall vow to wear clean linen, and feed wholsomelie.


Zuc. I and highly, I will take no more Tobacco, or come to your sheets
drunk, or get wenches, I will ever feed on fried frogs, broild snayles, and
boilde Lamstones, I will adore thee more then a mortal, observe and serve you
as more then a Mistress, do all duties of a husband, all offices of a man,
all services of thy creature, and ever live in thy pleasure, or die in thy
service.


Zo. Then here my quarrel ends, thus cease all strife.


Zuc. Until they loose, men know not what is a wife,
We slight and dully view the lamp of heaven,
Because we daily seet, which but bereaved,
And held one little week from darkened eyes,
With greedy vvonder, we should all admire,
Opinion of command, puts out loves fire.

Herc. An Act against mummers, false seemers, that abuse ladies with
counterfeit faces, courting only by signs; and seeming wise only by silence.


Cup. The penalty.


Herc. To be urged to speak, and the^ if inward ability answer not outward
seeming, to be committed instantly to the ship of fools, during great Cupids
pleasure. My Lord Granuffo to the bar, speak, speak, is not this law just?


Gra. Just sure, for in good truth, or in good sooth, when wise men speak,
they still must open their mouth.


Her. The brazen head haz spoken.


Don. Thou art arrested.


Gra. Me?


Herc. And judged away.


Exit Granuffo. Gone. Thus silence, and grave looks with hums and hawes,
Makes many worshipped, when if tried the'are dawes:
That's the morality or lenuoy of it lenuoy of it, on.

Herc. An act against privy conspiracies, by which if any with ambitious
wisdom, shall hope and strive to outstrippe love to cross his words, and
make frustrate his sweet pleasures, if such a presumptuous wisdom fall to
nothing, and die in laughter, the wizard so transgressing is ipso facto
adjudged to offend in most deep treason, to forfeite all his wit at the will
of the Lord, and be instantly committed to the ship of fools for ever.


Gone. I marry sir, O might Edipus riddle me out such a fellow, of all
creatures breathing I do hate those things that strugle to seem wise, and
yet are indeed very fools, I remember when I was a young man in my fathers
days, there were four gallant spirits for resolution, as proper for body, as
witty in discourse as any were in Europe, nay Europe had not such, I was one of
them; we four did all love one lady, a modest chaste virgin she was, we all
inioyde her, I well remember, and so inioyde her, that despite the strictest
guard was set upon her, we had her at our pleasure, I speak it for her honor
and my credit: where shall you find such witty fellows now a days: Alas how
easy it is in these weaker times to cross love tricks, ha ha ha alas, alas,
I smile to think I must confess with some glory to mine own wisdom, to think
how I found out and crossed, and curbd, and ierkt, and firkte, and in the end
made desperate Tiberios hope, Alas good silly youth, that dares to cope with
age, and such a beard: I speak it without glory.


Herc. But what yet might your well known wisdom think
If such a one, as being most severe,
A most protested opposite to the match
Of two young lovers, who having bard them speech,
Alt internewes, all messages, all means,
To plot their wished ends, even he himself,
Was by their cunning made the go between.
The only messenger, the token carrier,
Told them the times when they might fitly meet,
Nay, showed the way to one another bed.

Gone. May one have the sight of such a fellow for nothing;
Does their breath such an egregious Ass,
Is there such a foolish animal in rerum natura?
How is it possible such a simplicity can exist? let us not lose our laughing
at him for gods sake, let follies scepter light upon him, and to the ship of
fools with him instantly.


Don. Of all these follies I arest your grace.


Gone. Me? ha, me? me verlet? me fool? ha, toot'h Iayle with him: what varlet
call me Ass, me?


Herc. What grave Vrbins Duke, dares Follies scepter touch his prudent
shoulders, is he a Coxcombe, no, My Lord is wise, for we all know that Vrbines
Duke has eyes.


Gone. God a mercy Fawn, hold varlet, hold thee good Fawn railing reprobate?


Herc. Indeed I must confess, your grace did tell,
And first did intimate your daughters love,
To otherwise most cold Tiberio,
After conuaide her private favor to him,
A curious skarfe, wherein her needle wrought,
Her private love to him.

Gone. What I do this? ha.


Herc. And last by her persuasion shewde the youth,
The very way and best elected time,
To come unto her chamber.

Gone. Thus did I sir?


Herc. Thus did you sir, but I must confess,
You meant not to do this, but were ranckly gulde,
Made a plain natural. This sure sir you did.
And in assurance Prince Tiberio,
Renowned, witted, Dulcimel appear,
The acts of constant honor cannot fear. Herc. exit

Tiberio and Dulcimel above are discovered, hand in hand. Dull. Royally wise,
and wisely royal father.


Don. That's sententious now, a figure calde in art Ironia.


Dull. I humbly thank your worthy piety, that through your only means I have
obtained so fit, loving and desired a husband.


Gone. Death, a discretion, if I should prove a fool now am not I an Ass,
think you, ha? I will have them both bound together, and sent to the Duke of
Ferrara presently.


Tib. I am sure good Father we are both bound together as fast as the Priest
can make us already, I thank you for it kind father, I thank you only for it.


Her. And as for sending them to the Duke of Ferrara, See my good Lord,
Ferraraes ore ioid prince, meets the^ in fullest wish.


Gone. By the Lord I am ashamde of my self, that is the plain troth, but I know
now wherefore this Parliament was: what a slumber have I been in?


Herc. Never grieve or wonder, all things sweetly fit.


Gone. There is no folly to protested wit.


Herc. What still in wondering, ignorance does rest,
In private conference, your dear loved breast,
Shall fully take. But now we change our face.

Epilogus.
And thus in bold, yet modest phrase we end,
He whose Thalia with swiftest hand has pend,
This lighter subject, and has boldly torn,
Fresh bays from Daphnes arm, does only scorn,
Malicious censures of some envious few,
Who think they loose if others have their due.
But let such Addars hiss, know all the sting,
All the vain some of all those snakes that ringes
Mineruas glassefull shield can never taint,
Poison or pierce, firm art disdaines to faint,
But yet of you that with impartial faces,
With no prepared malice, but with graces,
Of sober knowledge, have suruaide the frame,
Of his slight scene, if you shall judge his flame,
Distemperately, weak, as faulty much,
In style, in plot, in spirit, lo if such
He daines in self accusing phrase to crave,
For praise but pardon which he hopes to have.
Since he protests he ever has aspirde,
To be beloude, rather then admirde.
FINIS.

