THE POMAVNDER of Prayer, Newly made by Thomas Becon.

ECCLE. 24. Pleasauntly do I smell, eue^ as it were Cynamome, and svvete Balm,

THOMAS BECONVS SACROSA^CTAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR. AETATIS SVAE.41 ANo
DN^I.1553.
portrait of Thomas Becon

Ora expressa vides, viuos imitantia vultus.
Quod potuit calamo pictor and art videt
Mentis qua^ nullus potuit tibi reddere pict^
Effigiem scriptis, praebuit ipse suis.
To the most honorable and virtuous Lady Anne of Cleue, her grace, sister to
the hye and mighty Prince Wylliam Duke of Cleue. etc. Thomas Becon wysheth the
favor of God, long life and continual health.
AMong many other godly and noble virtues, which God by his holy spirit has
graffed in your graces breast (most honorable Lady) the fervent affection and
continual desire of prayinge unto the Lord our God, has neither the last nor
the lest place in you. And as God has wrought in you by ye holy Ghost this
godly mind to call upon his holy name with diligent prayer, so likewise does
your grace stur up and confyrme that spiritual mocion with the exercise of daily
prayer, least that godly affeccio^ should be quenched, which the holy Ghost has
kindled in your heart. For your grace does rightwell consider, yt God deliteth
in nothing more then in ye inuocacion of his blessed name, and in the
sacrifice of thanks giving for his benefits. Where the name of God is
diligently called upon, and most humble and hearty thanks given unto him for his
fatherly and friendly gifts, there is his blessing grace and favor plenteous,
there is the holy Ghost present, there is a merry conscience, there al things
prosper, there wants no good thing. Continue therefore (most honorable Lady)
as ye have godly begun, both you and all your faithful family to call on the
glorious name of the Lord our God with fervent prayer, and forget not to be
thankful unto him for his benefits, wherewith above many other he has richly
endued your grace. So shall he be your loving Lord and gracious God, your
favorable father and strong shilde. So shall he make your grace to prosper in all your doings, and bless you both with longlyfe and much honor. And that your
grace may have at hand conuement prayers to pray unto the Lord our God I
thought it good, consyderyng your graces manifold virtues, to give unto you
this my Pommaunder of prayer, wherein are breeflye contained such godly
prayers as are most mete in this our age to be used of all degrees and estates,
most humbly beseching your grace to take in good part this my rude and bold
enterprise according to your accustomed gentleness. God, whose glory you
heartily love, whose word you ioifulli embrace, whose name you earnestly call
upon: might vouchesafe to preserve your grace in continual health and
increase of honor.

Amen.
Your Graces most humble and faithful Oratoure Thomas Becon.

The Pomau^der of Prayer.
A Prayer for the morning.
I Render unto thee (O heavenly father) most hartye thanks, by thy dear son
Jesus Christ, that this night past thou have vouchedsafe of thy fatherlye
goodness to preserve me from all evil, and to give my body rest and sleep: I
now most entierly beseech thee yt as thou have raised up this my body from
sleep, so likewise thou wylt deliver my mind from the sleep of sin, and from
the darkness of this world, that I walking in the light of thy blessed word,
may only do that is pleasant in thy sight, profitable to my neighbor, and
healthful to my soul.

Amen.
A prayer for ye Evening.
I Most humbly thank the (O merciful Father) for preseruinge me this day from
all misfortunes, and for thy other benefits wherewyth thou have ple^teously
blessed me. I beseech ye forgive me al my sins, wherwyth I have offended thy
fatherlye goodness from the very beginni^g of my life unto this present hour,
and take me this night into thy tuicion, ytmyne enemies may have no power over
me, but that my body enioyinge a sweet sleep, my mind may continually watch
unto thee, and through faith behold thy blessed majesty with a perfect hope
after this frail and transitory life, to possess ytimmortal and heavenly
life, where thou gloriously lyuest and reignest with thy only begotten son
and ye holy Ghost one true and everlasting God, worlds without end.

Amen.
A prayer for the forgeuenes of sin.
O My Lord and only savior Jesus Christ, which came into this world to take
away the heavy burde^s of them that were laden, to seek that was lost, to call
sinners unto repentance, to give everlasting life to the faithful, and to be
a mediator between God the father and us: I poor and wretched sinner from the
very heart lament, and inwardly bewail my synnefull and wretched, life,
desiryng the for thy promise sake according to thy merciful wont, to be my
mediator and advocate unto God the father, that he may forgive me all mine
old sins, and so wholly possess my heart by his blessed spirit, that he may
defend me, against al perils to come, which the devil, the world or the flesh
imagines against me, and so change me into a new man, that mine old sins
being wyped away in thy precious blood, I may walk from virtue to virtue unto
the glory and praise of his blessed name.

Amen.
A prayer unto God the father.
THy dearly beloved son (O most loving father) taught us in his holy Gospel,
that to know the to be ye alone true God, is everlasting life. Grant therefore
we beseech thee, yt we may truly know thee, even as we are taught by thy holy
word, believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth, that thou alone art
the true living and immortal God our heavenly father, our maker, our
preserver, and our defender, that we thus believing and confessing may through
thy son Christ be come heirs of everlasting life. And as we thus believe and
confess of thee* so give us grace to show forth this our faith by godly
conversation and virtuous living, ytme^ seeing our good works, may glorify
thee our heavenly father, to whom be praise for ever.

Amen.
A prayer unto God the son.
O Lord Jesus christ ye son of ye living God, yea, very God himself begotten
of god ye father from everlasting and continuing true and immortal God worlds
without end by thee al things were made both inheauen and in earth, by thee also
they be co^serued and kept in a order, thou art the bryghtnesse of thy fathers
glory thou art the very image of his substance, in thee are hid al ye
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, in ye dwells al fulness, by thee ar we
reconcyled to God ye father, by thee ar we set at peace with him, through ye
blood of the cross, by thee have we free access unto ye glorious throne of
Gods majesty, and by thee are we brought in through faith unto his grace,
wherein we stand and rejoice, in hope of the glory of God: we thank thee for
all thy benefytes, and most humbly beseech thee to give us grace faithfully
to believe in thee, steadfastly to confess thee true God and true man,
earnestlye to acknowledge thee our alone redemer, savior, Satisfier,
Reco^ciler, Intercessor, Mediator and Advocate that we altogether depending on
thee and thy merits, on thy blessed passion, precious death and glorious
resurrection, may study through thy grace, so to order our life in true
holiness and innocence, that at the day of judgment thou may present us both
body and soul unto thy heavenly father, and so for ever and ever placevs in
thy glorious kingdom.

Amen.
Unto God the holy ghost.
O Holy and blessed spirit, which being true and everlasting God, with God the
father and God ye son procedest from them both full of majesty and power,
which also with thy heavenly breath quycknest ye mides of the^ that before were
dead through sin, make merry the hearts of ye faithful penitent, bring
into ye way of truth al such as have erred and are deceived, set at one
such as were at debate, co^ fortest the souls of them ythu^ger and thirst after
righteousness and plenteouslye enrichest them with diverse gifts, which pray unto
thee in the name of Jesus Christ: Purifye our hearts we beseech thee with the
fire of thy love, mortify in us what soever is not thine, renew and garnishe
our minds with thy heavenly benefits and spiritual gifts, that they may be
made thy temples, lead us into all necessary truth, suffer us not to be
carried about with diverse and strange doctrine, but always to remain in that
doctrine, whereof thou alone art ye author, enarme our souls against the crafty
assaults of suttil Satan, against the vain pleasures of the wicked world, and
against the leude lusts of filthy flesh, that we being replenished with thy
holy breath, may do ytoneli, which is acceptable in thy godly sight.

Amen.
Particular prayers to be said of the Magistrates.
FOrasmuch as it is thy godli pleasure (O king of kings, and Lord of Lords)
to appoint me among other a ruler of thy people, give me grace I beseech thee,
so to minister the common weal, and so to execute my office, yt I may please
thee, and hurt no man in all my doings, but judge equally and iustli, rule
according to thy will, show my self a father unto thy people, and so behave my
self in all mine enterprises, yt I seking thy glory, ye furtheraunce of thy
blessed gospel, and the weal of ytsubiectes, may (when thou shall render to
every man according to his deeds) be found blameles in thy sight, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of the ministers of Gods word.
Thou high Priest and O everlasting bishop Jesus Christ, the alone teacher of
all godly truth, and the only Curate of our souls, which by thy holy
word have appointed some of thy congregation to be Ministers and Preachers of
thy blessed law and Glorious gospel, yt by this means, the holy ghost also
working, they may call sinners unto repentance, preach remission of sins in
thy name, persuade unto virtue, and dissuade from vice: forasmuch as it has
pleased thee to call me an unprofitable servant unto that holy office of
ministracion, and to make me a preacher of thy word: I most humbly beseech
thee, to give me thy holy spirit, which may lead me in to all truth,
instruct me with the knowledge of thy holimisteries, and through his heavenly
inspiracion so prepare my heart, and order my tu^g, that I may neither think,
breath, nor speak any thing, but that may turn unto thy glory and the edifying
of thy flock. Grant also that what soever I preach in word, I may fulfill the
same in work unto the example of that thy flock, which thou haste purchased with
thy precious blood, yt when thou the cheef shepeheard shall appear I being
found faithful in my office, may through thy goodness re ceiue ye incorruptible
crown of glory.

Amen.
Of Subjects or Commens.
AS it is thy godly appoi^tment (O Lord God) ytsum should bear rule in this
world to see thy glory set forth, and the common peace kept, so it is thy
pleasure again, that some should be subjects and inferiors to other in their
vocation, although before thee there is no respect of persons. And forasmuch
as it is thy good will to appoint me in the number of subjects, I beseech thee
to give me a faithful and an obedient heart unto the hye powers, yt there may
be found in me no disobedience, no un faithfulness no reason, no falshod, no
dissimulacion, no iusurrectio^, no co^mocio^, no co^spiracy, nor any kind of
rebellion in word or in deed against the civil magistrates but all faithfulness,
obedience, quietness, subjection, humility, and whatsoever else becomes a
subject, that I liui^g here in all lowliness of mind may at the last day
through thy favor be lifted up unto everlasting glory, where thou with the
father and ye holy ghost liueste and raignest very God for ever.

Amen.
Of Fathers and Mothers.
THe fruit of the womb and the multitude of children is thy gift and blessing
(O Lord) given to this end yt they may live to thy glory and the commodity of
their neighbor. For as much therefore as thou of thy goodness have given me
children, I beseech thee give me also grace to train them up even from their
Cradels in thy nourtoure and doctrine, in thy holy laws and blessed
ordinances, that from their very young age they may know thee, believe in thee,
fear and love thee, and diligently walk in thy commandments, unto the
praise of thy glorious name.

Amen.
Of Children.
THou haste given a commandment in thy law, O heavenly father, that children
should honor their fathers and mothers, I most humbly beseech thee, therefore
to breath thy holy spirit into my breast, that I may reverence and honor my
father and mother not oneli with outward gestures of mi body, but also with the
unfeigned affeccio^ of the heart, love them, obey them, pray for them, help them,
and do for the^, both in word and deed, whatsoever lies in my power, that
thou seeing mine unfeigned hearty good will toward my Parents may become my
loving heavenly father, and number me among those thy children, who^ thou have
appointed (from everlasting) heirs of thy glorious kingdom, through thy
well-beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of Masters.
THy commandment is by thine holy Apostle (O most merciful Lord Christ, ye
masters should entreat their servants gently, puttyng away threatninges, and
doing that unto the^, which is just and equal, forasmuch as we also have a
master in heaven with whom there is no respect of persons. Grant I most
heartily pray thee, I may so order my servants that I attempt none
unrighteousness against them, but so use my rule and authority over the^, that I
may always remember that thou art the common Lord of all, and we all thy
servants, again yt I may not forget that we be all brothers having one father
which is in heaven, and look for one glorious kingdom, where thou with the
father and the holy Ghost live and raygnest true and everlasting God for ever.

Amen.
Of Servants.
O Lord we are commanded by thy blessed Apostles, that we should honor and
obey our bodily masters with fear and trembling not only if they be good and
courteous, but also though they be froward, and serve them not unto the eye as
me^ pleasers, but with singlenes of heart, not churlishly answering them again,
nor picking, stealing, or conueying away any part of their goods vniustli,
but showing all good faythfulnes unto our masters, as though we served God and
not men. Grant me grace, I most humbly beseech thee, so to serve my master
and my superiors, that there may be found no fault in me but yt I behauing my
self uprightly, justly, faithfully and truli in my vocacion, may do worship
to the doctrine of thee my God and Savior in all things.

Amen.
Of Mayds.
THere is nothing that becomes a maid better the^ silence, shame fastnes and
chastitye of both body and mind. For these things being once lost, she is no
more a maid but a Strompet in the sight of God: howsoever she disgiseth her
self and dissembleth with the world I therefore most humbly beseech thee (O
merciful Father) from whom comes every good and perfect gift, and without
whom we are able to do nothing, yt thou will so order my tongue, and dispose my
talk yt I speak nothing but that become mi state, age and person, nether that
I delight to hear any talk, that might in any point move me to lewdnes, seeing
that evil words corrupt good manners. Give me also such shaine fastnes as may
pluck me away from the delectacion either of thinking speaking, hearing, seeing,
or doing evil, that my whole delight may be in virtue, in godliness in exchewing
ydlenes, in giving my self continually to some godly exercise, but above all
things in thinking and speaking of thee in reading thy blessed word and
heavenly law, which is a la^tern to my feet and a light to mi paths. Moreover
suffer neither my mind to be defiled with evil thoughts nor my body to be
corrupted with any kind of uncleanness, but give me grace so to order my self in
exchewing idleness and wanton wicked company, ytmy mind being free from evil
affectes, and my body clear from all uncleanness, I may be found a mete temple
for the holy Ghost to inhabit and if it be thy good pleasure hereafter to call
me unto the honorable state of Matrimony, yt I may bring also unto my husband
a pure and undefiled body, and so live with him in thy fear unto ye praise and
glory of thy blessed name.

Amen.
Of Singlemen.
LOrd thou have commanded by thine holy Apostle, that we should abstain from
fornicacion, and that every one of us should know how to keep his vessel,
that is to say his body in holiness and honor and not in the lust of
concupiscence: as do the heathen which know not God: I beseech thee give me
grace to behave my self according to this thy holy commandment* that in
this time of my single life I defile not my body with who redom or with any other
uncleanness: but so order my self with all honesty: and pureness of life, that I
may glorify thee my Lord God both in body and spirit.

Amen.
Of Husbands.
Forasmuch (O heavenly father, as thou have called me from the single life
unto the holy state of honorable wedlock, which is thy good and blessed
ordinance for all them to live in, that have not the gift of contine^cy, and
have given me a woman to wife, that I living with her in thy fear may avoid al
uncleanness, I most hartelye pray thee give me grace to live with her according
to thy godly pleasure. Kill in me al filthy and fleshly lusts. Suffer me not to
delyght in any strange flesh, but to content my self only with her love, to
love her as Christ loved the congregation, to cherishe her as I would cherishe
mine own body, so provide for her according to my ability, to instruct her
with ye knowledge of thy blessed word, quietly and peaceably to live with her,
and to agree together in such perfect concord and unity, as is found among
many members in one body* seeing now yt we also are no more two, but one flesh,
that other seeing our godly and quiet conversation, may her by be provoked to
forsake their filthy living, and so embrace the holy state of honorable wedlock
unto ye glory and praise of thy holy name.

Ame^.
Of Wives.
Lord forasmuch as thou Oof thy Fatherly goodness have vouchedsafe to keep me
from my tender age unto this present and have, now called me from mi single
life unto the holy state of honorable wedlock, that I living therein, might
according to thine ordinance bring forth children unto thy glory: Give me
grace I most entierlye beseech thee to walk, worthy of mi vocacion, to know
ledge my husband to be my head, to be subject unto him, to learn thy blessed
word of him, to reverence him, to obey him, to please him, to be ruled by him,
peaceably and quietly to live with him, to wear such apparel as is mete for
midegree, and by no means to delight in costly Jewels and proud galaunt
vestures, but always to use such clothing as become a sober Christen woman,
circumspectly and warely to look unto my household, that nothing perish through
my negligence, and always have a diligent eye, that no dishonesty, no
wickedness, no ungodliness be committed in my house, but yt in it all things be
ordained according to thy holy will, which art worthy all honor, glory and
praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
Of Householders.
TO have children and servant, is thy blessinge (O Lord) but not to order
the^ according to thy word, deserves thy dredful curse. Grant therefore, that
as you have blessed me with an household, so I may diligently watch that
nothing becommitted of ye same that might offend thy fatherli goodness, and be
an occasion of turning thy blessing into curssi^g but that so manias thou have
committed to my charge, may exchew all vice, embrace all virtue, live in thy
fear, call upon thy holy name, learn thy blessed commandments, hear thy
holy word, and avoiding idleness diligently execute them selves every one in
his office according to their vocacion and calling unto the glory of thy most
honorable name.

Amen.
Of all Christians.
Albeit (O heavenly Father) all we that unfeignedly profess thy holy religion,
and faithfully call on thy blessed name, are thy sons and heirs of
everlasting glory, yet as all the members of a body have not one office, so
likewise we being many and making one body (whereof thy dearly beloved Son
is the head) have not all one gift, neither are we all called to one office,
but as it has pleased ye to distribute, so receive we. We therefore most
humbly pray thee, to send the spirit of love and concord among us, that without
any disorder or debate, eueri one of us may be content we our calling, quietly
live in ye same, study to do good unto all men by the true and dilligent
exercise thereof without to much seking of our own private gain, and so order
our life in all points according to thy godly will, that by well doing we may
stop ye mouths of such foolish and ignorant people, as report us to be evil
dooers, and cause the^ through our good works to glorify the^e our Lord god in
yt dai of visitacion.

Amen.
For the Grace and favor of God.
Whosoever lives with out thy grace and fa uour (O most gracious and favorable
Lord) although for a time he waloweth in all kind of fleshely pleasures, and
abound with to much wordly riches, yet is he nothing else but ye wretched bond
slave of satan, and the vile du^ghil of syn. Al his pleasure is extreme
poison, all his wealth is nothing but plain beggeri. For what felicity can there
be, where thy grace and favor wants* But where thy grace and favor is
present (though the Deuel roar, the world rage, ye flesh swel) there is true
blissednes, unfeigned pleasure and continual wealth. Pour down therefore thy
heavenly grace and fatherly favor upon us, that we being assured of thy
favorable goodness toward us may rejoice and glory in thee, and have merry
hearts when so ever we be most assailed with any kind of adversity, be it
poverty or sickness, loss of friends, or persecution for thy names sake, to
whom be glory for ever.

Amen.
For the gift of the holy Ghost.
SO frayl is our nature, so vile is our flesh, so lewd is our heart, so corrupt
are our affects, so wicked are al our thoughts even from our child hod upward,
yt of our selves we can nether thinck, breath, speak or do any thing yt is
praise worthy in thy sight (O heavenly father) yea, except thou do assist us
with thy merciful goodness all things are so far out of frame in us, that we se
nothing present in our selves but thy heavy displeasure and eternal damnacion.
Uouche safe therefore (O sweet father, to send thy holy spirit unto us, which
may make us new creatures, put away from us al fleshly lusts, fill our hearts with
new affects and spiritual mocio^s, and so altogether renew us both in body and
soul through his godly in spiracion, ytwe may dye unto old Adam, and live
unto thee in newnes of life serving thee our Lord God in holiness and
righteousness all ye days of our life.

Amen.
For the true knowledge of our selves.
IT is written in thy holy Gospel, most loving Savior yt thou cammest into
this world not to call ye righteous, that is such as justify the^ selves, but
sinners unto repentance. Suffer me not therefore (o lord) to be in ye number of
those iusticiaris, which boasting their own righteousness, their own wurks,
and merits, despise that righteousness that comes by faith, which alone is
alowable before thee. Give me grace to know and to knowledge my self as I am
even ye son of wrath by nature, a wretched sinner, and an un profitable
servant, and wholly to depend on thy merciful goodness with strong and unshaken
faith, yt in this world, thou may continually call me unto true repentance,
seeing I continually sin, and in ye world to come bring me unto everlasting
glory.

Amen.
For a pure and clean Heart.
THe heart of man naturalli is lewd and unsearchable through the multitude of
sins, which as in a stinking du^ghil lies buried in it, in so much that no
man is able to say: mi heart is clean and I am clean from syn. Remove from me
therefore (O heavenly Father) my lewd, stony, stuburn, stinking and unfaithful
heart. Creat in me a clean heart free from al noisome and ungodly thoughts. Breath
into my heart by thy holy spirit, godly and spiritual mocions, that out of the
good treasure of the heart, I may bring forth good things un to the praise and
glory of thy name.

Amen.
For a quiet conscience.
THe wicked is like a ragi^g sea which is never in quiet, neither is there any
peace to the ungodly, but such as love thy law (O Lord) they have plenty of
peace, they have quiet minds and contented consciences, which is the greatest
treasure under ye Sun given of thee to so mani as seek it at thy hand with true
faith and continual prayer. Give me (O Lord) that joyful Jewel, even a quiet
mind and a free merry conscience ytI being free from the damnable accusacions
of Satan, from the crafty perswacions of the world, from the subtle
entysements of the flesh, from the heavy curs of the law, and fully persuaded
of thy merciful goodness toward me through faith in thy Son Christ Jesus, may
quietly serve thee both bodyly and ghostly in holiness and righteousness all the
days of my life.

Amen.
For Faith.
Forasmuch as nothing pleases thee, that is done with out faith, appereit
before the blind world never so beautyful and commendable, but is counted in
thy sight sinful and damnable, yea, the self syn and damnacion, this is most
humbly to desire thee (O father) for Christ's sake, to breathe into my heart by
thy Spirit, this most precious and singular gift of faith, which works by
Charity, whereby also we are justified and received into thy favor, yt I truly
believing in thee, and fully persuaded of the truth of thy holy word, may be
made thy son and inheritour of everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
For Charity.
THy cognisaunce and badge, whereby thy Disciples are known (O Lord and
savior Jesus Christ) is charity or love, which comes out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. I pray thee therefore give me this
Christen love, and perfect charity, that I may love thee my Lord God with all
my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my stre^gths, doing
always of very love yt only, which is pleasant in thy sight: again that I
may love my neighbor and Christen Brother as my self, wishing as well to him
as to my self, and ready at al times to do for him, what so ever lies in my
power, that when we al shall stand before thy dreadful iudgyng place, I being
known by thy badge, may be nu^bred among thy disciples, and so through thy
mercy receive the reward of eternal glory.

Amen.
For Patience.
WHen thou liuedst in this world (O Lord) Christ, thou shewedst thy self a
mere mirror of perfect patience sufferi^g quietly not ye spiteful words, but
also ye cruel deeds of thy most cruel enemies forgeuing the^ and praying for
the^, which most tyranlike handled thee. Give me grace (O thou most meek and
loving lamb of God) to follow this thy patience, quietly to bear the slanderous
words of mine adversaries, patiently to suffer the cruel deeds of mine
enemies, to forgive the^, to pray for them, yea, to do good for the^, and by
no means to go about once to avenge my self, but rather give place unto
wrath, seeing yt vengeance is thine, and you wilt reward, seeing also that thou
helpest them to their right that suffer wrong, that I thus patiently suffering
all evils, may after ward reign with thee in glory.

Amen.
For Humility.
WHat have we, O heavenly Father, that we have not received* Every good gift,
and every perfect gift is from above and comes down from thee, which art the
father of lights. Seeing then all yt we have is thine whether it pertain to
the body or to the soul, how can we be proud, and boast our selves of that
which is none of our own seeing also ytas to give, so to take away again thou
art able and wilt, whensoever thy gifts be abused, and thou not knowledged to
be the giver of them. Take therefore away from me all pride and hautynesse of
mind and graffe in me true humility, that I may knowledge thee the giver of al
good things, be tha^k full unto thee for them, and use them unto thy glory and
the profit of my neighbor. Grant also, that all my glory and reioysynge
may be in no earthly creatures, but in thee alone which do mercy,
equity, and ryghtuousnes upon earth. To thee alone be all glory.

Amen.
For Mercifulnes.
THy deerelye beloved son in his holy Gospel exhorted us to be merciful
eue^ as thou our heavenly Father art merciful and promisest that if we be
merciful to other, we shall obtain merci of thee, which art the father of
mercies, and God of al consolacion. Grant therefore that for as much as thou art
our Father, and we thy children, we may resemble thee in all our life and
conuersacio^, and that as thou art beneficial and liberal, not only to ye good,
but also to the evil: so we likewise may show our selves merciful gentil and
liberal to so many as have need of our healp, ytat the dredful day of dome we
may be found in the number of those merciful, whom thou shall appoint by thy
only begotten son to go into everlasting life, to who^ with thee and the
holy ghost be all honor and praise.

Amen.
For true godlynes.
IN thy law (O thou maker of heaven and earth) thou have appointed us a way to
walk in, and have commanded that we should tourn neither on the right hand, nor
on the left, but do according to thy good will and pleasure, with out adding
of our own good entents and fleshly imaginacions. As thou have commanded, so
give me grace good Lord, to do. Let me neither follow mine own will, nor the
fancies of other men, neither let me be begiled with the visar of old
customs, long vsages, fathers, decres, ancient laws, nor any other thing
that ffghteth with thy holy ordinances and blessed commandment, but
faithfully believe and steadfastly confess yt, to be the true godliness, which is
learned in thy holy Bible, and according unto that to order my life unto the
praise of thy holy name.

Ame^.
For the true understanding of Gods word.
O Lord as thou alone art the Author of the holy scriptures, so likewise can
no man, although never so wise, politic and learned, understand them,
except he be taught by thy holy spiryt, which alone is the Scholemaster to lead
the faithful into all truth. Uouchesafe therefore I most humbly beseech thee
to breath into my heart thy blessed Spirit, which may renew the senses of my
mind, open my wits, reuele unto me the true understanding of thy holy
mysteries* and plant in me such a certain and infailyble knowledge of thy
truth, that no subtle perswasyon of man's wysdom may pluck me from thy truth,
but that as I have learned the true understanding of thy blessed will, so I may
remain in the same continually, come life, come death, unto the glory of thy
blessed name.

Amen.
For a life agreeable to our knowledge.
AS I have prayed unto thee (O heavenly Father) to be taught the true
understanding of thy blessed word by thy holy spirit, so I most entierly
beseech thee to give me grace to lead a life agreeable to my knowledge. Suffer
me not, to be of the number of them which profes that they know God with their
mouth, but deny him with their deeds. Let me not be like unto that son which
said unto his father, that he would labor in his vineyard, and yet labored
nothing at al, but went abroad lottering idely. Make me rather like unto that
good and fruteful land which yeldeth again her sede with great increase, that
men seeing my good works, may glorify thee my heavenly father

Amen.
For the health of the body
I Feel in my self (O merciful Savior) how grievous a prison this my body is
unto my Soul, which contynually wysheth to be loosoned out of this byle
carcass and to come unto thee, seeing it has here no rest, but is at every
hour vexed with the filthy lusts of the flesh, with the wicked assaults of
the devil and the world, and is never at quiet but always in danger to be
overcome of her enemies, were it not preserved of thy goodness by the mynistery
and service doing of thy holy Angels. Notwythsta^ding (O most loving lord)
forasmuch as it is thy good pleasure that my body and soul shall still remain
here together as yet in this vale of mysery: I beseech thee to preserve my
soul from all vice, and my body from al sycknes that I enjoying through thy
benefyte the health both of body and soul, may be the more able to serve thee
and my neighbor in such works as are acceptable in thy sight.

Amen
For a good name.
NOthing becomes ye professor of thy name better (O heavenly Father) the^ so
to behave him self according to his professyon, that he may be well reported
of them, that be of the household of Faith, yea such synceritie and pureness of
life ought to be in them which profes thy holy name, that the very adversaries
of thy truth should be ashamed once to mutter a gaynst them. Give me grace
therefore I most intierly desire thee so to frame my life according to the
rule of thy blessed word, that I may give no man occasyo^ to speak evil of me,
but rather so live in my vocacion, that I may be an exsample to other, to live
Godly and virtuously unto the honor and praise of thy glorious name.

Amen.
For a compitent living.
ALthough I doubt not of thy fatherly provision for this my poor and nedy
life, yet for as much as you have both commanded and taught me by thy dear
Son to pray unto thee for things necessary for this my life. I am bold at
this present to come unto thy divine majesty most humbly beseching thee that
as thou have given me life, so thou will give me meat and drink to sustayn
the same. Again as thou have given me a body, so thou will give me clothes to
cover it, that I having sufficyent for my living, may the more fre ly and with
the quieter mind apply my self unto thy service and honor.

Amen,
For a pacient and thankful heart in sickness.
WHo^ thou love (O lord) him do thou chasten, yea every son that thou
receiuest, thou scourgest, and in so doing: thou offerest thy self unto him,
as a father un to his Son. For what son is he whom the father chaste neth
not? Grant therefore I most heartily pray thee, that whensoever thou layest thy
cross on me, and visitest me with thy loving scourge of sickness. I may by no
means strive against thy fatherly pleasure, but patiently and thankfully abide
thy chastiseme^t, ever being persuaded, that it is for ye health both of my
body and soul, and that by this means thou wurkest my salvation, subduest the
flesh unto the spirit, and make me a new crea ture, that I may hereafter
serve thee the more freely, and continue in thy fear unto my lyfes end.

Amen.
For strength against the deuell, the world, and the flesh.
O Lord God, the Devil goes about like a roaring Lio^, seeking whom he may
devour. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit. The world persuades un to
vanities, yt we may forget thee our Lord God, and so for ever be damned. Thus
are we miserably on every side beseeged of cruel and vnrestful enemies, and
like at eve ri moment to perish, if webe not defended with thy godly power
against their tira^ny. I therefore poor and wretched siner dispairi^g of mine
own strengthes, which in deed are none, most heartily pray thee to endue me
with strength from above, that I may be able through thy help with strong faith
to resist Satan, with serue^t prayer to mortify ye raging lusts of the Flesh,
with continual meditation of thy holy law, to avoid the foolish vanities and
transitory pleasures of this wicked world, that I through thy grace be ing set
at liberty from the power of mine enemies, may live and serve thee in holiness
and righteousness all the days of my life.

Amen.
For the help of Gods holy Angels.
AN infinite number of wicked Angels are there, (O Lord Christ) which
without ceasing seek my de struccio^, Against this exceeding great multitude of
evil spirits, se^d thou me thy blessed and heavenly angels, which may pitche
their te^ts round about me, and so deliver me from their tirany.

Thou (o lord) have devoured hell, and ouercom ye Prince of darkness with all
his ministers, yea and that not for thy self, but for them that be leave in
thee. Suffer men of therefore to be overcome of Satan, and of his servant,
but rather let me triu^phe over them (yt I through strong faith and the help of
the blessed angel having the victory of the hellish armi) may with a ioisul
heart sai: Death where is thy sti^g? hell where is thy victory? and so for ever
and ever magnifi thy holy name.

Am^
A prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, called Conditor celi et terrae.
OH maker of heaven and earth, king of kings, and Lord of Lords, which of
nothing did ma^e me to thy image and likeness, and did redeem me with thine
own precious blood, who^ I a siner am not wurthy to name, neither to call
upon, neither with my heart to think upon, humbli I desire thee, and meekly pray
thee, that gentli thou do behold me thy wicked servant, and have merci on
me, which hadest merry on the woman of Ca^nane, and of Mari Magda le^, which
did forgive the (...), and the thief hanging on ye cross. Unto the I confess, O
most holy father, my si^nes which if I would, I cannot hide from thee. Have
mercy on me Christ, for I a wretch have sore of fended thee, in pride, in
covetousness, in glotony, in lechery, in vainglory, in hatred, in envy,
inadultry, in theft, in lying in backbiti^g, in sporting, in dissolute and
wanton laughing, in idle wurds, in hearing, in tasting, in touching, in
thinking, in sleping, in wurking, and in all ways, in which I a fraill man,
and most wretched sinner might sin. Mi default, my most grievous default.
Therefore I most humbly pray and beseech thy ge^tlenes, which (for my health)
descended from heaven, which did hold up king David, that he should not fall
into sin. Have mercy on me, oh Lord have merci on me (O Christ) the which
did for give Peter, that did forsake thee. Thou art my creator and my
helper, my maker, and my redeemer, mi governor, my father, my lord, my god, and
my king. Thou art my hope, my trust, my gouerner, my help, my comfort, my
strength, my defense, my redemption, my life, my health and my resurrection.
Thou art my stedfastnes, my refuge or succor, my light and my help, I most
humbly and heartily desire and pray thee help me, defend me, make me strong and
comfort me, make me steadfast, make me merry, give me light and visit me, revive
me again, which am dead. For I am thy maki^g and thy wurk (oh Lord) despise me
not, I am thy servant thy bondma^, although evil, although vnwurthy, and a
sinner. But whatsoever I am, whether I be either good or bad, I am ever thine.
Therefore to whom shall I flee, except I flee unto the if thou cast me of, who
shall or will receive me? If thou despise me, and turn thy face from me, who
shall look upon me? Recognize and knowledge me? (although vnwurthy (coming to
thee, allthough I be vile and unclean, for if I be vile and unclean, thon can
make me clean, If I be sick, thou can heal me. If I be dead and buried, thou
can revive me. For thy merci is much more, the^ mine iniquity, thou can
forgive me more the^ I can offend. Therefore, Oh lord, do not consider nor
have respect to the number of my sins, but according to the greatness of thy
merci forgive me, and have mercy on me most wretched sinner. Say unto my soul,
I am thy health, which said: I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he live and be converted, and turn to thee. Oh lord be not angry with me, I
pray thee most meek father for thy great mercy, I most humbely secheech thee,
that thou bring me to the blis, that never shall ceas.

Ame^.
For the glory of heaven.
THe joys (o lord) which thou have prepared for them yt love thee, no eye
has seen, no ear has heard nether is any heart able to think But as the joys
ar great and unspeakable, so ar there few that do enjoy them. For straight is
the gate and narow is the way, which leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.

Notwithstanding, O heavenly father, thou have a little flock, to whom it is
thy pleasure to give ye glorious kingdom of heaven. There is a certain number
of sheep, that hear thy voice, whom no man is able to pluck out of thy hand,
which shall never perish to who^ also thou shall give eternal life.

Make me therefore: O lord of that number, whom thou from everlasting have
predestinate to be saved, whose names also are written in the book of life.
Pluck me out of the company of ye stinkking gotes, which shall stand on thy
left hand and be damned, and place me among those thy sheep, which shall stand
on thy right hand and be saved. Grant me this, o mer cifull Father, for thy
dear sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. So shall I enjoying this singular
benefit at thy hand, and being placed in thy glorious kingdom, sing per
petuall praises to thy godly majesty, which live and reignest with thy
dearly beloved son, and the holy ghost one true and everlasting God. etc.

A thanks giving unto God for all his benefits.
THy benefits, toward me O most loving Father, are so great and infinite
whether I have respect vntomy body or unto my soul, that I find not in my
self how to recompense any part of thine unspeakable goodness toward me. But you
which need none of my goods, knowing our beggary, yea ournothing, requirest
of us for a recompense of thy kindness only ye sacrifice of praise and thanks
giving, o lord and merciful father, what wurthi thanks am I pore and wretched
si^ner able to give the? Notwtsta^ding trusting on thy merci and favorable ki^d
nes, I offer unto thee in the name of Christ the sacrifice of praise, ever
thanking the most heartily for all thy benefits, which thou have be stowed
upon me thine unprofitable servant from the beginning of my life unto this
present hour, most humbly beseeching the to continue thy loving kindness to
ward me, and to give me grace to walk wurthy of this thy fatherly goodness,
that when thou shall call me out of this careful life, I may enjoy yt thy
most singular last benefit, which is everlasting glory through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the ho li ghost be al honor and praise
for ever and ever.

Amen.
A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of all me^ living and the everlasting
life of the^ which die in thy faith. I wretched sinner give and submit my self
wholly unto thy most blessed will. And I being sure that the thing ca^ not perish
which is committed unto thy merci. O lord, give me grace that willingly I may
leave this fraill and wicked flesh in hope of the resurrection, which in
better wise shall restore it to me again, I beseech thee, most merciful lord
(Jesus christ) that thou will by thy grace make strong my soul against all
temptacions. And that thou will cover and defend me with the buckler of thy
mercy against all ye assaults of the devil. I see and knowledge ye there is in
my self no help of salvation. But al my confidence, hope, and trust is in thy
most merciful goodness, I have no merits nor good wurks, which I may allege
before thee. Of my sins and evil wurks (alas) I see a great hepe, but through
thy mercy I trust to be in the number of them to whom thou will not impute
their sins: but take and accept me for rightuos and just and to be ye
enheritour of everlasting life. Thou merciful Lord wast borne for my sake, you
did suffer both hunger and thirst, for my sake thou did preach and
teach, thou did pray and fast for my sake, thou did al good wurks and
deeds for my sake. Thou sufferedst most grievous pains and torments for my
sake. And finally, thou gave thy most precious body to die, and thy blood to
be shed on the cross for my sake. Now most merciful savior, let all these
things profit me, which thou freely have given me, that have given thy self
for me. Let thy blood cleanse and wash away the spots and foulnes of my sins.
Let thy right ousnes hide and cover my unrighteousness. Let the merits of thy
passion and blood be satisfaction for my sins Give me Lord thy grace that my
faith and salvation in thy blood, waver not in me, but ever be firm and
constant, that the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting never decay in me,
that charity wax not cold in me, finally, that the weakness of my flesh be
not overcome with fear of death. Grant me (merciful savior) that when death
has shut up the eyes of my body, yet that the eyes of my soul may still
behold and look upon thee, that when death has taken away the use of my tung
and spech, yet that my heart may cry and say unto thee. In manus tuas domine
commendo spiritum meu^, that is to say (O Lord, into thy hands I give and
commit my soul. Domine Jesus accipe spiritum meum. Lord Jesus receive my soul
unto thee.

Amen.
Certain Godly Meditations made in the form of prayers. by S. Augustine which
if thou will read them quietly with a fervent spirit, they will stir thee much
to devotion.
A prayer wherein, through co^memoration of Christ's passion, we desire pardon
of our sins and continuance in virtue and godliness.
Behold (O pitiful father) thy most pitiful son, which suffered for me being
so wicked. Be hold (o most merciful king) who suffers, and remember (as thou
art loving and kind) for whom he suffered. Is not this (O my Lord) that
innocent whom allthough he were thy son, thou did deliver to redeem and
raunso^ a servant? Is not this the author and beginner of life, which being
led as a sheep to be killed, and being made obedient to thee, even unto
death, was not afraid to take upon him the most cruel and sharp kind of
death? Call to remembrance (O thou distributor of all health) that this is he
whom (although thou did beget him by thy power, yet not withstanding) thou
would have to be made partaker of mine infirmity and weakness. Truly this
same is thy Godhed which did take upon him my nature, which was hanged upon
the gibbet of tourment or cross, which in the flesh which he had taken upon
him, did suffer sorrowful punishment. Turn the eyes of thy majesty (O Lord my
God) toward the wurk of thine unspeakable pity. Look upon thy dear son,
whose whole body is stretched forth. Mark ye harmles and pure hands which do
drop and distill down innocent blood. And I beseech thee, be pacified and
pardon the wicked deeds which my hands have committed. Consider his bare and
naked side, being thrust through cruelly with a spear, and renew and wash me
with the holy fountain or well which I believe did flow from thens. Mark the
unspotted feet which have not stand in the way of sinners, but always have
walked in thy law, how they are perced through with sharp nails, and make perfect
my steps in thy paths, and make me (of thy loving kindness) to hate all ways of
iniquity. Remove from me the way of iniquity, and make me (of thy mercy) to
choose ye way of truth. I beseech thee (o king of holy men) by this holy one of
all holy ones, and by this my redemer: to make me run the way of thy
commandments, that I may be united and knit unto him in spirit, which did
not disdain to be clad in my flesh. Do thou not look upon and mark (o
pitiful father) the head of thy most deerly beloved son, a yungma^, how it
leaned upon his shoulder when he was past the most precious death? Behold (o
my most gentle creator) the humanity and gentleness of thy beloved son, and
have compassion upon the feebleness of me thy weak and feeble handy wurk. Behold
O most glorious parent) the torn and rent members of thy most kind and
loving child, and remember gently what substance I am of. Behold the pains of
God and man, and release and louse man (which is thy creature) out of miserye
and bondage of sin. Behold the punishment of him that did redeem and pardon the
offense of them that be redeemed. This is he (O Lord) whom thou did strike
for the sins of thy people although he be thy well-beloved, in whom was found
no gile, and yet nevertheless was he rekened amongst them that were full of
iniquity.

A prayer wherein man confesses him self to be the cause of Christ's passion.
WHat have thou committed (O Lord) that thou should be so judged? What have
thou offeded that thou should be so cru elli handled and ordered? What was
thy fault? what was thine offense? what was the cause of thy death? what was
thoccasion of thy condemnation? I (Lord) I am the cause of thy sorrow, the
fault is in me that thou wast kill led for. I have deserved thy death I
committed the offenses that were avenged upon thee. Oh marvelous kind of
judgment, and unspeakable disposition or ordering of mysteries. The un just man
offe^deth: and the rightwise is punished. The gilti does evil and the innocent
is beaten. The evil does trespass and the good is condemned. That which the
evil man deserves: the same does the just suffer. That which the servant does
amiss the master makes amends. That which man trespasseth: God suffers it. O
(thou which art ye sone of god) how low did thine humility des cend? How
greatly did thy charity (even as it were) wax hot and burn toward us. How
far did thy pity proceed? Whither did thy beningnitie, and gentelnes grow and
extend? How far did thy love stretche? How far came thy compassion? for I did
wrongfully: and thou wast punished. I commit ted the mischeuous deeds: and they
were avenged upon thee. I did the faut: and thou submitted thy self to the
torments. I was proud, and thou wast humble and meek, I was swelled and pufte
up, thou wast extenuated and ap paired. I was disobedient, nevertheless thou
being obedient, bare the pains and punishments of disobedience. I obeyed and
was, as it were a servant to al exces and glotony, and thou wast punished with
scarsitie and lack of food. The tree did draw me violentli unto unlawful
concupiscence and desires, but perfect charity led thee unto punishment. I
presumed being forbidden: but thou did smart therefore. I took my pleasure,
with delicatenes: thou wast vexed with the cross. I abound and have plenty of al
pleasures: thou art all to torn with naites. I do fast the plesaunt sweetness
of the apple: and thou the bitterness of gall. Behold (O king of glory) mine
iniquity and ungodliness: and thy pity and goodness is manifest. Behold mine
vnrightwisnes: and thy justice is plainly declared. What thing (O my king and
my God) shall I re^dre unto thee, for all those things which thou have bestowed
upon me? for nothing can be found in the heart of man, that may wurthely
recompense such rewards. Can ma^ns wit excogitate or imagine any thing that is
wurthy to be compared unto thy divine mercy* Nether is it the office of a
creature to go about to recompense fully and justly the aid and help of a
creator. There is truly (O son of God in this thy merueilous dispensation and
appointments) somewhat in which my frailnes may help a little, if so be that my
mind once pricked and stirred by thy visitacion do punish the flesh, with the
vices also and evil concupiscences thereof: and this thing, if thou will grant
and give me grace to do, then shall it begin as it were to suffer and sustein
sorrows and greefs, because ytthou also did vouchsafe to die for my sin.
And so by the victori of the inward man, it shall be armed (thou being a
captain) for thexternall and outward victory, forasmuch as (the spiritual
persecucion once ouercom) it shall not be afraid, for thy sake to be obedient
unto the material sword and cross of this world. And so the sle^dernes of my
state and condition (if it please thy good nes) shall be able according to the
little power thereof, to answer unto the greatness and excellency of my creator.
And this is the heavenly medicine (O good Jesus) this is (as it were a
preservative of thy love. This I beseech thee, by thine accustomed and ancient
mercies, to pour into my wounds, (the foul and filthy matter of the venomous
contagion and infectio^ once cast away, which may refresh and restore me to my
former purity and clennes, that when I have fasted of the plesa^t sweetness
which is to abide in thee) it may make me to despise and utterly set naught by
the enticements of this world, and to fear (for thy sake) none adversities
thereof, and that I (remembering thine everlasting nobility and excellency) may
always abhor and disdain the troubles of this transitory world. Let no thing
(I beseech thee) be delectable unto me, nor plese me without thee. Let no
precious nor beutiful thing be acceptable unto me but thee. Let all things (I
beseech thee) be counted as vile, and of no estimation unto me, without the.
That which is against thy nature: let it be irkso^ and grievous also unto me,
and that which pleases thee, let it be continually desired of me. Let it irk
me to rejoice without thee, and let it delight me to be sad for thy sake Let thy
name be an hartning unto me, and the remembrance of thee, a consolacion and
confort. Let my tears be made unto me as bread both day and night, serching
thy iustificacions. Let the law of thy mouth be better unto me, the^ thousands
of gold and silver. Give me an ardent desire and love to obey thee and an
extreme hatred to resist thee. I require thee (O my hope) for all thy pity and
goodnesses sake to have mercy upon mine impitie and wickedness. Make open mine
ears to thy co^mau^deme^ts, and let not mine heart be inclined (I beseech thee
by thy holy name) to any evil thing, to be minded as the ungodly or wicked
men. I re quire the also by thy merueilous humility, that I be not moved with
pride, nor yet with sinners.

Here does man declare unto God the father, that the Passion of his son, was
for his reconciliation and atonement with God.
BEhold (O almighty God, father of my Lord I beseech thee of thy beningnitie
and gentleness to have mercy upon me, because of ye most precious thing that I
could find, the same I have offered devoutly unto thee, the thing of most
estemacion, ytI could imagine, I have presented it humbly unto thee. I have left
nothing, but I have declared it to thy majesty. There is nothing remaining
that I may ad more, because I have committed and be taken my whole hope unto
thee. I have sent unto thee my advocate and spokes man, even thy well beloved
son. I have sent thy glorious child to be a mediator betwix me and thee. I
have set (I say) an intercessour by whom I trust to get pardon and forgeuenes
of my sins. I have sent wurd unto wurd (that is) God unto God, according to
that which saint Ihon has in ye beginning of his gospel, where he calls God
the wurd, saying in the beginning, was the wurd and the wurd was with God, and
God was the wurd. etc. which wurd (as I have said) was sent for my misdedes.
And I have rehearsed unto thee the passion of thy most holy son, which
passion I believe was suffered for me. I believe that the godhed which was sent
of thee did take upon him, mine humanity and nature, in the which he thought
not scorn to suffer buffets, bendes, spittings, mocks, yea, he took upon him to
suffer ye cross, nails and dart. I believe also that his ma^hod being in this
my nature during his infancy was trobled with creeping and scraulings, and was
wrapped in clothes after the manner of other children, was vexed in his youth,
with labors made lene, with waking and fastings, weried with iourneying,
afterward whipped and all to torn and rent with diverse kinds of punishments,
rekened amongst the dead, and when it was endued with the glory of
resurrection, he carried it into the joys of heaven, and placed it upon the
rightha^d of thy majesty. (This I say) he is my manhod, wai and means of
pacifying and appeasing thee and thy way and means of having mercy upon me.
Mercifully look upon, hear the son which thou did beget and the bond
servant which he redeemed. Behold here a creator, and do not despise a
creature. Receive the shepherd welcomed with a gentle and loving countenance,
and mercifully look upon the sheep which he has brought home upon his own
shoulders. This is that most faithful shepherd which by mani and diverse
labors and travails over steep hills and through hedlong and deep valies did
search for his own sheep that was straide away, which also when he had found
it faint and allmoste dead through long wanderyng, gat him self under it with
great reioising, and making it fast unto him with a merueilous bond of
charity, lifted it up out of the depth of confusion and brought it home to the
nintie and nine. Behold (O Lord) my king and God almighty, behold a good
shepherd, which re^dreth to thee, that which thou committed to his charge. He
took upon him through thine ordinance to save man, who^ he has delivered unto
the clean and pure from all spots through the washing in his blood. Lo thy
most deerly beloved son has reconciled unto thee thy ha^dy wurk, which was
gone astray far out of the way. Lo a gentle shepherd brings again to thy
flock, him that the violent pirate and robber had driven away. He has brought
unto thy sight, ye servant who^ his own conscience had made to ru^ away, that
he which by him self had deserved punishment, by thy son being his
sollicitour has deserved forgeuenes, unto who^ also for his offenses
everlasting fire was due: nevertheless being a soldier under such a captain,
he does hope to be brought home to his own country. I was able (O holy
Father) by my self to offend thee, but I was not able of my self to pacify and
appese thee. Thy well-beloved son (O my God) was made my helper, by taking upon
him mine humanity, to ye intent he might cure mine infirmity, that whereof the
first occasion of thy wrath did spring: of the same, he might offer up to thee
a Sacrifice of praise. And that he might re^dre and make me also well pleasing
to to thy goodness by that thing, in the which he sitting now on thy right hand,
did always show and declare him self to be equal with my substance, and as it
were fellow with the same. Lo my hope, behold, in whom is all my trust. If thou
despise me (as it were right) for mine iniquity: yet look upon me (at the least
wise) mercifully for the charity of thy beloved son. Give heed to thy son,
whereby thou may have mercy upon thy bond servant. Look upon the sacrament of
flesh: and pardon the offenses of flesh. How often so ever thou do remember
the wounds of thy blessed son: so often (I beseech thee) let mine in iquities
be hid. And because flesh has stirred thee to anger: let flesh (I beseech
thee) move thee to mercy, that like as flesh has seduced and led me to sin:
so flesh may get and obtein for me remission For certainly it is much ytmine
iniquity has deserved, but much more is it, that the goodness of my redemer
may even of right require. Mine unrighteousness is great, but his righteousness is
bigger. For look how much god is superior unto man: even so much is my malice
and evil inferior unto his goodness both in quality and quantity. For what
have I sinned being a man: that the son of God being made man has not
redeemed? what pride could be in me so exceeding hie: but such humility as was
in him, should bring it down? what power of death was there in me so great,
but the punishment which the Son of God suffered upon the cross migght de face
it and utterly destroy it? Truly my God, if the sins of sinful man should be
wayed in a just and equal balance with the love and favor that was in our
redemer toward us: the East is not so far distant from the West, nor the
innermost part of the earth so much separated from the upper most part of
the heaven: as they should be unlike, so much les should mine iniquity be,
then is his goodness. Now (O most noble creator of light) now parde^ mine
offenses for the unmeasurable travails and pains that thy beloved son did
sustein.

Now (I beseech thee) let his goodness be set against my wickedness, his
modesty and temperau^ce: against mine ungracious frowardnes, and his meeknes
against my ferse cruelty. Let his humility: recompense my pride, his
patience: mine impacience, his gentleness: mine unkind churlishnes, his
obedience: my disobedience, his quyetnes: mine unquietness, his plesau^t
towardnes: my bitter frowardnes, his sweet facility and gentleness: mine anger
and freating fumes, to conclude let his charity: make amends for my hemous
and dedetestable cruelty.

Amen.
A devout Prayer to the holy Ghost.
NOw (O almighty and holy Ghost) which art the love of the divine power, the
holy participator and partner with the almighty father, and his most blessed
son, the most merciful comforter of the sorrowful, I beseech thee to slide
by thy mighty power into thinward parts of mine heart, that thou dwelling
there, may make glad, and as it were lighten every dark corner of the neglect
and forletten co^tage, with the bright shining of thy light, and that in visiting
ye same, you would ornate and deck with ye plenteousnes of thy dew ye
loathsome places thereof, which be corrupted with filthiness. Kin del the preuy
wounded parts of the inner man, with thy holsom flames and with pearcing the
in ward parts of my soul entrails with the dart of thy love. Feed all the
inner parts bo the of my mind and body by the illuminating and lightening
with ye fire of thy holy and fervent love. Give me to drink of thy most
pleasant river, to the intent I may have no lust to taste any worldly things
which be mixed with poison. Give sentence with me (o lord) and defend my
cause against the ungodly nation. Teach me to do thy will because thou art my
God. For I believe that in who^ so ever thou do dwell: thou buildest an house
in him for the Father also and the Son. Blessed is that man that gets such
a gest, because that by thee, ye father and the son also will dwell and abide
with him. Come now (O most loving co^forter of my sorrowful soul) which art a
pro tector in all necessities and an help in troubles and adversities Como
purger of sins, healer and curer of wou^des. Come the strength of the fraill
and feeble, the releeuer and raiser up of the^ that slide. Come the instructor
and reacher of the humble and meek, the destroyer and plucker down of the proud
and stubbern. Com the good and kind father of the fatherles, the gentle judge
of widows. Come thou which art a gide unto them that are tossed in the waves
of this tempestuous world, like as a bright and notable star is to them that
sail on the sea, an haven unto the^ that are afraid of shipwrak. Com the
wurship and honor of all them that live, the only health of the dead. Come most
holy ghost, come and have mercy on me, make me meet for thee, and mercifully
grant unto me according to ye multitud of thy great mercies ytmy baseness may
please thy majesty, and my weakness thy allmighty power, for Jesus Christ my
sauioures sake, which with the fathers and thine unity lives and reigns
world without end.

Amen.
A prayer to the holy Trinity.
WIth all my heart and mouth do I confess, praise and bless thee, O God the
father vnbegot ten, and thee, O God the son only begotten, also thee, O holy
ghost and comfortour, to thee be glory in the world of worlds.

Amen.
An acknowledging of almighty God and his Majesty.
O Most high Trinity one only power and undivided Ma iesty, our God; God
almighty I the abject and hin most of al thy servant, confess and acknowledge
thee, and being the least member of thy church, I wurship thee with a due
sacrifice of praise, for as much as I am able and can, according to that which
thou have vouchsafed to endue me wtal. And for as much as I am destitute of
outward gifts to offer unto the. Those vows of praise which I have of the
gift of thy mercy: behold, willingly and gladly I offer them to thee, which be
an unfeigned faith and a pure co^sciece. I believe therefore with all my heart (O
king of heaven) and Lord of the earth, and with my mouth do I confess thee,
the father, the son and holy ghost, to be three in persons, and one in
substance, the true and very God almighty, of one simple, in corporal and
inuinsible nature, incomprehensible and of such a nature as is not in a place,
as other natures be, and that thou have nothing superior or above thy self.
or lower, or any thing bigger then thy self. But in all manner of means perfect
with out all spot of deformity, and that thou art great without quantity,
good without quality, ever lasting without time, life without death, strong
without infirmity or wekenes, true without lying, present in every place with
out any situatio^ or being placed in any place, to be al eueri where without
place, fulfilling all things without stretchi^g forth thy hand: going every
where without any contradiction or gain saying, passing over al things
without moving, abiding win all things without any kind of proportion, making
al things, having need of nothing, governing al things without labor, giving
all things their beginning, having no beginning thy self. Making all things
mutable and variable, thy self being without all kind of mutabilitie, in
greatness with out measure in power almighty, in goodness the cheef and best, in
wisdom inestimable, in counsels, intentes and purposes: terrible and fearful.
In judgments most upright and just, in cogitations and thoughts most secret,
in wurdes true, in wurkes holy, in mercies abundant and plentiful, toward
offenders most patie^t, to ward the penitent and those that be sorry for their
sins most gen tle and loving. Always the same everlasting and continually
continuing immortal, and in commutable impossible to be changed or altered,
whom nether the amplitude or largenes of places does make bigger, nor the short
nes or littlenes of places lesser, nor any places or corners, can co^ teine or
pres together, neither does thy will or intent vary or alter, nor familiarity
or acquai^tance corrupt thee, nor sorrowful things trouble or amase the: nor
glad things make thee plesaunt or frolike (as a man would say) from thee can
forgetfulness take nothing, nor mindfulnes, or remembrance give any thing,
nether are things passed unto us passed also unto thee, nor things which to us
are to come, come toward thee, for nether beeginning does give any beginning
to thee, nor time any increase, nor yet chance gives thee any end. But before
all worlds and in worlds and by worlds into everlasting, thou do live and
thou have continual praise and perpetual glory, most hie power and singular
honor, everlasting king dom and rule and imperie without end, through the
infinite and vnwery and immortal world of worlds.

After what sort God the father vouchedsafe to help mankind, and of the
incarnation of the wurd, which is Christ, and of the giving of thanks.
HItherto (O almighty God the beholder and sercher of mine heart) have I
acknowledged thal mightifulnes of thy majesty, and majesty of thine
almightifulnes. But now, like as with heart I believe (which is counted
righteousness unto me) so with mouth do I confess before thee (which is to my
salvation) after what sort and manner thou did vouchsafe in the end of the
world, to succor and aid mankind. Thou (in deed) only (O God the father) art
not red at any time, or in any place to be sent. But of thy son: the Apostle
writes. When that ye time was fulfilled: God sent his son. In that he says
(he sent) he does sufficiently declare that he, being sent, came into this
world, when as he (being borne a very and perfect man of blessed Mary a pure
Uirgin) did apeer and show him self in ye flesh. But what is that, which he
that is the cheef of the Evangelists does say? He was in the world and the
world was made my him. Thither, truly, was he sent by his humanity, where he
allway is and always has been by his divinity. The which sending or
embassage, I believe withal my heart and confess with my mouth to be the consent
and wurk of all the whole Trinity. Oh holy and good father, how did thou love
us? How great favor did thou bear toward us most merciful creator? which
haste not spared thine own son, but for us wretched sinners have delivered
him. He was obedient unto thee until death, yea death upon a cross, taking ye
obligation or hand writing of our sins, which was his flesh and fastening
it unto the cross, he crucified sin and killed death. He a lone, is amongst the
dead, free from death, having power to put his soul for us, and to take it
again for us. Therefore was he both a vanquisher and a sacrifice, and therefore
was he an ouercommer, because he was a sacrifice for us. He was both ye priest
and sacrifice, unto thee, and therefore was he apreest, because he was a
sacrifice. Not without a cause have I great hope in him. Forasmuch as thou will make whole all my diseases, for his sake that sits on thy right hand
and does continually make intercession for us. For my diseases (O Lord) are
great and many: oh they are many in number and great. For the Prince of this
world (as I very well know and confess) has mani things in me. But I beseech
thee deliver me, through our redeemer which sits on thy righthand, in who^
ye said Prince of this world could find none evil, that was his, of his own
committing. By him do thou justify me whom his self did not sin, nether was
there any deceit or gile found in his mouth. By him which is our head, in
whom there is not one spot of evil, deliver me, which am one of his members,
though I be but a little membre and feeble and weak. Deliver me (I be sech
thee) from my sins, offenses, faults, and ignoraunces. Fulfill me with thy
holy virtues and make me to shine in good manners, make me (I beseech the) for
thy holy names sake, to continue in holy wurks until thend, accor ding to thy
will and pleasure.

Of the trust which a soul ought to have in our Lord Jesus and in his Passion.
I Might despair verily because of my manifold sins and negli gences
without number, if it were not that thy wurd (O God) was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us. But I can not now despair because that seeing (when we were
enemies) we were reconciled by the death of thy son: how much more, are we
(now reconciled) saved by him. For all the hope and the certitude and sure nes
of all my trust, is in his precius blud which was shed for us and for our
salvation. In him do I take hartening: and trusting in him: I have a desire to
come unto the, not having mine own righteousness, but that which I have
through thy son our lord Jesus Christ. For the which (O most merciful God
and most gentle lover of mankind) we give thee thanks, which through Jesus
Christ thy son our lord, when we were not, did might ly make us, and when
we were lost through our sins: most merucilously did deliver and recover
us again. To thy goodness (I say) do I give thanks, and manifold praises do I
show for the to the withal my heart and mind, which (through the unspeakable
love) wherewith thou have vouchesafed of thy marvelous goodness to love us
wretches and (vnwurthy to be loved) did se^d that same thine only begotten
son from thy bosom unto our common weal, to save us sinners which were at
that time ye children of perdition and damnacio^. I render unto thee thanks for
his holy incarnation and nativity and for his blessed mother upon whom he did
vouchesafe to take flesh for us and for our salvation, to the intent that like
as he is very God of God: so he might be very man of man. I give thee thanks
for his passion and cross, for his death and resurrection, for his ascension
into heaven and his seat of his majesty on thy right hand. For he the forty
day after his resurrection, ascending above all the heavens (his disciples
seeing it) and sitting on thy right hand, did pour out his holy spirit
abundantly according to his promis, upon them whom he had chosen to be his
children. I give thee thanks for that most sacred sheding forth of his
precious blood, wherewith we are re deemed, and also for the most holy and
quickening sacrifice of his body and blood, which daily in thy church we feed
of and drink of, wherewith we are washed and sanctified, and are made partakers
of the only high divinity. I give thee thanks for thy merueilous and
unspeakable charity and love wherewith thou did love us vnwurthi persons,
and did save us by thine only and be loved son, for so thou did love ye
world, that thou gave thine only begotten son to the intent that none which
believed in him should perish, but have everlasting life. This thing truly is
everlasting life, to know thee and also Jesus Christ, whom thou sent to be
very God, by an upright faith and wurkes wurthy for faith.

Of thexceding love of the ever lasting father toward mankind.
OH unmeasurable pity and fatherly love, oh inestimable charity, that thou
should deliver thy son to suffer death to the intent thou might redeem
and raunsom a servant. God was made man, to the intent that man, being lost,
might-be plucked out of the power of deuels. How gentle and kind a lover of
man was thy son our God who thought it not enough to humble him self to be
made man of the very virgin Mary: but also took upon him the pains of the cross
in sheding his blood for us and for our salvation. He came a pitiful God, he
came for his pity and goodnesses sake, he came to search and to save that
which was lost. He sought the straied sheep, he sought and found, and he being
a good Lord and truly a very good and pitiful shepherd, brought him home upon
his shulders unto the foldes of the flock. Oh charity, oh pity, who has
heard any such things? who is not astonished to consider the bowels of so great
mercy? who would not meruail? who would not ho nor and wurship thee for thy
great charity wherewith thou louedst us? Thou did send thy son into the
similitude of flesh, subject to sin, that he might condemn sin for sin, that
we might be made thy righteousness in him.

For he was the very lamb with out spot, which took away the sins of the
world, which destroyed our death by diyng him self. But what may we render,
unto thee (our God) for so great benefits of thy mercy? What praises or what
thancks? Uerily, if we should have that same knowledge and power that blessed
Angels have: yet should we not be able to requite thy so great pity and
goodness with any thing of valor. No if all our me^bres were turned into tungs
to repay unto thee due praises: yet were not our slendernes sufficient. There
is one thing that excedeth all knowledge, even thine inestimable charity,
which thou did show unto us vnwurthi persons for thy goodness and pities
sake. Thy son (O our God) did take upon him to be the seed of Abraham not of
Angels, yea and he was made like unto us in all things sin only excepted. He
therefore taking mand nature not angels, and glorifying it with the stole of
holy resur rection and immortality: carried it above the he auens and above all
the melodious companies of Angels, above Cherubin and Seraphin, placing it upon
thy right hand. This humain nature do Angels praise, all the powers of heaven
do tremble, to see a man, to be God over the^. This truly is all my hope, all
my trust. And this same humain nature is in Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the
portion of every one of us, ye flesh and blood. Therefore whereas my portion
reigns: there do I believe to reign. Whereas my flesh is glorified: there do
I believe to be glorified. Where my blood rules: there do I per ceiueme to
bear rule. Although I be a sinner, yet I do not mistrust nor despair of the
communion and partaking of favor. Although my sins do hinder me and in a
manner forbid me: nevertheless my substance requires it. And al be it that mine
offenses do exclude me: yet the co^ manion of our nature does not expel me.
For God is not so ungentle as to forget man, and not to remember that thing
which him self bears, and that which for my sake he took upon him, and that
which for my sake he requires. But truly the Lord our God is lowly and meek,
and wunderfull gentle, and loves his flesh, his members and his bow else. In
the very same God our lord Jesus Christ, who is most gentle, loving and
merciful, in whom we are risen from death, (that is to say) from the state of
perdition and eternal damnation, and even now by him we ascend into the
heavens, and now sit in the heavens (in him I say) our flesh loves us. For we
have in him, and by him a prerogative and as it were a preferment of our blood.
For we are his me^bres and his flesh. And he is our head, of the which
depends the whole body (as it is written) a bone of my bones and flesh of my
flesh and they shall be two, in one flesh, and no man at any time hates his own
flesh but rather cherishes and loves it. This is a great mystery, I speak in
Christ, and in the church says the apostle.

Of the double nature of Christ, which has mercy upon us, and makes
intercession for us.
Wherefore with my lips and heart, and with all the might that I may, I render
thanks unto thine infinite mercy. o Lord our god) for all thy mercy, wherewith
merueilously thou vouchsafed to help and succor us that were lost, by the same
thy son our savior and recouerer, which died for our sins, and rose again
for our justification, and living, without end sits on thy right hand and
entreats for us, and together with thee, takes pity and mercy upon us,
because he is God through thee (O father) everlasting and of one substance with
thee in all things. Whereby always he may save us, but for as much as he is man
in whichething he is les and inferior unto thee, all power both in heaven and
in earth, was given unto him, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow
both of celestial, earthly creatures, and also of infernal, that all tu^gs
may confess that our lord Jesus Christ is in thy glory (O father almighty He
verily was constituted of thee and ordained to be aiudge of the quick and dead,
for thou truly iudgest no man, but all thy judgment have given to thy son,
in whose breast all trea sures of wisdom and knowledge are hid. He truly is
both a witness and a judge, a judge and a wit nes, whom no sinful conscience
can flee or avoid for all things be they never so secret, are open and even
naked and uncovered unto him. He verily which was unrighteously judged
himself: shall judge the whole world in equity, and the people in rightousnes,
and according to justice. Therefore do I bles thy name e uerlasting and glorify
the same with all my heart (O almighty and merciful Lord) for ytvnspeakable
and merueilous coniuntio^ of godhed and manhod together in the unity of a
person, and not after this sort, yt the one should be God, and the other man: but
one and the same was both God and man, man and God. Nevertheless although by
thy merueilous will, the wurd was made flesh, yet nether of both the natures
was changed into others substance. In the mystery of ye Trinity, there is
not afourth person added. For the substance of the wurd of god and of man was
united and knit together, but not co^fused and mixed, that that thing which
was taken of us: should be turned into god, and that which never had been before
that time, that is his flesh and manhod should be the same that had been ever
without any beginning, that is, his godhed. Oh meruellous mystery. Oh
unspeakable fellowship. Oh merueilous meeknes of the heauenli mercifulnes,
which is ever wurthy merueiling and ever to be loved. We were but vile servants
and behold we are made the sons of god. Yea, and heirs of god together with
christ. From whence came this goodness? and who brought us unto this state?
But I require the (O most merciful father (by thine inestimable pity,
goodness and charity: to make us wurthy of these many and great promises of
the same, thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Send forth thy strength (O God) and
establish the thing that thou have wrought in us.

Make perfect that which thou have begun, that we may be able to come unto the
fulness and per fectnes of thy pity. Make us tho row the holy ghost to
understand and through thy son to deserve, and with due honor allway to
wurship this great mystery of thy pity, which is manifest in our flesh.
Justified in the spirit, did appear unto Angels, was preched unto nations, was
bele ued to be in the world, was taken up into heaven.

Amen.
Of the thanks which man ought to give unto God for the benefit of his
redemption.
LOok how much (O Lord our God) we are in det unto thee eue^ for so great a
price were we redeemed, with such a great gift were we saved, and with so great
abenefit helped. How much ought we wretches to love, dread, bles, praise,
honor and glorify thee which have so loved us, after such facion saved us,
after such a sort sanctified us, so set us on high. To the truly do we owe,
and are bound, in as much as we are able, eue^ our life and all our study or
endeavor. But who has any thing that is not thine? But do thou (O Lord our
God) from whom all goodness proceeds, even for thy holy names sake) give us of
thy goodness, that we may serve thee of thine own goods and gifts and that we
may please thee in truth, and repay unto the daily due praises for so great
benefits of thy mercy. For by none other means can we serve or please thee,
but by thine own gifts, ytthou have lent us, while we be in this world. For
every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
father of light, with who^ there is none alteration or variablenes neither yet
is he changed un to darkness. O Lord our God, and a pitiful God, a good God,
and almighty God, an unspeakable God, and incomprehensible, of such a nature
that can not be co^ teined as in a place, o god which art the beginner of all
things and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which did send the same
thy beloved son our lord, forth of thy bosom to our common profit, to
take upon him our life, to the intent he might give us his life, and that he
might be perfect and very God of thee his father, and very and perfect man of
his mother, a whole and a perfect God, and a whole and perfect man: and yet but
one on ly Christ, both everlasting: and enduring but for a space, both
immortal and mortal, both a creator: and a creature, strong: and weke, an
ouercommer: and one ouercomed, a nurs: and one that was nurced him self, a
shepherd: and a sheep, dead for a time: and living with the everlasting, pro
mising to them that loved him the fredom of life. Who said to his disciples,
what thing so ever ye ask the father in my name: he will give it unto you. For
that hie Priests sake, which was al so a bishop in deed, and a god shepherd,
that offered him self in a sacrifice to thee, putting his life in ieoperdi for
his flock: for his sake I say (I beseech thee) which sits on thy right hand
and makes intercession for us, being our redemer and our advocate, that thou
would grant unto me that to gether with thy son and the holy ghost I may
in all things bles and glorify thee with much co^tricio^ of heart, and a
fountain of tears, with much reverence and fear: For the gift of them that be
all of one substance: is all one. But because abody that is corrupted does
aggrauate and burden the soul: stir up and awake I be seche thee) my
sluggishnes, with thy pricks and prouokings, and make me boldly to persevere and
continue in thy commandments and laws day and night Grant me that my heart
may wax warm within me, and that in my meditation and prayer I may be
fervent. And for as much as thy only son said.

No man can come to me except my Father that sent me, shall draw him: and again
no man comes to the father but by me, I re quire and humbly beseech thee, draw
me always unto him, that he at the length may bring me to thee: thither (I
mean) whereas he is sitting on thyrighthand, where as is everlasting life, and
continu al blessedness, whereas is perfect love, without all kind of fear,
where as is one day everlasting, and one spirit of all men, where as is most
sure security and safty, secure quietness, and quiet plesantnes, pleasant
felicity and happiness, happy eternity, continual and eternal seeing and
praising of thee without end, where as thou with him, and he with thee in the
communion and unity of the holy ghost everlastingly and continually live and
reignest through out all worlds of worlds.

Amen.
A devout prayer unto Christ
O Christ and God, which art my hope, and the true and gentle lover of
mankind, the light, the way, the life, the health, the honor and wurship of
them that be thine: I beseech thee call to thy remembrance all things that
thou willingly did suffer for the^, both bo^ds, cross, wounds, death and
sepulcher, which after three days, death being over comed, did rise, wast
seen of thy Disciples, reforming their hearts and establishing them that were
almost enclining from thee: the forty day after did ascend up to heaven,
which live everlasting ly now, and raignest through out worlds, thou art my
God both living and true, my father, and my God both holy and pitiful, my
mighty king, my good shepherd, mine only Master, my best helper, one, who^ I am
most bound to love, my living bread, mine everlasting priest, my guide unto my
conntrey, my true light, my holy sweetness, my right and straight way. Mine
excellent wisdom, my pure and unfeigned simplicity, my peasible co^corde, my
safe garrison, my good portion, mine everlasting health, my great mercy, my
stro^gest patience, mine unspotted sacrifice, my holy redemption, my sure and
steadfast hope, my perfect charity, my very and true resurrection, mine
everlasting life, my joy and most blessed vision, and continual without end:
I humbly beseech thee, I desire and pray thee, that I may walk by thee, that I
may come to the, that I may rest in thee, which art the way, the truth and
the life without the which no man can come unto the father. Thee do I desire
and covet (O good Lord) which art the brightness of thy fathers glory, which
sit above the Angel called Cherubin, and do behold, the low and deep
places, which art the true light the light ye lightneth all things, the light
that never fails nor goes out, which the Angels have desire to behold. Lo
my heart is before thee in thy sight, put away the darkness from it, that it may
fully be replenished with the clearnes of thy love.

Give unto me Lord thy self, behold I do love thee, and if that be but a
thing of small valor: make me to love the more strongly and earnestly. I can
not mesure to know how much I lack of thy love, nether ca^ I tell, how much
should be sufficient for me, that my life may fulfill his course in thy love,
and not turn back until it be hid in the secrets of thy countenance.
Nevertheless, this I know that it were evil with me, if it were not for thee
(O Lord) and that not only we thoutward things that belong unto me, but also
with the inward things. For all my riches (God except) is but mere pouer tie:
but thou only art a tresure and a parcel of riches that can nether be
changed into better nor wurs. Thou art he, to whom it is not one thing to
live, and an other thing to live happily, because thou art thy blessedness, thy
happiness, and thou art all one.

But I which am thy creature, to whom it is not one thing to live, and an
other to live blessedly and happily: all, both in that I live, and in that I
live happily, I ought not to at tribute nor refer it to be received of any
body, but of thy favor. And therefore have we need of thee but not you of us,
because if we were not at al, yet should thou lack nothing of thy goodness.
Therefore (O lord) it is necessary for us to stick and cleave unto thee, that
by thy continual help we may be able to live holily, virtuously, and as we
ought to live For with ye weight of our frailnes we are drawn ever downward,
but by thy gift we are stir red and carried upward: we fervent ly desire to
ascend, we make certain ascensions in our hearts, lifting the^ upward, and sing
ye so^gs of stars, we ye fire of thy love (I say) are we kindled and moved to
go we thee. Whether go we now upward, unto ye peace of Jerusalem? because I was
glad and did rejoice in those things whice were spoken unto me: we will go into
the house of our Lord: there has he placed us, we will have good things, ytwe
may will or dsire no thing else, but to tari and remain there for ever. But for as
much as whiles we be clad with this bo, die, we do as it were go a stray and are
strangers unto thee: we have not here an abiding place for ever but we seek
for one yt is to come. Our abiding place is in heaven. Therefore thy favor and
grace being my guide, I enter in to the chamber of my heart, and sing unto thee
songs of love (my king and my God) mourning with merueilous sighi^gs in this
place of my peregrinatio^, whereas thy justices are made my songs. And when I
remember Jerusalem, I extend and stretch forth toward it the senses of my heart:
Jerusalem (I say which is my country Jerusalem which is my mother: and toward
thee which art a king over her, her light, her father, her defender, her
patron, her governor, her keeper, her chaste and strong delight, her only and
whole pleasure, and all her goodness comes of thee, because thou art ye cheef
good and the true good, and I will never turn back, until thou bring me home
from this Pilgrimage (in which I am deformedlt scattered abroad) unto the
peace of my dearly beloved mother, whereas be ye first fruits of my spirit,
and until thou (O God which art my mer cy) fashion me and confirm me for ever

A prayer declaring with how great miseries this life is replenished.
I Am wunderfull weary (O lord) of this life and of this careful and painful
pilgrimage. This life is a wretched life, a life that will soon fade away, an
uncertain life a painful life, an unclean life, a life that wurthely may be
called the maistres of all evils, ye queen of pride, full of miseries and
errors which is not wurthy to be called a life, but rather a death, in the
which euerihoure, we die by diverse defects and failings of nature, by
mutabilities, alteratio^s and diverse kinds of deaths. How can we therefore,
call this that we live in this world, a life which is puffed up and swollen
often with humors, made lene and feeble with sorrows, dried with angres and hot
hasty furies of the mind, the air fills it full of diseases, metes do
infect it, fasting do extenuat and make it lean, pastimes makes it to
dissolute and rechles, pensiuenes does consume and waste it, trouble and
vexation does shorten and lessen it, security and to much ease: makes it dull
and nothing lusty, riches sets it a flote and puffs it up into pride,
poverty dismayeth and discourageth it, youth does extol it, age lameth it.
Infirmity breaks it, sorrow oppresses it. And immediately after these evils
as though it were by succession, comes death, and makes an end of all ye
joys of this miserable life, after such a sort that a man would not think
(when he leaves this life) to have lived at all. This living death, and dying
life, although it be sprinkled and mixed with these and other so rows and
miseries: yet (Oh good Lord) how many men does it catch and entangle with
her en tising snares? and how many does she deceive with her deceitful and
falls promises? And for all that she of her self is so falls and bitter, that her
blind lovers can not be kept long secret nor close unknown: yet does she daily
cause an infinite number of fools to drink of the golden cup, which she
bears in her hand, yea and makes them utterly drunken with the love of her.
Happy are they, but very few of them is there that refuse her acquaintance and
familiarity or that despise to use her joys, or that neglect her friendship
and fellowship, least when their deceiuer perishes, that they should perish
also.

Of the blessedness of that life which God has prepared for them that love him.
BUt thou heavenly life, thou art she whom God has ordained and prepared for
them that love him, thou art the heavenly life, the blessed life, the sure
life, the quiet life, the fair life, the clean life, the chastelife, the holy
life, the life that know no death, know no sadness or pen siuens, a life
without spot, with out dolor, without vexatio^, with out corruption, without
trouble without variety or mutabilitie, a life most full of pleasure and
dignity, where as is none adversary to strive against a man, no entice ments of
sins, where as is per fect love without all manner of fear, where as is day
continually an done spirit of all men.

Whereas God is seen face to face and the mind is fed with this meat of life
without end, I have a very good mind and desire to mark and give heed to thy
clear nes, with thy goods, the desire and appetite of my heart is delited. Look
how much I am able to considre with my self, in musing and thinking of thy com
modities: even somuche am I ravished and rapt with thy love with the ardaunt
desire of thee, and with the sweet and comfortable reme^brace of thee, am I
wunderfully delited. I have a pleasure therefore, surely to lift up the eyes of
my heart unto thee, to erect the state of my mind, and conform or fashion the
affects of my mind unto thee: It pleases me to talk of thee, to hear of
thee, to write of thee, to confer and meditate of thee, to read every day of
thy blessedness and glory, and to muse often times in my mind of the things I
have red concerning thee, that at the least by such means, I being under the
sweet refreshing and comfor ting of thy lively air, may pas from the vexations,
ieoperdies, labors, and traueils of this mortal life that will soon perish,
and ytin passing I may lay my weary head in thy bosom to sleep or to rest a
little, for this cause do I enter into the plesau^t meadow of the holy
scriptures, and in plow ing, I pluck the goodliest green herbs of sentences,
and in reading I do eat them, and in frequenting I do meditate, and as it
were cud them, and in gathering them together, at the last I lay them up in my
memory, that by such means when I have tasted of thy sweetness, I may sumwhat
les feel the bitterness of this most wretched life. O thou most happy life, oh
kingdom which art blessed in deed, which lackest death, which art without
end, no time does successifly pas at any time to thee. Whereas continual day
without night knows no time, whereas that capitain and conqueror is
accompanied with those queres of angels, singing of himnes and songs, they sing
unto God with out ceassing, the balet of Balets of Sion. Oh most noble head
which art compassed about with a perpetual crown, oh that par do^ and
forgeuenes of my sins were granted unto me, and the^ immediately, this burden
of my flesh laid away, that I might enter into thy joys to have true rest, and
that I might get within the goodly and beutifull walls of thy city to receive
a crown of life at the hand of our Lord, that I might be amongst those most
holy queres, that I might stand with the most blessed Spirits of the creator
of glory, that I might see presently the countenance of Christ, that I might
behold always ye most his and unspeakable light, inco^prehensible which ca^
not be contained as in a place. And so I should not only be out of al fear of
death: but also I might rejoice always at the gift of everlasting
incorruption.

Amen.
Hear do we complain that we be not moved nor pricked in our contem plation
and prayer like as the angels be which tremble at the sight of God.
PArdon me (O Lord) pardon me, mercifully forgive me and have mercyvpo^ me,
spare mine ignorance and my great vnper fectnes, do not reprove me as a rash
fellow, because I dare be so bold which am but thy servant but would to God I
were either a good servant, or none unprofitable nor evil servant. And
therefore am I an evil man because I praise, bless and wurship thee which art
our God almighty, terrible and very much to be feared, I wurship thee (I say)
without contricion of heart and without a well of tears. For if so be that the
angels when they wurship and praise thee, do tre^ ble being fulfilled with
marvelous gladness: I which am a sin ner, whiles I stand before thee saying
praises and offeringe sacrifice, why am I not afraid in my heart? why am I not
pale in my countenance? why do not my lips quake and tremble? why is not
all my body afraid? and why do I not mourn and bewail before thee after
such* a sort that tears might spring out of mine eyes: I would feign but I
am not able, because I can not do that which I desire to do. This makes me
truly, wonderfully to marvel, that I am no more moved when I see with the eyes
of my faith, thee which art so fearful But who can do any thing without the
help of thy Grace? Except thou make our stony hearts to relent: we of our
selfs are not able to mollify them, but all our health depends upon thy
great mercy. O wretch that I am, how is my soul made without any feeling or
perseueraunce? that it is not afraid with over much fear whiles it stands
before God and si^geth to him his own praises? Alas how is my heart so hardened,
that mine eyes do not gush out great fluddes of tears without ceassing, when I
which am but a servant or bondsman, do co^ mon and talk in my Lord and
masters presence? Yea a man, with God, a creature with a creator. I that am
made of the slime of the earth, do speak with him that made al things of
nothing? Put me before thee* (O Lord) and what so ever I perceive of my self
in the secrets of my heart, I do not keep it close from thy brotherly ears.
Thou art rich in mercy and liberal in rewards, give me of thy goods, that
with them I may serve the. For with nothing else ca^ we serve or please thee,
but with thin own gifts which thou have vouchsaued to bestow upon us. Fasten
I beseech thee thy fear in myfleshe. Let my heart rejoice and be glad to fear
thy name. Would God my sinful soul feared thee so much, as that holy man the
which said, I always: feared God as though it were great swelli^g fluddes
should come and tumble upon me. O God the geuer of all good things, give me
emongst thy praises, a well of tears, with the pureness of heart and reioising
of mind, that I loving thee perfetly and wurthily praising thee may feel, taste
and savor, in the palace of myhart, how swet and pleasant thou art (O Lord)
as it is written. Do ye taste and see how sweet and delectable the Lord is.
Blessed is the man that puts his trustin him. Blessed is yt people which
knows glad and ioifull praising. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee,
in whose heart ar thy ways, which going through the vale of misery, use it for a
well. Blessed ar the clean in heart because they shall see God. Blessed are
they that dwell in the house of the Lord, they shall praise thee world without
end.

A very devout prayer for the giving of thanks.
O Lord Christ which art the wurd of the father, which came into this world
to save sin ners. I beseech thee by the most loving bowels of thy mercy, to
amend and repair my life, make better my deeds, take thou thorderyng of my
manners, take from me that which noyeth and hurts me, and displeases the:
and give me that which thou know will please thee and proffit me. Who can
make clean yt which is conceived of an unclean sead but thou alone? Thou art
the god almighty, of infinite piety, which do justify and make righteous
even those that were wicked me^ and raisest again to life the^ that were dead
in sin, thou chaungest sinners and they are no sinners. Take away therefore from
me, what so ever is in me that pleases not thee, for thine eyes do see much
imperfectness in me. Lay thy hand I beseech the of thy pity on me, and
whatsoever offends ye eyes of thy pity, remove it from me. In thy sight is
both my health and my disease.

The one I beseech thee to preserve the other to cure: do thou heal me (O
Lord) and I shall be healed: do thou make me safe and I shall be saved. Thou I
mean which do make hole them that be diseased, and do preserve them that
be cured, which only with a beck do restore and repair things that be
decayed and fallen into rui^. For if thou will vouch safe to sow any good seed
in the feld of my heart, of necessity thou must pluck up first with the hand of
thy pity, the thorns a fvices which be in it. Put in my heart I beseech
thee, so great plenty of delectacion in the, that I may desire no earthly or
carnal thing nor yet think upon them, but that I may love thee alone, yt I may
have thee only in my heart and in my mouth. Write with thy fingar in my breast,
the delectable re membraunce of thy sweet name and so that it may be blotted
out with no forgetfullnes. Write thy will in ye tables of mine heart, and also
thy iustifications, that I may always and in every place have thee (O Lord)
before min eyes in my sight. Inflame my mind with that fire, which thou did
send into the earth, and willedst it to be kindled, that I might offer unto the
daily with tears, a sacrifice of a troubled spirit and a repentaunt heart. O
sweet Christ, O good Jesus, eue^ according unto my desire and even as I heartily
require thee with my whole mind, give me thy holy and chaste love, which may
replenish and keep me and also fully posses me. Give me an evident sign and
token of thy love, a flowing well of tears which will continually run, that
those tears may somewhat testify thy love in me, yt they may show forth, that
they may declare how much my soul loves thee, whiles for the great
delectacion it has in ye swetnes of thy love: it may not refreine from tears.
I call to my remembrance fom times good lord, that virtuous woman Ann, which
came to ye tabernacle to pray ye thou would send her a son, of who^ the
scrip ture makes mention yther countenance (after her tears and prayers) was
not again changed or altered. But when I think upon so great virtue, co^stance
and stedfastnes: I am vexed with sorrow and confounded with shame, because I a
wretchedoo perceive my self to be fallen over much from thee. For if a woman
did weep after such a sort and continued so in weeping, which did search for
nothing else but a son: how ought my soul to mourn and to persist and abide
in weping, that seeks and loves God, and has a desire to cum unto him? how
ought such a soul to mourn and weep, which seeks God day and night, which
will love nothing but Christ?

My tears now truly should be made unto me, meat day and night Look upon me
therefore (o lord) and take pity on me because the dolours and sorrows of my
heart are many in number. Give me thy heavenly consolation and do not despise
nor cast away a sinful soul for the which thou did die. Give me inward
tears I beseech thee from the botome of min heart, which may wash away the
spots of my sins.

Replenish my soul always with heauenli delectacion and heauely mirth, yt I may
obtain some little portion or part in thy kingdom, although not emongst the
perfect men whose stepes I cannot follow: yet at the least wise emongst the
inferior sorry. The marvelous devotion of an other woman cumeth now unto my
mind, which with a virtuous love did seek thee lying in the sepulcher, which
when thy discipies went away and departed from thee, did remain with thee her
self, which sat there sad and sorrowful weping long and very much, and when
she did arise she serched with a diligent eye and with many tears the corners
of the sepulcher which was left empty, if the might epsy thee out in any
place, whom she with a fervent desire sought. Yea and more over she went again
and again to the sepulcher, but that was not enough unto her, nether did it
satisfy her desire. For ye grace of a good wurk is to persevere and continue in
the same. And because she did love more then other, and that in loving she wept
and in weping she serched, and in searching she continued, therefore was it thy
pleasure that she should first find thee, see thee, and talk with thee before
all other.

And not only this, but also she was a tidinges berer of thy glorious
resurreccion unto thy disciples, when thou did command her and bid her, goo
and tell my brethern that they goo unto Galile, there they shall see me. etc.
Seeing therefore that a woman did weep after such a sort and continued in
weeping, which did seek him that was alive among the dead: which touched
thee with the hand of her faith: how ought a soul to mourn and to continue in
mourning, which believes in the, and with his mouth does acknowledge thee to be
his redemer that sit now in heaven and reignest every where? How much
therefore ought such a soul to mourn and weep, which loves thee with all his
heart, and with his whole desire does covet to see thee? Oh only refuge, the
only hope of wretches, unto whom no man needs at any time to pray with out
hope of mercy, grant unto me this grace for thy sake, and for thy holy names
sake, that as often as I think upon thee as often as I speak of thee, write of
the, read of thee, co^fer of thee, as often as ever I remember thee, stand before
thee, offer up praises, prayers and sacrifice unto thee: so often I may weep
aboundauntly with tears in thy sight, so yt my tears may be to me in stead of
bread day and night. Thou true ly king of Glory and master of all virtue, have
taught us with thy wurd and with thin exsample to mourn and weep, where as thou
say. Blessed be they ytmourne, for they shall be conforted. Thou did weep for
thy friend that was dead, and did let tears fall down plenteously for the
city which should perish. I beseech thee (O good Jesus) by those most precious
tears and by all thy mercies and pieties, wherewith thou did vouch safe
meruelously to help and succor us that were lost: give me the grace to weep
and to be earnestli repentaunt for my sins, which grace my soul desires
and coueteth very much, and except it cum of thy gift: I can not have it, but
by the holy ghost which does mollify the hard hearts of sinners, and provoke
them to weping.

Give me the grace of tears, like as thou gave to our forfathers, whose
examples we ought to follow, that I may bewail my self in all my life, like as
they did bewail them selves day and night. Give me the dew of thy grace from
above, and also a dew of tears benethe, that my tears may be unto me in stead
of bread day and night: and that I may be made in thy sight (O Lord my God) by
the fire of thy provocation, a fat and acceptable sacrifice. Make me to be mor
tified and killed upon thaltar of min heart, and that I may be received of thee
as a fat and a sweet smell ling sacrifice. Give unto me (O good Lord) a
plentefull flowing and clear well of tears, in the which I may wash continu
ally this foul and spotted sacrifice. For although I have offered up my self,
wholly unto thee, by the help of thy grace. Yet nevertheless in many things I
offend thee dailly, because of my great fragilitie and weakness. Eeue me
therefore the grace of tears (O blessed God) and most especially through the
great swetnes of thy love and the remembrance of thy mercies, prepare this
table for thy servant in thy sight, and give me power that as often as I list I
may be satisfied of it. Grant unto me for thy goodness and pity, that this thy
cup replenished and filled full, may satisfy my thirst, that my spirit may
covet thee, and that my mind may burn in thy love, forgetting all vanity and
misery.

Hear (my God) hear, thou that art the sturrer up, and quickner of my dull
ears, hear what I desire and ask: and give me grace to ask that which thou
hear.

O pitiful Lord, which art wo^t to be easyly entreated, be not hard to be
entreated of me because of my sins, but for thy goodness receive the prayers
of thy servant: and grant me theffect of my peticion and desire.

In this prayer man's mind is very much and plenteously stirred and moved, if
it be said in quietness.
O Lord Jesus, o gentle and loui^g Jesus, o good Jesus which did vouchsafe to
dye for our sins, and did rise again for our iustificacion, I beseech thee
by thy glorious resurrection, to raise me up out of the sepulcher of vices and
all my sins, and give me daily part in thy first resurreccion to thinte^t I
may receive some part in the latter resurreccion. O most mighty king which
did ascend into heaven, with the triumph of thy glory, and sit on the
right hand of thy father, draw me upward toward thee, that I may run after
thee in the sweet savor of thine anoyntments. Let me run and not faint when
thou drawest me and leadest me running: draw the mouth of the soul that
thirsts after thee, unto the high fluddes and streams of thine eternal a
bundaunce and sacietie, yea draw me holly unto thy self which art the living
well, to the intent I may according to my capacity, drinck of that whereupon I
do live.

O my God my life, thou did say with thy holy and blessed mouth, If any man
thirst, let him cum unto me and drink. O well of life, grant unto my
thirsty soul always to drink of thee, that according to thy holy and true pro
mise, waters of life may flow out of my belly. O well of life replenish and
fill my mind full of the river of thy pleasure. Make my heart to be drunken as
it were in thy love, that after the manner of the that be drunken with wine,
which forget all things save ye cup: so I may forget al vain and earthly
things, and continually have nothing else in my remembrance but the only,
according as it is written, I remembered God and was delited. Give me the holy
Ghost whom those waters did signify, which you did promise to give to the^
that thirsted after thee. Grant I beseech thee) that I may assay to goo with my
hole desire and all my study toward yt place unto the which, we believe thon
did ascend the forty day after thy resurreccion, that in this present misery
I may be only in body: but in thought and desire, always with thee: ytmy heart
may be there where as thou art which art my treasure wurthy to be coueted, and
much to be loved, wherewith no treasure is wurthy to be compared. In this great
flud of this life, where as we are tossed with storms on every side, there is
no steadfast standing or place high enough above the waters, no not for the
foot of a dove to rest upon in this (I say) there is no safe or quiet peace:
nowhere any sure rest: every where battle and strife: every where enemies and
fightings without doors, and fear at home within doors. And for as much as the
one part of us is heavenly, and the other earthly: our bodi which is
corrupted, does laden and is burdenous un to the soul. Therefore my mind which
is my fellow and friend, being weri with wa^dering forth of the way, is sick and
lies all to torn andrent of those things which it has passed by. It
hongreth and thirsts greatly after vanities, and I have nothing to set before
it, because I am poor and a beggar. Thou (O Lord) my God, art rich in all
good things, and the most plenteous geuer of the dainties of heavenly
sacietie: give meat unto the weary, not such as it lusts after, but such as
is convenient for it: gather together the disper sed: renew and refresh the
corn, Loo he stands at the door and knocks. I beseech thee by the bowels
of thy mercy, wherewith thou being the day spring from an high have visited us,
open the hand of thy pity to a wretch that knocks, and vouchsafe
mercifully to bid him enter in to the, and that he may rest with thee, and be
refreshed of thee, which art the living and heanenly bread, wherewith when he
is once fed, and that his strength is cummed to him again: he may ascend unto
more high things. And being lifted up out of this vale of misery and tears,
with the wings of his godly desire, he may fly unto the heavenly kingdom.

Let my spirit (O Lord I beseech thee) take wings as an Egle, and fly without
fainting, let it fly and come to beautifulnes of thy house and to the place
where thy glory dwells, where as upon ye meat tables of thy supernal citizens,
it may be fed of thy secrets, in the place of thy pasture, by the most
plentiful rivers sides. Let my heart rest in thee my God, my heart I say, which
is as though it were a great sea swelli^g with waves. Thou which did rebuke
the winds and the sea, and there was made straight way a great calm: cum and
walk upon the fluddes of min heart, yt all things which belong unto me may be
made calm and clear, that I may embrace thee which art mine only God, and
that I may behold thee which art the sweet light of mine eyes, without any
blind darkness of troublesome cogitacions and thoughts. Let my mind fly (O
Lord) under the shadow of thy wings from heat that it being covered with the
tamperatnes of thy pleasant colenes, may sing ioifully and say. I will lay me
down and rest in peace.

Let my memory sleep (O my God I beseech thee) from all evils, make it to hate
iniquity and to love righteousness. For what ca^ be better or more delectable,
then in the midst of the darkness of this life, and emongst the manifold and
bitter miseries of the same, to desire feruentli hea uenly swetenes? to covet
everlasting blessedness? a man's mind to be hold ever there, where as he may be
most sure to have infallible and true joys. O Lord which for thy loving
kindness art most wurthy to be desired and coueted of al things: when shall I
see thee? When shall I appear before thy face? when shall I be satisfied of
thy glory? when will thou bring me forth of this dark prison, that I may
confess thy name, so that afterward I be no more pricked? when shall I pass
and goo to that marvelous and beautiful house of thine, whereas the voice of
gladness and reioising does sound in the tabernacles of just men?

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house (O Lord) they shall praise thee ever
world without end. Blessed ar they, yea blessed in deed, whom thou have
chosen, and taken into that heavenly in heritaunce. Behold (O Lord thy saints
flourish before thee like unto lilies, for they are replenished with the
ple^teousnes of thy house, and thou do give them to drink of the flowing
river of thy pleasure, because thou art ye well of life, and in thy light and
brightness they do see light, so greatly that they them selves, which are a
light, which was made bright by the, o god which do give them light, do
shine like unto the son in thy sight. O how marvelous how fair and
beautiful, how acceptable are thy mancions and dwelling places of thy house, O
Lord of powers. My sinful soul does couit to en tree into them. O Lord I have
loved the comlynes of thy house and the place where thy glory dwells I asked
one peticion of the Lord, and the same will I require: that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life. Like as the heart coueteth to goo
unto ye water brooks even so does my soul desire to come unto thee. O God.
When shall I come and appear before the face of my Lord? When shall I see God
after whom my soul longs very sore? when shall I see him in the land of ye
living? For in this land of the dead, he can not be seen we mortal eyes: what
shall I do wretch yt I am, which am fettred with the heaui gives of mortality?
What shall I do? whiles we continue in this body, we go astray from ye lord,
we have here no abidi^g place for ever but we labor for one yt is to come. Our
free city is in heaven. Woe is me, me think I dwell emongst ye barbarous nations
and infidels, and not emongst the faithful Israelites, I led my life in ye
tents of Cedar. My soul has dwelt too long with them that hate peace and
quietness. Who will give me wings as a dove that I may fly and rest me. There
is nothing that I desire or delight so much in, as to be in my Lords company,
it is good for me to cleave unto God. Oh grant me, (O lord) whiles I am in
this fratle members, to stick unto thee, as it is written, he that cleaves
unto the Lord is all one spirit with him. Give me therefore I beseech thee, the
wings of contempla cion, wherewith when I am appareled, I may fly upward, and
for as much as every unlucky and unfortunate thing lies beneth: do thou, O
Lord, hold up my mind, lest it fall headlong, into the lowest botomes of the
dark valley, and lest the shadow of the earth should come between and separate
it from thee, that art the bright son of rightwisnes: and lest it, once hid
with the clouds of darkness: should not have liberty, but be let to look
for heaue^li things which be above. Therefore I do assay to goo upward unto
the joys of quietness and peace, and unto the delectable and pleasant state of
light. O hold my heart with thy hand, because it can not be draw en unto high
things without thee. Thither do I make haste where as most cheef and
principal peace reigns and continu all quietness shines forth. Hold and
govern my spirit, and take it according to thy will, that thou being a guide
unto it: it may ascend into the region and country of plentifulnes, whereas
thou feedest Israel everlastingly, with the food of truth, to the intent that
there, at the least wise with my swift cogitacion and thought, I may com nie
thy wis dom, which remains above al things: over passes all things and
governs all things. But alas there be many things, which when my soul would
fly unto thee, do cry out upon it. Command the^ all, O lord to hold their
peace, and speak not unto me As for my soul it self, let it give never a wurd
to answer. Let it pas by all things. Let it clime above al things that be
created and come unto thee, and that it may fasten the eyes of faith upon
thee, which art the only creator of all things. Let it couit unto thee, and be
bent toward thee, Let it think upon thee by meditacion and contemplacion. Let
it lay thee before his eyes for it self, let it roll and tos thee in his heart:
thee I say which art the true and cheef goodness, and the joy that will remain
ever without ending. There is surely mani co^te^placions, in the which man's
soul is marvelously fed of thee. But in none of them is my soul so much
delited, nor yet ha the so good rest in, as in thee: and when as it thinks
upon thee, and has thee only in co^templatio^. Oh how much is thy swetnes, O
Lord, how meruei lousli do thou enspire the hearts of them that love thee?
How delectable is thy love, the fruicion whereof they have that love nothing but
thee: they seek for no thing else, they covet to think of nothing else. Happy are
they whose only hope thou art, which have no trust but in thee only and all
their whole wurk is prayer. Blessed is he that sits solitarili alone and
holds his peace, and stands upon his ward that he is set to keep,
continualli day and night, that yet whiles he is in this fratle body, he may be
able to taste somewhat thy pleasau^tnes. I require thee by those thy wounds
which bring health unto us, which wounds thou suffredst upon the cross for
our health, out of the which thy precious blood wherewith thou redeemed us, did
distill and drop down: wound this my sinful soul, for the which also thou
did vouchesafe to dye.

Wound it (I say) with the fiery and mighty darte of thy great charity. For
the wurde of God is lively and effectuous: and more pearcing and sharp then any
two edged sword. Thou, O chosen dart and most sharp sword, which art able by
thy power to perce through the hard sheeld or buckler of man's heart, fasten and
stick the shaft of thy love in my heart, that my soul may say unto thee, I am
wounded with thy charity, so that forth of that same wou^d of thy love, tears
may flow most plenteously both day and night. Strike O Lord, strike I beseech
thee, this most indurated and hardened mind of mine with the sharp dart of thy
love, and perce it deper and deper into the inermost parts thereof by thy
mighty power, and so bring out of my head, abundaunce of water, and out of
mine eyes a very well of tears continually running through the great affect and
marvelous desire to see thy glory, ytI may mourn day and night without taking
any comfort in this life, until in thy heavenly wedding chamber, I may se thee
my well-beloved and beautiful spouse, my god and my Lord. And that there when I
see thy glorious, marvelous and beautiful face, full of all swetnes, together
with them which thou haste chosen: then I say, I may wurship humbly thy
majesty: and there at the last being replenished with heavenly and
vnspeekable reioising of everlasting gladness I may even cry out with them that
love thee (saying) Behold that which I have long desired now I have obtained.
For I am joined in heaven unto him, who^ when I was in earth, I loved with all
my strength, with all my charity I embrased him, unto whom with all my love I
did stick and cleave. Him do I praise, bless and wurship that lives and
reigns God world without end.

Amen.
A prayer in time of tribulation.
Have mercy on me (o Lord) have mercy on me a most wretched sinner, which
do commit wickedli, and do suffer there fore worthily, which do sin co^
tinualli, and suffer thy scourge there fore daily. If thou take my daily
tribulacion as a recompense for the evils which I have committed: then it is
not so much that I suffer. For it is a great deal more grievous which I have
tres passed, then yt which I do suffer. Thou art just, O Lord, and thy
judgment is according to right. Yea all thy judgments ar just and true, and
thou, O lord our god, art just and righteous: for there is none iniquity in
thee. Thou do not vniustli, nor yet cruelly scourge and punish sinners, O all
mighty and merciful God, which when we had no being at all did mightily
create and make us. And when we were lost by our own fault, thou by thy
pity and goodness, marueilously did recover us.

I know and am very certain and sure, that our life is not led by so den
motions, but it is disposed and governed of thee, O Lord our god. Whereby I
know thou take care for all men, and most chiefly for thy servant, which
have put their whole hope in thine oneli merci. Therefore do I beseech and
humbli require the, that thou woldst not deal with me according to my sins,
wherewith I have deserved thine anger: but according to thy great mercifulnes,
which exceadeth, yeathe sins of the hole world. Thou, O Lord which outward
ly do punish and scourge, grant me in wardli a patience that will never
fail, so that thy praise ne uer depart away from my mouth. Have merci on me, o
lord, have mercy on me and help me, as thou think best to be most necessary
for my body and soul. Thou know all things: thou can do all things,
which live for ever and ever.

A very devout prayer to the son.
O Lord Jesus Christ son of the living God, which being upon the cross with
thy hands spread abroad for the redemption of all mankind did drink the
most bitter cup of thy passion I beseech thee that thou would vouchsafe to
give me help this day and ever. Lo, I a poor wretch cum unto thee, which art
rich, a sinner unto thee that art merciful. Let me not retourn home contemned
and despised with no thing. I begin a hungered, let me not leave of fasting I
cum unto thee as though. I were famished, let me not go away unfed. Although
before I eat, I sigh and sorrow: yet after my sorrow, give me somewhat to eat.
First of all good Jesus, I acknowledge before thy majesty mine unrighteousness
toward thee. Behold, O Lord, I was conceived in sin and borne in the same:
and thou did wash them of from me, and sanctified me: but I afterward defiled
my self with bigger and more grievous sins. For I was born in sin of
necessity, because I could be borne none otherwise. But afterward I rolled my
self willingly in sins. Nevertheless thou, O Lord being mindful of thy pity,
did take me out of the house of my carnal father and out of the tents of the
ungodly and have enspired me and put me in mind to follow thee, with the ge
neration of them that seek thy face, of the^ that walk in ye right pathe, of
them that abide and continue emongst the lillies of chastity: and of them that
sit down together with the at supper of most scarcity and least exces. But I an
unkind person, forgetting so many great benefits, after that I was entered
into religion and holiness did commit many unlawful things. I did offend
wunderfull ungraciously: and where I should of right, have amended min evil
life, and lest my sins: I heaped si^ns upon sins, and these be the evils, o
Lord wherewith I have dishonored the, and have spotted and defiled my self
(whom thou did creat after the similitude and lik nes of thine own self) with
pride vain glory and other many evils wherewith mine unlucky soul is vexed,
punished, torn and destroyed. Behold, o lord mine unrighteousness is gone over
my head and ar like a sore burden, over heavy for me to bear. And except thou,
whose property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, do lay under me ye right
hand of thy majesty: I shall be constrained miserably to sink in to the deep and
be drouned.

Give heed, o Lord god and behold, because thou art holy, Look how mine
enemy assaulteth me saying, God has forsaken him, I will persecute him and
catch him, because there is no man that will deliver him. But thou lord how
long? Turn again and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake. Have
mercy upon thy son, who^ thou have brought forth with no small sorrow and
pain: and be not so ententife unto mine euilnes, that thou forget thine own
goodness: what father is there but he will deliver his son? yea and what
fathers is there that will not correct his son and chasten him? but with the
rod of pity. Therefore, O father and Lord, although I be a sinner yet can I
not choose but be thy son, because thou have made me, and made me again when I
was mard with sin. Repair and amend me now, o Lord, but first of all, I
being mended and chastised with thy scourge, deliver me to thy son. Can a
mother forget the child she bare of her wo^b and sureli, although she so^times
be forgetful: yet thou (O father, have promised not to forget us. Behold I cry
and thou do not hear me* I am vexed with sorrow and thou confortest me not.
What shall I say? or what shall I do, most wretched caitife that I am? I being
desolate of so great comfort, am cast out from the sight of thine eyes. Woe be
unto me: from how great goodness, into how great a mischefe am I fallen? whether
purposed I to go, and whether am I comen? Where am I? and where am I not? whom
did I study to attein* unto? and what evils have I obtained? I sought for good
things, and behold I have found trouble and care. Behold now I am in the state
of death, and Jesus is not with me. And surely it were better for me to have
nothing at all, yea no being at all: the^ to be without Jesus. It is better not
to live then to live without life. And thou O Lord Jesus, where be thine old
mercies? will thou be angry toward me for ever? Be pacified I beseech thee,
and have mercy upon me, and turn not thy face away from me, which to thinte^t
thou might redeem me, did not turn a way thy face from the^ that rebuked
thee and spitted upon thee. I confess and acknowledge that I have sinned and my
conscience deserves damnacion and the penance that I am able to do is not
sufficient to make ame^ds for mine iniquities. But sure and certain I am that
thy mercy exceadeth all offenses that a man can do. Oh do not (I beseech thee
most pitiful Lord) write my heinous sins against me, yt thou should enter
into judgment with thy servant. But ac cording to the multitude of thy
mercies, cross and blot out mine in iquities. Woe be unto me wretch that I am,
when the day of judge meant comes, and the books of consciences shall be laid
wide open: when it shall be said of me Lo, look upon this fellow and his wurkes:
What shall I do then, O Lord my God, when the hea uens shall reuele and show
forth mine iniquity, and the earth shall arise up and testify mine iniquity,
against me? Behold I shall be able to give never one wurd to answer. but to
stand in thy presence trimbling, quaking, utterly confounded and holding down
my head for shame. Alas wretch that I am, what shall I say? I will cry unto
thee, o lord my God. Why am I consumed and fretted with holdi^g my peace? But
if I should speak: my greef would not cease. And if I hold my peace: I shall be
most bitterly vexed within me. Mourn o my soul, and lament as a widow for her
first husband, that she had in her young age. Houle wretch and cry out with
weping because thy spouse Christ has forsaken thee, O God almighty let not
thine anger fall upon me: because that if thou lay somuche to my charge as is
dew for my sins: it is so much that I can not receive it. Sureli my power is
not able for to suffer or bear it.

Have merci upon me least I dispeire. But in despeiring I will take heart to me
and be so^what comforted. For all though I have committed so much that thou
may condemn me wurthely: yet thou have not lost that wherewith thou wast wont
to save sin ners, nether do thou reioise at the destruction and los of them
that dye, yea to thintente that dead men might live, thou thy felf did die:
and thy death did kill the death of sins. And if they were revived again
and did live by thy death: I beseech thee, let not me die, now ytthou live
Send down thy hand and power from hie, and deliver me out of the hands of mine
enemies, that they rejoice not over me and say, let us devour him. Who ever (O
good Ie su) needed to mistrust of thimerci? which when we were thine enemies
didstredeme us with thy blud, and reconciled us unto God? Behold, I being hid
under the shadow of thy mer cy, do come unto the throne of thy glory
requiring, and I do ru^ crying and knocking until thou take pity upon me.
For if thou did call us to pardon and forgeuenes before we labored for
pardon: how soon shall we obtein forgeuenes when we ask it? Do not remember,
omost bou^tefull Jesus, thy justice toward a sinner? but think upon thy
liberality and gentleness toward thy creature. Do not remember thine anger
toward the guilty, but remember thy pity and mercy toward a wretch. Forget me
in yt I proudly did provoke and move thee to wrath: and look upon a wretch
that calls upon thee. For what is Jesus but a savior? Therefore, good Jesus,
for thine own sake, arise and help me: and say unto my soul. I am thy health
and thy safegarde. I presume much and am very bold of thy goodness (O Lord)
because thou do teach us to ask, to seek and to knock, wherefore I being
admonished by thy wurd do ask, seek and knock. And thou, O Lord that
commaundest us to ask, make me able to receive. Thou that geuest council to
seek, grant that I may find. Thou that teach us to knock, open to me
when I knock, and confirm me which am unstable and wavering, restore me that
am lost, raise me yt am dead: and vouchsafe to direct and govern in thy favor
all my senses, my thoughts and doings, that from hensfoorth I may serve thee,
I may live toward thee and that I may commit my self unto thee I know (O my
Lord) that through this that thou have made me, I owe and am in det unto thee
even mine own self: and because thou have redeemed me and wast made man for my
sake: for this (I say I owe unto thee more the^ my self. Lo I have no more:
nether can I give that which I have unto thee, without thee. But do thou take
me and draw me unto thee, yt I may be thine in following and loving thee: like
as I am thine in condition and, creation, which live and reignest world
without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the
father of heaven. etc

O God the son redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O
God the son, redemer of. etc.

O God ye holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners. O God the holy Ghost proceeding etc

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one god: have merci
upon us miserable sinners. O holy blessed and glorious. etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses, of our forefathers nether
take thou vengeance of our sins. Spare us good lord, spare thy people who^
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever. Spare. us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation. Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride vain glory and hipocrisy, from envy
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness. Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the world,
ye flesh and the Devil. Good Lord deliver us.

From lighteni^ges and tempests, from plague, pestilence and famine, from
batell and murder, and from sudden death. Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and priui conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from all hardness of heart, and contempt of thy wurde and Commandment. Good
Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and and
circumcision, by thy baptism fasting and temptation. Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and asce^cion, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost. Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death
and in the day of judgment. Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee, to hear us O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and go uern thy holy Church universally in the right way. We
beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true wurshipping of
thee, in righteousenes and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious Queen and gouernoure. We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please the, to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love and
that she may evermore have affiaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory. We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please the to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victori
over all her enemies. We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastoures and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy wurde: and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it furthe and show it accordingly.
We beeseche thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to endu the Lords of the counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace wisdom, and understanding. We beseech thee to hear us.
etc.

That it may please thee to bles and keep the magistrates, giving them grace to
execute justice and to maintain truth. We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people. We beseech thee to
hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity, peace, and concord. We
beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread the, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments. We beseech thee to hear us.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increace of grace, to hear
meekly thy wurd, and to receive it with pure affeccio^, and to bring forth the
fruits of ye spirit We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived. We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to stre^gthen such as do stand, and confort and help
the weak herted and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan
under our feet. We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to succor, help and confort all that be in danger,
necessity and tribulation. We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and yung children, and to show thy
pity up on all prisoners and captives. We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherles children, and
widows, and all that be desolat and oppressed. We beseech thee to hear us
etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men. We beseech thee to hear
us. etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and slau^derers,
and to turn their hearts. We beseech thee to hear us. etc

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use, the kind ly fruits of
ye earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them. We beseech thee to hear us.
etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignoraunces, and to endue us with the grace of thy
holy spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy wurde. We beseech thee
to hear us. etc.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us. Son of God we beseech thee to.
etc.

O Lamb of God that take a way the sins of the world: Grant us thy peace

O Lamb of God that take a way the sins of the world. Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us. O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacio^.

But deliver us from evil.

Amen.
The versicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

O God merciful father, that dispisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers, that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they op pres
us. And graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and sutteltie of
the devil or man wurketh against us be brought to naught and by the providence
of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy seruau^ts being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Ie sus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise help, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears and our fathers have declared unto us ye
noble wurcks that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy honor.

Glory to the father, the son, and to the holy ghost. Asit was in the
beginning, is now. etc. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our
heart.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David, have mercy upon us. Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear
us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

O Lord, let thy merci be showed upon us.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech chee, O father, mercifulli to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils yt we most
righteously have deserved: And grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and
pureness of living to thy honor and glory, through our oneli mediator and
advocate Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer for the Queens Majesty*.
O Lord our heavenly Father high and mighty, king of kings, Lord of Lords,
the only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the
dwellers upon the earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to
behold our most gracious souerain Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her
with the grace of thy holy spirit that she may always incline to thy will and
walk in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heauenli gifts. Grant her in
health and wealth long to live, strength her that she may vanquish and overcome
all her enemies. And finalli after this life, she may attain everlasting ioi
and felicitte. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For rain if the time require.
O God heavenly father which by thy son Jesus Christ, have promised to all
the^ that seek thy kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary to
their bodily sustenaunce: sed us we beseech thee in this our necessity such
moderat rain and shoures that we may receive the fruits of the earth to our
comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For fair wether.
O Lord God, which for ye sin of man did once drown all the world except
eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to
destroy it so again, we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities
have wurthely de served this Plague of rain and waters: yet upon our true
repentance, thou will send us such weather, whereby we may receive the
fruits of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend
our lives, and for thy clemency to give the praise and glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer of Chrysostom.
ALl mighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord to
make our co^ mon supplicacions unto thee, and do promise: that when. ii. or
iii. be gathered in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now (O
Lord) the desires and peticions of thy servants, as may be most expedient
for the^: grau^ting us in this world know ledge of thy truth, and in the world
to come life everlasting.

Amen.
In the time of dearth and famine.
O God heavenly father, whose gift it is yt the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increace, and fishes do multiply. Behold we beseech thee,
the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and dearth (which
we do now most iustli suffer for our iniquity) may through thy goodness be
mercifully turned into cheapnes and plenti, for the love of Jesus Christ our
Lord: to whom with thee and the holy ghost. etc.

Or thus.
O God merciful father, which in the time of Heliseus the Prophet, did
suddenly turn in Samaria, great scarcity and dearth into plenty and cheapnes,
and extreme famine into abounda^ce of victual: have pity upon us, ytnow be
punished for our sins with like adversity, increase the fruits of the earth
by thy heavenly Benedictio^: And grant that we receiving thy bountiful
liberality, may use the same to thy glory, our confort, and relief of our nedi
neighbors, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In the time of war.
O Almighty God, King of all kings, and governor of all things, whose power
no creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs iustli to punish sinners
and to be merciful unto them that truly repent: save and deliver us (we humbly
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies, abate their Pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devises, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils to glorify thee, which art the only
geuer of all victory: through the merits of thy only son Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
In the time of any common plage or sickness.
O Almighty God: which in thy wrath in the time of king Da uid did slay with
the plage of pestilence three score and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy, did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now
are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thine* angel to cease from punishing: So it may now please the to
withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
The end of the letany.
A Table of the prayers contained in this book.
A Prayer for the morning Folio. 3 A prayer for the Evening Folio. 4 A prayer
for the forgeuenes of. Folio. 5 A prayer unto God ye Father Folio. 6 A prayer
unto God the son Folio. 7 A prayer unto God the holy Folio. 8 A prayer tobe
said of Magist* Folio. 10 A prayer of ye ministers of gods wurd. Folio. 11 Of
Subjects or Eomons. Folio. 12 Of Fathers and Mothers. Folio. 13 Of the
Children. Folio. 14 Of Masters. Folio. 15 Of Servant. Folio. 16 Of maids.
Folio. 17 Of Single men. Folio. 19 Of Husbands* Folio. 20 Of Wives. Folio. 21
Of householders. Folio. 22 Of all Christians. Folio. 23 For the grace and favor
of God. Folio. 24 For the gift of the holy Ghost Folio. 25 For the true
knowledge of our selves. Folio. 26 For a pure and a clean heart Folio. 27 For a
quiet conscience. Folio. 28 For faith. Folio. 29 For Charity. Folio. 30 For
patience. Folio. 31 For humility. Folio. 32 For Mercifulnes. Folio. 33 For
true Godliness. Folio. 34 For the true understanding of Gods wurd. Folio. 35 For
a life agreeable to our know ledge. Folio. 36 For the health of the body. Folio.
37 For a good name. Folio. 38 For a compitent living. Folio. 39 For a pacient
and thankful heart in sickness. Folio. 40 For strength against the Deuel, the
world and the Flesh. Folio. 41 For the help of Gods holy Angels. Folio. 42 A
prayer to our lord Jesus Christ called Conditor celi and terrae. Folio. 43 For
the glory of heaven. Folio. 47 A thanks giving unto God for all his benefits.
Folio. 48 A prayer to be said at the hour of death. Folio. 50 A prayer wherein,
through commemoratio^ of Christ's passion: we desire pardon of our sins and
continuance in virtue and godliness. Folio. 53 A Prayer wherein Man confesses
him self to be the cause of Christ's passion. Folio. 56 Here does man declare
unto God the Father, that the passion of his son was for his reconciliacio^
and atto^ment with God. Folio. 61 A devout Prayer to the holy Ghost. Folio. 67
A Prayer to ye holy Trinity. Folio. 69 An acknowledging of Allmighty God and
his majesty. eode^. After what sort God the Father vouched safe to help
ma^kinde, and of thincarnatio^ of the wurd which is Christ, and of the giving
of thanks. Folio. 72 Of the trust which a soul ought to have in our Lord
Jesus and in his passion. Folio. 75 Of thexceding love of theuerlasting Father
toward mankind. Folio. 77 Of the double nature of Christ which has mercy
upon, us and makes intercession for us. Folio. 81 Of the thanks which man
ought to give unto God for the benefit of his redemption. Folio. 84 A devout
prayer unto Christ. Folio. 88 A prayer declaring with how great miseries this
life is replenished. Folio. 92 Of the blessedness of that life which God has
prepared for them that love him Folio. 94 A complaint that we be not moved nor
pricked in our contemplation and prayer like as the Angels be, which tremble
at the sight of God. Folio. 96 A very devout prayer for the giving of thanks.
Folio. 99 A prayer wherein man's mind is very much and plentuously stirred
and moved, If it be said in quietness. Folio. 107 A prayer in time of
tribulation. Folio. 118 A very devout prayer unto the Son. Folio. 120 The
Letany. Folio. 128
The end of the. Table.


Imprinted at London over Aldersgate benethe. S. Martins, by John Day. 1561.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


