HOLLANDS LEAGVER.

AN EXCELLENT COMEDY AS IT HAS BIN LATELY and often Acted with great applause,
by the high and mighty Prince CHARLES his Servants; at the private house in
Salisbury Court.

Written by SHACKERLEY MARMYON, Master of Arts.

-- Vult haec sub luce videri,
Indicis argutum quia non formidat acumen.
Printed at London by I.B. for JOHN GROV^ dwelling in Swan-Yard within Newgate.
1632.

To the Reader.
CVrteous Reader (for so I presume thou art) if otherwise, thou losest the
title of being styled ingenious; for there are none but favor learning, if
they so much as pretend to it: but I hope I need make no apology, either to
gain thy favor, or to credit the Work, it has so often passed with
approbation, that I have hopes it will continue it. If there be any so
supercilious to condemn it, before they read it, let them rest content with
the title, and not enter into the Theater, unless they intend to behold the
Florales. However, my Muse has descended to this subject; let men esteem of
her, only as a reprover, not an interpreter of wickedness: Occultare
peccantis, promulgare ludentis est.

Aristippus being compelled to dance in purple against the dignity of a
Philosopher, made an excuse, that the baits of sin had no power on a good
nature: and Plato having composed wanton Verses, affirmed, that the more plain
they were, the more honest: and your former Writers, in their accurate
discovery of vice, have mingled the precepts of wisdom. If thou shall accept
this as it was simply meant, the applause it has obtained, shall not so much
crown it as thy acceptance.

SHACKERLEY MARMYON.

Dramatis Personae.
Philautus, a Lord inamord of himself. William Brown. Ardelio, his parasite.
Ellis Worth. Trimalchio, a humorous gallant. Andrew Keyne. Agurtes, an
Impostor. Matthew Smith. Antolicus, his disciple. James Sneller. Capritio, a
young Novice. Henry Gradwell. Miscellanio, his Tutor. Thomas Bond. Snarle,
friends to Philautus. Richard Fowler. Fidelio. friends to Philautus. Edward
May. Ieffery, tenant to Philautus Robert Huyt. Triphoena, wife to Philautus.
Robert Stratford. Faustina, sister to Philautus. Richard Godwin. Millescent,
daughter to Agurtes. John Wright. Margery her maid. Richard Fouch. Quartilla,
Gentlewoman to Triphoena. Arthur Savill. Bawd. Samuel Mannery. 2 Whores.
Pander. Officers.
Prologue.
GEntle spectators, that with graceful eye
Come to behold the Muses Colonie,
New planted in this soil; forsook of late
By the Inhabitants, since made fortunate
By more propitious stars; though on each hand
To overtop us, two great Laurels stand;
The one, when she shall please to spread her train,
The vastness of the Globe cannot contain;
The Other so high, the Phoenix does aspire
To build in, and takes new life from the fire
Bright Poesy creates; yet we partake
The Influence they boast of, which does make
Our Bays to flourish, and the leaves to spring,
That on our branches now new Poets sing;
And when with joy he shall see this resort,
Phoebus shall not disdain to stile't his Court.
HOLLANDS LEAGVER.
ACT. 1.
SCEN. 1.
Fidelio, Snarle. Fid. WHat Snarle, my dear Democritus, how is it?
You are a Courtier grown, I hear.

Snarl. No Sir:
That's too deep a mystery for me to profess.
I spend my own revenewes, only I have
An itching humor to see fashions.

Fidel. And what have you observed, since you came hither?


Snarl. Why they do hold here the same Maxim still;
That to dissemble, is the way to live:
But promotion hangs all upon one chain,
And that's of gold; he that intends to climb,
Must get up by the linkes; and those are tied
Together, with the thread of my Lords favor.

Fidel. So Sir.


Snar. And all desire to live long, and healthy;
But ambition and luxury will not permit it.

Fid. I hope you do not share in their desires.


Sna. There is other preposterous dealing too;
Fornature cannot find her self amongst them,
There Is such effeminacy in both sexes,
They cannot be distinguished asunder;
And for your times and seasons of all ages;
Your best Astrologer cannot discern them,
Not Spring from Autumn; you shall have a Lady,
Whose cheek is like a scrue, and every rinkle
Would look like a furrow, yet with a garnish
Is so filled up and plai^tred, that it looks
As fresh as a new painted tavern only

Fid. Hold there, you will run your self out of breath else:
And now resolve me of the Lord Philautus:
Is all that true that is reported of him?

Snar. Who, he? the most besotted on his beauty;
He studies nothing but to court himself;
No Music but the harmony of his limbs;
No work of art but his own symmetry,
Allures his sense to admiration.
And then he comes forth so bathed in perfumes,
Had you no sense to guide you, but your nose,
You Would think him a Muske-cat, he smells as rank,
As the extreme unction of two funerals.

Fid. My sense will note be able to endure him.


Sna. Such men as smell so, I suspect their favor.


Fid. Is none his friend to tell him of his faults?


Sna. There want not some, that seek to flatter him;
For great men's vices are esteemed as virtues.

Fid. O they are still in fashion: in them
A wry neck is a comely president:
Disorder, disagreement in their lives
And manners is thought regular, their actions
Are still authenticke, if it be received;
To be illiterate, is a point of state.
But the worst thing which I dislike in him,
Which he does more by words then action:
He gives out that the Ladies dote upon him,
And that he can command them at his pleasure,
And swears, there is scarce an honest woman.

Fid. How.


Sna. It is not well to say so, but by this light,
I am of his mind too.

Fid. You are deceived,
There are a thousand chaste.

Snar. There was an age
When Juno was a maid, and Iov^ had no beard,
When miserable Atlas was not oppressed
With such a sort of Dieties, and each
Dined by himself: before Vshers and Pages
Swarmed so, and Banquets, and your Masks came up
Riding in Coaches, visiting, and Titles,
So many Plays, and Puritan preachings,
That women might be chaste; now it is impossible:
Now should I find such a prodigious faith,
I Would honour't with a sacrifice.

Fid. It Is ill
To be incredulous, when charity
Exacts your belief: but let that pass:
What will you say, if I find out a means
To cure him of his folly?

Snar. Then I pronounce
The destruction of Bedlam, and all mad folks
Shall be thy patients.

Fid. Nay, I Will do it:
I Will make him in love, and do it.

Snar. That Is a cure
Worse then any disease. I can as soon
Believe a fire may be extinct with oil,
Or a Fever coold with drinking of Sack.

Fid. Suspend your judgment, till I confirm you.


Snarl. No more, stand by, here comes the Parasite.
That is Narcissus, and this is his Echo.

Fid. What is he?


Snar. One that feeds all men's humors that feed him,
Can apprehend their jests, before they speak them,
And with a forced laughter play the Midwife.
To bring them forth, and carries still in store
A Plaudite, when they break wind, or urine.
He fits his Master right, although he nere
Took measure of him, and though he has not been
Far from home, yet will lie like a Traveller.
He Will rather vex you with officiousness
Then you shall pass unsaluted: his business
Is only to be busy, and his tongue's still walking,
Though himself be one of the worst movables:
A confused lump leavened with knavery.
Stand by a little, and let us hear his discourse.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 2.
Ardelio, Ieffry, Fidelio, Snarle. Ard. IEffry come hither.


Ieff. Sir, I wait upon you.


Ard. Ieffry, you know that I have ever been
Indulgent to your knaveries.

Ieff. I thank your worship, you have ever been my friend.


Ard. Winked at your faults.


Ieff. True.


Ard. And the reason is.
Because I still am welcome to thy wife.

Ieff. Your worship may be welcome there at all times.


Ard. Honest Ieffry, thou shall lose nothing by it.
You know my authority in the house: my Lord
Puts all the care into my hands, has left me
The managing of his estate, because
I know the way to humor him.

Ieff. That is an evident token of your worships wisdom.


Ard. And none of them have any place or being,
Without my suffrance.

Ieff. Sir, you are of power to disperse us like attomes.


Ard. Therefore I expect the reverence is due unto my place.


Ieff. And reason good.


Ard. Well, for thy honest care,
I mean to substitute thee under me
In all inferior matters, for I mean
To take my ease, and pamper up my Genius,
As well as he, only for entertainments,
Or any thing belongs unto the Kitchen;
Let me alone,

Ieff. Yes Sir, your providence
Has showed it self sufficiently that way.

Ard. I Will take the air in his Coach, eat of the best,
And for my private drinking, I will have
My choice of Wines, filled out of vessels, whose age
Has worn their Countries name out, and their own,
Like some unthankful Hospital, or College,
That has forgot their Founder.

Snar. To what purpose,
I wonder, should Nature create this fellow?
He is good for nothing else, but to maintain
The mutiny of the Paunch, against the members.
Keep him from his Whore, and his Sack, and you
Detain him from his center.

Ard. By the way,
I will acquaint thee with a secret Ieffry.

Ieff. What Is that, Sir?


Ard. I do love a pretty Wench well.


Ieff. It Is the only gentile humor that is extant.


Ard. I will not leave my recreation that way
For a whole Empire, it is my summum bonum,
My sole felicity, tickles my conceit,
But not a word.

Ieff. Not I by any means, Sir?


Ard. And for this cause, I mean t'apply my self
Wholly to my Venery. I feel this heat
Renewes my blood, and makes me younger for it.
And thou shall keep one for me at thy house.

Ieff. Where, at my house?


Ard. I, there, a heavy burden
Of fleshly desires, daily grows upon me;
And ease works on my nature, once a week,
When I am ballasted with wine, and lust,
I Will sail to my Canaries.

Ieff. And unlade there.


Ard. Wilt keep her form, and let none come near her.


Ieff. I have had such favor at your worships hands,
That should good fortune come in humane shape
To tempt your Mistress, I Would not let her in.

Ard. I Will procure thee the Lease of thy house free,
And when I have done, I Will see it shall not stand empty:
Have thou any good rooms for Stowage there?

Ieff. Spare rooms enough, Sir, why do you ask?


Ard. Because I will convay away some Household stuff.
That Is not amiss.

Ief. No Sir.


Ard. It Is quite against my nature to see any vacuum.
Besides, it is not an age to be honest in.

Ieff. That Is the high way to poverty.


Ard. I mean to make the benefit of my place therefore.
And when I have done, I Would feign see all your Artists,
Your Politicians with their Instruments
And Plummets of wit, sound the depth of me.

Ieff. It lies not in the reach of man to fathom it.


Ard. Were I set in a place of Justice now,
They would admire me, how I should become it;
Cough on the Bench of State, sit in my nightcap,
Stroke out an Apophthegme out of my beard,
Frame a grave City face, jeere at offenders,
Cry out upon the vices of the times,
O Tempores, O morums.

Snar. How the rank Rascal
Is overgrowne with flesh and villainy?

Ard. This getting of money is a mystery,
Is to be learnt before a man's Alphabet,
No matter how, it is supposed, he that has it
Is wise and virtuous, though he be obscure,
A fugitive, and perjured, any thing,
He, and his cause, shall neither want for friends.
He is the chicke of the white Hen, old Fortune:
What ere he treads upon, shall be a Rose.
He shall be invited to his Capon, and Custard,
Ride to the Sheriffs a feasting on his Foot cloth,
Possess the highest room, have the first carving,
With please you eat of this, or that, my Noble,
My Right Worshipful brother? your rich men
Shall strive to put their sons to be his Pages,
And their wives to be his Concubines.

Ieff. Shall marry young ones a purpose for him.


Snar. Very likely.


Ard. No more, be gone, I hear my Lord a coming,
I Will send thee my Wench, mark me, keep her close:

Ieff. Believe it, not a breath of air comes near her,
But what steals in at the window.

Ard. It Is well said.


Ieff. But stay, Sir, will she not be too great a charge
To keep her to your self, what if you hired her
By the month, as your Factors do beyond Sea,
And when she is grown old and leakie, Sir,
Mend her in the docke, and fraught her ore for Holland.

Ard. I, ore the water, 'twas well thought upon.
I think, and she were trimd up, she would serve
At last for such a voyage well enough.
What will thou say, when I have done with her,
If I do make thee Master of my bottom?

Ieff. Who me? the devil shall be the Pilote first,
Ere I come near their quicksands, their base roads.
They have a dangerous Key to come into.

Ard. What ere the Key be, still the dore's kept fast.


Ieff. As strict as an Aldermans at dinner time:
I, and the way to hell is grown so narrow,
A man's in danger to pass ore, for if
We reele beside the bridge, straight we shall fall
Into a Lake that will foully dight us,
Darker and deeper, then Styx or Cocitus.

Adr. Well rim'd Ieffry, this knave will come in time,
By being often in my Company,
And gleaning but the refuse of my speech,
T'arrive at some proportion of wit,
But to avoid suspicion, be gone.
Exit Ieffry. Now would I see the man that should affront me.
My Lord will straight be here, I Will entertain him,
And talk as superciliously, and walk
As stately, as the Warden of a college,
Until I have made a right Pupil of him.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 3.
Snarle, Fidelio, Ardelio. Snar. HOw now Ardelio, what? so melancholy?


Ard. Faith all this day I have bin so imploid
With setting things in order, and provisions,
I can compare my pains to nothing less,
Then a Lord Generals.

Snar. Why what is the matter?


Ard. Things must be ordered, and there is nothing
Done, unless I ouersee it; my industry
Must marshall the Dishes, put the Stools in rank,
See the Wood set upon the carriages,
Sharpen the Knives; all these witness mycare
The very shining of the Candlestickes
Acknowledge my directions.

Snar. It Is much,
The strange activity that some men have
To dispatch business.

Ard. Why Sir, did you never
Hear how Apelles pictured Homer spewing,
And all the Poets gaping to receive it?

Snar. Yes, and what then?


Ard. In the same manner do I,
Upon the Hushers, the Clarks, and the Butlers,
The Cooks, and other Officers, amongst whom
I find to be a drought of understanding,
Shower down the dregs of my counsel.

Snar. They are like to be well edified.


Ard. Here comes my Lord, make room for my Lords grace.


ACT. 1. SCEN, 4.
Philautus, Triphaena, Trimalchio, Ardelio. Snarle, Fidelio. Ard. GOd save your
honor, may your flourishing youth
Enjoy an everlasting spring of beauty,
And know no Autumn.

Philau. Thanks good Ardelio:
Your wishes have effect, this is the tree,
Under whose shadow Flora builds her Bower,
And on whose branches, hangs such tempting fruit,
Would draw fair Atalanta from her course;
An Altar, on which Queens should sacrifice
Their scorned loves: Nature will scarce believe
It is her own invention, and repines
She has no way to be incestuous.

Triphae. Mr. Trimalchio, I am sick to hear him.
I cannot abide these repetitions,
And tedious Encomiums of himself:
Let you and I walk a turn in the Garden.

Trim. You are the only Garden of ^y delight,
And I your dear Adonis, honored Lady.

Exeunt Trimalchio, T^iphaena. Philau. Ardelio, tell me how this suit becomes
me?


Ard. Exactly well, Sir without controversy,
And you wear it as neatly.

Philau. Nay I have
A reasonable good Tailor, I hope he has not
Survayd me so long, but he knows my dimensions.
I think, I may venture in the presence with it.

Ard. In The presence, I, and love were in the presence,
You Would thrust Ganimede out of his office.

Philan. What think you Gentlemen?


Fid. We all do wish,
Your beauty, or your vanity were less.
For by this means, that which would else commend you,
Proves your disgrace, you take the edge of praise off,
Is due to you, by too much whetting it.

Philau. I should prove too injurious to my self,
Should I pass over, with a slight regard,
This building, Nature has solemnized
With such Magnificence, to which I owe
The loves of Ladies, and their daily presents,
Their hourly solicitations with letters,
Their entertainments when I come, their plots
They lay to view me, which should I recount,
'Twould puzzell my Arithmeticke, and to answer
Their unjust desires, would ask the labors
Of some ten Stallions.

Ard. And make all jades of them.


Fid. You are the Center of all women's love then.


Philau. It Is true, I have a strange attractive power
Over your females, did you never hear of
Three Goddesses, that strove on Ida hill,
Naked before a shepherd, for a Ball,
With an inscription; Let the fairest have it.

Fidel. And what of those?


Phil. Bring them all three before me:
If I surprise them not all at first dash,
If they fall not together by the ears for me,
Nay, if they run not mad, and follow me,
As if they were drunk with a love potion,
Nere trust a Prognosticator again.

Snar. But how if you should chance to meet Diana?
Take heed of her, it is a testy Girl,
A professed Virgin. Phil. It Is my ambition
To meet with her, to bath my limbs with her,
In the same Well, shoot in her bow, dance with her,
And get the foremost of her troop with child,
And turn the rape on Jupiter.

Snar. Fine in faith.


Fid. It seems that you are of opinion,
There is no text of woman-kinde so holy,
But may be corrupted, though a Deity.

Philau. Ardelio, tell me what thou do think of them.


Ard. Who I? hang me should I be questioned
Now for my faith, concerning Articles,
Of women's chastity, I should be burnt
For a rank Heretic, I believe none of them.

Fid. But I think otherwise; and can justify it.
What if I bring you now unto a beauty
As glorious as the Sun, but in desire
Cold, as the middle Region of the air,
And free from all reflection of lust?

Philau. But shall I speak with her, and tempt her to it?


Fid. You shall converse with her, and she shall feed
Your sense with such discoursive influence,
And a voice sweeter than the Lydian tunes
Jove would bow down his ear to, yet her blood
Shall run as cold as Iulips through her veins:
The springtide of her youth, shall swell with more
Delights, then there be drops in April, yet she
As chaste as Salmacis, amidst the streams.
Her eye shall sparkle like the Diamond,
And be as pure, her kisses soft and melting,
As the South wind; but undefiled as heaven.
And you shall feel the Elementall fire
Of her unspotted love, and grieve, and swear
She is so celestial, and Divine a creature,
That's only hot in her effect, not nature.

Philau. Why such an one would I converse withal.
The Conquest will be greater, shall I see her?

Fid. I Will bring you to her.


Ard. He has a strong belief.
I have no such confidence, she may be Lucresse,
And he' a foolish Colatine to brag of her.
But most of them, in playing fast and loose,
Will cheat an Orac^^. I have a creature
Before these, ^ou^^iers (...) their lips at her,
I Will trust a want^n bag^a^^ (...) the w^nd.

Fid. This Lady (...) sister and (...) M^s^ris.
Yet both unknown to him, some few years since,
Her father jealous of my love, because
I was a Gentleman of no great fortune,
Sent her away, and charged her by an oath,
To marry none, till seven years were expired,
Six parts of which are gone, yet she remains
Constant to what she promised, though his death,
Has partly quit her: To live in her sight,
And not enjoy her, is a heavenly torment,
But unsufferable, I must live apart,
Till the praefixed minute be expired.
In the mean time, I Will work by some good means,
To win his love, and draw him from his folly.
But first by him, I Will try her constancy.
I must prepare her for his entertainment,
Because she will admit no Company,
Nor will be known to any, but my self.
Come Sir, let us go, by that which shall ensue,
You shall affirm, what I relate, is true.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 5.
Agurtes, Autolicus. Agur. It Is a dull age this same, casts not her eyes
On men of worth, Captains and Commanders,
Victorious abroad, are vanquished at home,
With poverty, and disgrace, they look as bad
As Brutus, when he met his evil Genius:
Worse, then they had been frighted from the ruins
Of Isis Temple; and you Sir, for your part,
That have been brought up under me at my elbow,
A daily witness unto all my proiects,
That might have got experience enough
To cozen a whole State, if they had trusted you.
Now to be wanting to your self, worn out,
No name, or title, but on posts, and trenchers,
And doors, scor'd with a cole, in stead of chalk.
Are my hopes come to this?

Autol. What should I do?
I have no thriuing way to lie and flatter,
Nor have I such dexterity of wit
As you have (blessed be heaven) to convert
Black into white.

Agur. Nay, if you have no will,
Nor power to fr^e your self, you must resolve
To stick in the dirt still.

Autol. Nor can I promise
The death of any by the Stars, I have
No rich man's funeral to folemnize,
That left a guilt ring for my Legacy,
And his old Velvet jerkin to survive him.
I have no secret boyles within my breast.
For which I am feared, no s^it in Law to follow,
No accusation against a great man,
No house to let to farm, ^o tender wife
To prostitute, or skill to corrupt others,
And sleep amidst their wanton Dialogues.

Agur. I cry you mercy, you would feign be styled
An honest politic fool, ^ee all men's tu^nes
Served but your own; so leave off to be good.
For what is now accounted to be good?
Take a good Lawyer, or a good Attorney,
A Citizen that is a good Chapman;
In a good sense what are they? I would knows
Why a good Gamester, or a good Courtier?
Is It for their honest dealing? Take a good Poet,
And if he write not bawdy lines and raptures,
I Will not give a pin for him.

Autol. Would you have me
Act the plagiary, and seek preferment,
To be the drunken ba^d of some black stews?
And think my destin^e well satisfied,
When my shame feeds me, and at length expect
A Legacy, bequeathed me from some Bawd,
In lieu of my old service, or according
To the proportion of my Hernia.

Agur. Well I perceive that I must once more take you
To my protection, which if I do,
I Will teach you better rules, you shall no more
Commit your misery to loose papers.
Nor court my Lord with Panegyricks, nor make
Strange Anagrams of my Lady: you shall not need
To deal for stale Commodities, nor yet
Send forth your privy Bills without a Seal,
To free you from your lodging, where you have
Lain in, most part of the vacation.
You shall no longer run in score with your hostess
For brown Tosts and Tobacco, but you shall leave
Your open standings at the ends of Lanes,
Or your close coverts in Tobacco-shops,
Where you give strickt attendance like a Sergeant,
Until some antidated Country cloak
Pass by, whom you most impudently may
Assault, to borrow twelve pence; but bear up
Stiffly, and with the best.

Autol. How shall that be done?


Agur. We will not call Tiresias from the dead,
To show us how, as he did once Ulysses.
You must resolve to learn virtue from others,
Fortune from me.

Autol. For that I Will make no scruple.


Agur. I have a bird in the wind, I Will fly thee on him.
He shall be thy adventure, thy first quarry.

Autol. What Is he?


Agur. A golden one, that drops his feathers,
That has received his patrimony, gives money
For all acquaintance, when he first came up,
His only search was for prime Curtezans.
And those he entertained for Mistresses,
Only sometimes to drink a health to them,
The Ladies too would use him for a cooler,
But they suspect his silence, yet he uses
Their names and titles as familiarly
As he had bought them, thou shall hook him in,
And crack him like a Nut.

Autol. Is he not the Son
To the rich Usurer, that died so lately?

Agur. The same, that heaped up money by the Bush^l;
And now this studies how to scatter it.
His father walks to see what becomes of it,
And that is his torment after death.

Autol. When shall I see him?


Agur. He is to meet me here within this hour,
Then take you an occasion to pass by,
And I will whisper to him privately,
And praise thee, beyond Pirrbus or Hannibal.
You must talk, and look big, 'twill be the grace on it.

Autol. What shall I turn a Roarer?


Agur. Any thing.
Broker, or Pandar, Cheater, or Lifter,
And steal like a Lacedemonian.
Observe what I do, and fill up the Scene.
Enter Boy. How now? what news?

Boy. Sir, there is some five or six without to speak with you.


Agur. How, five or six.


Boy. Yes, Sir, and they pretend
Great business.

Agur. What manner of men are they?


Boy. They look like pictures of Antiquity.
And their cloakes seem to have bin the coverings
Of some old Monuments.

Agur. They are my Gibeonites,
Are come to traffic with me, some design
Is now on foot, and this is our Exchange time.
These are my old proiectors, and they make me
The superintendent of their business.
But still they shoot two or three bows too short,
For want of money and adventurers.
They have as many demurres as the Chancery,
And hatch more strange imaginations
Than any dreaming Philosopher: one of them
Will undertake the making of Bay Salt,
For a penny a Bushel, to serve the State,
Another dreams of building water-workes,
Drying of Fennes and Marshes, like the Dutchmen.
Another strives to raise his fortunes, from
Decayed Bridges, and would exact a tribute
From Alehouses, and signe-posts: some there are,
Would make a thorow-fare for the whole kingdom,
And office, where Nature should give account
For all she took, and sent into the world.
But they were borne in an unlucky hour,
For some unfortunate mischance or other,
Still come a'thwart them; well I must into them,
And feast them with new hopes, 'twill be good sport,
To hear how they dispure it, Pro, and Con.
In the mean time, Autolicus, prepare
To meet my Courtier.

Antol. I have my Q. Sir.


ACT. 2.
SCEN. 1.
Agurtes, Trimalchio. Agur. It Is near about the time he promised.


Trim. Boy,
Go and dispatch those Letters presently.
Return my service to the Lady Lautus.
And carry back her Watch, and Diamond.
Ask if the Dutch^sse has been there to day.
And if you chance to see the Lord her brother,
Tell him I'lll meet him at the Ambassadors.

Boy. I shall Sir.


Agur. What M. Trimalchio.
Yo' are punctual to your hour.
Trim. Sir, for your sake,
I can dispense with my occasions.
You Will not imagine what a heavy stir,
I had to come to day.

Agur. Why what is the matter?


Trim. No less then seven Ceaches to attend me,
To fetch me Valens, No^^ns.

Agur. Pray from whom?


Trim. The Lord Philantus, and some min^ Nobles.
Whose names, I am loa^h should clog my memory.
They strove for me, as the seven Grecian Cities
Were said to wrangle about the blind Poet.

Agur. How got you rid of them?


Trim. I had the grace
To go with none of them, made an excuse.
TO avoid their troublesome visitations.

Agur. How do they relish your neglect of them?


Trim. I know not, yet I still abuse them all.


Agur. How? not abuse them.


Trim. I mean laugh at them.
Some passages, some sprinkling of my wit,
No otherwise, for which you little think
How I am feared amongst them, how the Ladies
Are took with my conceits, how they admire
My wit, and judgment, trust me with their secrets,
Beyond their Painter, or Apothecary.
I Will tell you in a word, but 'twill perplexe you,
I am their Lasanophorus.

Agur. Their Pisse-pot carrier.


Trim. Their winged Mercury, to be employed
On messages, and for my company,
They swear it is the Element they move in.

Agur. You are happy, Siguier Trimalchio.


Trim. I thank my Fates, they have not altogether
Envyed me the fruition of such gifts
Are worth the taking notice of, besides
Some special helps of our own industry.
I lately studied the Economicks.

Agur. What Is that?


Trim. The ordering of my Family.
I have reduced it to a certain method.

Agur. As how?


Trim. I Will tell you, since, my fatehrs death,
First thing I did, I casheir'd his old servants;
And to avoid confusion, and expense,
I left the Country, to revel it here.
In The view of the world, and in the sight of beauties,
And have confined my self unto some certain
Appendices, some necessary implements.
My single Page, my Coach, my Groom, my Footboy,
And my two pentionarie Whores.

Agur. And these
Are all your inventorie.

Trim. Stay, who comes there?

Enter Autolicus.
Agur. O it is Autolicus.
My Noble friend and brother of the Sword;
His stomach, and his Blade are of one temper,
Of equal edge, and will eat flesh alike.
He walks there melancholy; to show that worth
Can pass unregarded, be proud to know him,
He is the shrewdest pated fellow breathing,
The only Engineere in Christendom,
Will blow you up a Caracke like a squib,
And row under water. the Emperor,
And Spinola, by secret intelligence,
Have laid out for him any time this ten years,
And twice he has escaped them by a trick.
He is beyond Doedalus, or Archim^des,
But lives concealed like a Seminary,
For fear the State should take notice of him.
Machavill for policy, was a Dunce to him,
And had he lived in Mahomets days, h' had been
His only Counselor for the Alcaro^:
He is newly come from Holland.

Trim. My body
Is all of an itch, to be acquainted with him,
Pray speak to him for me.

Agur. Nay more, he is able
To make you a perfect Statesman in a month,
Able to be employed beyond the Line.

Trim. You will for ever thrall me to your service.


Agur. Hark you, Autolicus, here is a Centleman,
Who though he be the Phoebus of the Court,
So absolute in himself, that the desires
Of all men tend toward him, and has power
Enough, to wander in the Zodiac
Of his own worth, yet craves your acquaintance.

Autol. I take, S^guiour Trimalchio.


Trim. Do you know me then?


Agur. By an instinct, Sir, men of quality
Cannot lie hid.

Trim. Indeed, my fathers name
Was Malchio, for my three additions,
Of Valor, Wit, and Honor, it is enlarged
To Mr. Trimalchio; this is wonderful.

Agur. Alas, it is nothing, Sir, if you knew all.
No Ambuscado of the enemy,
No treachery, or plot, but he foresees it.
He was the first brought o^re the mystery
Of building Sconces here in England, a Trade
That many live upon.

Trim. A good Commonwealths man.


Agur. But this is certain, once in a strait Leaguer,
When they were close besieged, their Ammunition
And victuals, most part spent, he found a means,
To yield the Town on composition.

Trim. Stand by a while, I must reward his virtues.
Sir, will you please to enlarge your disposition,
TO accept a Courtesy, to bind me to you.

Autol. I do not use to sell my liberty,
But that I see your face promise true bounty.

Trim. Have you skill in the face, Sir?


Autol. I were not fit else, to be styled traveller.


Trim. How do you find my looks inclined to State?


Aut. Sir you have won me to power out my thoughts,
And (...) tell your plain, they are too loose,
Too scatterd, to pretend such an acumen,
Too much displaid, and smooth, you must have quirks,
And strange Meanders in your face to express
A State subtility, I Will make it plain.
Hereafter by demonstration in the Optics.

Trim. Who would have lost the opportunity
Of getting such a friend? Came you from Holland?

Autol. Yes, very lately.


Trim. Pray what news from Holland?


Autol. Holland's beleaguered.


Trim. What all Holland beleaguered?


Autol. And will hold out as long as Busse or B^lloign.
They have their Mote and Drawbridge, I have given them
Besides, a draft of a fortification,
Will hold them play this twelvemonth, for they keep
Their passage open, and want no supplies,
For whosoever comes, they pay them soundly:
The French have made many onflats upon them,
And still been foyld.

Trim. Is there such hot service there?


Autol. Crossing the Line's a Bath to it, I had like
Been scorcht to death with the intemperature
Of the Climate, it is the only Zona torrida,
In the whole microcosme of man or woman,
If you shall once come near the height of it,
'Twill melt you like Lightning.

Trim. Shal's build a Sconce there?


Autol. If you please.


Trim. Agreed, who is the Leader of
These factious troops?

Autol. A woman.


Trim. How, a woman?
Now by t is ^and, an Amazonian,
A Toma^^, a right Pe^this^^e.
I Will view this Leaguer by this light, and swim
Like a Leander over the Helle^pout,
That shall divide me from these Heroines.

Agur. It Is well resolved, you are not married Sir?


Trim. No pox, I know them all too well for that:
I can use them for recreation, or so.

Agur. What think you of a rich Widow?


Trim. I Will none of them,
They are like old clothes that have been worn.

Agur. I like you, that you care not for such relics;
But yet I think I have a match will fit you,
An Orphan, a young heir, that has some thousands,
Besides her possibilities, if you
Can win her, she is at her own disposing,
There Is one that knows her.

Trim. By instinct, it may be.


Autol. But for the pattern of true modesty,
It Is seldom known, riches and virtue meet
In such a mixture.

Trim. Will you bring me to her?


Agur. I, and perhaps persuade her to it, you know not
Let us secure this business first of all,
And then we will meet at the Leaguer.

Autol. It Is good counsel.


Trim. And I Will confirm all with a jointure.


Agur. Well,
It Is done,
I Will tell you more of her, she is one
Whose tender years have not as yet aspired?
The height of wickedness, but may be brought
To commit venery in her own language,
And be content with one man, has not robbed
Young boves of their voices, knows not her slights,
And doubles, nor her Labyrinths, through which,
The Minotaure her husband shall nere tracke her,
Cannot indite with ar, t^or give a censure,
Upon the lines are senth er, has no agents,
No factors, pentioners, or Champions,
Nor has her tears fixed in their Station,
To flow at her command, and so confirm
Her perjury: no^ large in her expense, nor one
That when she is dressed, will call a conventicle
Of young, and old, to pass their judgments on her,
As if her life were gagged upon the matter,
Nor carries an Ephemerides about with her,
To which sh' ascribes your forked destiny,
Nor is her body crazie, neither takes she
Physic for state, nor will rise up at Midnight
To eat her Oisters, and drink Wine, till lust
Dance in her veins, and till the house turns round,
And she discern not 'twixt her head and tail.
Nor holds strange intelligence abroad,
To furnish her discourse with, neither takes she
Her journie once a year to the Bath, nor is
So learned, as to judge betwixt your Poets,
Which of them writes best, and fluenst, nor yet
Is grown an Antiquary, to decide
Matters in Heraldry: she has no fucus,
To catch your lips like Birdlime, nor yet uses
Restoratives, more then the help of nature;
I Will speak the noblest words I can, of you:
So many women on a mere report,
Do fall in love with men, before they see them.

Trim. Nay, when I see her, I am sure of her.
I have a little have, I am to meet
A Countess at the Exchange within this hour.
Besides, I have a Catalogue of business,
If I could think on it: so I take my leave,
Farewell Gentlemen.

Autol. Farewell Sir.


Agur. Farewell sweet M. Coxcombe.
This Wench I so commended, is my daughter.
And if my skill not fails me, her I Will make
A Stale, to take this Courtier in a brake.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 2.
Fidelio, Faustina. Fid. IS there no means to absolve you of your oath?
The blame on me, let the bright day no longer
^nvy the darkness, that conceales such beauty:
You are no Votarie, and yet force your youth
To such a strict and solitary life,
Which others bound by vow, cannot perform.
I wonder at the temper of your blood,
So differing from your Sex, when your old women
Do burn with lustful thoughts, as with a Fever,
Yet you go on, in the old track of virtue,
Now overgrowne with seeds of vice.

Faust. Sweet hear me;
It is a penance that I live reserved,
Because my love to you was made abortiue,
But when due time shall perfect in her womb,
And bring it forth anew unto the birth:
I will surrender up my self, and it,
To your dispose: Let it suffice the while,
I am no haunter of your public meetings,
No entertainer, nor no visiter.
Nor did I ever trust my wandering eyes,
To view the glittering vanity of the world,
Nor ever yet did sit a guilty witness
To a lascivious, and untuned discourse,
Sounding to their phantasticke actions.

Fid. But I must begone favor at your hands,
And suffer no repulse.

Faust. What is it?


Fid. It may offend you.


Faust. It shall not.


Fid. Then know that I have boasted of your beauty.
Nay more, exposed thy virtues to the trial.

Faust. You have not prostituted them on Stalls,
To have the vulgar fingers sweat upon them,
As they do use upon your Plays and Pamphlets?

Fidel. I am engaged to bring a Lord to see you.


Faust. A Lord.


Fid. And you must use all art for his content,
With Music, Songs, and dancing, such as are
The stirrers of hot appetites.

Faust. Profane,
And idle wretch, to cast away thy hopes,
Upon a Pandarly profession.
Or did thou think, that I could be corrupted,
To personate a Strumpets dalliance?
I grieve for thee. Be gone, henceforth I Will live
Immured for ever, as an Anchorist,
From him, and thee, since thou have wronged my love.

Fid. Mistake me not, the difference 'twixt the Poles
Is not so great, as betwixt me, and baseness:
Nor is it a sinister intent to make
Your favors stale, and common as a drugge,
Which are so dear to me, that both the Iudies
Are not of equal value to ingrosse,
But for a noble and peculiar end.

Faust. This seems to me a Paradox.


Fid. It Is true.


Faust. If it be so, it is granted, speak it free.


Fid. Then if you please to grant relief
To my desires, take them in brief;
I would have you first express
All the skill that comeliness
Can invent, to make you seem
Fair, and pleasant, as loves Queen.
When she Anchises came to kiss
On the Banks of Simois.
Call the graces, and suborne
Them thy beauty to adorn,
Thy face, the table where love writes
A thousand stories of delights:
Make it all over, smooth and plain,
But see you shadow it with disdain.
Weave a net out of thy hair,
A subtle net, that may ensnare
Such fond souls as shall aspire
To come near the holy fire
Of thine eyes, which were of late,
By Cupids torch illuminate.
Use all the delusiue art
That may captiuate his heart.

Faust. What Is your intent in this?


Fid. I Will have him punished.
He casts aspersions of disloyalty,
On all your sex, and you shall vindicate them
When he is plunged in love irrevocable,
As conquered by thy all subduing look,
Then you shall bind him to conditions,
As I shall first instruct you, shall redeem
Him from his folly, and next clear your honor.

Faust. Your wi l's a law, and shall not be withstood,
When my ill's quited with another good.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 3.
Agurtes, Autolicus, Margery. Agur. MArgery, go call your Mistress.


Autol. What is she?


Agu. My daughters maid, a wench fit for the purpose,
Cunning as a Whore: besides, I have provided
A bed, and hangings, and a casting bottle,
And once a day a Doctor to visit her.
Enter Millescent. Mill^seent come hither, know this Gencleman.
Captain, herelyes our venture, this is she,
The rich Antomo's daughter, the great heir,
And Niece ^o the grand Sophies of the City;
That has been wood and sued to by great Lords,
Aldermans sons, and agents of all sorts.
Thus we have spoke thy praise, wench, has not seen
The man she likes yet, but her fortunes may
Ordain her to some better choice, to the making
Of some deserving man, which must needs be
Trimalchio, and no other; how like thou her?

Autol. Hang me, so well, I think you may go on,
In a right line, she is worthy of a better.
Few of your modern faces are so good.

Agur. That Is our comfort, she may put a good face o^'t.


Milles. Let me alone, Sir, to be impudent,
To laugh them out of countenance, look skirvy,
As a Citizens daughter new turned Madam.

Marg. I warrant you, Sir, my Mistress, and I,
Have practiced our Lirripoope together.

Agur. Thou must insinuate strange things into her
Both of her virtue and Nobility,
The largeness of her dowry, besides Jewels,
The expected death of her old grand mother,
That has a blessing for her, if she marry
According to her mind, keep him at distance,
Make him believe, it is hard to have access,
And wait the happy hour, to be let in
At the back door.

Marg, I, and the fore-doore too.


Autol. Thou have a noble wit, and spirit, wench,
That never was ordaind for any skinkard
T'ingender with, or mechanic Citizen,
Unless it were to Cuckold him, thou shall
Be stilli'th front of any fashion,
And have thy several Gowns and Tires, take place,
It is thy own, from all the City wires,
And Summer birds in Town, that once a year
Come up to moulter, and then go down to'ch Country
To jeere their neighbors, as they have been sera'd

Agur. Nay more, if you can act it handsomely,
You Will put a period to my undertakings,
And save me all my labor of proiecting,
As putting out my money on return,
From aqua pendente, or some unknown place,
That has as much ado to get a room
In The Map, as a new Saint in the Calendar.
'Twill dead all my device in making matches,
My plots of Architecture, and erecting
New Amphitheaters, to draw the custom
From Play Houses once a week, and so pull
A curse upon my head from the poor scoundrels.
'Twill hinder to the gain of Courtiers,
Put on by me, to beg Monopolies,
To have a sixth share in the business,
Nor need I trample up and down the Country,
To cheat with a Polonian, or false rings,
Nor keep a tap-house o'th Bank side, and make
A stench worse then a Brew House, amongst my neighbors,
Till I am grown so poor, that all my goods
Are shipped away in the bottom of a Sculler,
And then be driven t'inhabit some blind nooke
In The Suburbs, and my utmost refuge be
To keep a bawdy house, and be carted.

Milles Nere fear it Sir.


Agur. It Is well, speak for thy self, Girl.


Milles. If I do not, let me be turned to ashes,
And they be buried in an vrne so shallow,
That boys may piss into it, let me deal
In nothing else but making Sugar Cakes,
Ointments, and Dentifrices: Let me serve
Seven years Apprentiship, and learn nothing else,
But to preserve and candy. Let me marry
With a Pedant, and have no other dowry
Than an old cast French-hood. Let me live
The scorn of Chambermaids, and after all.
Turn a dry-nurse.

Autol. You shall have trophies, wenches,
Set up for you, in honor of your wits,
More then Herculean pillars, to advance
Your Fame to a non ultra, that who ever
Shall read your history, may not attempt
To go beyond it.

Agur. Well, prepare your selves
To entertain him.

Autol. Faith you need not doubt them,
To manage the business.

Milles. Let us alone.


Agur. We leave the charge to your discretion.


ACT. 2.
SCEN. 4.
Triphaena, Quartilla. Quar. MAdam, in troth this grief does not become you,
It Is an ill dressing for so good a face,
Yet you pursue it with such eagerness,
As if you were ambitiously sad.
It Is some invincible malignitie
Makes her untractable, deaf to all comfort.
What might I gh^sse the cause of this disaster?
Her Monkey and her Dog are both in health,
I thank my providence, only her Monkey
Is a little costiue, but I Will physic him:
Sure her intelligence arrived too late,
About the last new fashion, or the crime
Lies in the Sempster, or it must needs be
Some other grand solecisme in her Tailor.
What if it prove a Capital offense,
Committed by the tire-woman? but I believe
Some skiruy Lady put it in her head,
To practice a State melancholy, that first
Begins in an imperious revolt,
And frowning, and contempt of her own husband,
And what she might recover by the Law
In case of separation, or a nullity,
Which she already has took counsel of:
Come it is so.

Triph. Nay tell me now, Quartilla,
Can I behold the current of that love
Should flow to me with a prodigious course,
Run back to his own head, to have a husband
That should grow old in admiration
Of the rare choice he made in me, at last,
As if there were a barrenness and want
Of my perfections, dote upon himself?
I could plot against him? Prithee Quartilla,
How long have thou been chaste?

Quar. This chastity
Is quite out of date, a mere obsolete thing,
Clean out of use, since I was first a Maid,
Why do I say a Maid? let Juno plague me,
If I remember it, for I began
Betimes, and so progrest from less to bigger,
From boys to Lads, and as I grew in years,
I writ my Venery in a larger volume.

Triph. Where Is my brother?


Quar. With his Tutor forsooth


Triph. I think that dull Prometheus was asleep
When he did form him, had he but so much
As the least spark of salt that is in me,
He would see me righted.

Quart. He is very obtuse,
And so are many of your elder brothers.
I carried all the wit from mine, when I
Was young, I Would have look: a Captain in the face,
Answered him in the Dialogue, and have stood
On tip-toe to have kissed him: But for your brother,
Do not despair good Madam, what although
His breeding be a little course, he may be
A Lord in's time, now he has means enough?

Thiph. I sent for him up hither to that purpose:
But yet I am ashamed to have him seen,
Or show him publicly.

Quar. You have provided
A Tutor to inst^uct him, a rare man,
One that has poisoned me with eloquence,
I fear he will make my belly swell with it.

Triph. Go call the Novice hither, and his Tutor.
Exit Quartilla. And now I think on it. Mr. Trimalchio
Shall take him strait to court with him, to learn
And imitate his fashions, suck from him
The Quintessence of education.
He is the only man I know, and for
His face, it is the abstract of all beauty.
Nor does his voice sound mortal, I could dwell
For ever on his lip, his very speech
Would season a tragedy; nay more, there is
A natural grace in all his actions.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 5.
Thiphaena. Quartilla, Capritio, Miscellanio. Triph. What are you come, it is
well, advance yet forward
We ever told you what a hateful vice
This bashfulnesse was counted.

Quart. You forget
The Theoremes we told you. Lord how often
Shall we enforce these documents upon you?

Capr: May not a man buy a brazen face, think you,
Among all this Company?

Quar. By no means
Your Tradesmen will not part with them, there are
Many in the City have such furniture,
But they do keep them for their own wearing.

Miscel. Stand by a while, let me salute these Ladies.
Hail to these twins of honor, and of beauty.

Quar. Sir, you transgress in your opinion,
If you consider both, alas my beauty
Is much exhausted.

Miscel. Lady, you are deceived,
For you are amiable, or else I have
In vain, so often exercised my judgment
In the distinction of faces.

Quart. I shall
Be proud to be so seated in your favor.

Triph. But tell me, Signeour Miscellanio,
What think you of your pupil?

Miscel. Troth I found him
As rude as any Chaos, so confused
I knew not which way to distinguish him.
He seemed to me, not to participate
Of any Gentle Nature, never I think,
To fashion out a Mercury with such
A crooked piece of timber, was attempted
By a true traveller: but I hope in time
To rectify him, for Labor vincit omnia.

Triph. Does he come on well, is there any hope
He will receive his true dye, his right tincture?

Miscel. I warrant you, that I Will make him in time,
A perfect Caveleiro: he shall wear
His clothes as well, and smell as rank as they,
And court his Mistress, and talk idly: that is
As much as can be required in a true Gallant,
T'approue him one: nay more too, he shall dance
And do the half Pomado, play at Gleeke,
And promise more than ere he will perform,
And nere part with a penny to a Tradesman
Til he has beat him for it: shall walk the streets
As gingerly, as if he feared to hurt
The ground he went on, whilst his cast down eye
Holds commerce with his leg: shall utter nothing
What ere he thinks, yet sweare't what ere it be.
Nay more, he shall vow love to all he sees,
And damn himself to make them believe it.
Shall fawn on all men, yet let his friend perish,
For what he spends in one day on his Punke,
For Coach hire: these are special properties,
And must be often practiced, to remember,
He shall never rise till it be ten a clock,
And so be ready against dinner time.

Caprit. 'Slight and my father had not bin an Ass,
I might have been able to have writ this down.

Triph. Pray let me hear how he has profited.


Miscel. Salute these Ladies as you were instructed.
You must conceive the coldness of his courtship,
As yet points but one way; you may suppose it
To his disdainful Mistress, when he shall come to
The Cape de bone speranza of her love,
He may vary like the compass of his complement.

Capr. Lady, the Fates have led me to your service,

To know my self unworthy of your favors.
Yet let me so far win upon your bounty,
That what I utter in humility,
May not cause my contempt, or have my love
Shak'd off, because it is ripe, but let me hang by
The stalk of your mercy, the remnant of whose life
Lies in your power.

Miscel. Your oath now to confirm it,
If she should chance to doubt, or press you to it.

Caprit. That Is true indeed. By the structure of your breasts,
And by the si^ken knot that ties your hair
Upon the top of your crown, I protest it.

Quart. If he can persevere, it is excellent.

Enter Trimalchio.
Trim. Where be these noble Ladies?


Triph. Sir you are come in the most happy hour,
I was wishing for you.

Trim. I am in haste,
And only come to see you: there is a banquet
Stands ready on the table, and the Lords
Swear they will not sit down, until I come.

Trip. You still are in such have, when you come hither.


Trim. I think I must retire my self, I am
So sued and sought to, where I come, I am grown
Even weary of their loves: Last night at a Masque,
When none could be admitted. I was led in
By the hand, by a great Lord, that shall be namelesse,
And now this morning early, in his Chamber,
A Fencer would needs play with me at foyles,
I hit him in three places, and disarmed him.

Quar. Why now my dream is out, I lay last night
Upon my back, and was adream'd of fighting.

Trip. Sir, will you please to know these Gentlemen,
My brother, and his Tutor.

Trim. I must crave pardon,
Is this your brother?

Triph. Yes.


Trim. I must embrace him.
I never saw a man in all my life
I so affected on the sudden, sure
There Is some Nobility does lurk within him
That Is not perspicuous to every eye:
He promises so fair, I should have known him
To be your brother, had you not told me so.

Miscel. Your method now of thanks.


Caprit. Right Noble Sir,
I have so often times been honored,
And so much madefied.

Quart. That word I taught him.


Capr. With the distilling influence of your bounty.
That I must blame my self, and my hard fortune,
That has envyed me the ability
To render satisfaction.

Miscel. Very well.


Trip. Sir you must pardon him, he is but a Novice,
Newly initiated, and it is his fault,
That he is bashful.

Trim. Is that all? I Will take him
To Court with me, where he shall be acquainted
With Pages, Laundresses, and waiting women,
Shall teach him impudence enough.

Trip. It Is my desire.


Quar. His Tutor has taught him the Theory.
Only he wants the practike.

Trim. I pray Sir,
Without offense, may I demand of you,
What do you profess?

Miscel. Why Sir, any thing
Within the compass of humanity.
To speak, or act, no Pythagorean
Could ever think upon so many shapes
As I will put you in; the French, the Spanish,
Or the Italian garb; not any one,
But jointly all, I Will make a perfect man
Out of the shreds of them.

Quart. Besides the riding
Of the great Mare; nay Sir, his very carvings,
Even to the discecting of a Capon.
Are Lectures of Anatomy.

Trim. I shall
Be proud to know him.

Miscel. Now I collect my self,
Sure I have scene you Sir in Padua,
Or some face near like yours.

Trim. I have indeed,
Received letters of invitation
From one, that is son to a Magnifice,
Who is informed that I am very like him.

Miscel. There was the mistake then.


Trim. Sir, had I power
Over my occasions, which now are urgent,
I would most willingly employ the time
In survay of your virtues.

Miscel. Sir, it has been
The scope I ever aimed at in my travels,
To seek out, and converse with such as have
With foreign observations advanced
Their natural endowments, and I thank
My Stars, I have been ever fortunate
To be beloved amongst them, and that you
Are one, I make no question.

Trim. Sir, you need not.


Miscel. My mind was ever larger, than to be
Comprised within the limits of my Country.
And I congratulate my Fate, in that
I come so near the virtue of that planet,
That rui'd at my Nativitie; whose nature,
Which e're it be, is ever to be wandering.

Trim. Sir I must be abrupt, but for my promise
Unto some Noble friends that do expect me,
I could not asily be drawn away
From o^e in whom so many several graces^
Are so apparent, therefore I entreat you
Not to impute it to my lack of judgment,
Or neglect of your worth.

Miscel. By no means, Sir,
Friendship is turned into an injury
When it usurps authority, conceive me,
Over a friends business, some other time
Shall serve to give a mutual testimony
Of love between us, and how much I honor you.

Quar. When will you do this?


Capr. I am practicing.


Trip. Prithee Quartilla, help me stave them off.
Although they have no mercy on themselves
Yet we must use some conscience.

Quar. Gentlemen,
You Will break your wits with stretching them, forbear
I beseech you.

Trim. My wit, it never fails me,
I have it at a certainty: I Will set it
To run so many hours, and when it is down,
I can wind it up like a Watch. But I fear
I have deceived the time too long. Ladies,
I Will take my leave of your fair beauties: you have
No service to enjoyne?

Trip. You Will take my brother
Capritio with you.

Trim. If he please, and his Tutor.


Miscel. My suff^age shall consent to any thing
Her Lady ship approues.

Quart. You must remember,
You prove not refractory to your discipline,
'Twill be much for your improvement.

Trim. I Will bring him
Unto a Captain, shall set both our faces
To look like the very Ianus of a Statesman,
And so farewell. Come Sir.
Exeunt Trimalchio, Capritio.
Triph. I told you, Signiour,
What a rare man he was.

Miscel. In all my travels

a ue not met the like; not any one
Was so mellifluous in his discourse.
I think when he was young, some swarm of Bees
Did light upon his lips, as it was feigned
Of Hesiod.

Triph. Let Us in, for I shall mourn,
And be melancholy, till his return.

ACT. 3.
SCEN. 1.
Philautus, Ardelio. Phil. ARdelio, we are now alone, come tell me
Truly, how does the vulgar voice pass on me.

Ar. Why Sir, the shallow currents of their brains
Runs all into one stream, to make a deep,
To bear the weighty burden of your fame.

Phil. And it is all true they say.


Ard. That you are most fair,
A most exact, accomplished, gentile Lord,
Not to be contradicted, it is a truth
Above all truths, for where is any truth,
That is agreed upon by all, but this?

Phil. Such is the force of beauty, there is nothing
Can please without it, and who ever has it,
As there be few, is adjudg'd happy in it.

Ardel. All this is true.


Philau. Then he that has a pure
And sublimed beauty, it is a thing sensible,
And cannot be denied, must be admired,
And free from all detraction.

Ardel. This is true.


Phil. He that excels in valor, wit, or honor,
He that is rich, or virtuous, may be envied,
But love is the reward of beauty; no object
Surprises more the eye, all that delights us,
We ascribe beauty to it.

Ardel. All this is true.


Phi. Look high or low, it is true, why are the stars
Fixed in their Orbs, but to adorn the heavens?
And we adore their beauty more than light.
Look on the Arts, how they tend all to beauty,
It Is their only end: he that builds a house,
Strives not so much for use, as ornament,
Nor does your Orator compose a speech
With lesser care, to have it elegant,
Then moving; and your Limner does observe
The trimne, and dress, more then the rules of painting.

Ard. All truth, and Oracles.


Phi. Look on a fair ship,
And you will say, it is very beautiful.
A General reioyces in the title
Of a fair Army. I Will come nearer to you;
Who were thought worthy to be deified,
But such as were found beautiful? for this cause,
Jove took up Ganimede from Ida hill,
To fill him wine, and go a hunting with him.

Ard. It Is too much truth to be spoke at one time.


Philau. It shall suffice, but yet you know that man
May safely venture to go on his way,
That is so guided, that he can not stray.
Enter Fidelio. How now, have thou obtained in thy request?

Fid. I have with much entreaty gained your admittance


Phil. Let me embrace my better Genius.


Fid. I do not use the profession.


Phil. It Is an Art
Will make thee thrive; will she be coy enough?
To tell you true, I take a more delight
In the perplexity of woing them,
Then the enjoying.

Fid. She is as I told you:


Phil. If she be otherwise than I conceive.
A pox on the Augury.

Fid. But hark you, Sir,
You need not be known who you are.

Phi. For that,
Trust to my care; Come let us go about it.
Some men may term it lust; but if it hi^,
The better part shall be ascribed to wit.

Exeunt. ACT. 3. SCEN. 2.
Taimaelchio, Capritio, Agurtes, Autolicus. Trim. HOw goes our matters forward?


Ag. Very well Sir.
For I have made your entrance open; told her
All that I can to grace you, that you are
Exactly qualified, unparalleld,
For your rare parts of mind, and body, full
Of rare bounty, and that she likes best in you,
She holds it a good argument you will
Maintain her well hereafter, marry else
She is natural covetous, but that is
A point of Huswivery, she does not care,
You should spend much upon your self, and can
Dispense with house keeping; so you allow her
To keep her State, her Coach, and the fashion,
These things she means to article beforehand,
I tell you what you must trust to.

Trim. Very well Sir.


Agu. Now see that you be circumspect, and fail not
In the least circumstance; you may do somewhat
Extraordinary, at the first meeting.
For when she has conceived of your good nature,
The less will be expected.

Trim. Why the Captain
Has put me in a form:

Agur. Of words he has.
But you must do the deeds.

Trim. I, so I will.
For look you Sir, I have the several graces
Of four Nations, in imitation
Of the four Elements, that make a man
Concu^re to my perfection.

Ag. As how?


Trim. I am in my complement, an Italian,
n my heart a Spaniard,
In my disease a Frenchman,
And in mine appetite an Hungarian.

Agur. All these are good and commendable things
In a Companion, but your subtle women
Take not a man's desert on trust, they must
See and feel something, what you give her now,
You make her but the keeper, it is your own,
You win her by it: I should be loath to see you
Out done with Courtesies: what if some Gull,
That has more land than you, should interpose it,
And make eclipse between you? it is a fear,
Therefore you must be sudden, and dispatch it,
For she is ticklish as any Haggard,
And quickly lost: she is very humoursome.

Trim. I Will fit her then, I am as humoursome
As her self, I have all the four humors.
I am hot, I am cold,
I am dry, and I am moist.

Agur. I must be like the Satyr then, and leave you,
If you are hot and cold.

Trim. Oh you mistake me.

I am ^ot in my ambition,
I am dry in my jests,
I am cold in my charity,
And moist in my luxury.

Autol. Sir, for the Gentlewoman that is with her,
Not so much in the nature of a servant,
As her Companion; for it is the fashion
Amongst your great ones, to have those wait on them
As good as themselves: she is the sole daughter
To a great Knight, and has an ample dowry.
Apply your self to her, though it be nothing
Else but to practice Courtship, and to keep you
From sleep and idleness.

Caprit. I shall be ruled
By you in any thing.

Autol. You shall not do
Amiss then: what? you may get her good will:
And then object it to your friends; you can
Advance your self without their counsel.

Capr: Counsel;
I still scorned that.

Trim. Captain, a word with you:
Were I not best look like a Statesman, think you?

Autol. What to a woman? 'twere a solecisme
In nature, for you know Cupid's a boy,
And would you tire him like a Senator,
And put a declamation in his mouth?
Twere a mere madness in you: here they come;
See what a Majesty she bears, go meet her.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 3.
Trimalchio, Capritio, Agurtes, Autolicus, Millicent, Margery. Tri. STand by,
it is my happiness invites me.
O that I could appear like Jupiter,
Unto his Semele.

Agur. Why, would you burn her?


Tri. Yes, with my love I would; most Luculent Lady,
After the late collection of my spirits,
Lost in the admiration of your beauty,
Let me crave pardon.

Milles. Sir, for what?


Trim. My boldness.

Milles. I apprehend none.


Trim. You must pardon me,
For I am jealous of the least digression:
And you may justly frown.

Milles. I should be loath,
To acknowledge so much from you.

Trim. Lady, you have those fair additions
Of wealth, and parentage, joined to your virtues,
That I may justly suspect your disdain:
But by my hopes, I do not court your fortunes,
But you.

Milles. Believe me, no deserving man
Shall be the less esteemed for that, where I find
Ability to govern, what I bring him.
It Is that I value: things that are without me,
I count them not my own.

Trim. It Is a speech Lady,
Worthy an Empress. I am a made man,
Since you have cleared the heaven of your brow:
Now by that light I swear, a brighter day
N^^e broke upon me.

Agur. Sir, I hope this Lady
Shall have no cause to repent your admittance.

Milles. Sir, for my part, since virtue is my guard,
I do not only keep my door^s st^^l open,
Bu^ (...) breast ^o^, for Gentlemen of merit.

Trim. Now by this air, that does report your voice
With a sound more then mortal: by your fair eyes,
And as I hope to be enrold your servant,
I honor the meanest stitch in your garment.

Milles. I would not wish you place your love upon
A thing so mean, so likely to be cast off.

Trim. O divine counsel! that so rare a beauty
Should mix with wisdom: these words are not lost.
I am your slave for ever. I Will go hire
Six Poets to sing your praise, and I my self
Will be the seventh to make up the consort.

Autol. You see your friend there, Mr Trimalchio
Is like to speed, and fairly on his way
To much happiness. I would not willingly
That any should miscarrie in a plot
That I have a hand in: you must be sudden
I told you, it you mean to be a favorite
To fortune, and your Mistress, and be bold.

Cap. If I had spoke to her, the brunt were past.


Autol. I then the ye were broke; now she makes toward you,
It Is the best time, let no occasion slip,

Cap. Lady advance the p^nnacle of your thoughts,
And enlarge the quadrangle of your heart,
To entertain a man of men.

Autol. A man
Of means, sweet Lady, that I can assure you.

Marg. He Is so much the more welcome, I assure you,


Autol. You are welcome by this means, do you mark that?


Caprit. Some 3000. a year or thereabouts.
Alas I value it not, 'twill serve to trifle
In pinnes, and gloves, and toies, and banquets.

Marg. It Is much.
One of so tender years, should step so soon
Into the world.

Caprit. Indeed the spring of my courtship
Has been somewhat backward: but I will strive
To redeem it; I have some seeds a growing,
Shall make m'ere long, spread like a Gentleman,
And you shall say so too.

Marg. I do believe it.


Caprit. Nay where you do or no, it is no great matter.


Autol. Be not Capritious.


Caprit. My name's Capritio.
There be in Town of the Capritio's,
Came from our house, that shall approve it so.

Autol. What will you say, if I show you a way
To get a general credit?

Caprit. Can you do it?


Autol. I can, and will; I Will have you out of hand,
The master of a good horse, and a good dog,
And be known by them.

Caprit. Will that do it?


Autol. Will it?
Why when you once have matched your horse, or dog.
The adverse party being a man of note,
'Twill raise an inquisition after you.
Whose is the horse, says one, Mr, Capritioes.
What he, says another? a Noble Gentleman.
'Twill draw the eyes of a whole Shire upon you,
Besides the Citizens that go down to bett.

Caprit. Why this is rare indeed.


Autol. And then 'twill furnish you
With fitting discourse for any man's table.
A horse and a dog, no better a subject
To exercise your tongue in, many Ladies
Talk in that dialogue; besides, there being
A kind of near relation in the nature
Of you and those beasts. the good qualities
That are in them, may be thought to be yours.

Cap. I Will buy me a dancing horse that can caper,
And have him called Capritio, by my name.

Aut. You may do so.


Capr. Lady, by your leave I will.


Mar. Sir, what you please.


Au. Her desires go with yours.
Observe but what a wife sh'is like to prove,
That is no more imperious being a Mistress.

Cap. Brother come hither.


Trim. I am busy here.
How do you like the fabric of this Watch?

Milles. Pray let me see it, a rare piece of work.


Trim. It cost me twelve pound, by this light, this morning.


Milles. But that it was so dear, I would have begged it.


Trim. It Is at your service, Lady.


Milles. I Will make use of
Your courtesy, with many thanks, Sir.

Trim. Nay, but
You must not have it.

Milles. Will you go from your word?


Trim. I Will give you as good, but this is none of mine,
By this hand I borrowed it.

Milles. You said you bought it.


Trim. I said so indeed.


Milles. You should do well to buy you
A better memory, as I shall hereafter,
To keep at distance with you.

Exit Millescent, Agur. Is she gone?


Trim. Gone in a fume.


Agur. How did you anger her?


Trim. She would have begd my Watch, and I excused it.


Agur. She beg your Watch? she scorns to beg any thing.
She has more than she can tell what to do with.
Perhaps she longed for yours, and would receive it
As acourtesie, why would you show it her,
Unless you meant to part with it?

Trim. I know not:
I think my wit was crampt,

Agur. You must nere look for,
The like occasion offered you; why this
Was such a time to win her love: a gift
Would put her every hour in mind of you.

Trim. What shall I do?


Agur. Best send it after her.


Trim. Do you carry it; tell her withal, I Will send her
A Coach and four horses, to make her amends.

Agur. Give me the Watch, if I do make all good,
Will you perform your promise?

Trim. By my life,
I Will send them without fail, immediately.

Ag. I Will after her, and see what I can do.


Exit Agurtes Cap. Stand for a watch: here take this Diamond:
Nay, do not wrong me, I have sworn you shall,
Were it as good as that which was made precious
By B^renices finger, which Agrippa
Gave his incestuous sister, you should have it.
What do you think I am an Ass? no sir,
It Is he has taught me wit.

Auto. And you are happy,
That can ^e wise by other men's examples.

Cap. What should I loose my Mistress for a toy?


Trim. Lead on good brother, I am all of a sweat,
Until some gale of comfort blow upon me.

Exeunt. ACT. 3. SCEN. 4.
Philautus, Fidelio, Faustina. Fid. YOu see that I have brought you to the
treasure,
And the rich garden of th'Hesperides:
If you can charm those ever-watchfull eyes
That keep the tree, then you may pull the fruit,
And after glory in the spoil of honor.

Phil. Prithee let me alone with her.


Fid. I Will leave you.


Exit Fidelio: Phil. Lady, my preface is to know your name.


Fau. Faustina, Sir.


Phil. I may be happy in you.
I have a sister somewhere of that name,
That in her youth did promise such a feature,
And hopes of future excellence: she had
A beauty mixed with majesty, would draw
From the beholders, love, and reverence.
And I do ill me thinks, with unchaste thoughts
To sin against her memory: this task
Would I were rid of; but I Will venture. Lady,
You are not blind, I conceive.

Fau. No sir, I have not
Yet seen a thing so strongly sensible,
To hurt my eyesight.

Phil. Then I hope you can
Take notice of a Gentleman's good parts,
Without a Periphrasis.

Fau. What Is that?


Phil. A figure,
Needless at this time to explain my deserts,
So easy and apparent to be seen.

Fau. I dare not envy, nor detract, where worth
Do^s challenge due relation of respect:
Nor is my wit so curious, to make
A gloss or comment on your qualities.

Phil. It Is too much labor, 'twere a task would dull
The edg^ of Rhetoric, to describe them rightly;
Nor would I have them dwell upon your tongue,
But fixed in your thoughts, there let them move
Till they meet in coniunct: on with your love;
Nature would boast so sweet a simpathie:

Fau. I should be sorry, if my understanding
Moud in so poor a circle, as your praise;
I have not leisure to take notice of it.
Is this all you have to say?

Phil. No, I have more;
But love is slow to dictate to my vows:
And yet those sacred and divine impulsions,
Strike truer then my heart, and by his power
That has inflamed me, here I swear I love you.

Faust. Your oaths and love, are made of the same air.
Both dye in their conception: quickly utterd,
And as easily not believed.

Phil. Nay now you wrong
My true intent.

Faust. Suppose I grant you love me,
What would you infer?

Phil. That you should speak the like,
And with the same affection.

Faust. If your love
Be not a Bawd unto some base desire,
I do return the like.

Phil. I know not how
You may interpret it, but sure the law,
And the command of nature, is no baseness,
A thing that love himself has dignified,
And in his rapes confessed the god of love
The greater of the two, who^ Kings have stoopt to,
We are allowed to enjoy some stolen delights,
So we be secret in it; for it is set down
By such as in this art have skillful been.
W' are not forbid to act, but to be seen.

Faust. Upon these terms, I do deny you love me
'Twas lust that flattered sin, made love a god,
And to get freedom for his thefts, they gave
Madness the title of a Deity.
For how can that be love, which seeks the ruin
Of his own object, and the thing beloved.
No, true love is a pure affection,
That gives the soul transparent, and not that
That Is conversant in beastly appetites.

Phil. Tell not me of your Philosophical love.
I am a fool to linger, women's denial
Is but an easy cruelty, and they
Love to be forced sometimes.

Faust. Pray know your distance.


Phi. Come you dissemble, and you all are willing


Faust. To what?


Phil. There Is none of you but feel the smart
Of a libidinous sting; else wherefore are
Those baits and strong allurements to entice us?
Wherefore are all your sleekings, and your curlings,
Crispings, and paintings, and your skin made soft,
And your face smooth with ointments, then your gate,
Confined to measure, and composed by art,
Besides the wanton petulancy of your eyes,
That scatter flames with doubtful motion,
Unless it were to prostitute your beauty?

Faust. I Will give account for none Sir, but my self.
And that I Will speak before my Virgin Zone,
Shall be vnti'de by any unchaste hand,
Nature shall suffer dissolution.
But what ere others be, me thinks your worth
Should not pretend to an ignoble action.

Phil. Now by this light I think you will moralize me.


Faust. It Is my desire you should go better from me
Then you came hither; you have some good parts
But they are all exterior, and these breed
A self conceit, an affectation in you,
And what more odious? Some applaud you in it,
As parasites, but wise men laugh at you.
Will you employ those gifts that may commend you,
And add a grace to goodness, had you any,
In the pursuit of vice, that renders you,
Worthy of naught but pity?

Phil. I come as to
A Whore, but shall return as from a Saint.

Faust. Then leave to prosecute the foggy vapors
Of a gross pleasure, that involves the soul
In clouds of infamy. I wonder one
So complete in the structure of his body,
Should have his mind so disproportioned,
The lineaments of virtue quite defaced.

Phil. I am subdued, she has converted me.
I see within the mirror of her goodness,
The foulness of my folly: sweet instruct me.
And I will style thee my Aegeria.

Fau. It is a shame, that man that has the seeds
Of virtue in him, springing unto glory,
Should make his soul degenerous with sin,
And slave to luxury, to drown his spirits
In Lees of sloth, to yield up the weak day,
To wine, to lust, and banquets.

Phil. Here Is a woman:
The soul of Hercules has got into her.
She has a spirit, is more masculine,
Then the first gender: how her speech has filled me
With love and wonder? sweet ^adie proceed*

Fau. I would have you proceed, and seek for fame
In brave exploits, like those that snatch their honor
Out of the talents of the Roman Eagle.
And pull her golden feathers in the field.
Those are brave men, not you that stay at home,
And dress your self up, like a Pageant,
With thousand anticke, and exoticke shapes,
That make an idol of a Looking-glass,
Sprusing your self two hours by it, with such
Gestures and postures, that a waiting wench
Would be ashamed of you, and then come forth
To Adore your Mistress Fan, or tell your dream,
Ravish a ^^sse from her white glove, and then
Compare it with her hand, to praise her gown,
Her Tire, and discourse of the fashion;
Make discovery, which Lady paints, which not:
Which Lord plays best at Gleeke, which best at Racket.
These are fine elements.

Phil. You have redeemed me,
And with the sunnie beams of your good counsel
D^sperst the mist that hung so heavy on me:
And that you may perceive it takes effect,
I Will to the wars immediately.

Fau. Why then,
I must confess I shall love you the better.

Phil. I will begin it in your happy omen:
But first confess, that you have vanquished me.
And if I shall overcome an enemy,
Yield you the Trophies of the victory.

Faust. Please you walk in the while.


Phil. I shall attend you.
Exit Faustina. Henceforth I Will strive to fly the sight of pleasure,
As of an Harpy or a Basiliske,
And when she flatters, seal my ears with Wax,
Took from that boat, that rowed with a deaf oar,
From the sweet tunes of the Sicilian shore.

Enter Trimalchio, Capritio, Fidelio, Ardelio, Snarle. Trim. Are you for the
war indeed?


Phil. Immediately.
Is there any of you will go along with me,
Besides this Gentleman?

Trim. I think no body.


Phil. Ardelio, thou art my faithful servant.


Ard. Alas sir,
My body is fat, and spungy, penetrable;
And the least cold will kill me.

Snarle. Yet his face
Is hatched with impudency, threefold thick.

Ard. I am not for your Trenches, and cold crampes,
Their discipline will quickly bring me under:
I Will stay at home, and look to your business.

Phil. Brother Capritio, what say you to it?


Caprit. Who I? ods lid I am not such an Ass,
To go amongst them, like your volunteers,
That frighted worse at home with debt and danger,
Travel abroad in the summer to see service,
And then come home in the winter, to drink Sack.
I am none of those, i will hardly trust my self
In the Artillery yard, for fear of mischief.

Phil. Mr. Trimalehio, you are young and lusty,
Full of ambitious thoughts.

Trim. It Is true indeed,
That I am grown ambitious of honor.
And mean to purchase it.

Snarle. But with no danger
Of life and hope.

Trim. I mean to hazard a limme for it.


Phil. Why, whither are you going?


Trim. To the Leager,
Upon the same employment, that Hercules
Did once against the Amazons.

Snarle. And I
Will stay at home, and write their annals for them.

Phil. Stay all at home, and hug your ignominyes,
And whilst we spoil the enemy, may you
Be pil'd by pimpes. Cheaters entrench upon you.
Let Bawds, and their issues join with you. Marry
With whores, and let proiectors rifle for you.
And so I leave you.

Trim. We shall hear of you,
By the next Caranto, I make no doubt of it.

Actus 4.
Scene 1.
Trimalchio, Capritio. Trim. Brother Capritto, are you well provided
With ammunition? armed Capa pea,
To scale the Fort of our Semiramis?

Capr. I am appointed, Brother.

Trim. Then let us on,
And beat a parley at the gates. So, ho.

Enter Pander. Pand. How now what bold adventurers be here?
What desperate rudeness tempts you to your ruin?
Here are no Geese to keep our Capitol.
But men of arms, you slaves, stout impes of Mars:
Giants, sons of the Earth, that shall rise up,
Like Cadmus progeny, to fight it out,
Till you are all consumed. Have you any gold?
It Is that must break our gates open: there are locked
A score of Danaes wenches of delight,
Within this Castle, if I list to show you
Where Circe keeps her residence, that shall,
If she but lay her rod upon your necks,
Transform you into Apes, and Swine, you sheeps face.
If thou shal't once but drink of her enchantments,
She Will make a Lion of thee.

Caprit. Alas sir,
I had rather look like an Ass, as I am still.

Trim. Be not too boistrous, my son of thunder.
We are wel-wishers to thy camp, and thee,
Here is a freshman, I would have acquainted
With the mystery of your iniquity.

Pand. I do embrace thy league, and return the hand
Of friendship. To thy better understanding,
I will discover the situation of the place.
It Is of it self an Island, a mere Swans nest:
Which had Ulysses seen, he would prefer
Before his Ithaca, and he whom Fate
Shall bless to vanquish it; He may deserve
The name of a new conqueror. It has
The credit, to be styled the Terra florida,
Of the best beautyes in the Town, my friend,
That repair hither upon the least summons,
Besides some that are constant to their trenches.
Venus in his house is predominant.
It Is barren, I confess. Yet wholly given
To the deeds of fructication. But those
Are barrd from coming to perfection,
With Rhewmes, and diseases. You Dormise,
What must I read a lecture to you gratis?

Trim. No sir, here is money for you.


Pander, You may enter,
And return safe, upon your good behavior.

Actus 4. Seen 2.
Bawd 2. Whores. Bawd. Well, they may talk of Dunkerke, or of Callis,
Enricht with foreign booties, but if ever
A little Garrison, or sconce, as this,
Were so filled up with spoils, let me be carted.

1. Whore. And carry it so cunningly away,
Beyond the reach of Justice, and of all
The jurisdiction in our own hand,
Like a free state.

Bawd. Did not I purchase it?
And am not I the Lady of the Manor?
And who shall dare to question me? I hope,
I shall be able to defend my Fort,
From the invasion of the painted staff,
Or the tempestuous paper Engine, safe,
As a Moale in a Trench, and work at hie midnight.
When their wise heads are laid, we will raise the spirits
Of our dead pleasures, use the benefit
Of youth, and dance our Orgyes by the Moonelight.

1. Whore. I hope they need not to condemn us, we drive
As open trade as they, and vent as ill
Commodities, as any: all that we utter,
Is in dark shoppes, or else by candlelight.

2. Whore. We are become the envy of Citizens.


1. Whore. It is reported that we study physic.


Bawd. Why so?


1. Whore. The reason is, because we know
The several constitutions of men's bodies.

2. Whore. And some term us the Leager*


Bawd. We defye
The force of any man, who is that knocks so?
Go bid the watch look out, and if their number
Be not too plural, then let them come in.
But if they chance to be those ruffian Soldiers,
Let fall the purcullis. All they can do,
Is to discharge a volley of oaths at me.
I Will take no tickets, nor no future stipends.
It Is not false titles, or denominations
Of offices can do it. I must have money.
Tell them so, draw the bridge. I Will make them know,
This is no widows house, but Marcus Manitius,
Is Lord of the Island, Who wast?

1. Whore. The Constable.


Bawd. What would he have?


2. Whore. You know his business.


Bawd. Pox on the Marshall, and the Constable.
There cannot be a Mystery in a Trade,
But they must peep into it. Merciless varlets,
That know how many fall by our occupation,
And yet would have their Venery for nothing.
A chambermayd cannot have a Ruff to set,
But they must be poking in it;
Now they have brought us under contribution,
They vex us more then the Venetians do
The whole Corporation of Curtezans:
But we must give good words, show them a room.

Enter Ardelio. Ard. There Is hot service within, I hear the Muskets
Play from the Rampires. I am valiant,
And will venture upon the very mouths of them.

Bawd. Mr. Ardelio, you have been a stranger.
You are grown rich of late.

Ard. Who, I grown rich?


Bawd. Yes somewhat pursy for want of exercise.


Ard. Well, I was wont to put in for a gamester.
But now I am quite thrust out of all play.

Bawd. We were wont to be your subjects to work on,
And since you scorn us, yet you cannot say,
But you have found good dealing at our hands.

2. Whore. We have bin always bent to your worships will
And forward to help you on at all times.

Ard. Come, you are good wenches.


Bawd. Truly sir you know,
I keep as good creatures at livery,
And as cheap too, as any poor sinner
Of my profession.

Ard. Have thou ere a morsel,
That is not tainted, or fly blown?

Bawd. Indeed I have
So much ado to keep my family sound,
You would wonder at it* and such as are so,
They are taken up presently. But I have one,
I dare commend to you, for wind and limme.

Ard. Come, let me have her then.


Bawd. Please you walk in, sir.


Exit Ardolio. Enter Miscellanio. Miscel. Its strange there is no more
attendance given,
To usher in a man of my quality.
Are you the Gouernesse of this Cinqueport, Lady?

Bawd. The fortress, sir, is mine, and none come here,
But pay me custom.

Miscel. Have thou nere a Pilot,
Or man of war to conduct a man safe
Into thy Harbor? there be roagues abroad.
Piraticall varlets that would pillage me.

Bawd. Very well, sir.


Miscel. I thought at first, you would have bard my entrance.


Bawd. I do not use the fashions of those Countries,
That keep a stranger out four weeks at sea,
To know if he be sound. I make no scruple,
But give free traffic to all Nations.
If you have paid your due, you may put in,
There is the way, I Will follow presently.
Exit Miscellanio. I think our soldiers are all come, lets in
And set the watch.

Enter Trimalchio, Capritio. Trim. Stay punke, make room for us,
That have advanced our banners to thy walls,
Past all the pikes, the perdues, and the Centries.
It Is a good Omen, whers Bellona there,
And the daughters of Mars, those brave Girls?
We are come to pay our homage to their smockes.

Bawd. Nay, if you are unruly, we shall tame you.


Trim. Fear not, we are tributaries, punke.


Bawd. Sir, do you speak with no more reverence
To me? it seems you know me not

Trim. I shall
Endeavor to preserve thy dignity,
Art thou that brave Hyppolite, that gouernes
This troop of Scythians? Speak, Orsthya,
My Menalippe, my Antiope
We are sworn vassals to your petticoates.

Bawd. Did you attempt but the least injury,
There be in readiness, would vindicate
The wrongs, and credit of my house.

Trim. I know
Thy power, punke, and do submit me, punke,
Tam Marti, quam Veneri. It Is thy Motto, punke.

Caprit. Would I could tell how to get out again.


Bawd. How came you in? have you performd all duties?


Trim. I threw thy Cerberus a sleepy Morsel,
And paid thy Charon for my waftage over.
And I have a golden sprig for my Proserpine.

Bawd. Then you are wel-come, sir.


Trim. Nay I do honor
Thee, and thy house, and all thy vermin in it.
And thou do well to stand upon thy guard,
Spite of the statutes. It Is a Castle this,
A Fort, a Metrapolitan bawdy house.
A Cynosarges, such as Hercules
Built in the honor of his pedigree,
For entertainment of the bast ard issue
Of the bold Spartan.

Bawd. You have said enough, sir.
And for requital, I will show you in,
Where you shall read the titles, and the prices.

Trim. But here is a brother of mine is somewhat bashful:
I Would feign deliver him to thy discipline.

Bawd. What, is he bashful? that is a fault indeed.
Come hither, chops, you must not be so shamefaced?

Trim. Lo you there, sir, you shall come forth in print*
March on, my Calypso, come sir, follow your colors.
You shall have the leading of the first title,

Actus 4. Scene 3.
Agurtes like a Constable. Antolicus Snarle like watchmen. Agur. Are your
disguises ready?


Antol. I have mine.


Snarle. Mine Is in my pocket.


Agur. Put it on your face.
Now they are house, I Will watch their coming forth,
And fright them in the form of a Constable,
If that succeeds well, then I Will change the person,
To a Justice of peace, and you shall act
My clarke Antolicus. They say an officer
Dares not appear about the Gates: I Will try it.
For I have made one drunk, and got his staff.
Which I will use with more authority,
Then Mercury his all-commanding rod,
To charm their steps, that none shall pass this way;
Without examination. There stalks one,
Ardelio passes by* I Will first know what he is; now they drop away,
As if they leapt out from the Trojan horse;
This is the Autumn of the night: who goes there?

Ardel. A friend.


Antol. Friend, or foe, come before the Constable,


Agur. Whence come you, friend?


Ardel. And't please you Sir, I have
Been waiting on my niece, home to her lodging.

Agur. Why, is your Niece a Leagerer, asuttler,
Or Laundresse to this Fort?

Ardel. No, and it like you,
She lies without the camp.

Agur. You lie like a Pimpe.
You are an Apple-squire, a Rat, and a Ferret.
I saw you bolt out from that Conney-berry.

Ardel. Mr. Constable.


Agur. Out of the wind of me what do you think,
You can put out the eyes of a gorcrow?
Fob me off so, the Constable, that have
The parish stock of wit in my hands? I am glad,
That I have got you from your covert. You shall
Be learcht, you shall along with me sir.

Ardel, Whither?


Agur. No farther then to prison, where you shall pay,
But forty shillings for noctiuagation.

Ardel. I am undone then. There are forty old scores,
I owe in Town, will follow after me.

Agur. What are you? what is your name?


Ard. Ardelio,
A Lords servant.

Agur. Do Lords servants do this?


Ardel. Alas, a venial sin, we use to learn it,
When we come first to be pages.

Agur. Stand by, there is one has got a clap too.


Miscellanio passes by. Miscel. The shirt of Hersuses was not so hot.


Snarle. There Is one sure has been hurt with a Gronieado.


Agurt. How now, who is there?


Miscel. Here Is no body.


Agur. No body. My senses fail me then, who is it?
What man are you?

Miscel. No man, you are deceived,
I can not find I am a man, that part
Is dead, wherein I once was an Achilles:

Anto. Come nearer.


Miscel. I can not go, I have lost my nerves.


Antol. You shall be carried to the Iayle then*


Miscel. Fitter
For an Hospital. I am condemned already
To fluxes, and dyer drinks.

Trimalchio. Capritio. Trim. Murder, Murder, Mr. Constable, Murder.


Agur. Who Is that Heronimoes sons ghost in the Garden?


Trim. O Mr. Constable, we have been so used,
As never two aduentrous Gentlemen
In the hands of their enemies.

Agur. What Is the matter?


Trim. Let me take breath: I am at the last gasp.
We have eskapt from the den of the Cyclops,
There was one ran a spit against my eyes.

Caprit. Amongst the rest, there was a blinke-eyed woman
Set a great dog upon me.

Trm. They have spoyld us
Of our cloakes, our hats, our swords, and our money.

Snarle. Your wits, and credit were both lost before.


Caprit. No, we had not our wits about us then.


Trim. Good sir, let us think on some revenge, call up
The Gentlemen prentises, and make a Shrouetuesday.

Agur. By no means, I must suppress all violence.


Caprit. My brother talked of building of a sconce,
And straight they seazd our cloakes for the reckoning.

Trim. There I lost my hat and sword in the reskew.


Agur. It Was weldone.


Trim. And whilst some strove to hold my hands,
The other diu'd in my pockets. I am sure,
There was a fellow with a tand face, whose breath
Was grown sulphurous with oaths and tobacco,
Puffed terror in my face, I shall never be
Mine own man again.

Bawd and whores from above. Bawd. Stop their throats, somebody.


1 Who. Twere a good deed to have made them swim the mote.


2 Who. I, to have siript them, and sent them out naked.


1 Who. Let Us sally out, and fetch them in again.
Then call a court on them for false alarums.

Trim. Fly from their rage, sir; they are worse then Harpyes,
They Will tear us, as the Thracians did Orpheus,
Whose Music, though it charmd the powers of Hell,
Could not be heard amongst these. Mr. Ardelio
And Miscellanio, I joy to see you,
Though ill met here.

Miscel. Signiour Trimalchio,
Sir you must pardon me. I can not stoop.
I have the Grincums in my back, I fear
Will spoil my courtship.

Trim. Mr. Ardelio,
Who would expected to have met you here?

Ard. Nay, who would not expect it? it is my haunt.
I love it, as a pigeon, loves a salt-pit.

Miscel. O me! my scholar too how came he hither?
I did not mean t'impart this mystery.
How could he find it out?

Trim. His own Minerua,
And my helped, sir.

Agur. Well, you must all together,


Trim. Whither must we go?


Agur. Marry, before a Justice,
To answer for your riot.

Ardel. M. Constable.


Agur. I can not dispense with it.


Miscel. Let us redeem our peace.


Agur. Not before next sessions. Bring them away.


Snarle. Come, there is no remedy.


Actus 4. Scene 4.
Bawd, Whores, Pander. Bawd. Was ever such a treacherous plot intended,
Against our State, and dignity?

Pand. Had this
Past with impunity, they might have sworn,
Vengeance had r^nne the country.

1. Whore. But I hope,
They have no cause to boast their victory,

Pand. Now by this air, as I am a true sould^er,
Bred under, and devoted to your Banne,
But that your pity did prenent my rage,
They should have known no quarter, for this brow
Brooks no affronts.

2. Whore. Captain, you fought it bravely.


Bawd. We Will have a stone graven with characters.
To intimate your prowess.

Pand. No, my dear Gorgons,
I will not have my same wander without
The precincts of your Castle: it is enough
It can be sheltred here, within these walls.
And to recount with your acknowledgements,
What this Fort owes to my protection.

Bawd. Captain, we must confess you are our Guardian.


Pand. Then let me sacrifice unto my humor.
All you this night, shall be at my disposing,
To drink and dra^, it is the fault of your fortune
That do profess this trade, to have somebody,
To spend your purchase on, it is my decree,
What others riot, you should waste on me.

Actus 4. Scene 4.
Agurtes like a Justice of peace. Antelicus his Clarke. Agur. What, are they
come?


Antol. Yes, sir.


Agur. Then let me see
How I can act it: do I look like a Justice?

Antol. As fearful as an Ass in a Lions skin, sir.


Agur. Here I begin my state. Suppose me now
Come down the stairs, out of the dining room,
Into the hall, and thus I begin. Brisco.
Call Brisco my Clarke.

Antol. At your elbow, sir.


Agur. Reach me my ensign of authority,
My staff I mean. Fie, fie, how dull you are,
And incomposed? Now set me in my chair,
That I may look like a Cathedral Justice,
That knew, what belongs to an Assignanimus,
And Dedimus potestatis. Nay, though we are
O^ the peace, we can give Priscian a knock.
Let me alone now to determine causes,
As free from error as the Pope. Old Minos,
And Rhadmanth, are not so skilldith vrne,
As I am in the statutes. I have them ad vngue^
Now if they enter, at their peril be it.
How do thou like my action?

Antol. Very well, sir.


Agur. Let them come in.
Enter Snarle like a Constable. Trimalchio, Capritio, M^scellanio, Ardelio. Now
Mr Constable,
I must commend your diligence. Come hither.

Snarl. Sir I have brough four men before your Worship,
I found last night, at midnight, in the streets,
Raising a tumult.

Agur. Brisco, be ready to take
Their examination. Good: you found four men,
At midnight. Whose men are they?

Trim. Our own men, sir.


Agur. So it seems by your Liueries.
Write that down; first they say, they are their own men.

Ardel. Sir, by your favor, I am not my own man.


Agur. I thought they would not all be in one tale,
I knew I should find them tripping, and I
Once come to sift them. You are not your own man.
It argues you are drunk. Write his confession,
Ex os tuum te iudico: perge Mr. Constable.

Snarle. I hold it fit, your Worship should examine
What they did there so late,

Agur. What did you there
So late?

Miscel. Good Justice Echo, we had business.


Agur. Record, they say they had business. They shall know.
That I am Judge of Record, and what I do
Record, shall stand, and they shall have no power
To plead not guilty in a Scire facias,
By a Recognifance. I have my terms.

Ardel Good your Worship, give us not such hard words.


Trim. It Is almost as hard usage as the Leager.


Agur. Then you came from the Leager?


Trim. You may read
Some adventures in our habit, we have seen,
And tasted the experience of the wars.

Miscel. They have made me of another religion,
I must turn Jew, I think, and be circum^ised.
I may be any thing, now I shall lose a Limme.
I may go seek my pension with the soldiers.
But ti^ no matter, I Will turn valiant,
And fight with the stumpe.

Agur. You are a fighter then.
T^is does appear to me, to be a riot.
What think you, Mr. Constable?

Snarle. I think no less.


Agur. It Was adterrorem populum.


Snarle. I know not
What you mean, but I mean as your Worship means.
I did perceive they had been quarelling.

Agur. Why then 'twas an affray, a sudden affray,
Directly against the State of Northampton.
The Decimo tertio of Harry the fourth cleares the doubt.
How do you trauerse this? what do you answer?

Ard. We make a question, by your Worships favor,
Under correction, whether that which was
Done under foreign powers, in foreign Lands,
Be punishable here or no.

Agur. How prove you that?


Ard. It Is a province by it self, a priuiledg'd place,
A strong corporation, and has factions
In Court and City.

Trim. Is inhabited
With furies, that do multiply like Hydra:
An army of diseases cannot suppress them,
Besides their many fallings the other way.

Agur. I should be loath t'infringe their liberties,
I Will send you to betryed, from whence you came then.

Caprit. O good your Worship, hang us up at home first,
Let us endure the rack or the strappado,
We do submit us to your Worships censure.

Agur. Have you provided sureties for the peace then?


Ard. More need to provide somethings for my belly.
I think they mean to keep me for a race.
I am fallen away quite, I was like a hogshead.
Now I amable to run through my hoopes.

Agur. What Is he that halts before (...) do you mock me?
It Is ill halting before acripple, (...)

Miscel. This sore against my will, I can not help it.
Would I could run away with half my teeth.

Agur. Cannot a man have the venerable gowt,
Or the bone-ache, but you must imitate him?

Miscel. Good Mr. Justice.


Agur. Mock your fellow rogues.
I am none of those, that raysd my fortunes with
Fiddling and Tobacco. Make his Mittimus.

Snarle. And't please you sir, here is one has brought a Letter.


Agur. From whom?


Snarle. He says, from one Mistrisse Millescent,
The contents will inform you.

The Letter.

NOble sir, I am sorry to interest my vnstay^d honor in the patronage of
offenders, orto abuse the credit I have with you, in stopping the course of
Justice against them, whose youthful licenciousnesse, would pollute the pen of
a Lady to excuse it. On the other part, J hold it the betraying of a virgins
sweet disposition, to withdraw her favors, where she has once placed them,
although there be some want of desert. I must confess it is an Antipathy to my
nature, to see any Gentleman suffer, when I may prevent it. Howsoever I have
found a disrespect from him, yet I forget it. For anger abides in the bosoms
of women, as snow on the ground: where it is smooth and level, it falls quickly
off, but remaynes where it is rough and uneven. That this may appear to be
true, I would entreat you to dismiss those two Gentlemen and their
associates, Mr. Trimalchio, and Capritio, whose ryotous looseness has made
them obnoxious to your censure, and my suspicion. Thus not doubting the
success of my letter, I rest in your favor as you may presume on mine, and
your true friend,

Millescent.

Agur. This Lady, that has writ in your behalf,
Is one I honor.

Trim. How should she hear of it?


Agur. It ^^^^es, your fault is quickly blown abroad.
(...) rather seal a Nouerint vniuersi,
For a thousand pound stale commodities,
Then thee should know of it.

Agur. As for you two,
You may pay your fees and depart, you have
Your manumission, or this Ladies sake.
Master. Constable, you are discharged, and you may
Go along with them and receive their fees.

Mis. Though I say nothing, yet I smell something:
A Lady send a letter? She is, in love
With me, I Will pawn my life, and I nere knew it.
I Will get my back well, and go visit her.

Ard. Now I have got my teeth at liberty,
And they ere tie me to the rack again,
Let me be choakt.

Exeunt Miscellanio, Snarl^, Ardelio! Agur. Well, I perceive you are
A favorite to this Lady. What Is your name?

Trim. Trimalchio.


Agur. And yours?


Capr. Capritie.


Agur. Two ancient names in Camden, Of what country?


Capr. Of Norfolk.


Agur. The Capritios of Norfolk.
I think we shall be kin anon. My mother
Was a Capritie, and of that house;
Are you alyed unto this Lady?

Trim. No sir.
But I have formerly been entertained
As a poor ^utor to her graces favor.

Agur. I find by that, you are a man of fashion.
And would you then?

Trim. Nay good sir, do not chide.


Agur. Yes, I must tell you, that you were to blame,
Having so fair a fortune before you, to wrong
A Lady of her spirit; so rich, and fair,
Of vn^ep^ooued chastity, and one
So high in birth, nay it is not possible
To speak her virtues, and present your self
So ^umpishly, nay perhaps fill her bed
Full of diseases.

Trim. Good sir, say no more.
I am a^raycor, I have killed a man,
Committed sacrilege. Let her seek revenge
For these, or if less punishment will serve:
To have me beaten, I Will run naked to her.

Agur. I will not press a good nature so far:
You two shall stay and dine with me. I Will send
My coach for your Mistress, it shall go hard:
But I will make you friends, before we part.

Actus 5.
Scene 1.
Philautus, Fidelio, Faustina. Faust. Now let me bid you welcome from the
wars,
Laden with conquest, and the golden fleece
Of honor, which like Jason, you have brought
T'inrich your Country, now indebted to you.
Had it not been a pity such a talent
Of virtue should be lost or ill imployd?

Phil. Lady, you are a good Physicion,
It was your counsel wrought' this miracle,
Beyond the power of Aesculapius:
For when my mind was stupefied, and lost
In the pursuit of pleasures: all my body
Torn, and dissected with close vanities,
You have collected me anew to life:
And now I come to you, with as chaste thoughts,
As they were first adulterous, and yield
A due submission for the wrong I did
Both to your self, and sex.

Faust. Sir. for my part,
You have your pardon.

Phil. You were borne to quit me.


Fude. But when you know the Author of your freedom,
You Will thank her more.

Phil. Why, who is it?


Fudel. Your sister.


Phil. Who? not Faustina? she told me so indeed,
Her name was Faustina. Let me look upon her,
As on the picture of all goodness, engraven
By a celestial finger, shall wear out:
A marble character. I knew her not,
I am glad there is ascien of our ftock.
Can bear such fruit as this, so ripe in virtue.
Where have you lived recluse? you were betrothd
To one Fidelio; but crossed by your father.
I have heard good reports of the Gentleman.

Faust. I never knew you flatter any man
Unto his face before.

Phil. Unto his face?
Where is he?

Fidel. My name's Fidelio.


Phil. I am transported, ravished: give me leave
Good gods, to entertain with reverence,
So great a comfort. Let me first embrace you.
Great joys, like greifes, are silent. Loose me now,
And let me make you fast. Here join your hands,
Which no age shall vnty. Let happiness
Distill from you, as the Arabian gummes,
To bless your issue.

Fidel. Now I hope, sweet Lady,
The time has put a period to your vow.

Faust. It Is ended now, and you may take a comfort,
That I could tie my self to such a law.
For you may hope thereby, I shall observe you
With no less strict obedience.

Fide. I believe you.


Phil. And for her dowry, I will treble it,
Enter Snarle. Here Sanrle is come to be a witness to it.

Snarle. My Lord Philautus, if I may presume
To congratulate your Honors safe return,
I must confess, I do it with my heart,
And all your friends long to participate
Your happy presence.

Phil. Thanks both to them and thee.


Snarle. Master Fidelio, no less to you.
I see you happy in your Mistress favor:
And that's as much, as I can wish to you.

Fidel. You have bin always privy to my counsel
Ask me no questions now, I shall resolve you
When we come in.

Phil. How fares our Camp at home,
Trimalchio, and the rest?

Snarle. I have been busy,
In proiecting for them, they must all be married.
I have seen the interlude of the Leager:
And we have played the Justice, and the Constable:
I will not prepossesse you with the sport,
But I will show you such ascene of laughter.

Phil. Where is Ardelio


Snarle. Your servant Ardelio.
It Is the notorioust mixture of a villain,
That ever yet was bred under the dunghill
Of servitude. He has more whores at command,
Then you have horses. He has stables for them,
His private vawting houses.

Phil. Discharge him the house.
Take his accounts and office, and dispose them.

Snarle. Ever your Lordships true and faithful servant.


Actus 5 Scene 2.
Millescent, Margery. Milles. When was my Father, and the Captain here?


Marg. They are plotting abroad, I hope to see you shortly
Honestly married, and then turn virtuous.

Milles. It Is the course of the world now, Margery.
But yet I fear, I have got such a trick,
When I was young, that I shall never leave it.

Marg. What help then? the poor Gentleman must suffer,
Good Trimalchio: it is his fate.

Milles. I am thinking,
What I shall do with him, when I am married.

Marg. What do other women do with their husbands?
Bring him up in obedience, make him besides
An implement to save your reputation.
Let him not press into your company
Without permission, you must pretend,
You are ashamed of him. Let him not eat,
Nor lie with you, unless he pay the hire
Of a new gown, or petticote: live with him,
As if you were his neighbor, only near him,
In that you hate his friends: and when you please.
To show the power you carry over him,
Send him before on foot, and you come after
With your coach and four horses.

Milles. It Is fitting so
Enter Miscellanio. Host now what piece of motion have we here
Would you speak with any body?

Miscel. My business,
Is to the Lady Millescent.

Milles. What Is your will?


Miscel. Are you that Lady?


Milles. Yes, my name is so.


Miscel. To you then I derect m^ apology.
It seems your eye with approbation,
Has glanced upon my person. I protest
I never was so dull in the construction
Of any Ladies favor in my life:
I am ashamed of my error.

Milles. In what, sir?
I can not call to mind that ere I saw you.

Miscel. You have been still too modest to conceal it.
That was not my fault: you did ill to strive
To hide the flames of love, they must have vent:
It Is not the walls of flesh can hold them in.

Milles. What riddles have we here? that I should love you?
I would not have you think so well of your self.

Marg. Perhaps he has some petition to deliver,
Or would desire your letter to some Lord.

Misce. I know not how, sure I was stupifyed,
I have ere now ghest at a Ladies mind,
Only by the warbling of her Lutestring,
Kissing her hand, or wagging of her feather,
And suffer you to pine for my embraces,
And not conceive it?

Milles. Pray be pacified.
This fellow will persuade me, I am in love.

Miscel. Lady, you have took notice of my worth
Let it not repent you. Be not stubborn
Toward your happiness. You have endured
Too much already for my sake, you shall see,
Pity can melt my heart. I take no delight,
To have a Lady languish for my lioe.
I am not made of flint as you suspect me.

Milles. I would thou were converted to a pillar,
For a memorial of this impudence.

Miscel. You shall know what it is to tempt me hereafter,
When I shall let you perish for your folly.
I came to remunerate the courtesy,
I received from your Ladyship.

Milles. I know of none.


Miscel. I must acknowledge my self bound to you


Milles. For what?


Miscel. Your Letter to the Justice, Lady,
It freed me from the pounces of those varlets,
When I was under the gripe of the Law.
I know, the only motive was your love.

Milles. I cry you mercy, were you one of them
That drew Trimalchio to those idle courses?
I am ashamed of the benefit, leave me
That I may not see the cause of my sorrow:
But it is no matter, we shall leave you first.

Exeunt Millescent, Margery. Miscel. They shall find, I am no man to be
slighted,
And that she has misplaced her affection.
When I have wrackt the wrongs on my corriuall,
Trimalchio, look to thy self, were he removed,
There might be hopes, my valor shall make known
There is a difference. I Will straight to the tavern:
And when I once am hot with good Canary,
I pronounce him dead that affronts my fury.

Actus 5. Scene 3.
Ardelio. Turned out of service the next turn will be
Under the Gallows, and have a Ballad made of me,
The corruption of a casheer'd Seruing-man,
Is the generation of a thief. I scare,
My fate points me not out to so good fortune.
My bulk will not serve me to take a purse.
The best thing I am fit for, is a tap^ter,
Or else get a wench of mine own, and sell
Bottell Ale and Tobacco, that is my refuge
They tearmd me parasite, it is a mystery
Is like a familiar, that leaves a man
When he is near his execution.
I have no power to flatter my self now,
I might have gone a wooing to some widow,
And had his countenance, but now the tenants
Look like their Bacon, rustily, upon me.
Enter Ieffry. What, Ieffery! thou art the comfort of my woes:
Welcome, good Ieffry.

Ieff. Thanks to your good Worship;


Ard. Where are my hangings, Ieffry?


Ieff. Very well, sir.
Locked in a Cypress chest, for fear of Moths.

Aed. And all the other furniture good Ieffry.


Ieff. They are kept safe, and well ary'd for your Worship.


Ardel. Thanks, good Ieffry. I were in a sweet case,
If I had not conuayd somethings away,
To maintain me hereafter.

Ieffry. Why so, sir?


Ard. I may go set up bills now for my living,
Cry Vinegar up and down the streets; or fish
At black Friars stayres; or sit against
A wall, with a library of ballads before me.

Ieff. You are not out of service.


Ard. Turned a grazing,
In the wide Common of the world, Ieffry.

Ieff. Then are my hopes at best, I have no reason
To care for him any longer; a word with you.
What furniture do you mean?

Ard. Those that I sent,
The beds, and hangings.

Ieff. Did you send any such?


Ardel. I hope you will not use me so.


Ieff. Your own words.
I must make the best benefit of my place:
You know, it is not an age to be honest in.
It Is the only highway unto poverty.
I know not how, I do not fancy you
Of late.

Arde. I chose thee for thy knauish look.
And now thou have requited me: of all
My evils, thou art the worst.

Ieff. No faith, sir.
You have a worse commodity at my house.
But you may save the charges of a writ.
I Will send her you without reprieue or bail.
I do you that favor.

Ard. No, you may keep her still.


Ieff. My thinks you are much dejected with your fall,
I find an alteration in your face.
You look like an Almanacke of last years date.
Or like your livery cloak, of two years wearing.
Worse then the smoaky wall of a bawdy house.

Ard. Villain, do thou insult on me?


Ieff No faith sir,
Al^sse, it is not within the reach of man,
To countermine your plots.

Ard. Well, slave, because
I Will rid my hands of thee, I Will give thee a share.

Ieff. You must have none, without lawful proceeding.
And that I know, you dare not.

Enter Snarle, and Officers. Snarle. But I dare.
Have you been partners all this while in mischief,
And now fall out, who shall be the most knave?

Ieff. What do you mean?


Snarle. I mean to search your house
For ammunition, no otherwise,
Which I suspect you send unto the Leager.

Ieff. Sir I have nothing there, but one cracked piece
Belongs to this Gentleman, can do no service.
She is spoyld in the bore.

Snarle. We Will have her new cast.
Come, bring them away.

Ard. Nay good sir, you know,
That I was lately quit before a Justice.
And if I fall in a relapse.

Snarle. All Is one
To me, but you must satisfy the Law.

Ard. Well then, I know the worst of it.


Actus 4. Scene 4.
Agurtes, Antolicus. Trimalchio, Capritio. Agur. Master Trimalchio, it is an age
since I saw you.


Trim. I was nere out of town.


Agur. Not out of town?
We sought you about all the Ordinaries,
Tauernes and Bawdyhouses, we could imagine
You ever haunted.

Trim. You might have found us then.


Antol. Nay more, we inquired at the Play Houses.


Agur. 'Twas once in my mind, to have had you cried.


Antol. We gave you lost.


Trim. Well, shall I tell you, Captain?


Antol. I; do, what is it?


Trim. This Gentleman and I
Have past through purgatory, since I saw you.
If I should tell you all the passages
At the Leager.

Antol. Thither we came to meet you,
And you were gone.

Capr. And then at the Justices.


Agur. Were you before the Justice?


Trim. It Is such a story
Would fill a Chronicle.

Capr. We met with a party of the enemies,
Took all we had from us, and then it cost us
Forty shillings in fees at the Justices.

Agur. That was hard dealing.


Capr. The old boy and I
Grew to be kin at last.

Trim. He made me sure
To my mistress, before we parted.

Agur. How?

By what strange accident?


Trim. Honest Ardelio,
And Misellanio, we were all together
In rebellion, and quit by a Letter,
That came from my mistress.

Agur. Is It possible?
And Miscellanio turn traitor?

Trim. What.


Agur. Would have your mistress from you, thinks the Letter
Was sent for his sake.

Trim. That I am sure he does not.


Agur. Threatens, and swears that he will fight for her.


Trim. If he be weary of his life, he may.
Why what can he pretend to her?

Agur. I know not,
What has past between them, but I am sure,
He has been practicing at the Fencing school,
To get a trick to kill you.

Trim. He kill me!
I Will kill him first. I fight by Geometry.

Agur. How? By Geometry?


Trim. Yes sir, here I hold
My Rapier, mark me, in a diameter
To my body; that's the center, conceive me.

Antol. Your body is the center, very good.


Trim. And my hilt, part of the circumference.


Antol. Well sir.


Trim. Which hilt is bigger then my body.


Anto. Then your whole body?


Trim. Yes at such a distance.
And he shall never hit me, whilst he lives.

Antol. Where did you learn this? At the leager?


Trim. No.
No by this light: it is my own invention.
I learnt it in my travels.

Anto. Very strange:
You are a scholar.

Tri. No: I would not be
^uspected of such a crime for a Million.
But it is no sin to know Geometry;
And by that, I can tell we shall nere fight.

Antol. Not fight at all?


Trim. I Will show you in Geometry,
Two paralels can never meet: now we two
Being paralels, for so we are, that is
Equal in wit and valor, can never meet.
And if we never meet, we shall nere fight.

Enter Miscellanio. Antol. To prove your axiom false, see where he comes*


Trim. I do defy him.


Miscel. Hang thee blustering son
Of Aeolus, defy me! I Will tie up thy breath
In bags, and sell it for a penny an ounce.

Antol. Draw sir.


Miscel. Draw if he dares.


Capri. Sure, this is the second part of the Leager.
Twere best for me, to hide me in my cabin.

Exit Capritio. Miscel. Will you resign your mistress?


Trim. No, I scorn it.


Miscel. Unless you will have her taken away by force.


Antol. I see, this cannot be ended without blood.


Trim. Captain, a word with you.


Anto. What say you sir?


Trim. I am afraid he comes with the black art.


Antol. How you afraid? do not say so for shame.


Trim. He has layne with an old witch at Sweden.
And is grown stick free.

Antol. Fie that you shall say so.


Trim. I Will be resolved of that before I fight.


Antol. Why, do you think that witches have such power?


Trim. I marry do I, I have known one of them,
Do more then that, when her husband has followed
Strange women, she has turned him into a Bezer,
And made him bite out his own stones.

Antol. It Is strange!


Trim. I Will tell you another as strange as that, of one
When a Vintner has sent her but ill wine,
She has converted him into a Frog.
And then coniur'd him into one of his butts,
Where he has lived twelve months upon the lees,
And when his old ghests chance to come to see him,
He has croackt to them, out at the bunghole.

Antol. This is miraculous.


Trim. There was a Lawyer
That spoke against one of them at the bar.

Antol. What did she then?


Trim. Turned him into a Ram,
And still that Ram retaynes his profession,
Has many Clients, and pleads causes as well
As some Lawyers in Westminster.

Anto. Do you think,
That he has had recourse to any such?

Trim. I know not, but it is good to be mistrustfull.
He may have advantage in the encounter.

Enter Millescent. Margery. Miscel. There she comes, win her, and wear her.


Milles. Hold your hands.
I Will have no blood a prologue to my wedding.

Trim. Nay then have at you. Hold me not, I say^
I am as fierce as he.

Milles. Be pacified.
I thought you had been both bound to the peace.

Antol. Lady, it seems, that these two Gentlemen
Do stand in competition for your love.

Milles. Mr. Trimalchio, I confess, has been
A former suitor, but with his ill carriage,
He has thus long prevented his good fortune.

Antol. Then let me make a motion.


Milles. What is it?


Antol. Will they both stand to it?


Trim. I agree.


Miscel. And I.


Autol. Then let the Lady dispose of her self.


Trim. She is mine already. I am sure to her,
Before a Justice.

Miscel. I will have no woman,
Against her will.

Milles. No sir, nor you shall not,
Since you are so peremptory, on your words then
That he shall sing a Palinodium,
And recant his ill courses, I assume
My Love Trimalehio.

Capritio peeps out. Capri. Do we take, or are we taken?


Trim. Nay, we do take.


Agur. Who Is that, Capritio? where have you been?
Come your ways forth, and lay hands on the spoil.
Go lead away that Lady by the hand.
Now you may take occasion by the foretop,
Advance your own predominant the better,
And march away,

Trim. Come, let us to the Church.


Exeunt. Trimalchio, Millescent. Capritio, Margery. Miscel. And what must I do
now? be laughed at?


Agur. Would you
Hazard your self, for one that cares not for you?
You may be glad you escaped. Recall your self.
Were not you formerly engagd?

Miscel. No, never.


Agur. Not to mistress Quartilla?


Miscel. Faith we have toy'd
In jest sometime.

Agur. Let it be now in earnest.
Make her amends. I know she loves you.

Miscel. Well.
I will have her, and stand up for my portion,
With the rest of my tribe.

Actus 5.
Scena vltima.
Snarle, Philantus. Snarle Stay here a little, they are gone to Church,
And will return in couples. First, Trimalchio,
That Giant in conceit, thinks he is ma^cht
To some great heir, but shall embrace a cloud
In stead of Juno. Then her waiting woman,
Her Iris, reflects upon Capritio,
And for my piece of fragmentary Courtship,
My Miscellany Gentleman, it is his lot
To be cast upon Quartilla with Agurtes
In his old Iusticeship. All these march together,
Like the seven deadly sins, and behind them,
Comes Antolicus, the clarke of the company.

Enter Agurtes like a Justice. Trimalchio, Millescent. Miscellanio, Quartilla,
Capritio, Margery, Antolicus like a Clarke, Antol. Look you sir, here they
come.


Trim. Make room, me thinks
You should not stop the course of Justice so.
My Lord Philantus, you are welcome from
The Wars, and I from the Church. I wonder
Who makes the better return, you have got
Honor, and so have I. But where is your wealth?
I can embrace five thousand pounds, a year.
That Is nothing with you, I have no more wit,
Then to be pi'd by pimpes, and marry whoores,
Yet I mean shortly to rank with your honor.
Here is my warrant, I have promisd her,
To make her a Countess, but that's nothing with you,
Nay, more then this I can go on, and leave
Some advancement: behind me. Ecce signum,

Phil. It Is well, I am glad of your happiness,
And much joy to my brother Capritio,
And his fair spouse.

Capri. She is according to
My hearts desire, sir.

Snarle. Well, a word with you,
Master Trimalchio, and the rest.

Trim. What say you?


Snarle. You were as good know it at first, as at last.
You are not the first, that have been deceived.

Trim. In what? my wife? I married her for a maid.
And whether she be one, or no, I care not.

Snarle. Nay, should I hear a man that should abuse her
In that, I would defend her with my sword.
But she and you must call this man your father.

Trim. I so she must, he gave her at the Church.


Snarl Nay, her own natural father, flesh and bone,
I hope she will not deny it.

Milles. No indeed, sir.
I would not live to be so ungracious.

Agur. I must acknowledge thee my child, or I
Should do thy mother wrong.

Trim. I do not think so,
You Will not make me believe that I took her
For a Lords daughter, and a great heir. Where are
Agurtes and the Captain to justify it?
Is he your father?

Milles. He has ever bred me:
And I have always called him so. I hope
It is no shame: my parentage is honest.

Trim. Well, if he be, it is no disparagement,
To marry a Justices daughter.

Snarle. Come, you have
Been carried hood winkt through this business.
Nor is the day yet clear before you. Mark me;
I Will open but one leaf in all the book,
And you shall see the whole discovery.
Come sir, unease.

Agurtes and Antolicus pull off there disguises. Trim. Who have we here?
Agurtes
And the Captain? Was It you that played the Justice?
And you his clarke?

Snarle. And I the Constable.


Trim. Then you are a knot of knaves for your labor.
Now I perceive that I am plainly guld.

Capr. I am glad there is no man cheated but himself.


Snarle. Your arrow is one of the same quiver too.

Trim. I Will none of her by this light.


Agur. Why, you may choose.
And yet I do not well see, how you can choose.
She is your wife, and you have married her,
And must allow her means to maintain her.
You may declare your self unto the world.
And be laughed at: but keep your own counsel,
And who needs know of it?

Phil. Believe me sir,
The Gentlewoman is not to be despisde,
Her wit and virtues are dowry sufficient.

Trim. Nay, if you say so, then must I needs love her:
But by this hand, I thought you would have jeered me.

Phil. Hold on your course, march on as you came in,
And rest content, since fate has thought it fit,
To make your fortunes equal with your wit.

FINIS.

