SELECTED EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL.

Englished By THOMAS MAY Esquire.

-- Nec Crimenerit nec Gloria --

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley at Britains Burse. 1629.

To the Right honorable and truly Noble, HENRY Earl of Holland, Knight of the
most noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most hon: privy Council,
and Chancellor of the famous University of Cambridge, etc.
My noble Lord,
I Should not present, without much Apology, so mean a Work to a hand so
honorable, did not a confidence in your true worth, and the clearenes^e of
mine own thoughts, give me Encouragement. Therefore with the same modesti^ that
the ingenious Author of these Epigrams presented some of them to Plinius
Secundus, a noble Roman of happy employment under Traian the Emperor (as a
recreation only to his hours of mirth and pleasure) do I offer these my poor
Endeavors to your Lordship. With how much courtesy the noble Pliny in one of
his Epistles does acknowledge the respect of Martial, I do no ways infer,
either to direct, or much less to engage your Lordships acceptance; since I
confess the difference to be great between so acute an Author, and my self
the unworthy Translatour. Only requesting humbly that you would be pleased in
this little to accept my true service. Of which (in mine own judgment) I
cannot make a fitter tender than to such a Lord, to whose known Virtues so
famous a University as Cambridge has yielded the Protection of her self. To
which, and to all good learning, that you may long live a favorable Mecaenas,
and (like Mecaenas) graced in the service of our good, and great Augustus, he
prays, that will ever continue

Most humbly devoted to your Lordship THO. MAY.

To the Reader.
THe Translation of these Epigramms is a thing (Reader) which I confess for
diverse Reasons I was leath to publish: One is, because they are but a part of
Martial, and chosen out here and there; so that I am liable to a double
censure, and not only the skill in translating, but the judgment in choosing
of them may be called in question. But in that case not only Joseph Scaliger,
who published diverse of these Epigramms, translated into Greek, but diverse
others, in other Languages, may in part excuse me for meddling with a part of a
Book. The second reason is, because it is more than probable, that diverse
Gentlemen have exercised or pleased themselves in translating some of these,
and may therefore peruse mine with a more rigid censure. but that I must
refer to the goodness of their dispositions. The third reason is, because
that having already published two Translations, I was loath any more to vex
the Roman Poets (who shall sleep quietly in their Vrnes hereafter for me)
though Translation be a thing which, I think, the ablest men do not at all
condemn. Some men there are who complain of late that too much learning is
brought into our native Language, and that that is by others attained at too
easy a rate, which cost themselves more labor. Those (as I take it) are such
pretty Scholars as have rather strived to get some skill in the Latin or
Greek tongues, than to furnish themselves with the substance of Art, which is
contained in those tongues; and wanting so much real Learning as may commend
them to the world, would feign be applauded for the shadow of it: Like some
unlearned or iniudicious Preachers in Country parishes, who would rather be
liked by the ignorant People for speaking of Latin sentences, than informing
their knowledges with substantial Doctrine, and have the fortune to be
praised by none, but those which do not understand them: and indeed those
which I have observed mis-likers of Translation, are neither perfect in the
Latin, nor able in their native Language. There are many things (Reader) in
this Work I do confess, which must entreat a favorable excuse, and dare not
stand a strict censure; especially the first Epigramme of all, which is in the
Latin both too full to be rendered in a Verse of ten Syllables, and subject to
diverse Constructions of sense: But being entreated which by a friend of mine to
do all the Book of Spectacles, I could not leave out the first of them. Some
of them have lain many years by me, and were not intended for the Press, and
many of them in loose Papers I have lost, and perchance thou will say (and I am
of that opinion) it had been no great matter if they had been all lost.

Martial's Epigramms upon the Spectacles of the Roman Amphytheater.
He preferres the Amphytheater, begun by Vespasian the Emperor, finished and
dedicated by Titus his Son, before the ancient wonders of the World.
LEt Memphis flame-like Towers no more be known,
Nor men still strive in praising Babylon;
Nor those soft honors Phaebes Temple fame,
Nor the horny Altar boast Apollo's name,
Nor let the Carians with immoderate praise
Mausolus tomb from the air to Olympus raise.
Let all to Caesar's Theater give place;
One work for all let fame for ever blaze.
He ex^ells the gracious m^^ificence of the two Emperors, Vespasian and
Titus; who demolishing the vast Palace of Nero, had builded ^n the room of it
public works, as the Colossus, the Amphitheater, the hot Baths, and common
walks of pleasure.
HEre where the huge Colossus meets the skies,
And in the mid way lofty Pageants rise,
Once cruel Nero's envied Palace shone,
And in all Rome stood one proud house alone.
Here, where the stately Amphitheater
His bulk displayes, once N^to's fish ponds were*
Here, where the hot Baths quick work we wonder at,
The injurious court diss^is'd poor dwellers late.
Where shade the Claudian Gallery does lend,
Thither proud Nero's Palace did extend.
Rome's to her self restored by Caesar's reign.
What joys the Prince engro^s'd, the people gai^
An elegant description of the general acclamation of Spectators in the
Amphitheater of all Nations belonging to the Roman Empire, in honor of Caesar.
What nation, Caesar, is so wild or far,
But some spectators in thy city are?
From Rhodopeian Hoemus dwellers come
Sarma^tian horse blood drinkers leave their home.
Those that on Thetis farthest shore are bred,
Are here, and those that drink of Nilus head.
Hither the Arabians, and Sabaeans have,
Cilicians here their own sweet waters taste.
Hither come knot-hair'd curled Sicambrians,
And otherwise curled Aethiopians.
Though different sounds, yet all in this agree
When Romes true father thou art said to be.
He honors Titus for banishing the common accusers, who in the time of
Nero, and other Tyrants, were the ruin of honest men.
THe peace disturbers, enemies to rest,
That still the goods of wretched men oppressed,
More than the Stage could hold, to Afric now*
Banished, receive what they did crst bestow.
The accuser banished from the City goes,
Her life to Caesar's grace the City owes.
Among other specta^les, ancient fables were acted a^ the Theater, and among
others, this of the queen P^^^^phe, who unnaturally lusted after a Bull.
Believe a bull enjoyed the Cretan Queen;
The Old fable verified we all have seen.
Let not old times, Caesar, selfe-praised be;
Since what fame fings, the stage presents to thee.
In the hunting of the amphitheatre, a woman (it seeme^) had killed a lion,
upon which, he extolleth the exercises of Caesar's theater, before former times.
THat Mars does conquer, Caesar, at thy fights,
It Is not enough, but tender Venus fights.
The lion slain in Nemean Vale of old,
Fame as a great Herc^lian action told.
Let old fame silent be; for since thy show,
As much we saw a woman's hand to do.
Men condemned to die, did personate in their death^ some ancient fable upon the
stage, as this Prometheus.
AS to the Sythian rock Promotheus bound
Fod still a bird with his breasts deathles wou^d.
Laureolus on no false gibbet here,
So yields his breast t'a Calidonean bear
His torn bloud-dropping members lived one wound*
And in's whole body was no body found.
Surche, that suffered thus, with impious sword
Murdered his Father, or had slain his Lord;
Or robbed the temples of their sacred gold,
Or fired Rome. What ere, that crime of old
His crime surpast; for what they did invent
Oftothers harm, was his true punishment.
Upon a Malefactor personating Daedalu^.
When by a bear thou Daedalus, were torn,
How gladly then would thou thy wings have w^r^^?
Of a Rhinoceros.
THe fierce Rhinoceros, Caesar, in thy sight,
More than he promised did perform the fight.
How fierce in rage, how strong of horn was he,
Whose strength in the air made bulls like balls to flee?
He praises the justice of Caesar, who commanded a Lion to be killed on the
Stage, for hurting or killing his Keeper.
ATreacherous Lion hurt his Keeper late,
Daring those well known hands to violate.
But for his foul offense he pai'd full dear,
In stead of stripes he felt a killing spear.
Under a Prince, that teaches gentleness
To beasts, what manners should his men express?
Of a Bear caught with bird-lime on the Theater.
Whilst ore the bloody stage a Bear so fast
Does roll, in bird-lime caught he lost his haste.
Let cased hunting spears now useless stand,
And iavelins fly no more from th'hunters hand.
Let huntsmen in the air pursue their prey,
If beasts be caught after the fowlers way.
Of a Sow chased ore the Theater, and killed with a spear, who out at that
wound farrowed (...) pigges.
AT our Caesarian Dians cruel show,
A flying dart had hurt a praegnant sow,
When from the damms death-wound the pigges proceed.
Cruel Lucina, this the way to breed?
The dying sow would of mo^ wounds be glad
To make sad way for all the pigs she had.
Deny not Bacchus borne by mothers death.
A God might well, since so a beast took breath.
Another of the same.
A Breeding sow hurt with a mortal blow,
At once lost life, and did new life bestow.
What certain aim the iaueline-thrower took?
I think it was Lucinaes hand that struck.
Her death the power of both Diana's tried;
Helped as a da^^e, as hunting game she died.
Another of the same.
A So^ now great, the fruit of her ripe womb
Brought forth, a parent by a wound become.
That lay not still, but run when the dam feli.
How wit in sudden chances does excel!
^e praises young Carpophorus, a favorite of Domitian the Emperor's, who to
win honor, fought with beasts upon the stage, (as the custom was) he
prefers him before Hercules and Meleager.
A Bore, whose death gave Meleager name,
But part is of Carpophorus his fame.
He in a Bear, as great as any were
Under the North, did sheathe his hunting spear.
He slow a Lion of unusual size,
That might be held a fair Herculean prize:
And a swift Libbard, yet his freshness such,
When crowned for this, he could have done as much*
A spectacle, in which by an engine the image of Domitian, arrayed like
Hercules, seemed to be carried by a Bull up into heaven; he compares it with
the Bull that carried Europa.
THat from the Stage a Bull did mount the sk^e,
It was no work of Art, but Piety.
A Bull Europa bore through's Brothers Seas,
Now to the sky a Bull bare Hercules.
Caesar's and love's devices now compare;
Though both bare equal loades, this highest bare.
Of an Elephant adoring Domitian the Emperor.
THat the Elephant, whose might the Bull before
So feared, thee (Caesar) prostrate did adore,
It Was not his Keepers teaching, or commands;
Even he thy Godhead, Caesar, understands.
Of a Tiger and a Lion.
A hard-got Tiger from the Hyrcanian Land,
That used to lick his fearelesle Masters hand,
Lately in rage (a thing not heard before)
A mighty Lion all to pieces tore.
He durst not do within the Forest thus,
But grew more furious since he lived with us.
Of a Bull and an Elephant.
THe Bull, that late provoked on the stage
By fire, did toss the Bals up in his rage,
Did fall at last by strength of horn, whilst so
He thought in the air an Elephant to throw.
He flatters the wisdom of Domitian, who satisfied at once the desires of
both factions of the People.
WHile some Triumphus, Myrinus some crave,
Caesar at once with both hands promise gave.
This merry strife who better could accord?
Oh pleasant wit of an unconquered Lord!
The Fable of Orpheus was presented on the Amphitheater. in which acondemn'd
man was torue by a Bear, as Orpheius was by the Women in the sacrifice of
Bacchus.
WHat ^re of Orpheus Aemus vale did see,
Thy stage, OCaesar, did present to thee.
The Rocks did creep, the Woods were running seen,
Such as the Hesperides were thought to have been.
Beasts after him both wild and tame did throng,
And sholes of Birds about the Poet hung.
But he was slain by an ungrateful Bear.
This here was true, to other was fained there.
Of the Rhinoceres.
WHilst long the fearful Keepers did provoke
The Rhinoceros, ere he his anger took,
They did despair the expected sight to obtain;
At last his usual rage returned again;
For with his double horn he tossed a Bear
As high as Bulls stuffed Bals have tossed there.
Of Carpophorus.
HOw strong and sure, yet in his tender years
Carpophorus throws his Dorick hunting spears?
Two mighty Bullocks easily he killed;
To him the bugle and fierce Bull did yield.
From him a Lion on the weapons ran:
Blame not the tarrying of the combat than.
A navall fight presented on the Theater (the water being suddenly let in by
certain devices) made spectators that were strangers believe it was the Sea;
but that presently after they saw the water let out, and the Sword-players
exercising in the same place.
SPectator, thou that come from some far shore,
And never saw these sacred shows before,
Be not deceived with Sea-like Pooles, that bear
Whole navall fights; dry Land was lately there.
Doo'st not believe? stay till the Fencers play
By Land: here lately was the Sea, thou wilt say.
The History of Leander, personated upon the water, let into the Amphitheater.
in which he prayseth the emperor as more merciful than Neptune; for this
personated Leander was here saved; the true one was drowned in the Hellespont.
THat this night-sea thy life, Leander, saves
Cease youth to wonder, they were Caesar's ^ av^^
When bold Leander swam to his fair Love,
And against the swelling waves now weari'd strove,
Thus the approaching ^illowes he bespake
This life but going spare, returning take.
Young men, skillful in swimming, attired in the habit of Sea-Nymphs, played
upon the water of the Theater. Which artificial spectacle he prefers
before the true Exercises of Thetis, and her Nymphs.
ON Seas a well-taught Troop of Sea-Nymphs playde
And various ranks on the easy waters made.
The threatening Tride^t, the crook'd Anchors there,
The Ships, the Oars (we thought) did true appear;
The Oebalian Twins, the Sailors saviors shined;
Broad Sails did seem to swell against the wind.
Who first such works on liquid waters wrought?
These sports here Thetis learned, or Thetis taught.
Of Carpophorus.
HAd former ages bred Carpophorus,
No Monsters, Caesar, had been left for us.
Nor had men feared the Nemean Lions rore,
The Cretan Bull, nor fierce Arcadian Bore.
By his armed hand Hydra one death had died;
He at one blow Chimaera had destroyed.
Tamed Colchos Bulls without Medaea's aid,
And freed Andromeda, and the Trojan Maid.
Count great Alcides praises, and to tame
Twice ten wild Beasts at once, is greater fame.
He prefers the Sea Fights, exhibited for spectacle by the Emperors Titus,
and Domitian, before those of Augustus, Claudius, and Nero.
TO join two fleets, and with Sea-trumpets raise
A navall fight, was great Augustus praise;
More is our Caesar's; Galataea viewed,
And Thetis too, strange Beasts in water showed.
And Triton Sea-wett Chariots here has seen,
And thought they had his Masters horses been.
For these fierce ships whilst he prepares a fight,
Old Nereus would not from his Chariot light.
What ere upon the circke or stage men see
Caesar's rich water does present to thee.
Let Claudius Lakes, and Nero's not be known
To after times, but this Sea Fight alone.
When two Sword-Players fought equally, and neither yielded, Caesar (though the
People desired it) would not dismiss them, till at last both equally yielded.
Upon which he dismissed them both, crowned them both as Conquerours, and freed
them from the service of the stage by seading them Staves as the Custom was.
WHen Verus here, there Priscus did prolong
The fight; and both their strengths in balance hung,
The Peoples clamours often dismission prayed
For both; but Caesar his own Law obeyed
Which was, the yeelder must his finger show;
How er^, he gif^ and ^unkets did bestow.
At last an end this equal combat found,
Both fought alike, and both alike gave ground
Caesar to both gave prize and liberty,
All this became ingenious virtues fee*
'Twas never known, Caesar, before thy reign,
That two should fight, and conquest both obtain^
FINIS.
MARTIAL His Epigramms.
Hic est quem legis -- Epig. 1 Lib. 1.
HEre whom thou seek'st, Reader, thou have
Martial through all the known world graced
For Epigrams of choysest wit.
To whom alive, and knowing it,
Reader, the favor thou have shown
Few Poets Vrnes have ever known.
Cum peteret Regem -- Epig. 22. Lib. 1.
WHen Mutius mist of his King-killing aim,
His willing hand he offered to the flame.
But the mild Foe such Miracles abhorred,
And safe from fire his Prisoner home restored.
That hand, that Mutius from least fainting free
Durst burn, the King could not endure to see.
Thus happy error greater glory won,
And less this hand, if not deceived, had done.
Po^^peios iuvenes -- Epig. 74. Lib. 5.
EVrope, and Asia Pompey's sons interre,
He tomb'd in Lybia lies, if any where;
No marvel it is, they scattered thus remain,
Since no one place such ruin could contain.
Coniugis audisset fatum -- Epig. 43. Lib. 1.
WHen Brutus death to Portias ear was brought,
And weapons hid from her, her sorrow sought,
Know ye not yet, quoth she, death's nere denied?
Learned you not so much when my Father died?
This said, hot swallowed coals dispatch her life.
In vain, alas, have you denied a knife.
Dum dubitaret -- Epig. 32. Lib. 6.
WHile civil Furies fate did doubtful stay,
And yet soft Otho might have won the day.
Mars he condemned with blood already cloyed,
And his own life his certain hand destroyed.
Though Cato's life than Caesar's greater was,
Not Cato's death could dying Otho pass.
Quod magni. Thrase^, -- Epig. 9. Lib. 1.
THat great Thrasea's Sect thou do maintain,
And dying Cato's, yet still safe remain,
Nor on drawn Swords thy naked breast have run,
What I could wish, has Decianus done.
I weigh not him, whose glory death must raise.
Give me the man, that living merits praise.
Cum gravis -- Epig. 73. Lib. 4.
WHen sick Vestinus drew his latest breath,
And saw before his eyes approaching death.
The Sisters drawing his last thread he prays
In that black task to use some small delays,
Dead to himself he now lives to his friends.
The Fates gave way to his Religious ends.
Then parting his large wealth, he yields his breath,
And thinks himself now old enough for death.
Vu fieri liber -- Epig. 53. Lib. ^.
THou would be free, thou lie, thou would'^^ not be^^
But if thou would, I Will chaul^ the way to thee
At others Tables can thou scorn to dine?
Can quench thy thirst with small Etrurian wi^^^^
And cast on Cinna's Plate no covetous eye,
And be content with such a gown as I?
Can a cheap Wench suffice thine appe^ite?
And rooms, in which thou can not stand uprigh^
Could thou thy mind to this true temper bring,
Thou should live freer than the Parthian King.
Nullos osse Deos -- Epig. 21. Lib. 4.
THat in the Heavens no gods there be
Selius affirms, and proves, cause h^
Still thinking so lives happily.
^sse quid hoc -- Epig. 10. Lib. 5.
WHence is it, that men alive no praise can gain*
And that few Readers their own times mainetaine?
Thi^, Regulus, is Envie's wonted guise
To praise what is past, and present things despise.
So we old Pompey's Gallery desire,
And ^ulius Temple our old men admire.
^nnius Rome read, whilst Maro there resided.
By his own times great Homer was derided.
F^w Stages ^^ownd Menander sounded forth.
None but Corinna knew her Ovids Worth.
But haste not you (my Books) for Fame, to whom
^is soon enough if after death it come.
Sit cister^^ mibi -- Epig. 55. Lib. 3.
A Vineyard at Ravenna; no a Well.
For Water there than Wine does dearer sell.
Callidus imposiat -- Epig. 56. Lib. 3.
THe Vin^ner cheated me, and pure Wine gave*
Wine mixed with Water ^ desired to have.
Callidus effracta -- Epig. 43. Lib. 5.
THieves may thy Coffers break, steal coin or plate;
Thy house a sudden fire may ruinate.
Debtors may Use, and Principal deny,
And dead thy seeds in barren Grounds may lie:
Thy Steward may be cheated by a Who^re;
Thy Merchandise the Ocean may devour.
But what thou giv'st thy friends, from chance is free.
Thy gifts alone shall thine for ever be.
COntinual showrs have so bedrenchd the vines,
Though Vin^ners would, they could not sell pure wines.
Of a Viper smothered in Amber. Flentibus Heliadum ra^i^ -- Epig. 59. Lib. 4.
WHilst on the Heliades Amber-weeping Bows
A Viper creeps down, on the Worm it flows.
Who whilst amazde in this sweet Deaw it lies,
The Amber hardens, and the Viper dies.
Boast not, Egyptian Queen, thy Tomb so brave,
Since here a Viper finds a nobler grave.
Primos pass^ ^o^os -- Epig. 22. Lib. 4.
But newly bedded, and scarce tamed, from me
To a clear Lake did Cl^opatra flee
To hide her, but the water her betrayed,
And to my sight her naked Limbs displayed.
So in a glaffe are Lillyes plainly spyde,
Nor blushing Roses can pure Crystal hide.
I, leaping in, a struggling kiss did get,
But more the water would not there permit.
Quisquis flaminiam -- Epig. 14. Lib. 11.
WHo ere d^st pass Flaminiaes way,
At this enobled Marble stay.
Romes Love, Aegypts facetious Play.
The Art, the Grace, the Sport, and Pleasure,
The Roman Stages Grief and Treasure,
All Venus^^, and Cupid's here
Are closed in Paris Sepulc^^^.
Tanta tibi est -- Epig. 6. Lib. 11.
CAes^r, as just thou art, as full of grace
As Numa was; but poor old Numa was.
It Is strange, a mind not changed by wealth, to see
That Croesus Master should a Numa be.
If those great names, the Roman Fathers should
Ascend from forth Elisium's empti'd wood,
For thee Camillus freedom would forsake,
And gold Fabritius from thy hand would take;
Brutus would serve thee, to no hand but thine
Would Sylla his Dictatorship resign.
Pompey would love thee, Caesar private still
Would live; and Crassus wealth should serve thy will.
Nay, if from Stygian gulf Cato were free,
Ca^o himself would a Caesarian be.
Bellaes, novimus, and -- Epig. 65. Lib. 1.
THE art fair Fabulla, it is most true,
Rich, yongue, there is none denies thy due.
But whilst thy self do too much boast,
Thy youth, thy wealth, thy beautie's lost.
Frontibus adversis -- Epig. 35. Lib. 4.
We saw faint Dear with furious butts of late
Each other meet, and dye with mutual fate,
The Dogs beheld their prey, the Hunts-man proud
Admired no work was to his knife allowd.
Whence should faint hearts such furi^ entertain?
So fight stern Bulls, so valiant men are slain.
Dic mihi quem portas volucrum -- Ep. 56. Lib. 5.
TEll me, who^ bearst thou, Queen of Birds? great love*
Why wears he not his Thunder? he is in love.
With whom? a Boy* Why do thou turn thy beak
So pleased to love? Of ^anymed I speak.
Casta suogladum -- Epig. 14. Lib. 1.
WHen to her Paetus Aria gave the Sword,
Which had her own chaste breast already gored,
Trust me (she said) mine own wou^d grieves not me;
That wound's my grief, which must be made by thee.
Jrasci tantum felices -- Epig. 37. Lib. 3.
RIch friends' against poor to anger still are pron^^
It is not well, but profitably done.
Quem recit^^ men^ est -- Epig. 39. Lib. 1.
THe Book thou readst, O Fidentine, is mine;
But when thou ill recit'st it, it proves thine.
Flete nefas vestrum*
Weep, Nymphs, for your misdeeds all Lu^rine lake*
Let Thetis feel your sorrow, and partake.
Drowned in the Baian waters, Eutychus
Is lost, thy dear Companion Castricus.
That knew thy thoughts, thy cares that gently eased
The loved Alexis, which our Poet pleased.
Perchance the wanton Nymph within the Lake
Thee naked saw; and sent young Hylas back;
Or else the Goddess moved with delight
Of thy embrace, neglects the Hermaphrodite.
What ever caused thy sudden rape, to thee
Let both the earth and water gentle be.
Semper eri^ p^^per -- Epig. 82. Lib. 5.
IF thou be poor, thou shall be ever so;
None now do wealth, but on the rich, be^^o^*
Tristis es and felix -- Epig 79. Lib. 6.
THE art rich and sad; take heed lest fortune know;
She 'll call the unthankefull, Lupus, if she do.
Profecit poto Mithridates -- Epig. 77. Lib. 5.
BY taking Poison often the Ponticke King
Secu^'d himself from hurt by poisoning;
And, Cinna, thou by supping basely still
Procur'st that hunger thee can never kill.
N^scis, creed ^ihi, quid -- Epig. 49. Lib. 4.
THou know not, trust me, what are Epigrams,
Flaccus, who think them jests, and wanto^ games*
^^ wantons more, who writes what horrid meat
The plagued Thyestes, and vexed Tere^^ (...)*
Or Daedalus fitting his Boy to fly,
Or Polyphemus flocks in Sicily.
My Book no windy words, nor turgid needs,
Nor swells my Muse with mad Cothurnall weeds.
Yet those things all men praise, admire, adore.
True; they praise those, but read these Poems more.
Non donem tibi -- Epig. 74. Lib. 5.
THou wonder'st, Theodore, why I
Entreated often and urgently
Refuse to send my Books to thee;
I fear thou 'lt send thine own to me.
Frustra blanditiae -- Epig. 72. Lib. 10.
IN vain o wretched Flattery,
With bare-worne lips thou comst to me
To call me falsely Lord and God.
Away; for thee here is no abode;
To Parthia's mitred Monarchs go;
There falling prostrate, basely low,
The gaudy Kings proud feet adore.
This is no Lord, but Emperor,
Of all the iustest Senator.
By whom from Stygian shades, the plain,
And rusticke truth's brought back again.
Thou dare not, Rome, he Emperor,
To flatter as thou did before.
Nubere Paull^ cupit -- Epig. 8. Lib. 10.
PAulla would marry me; I would not her
Because she is old, unless she elder were.
Qui legis Oedipodas -- Epig. 4. Lib. 10.
WHat are, but Monsters, in the Theban bed,
Thyestes, Scillaes, or Medea's read?
What profits thee sleeping Endymion?
Parthenopaeus, Atis, Hylas gone?
Icarus drowned* Hermaphroditus f^^e,
Who now does loves transforming waters hate?
Why such vain trash spendst thou thy time upon?
Read that, which truly thou may call thine own.
There are no Centaures, Gorgons, Harpyes here;
My page speaks only man. But thou do fear
Thy self, Mammurra, and thy crimes to know.
Then read Callimachus his causes thou.
Festinata prior decimi -- Epig. 2. Lib. 10.
THis my tenth Book set out before too soon,
Back to my hands comes to be better done.
Some old, but new corrected, thou will find;
The most are new; Reader, to both be kind.
Reader, my wealth; whom when to me Rome gave,
Naught greater to bestow (quoth she) I have.
By him ungrateful Lethe thou shall fly,
And in thy better part shall never dye.
Wild F^g-trees rend Messalla's Marbles off;
Crispus halfe-horses the bold Carters scoff.
Writings no age can wrong, no theeving hand.
Deathlesse alone those Monuments will stand.
Quinque satis fuerant -- Epig. 3. Lib. 8.
FIve Books, or six, or seven, had bin ^now,
Nay, Muse, too much; why further wantonst thou?
Here and for shame; fame now can add no grace
To me; my Books are read in every place.
And when Licinius, and Messalla's high,
Rich marble Towers in ruined dust shall lie,
I shall be read, and strangers every where
Shall to their farthest homes my Verses bear^.
Thus I, when thus the ninth Muse answered me,
Whose hair and clothes still wet with ointments be,
Can thou, ungrateful man, thy toys forsake?
What better course (speak idler) can thou take?
Will thy low Verse ere fit the Tragic vain?
Or thunder Wars in an Heroicke strain?
That Schoolmasters, till they be hoarse, may read
Thy lines, and Girls and Boys thy name may dread?
Let men more grave and sour such Verses write,
Who do by Candles spend the toylesome night;
With Roman salt thy merry Books fill thou,
Where men their manners may both read and know.
What though thou seem to pipe on humble reeds,
Whilst others Trumpets thy small Pipe exceeds?
Aeolidon Canace iacet hoc -- Epig. 92. Lib. 11.
WIthin this Tomb fair Canace is placed,
To whom her seventh Winter was her last.
O dire mischance! Reader, why weep^t thou there?
It Is not her short life, that requires thy tear*
Deaths maner's worse than death; the dire disease
Beset her face, her tender mouth did seize.
The Monster sickness strived a kiss to have.
Her fair lips went not wholly to the grave.
If fates so soon bad meant to stop her breath,
They should have come some other way. But death
Made haste her tongues sweet Music to prevent,
Le^t that should make the ^linti^ Fates relent.
Quod ta^ grande -- Epig. 48. Lib. 6.
THat flattering guests to praise thy words consent
Not thou, Pompon^us, thy feast's eloquent.
Qui recitat lana fauces -- Epig. 41. Lib. 6.
He that recites, his throat close muffled, he
Shows he can neither speak, nor silent be.
Si quid forte petam -- Epig. 24. Lib. ^. To Caesar.
IF my small fearful Book do beg of thee,
Grant it, if not too bold my beggings be;
Or pardon, though thou grant not what I move;
Incense and prayers nere offended love.
He makes not gods, who does their figures raise
In gold and marble; but the man that prays.
Liber amicorum dulcissima -- Epig. 77. Lib. 8.
LIber thy friends dear care, worthy to live
For evermore where sweetest Roses thrive,
With flowers (if thou be wise) still crown thy head,
Upon thy hair Assyrian ointment spread:
Thy Crystal glass let black Falernum die:
Thy soft bed warm with pleasing Venery.
Who ere lives thus, although but half his time,
He makes more life than was bestowed on him.
^^^^ quem ^^^^ tibi -- Epig. 15. Lib. 9.
Think thou his friendship ever faithful proves,
Whom first thy Table purchased? no, he loves
Thy Ovsters, Mullets, Bores, Sowes paps, not thee:
If I could feast him so, he would love me.
Laudas balaca -- Epig. 20. Lib. 9, To Sab^llus.
THou prayse^t in three hundred lines
Ponticus Baths, who richly dines;
Thy mind to eat, not wash inclines.
N^n^o^ in E^is -- Epig. 26. Lib. 8, To Domitian.
NOt in the Hyrcanian woods, nor India
Did ere mo Tigers the pale hunts-men aw
Than did thy Rome, Germanicus, in sights
Late show; nor could she number her delights.
The Indian Triumph was excelled by thee,
The wealth and conquest of a Deity.
For Bacchus with two Tigers was content
When Captive Indians by his Chariot went.
Munera qui -- Epig. 27. Lib. 8.
GAurus, the art old and rich; who ere to thee (die.
Gives gifts (conceive him right) he bids thee
Host^^ cum fugeret -- Epig. 80. Lib. ^.
WHat Furie's this? his Foe whilst Fannius flies
He kills himself; for fear of death he dies.
Splendophorus Libyeas -- Epig. 57. Lib. 9.
TO Libya goes Splendophorus to war.
Cupid, thy shafts for this fair Boy prepare,
Those shafts, which youths and tender virgins wou^d;
Light let thy spear in his soft hand be found.
The breast plate, helm and shield I leave to thee;
To fight in safety, naked let him be.
No arrow, sword, nor dart could hurt in war
Parthenopaeus, whilst his face was bare.
He, whom this youth shall wound, will die of love,
And happy too so sweet a fate to prove.
Whilst yet thy chin is smooth fair boy come home;
Grow not a man in Affricke, but at Rome.
In Tartessiacis domus est -- Epig. 62. Lib. 9.
A Well known house does in that country stand
Where Baetis waters Corduba's rich Land,
Where Wool's their native metals color keep,
And growing goldfoile guilds the Spanish sheep.
In midst of the house her gods ore-shadowing
Does Caesar's plaine-tree prosperously spring
Planted by that victorious guest, from whose
Imperial hand the tender twigg arose;
Which now it seems her Lord and founder knows
She spreads so fast her sky-aspiring bows,
Under that shade the Rusticke Dryades,
And wanton Fauns themselves with sporting please;
And often, as she by night from Pan does fly
This silent house does Syrinx terrify.
There often has Bacchus kept his revelling.
When wine has made the Tree more richly spring.
There Roses grow to adorn the drinking crown;
And none can say those Roses are his own.
Great Caesar's Tree, to all the Gods most dear,
No sacrilegious fire, nor hatchets fear.
Still may thou hope honored with leaves to be;
It Was no Pompeian hand that planted thee.
Dixerat O mores, O tempora -- Epig. 72. Lib. 9.
OH times, O manners once old Tullv said,
When Catiline his hellish plot had laid,
When Wars did son and father in law divide,
And Romes sad earth with civil slaughter died.
Why now O times, O manners cry'st thou man?
What is it displeases thee Cecilian?
No Generals rage, no swords of Traitors now;
But peace and joy do plentifully flow.
It Is not the ages manners, but thine own
Have made the age to thee so hateful grown.
Hic qui dura sedens --
THis mighty God in brass but little done,
Whose Lions skin softens the harder stone,
Who views the heavens, which once his strength bore up,
Whose left hand holds a clubb, his right a cup,
Is no new piece, no glory of our days,
But famed Lysippus gift, and work of praise;
This god once Alexander's Table showed,
Who Conqueror lies in the earth so soon subdued.
By him young Hanniball at the altar swore;
By his command stern Sylla Rule gave ore.
Grieved at these several Courts vain terrors, he
Now in a private house is glad to be,
And live with learned Vindex as his god,
As once he graced Molorchus poor abode.
Cum faciem laud -- Epig. 50. Lib. 3. To Galla.
WHen ore I praise thy face, hand, leg; far more
(Thou say) I Would like th^e, if all naked ore;
Yet still thou ^hun'st the common Baths with me;
Fear thou that I should not be liked by thee?
Empta da^nus fuerat -- Epig. 51. Lib. 3.
TWo hundred pound thy house, Tongilian, cost,
Which was by fire, a chance too frequent, lost.
Ten times as much in lieu was gathered thee.
Did thou not burn thy house in policy?
Cum dare non possim -- Epig. 53. Lib. 3.
WHen for a night thou cravest more than I
Can give, twere plainer, Galla, to deny.
Quod spirat tenera malum -- Epig. 64. Lib. 3. To Diadumenus.
WHat smell ripe Apples bit by Virgins fair,
Or what Cilician saffrons fragrant air,
What blooming Vines with blossoms lately filled,
Or springing pastures cropped by sheep do yield:
What Myrtles, chafed Amber, Eastern gumms,
Arabian incense rising in palefumes:
What meadows lightly wet with summer showers,
Or Nard in chaplets made of sweetest flowers:
All this, fair Boy, thy frag ant kisses be.
What would they, did thou give them full and fre^?
Dum modo Causidicum -- Epig. 64. Lib. 2. To Taurus.
WHilst Rhetoric now, now Law best pleases thee
And thou resolv'st not, Taurus, what to be,
Old Priam's time, Peleus, or Nestor's runs,
A time to leave off all professions.
Three Rhetoricians died within a year;
Be thou one, if the art bold, and skillful there;
If not; all Courts are full of brawles for thee;
Even Mar^ia's statue might a Lawyer be.
Delay no more. How long expect we thee?
Thou 'lt doubt so long, till thou can nothing be.
Ad caenam nuper -- Epig. 78. Lib. 4.
VArus invited me to supper late,
Where little meat there was, but store of plat^*
His men with gold, not victuals filled the board,
Feasts to our eyes, not stomachs to afford.
We came to feed no eyes, but bellies here;
Keep up thy wealth, or shew't in better cheer.
Munera quod senibus -- Epig. 56. Lib. 4. Against Gargilian.
GIfts to old rich men thou sendst, and widows all,
Yet would be thought, Gargilian, liberal.
There Is naught more sordid, naught more base than thee,
To call thy snares a liberaliti^.
So to the greedy fish the hook is kind:
Such favor, Beasts from cousening bates do find.
But would thou know true liber^litie?
^e teach thee then; bestow thy gifts on me.
^^igis ^^ ^^nem nostros -- Epig. 72. Lib. 4. To Quinctus.
THou begg'st, that I Would bestow my Book on thee,
I ^ave none; the Stationer can show it thee.
Shall I give coin for toys, think thou, and buy
Thy Books? I am not such a fool; nor I.
^gi^ti (...) semper, Li^e -- Epig. 66. Lib. 4.
LInus, thou still a Country life did live;
Than which naught can more cheap contentment give.
Few Ides, or Calends ere in Rome did see
Thee gown'd; one cloak ten Summers served thee;
Thy grounds did yield thee bores, and hares unboght;
The woods fat Thrushes to thy table brought.
The rivers gave thee fish; in pots of earth
Thou drunkst cheap wine, which boasts no foreign birth.
No beauteous high-priz'd Boys of Greece did fill
Thy wi^e, but plain and rustic servants still;
Or else thy tenants homely wife did lie
With thee, when wine had raised thy spirits high.
No heats did spoil thy crops, no fire burnt down
Thy house; the sea no ships of thine did drown.
No dice, or gaming took thy wealth away.
For nuts, like children, was thy deepest play.
Where Is all the wealth thy mother left thee gone
Linus, it is hard to do what thou have done.
Quae mihi praestiteris memini -- Epig. 53. Lib. 5. To Posthumus.
THy gifts to me I think of, and still shall.
Why then do I not speak of them at all?
Thou do. Where ere i tell thy charity,
It Is answered straight, himself has told it me.
This work befits not both; one is enough;
If thou would have me speak, be silent thou.
For (trust me) were thou nere so liberal,
The givers talking would destroy it all.
^asia da nobis -- Epig. 34. Lib. 6. To Diadumenus.
Kiss fully, fairest Boy. How often (sai'st thou)
The Oceans waves thou bidst me number now;
Or shells upon the Aegaean shor^ to count,
Or bees, that swarm about the Athenian mount;
Or on the Theater the peoples cries,
And shouts, when Caesar first does greet their eyes.
What number Lesbia to Catullus gave
I beg not. Few would he, that counts them, have.
Vatis Apollinei magno -- Epig. 21. Lib. 7. Of Lucan.
THis day so famed for Phoebus Prophets birth
Returns; ye Poets, sacrifice with mirth.
This day deserved, which Lucan did bestow,
That Baetis mixed with Helicon should ^low.
Ede tuos tandem -- Epig. 26. Lib. 1.
PVblish thy Books (Faustinus) yet, and show
Thy polished labors to the peoples view,
Those Books, which Athens cannot dis respect,
Nor our old Romans but with prai^e affect*
Wilt not admit fame standing at thy door?
And take the fruit of all thy pains before?
Fame to the Vrne comes late; let those Books live
With thee, which after life to thee must give.
Cum clamant omnes -- Epig. 98. Lib. 1. To Naevolus the Lawyer.
WHen there is most noise, thou plead'st, thinking to show
Thy self a Patron, and a Lawyer so.
At such a time all men speak well* but now
When all are silent, speak to the purpose thou.
Non plenum modo -- Epig. 100. Lib. ^. To covetous Calenus.
THou once had an estate but small;
But then so brave, free, liberal
Thou were, Calenus, that all we
Did wish ten times as much to thee.
Some God then heard what we did pray,
And ^^e seven Calends past away
Four deaths on thee bestowed that sum;
But thou, as if no means had come,
But rather as much loss to thee,
Fell'st to such wretched penury,
That even thy feasts most high and rare,
Which once a year thou do prepare,
Thou make for small sums of base coin;
And seven of us old friends of thine
Cost thee a leaden halfe-penny.
For this what shall I wish to thee?
I Will wish thy wealth ten times as much.
Thou 'dst starve our right, if it were such.
Qui pi^xit Venerem -- Epig. 103. Lib. ^ To Lycoris.
THat Painter sure, Lycoris, meant to show
Favor to Pallas, which thy (...) drew.
Esse quid hoc dicam -- Epig. 12. Lib. 2. Against Posthum^^.
WHence is it, that still like myr^he thy kisses bee^
That still thou bearst a borrowd sent with thee?
I needs must censure thee for that sweet smell.
He smells not well, that always smells so well.
Quod querulum spirat -- Epig. 26. Lib. 2. To Bithynicus.
THat in thy bosom thy old wife does lie
Coffing, and groaning still, as like to dye
Thou think thou art surely made, but thou will b^e
Deceived; she dooes not die, but flatter thee.
^utua vigintisestertia -- Epig. 30. Lib. 2. Against Caius.
TWenty sesterces I Would have borrowed late,
Which, if bestowed, had been a gift not great. hold.
For it was a rich friend whom I asked, and old,
Whose crowded chests would scarce his riches
He cries, ^^rne Lawyer, and ^hou'lt thrive; I Would have
No counsel, Caius, give me what I crave.
^mi seu puerum -- Epig. 44. Lib. ^. Against Sextus.
WHen I a Boy, or gown have bought,
Or some small plate of silver wrought,
Sextus the Usurer, whom you
To be my old companion know,
Fearing I Would beg of him, thus he
Speaks to himself (ore-heard by me)
To Phoebus four thousand, eleven
Philetus, to Secundus seven
Iow; and have at home no whit
Of coin; welfare an old friends wit.
It Is hard, when asked, thou should deny;
Harder before I ask of thee.
V^guent^^^ fateor -- Epig. 12. Lib. 3. Against Fabullus.
THou gav'st good ointment (it is confessed)
But little supper to thy guests.
It Is an improper thing to be
Perfumed, and hungry. Well may he,
That is anointed, and not fed,
Be thought a coarse, that's newly dead.
Proscriptum famulus -- Epig. 21. Lib. 3. Against a cruel Master; whose life
notwithstanding a wronged slave of h^^ did save at the Proscription.
ABranded slave his proscribed Lord did save.
Not life, but envy, to his Lord he gave.
Mentiris i^venem -- Epig. 43. Lib. 3. Against Lentinus.
THou dy'st thy hair to seem a younger man,
And turn'st a Crow, that lately were a Swan.
All are not cousen'd; hels queen knows thee gray.
She Will take the vizor from thy head away.
Occur^it tibi nemo -- Epig. 44. Lib. 3. Against Ligurinus.
THat none would meet thee willingly,
But where so ere thou come, all fly
O Ligurinus, would thou know it?
The cause is the art too much a Poet.
That fault is wondrous dangerous.
No Tiger robbed of whelps by us
So much is feared, no Scorpion,
Nor Dipsas basking in the Sun.
For who can ere endure such pain?
Standing thou read'st, sitting again;
Running, and at the privy too.
To the bath I go; there read thou.
I go to swim; thy Book delays me.
I go to supper; thence it stays me.
When I am set, thy reading makes me
To rise; and when I sleep, it wakes me.
Behold, what hurt thou do. None can
Brook thee a just, good, harmless man.
Et latet, and lucet -- Epig. 32. Lib. 4. Of a Be smoother'd in Amber.
HEre shines a Be closed in an Amber tomb
As if interred in her own honey-combe.
A fit-reward fate to her labors gave;
No other death would she have wished to have*
Hic est Pampine is -- Epig. 44. Lib. 4. Of the hill Vesuvius bu^ned by a
strange fire.
VEsuvius shaded once with greenest vines,
Where pressed grapes did yield the noblest wines.
Which hill far more tha^ ^ysa Bacchus loved,
Where Satyrs once in mirthfull dances moved,
Where Venus dwelt, and better loved the place
Than Sparta; where Alcides Temple was,
Is now burnt down, raked up in ashes sad
The gods are grieved that such great power they had*
Sum fateor, semperque fui -- epig. 13. Lib. 5. Against Callistr atus.
I Am poor, Callistratus, and ever was,
But yet a Gentleman, free from disgrace,
And read through all the world, and pointed at,
And living find what few find after fate.
An hundred columns thy large house uphold;
Thy crowded chests can scarce contain thy gold.
Much rich Egyptian Land thou have; but more,
Thy flocks from Parma send thee fleeces store.
Thus are we two; what I am thou 'lt nere be,
The basest man by chance may equal thee.
Sextantes, Caliste duos -- Epig. 65. Lib. ^. To his servants.
TWo cups, Calistus, of rich wine fill thou,
Thou Alcimus, allay 't with summer snow.
Let my moist hair with richest ointment sweat;
And sweet rose chaplets on my Temples set.
Come, let us live; the Caesar's tombs so nigh
Teach us that even the gods themselves will dye
Antonni Phario -- Epig. 70. Lib 5. Against Marcus Antonius the Tri^^nvir.
WOrse than Photi^us, and more odious grown*
By Tullies death, than thy proscription,
Why by thy sword should that brave Roman bleed?
Fieree Catiline would have abhorred the deed*
The impious Soldier gold corrupts, and naught
But one tongs silence that great wealth has bought.
What boots that sacred tongues dear silence now
All men will speak in stead of Cicero.
Qui potuit Bacchi -- Epig. 73 Lib. 5. Of Bacchus birth.
WHo says that love was Bacchus mother, he
As well may call his father S^^^le*
Jurat capillos -- Epig. 12. Lib. 6. Of Fabulla.
FAbulla swears her hair (which at a rate
She bought) is hers. Is she forsworn in that?
Dum Phaeton^aea -- Epig. 15. Lib. 6. Of an Ant drowned in Amber.
A Namber drop from Phaetons branches wept
Enclosed a little Ant that under crept*
That Ant not valued in her life at all
Is now made precious by her funeral.
Quod nubis Proculina -- Epig. 22. Lib. 6. Against Proculina.
THat Proculina's servant marries her
Her husband now, late her adulterer
For fear the Julian Law should tax her, she
Not marries, but confesses that was he.
Amisit Pater unicum -- Epig. 62. Lib. 6. To Apian.
SIlanus only son is dead.
Why, Apian, have thou offered
No gifts to the sire? oh destinies
What Vultur shall this carcass seize*
M^chum Gellia -- Epig. 90. Lib. 6. Of Gellia.
BV^ one Adulterer has Gellia now;
That's worst of all to be a wife to two.
C^l^tus tibi cum -- Epig. 92. Lib. 6. To Amianus.
WHen on thy cup a serpents shape is wrought
By Myrons hand, and wine but small and naught
Thou drink'st therein, ^ure it is a poisoned draught.
Fr^gmentum quod vile -- Epig. 18. Lib. 7. Of a piece of the ship Argus.
THis, which thou think base planks, and useles wood,
Was once that ship that first the Ocean plowd.
Which nor Cyanean Islands, nor the rage
Of S^ythian Seas could break, but powerful age
Did ruin it; yet though to time it yield,
Let this more sacred than whole ships be held.
Primum est ut praestes -- Epig. 42. Lib. 7. Against Cinna.
THe first love, Cinna, is to grant what I
Request; the second quickly to deny.
I love the one, the other hate not I;
But thou nor grant'st, nor quickly do deny.
Commendare tuum dum -- Epig. 45. Lib. 7. To Priscus.
WHilst thou thy gifts to me in verse would fain
Commend, and striv'st to pass great Homers vein;
Thy self and me thou too too long do vex;
While thou art studying, wants do me perplexe.
Send rich men Verses, and high Elegyes;
Poor men plain gifts without a Verse will please.
Doctorum Licini celeberrime -- Epig. 46. Lib. 7. To Licinius.
LIcinius, famed for learning, best of men,
Whose language brings the old purity again.
By what great gift of fate to us art thou
(Near tasting Lethes stream) restored now?
Our fears were past, our sorrow freely wept,
And had thy obsequies already kept.
But hels sad King such envy could not brook,
And to the fates restored the web he took.
How thy false death was wail*d is known to thee;
Thou now enioy'st thine own posterity.
Live as by stealth; seize joys that flying poast.
Let not a day of this new life be lost.
Quod te diripiunt -- Epig. 75. lib. 7. To Philomusus.
THat great men court thee every where,
At feasts, and at the Theater,
And would, as often as well may be,
Walk, bathe, or take the air with thee;
Do not admire thy self for it.
It Is not their love, but their delight.
Si meus a^^ita -- Epig. 86. lib. 7.
IF Flacus love a long-ear'd ^ Bird.
Harefoots sight,
And Caniusin a Blackamore delight;
If Publius fall enamored of a Bitch,
And Cronus thoughts a Monkey can bewitch;
If Marius prize a harmefull Indian Rat,
Lausus a Py, that can salute and that;
If fair Glacilla's neck her snake become,
And Thelesine her Nightingale entombe:
Why should not I my fair La^ycas love,
When such strange Monsters their delights can move*
Si quid upon ^uerit -- Epig 91. lib 7. Against Bacchra.
WEre I in want, I need not ask of thee
Thus, Bacchra, oftentimes thou tellest me.
My Creditors at my non-payment taunt.
Thou hear'st, yet know not, Bacchra, what I want.
My Landlord rent does openly demand;
Thou hear'st, yet know not in what need I stand.
My clothes are ^old, worn bare unto a thread.
Thou see, yet know not, Bacchra, what I need.
My need is no have thee struck dumb therefore,
That thou might say, were thou in need no more.
Conditus his eg^ s^^^ -- Epig. 95. Lib. 7. An Epitaph upon Vrbicus a Child.
I Vibicus the grief of Bassus, am
Here tomb'd, on whom great Rome bestowed a name.
Six Months I wanted of two years, when to
My thread of life did cruel fates undo.
What did my beauty, talk, or age avail?
Who ere readst this, my death untimely wail.
So may that man at Nestors age to grave
Descend, whom thou would thy surviver have.
Sic placidum semper -- Epig. 98. lib. 7. To Crisp^^^^.
SO may thou still be favored by our love,
And gain as well Romes an thy Memphis love,
When thou my Verses read in Court shall hear
(For they sometimes enjoy great Caesar's ear)
Say, like a candid Reader, this man's ri^es
Do add some honor, Caesar, to thy times,
Not far from Marsus or Catullus best.
This is enough; to love I leave the rest.
Milo domi non est -- Epig. 101. lib. 7. Of Milo.
MI^orides forth; his grounds, while he is from home,
Ly wast: his wife still bears a fruitful womb.
Why are the grounds, and she not, barren grown?
His wife has tillers, though the grounds have none.
Achetypis vet^^ -- Epig. 6. lib 8. Against Euctus.
HOw odious Euctus antique gobblets are!
In earthen pots twere better drinking far,
While he the moldy ages of his plate
(Palling the wine with talking) does relate.
This cup belonged to King Laomedon;
For this Apollo's Harp did wall the Town.
This pot in fight did furious Rhaetus use
Against the Lapithes; see, here is the bruise.
This with two bottoms Nestor did delight:
It Was Nestor's thumb that wore this dove so bright.
This cup Achilles in a ioviall vain
Drunk freely off, his friends to entertain.
In this fair Dido drank to Bitias,
When Troys loved Prince her guest at supper was.
While thou these old engravings wondrest at,
Thou drinkst Astyanax in Priam's plate.
Principium des Jane -- Epig* 8. lib. 8. To Jamis.
THough, Ianus, thou begin swift years, that have,
And with thy look call back the ages past:
Though thee all incense first, all prayers implore:
All honors new, and purple gowns adore;
Yet more thou joy st to see what now is come,
That in thy month our god returns to Rome.
Egi, Sexte, tuam -- Epig. 17 lib. 8. To Sextus.
SExtus, thy cause I pleaded; for my fee
Thou sentst a piece; for two did I agree.
But thou complainst I did thy cause betray;
More for the shame I suffered, thou should pay.
Aeraper tacitum -- Epig* 32. lib. 8. Of Aretulla's Pigeon.
TO Aretulla's lap a snowy Dove
Descended gently through the air above.
It was no chance; for there the Dove did stay,
And, though permitted, would not fly away.
If that so good a sisters pious love,
And Prayers may hope our earthly god to move,
This Dove, from Sardos from her brother sent,
Brings news of his repeal from banishment.
Quantatua est probitas -- Epig. 46. lib. 8. To Cestus.
CEstus, so chaste thou art, so wondrous fair
That Theseus son may not with thee compare.
To bathe with thee would naked Diana joy.
Cybel for thee would leave her Phrygian boy.
Juno would let thee lie, for Ganymede,
With love, and would not thy chaste kisses dread.
Oh happy Bride, whose maidenhead shall take
Thy first fresh strength, and thee an husband make.
Formosissima quae -- Epig. 53. lib. 8. Against Catulla.
OF all thy sex thou fairest fair,
But baser than the basest are,
Oh how I wish, Catulla, thee
Less fair, or else more chaste to be.
Tres habuit dentes -- Epig. 57. lib. 8. To Picens.
THree only teeth had Picens, and did spit
Them out; as he before his tomb did sit.
Then gathring his mouths ruins up, he there
Entombed them; so that although his heir
Gather not up his bones, when he is gone;
This funeral rite he to himself has done.
Qui Corcyraei vidit -- Epig 68 lib. 8. To Entellus.
WHo both has seen, will praise thy garden house
More than the Orchard of Alcinous.
Where, lest the purple grapes sad winters frost
Should burn, and Bacchus gifts by cold be lost;
Closed in transparant stone thy Vines do live,
And to the eye, though hid, their luster give.
So pebble stones in Crystal brooks are spied,
And Maids white skins through tyffeney descried.
What would not nature let wit reach unto,
When barren* Winter Autumn's works must do?
Miraris veteres -- Epig. 69. lib. 8. Of Vacerra.
VAcerra, thou approv'st of none
For Poets, but are dead and gone.
Pardon; for so much do not I
Esteem thy praises as to die.
Dic verum mihi, Marce -- Epig. 76. lib. 8. Upon Gall^cus.
I Prithee, Marcus, tell me true;
There Is naught I Would rather hear from you;
Thus, when thy Books thou do recite,
Or when thou pleadst thy clients right,
Still, Gallicus, thou begg'st of me.
Twere hard I should deny it thee.
Then hear what is true as true can be;
Thou do not hear truth willingly.
Qua^^^^ iam superis -- Epig 4. lib. 9. To Domitian.
OF what thou, Caesar, to the gods have given,
If thou would now exact repayment even,
Although in Heaven an outcry should be made,
And the gods forced to sell what ere they had;
Atlas were bank-rupt; love could not compound,
Though thou would take five groats in every pound.
What can he pay for his Tarpeian crown?
What for his Capitol, rebuilt, when down?
How much for her two temples luno owes!
Pallas I pass, for she thy business does,
Why should I name the Flavian Temples now?
What Laeda^s sons, Alcides, Phoebus ow?
Caesar must needs forbear, or give them day.
For loves chest has not where withal to pay.
Cae^es ^anthare cum -- Epig. 11. lib. 9. Against Cantharus.
WHen thou at others cost cat'st still,
Thou roar'st, thou threaten'st, and speak ill.
Such pride and fierceness sits not thee:
Thou can not sharke, and be so free.
Cappadocum saevis -- Epig 31. lib. 9. Of Antistius Rusticus.
IN Cappadocia did Antistius dy^.
Oh guilty land in such a Tragaedy?
Nigrina, when her dear Lords bones she brought
Home in her lap, too short the journey thought.
When the ^nvy'd tomb the sacred Vrne received,
She seemed again of her dear Lord bercav'd.
Jupiter Jdei -- Epig. 35. lib. 9. In praise of Domitian.
WHen love great Caesar's Flavian Temple ^y'd
His fabulous Cretan tomb he did deride.
And when at table he did freely supp
Nectar, and gave to Mars, his son, the cupp;
Looking on Phoebus, and bright Phoebe, where
Fair Maiaes son, and great Al^ides were.
You raised me Cretan monuments, quoth he,
How much more Caesar's Father it is to be!
Si credis mibi -- Epig. 53. lib. 9. To Ovid.
WHat thou deserve, if thou believe,
I do to Aprils Calends give
For thy birth, Ovid, what I do
To March, to which mine own I owe.
Both happy days, with whitest stone
Both to he marked by me; by one
A friend: by the other life I have.
The greater gift thy Calends gave.
Lector and auditor -- Epig. 82. lib 9. To Aulu^.
REaders and hearers, both my Books renown*
Some Poets say the are not exactly done.
I care not much; like banquets, let my Booke^
Rather be pleasing to the guests than Cooks.
Dixerat Astrologu^ -- Epig. 84. lib. 9. To C^^^*
CInna, the Astrologer foretold that the^
Should perish soon, nor did he (...)
For loath to leave ought here, when th^^ (...),
Thou spent'st thy goods in ^iot speedily.
And all thy treasure in one year is gone.
What is this, Cinna, but to perish soon?
Juter tanta tu^ -- Epig. 85 lib. 9. To Domitian.
Among all the wonders, Caesar, of thy stage
Aequal'd by no, or former Prince or age.
The eye owes much to thee; but more the ^are*
That they who once did act, now sit and hear.
Quadringentorum reddis -- Epig. 105. lib* 9. To Phoebus
BOnds of four hundred thou giv'st back to me;
I Would rather have one hundred lent from thee.
Boast such vain gifts to some man else; I say
Th^^s mine already which I cannot pay.
Que nova tam -- Epig. 106. lib. 9. Of two alike fair Brothers.
WHat other Laeda such like twins has bred?
What other swan some Spartan dame did tred
Asillus Castors, Hierus has the face
Of Pollux; both have Hellens lovely grace.
Had Laedaes sons been of so fair a hew,
When Venus gift, though worst, the rest (...)
Helen had stayed behind; Paris had then
With two stolen Ganymeds returned again.
Jam placido (...) -- Epig. 23. lib. 10. Of Antonius primus.
ANtonius Primus to his blessed content
Seventy five years of life can number spent.
His former years secure he looks upon,
And fears not Lethes stream now nearer grown.
No day, that's past, seems sad or grievous yet,
No day, which he would study to forget.
Thus good men to themselves long life can give,
IN enjoy our former life is twice to live.
V^^e Parethonias -- Epig. (...). lib. 10. Of Varus.
VArus, which as Romes Tribune did command
An hundred men, tenownd in Aegypts land.
Now as a stranger Ghost thou do remain
On Nilus shore, promised to Rome in vain.
We could not dew with tears thy dying face,
Nor thy sad funeral flames with odours grace,
Yet in my Verse eternized shall thou be.
Of that false Egypt cannot cosen thee.
O^^^^ Sulpitiam -- Epig. 35. lib. 10. Of Sulpitia.
LEt all chaste Virgins, that would we^
One man alone, Sulpitia read.
Let all good men, that love the bed
Of one chaste Spouse, Sulpitia read.
She sings not of Medaea's spells,
Nor dire Thyestes banquet tells.
Scylla, and Bibli^ stories lies
She counts; pure loves, and chastiti^s,
Sweet sports, and harmless she relates,
Her Verse who ere well aestimates,
Will say that none are holier.
Such jests, I think, Aegeriaes were
In that moist Cave to Numa's ear.
Brought up with her, or taught by her,
Chaste, and more learned had Sappho been.
But flinty Phao, had he seen*
Them both, had loved Sulpitia sure,
(Although in vain) for she more pure
Would not exchange Calenus love
For Bacchus, Phoebus, or great love.
(...) -- Epig. 71. lib. 10. Upon the tomb of Rabiriu^ his Parents.
THou that do wi^h thy parents lives should prove
Both long and blessed, this tombs short title love.
Wherein Rabiri^s dead dear parents rest.
No age with happier fate was ever blessed.
Wedlock of threesoore years one night untwines,
And in one funeral flame both bodies ioynes.
But he, as they had died in greener years,
Still weeps. What justice is there in those tears?
Non Vrbana mea -- Epig. 3. Lib. 11. Of his Books.
It Is not the City only does approve
My Muse, or idle cares my Verses love.
The rough Centurion, where cold frosts oresprcad
The Scythian fields, in war my Books does read.
My lines are sang in Britain far remote;
But yet my empty purse perceives it not.
What deathless numbers from my pen would flow*
What wars would my Pierian Trumpet blow?
If, as Augustus now again does live,
So Rome to me would a Mecaenas give
Aedes emit Aper -- Epig. 35. Lib. 11. Of Aper.
APer a cottage bought, which not an Owl
Would deigne to own, it was so old and foul.
But Maro's sumptuous house, and walks excel.
Aper will richly fare, not richly dwell.
Ignotos mihi cum -- Epig. 36. Lib. 11. To Fabullus.
WHen many guests strangers to me
Thou bidst, and then I failed thee
Thou chid^^ because I made not one
I do not love to sup alone.
Vi^ida cum poscis -- Epig. 43. lib. 11.
WHen living Epigrams thou crav'st of me,
Thou giv'st dead arguments. How can that be?
How can thou have Hy^^^tian honey flow,
And Corsick thyme ^ Athenian Bees allow*
Quod ^i^i^^ laudas -- Epig. 57. lib. 11. Against Cher^mon.
THat thou, Cheraemon, death do est desire
Thou would have us thy valiant mind admire*
This high resolve comes from an careless pot,
A chimney without fire to keep it hot,
A bedstod eat with worms, ^ugs course and light*
One short bare gown ^o wear both day and night.
How brave a man art thou can want such geere
As straw, course bread, and lees of vinegar*
But if a woven purple coverled,
And fine french lawne adorned thy downy bed,
Had thou a Boy, whose rosy lips would fire
As wine he fills; thy lustful guests desire:
Then thou to live thrice Ne^^ors years would pray*
And would not lose an hour of any day.
In poor estate it is easy scorning death;
Valiant is he dares draw a wretched breath.
Nil mihi das vivus -- Epig. 68. lib. 11. Against Maro.
ALive you give me naught, you say you will
At death: you know my wish if you have skill.
Pa^^arogas magnos -- Epig. 69. Lib. 11. Against Matho.
THou begg'st small gifts of great ones, which they yet
Deny. To be le^^e shamed, beg gifts more great,
Clamabat tumidis audax --
THus bold Leander cried ith swelling Maine
Then drown me waves when I return again.
Mutari melius Ta^ro -- Upon the picture of Europa's rape.
THen rather, Jove, should thou have chose to be
A Bull, when Io was a Cow for thee.
FINIS.

