Pappe with an hatchet. Alias, A fig for my God son. Or Crack me this nut.
Or A Country cuffe, that is, a sound box of the ear, for the idiot Martin to
hold his peace, seeing the patch will take no warning.

Written by one that dares call a dog, a dog, and made to prevent Martins dog
days.

Imprinted by John Anoke, and John Astile, for the Bayliue of Withernam, cum
priuilegio perennitatis, and are to be sold at the sign of the crab tree
cudgel in thwackcoate lane.

A sentence.

Martin hangs fit for my mowing.

AA


To the Father and the two Sons, Huffe, Ruff, and Snuff, the three tame
ruffians of the Church, which take pepper in the nose, because they can not
mar Prelates grating.
Room for a royster; so that's well said, itch a little further for a good
fellow. Now have at you all my gaffers of the railing religion, it is J that
must take you a peg lower. J am sure you look for more work, you shall have
wood enough to cleave, make your tongue the wedge, and your head the beetle,
Jle make such a splinter run into your wits, as shall make the^ ranckle till
you become fools. Nay, if you shoot books like fools bolts, Jle be so bold
as to make your judgments quiver with my thunderbolts. If you mean to gather
clouds in the Commonwealth, to threaten tempests, for your flakes of snow
we will pay you with stones of hayle; if with an Easterlie wind you bring
Catterpillers into the Church, with a Northern wind we will drive barrennes into
your wits.

We care not for a Scottish mist, though it wet us to the skin, you shall be
sure your cockscombs shall not be mist, but pearst to the skuls. J profess
railing, and think it as good a cudgel for a Martin, as a stone for a dog,
or a whippe for an Ape, or poison for a rat.

Yet find fault with no broad terms, for J have mesured yours with mine, and I
find your broader just by the list. Say not my speeches are light, for J have
weighed yours and mine, and I find yours lighter by twenty grains than the
allowance. For number you exceed, for you have thirty ribauld words for my
one, and yet you bear a good spirit. J was loath so to write as J have done,
but that J learnde, that he that drinks with cutters must not be without his
ale dagger; nor he that buckles with Martin, without his lavish terms.

Who would currie an Ass with an Juorie comb? give the beast thistles for
prouender. J do but yet angle with a silken fly, to see whether Martins will
nibble; and if J see that, why then I have worms for the nonce, and will give
them line enough like a trowte, till they swallow both hook and line, and then
Martin beware your gilles, for Jle make you dance at the poles end.

J know Martin will with a trice bestride my shoulders. Well, if he ride me,
let the fool sit fast, for my wit is very kickish; which if he spur with
his copper reply, when it bleedes, it will all to be smeare their consciences.

Jf a Martin can play at chestes, as well as his nephewe the ape, he shall
know what it is for a scaddle pawn, to cross a Bishop in his own walk.
Such dydoppers must be taken up, else they will not stick to check the king. Rip up
my life, discipher my name, fill thy answer as full of lies as of lines, swel
like a toade, hiss like an adder bite like a dog, and chatter like a monkey,
my pen is prepared and my mind; and if ye chance to find any worse words
than you brought, let them be put in your dads dictionarie. And so farewell,
and be hanged, and J pray God ye fare no worse.

Yours at an hours warning Double V.

To the indifferent Reader.
IT is high time to search in what corner of the Church the fire is kindled,
being crept so far, as that with the very smoke the consciences of diverse are
smothered. It is found that certain Martins, if no miscreants in religion
(which we may suspect) yet without doubt maleco^tents (which we ought to
fear) have thrown fire, not into the Church porch, but into the Chauncell,
and though not able by learning and judgment to displace a Sexton, yet seek
to remove Bishops. They have scattered diverse libels, all so taunting and
slanderous, as it is hard to judge, whether their lies exceed their
bitterness, or their bitterness their fables.

If they be answered by the gravity of learned Prelates, they presently reply
with railings; which argues their intent to be as far from the truth of
devotion, as their writings from mildnes of spirit. It is said that camels
never drink, til they have troubled the water with their feet, and it seems
these Martins cannot carouse the sapp of the Church, till by faction they make
tumults in religion. Seeing the^ either they expect no grave reply, or that
they are settled with railing to reply; I thought it more convenient, to give
them a whisk with their own wand, than to have them spurd with deeper learning.

The Scithian slaves, though they be up in arms, must be tamde with whippes,
not swords, and these mutiners in Church matters, must have their mouths bungd
with jests, not arguments.

I seldom use to write, and yet never writ any thing, that in speech might
seem indecent, or in sense dishonest; if here I have used bad te^^mes, it is
because they are not to be answered with good terms: for whatsoever shall
seem lavish in this Pamphlet, let it be thought borrowed of Martins language,
These Martins were hatched of addle eggs, else could they not have such idle
heads. They measure conscience by their own yard, and like the thieves, that
had an iron bed, in which all that were too long they would cut even, all that
were too short they would stretch out, and none escapte vnrackt or vnsawed,
that were not just of their beds length: so all that are not Martins, that is,
of their peevish mind, must be measured by them. If he come short of their
religion, why he is but a cold Protestant, he must be plucked out to the
length of a Puritan. If any be more devout than they are, as to give alms,
fast, and pray, then they cut him off close by the works, and say he is a
Papist. If one be not cast in Martins mould, his religion must needs mould. He
says he is a Courtier, I think no Courtier so perverse, that seeing the
straight rule of the Church, would go about to bend it. It may be he is some
Iester about the Court, and of that I marvel, because I know all the fools
there, and yet cannot guess at him. What ever he be, if his conscience be pind
to his cognizance, J will account him more politic than religious, and more
dangerous for civil broils, than the Spaniard for an open war. I am
ignorant of Martin and his maintainer, but my conscience is my warrant, to care
for neither. For I know there is none of honor so careless, nor any in zeal
so peevish, nor of nature any so barbarous, that will succor those that be
suckers of the Church, a thing against God and policy; against God, in
subuerting religion; against policy, in altering government, making in the
Church, the feast of the Lapithees, where all shall be thrown on another
head, because every one would be the head. And these it is high time to tread
under foot: for who would not make a threshold of those, that go about to make
the Church a barn to thresh in. Itaque sic disputo.

FINIS.
Pappe with an hatchet.
GOod morrow, goodman Martin, good morrow: will ye any music this morning?
What fast a sleep? Nay faith, I Will cramp thee till I wake thee. O whose tat?
Nay guess old knave and odd knave: for I Will never leave pulling, til I have
thee out of thy bed into the street; and then all shall see who thou art, and
thou know what I am.

Your Knaueship brake you fast on the Bishops, by breaking your jests on them:
but take heed you break not your own neck. Bastard Junior dinde upon them,
and cramde his maw as full of malice, as his head was of malapertnesse.
Bastard Senior was with them at supper, and I think took a surfeit of cold
and raw quipps. O what queasie girds were they toward the fall of the leaf.
Old Martin, never entaile thy wit to the eldest, for he will spend all he has
in a quire of paper.

Now sirs, knowing your bellies full of Bishops bobbs, I am sure your bones
would be at rest: but we will set up all our rests, to make you all restie. I
was once determined to write a proper new Ballet, entitled Martin and his
Maukin, to no tune, because Martin was out of all tune. Elderton swore he had
times lying a steep in ale, He swears by his mazer, that he will make their
wits wetshod, if the ale have his swift current.
which should mar all your reasons there is an old hacker that shall take
order for to print them. O how he will cut it, when his ballets come out of the
lungs of the licour. They shall be better than those of B^nner, or the ierkes
for a Jesuit. The first begins, Come tit me come tat me, come throw a halter at
me.

Then I thought to touch Martin with Logic, but there was a little wag in
Cambridge, that swore by Saint Seaton, he would so swinge him with Sillogismes,
that all Martins answers should ache. The vile boy has many bobbes, and a
whole fardle of fallacies. He begins, Linquo coax ranis, cross coruis, vanaque
vanis.
Ad Logicam pergo, quae Mart'ins non timet ergo.
And says, he will ergo Martin into an ague. I have read but one of his
arguments.

Tiburne stands in the cold,
But Martins are a warm furre:
Therefore Tiburne must be furd with Martins.
O (quoth I) boy thou will be shamed; it is neither in mood nor figure: all the
better, for I am in a mood to cast a figure, that shall bring them to the
conclusion. I laughed at the boy, and left him drawing all the lines of Martin
into sillogismes, uerie conclusion being this, Ergo Martin is to be hanged.

Nay, if rhyme and reason be both forestalde, I Will rail, if Martin have not
barrelde up all rakehell words: if he have, what care I to knock him on the
head with his own hatchet. He has taken up all the words for his obscenitie:
obscenitie? Nay, now I am too nice; squirrilitie were a better word: well, let
me alone to squirrell them.

Martin, think thou, thou have so good a wit, as none can outwrangle thee?
Yes Martin, we will play three a vies wits: art thou so backed that none dare
blade it with thee? Yes Martin, we will drop vie stabbes. Martin swears I am
some gamester. Why, is not gaming lawful? I know where there is more play in
the compass of an Hospital, than in the circuit of Westchester. One has
been an old stabber at passage: the One that I mean, thrust a knife into ones
thigh at Cambridge, the quarrel was about cater-tray, and ever since he has
quarrelled about cater-caps.

I thought that he which thrust at the body in game, would one day cast a
foyne at the soul in earnest. But he works closely and sees all, he learnd
that of old Vydgin the cobbler; who wrought ten years with spectacles, and yet
swore he could see through a dicker of leather. He has a wanton spleen, but
we will have it stroakt with a spurn, because his eyes are bleard, he thinks
to bleare all ours; but let him take this for a warning, or else look for such
a warming, as shall make all his devices as like wood, as his spittle is like
woodsere. Take away the Sack, and give him some Cinamom water, his conscience
has a cold stomach. Cold? Thou art deceived, it will digest a Cathedral Church
as easily, as an Estritch a two penie nail.

But soft Martins, did your Father die at the Groyne? It was well groapt at,
for I knew him sick of a pain in the groyne. A pockes of that religion,
(quoth Julian Grimes to her Father) when al his hairs fell off on the sudden.
Well let the old knave be dead. Why are not the spawnes of such a dog-fish
hanged? Hang a spawne? drown it; alls one, damn it.

Ye like not a Bishops rochet, when all your fathers handkerchers were made of
his sweet hearts smock. That made you bastards, and your dad a cuckold, whose
head is swollen so big, that he had need send to the cooper to make him a
biggin: and now you talk of a cooper, I Will tell you a tale of a tubb.

At Sudburie, where the Martin-mo^gers swarmd to a lecture, like bears to a
honnie pot: a good honest strippling, of the age of fifty years or
thereabout, that could have done a worse act if company had not been near,
asked his sweet sister, whether lechery in her conscience were a sin? In
faith (quoth she) I think it the superficies of sin, and no harm if the
terms be not abusde. for you must say, vertuousty done, not lustily done.
Fie, this is filthy ribaldry. O sir, there is no mirth without ribaldrie, nor
ribaldrie without Martin, ask mine hostess of the iuie bush in Wye for the
one, and my old hostess of the Swanne in Warwick for the other. She is dead:
They are not so many, they are all Centimani, an hundred hands a pieces so that
in all they are but one thousand.
the devil she is. You are too broad with Martins brood: for he has a
hundred thousand that will set their hands to his Articles, and show the
Queen. Sweeter and sweeter: for we have twenty hundred thousand hands to
withstand them. I would it were come to the grasp, we would show them an Irish
trick, that when they think to win the game with one man, we will make them
hold out till we have but two left to carry them to the gallows: well
followed in faith, for thou said thou were a gamester. All this is but bad
English, when will thou come to a style? Martin has many good words. Many?
Now you put me in mind of the matter, there is a book coming out of a
hundred merry tales, and the petigree of Martin, fetchte from the burning of
Sodom, his arms shall be set on his hearse, for we are providing his funeral,
and for the winter nights the tales shall be told secundum vsum Sarum: the
Deane of Salisburie can tell twenty. If this will not make Martin mad,
malicious and melancholy (o brave letter followed with a full cry) then will
we be desperate, and hire one that shall so translate you out of French into
English, that you will blush and lie by it. And one will we conjure up, that
writing a familiar Epistle about the natural causes of an Earthquake, fell
into the bowels of libelling, which made his ears quake for fear of
clipping; he shall tickle you with taunts; all his works bound close, are at
least six sheets in quarto, and he calls them the first tome of his familiar
Epistle: he is full of latin ends, and worth ten of those that cry in
London, haie ye any gold ends to sell. If he give you a bob, though he draw
no blood, yet are you sure of a rap with a babble. If he join with us, perijsti
Martin, thy wit will be massacred: if the toy take him to close with thee, then
have I my wish, for this ten years have I looked to lambacke him. Nay he is a
mad lad, and such a one as cares as little for writing without wit, as Martin
does for writing without honesty; a notable coach companion for Martin, to
draw Divinity from the Colleges of Oxford and Cambridge, to Shoomakers hall
in Saint Martins. But we neither fear Martin, nor the foot-cloth, nor the
beast that wears it, be he horse or ass; nor whose son he is, be he Martins,
son, John's, son, or Richards, son; nor of what occupation he be, be a
ship-wright, cart-wright, or tiburn-wright. If they bring seven hundred men,
they shall be boxt with fourteen hundred boys. Nay we are growing to a secret
bargain. O, but I forgate a riddle; the more it is spied, the less it is
seen. That's the Sun: the less it is spied of us, the more it is seen of
those under us. The Sun? thou art an ass, it is the Father, for the old
knave, thinking by his bastardie to cover his own head, puts it like a
stagge over the pale. Pale? nay I will make him blush as red as ones nose, that
was always washed in well water.

What news from the Heraldes? Tush, that's time enough to know to morrow, for
the sermon is not yet cast. The sermon fool? why they never study, but cleave
to Christ his dabitur in illa hora. They venture to catch souls, as they were
soles; Doctors are but dunces, none sowes true stitches in a pulpet, but a
shoemaker.

Faith, Martin Junior says, he found his fathers papers vnd(...)was (...) his
Form.
thou will be caught by the style. What care I to be found by a style, when so
many Martins have been taken under an hedge? If they cannot level, they will
roue at thee, and anatomize thy life from the cradle to the grave, and thy
body from the corn on thy toe, to the crochet on thy head. They be as
cunning in cutting up an honest man's credit, as Bull in quartering a knaves
body. Tush, (what care I) is my posie; if he meddle with me, I Will make his
brains so hot that they shall crumble, and rattle in his warpt scull, like
pepper in a dride bladder.

I have a catalogue of all the sheep, and it shall go hard, but I will cross
the bel-weather. Why should I fear him that walks on his neats-feete. Neither
court, nor country that shall be free, I am like death, I Will spare none. There
shall not miss a name of any, that had a Godfather; if any be unchristened,
I Will nicke him with a name.

But whist; beware an action of the case. Then put this for the case, whether
it be not as lawful to set down the facts of knaves, as for a knave to
slander honest men. Alls as it is taken; marie the devil take al, if truth
find not as many soft cushions to lean on, as treachery.

There Is one with a lame wit, which will not wear a four cornerd cap, then let
him put on Tiburne, that has but three corners; and yet the knave himself has
a pretty wench in every corner.

I could tickle Martin with a true tale of one of his sons, that having the
company of one of his sisters in the open fields, He calls none but the
heavens to witness.
said, he would not smoother up sin* and deal in hugger mugger against
his Conscience. In the hundred merry tales, the places, the times, the
witnesses and all, shall be put down to the proof, where I warrant you, the
Martinists have consciences of proof. Do think Martin, thou can not be
discovered? What fool would not think him discovered that is balde? Put on
your night cap, and your holy day English, and the best wit you have for high
days, all will be little enough to keep you from a knaves penance, though as
yet you be in a fools paradise If you coin words, as Cankerburie,
Canterburines, etc. why, I know a fool that shall so inkhornize you with
strange phrases, that you shall blush at your own bodges. For Similes, there is
another shall liken thee to any thing, besides he can rail too. If Martin
muzzle not his mouth, and manacle his hands, I Will blabb all, and not stick to
tell, that pewes and stews are rhyme in their religion.

Scratch not thy head Martin, for be thou Martin the bird, or Martin the beast;
a bird with the longest bill, or a beast with the longest ears, there is a net
spread for your neck. Martin, I Will tell thee a tale worth twelve pence, if thy
wit be worth a penny.

There came to a Duke in Italy, a large lubber and a beggarly, saying he had
the Philosophers Stone, and that he could make gold faster, than the Duke
could spend it; The Duke asked him, why he made none to maintain himself?
Because quoth he, I could never get a secret place to work in; for once I
endeavored, and the Popes holiness sent for me, whom if he had caught, I
should have been a prentice to maintain his pride. The Duke minding to make
trial of his cunning, and eager of gold, set to him work closely in a vault,
where it was not known to his nearest servants. This Alcumist, in short time
consumed two thousand pound of the Dukes gold, and brought him half a ducket:
why (quoth the Duke) is this all? All quoth he my Lord, that I could make by
Art. Well said the Duke, then shall thou see my cunning: for I will boil thee,
strain thee, and then dry thee, so that of a lubber, that weighed three
hundred weight, I will at last make a dram of knaves powder. The Duke did it.

Martin, if thou to cosen have crept into the bosom of some great me^, saying
thou have the churches discipline, and that thou can by thy faction and
policy, pull down Bishops and se^ ^p Elders, bring the lands of the Clergy,
into the cofers of the Temporaltie, and repair Religion, by impairing their
livings, it may be, thou shall be hearkened too, stroakt on the head, greasd
in the hand, fed daintelie, kept secretly, and countenaunst mightelie But when
they perceive, that all thy devices be but Chymeraes, monsters of thine own
imaginations, so far from pulling down a Cathedral Church, that they cannot
remove a corner of a square cap, the^ will they deal with thee, Martin and
his mainteiner are both sawers of timber, but Martin stands in the pit, all the
dust must fall in his eyes, but he shall never walk on the boards.
as the Duke did with the Alcumist, give thee as many bobs on the ear, as thou
have eaten morsels of their meat, and make thee an example of sedition to be
pointed at, that art now so mewde up, that none can point where thou art. All
this tale, with the application, was not of my penning, but found among loose
papers; marie he that did it, dares stand to it. Now, because I have nothing to
do between this and supper, I Will tell you another tale, and so begin Winter by
time.

There was a libeller, who was also a coniurer, so that whatsoever casting of
figures there was, he deceived them; at the last, one as cunning as himself,
showed, where he sat writing in a fools coat, and so he was caught and whipped.
Martin, there are figures a flinging, and ten to one thou will be found sitting
in a Knaves skin, and so be hanged.

Hollow there, give me the beard I wore yesterday. O beware of a gray beard,
and a balde head: for if such a one do but nod, it is right dudgin and deep
discretion. But soft, I must now make a grave speech.

There is small difference between Swallows and Martins, either in shape or
nature, save only, that the Martins, have a more beetle head, they both breed
in Churches, and having fledgde their young ones, leave nothing behind them but
dirt. Unworthy to come into the Church porch, or to be nourished under any
good man's eues, that gnawe the bowels, in which they were bred, and defile the
place, in which they were engendered.

They study to pull down Bishopps, and set up Superintendents, which is
nothing else, but to raze out good Greek, and enterline bad Latin. A fine
period; but I cannot continue this style, let me fall into my old vain. O do
ost remember, how that Bastard Junior complains of brothells, and talks of
long Megg of Westminster. A crafty jack, you thought because you twitted
Mar-martin, that none would suspect you; yes faith Martin, you shall be
thresht with your own flaile.

It was one of your neast, that writ this for a love letter, to as honest a
woman as ever burnt malt. Grace, mercy, and peace to thee (O widow) with
fervent motions of the spirit, He thought Lats had still lien at Corinth as well
as Paul.
that it may work in thee both to will and to do. Thou know my love to
thee is, as Paul's was to the Corinthians; that is, the love of copulation.

How now holy Martin, is this good wooing? If you profane the Scriptures, it
is a pretty wit; if we but allege Doctors to expound them, we are wicked If
Martin oppress his neighbor, why he says, it is his conscience; if any else
do right, it is extremity. Martin may better go into a brothell house, then
any other go by it; he slides into a bad place like the Sun, all others
stick in it like pitch. If Martin speak broad bawdrie, why all the crew says,
your worship is passing merry. Martin will not swear, but with indeed, in
sooth, and in truth, he will cogge the die of deceit, and cut at the
bumme-carde of his conscience. O sweetly brought in, at least three figures
in that line, besides the witant.

One there was, and such a one as Martin would make the eldest of his Elders,
that having forty angels sent him for a benevolence, refusde to give the poor
fellow a quittance for the receipt, saying, Christ had given his master a
quittaunce, the same hour he told it out: and this was at his table, where he
sat with no less than forty good dishes of the greatest dainties, in more
pomp than a Pope, right like a superintendant.

Now to the two bastards, what were you twins? It should seem so, for there
went but a pair of sheeres between your knaueries. When the old hen hatched
such eggs, the devil was in the cocks comb. Your father thrusts you forward,
remember petty Martins Aes^ps crab, the mother going backward, exhorted her
sons to go forward; do you so first mother quoth they, and we will follow.
Now the old cuckold has pulled in his horns, he would make you creep clean
out of the shell, and so both loose your houses, and show your nakedness. You
go about impossibilities, well no such change, and if ye had it, ye would be
weary of it.

There was a man like Martin, that had a goose, which every day laid him a
golden egg; he not content with the blessing, killed his goose, thinking to
have a mine of gold in her belly, and finding nothing but dung, the ga^der
wished his goose alive. Martinists that live well by the Church, and receive
great benefits of it, think if all Churches were down, they should be much
better, but when they shall see confusion in stead of discipline, and atheism
to be found in place of doctrine, will they not with sighs wish the Churches
and Bishops in their wonted government? Thou art well seen in tales, and
preachest Aesops fables. Tush, I Will bring in Pueriles, and Stans puer ad mensam,
for such vnmannerlie knaves as Martin, must be set again to their A. B. C and
learn to spell Our Father in a Horn book. Mantin Junior gives warning that
none write against reverent Martin: yes, there are atribus ad centum, from
three to an hundred, that have vowed to write him out of his right wits, and
we are all Aptots, in all cases alike, till we have brought Martin to the
ablative case, that is, to be taken away with Bulls voyder.

O here were a notable full point, to leave Martin in the hangmans apron. Nay,
he would be glad to escape with hanging, we will first have him lashte through the
Realm with cords, that when he comes to the gallows, he may be bleeding new.

The babie comes in with Nunka, Neame, and Dad: (Pappe with an hatchet for such
a puppie) give the infant a bibbe, he all to beslauers his mother tongue, if he
driuell so at the mouth and nose, we will have him wipte with a hempen wispe.
Hui? How often have thou talked of haltring? Why it runs still in my mind
that they must be hanged. Hangde is the Que, and it comes just to my purpose.

There was one endited at a Iaile delivery of felony, for taking up an halter
by the high way. The Jury gave verdit and said guilty. The Judge an honest
man, said it was hard to find one guilty for taking up a penie halter, and bad
them consider, what it was to cast away a man. Quoth the foreman, we have
enquired thoroughly, and found there was a horse tied to the halter. I marie
(quoth the Judge) then let him be tied to the halter, and let the horse go
home. Martin, a Monarch in his own moist conceit, and dry counsel, says he
is envied only, because he leuelleth at Bishops; and we say as the Judge
says, that if there were nothing else, it were hard to persecute them to
death; but when we find that to the rule of the Church, the whole state of the
Realm is linckt, and that they filching away Bishop by Bishop, seek to fish
for the Crown, and glue to their new Church their own conclusions, we must
then say, let Bishops stand, and they hang; that is, go home. Look how many
tales are in this book, so many must you abate of an hundred in the next
book, reckon this for one.

There came by of late a good honest Minister, with a cloak having sleeves: ah
(quoth a Martinist, sitting on a bulk in Cheapside) he is a knave I warrant
you, a claspe would become one of his coat to claspe his cloak under his
chinne. Where it is to be noted, that they come in with a sleeuelesse conscience,
and think it no good doctrine, which is not preached with the cloak cast over
each shoulder like a rippier.

It Was a mad knave and a Martinist, that divided his sermon into 34. parts for
memory sake, and would handle but four for memory sake, and they were, why
Christ came, wherefore Christ came, for what cause Christ came, and to what end
Christ came; this was all for memory sake. If that Martin could thatch up his
Church, this man's scabship should be an Elder, and Elders they may be, which
being fullest of spungie pith, prove ever the driest kixes. For in time you
shall see, that it is but a bladder of worldly wind which swells in their
hearts, being once pricked, the humor will quickly be removed. O what a brave
state of the Church it would be for all Ecclesiastical causes to come before
Weauers and Wierdawers, to see one in a motlie Ierkin and an apron to read the
first lesson. The poor Church should play at unequal game, for it should loose
al by the Elder hand. Nay Mas Martin, we will make you deal, shuffle as well as
you can, we mean to cut it.

If you had the foddring of the sheep, you would make the Church like Primero,
four religions in it, and nere one like another. I cannot out of his gaming
humor. Why? Is it not as good as Martins dogged humor, who without reverence,
regard, or exception, uses such unfitting terms, as were he the greatest
subject in England he could not justify them.

Shut the doors (sirs) or give me my skimmer, Martins mouth had sod vnskimde
these twelve months, and now it runs over; yet let him alone, he makes but
porredge for the devil.

His Elderberines though it be naught worth, yet is it like an elderberrie,
which being at the ripenes of a perfect black, yet bruised stains ones hands
like blood. They pretending gravity in the rottennes of their zeal, be they
once wrung, you shall find them lighter than feathers. That's a simile for the
slaves. Nay, I Will touch them deeper, and make them cry, O my heart, there is a
false knave among us.

Take away this beard, and give me a pikede vaunt, Martin swears by his ten
bones: nay, I will make him mumpe, mow, and chatter, like old John of Paris
garden before I leave him.

If Martin will fight City fight, we challenge him at all weapons, from the
tailors bodkin to the watchmans brown bil. If a field may be pitched we are
ready: if they scratch, we will bring cattes: if scolde, we will bring women:
if multiply words, we will bring fools: if they floute, we will bring
quippes: if dispute the matter, we will bring scholars: if they buffet, we
will bring fists. Deus bone, what a number of we will brings be here? Nay, we
will bring Bull to hang them. A good note and sign of good luck, three times
motion of Bull. Motion of Bull? Why, next old Rosses motion of Bridewell, Bulls
motion fits them best. Tria sequuntur tria, in reckoning Bull thrice, me
thinks it should presage hanging. O bad application* Bad? I do not think
there can be a better, than to apply a knaves neck to an halter. Martin
cannot start, I am his shadow, one part of the day before him, another
behind him; I can chalk a knave on his back thrice a week, I Will let him
blood in the comb.

Take heed, he will pistle thee. Pistle me? Then have I a pestle so to stamp
his pistles, that I Will beat all his wit to powder. What will the powder of
Martins wit be good for? Marie blow up a dram of it into the nostrels of a
good Protestant, it will make him giddie; but if you minister it like Tobacco
to a Puritan, it will make him as mad as a Martin.

Go to, a hatch before the door, Martin smells thee, and will not fear thee;
thou know how he deals with the Archbishop and a Counselor, he will name
thee and that broadlie. Name me? Mary he and his shall be namefied, that is it
I thirst after, that name to name, and knowing one another, we may in the
streets grapple; we except none: we come with a verse in our mouths,
courage in our hearts, and weapons in our hands, and cry*

Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere diu^s. Martins conscience has a
periwig; therefore to good men he is more sower than wig: a Lemman will make
his conscience curd like a Posset. Now comes a biting speech, let me stroke
my beard thrice like a Germain, before I speak a wise word.

Martin, we are now following after thee with hue and cry, and are hard at
thy heels; if thou turn back to blade it, we doubt not but three honest men
shall be able to beat six thieves. We Will teach thee to commit sacrilege,
and to rob the Church of xxiiij. Bishops at a blow Do think that we are
not men Martin, and have great men to defend us which write? Yes, although with
thy seditious cloase, thou would persuade her Majesty, that most of the
Gentlemen of account and men of honor, were by us thought Puritanes. No, it is
your poor John's, that with your painted consciences have colored the religion
of diverse, spreading through the veins of the Commonwealth like poison, the
doggednes of your devotions; which entering in like the smoothnes of oil into
the flesh, fretteth in time like quicksiluer into the bones.

When children play with their meat, it is a sign their bellies are full, and
it must be taken from them; but if they tread it under their feet, they ought
to be ierkt. The Gospel has made us wantons, we dally with Ceremonies,
dispute of circumstances, not remembering that the Papists have been making
rods for us this thirty years; we shall be swing'd by them, or worse by
Martin, if Martins be worse. Never if it, for they be worse with a witness,
and let the devil be witness. We are so nice, that the Cap is a beam in our
Church, the book of Common Prayer a millstone, the Pater noster is not well
pend by Christ. Well, either religion is but policy, or policy scarce
religious.

If a Gentleman riding by the way with twenty men, a number of thieves should
by devise or force bind all his servants; the good Justice of Peace would
think he should be robbed. When Martinists rank robbers of the Church shall
bind the legs and arms of the Church, me thinks the supreme head of the
Church should look pale.

They that pull down the bells of a steeple, and say it is conscience, will
blow up the chauncell to make it the quintessence of conscience. Bir Lady,
this is a good settled speech, a Divine might have seemd to have said so much.
O sir, I am nor al tales, and riddles, and rimes, and iestes, that's but my
Liripoope, if Martin knock the bone he shall find marrow, and if he look for
none, we will knock the bone on his pate, and bring him on his marie bones.

I have yet but given them a fillip on the conceit, I Will fell it to the ground
hereafter. Nay, if they make their consciences stretch like chiuerell in the
rain, I Will make them crumple like parchment in the fire.

I have an excellent balm to cure any that is bitten with Martin mad-dog.

I am worth twenty Pistle-penners; let them but chafe my pen, and it shall
sweat out a whole realm of paper, or make the^ odious to the whole Realm. O
but be not partial, give them their due though they were devils, so will I, and
excuse them for taking any money at interest,

There is a good Lady that lent one of these Martinists forty pounds, and
when at the day she required her money, Martin began to storm, and said, he
thought her not the child of God, for they must lend, looking for nothing
again, and so to acquit himself of the blot of usury, he kept the
principal.

These Martins make the Scriptures a Scriueners shop to draw conueyances, and
the common pleas of Westminster to take forfeitures. They Will not stick to
outlaw a man's soul, and serve it presently with an execution of damnation, if
one deny them to lie with his neighbors wife. If they be drunk, they say,
they have Timothy his weak stomach, which Saint Paul wills to warm with
wine.

They have sifted the holy Bible, and left us nothing as they say, but branne;
they have boulted it over again and again, and got themselves the fine meal;
it is meal indeed, for with their wresting and shuffling holy Writ, they find
all themselves good meals, and stand at liuerie as it were, at other men's
tables.

Sed heus tu, dic sodes, will they not be discouraged for the common players?
Would those Comedies might be allowed to be played that are pend, and then I am
sure he would be decyphered, and so perhaps discouraged.

He shall not be brought in as whilom he was, and yet very well, with a cocks
comb, an apes face, a wolfs belly, cats claws, etc. but in a cap'de cloak,
and all the best apparel he ware the highest day in the year, that's neither
on Christmas day, Good fridaie, Easter day, Ascension, nor Trinity sundaie,
(for that were popish) but on some rainie weeke-daie, when the brothers and
sisters had appointed a match for particular prayers, a thing as bad at the
least as Auricular confession.

A stage plaier, though he be but a cobbler by occupation, yet his chance may
be to play the Kings part. Martin, of what calling so ever he be, can play
nothing but the knaves part, qui tantum constans in knauitate sua est.

Would it not be a fine Tragedy, If it be showed at Paul's, it will cost you
four pence: at the Theater two pence: at Saint Thomas a Watrings nothing.
when Mardocheus shall play a Bishop in a Play, and Martin Hamman, and that
he that seeks to pull down those that are set in authority above him, should
be hoysted upon a tree above all other.

Though he play least in sight now, yet we hope to see him stride from Aldgate
to Ludgate, and look over all the City at London Bridge. Soft swift, Read*
Martin Seniors Libell, and you shall perceive that he is able to teach Gracchus
to speak seditiouslie.
he is no traitor. Yes, if it be treason to encourage the Commons against the
chief of the Clergy, to make a general revolt from the government so well
established, so wisely maintained, and so long prospering.

Because they say, Aue Caesar, therefore they mean nothing against Caesar.
There may be hidden under their long gowns, short daggers, and so in blearing
Caesar's eyes, conspire Caesar's death. God save the Queen; why it is the Que
which they take from the mouths of all traitors, who though they be thoroughly
convinced, both by proof and their own confessions, yet at the last gasp
they cry, God save the Queen. GOD sane the Queen (say I) out of their hands,
in whose hearts (long may the Queen thus govern) is not engraven.

Her sacred Majesty has this thirty years, with a settled and princely
temper swayed the Scepter of this Realm, with no less content of her
subjects, than wonder of the world. GOD has blessed her government, more by
miracle tha^ by counsel, and yet by counsel as much as can come from
policy. Of a State taking such deep root, as to be fastened by the
providence of God, the virtue of the Prince, the wisdom of Counselors, the
obedience of subjects, and the length of time; who would go about to shake the
lowest bough, that feels in his conscience but the least blessing. Here is a
fit room to squese them with an Apothegme.

There was an aged man that lived in a well ordered Commonwealth by the space
of threescore years, and finding at the length that by the heat of some men's
brains, and the warmnes of other men's blood, that new alterations were in
hammering, and that it grew to such an height, that all the desperate and
discontented persons were ready to run their heads against their head;
coming into the midst of these mutiners, cried as loud as his years would
allow; Springalls and vnripened youths, whose wisdoms are yet in the blade,
when this snow shall be melted (laying his hand on his silver hairs) then
shall you find store of dirt, and rather wish for the continuance of a long
frost, than the coming of an untimely thaw. I Will moralize this.

I Will warrant the good old man meant, that when the ancient government of the
state should be altered by faction, or new laws brought in that were devised
by nice heads that there should follow a foul and slipperie managing; where
if happily most did not fall, yet all would be tired. A settled reign is not
like glass metal, to be blown in bigness, length or fashion of every man's
breath, and breaking to be melted again, and so blown afresh; but it is
compared to the fastening of the Cedar, that knitteth it self with such wreaths
into the earth, that it cannot be removed by any violent force of the air.

Martin, I have taken an inventory of al thy uncivil and rakehell terms,
and could suit them in no place but in Bedlam and Bridewell, so mad they are,
and so bad they are, and yet all proceeds of the spirit. I think thou art
possessed with the spirits of Jack Straw and the Blacksmith, who, so they
might rent in pieces the government, they would draw cuts for religion.

If all be conscience, let conscience be the foundation of your building, not
the glass, show effects of conscience, mildness in spirit, obedience to
Magistrates, love to thy brethren. Stitch charity to thy faith, or rip faith
from thy works.

If thou will deal soberlie without scoffs, thou shall be answered gravely
without jests, yea and of those, whom thou can not control for learning, nor
accuse for ill life, nor should contemn for authorie. But if like a restie
Jade thou will take the bitt in thy mouth, and then run over hedge and ditch,
thou shall be broken as Prosper broke his horses, with a muzroule, portmouth,
and a martingall, and so have thy head run against a stone wall.

If thou refuse learning, and stick to libelling; if nothing come out of those
lavish lips, but taunts not without bitterness, yet without wit; railing not
without spite, yet without cause, then give me thy hand, thou and I will try
it out at the cuckingstoole. I Will make thee to forget Bishops English, and weep
Irish; next hanging there is no better revenge on Martin, than to make him cry
for anger; for there is no more sullen beast, than a he drab. I Will make him pull
his powting croscloath over his beetle brows for melancholy, and then my next
book, shall be Martin in his mubble fubbles.

HEre I was writing Finis and Funis, and determined to lay it by, till I might
see more knauerie filde in: within a while appeared old Martin with a wit worn
into the socket, twinkling and pinking like the snuff of a candle; quantum
mutatus ab illo, how unlike the knave he was before, not for malice but for
sharpness.

The hogshead was even come to the hauncing, and nothing could be drawn from
him but dregs: yet the empty caske sounds louder than when it was full; and
protests more in his waining, than he could perform in his waxing. I drew
near the silly soul, whom I found quiuering in two sheets of protestation
paper. O how meager and lean he looked, so creast fallen, that his comb hung
down to his bill, and had I not been sure it was the picture of envy, I
should have sworn it had been the image of death, so like the very Anatomy
of mischief, that one might see through all the ribs of his conscience, I
began to cross my self, and was ready to say the Pater noster, but that I
knew he card not for it, and so used no other words, but abi in malam
crucem, because I knew, that looked for him. I came so near, that I could
feel a substantial knave from a sprites shadow.

I saw through his paper coffen, that it was but a cosening corse, and one
that had learnde of the holy maid of Kent, to lie in a trance, before he had
brought forth his lie; drawing his mouth awrie, that could never speak right;
goggling with his eyes that watered with strong wine; licking his lips, and
gaping, as though he should loose his childs nose, if he had not his longing
to swallowe Churches; and swelling in the paunch, as though he had been in
labor of a little babie, no bigger than rebellion; but truth was at the
Bishops travail: so that Martin was delivered by sedition, which pulls the
monster with iron from the beasts bowels. When I perceived that he masked in
his railing robes, I was so bold as to pull off his shrowding sheet, that all
the world might see the old fool dance naked.

It Is not a peniworth of protestation that can buy thy pardon, nor al worth a
penie that thou proclaimest. Martin comes in with blood, blood, as though he
should be a martyr. Martins are mad martirs, some of them burnt seven years
ago, and yet alive. One of them lately at York, pulling out his napkin to
wipe his mouth after a lie, let drop a surgeans caliuer at his foot where he
stood; these fellows can abide no pomp, and yet you see they cannot be
without a little squirting plate: rub no more, the curtall wrinches.

They call the Bishops butchers, I like the Metaphore well, such calves must be
knocked on the head, and who fitter than the Fathers of the Church, to cut the
throats of heresies in the Church. Nay, when they have no property of sheep
but bea, their fleece for flocks, not cloth, their rotten flesh for no dish,
but ditches; I think them worth neither the tarring nor the telling, but for
their scabbednes to be thrust from the pinfolde to the scaffold, and with an
Habeas corpus to remove them from the Shepherds tarre-boxe, to the hangmans
budget.

I but he has sillogismes in pike sauce, and arguments that have been these
twenty years in pickle. I, pick hell, you shall not find such reasons, they
be all in celarent, and dare not show their heads, for we will answer them
in ferio and cut their combs. So say they, their blood is sought. Their blood?
What should we do with it, when it will make a dog have the toothach to
eat the puddings.

Martin tunes his pipe to the lamentable note of Ora whine meg. O it is his best
dance next shaking of the sheets; but he good man meant no harm by it. No
more did one of his minions, that thinking to rap out an oath and swear by his
conscience, mistook the word and swore by his concupiscence; not unlike the
thief, that in stead of God speed, said stand, and so took a purse for God
morrow.

Yet does Martin hope that all her Majesty's best subjects will become
Martinists; a blister of that tongue as big as a drums head; for if the
Queens Majesty have such abiects for her best subjects, let all true subjects
be accounted abiects.

They that tear the boughs, will hew at the tree, and having once wet their
feet in factions, will not care how deep they wade in treason.

After Martin had racked over his protestation with a Iades pace, he runs
over his fooleries with a knaves gallop, ripping up the souterlie seames of his
Epistle, botching in such frize iestes upon fustion earnest, that one seeing
all sorts of his shreddes, would think he had robbed a tailors shop board; and
then he concludes all doggedlie, with Doctor Bullens dog Spring, not
remembering that there is not a better Spanniell in England to spring a couie of
queanes than Martin.

He sliues one, has a fling at another, a long tale of his talboothe, of a
vulnerall sermon, and of a fools head in souce. This is the Epistle which he
woonders at himself, and like an old Ape hugges the Vrchin so in his
conceit, as though it should show us some new tricks over the chain, never
wish it published Martin, we pity it before it comes out. Trusse up thy
packet of flim flams, and roage to some country Fair, or read it among boys
in the belfrie, never trouble the church with chattering; but if like dawes,
you will be cawing about Churches, build your nests in the steeple, defile not
the quier.

Martin writes merely, because (he says) people are carried away sooner with
jest than earnest. I, but Martin never put Religion into a fools coat; there
is great odds between a Gospeller, and a Libeller.

If thy vain be so pleasant, and thy wit so so nimble, that all consists in
glicks and girds; pen some play for the Theater, write some ballads for blind
David and his boy, devise some jests, and become another Scogen; so shall thou
have ve^t enough for all thy vanities, thy Printer shall purchase, and all
other iesters beg.

For to give thee thy due, thou art the best died fool in grain that ever
was, and all other fools lack many grains, to make them so heavy.

There is not such a mad fool in Bedlam, nor such a baudie fool in Bridewell,
nor such a dronken fool in the stocks, nor such a scolding fool on the
cuckingstoole, nor such a cosening fool on the pillerie, nor such a roaging
fool in the houses of correction, nor such a simple fool kept of alms, nor
such a lame fool lying in the spittle, nor in all the world, such a fool,
all. Nay for fools set down in the scriptures, none such as Martin.

What atheist more fool, that says in his heart, There is no God? What fool
more proud, that stands in his own conceit? What fool more covetous than he,
that seeks to tedd abroad the Churches goods with a forke, and scratch it to
himself with a rake.

Thou see Martin with a little help, to the four and twenty orders of
knaves, thou may solder the four and twenty orders of fools, and so
because thou say thou art unmarried, thou may commit matrimony, from the
heirs of whose incest, we will say that which you cannot abide, Good Lord
deliver us.

If this vein bleed but six ounces more, I shall prove a pretty railer, and
so in time may grow to be a proper Martinist. Tush, I do but lick over my
pamphlet, like a Bears whelpe, to bring it in some form; by that time he
replies, it will have claws and teeth, and then let him look to be scratcht
and bitten too.

Thou see Martin Moldwarpe, that hitherto I have named none, but marked them
ready for the next market: if thou proceed in naming, be as sure as thy shirt
to thy knaves skin, that I Will name such, as though thou can not blush,
because thou art past shame, yet they shall be sorry, because they are not all
without grace.

Pasquil is coming out with the lives of the Saints. Beware my Comment, it is
odds the margent shall be as full as the text. I have many sequences of
Saints; if naming be the advantage, and ripping up of lives make sport, have
with thee knuckle deep, it shall never be said that I dare not venture mine
ears, where Martin hazards his neck.

Now me thinks Martin begins to stretch himself like an old fencer, with a
great conscience for buckler, and a long tongue for a sword. Lie close you old
cutter at the lock, Nam mihi sunt vires, and mea tela nocent. It Is ods but that
I shall thrust thee through the buckler into the brain, that is through the
conscience into the wit.

If thou sue me for a double maime, I care not though the Jury allow thee
treble damages, it cannot amount to much, because thy conscience is without
wit, and thy wit without conscience, and therefore both, not worth a penie.

Therefore take this for the first venew, of a younger brother, that means to
dry beat those of the Elder house. Martin, this is my last strain for this
fleech of mirth. I began with God morrow, and bid you God night. I must tune
my fiddle, and fetch some more rozen, that it may squeake out Martins
Matachine.

FINIS.
Candidissimi Lectores, peto terminum ad libellandum.


Lectores. Assignamus in proximum.



