Mar-Martin.
I Know not why a frutelesse lie in Print;
May not as well with modesty be touched
As truthlesse Prose, since neither has his stint,
And others doings cannot be anouched:
Then if both Rhyme and Prose impugn the troth,
How like you him, lykes neither of them both.
Our Prelates ( Martin says) want skill and reason,
Our Martinists Mar-martine terms asses,
The one an other does accuse of treason,
He passes best that by the gallows passes.
Traitor, no Traitor, heeres such Traytrous striving,
That Romish Traitors now are set a thriuing.
Whilst England falls a makening and marring,
Reli^ion fears an utter overthrow,
Whilst we at home amongst our selves are iarring,
Those seeds takes root, which forrayne seedmen sow:
If this be true, as true it is for certain,
Woe worth Martin Mar-Prelat, and Mar-Martin.
MAR-MARTIN.
ON Whitson even last at night,
I dreaming saw a pretty sight,
Three Mensters in a halter tide,
And one before who seemd their guide*
This foremost looked and looked again,
As if he had not all his train.
With that I asked this gaping man
His name: my name (quoth he) is Lucyan,
This is a Jesuit (quoth he)
This Martin and Mar-Martin be,
I seek but now for Macheuell,
And roundly then we go to Hell.
Two Books upon a Table lay,
For which two yonkers went to play,
They tripe a Dye and thus did make,
Who threw the most should both Books take.
He that had Martin slang the first,
An ass it was, which was the woorst.
Mar-Martins master in the haste,
Hopt then to hit a better cast,
And yet as cunning as he was,
He could not flyng above an ass.
To geather by the ears they go,
Which of the asses got the throw,
The first upon his ass would stand,
He wan it by the elder hand.
Tush quoth the second that no matter,
Mine was an ass though twere the latter,
And turning back, he spoke to me,
Who all this while this sport did see,
Is It not a wonder, say of love,
That none of us should flyng above:
No quoth I it were a wonder
If either of you two had thrown under.
What sons: what fathers: sons and fathers fighting:
Alas our welfare, and alas our health,
What motes, what beams, and both displayed in writing:
Alas the Church, alas the common wealth.
What at this time: what under such a Queen:
Alas that still our fruit should be so green.
What wanton Calves: what lost out former love:
Alas our pride, alas our mutabilitie,
What Christ at odds: what serpents ner adoue:
Alas our rage, alas our inhumilitie.
What bitter ta^s, what lies in stead of preaching,
Alas our health, alas our need of teaching.
Bear gracious Sovereign, Europs matchles mirror,
Bear noble Lords renowined counsel geuers,
Bear Clergy men, for yours is all the error,
Bear common people, common light believers.
Bear jointly one another weakness so,
That though we wither, yet the Church may grow.
If all be true that Lawyers say,
The second blow does make the fray,
Mar-Mrtins fault can be no less
Then Martins was that brake the peace.
Martin, Mar-Martine, Barrowe and Brown,
All help to pull Religion down.
FINIS.

