A True report of the taking of Marseilles by the favorers of the league
together with the rescue thereof by the kings faithful subjects, Wherein may be
seen the wonderful providence of Almighty God in the delivery of them that
trust in him from the treacherous and bloody devises of their adversaries.

Lately translated out of French.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Windet for Edward Aggas.

The true report of such occurrences as fell out at Marseiles the 8.9.10. days
of April. Also an advertisement concerning the same.
IF it be lawful for any man to pervert al order of Justice and law, then
must it necessarily be lawefull in atchiuing a kingdom, said he who
ouerthrewe the estate of Rome, thereby evidently giving to understand that
such as can brook no peace, neither be content with their own, do highly
esteem the violation of laws and contempt of Justice, also that there is
nothing so holy or sacred but they will profane, neither any wickedness or
treachery so great but they will commit, for the atteyning to soueraignitie,
and after the atteyning thereof, for the mainteynaunce of the same, whereof him
self soon after showed the experience, as had done also Silla and Marius
before: for ambition and avarice are passions and even principal grounds of
all mischief, procuring the transformation of men into all forms and
colors, even as fear forces the Chameleon, whereby the infernal furies do
drive them to spare neither parents nor friends, no not God himself, whose
name they do abuse to the end with greater facility to deceive, so as a man
would suppose that being even consumed with zeal to Gods house they were
Helies which seek nothing but reformation in religion or that touched with the
miseries of the people they be Moses who endeuoreth only to deliver them from
this oppression: But entering into deeper consideration of their dealings, we
find the^ to be rather Berchomanes or Noyses of Candy as the success do
show, though over late for the weal of those who with Esopes horse having
admitted the snaffle and sadle, must of force pass on in the carrier. The
sheep says Archidamus, ever sings one song, but the ambitious person never
leaves altering of tunes until he has atchiued his purpose. Cratenus and
Antigonas proclaimed nothing but liberty to the Athenians, but having once
obtained the mastrie, they fell into an other phrase. Those men that trouble
this estate do proclaim only zeal to Catholic Religion, and affection to
the reformation of the estate and relief of the people, yea if we will believe
them, those are the only causes of their taking of arms: but if we look into
their actions not only passed but also present, we shall find that under
this so fair a pretense, they seek with Absalon to steal away the peoples
hearts, to the end so to usurp the estate, even already the most
incredulous do begin to smell it out, yea and to feel it to their great
damage, very well perceiving that the reunion which they speak of, is not
meant of the Protestants to Romish Religion, but of their own estate to the
house of Lorrain whereto they have long sought to persuade the world yt it does
appertain: that it is not ye reformation, but the usurpation of the Realm:
neither the relief but oppression of the communalty, and therefore do with one
accord seeing their goods embeselled, their houses burned, their wives and
daughters defloured, and so many murders committed, exclaim of them, declaring
that although their pretenses were true, yet were the medecin more dangerous
and intolerable than the disease, and that they are crafty Physicians that
draw so much blood, and do so extremely purge their patients, to the end the
same never recovering, they may become their heirs. But least any should
suppose that I speak all this without cause, or of any particular passion, I
will prove it by that which passed at Marseiles this present month of April,
even in such manner as an honorable person has set it down in a letter to a
brother of his: as follows.

Brother I writ unto you at large eight days ago, since which time we have had
wonderful occurences in this town of Marseiles, whereof although you may have
heard before the receipt of these prese^ts, yet I thought good to write unto
you the perticularities and truth of al, to the end you may with us praise God
for the favor he has showed us. Know you therefore that the first Consul of
this town, being gone to the Court about two months since where he yet
remains, the second Consul named Jews de la Motte de Aries took the
government upon him in the absence of the Lord great Prior, which Consul
hearing of the late troubles of this realm, and in this country prosecuted by
the Lord of Vins, he cast with himself how to prepare a way whereby he might
usurp the soueraignitie of Marseiles and to that intent he secretly practiced
the said Lord of Vins to join with him, as assuring himself that the
pretense of war and league against the contemners of Romish religion, whereto
these people are wonderfully addicted, would cause them to like of whatsoever
his attemptes. And for the atcheiuing of his purpose he also practiced two of
the captains of this town, as good as himself, who easily condiscended to
his advise, especially the one called Captain Boniface, who conditioned with
him that first he should make away his brother named General Boniface, a man
accounted worth threescore thousand Crowns: further, for the better compassing
of his enterprise he purposed to sease upon the foretresse called Our lady of
the guard before he did innouate any other matter, and therefore the 8. of this
present month he went to the said foretresse under color of seeing whether
it were sufficiently fortefied, the captain thereof, although he held nothing
of the town, yet seeing it was the Consul, permitted him and three more to
come in: he being entered took the said Captain by the collar offering the
dagger to his throat, in case he once stirred against him, and so caused the
gate to be opened and brought in soldiers to his behoof, neither would he
suffer the said Captain to go down into the town lest the people should
have notise of his proceedinges. Thus finding himself master of the said
foretresse he purposed the next night to put his practice in execution, and to
the end not to fail of his promise to the said Boniface, he caused the
aforesaid general Boniface (who the same morning was riding to Aix to the Lord
great Prior) to stay at the gate and so procured him to tarry until the next
morning under pretense of sending by him a letter of very great importance for
the kings service, to the said Lord great Prior, The poor general not
suspecting any harm, and the rather because he had lately Christened his
child, did willingly alight and stay his journey until the next day, but
before the morning trauayled an other way then he thought for: for the same
evening about eight of the clock, the said Consul together with 4. of his
confederates came and knocked at the said generals gate, demanding to speak
with his gossip, who immediately came down to ye gate, where after usual
salutations he delivered him the said supposed letter to the L. great Prior,
saying to them that were with him do your office, which was the watch word, and
so presently they fell upon the said general and gave him four or five
blows with their daggers, who being so wounded got up into ye haule where
presently he fell down dead, this done his said brother not being far off
entered the house merely, and as enheritour began to rifle and sease upon what
he list, while the Consul for his part was not idle, for straightway with a
troop of 25. Hargabuziers he rapped at the Protestants doors, and all that
he found he imprisoned in Saint John's Tower, that done with all expedition
he wrote a letter to the Lord of Vins, the tenure whereof ensues.

My Lord these presents may be to assure you that without dissimulation the
town of Marseiles has openly embraced the party of God and the estate to the
end to make full profession of the Catholic faith, where every one is
resolved with whatsoever their means, to cleave to the league of the Christian
and Catholic Princes, also to you, who^ to the same effect we beseech to come
unto us, and if you take the way of Aix, you may come to Porneux or Fumeau, but
if you take any other, take the way to S. Iaquaries or Gemenes, for we do send
to all the villages to assist you with victuals aid and favor, and in case they
do otherwise we will rote them out, yea if need be, we will bring the Canon
denouncing your enemies to be ours, and those to be our friends that be yours,
or shall assist you, taking you into our protection, like as also we commit our
selves to the protection of al Christian and Catholic princes and to yours.
This day was the fort of Our lady of the guard taken and subdued unto your
and our devotion: Thus beseeching God the King of Kings to have you in his
holy keeping:

From Marseiles this eight of April. Your affectionate friends and servants:
Nicolas Roque, Consul de Aries, Consul Gorgone, Captain Antonye Cornich,
Captain Charles of Casane, Captain Boniface, Captain Taron, Cap. Tanse.



THe next morning he delivered two protestants to the people to be murdered
whom the children dragged up and down the town while the honester persons
remained shut up in their houses, as well to eschew the view of such cruelties,
as for fear least such Catholics as had any thing to lose, might have the
like entertainment, besides their doubt ye the Lord of Vins had already
brought his power into the town, and their opinion that whatsoever this
Consul had done, was without any commandment from the king: for even his
familier friends before knew not of it, thus he reigned all that day and the
next night. The next day the people knowing that the Lord of Vins his power was
not yet entered the town took heart and together with the chiefest among them
determined to talk with the consul, and to enquire by whose authority and
commandment he wrought these broils: others began to report throughout the
town yt the Consul did al of his own head, in purpose to bring in the Lord
of Vins and to make him master of ye town, so that the people, not used to such
subjection, and minding to maintain their liberty, began to quail in that good
opinion which before they had conceived of the Consul, which he perceived or
at the least greatly feared, and therefore for a remedy answered such as
demanded the reason of his doings, that it was because he had notice of some
intelligence which the Protestants had practiced in the town, for ye
preventing whereof, he had proceeded to the shutting of them up in S Ihons
tower, which he could not so well perform, but yt the commons had gotten
those yt were slain out of his hands: Furthermore, that he thought good there
should be after dinner a meeting of the most honorable in ye town house, there
to determine thereof, also that the same should be general and so it was at the
last concluded. Howbeit seeing the people begin to quail, to the end still to
flesh them on he delivered them an other prisoner whom he procured to be slain
and dragged all about the town, thereby weening to encorage the people to
prosecute their cruelties, and desired them still to continue in their affection
to the Catholic faith, having before made proclamation that all men should
wear crosses in their hats: when he perceived that every one resolved to
appear at the said assembly, he and his confederates hoped ye same to be the
ready way to become the strongest, and thereuppon concluded among themselves
to cut the throts of all that came, and to that purpose to place 60.
Harquebuziers in ye town house, also to strenthen the body of the guard yt was
beneath. The heads of famelies not fearing any such matter went boldly to the
town house, the whole assembly consisting at the least of 500. persons al in
one haule easy to have been enclosed and made away. The Consul oftentimes ran
in and out as one uncertain what to do, but in the end resolved to propound to
the whole asse^bly his justification, whereupon by their cou^tenances gathering
yt they misliked his proposition he thought it expedient to go forth and then
to murder the^ al, howbeit god, as it may be said, not permitting the
execution of such cruelty, so alienated the senses and took away the wits of
all the assembly that in liew of reproving his doings they made no answer to
his motion, as seeming to them that he had reason in all that he had done, and
so they brake up and departed without other resolution, nevertheless being out of
ye house, gathering their wits together, they began to fear the coming of ye
Lord of Vins and therefore resolved among themselves at night to join with the
watch, notwithstanding they had no such commandment, and so to become the
stronger: on the otherside ye said Consul knowing yt the Lord of Vins could not
that night bring in his power, and fearing to be over reached commanded the M.
of the great Priors galley of Tholouze to prepare the said galley, purposing if
matters went amiss, together with his associats to enter ye said galley and so
to depart: he also sent to ye Duke of Florence 4. galeys which as yt voice went
stayed in ye Isles to conduct the Duke of Neuers to Luke, willing them to send
him 200. soldiers for the kings service, and augmentation of ye Cath. faith,
which they granted him in consideration of his travel taken ye day before
against the protestants, but god so quickened ye minds of good men yt they
taking arms displaced ye body of the guard and set others in ye room, and yet
without violence, so to see what ye captains of ye town would do of whom two were
partakers in ye co^spiracy, but they seeing so many new me^ which would not obey
the^ began to quail, as did also the Consul aforesaid, because wheresoever
they became they still found such as would resist them, which caused the said
Consul to get into the watch of Canaillon turning and tossing all night like a
moth about a candle, and so coming within the view of the Tower of S. John he
drew thitherward and so to the chain where he purposed to receive the 200.
Harquebuzieres which ye forenamed 4. Galleys of Florence brought thither at the
break of day, but in that place he found five hundred harquebuziers, whom when
he beheld he purposed to embarke himself in a Squiffe and so to have fled to
the said Galleys, but he was by them stayed, and word sent to the guard of the
Lodge of his being at S. John's, whereupon thither resorted a band of me^, who
demanded of him by whose authority he committed these murders, but he seeing
himself thus cast away could make no answer and so was conveyed to the town
house, where at ye same instant even before his face they chose 24. of the
chief men of the town to order their affairs together with ye youngest Consul
who was but an idiot, and they so chosen did immediately appoint new Captains,
who had quickly assembled five or six thousand Harquebuziers in the town, and
the same once armed and the town assured to the king they presently dispatched
a messenger to the Lord great Prior then lying at Aix very sorrowful for the
loss of a town of such importance, whom they desired speedely to come to them,
and in the mean time they seized upon the fort of our Lady of the guard, which
was soon yealded when they that keept it perceived the town to be lost, and
so Claud. Boniface was also brought to the town house, the rest saved
themselves. The Consul being degraded from his hood and office, was committed
to the kings prison with the said Boniface. The Lord great Prior arrived about a
leven of the clock at night, and immediately they began to prosecute the
process of the Consul and his adherents, which was not perfected before ten of
clock the next night and within one hour after, the said Consul and Captain
Boniface were both hanged before the gate of the late general Boniface, the
people having continued in arms from the time they were apprehended until
their execution, This was the end of these two Traitors, who were punished
according to their deserts, and reigned but 48. hours: The said Consuls
practice tended to become Lord of the town, and not to use the Lord of Vins
power except upon necessity, being also determined to sack the same, and he
had chosen for himself and his chief adherents threescore houses the rest
should have fallen to his soldiers: but God would not permit such mischief,
who as we may say, wrought mightily, and saving us preserved also the
Protestants, whom ye Lord great Prior did set at liberty the same night that
he arrived.

By this little may we evidently see that the words and writings of these men
are no perfect images of their events, and therefore yt we must rather have
recourse to their actions, which do more lively express them, and as effects
do necessarily plead their cause. The dog and the Woolfe are very like, but
their deeds do bewray the difference, the one being by the^ known for a
keeper, the other for a murderer of the flock, and says great Alexander,
oftentimes, such as outwardly are clothed in white do underneath wear purple
garments, so many times these preachers of religion, and reformation of the
estate do inwardly hatch Atheism and destruction of the country: and herein
we see, that it is not religion, but ambition neither the wealth, but subuertion
of the estate that causes them to take arms. This Consuls zeal was tyranny
over Marselles, and the religion of Captain Boniface was successor to his
brother, the rest of these zealous people together tended to the spoil of
their town and destruction of their country.

But now to enter into consideration of this hypocritical Consuls pretense.
The Protestants, says he, had intelligence in the town The like speech uses
the Cardinal of Vaudemount in the discourse of the taking of Verdu^ which he
has procured to be printed, and Antragues uses the same language to exclude
the duke of Montpensier out of Orleans whether is majesty sent him. Neither is
it to be marvelled that they all agree in one phrase, as being wholly possessed
with one and the same spirit who has been a liar from the beginning: But least
they should be daunted at over strait examination of matters, I would ask
them what intelligence the protestants had in Chaalon, Diion, Rheins, Maisiers
and Argenteau? It is all as true as the league of Magdeburge in Germany lately
concluded by the Lord of Segur, as they say, with the County Palatine, who
dyed 8. years before Segar ever set foot in Germany, also with the protector
of Scotland, who deceased 5. years before: yea and as true as that the
protestants brake the cross of S Martins in the field near to Paris, when
within few nights after, the Captain of that quarter surprised one that was
making an end of the breaking thereof, thereby to provoke the people to
sedition. They must use some better colors in their affairs, for God by his
just judgment has undoubtedly given them over to a spirit of astonishment,
and therefore O poor nation beware, least they under the like pretense, abuse
thee in the same manner. Consider in what predicamet this zealous reformer does
constitute the king, the princes of his blood, and generally all that follow not
his faction, when he depriueth them of their titles of Catholic and Christian
and appropriateth the same to his like. This is the honor that he yeldeth to
his majesty for his so often aduenturing his life in such a quarrel. Thou shall
not slander the law, the Prince, or the people and yet these great zelators do
not only in words, but also in writing continually slander the king, yea so
far forth that the Cardinal of Vaudemont endenoreth to persuade the king that
he minds to use the help of the protestants and Turks for the subuertion of
Catholic religion: let us therefore enter into the view of this Consuls
conscience who for the establishing of his tyranny and renting this flower from
the crown of France, purposes to use the weapons of the Lord of Vins, though
but as a scafolde which builders use, and which when the building is done they
pull down again, and these trecheries do they learn of that evil spirit
that directs al their actions. We may therefore hereby see what may be looked
for from them. Even you ministers of the Clergy, Nobility and third estate
who have embarked you selves with them They use you, but if God should so far
affect this realm as to permit them to attain to their purposes you should be
entreated after ye Marsilian manner. We see what Antragues has already done, how
he first imprisoned, then banished those captains that established his tyranny.
Know you not those whom you follow to be such as are of an insatiable ambition,
whom all the wealth in the world cannot content? They will resemble this
Consul, who for himself and his associates reserueth all the best houses,
appointing to his soldiers those wherein nothing is to be had: but what stand I
here upon, when ye whole house is shared out, what can be left for you? They
use your help in hunting for their pray, but in dividing the spoil they will
imitate ye Lion. The shares laid out they will sease upon one, but if you
reach toward the other, the lions claws will cool you: for men have no fixed
term in their desire of atteining to riches. These are subtle Foxes, such as
with the smoke of fair promises do spoil you of all that you have, that
themselves may sease thereupon. They be Mermaids, who to the end to procure
your shipwreck do with their pleasant songs seek to full you on sleep, but
with Ulysses stop your ears, and with the Troyans close your eyes against this
Helein whom they bring into this country to bury us up in ye ruins thereof. Let
us in this discourse consider the fruits of covetousness and ambition, the
one proceeding so far ^oh horrible among Christians) as to murder his own
brother, how Catholic so ever, the other to enfringe his vowed faith to his
prince and to imbrew his hands in the blood of his fellow citizens, and both
together to enrich themselves with the spoil of their country. By this
example let us judge what else we may hope for of these reformers, saving that
having begun with the protestants they will end with our selves, or rather
that as this Consul began with the welthiest catholics, so will they proceed
with such as among us shall be of best ability: yea, who shall be safe when the
one brother spares not the other: and since they begin with the Catholics, yea
with the king himself, whose towns and treasure they daily seize upon,
whether shall we hope for better? The Protestants goods are not sufficient to
fill the broken bags or quench the insatiable thirst of these cormorants and
this do not the chifest among them conceal, who do account of this realm as
of a booty, to the end after the example of Silla to exhibit our goods to ye
most giver. If at the beginning of this banquet where to these crafty
victioners do enuite us, they set before us such wine, what shall we look for
in the midst, or at the end? Let the rich men at the beginning account
themselves protestants, for their fair houses, goods, and lands are so
already, and by this tyrants letters we see what the poor country men are to
look for. Tyrants says Diogines do use their favorites as bottles, they hang
up the full and cast of the empty. If then they spare not those, what will
they do with the rest? Does not Antragues begin to expel the richest
Catholics out of Orleans to the end to seize upon their goods? Antisthenes did
very truly account tyrants worse then tormenters, for these put only offenders
to death, the others spare not yt innocent. How happy therefore are those whom
other men's harms can make to beware. Finally I pray you a little with me to
stay upon the diligent consideration of the wonderful delivery of this poor
town, together we many good people in the same. The tyrant has the fortress:
the protestants are chained up in dongeons, the rest sometime shut up in their
houses, sometime besieged in the town house, and sometime naked among his
weapons: he has his power upon both sea and land. All this notwithstanding,
God who shows his strength in our weakness, and preserves the weak from
the lions jaws, and in the fiery furnace, has freed all good men, and kept
this place being of so great importance to his majesty. The tyrants heart
fails him at his most need: the Lord depriueth him of his senses, and he
bandoneth his tyranny without any stroke stricken. None is more coward than a
tyrant. God the establisher of kings does preserve them and their estates, and
although sometimes he afflicts the^ with the rebellions of their nearest
friends as he did David, so that he brings them low as he did Manasses and
Nabuchadonozer, yet does he afterward deliver and raise them up again. We see
the small continuance of this tyranny, which lasted but 48. hours: hardly did
this tyrant give his subjects time to eat or drink, so short was this bloody
tragedy. These were violent storms, and soon ouerblowne. This conspiracy
was no sooner sprung up but it withered again: This is an example of gods
judgments, for says the Apostle, Who so resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and who so resists Gods ordinance do draw his curse upon
them. These be the tyrants which war against God, and against whom he
shoots the darts of his wrath: David shall never want power and courage to
pursue such Absalons, neither does France want trees to hang them upon, as was
this Consul. France is yet sufficiently stored of true and natural frenchmen,
both willing and able to deliver her from those that have sworn her
destruction. To conclude, those that have been seduced will reclaim
themselves and such good and honorable personages, as hitherto have kept their
houses, not for fear, but expecting his majesty's commandment will take the
fields to the end altogether under his banners to follow the example of the
Marsilians.

FINIS.



