THESIS MARTINIANAE: That is, CERTAIN DEMONSTRATIVE Conclusions, set down
and collected (as it should seem) by that famous and renowned Clarke, the
reverend Martin Marprelate the great: serving as a manifest and sufficient
confutation of all that ever the College of Catercaps with their whole band of
Clergie-priests, have, or can bring for the defense of their ambitious and
Antichristian Prelacie.

PVBLISHED AND SET FORTH as an afterbirth of the noble Gentleman himself, by
a pretty stripling of his, MARTIN IVNIOR, and dedicated by him to his good neame
and nuncka, Master John Kankerbury: How the young man came by them, the Reader
shall understand sufficiently in the Epilogue, In the mean time, whosoever
can bring me acquainted with my father, I Will be bound he shall not loose
his labor.

Printed by the assigns of Martin Junior, without any privilege of the
Catercaps.

Martin Junior son unto the renowned and worthy Martin Marprelate the Great,
to the Reader.
THou shall receive (good Reader) before I set down unto thee any thing of
mine own, certain of those things of my fathers doings which I found among
his imperfect papers: I have not changed any thing in them, detracted any thing
from them, nor added unto them aught of mine own, but as I found them, so I
have delivered them unto thee. Mine own meaning thou shall understand at the
latter end in my Epilogue, to my nunckle Canturburie. This small thing that
follows before his Theses, is also his own. I have set down the speech as I
found it, though imperfect. One thing I am sorry for, that the speech
pretends the old man to be something discouraged in his courses.

THESES MARTINIANAE.
I See my doings and my course misliked of many both the good and the bad,
though also I have favorers of both sorts. The Bishops, and their train,
though they stumble at the cause, yet especially, mislike my manner of writing.
Those whom foolishly men call Puritanes, like of the matter I have handled, but
the form they cannot brook. So that herein I have them both for mine
adversaries. But now what if I should take the course (...) in certain Theses
or conclusions, without inueighing against either person or cause? might I not
then hope my doings would be altogether approved of the one, and not so
greatly scorned at by the other? Surely, otherwise they should do me great
injury, and show, that they are those who delight neither in heat nor cold,
and so make me as weary in seeking how to fit them as the Bishops are in
laboring how to find me. The Bishops I fear are past my cure, and it may be I
was unwise, in taking that charge upon me: if that which I have already done
can do them any good, or any wise further the cause which I love, I shall be
glad, if not, what hope is there of amending them this way? The best is I know
how to mend my self. For good leave have I to give over my desparate cure, and
with this my farewell unto them, I wish them a better Surgeon. Yet ere I leave
them, I do here offer unto the view of the world, some part of their monstrous
corruptions; in defense whereof, for their lives dare not they in any learned
meeting or assembly dispute with with me, or attempt to overthrow mine
assertions by modest writings handled any thing scholerlike, that is, by good
and sound syllogismes, which have both their Mayor and Minor, confirmed by the
word. I would once see them enter into either of these courses, for as yet
they have been far from both. Fire, and faggot, bands, and blows, railing,
and reuiling, are, and have been hitherto their common weapons, as for
slandering and lying, it is the greatest piece of their holy profession. And
these with their bare assertio^s, and their wretched cleuing to popish
absurdities, are in a manner the only proofs and tried maxims they offer unto
the Church in this age. And so if a man would be confuted, I must needs say,
my Lord of Winchester has long ago sufficiently and dexterely performed it. I
am not of opinion, (says he) that, vna semper debet esse oeconomia Ecclesiae,
That the government of the Church should always, and in all places, be one
and the same, especially by a company of Elders. Lo sir, what say you to this?
here is enough, I trow, for any man's satisfaction, that bishop Couper is not
of opinion. Yea but our Savior Christ his Apostles and holy Martirs are of
opinion, that the government of the church should always, and in all places,
be one, especially by a company of Elders. As for my Lord of Winchesters
opinion, we have little or nothing to do with that: nor no great matter which
side it lean to, whether with or against the truth. For if his bishopric
and unruly jurisdiction were no more noisome and hurtful to the Church of God,
then his learning and opinion is hurtful to the cause of Discipline, he might
sit long enough vndistempered in his chair for us: the good old manne might
cough his fill, and be quiet, having his faithful promise and booke-oth (as we
have also John a Bridges and Bancrofts) that by arguments he will never hurt
us. For they must think, that it is not such dry blows as this, I am not of
opinion, etc. that will satisfy the learned, and answer the demonstrations
that are brought on the contrary side. If then they have indeed any purpose
at all, to quiet the contentions of our Church, let them bring unto us, not
these bables of their own, We are not of opinion, etc. but some sound warrant
from the word, that Christ and his Apostles were not of opinion with us in the
points wherein we truly charge them to have erred, otherwise their 812.
their 1401.

THESES MARTINIANAE: That is, The unanswerable Conclusions of MARTIN, wherein
are plainly set down many strange and unknown things (if hereafter they may
be proved) against the Bishops.
Compiled by Martin the Great: found and published by Martin Junior, for the
benefit of posterity, if his fathers should be slain.
1 THat all the officers of a true and lawful church government in regard of
their offices, are members of the visible body of Christ, which is the Church.
Romans 12.4,5. etc. 1. Cor. 12.8,28.

2 That none but Christ alone is to ordeine the members of his body, to wit,
of the Church: Because

3 That the Lord in his word has left the church perfect in all her members,
which he should nor have done, if he had not ordained all the officers, namely,
the members thereof, and so he should leave the building of his church
imperfect, and so it must continue, for who will presume to finish that which
he has left undone in the building of his Church.

4 That to ordeine a perfect and an unchangeable government of the Church, is,
a part of Christ's prerogative royal, and therefore cannot, without the great
derogation of the Son of God; be claimed by any Church or man.

5 That if Christ did not ordeine a Church-gouernement, which at the pleasure
of man can not be changed, then he is inferior unto Moses, for the government
placed by him might no man to alter, and thereto might no man add any thing.
Heb. 3.2,3.

6 That the Lord in the New Testament did appoint as perfect and unchangeable
a form of Church-gouernement in the offices and officets thereof, as Moses did
in the old.

7 That the Lord never placed any offices in the New Testament, but the
offices of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and
Deacons.

8 That unto the end of the world there were no other offices to be placed in
the Church, but only these.

9 That none of these were, and so no offices of a lawful Church-gouernement
are to be removed out of the Church, by any but by the Lord Christ himself,
who placed them, because they are the members of his body, in the placing or
displacing whereof, man has no skill, nor yet commission to deal.

10 That the Lord for the causes seeming good to his own wisdom (whereof any
further then he has set down in his word man is not to enquire) has
removed out of the church the offices of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists.

11 That the want of these can be no maime unto the church, seeing the Lord
by remoouing them thence, shows, that the body can have no use of them.

12 That the church is now unto the worlds end, to have none other offices in
it, but of pastors, doctors, elders, and deacons.

13 That the displacing, or the want of these, is a maime unto the church: And
therefore.

14 That the churches of God in Denmark, Saxony, Tygurium, etc. wanting this
government by these offices, are to be accounted maimed and imperfect.

15 That it is as good a reason, yea, and a far better, to say, that learned
men, and valiant captains, must have their eyes put out, because Homer and
Zisca were blind, as to avouch that the church of England may not be governed
by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and deacons, because other good churches want this
regiment.

16 That to place others in the stead of these, is both a maiming and a
deforming of the church.

17 That no magistrate may lawfully maime or deforme the body of Christ, which
is the Church: And therefore.

18 That no lawefull Church-gouernement is changeable at the pleasure of the
magistrate.

19 That the platform of government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons,
was not devised by man, but by our Savior Christ himself, the only head, and
alone universal Bishop of his church, as it is set down Romans 12.4,5. Ephesians.
4.12. and 1. Cor. 12.8,28. God has ordained, says the Apostle.

20 That no inconvenience can possibly come unto any state, by receiving this
government.

21 That the true stabilitie of al christian states and commonwealths
consists in the sound execution of this church-gouernement, by Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, and Deacons.

22 That of necessity all christian Magistrates are bound to receive this
government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and to abolish al other
church-gouernements.

23 That a church government, being the ordinance of the magistrate, or of
the church, is an unlawful church-gouernement.

24 That it is merely and utterly unlawful for any man, church, or state, to
ordeine any church-gouernement, or any church officer, save that government,
and those officers before named: Because.

25 That a church-gouernement consisting of any other officers, but Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, is a government of maimed and misshapen members:
Therefore

26 That our church-gouernement in England by lord archbishops, and bishops, is
a government of maimed, unnatural, and deformed members, serving for no use in
the church of God: Therefore also

27 That no lord bishop is to be maintained in any christian common wealth.

28 That those kingdoms and states, who defend any church-gouernement, save
this of Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, are in danger of utter
destruction, in as much as they defend the maime and deformity of the church:
And therefore

29 That our lord archbishops and bishops, in defending this their ungodly
government, are, not only traitors to God and his church, but utter enemies
unto her Majesty, and the State, in as much as they enforce the Lord by these
their sins, to draw the sword against us to our utter ruin.

30 That our lord archbishops and bishops hold it lawful for our magistrates
to maime or deforme the church.

31 That they hold Jesus Christ to have left behind him, an imperfect and a
maimed church, wanting some of her members.

32 That they hold it lawful for the magistrate to abolish the true and
natural members of the body, and to attempt the making of new by his own
invention.

33 That they, to wit, archbishops and bishops, are the maime of our church,
and like to be the destruction of our commonwealth.

34 That the warrant that the archbishops and bishops have for their places,
can be no better then the warrant which the maintenance of the open and most
monstrous whoredom in the Stews had in times past amongst us. For by the
word they are condemned to be the maime or deformity of the church, or both.
And as for the laws that maintain them, being the wound and sore of the
church, they are no more to be accounted of, then the laws mainteining the
Stews.

35 That the places of lord bishops are neither warranted by the word of God,
nor by any lawful humane constitutions.

36 That the government of the church of England, by lord archbishops and
bishops, is not a church government set down in the word, or which can be
defended to be Gods ordinance.

37 That the government of lord archbishops and bishops is unlawful,
notwithstanding it be maintained, and in force by humane laws and ordinances.

38 That the humane laws mainteining them, are wicked, and ungodly, and to be
abrogated of al christian magistrates.

39 That to be a lord bishop then is simply unlawful in it self, that is,
in respect of the office, though the man susteining the same should not abuse
it as our prelates do.

40 To be a lord bishop in it self simply, besides the abuse, consists of
two monstrous parts, whereof, neither ought to be in him that professes
himself a minister.

41 The first is, to bear an inequall and a lordly superiority over his
brethren in the ministry, and the rest of the church of God under his
jurisdiction.

42 The second is, the joining of the civil Magistracy unto the Ministry.

That both these parts are condemned by the written word of God. Luke 22.25.
1. Pet. 5.1,2. Mat. 20.25. Mark 10.42. 1. Cor. 8.10. Luke 12.14. 2. Tim. 2.4.
and John 18.36. compared with, Matthew. 10.25. Luke 16.13.

43 That the hierarchy of bishops, in their superiority over their brethren,
and their civil offices has been gainesaide and withstoode by the visible
church of God successively, and without intermission for these almost 500.
years last past.

44 That this cause of overthrowing the state of lord bishops, and bringing in
the equality of Ministers, is no new cause, but that which has bin many
years ago held and maintained, even in the fire, by the holy martires of
Christ Jesus.

45 That this wicked government of bishops was an especial point, gainesaid
by the servants of God, in the time of King Henry the eight, and Q. Marie; and
in the withstanding whereof they died, the holy martires of Christ Jesus.

46 That none ever defended this hierarchy of bishops to be lawful, but
Papists, or such as were infected with popish errors.

47 That we have not expelled and banished every part of popery, as long ae
we maintain L. bishops and their seats.

48 That the offices of lord archbishops and bishops, together with other their
corruptions, are condemned by the doctrine of the church of England.

49 That the doctrine of the church of England condemning the places of lord
bishops, is approved by the statutes of this kingdom, and her Majesty's
royal prerogative.

50 That to be a lord bishop, is directly against the statute 13. Elizab.
rightly understood, and flatly condemned by her Majesty's royal privilege.

51 That al her Majesty's loving subjects, Ministers especially, are bound by
statute (and have the alowance of the doctrine of the church of England
published with her Majesty's prerogative) not to acknowledge, yea, to disauow,
and withstand the places and callings of lord bishops.

52 That the doctrine of the church of England in the days of King Henry the
eight was the doctrine which the blessed martires of Christ Jesus M. Tindall M.
D. Barnes, and M. Fryth taught them and delivered unto us.

53 That this doctrine of theirs is now to be accounted the doctrine of the
church of England, in as much as (being the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles) it is published in print by Master Fox, and that by her Maiestiies
privilege.

54 That this their doctrine is maintained by statute, under the name of the
doctrine of the faith and sacraments.

55 That the doctrine which according to the word is published by Master Fox
in the book of Martyrs, seeing it is, cum priuilegio, is also to be
accounted the doctrine of faith and sacraments in the church of England, and
so is approved by statute.

56 That upon these former grounds we may safely hold these conclusions
following, and are thereby allowed by statute, and her Majesty's prerogative.

57 That by the doctrine of the church of England, it is not possible, that
naturally there can be any good lord bishop, Master Tindalls practice for
prelates. page 374.

58 That by the doctrine of the church of England, a bishoprike is a
superfluous honor, and a lewd liberty, ibid.

59 That by the doctrine of the church of England, our bishops are none of the
Lords annoynting, but servants of the beast.

60 That by the doctrine of the church of England, our lord bishops are none of
Christ's bishops, but the Ministers of Antichrist.

61 That by the doctrine of the church of England, our bishops and their
government are no part of Christ's kingdom, but are of the kingdom of this
world.

62 That by the doctrine of the church of England, lord bishops are a part of
that body whereof Antichrist is the head.

63 That by the doctrine of the church of England, the places of archbishops
and bishops are the seats of Antichrist.

64 That by the doctrine of the church of England, a bishop can have no other
lawful authority, but only to preach the word.

65 That by the doctrine of the church of England, the desire of a bishopric,
or any other honor in a minister, is a note of a false Prophet.

66 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, all our bishops
and their chapleines are false prophets.

67 That the doctrine of the church of England concerning the civil offices of
our Prelates, is, That all civil rule and dominion is by the word of God
flatly forbidden unto the Clergy.

68 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, the ministry
and the magistracy cannot by the ordinance of God be both in one person.

69 That by the doctrine of the church of England, the joining together of the
ministry in one person, does put every kingdom out of order.

70 That for a lord bishop to be of the privy counsel in a kingdom,
according to the doctrine of the church of England, is as profitable unto the
Realm, as the woolfe is to the lambs.

71 That bishops ought to have no prisons wherein to punish transgressors.

Mark this (good Reader)
72 That according to the church of England, all Ministers be of equal
authority.

73 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, those Doctors
(who are daily alleged by our bishops in the defense of their superiority
over their brethren) to wit, Cyprian, Ierom, Augustine, Chrysostom knew of no
authority that one bishop should have above another, neither thought, or once
dreamed, that ever any such thing should be.

74 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, a bishop and an
elder, or a minister, note out in the word of God the one and the self same
person and church officer, the contrary whereof is popery.

75 That by the doctrine of the church of England, it is popery to translate
the word Presbyteros into Priest, and so to call the ministers of the Gospel
Priests.

76 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, D. Bancroft in
his Sermon at Paul's the 28. of January 1588. maintained a popish error, in
auouching, that in the days of Cyprian there was a difference between a bishop
and a priest or minister.

77 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, John Cant. is a
mainteiner of a popish error, in terming the ministers of the Gospel by the
name of priests.

78 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, our prelates have
no authority to make ministers, or to proceed to any ecclesiastical censure.

79 That by the doctrine of the church of England, to have a bishops license
to preach, is the very mark of the beast Antichrist.

80 That by the doctrine of the church of England, the godly ministers ought to
ordeine those that would enter into that function, without any leave of the
Prelates, and not so much as once to suffer them to take any approbation of the
Prelates.

81 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, there ought to be
no other manner of ecclesiastical censure, but that which is noted, Matthew.
18.15,17. which is, to proceed from a private admonition to one or two
witnesses, and thence to the church, that is, not to one, but unto the
governors of the church, together with the whole congregation.

82 That according to the doctrine of our church, the citations, processes,
excommunications, etc. of the Prelates, are neither to be obeyed nor regarded.

83 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, men ought not to
appear in their courts, seeing their proceedings are so directly against the
truth, as now they are manifested to be, seeing the doctrine of the church
warranteth them no such calling.

84 That according to the doctrine of the church of England, that a man being
excommunicated by them, ought not to seek any absolution at their hands.

85 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, every minister
is bound to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the inhibition of the bishops.

86 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, a man being once
made a minister, is not to be kept back from preaching, by the inhibition of
any creature.

87 That according unto the doctrine of our church, our prelates notably
profane the censure of the church, by sending them out against those, who are
not offenders against God, for money matters, and other trifles, etc.

88 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, it is great
tyranny in them, to summon and cite poor men, as they do, to come before
them, for hearing the word, or speaking against their hierarchy.

89 That it is tyranny by the doctrine of the church of England, and the badge
of Antichrists disciples, for our prelates to break up into men's consciences,
to compel them by oaths, to testify against themselves.

90 That by the doctrine of the church of England, our prelates learned this
abomination of Pilate Matthew. 26.93.

91 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, none ought to be
in the ministry, but such as are able to preach.

92 That according unto the doctrine of the church of England, Nonresidents,
and pluralities of benefices, are most intolerable in the sight of God and man.

93 That all true subjects have better warrant to deny the superiority of
bishops, then the bishops have to impose themselves upon the church.

94 That her Majesty's true subjects in oppugning the state of L. bishops have
the warrant of the word of God, the warrant of our laws and statutes, the
doctrine of the church of England, the consent of the church of God for the
space of above 400. years, and her Majesty's privilege.

95 That the bishops have nothing for their defense, but the corruption
received into our church contrary unto the word, contrary unto our statutes,
contrary unto her Majesty's privilege, contrary unto the doctrine of our
church.

96 That our bishops in this controversy for their hierarchy, have not me,
poor man, for their only adversary, but our savior Christ, his Apostles,
and holy Martires, our laws and statutes, her Majesty's privileges, and the
doctrine of our church has long ago condemned them for traitors unto God,
unto his word, his church, and unto our laws and privileges.

97 That Master Thomas Cartwright, together with all those learned men, and my
self also that have written against the state of the Clargy, could do no less
then we have done, except we would betray the truth of God, the laws of
this land, and the doctrine of our church.

98 That our magistrates in mainteining both the doctrine of our church, and
also the hierarchy of our bishops, maintain two contrary factions under
their government, which their wisdoms know to be dangerous.

99 That this faction is likely to continue until either of the parties give
over.

100 That those who defend the doctrine of our church in oppugning of our
bishops, neither can nor will give over the cause, in as much as it is confirmed
by the word professed in our church allowed by our statutes, and maintained by
her Majesty's privilege.

101 That the bishops will not give over, in any likelihoode to die for it, as
long as the state will maintain them.

102 That the continuance of these contrary factions, is likely in a while to
become very dangerous unto our state, as their wisdoms, who are magistrates
do well know and perceive.

103 That their wisdoms then are bound, even for the quieting of our outward
state, to put down either the doctrine of our Church, or the corruption,
viz. our bishops, and their proceedings.

104 That they cannot, without the endaungering of themselves, under the wrath
of God, and the odious and most monstrous sin of inevitable Apostacy from
the truth, put down, and abolish the doctrine of our church.

105 That they can not any longer maintain the corruptions of our church,
namely, archbishops and bishops, without the shameful contradiction of our
doctrine, and the discontentednes of their subjects.

106 That all Ministers are bound by subscription, by virtue of the statute
that requires their subscription unto the doctrine of faith and sacraments in
the church of England, to disauowe the hierarchy of bishops.

107 That it were well, that all these ministers who are urged to subscribe
would require a resolution in this point, before they yield their subscription.

108 That Doctor Bancroft in affirming her Majesty to be a petty pope in his
Sermon preached at Paul's the ninth of February 1588. preached treason against
her Majesty's royal crown and dignity. Page 68. lin. 19


109 That the said Bancroft is a traitor, in affirming, her Majesty to usurp
that authority within her dominions, in causes ecclesiastical which the pope
usurped in times past.

110 That our bishops in suffering the said Sermon to be published in print,
containing the former points of treason, are accessory unto Bancrofts treason.

That our prelates. Here the father left his writings imperfect, and thus
perfitely begins the son.

Martin Iuniors Epilogue. To the worshipful his very good neame, Master John
Canturburie.
AFter my hearty commendations unto your VVorshippe, (good nunckle Canturbury)
trusting, that you, with the rest of the Cater-caps are as near your
overthrow, as Jyour poor nephew am from vvishing the prosperity of your
Antichristian callings. The cause of my vvriting unto you at this instant, is,
to let you understand, first, that I was somevvhat merry at the making
hereof, being indeed sorry, together with others of my brethren, that we
cannot hear from our good father, Master Martin Marprelate, that good and
learned discoursing brother of yours, but especially grieved, that we see not
the utter subversion of that unhappy and pestilent government of L. Bishops,
at the helm whereof ye sit like a Pilate, or a Caiphas rather. Moreover, I
do you to vveete, that you shall receive by this bearer, certain imperfect
vvritings of my fathers, praying your prelacie, if you can send me, or any of
my brethren any word of him, that you would return us an answer with
speed.

MAny flim flam tales go abroad of him, but of certainty nothing can be
heard, in as much as he keeps him self secret from all his sons. Some
think, that he is even now employed in your business; and I think so too,
my reason is, quoth Robert Some, because it was for your sakes and good, that
he first fell a studying the Art of Pistle making: Others give out, that in
the service of his country, and her Majesty's, he died, or was in great danger
at the Groine. And the others (ka mine vncka Bridges) have seen motives
inducing them to be of this mind: Some there are also, who fear that you have
him in your hands. Howsoever it be somewhat is not well, that he is silent
all this while. We his sons must needs be disquieted, seeing we can neither
know where our father is, nor yet hear from him. If we could but here by
some Pistle, though it were but of 20. sheets of paper, that he is well, we
would not then be so inquisitiue of him. But now that he has bin so long time
tongue-tied these four or five months, we must needs enquire of the matter.
Speak then, good nuncles, have you closly murdered the gentlman in some of
your prisons? have you strangled him? have you given him an Italian fig? or,
what have you done unto him? have you choked him with a fat prebend or two?
What? I trow my father will swallow down no such pills. And he do, I can
tell he will soon purge away all the conscience he has, and prove a mad
hind ere he die. But tell me, I pray you, what you mean to do unto him if
you have him in hold? Do you mean to have the keeping of him, least he should
not be otherwise well looked unto? why what need tat? I am sure he has 500.
sons in the land, of good credit and ability, with whom he might have
other gates welcome, then with any Catercap o them all. And I pray you,
nunckles, never trouble your selves with the keeping of him, I trust he shall do
well, though he never come near any of you all. And I think in reason it were
more meet his sons, then his brethren should be charged with him; if it so
came to pass, that he were forced to lean unto others. This I know full
well, that my father would be sorry from his heart, to put you to any such
cost, as you intend to be at with him. A meaner house, and of less strength
then the Tower, the Fleet, Newgate, or the Gate House is, would serve him
well enough: he is not of that ambitious vain, that many of his brethren the
bishops are, in seeking for more costly houses then ever his father built for
him. And therefore, good sweet neames now, if you have him, let him be
dispatched out of your hands, with honesty and credit. My father is of a kingly
nature I perceive by him, he would do good unto you, but he would not be
recompensed for it again. He will none of your courtesies unless it be for
your own sakes, that you will give over your bishopdomes, that is the greatest
benefit he accounts of from you, other recompense he seeks none.

If you demand of me, where I found this, the truth is, it was taken up
(together with certain other papers) besides a bush, where it had dropped from
some body passing by that way. I hope my fathers worship will not be oftended
with me, for publishing of it, being not so perfect as questionless he would
have had it. He, and you, can not but commend my good dealing, in setting it
out; for I chose rather to leave the sentences imperfect then to add any thing
more then I found legible. The Arithmeticall nombers in the end of his preamble
show, that when he had written so far, he had something more in his head then
all men do conceive, which made him leave in the midst of a period. I my
self do perceive some tantologies in the co^clusions as being the first
draught, but I would not presume to mend them, that I refer to himself, if
he be yet living, if dead, yet posterities may have his afterbirth to be
altogether his own. And let them take this as his cygncam cantionem, viz. his
farewell to booke-making. But that would I be sorry of. For who can be able to
prove the points which he has set down here, concerning the doctrine of our
church, mainterned by statur, and her Majesty's privilege, so soundly, and so
worthily, as he himself would perform it. A thirty or forty of the first
Conclusions are already showed in, Hai any work for the Cooper, and therefore
they need no further proof then the reading over that worthy Treatise,
whence they seem to have been collected. The rest I hope shall be showed in
More work for the Cooper.

And vather, if you can prove these things out of the doctrine of our church,
then certainly you deserve to be chronicled for ever. Then John Canturbury,
come down with thy popery, ka M. Martin Junior: for now art thou set out in
thy colors, to be an adversary, not only of Christ and his Apostles, which all
men might know, but even also an utter enemy unto the doctrine of the church
of England sowed here by the holy Martires, and sealed with their blood, yea,
allowed by statute, and published with her Majesty's royal privilege, which
is a point that the most have not considered of. And who is he now that dares
persuade Martin to give over his course, unless the same also will show
himself an enemy to the doctrine of the church of England. For Martin in his
writings, is not so much an ennemie unto the bishops, as a defender of the
doctrine of our Church. And therefore you Puritanes, that mislike of him, take
heed that you be not found amongst posterities, to be the betrayers of
this doctrine (for your ease and quietness sake) which you are bound to
deliver unto your children, without corruption or mangling, though it cost you
your lives a thousand times* For to tell you the truth, if you do but read
over the writings of M. Tindall, M. Frith, M. Barnes, M. Hooper, M. Knox, M.
Lambert, etc. which were the first planters of the Gospel amongst us, you
shall find your selves in faithfulness, courage and zeal, yea, even the best of
you far behind them; which I speak not but to your great shame, with a
desire of your amendment. And therefore I tell you true, I think it a great
blessing of God that has raised up this Martin, whom you can hardly
brook, to hold tackling with the bishops, that you may have some time of
breathing, or rather a time to gather courage and zeal, joined with knowledge,
to set upon these enemies of the doctrine of our church, even the doctrine of
God, I mean maintained in our church. For that as hitherto ye have done, you
be so loath (for the disturbing of our state forsooth, and the offending of her
Majesty) not only to speak against, but even utterly to reject this
hierarchy of our bishops, even to have no more to do with it, then with the
seat of the beast, you shall declare unto our children, that God raised up
but a company of whiteliuered soldiers, to teach the Gospel in sincerity
under her Majesty, and take heed lest our forenamed fathers rise up in
judgment against you. As for her Majesty, or the state, I think she has
little cause to thank you for your wisdom, in seeking the quietness of this
commonwealth, by-winking at the sin of the pompous ministry. And me
thinks you are bound unto her, and her people, to make so much at the least
known, as she mainteineth publikelie in books, by her statutes and
privileges, to be the doctrine of this our church under her government.
Therefore, look unto these things, for certainly, if ever the Lord shall
make the proceedings of our wicked bishops known unto her Majesty, to be
so contrary to word of God, the profession of holy Martyrs, and the
doctrine of our church maintained, both by our statutes, and privileges, as in
these Theses they are set down, assure your self, that she will then
enquire, whether she had not any faithful preachers in her kingdom, that
would stand to the defense of the truth, until she saw further into it.

As for the bishops, they may herein see, to their woe, what wicked caytiffes
they are, in maintaining themselves and their thrice curssed popedom, against
such clear light. But the beasts, I fear, were borne to no other end, then
to be the Lords scourge, to chastise his church, and then to be burnt in hell.
And out upon them, they are as unlike Christ, his Apostles, and holy Martyrs,
which were the planters of our Church, as the wretches are like unto
themselves. A man would have thought, if they had not been desperate in their
wickedness, that by the warning which Martin gave them, they would have been
restrained from their villainy in some sort. But, as though their very reason
had been clean gone, the more they are threatened to have their proceedings
displayed, the more wicked do they manifest themselves. As if they would
declare unto the world, that they will not be made known unto posterity,
but upon the condition, that they may be the most wicked, that ever were in
the church of God. They will be so many Iudases, so many Diotrepheses, so many
Simon Maguses, as now they are wicked bishops of England, or else they
think not themselves well dealte with. Wherefore, reverend father, if you be
as yet on your feet, and have escaped out of the danger of gunne shot,
begin again to play the man. Fear none of these beasts, these pursuvants,
these Mar-Martins, these stage players, these prelates, these popes, these
devils, and al they can do. Quit your self but as like a man as you have done
in Hai any work, and I doubt not but you will make these rogish priests lie in
the kenell. The report abroad goes, that you are drawn dry, and can say no
more. They are fools that so think, I say, Let these Conclusions be judge,
whereby I tell you true, I hope you shall be able to emprie every bishopric
in England, if weight of tructh can do it. There be that affirm, the rimers
and stage players, to have clean put you out of countenance, that you dare
not again show your face. Alas poor haglers, their fathers are too young to
outface the least of your sons. And I do think, that, lay aside their
tyranny, all the bishops of England are too weak to deal with a
scarre-crowe, that has but the name of reverend Martin written upon it. And
therefore, I persuade my self, that they their selves are thorowlie so
persuaded, ka my nuncka Bridges, that you contemn such kenell rakers, and
scullions, as to their shame, in the time of your silence have sold them
selves for pence a piece, to be derided of come who so will, to see a company
of disguised asses.

Concerning Mar-martin, if he be a Londoner, or an university man, ten to
one but you shall see him, one of these odd days, carted out of the town for
his honesty of life. Why that time of his shows, that he had no other
bringing up, then in a brothel-house. And herein I would crave pardon of
the universities, and the famous city of London, if I should be thought to
give out, that such a ribaulder as this is, were there maintained. To speak
what I do think of the youth, I can not be induced to think, that he has
had his bringing up at any other trade, then in carryeng long Meg of
Westminsters hand-basket, and in attending upon some other of his auntes, at
her appointment while she lived. After her death, it may be he has been
promoted unto the service of some laundresse in a bishops house, where, in
hope to be preferred by his good lords, he has undertaken to mar-rimes, in
publishing bawdery, and filthiness, for the defense of these honest bishops.

The stage players, poor seely hunger-starued wretches, they have not so much
as an honest calling to live in the commonwealth: And they, poor varlets, are
so base minded, as at the pleasure of the veryest rogue in England, for one
poor penny, they will be glad on open stage to play the ignominious fools,
for an hour or two together. And therefore, poor rogues, they are not so much
to be blamed, if being stage players, that is, plain rogues (save only for
their liueries) they in the action of dealing against Master Martin, have
gotten them many thousand eie-witnesses, of their wittelesse and pitiful
conceits. And in deed they are marvelous fit vpholders of Lambehith
palace, and the crown of Canturburie. And therefore, men should not think
of all other things, that they should any ways make Master Martin, or his
sons to alter their course. And hereof, good Master Canturburie, assure
your self. Well, to grow to a point with you, if you have any of your side,
either in the Universities, or in your cathedral Churches, or any where within
the compass of all the bishopdomes you have, that dare write, or dispute
against any of these points set down by my father, here I do by these my
writings, cast you down the Glove, in my fathers name, and the names of the
rest of his sons. If my father be gone, and none else of my brethren will
uphold the controversy against you, I my self will do it. And take my
challenge if you dare. By writing you may do it, qand be sure to be answered.
By disputations, if you will appoint the place, with promise, that you will not
deal vi and armis, you shall be taken also by me, if I think I may trust you.
Otherwise, the Puritanes will, I doubt not, maintain the challenge against you.

But here by the way, John Canturbury, take an odd advice of your poor
nephew, and that is this. First, in regard of your self, play not the tyrant
as you do, in Gods Church; if you go on forward in this course, the end will
be a woeful reckoning. Thou have been raised up out of the dust, and even
from the very dounghill, to be president of her Majesty's counsel, being of
thy self, a man altogether unmeet for any such pre-eminence, as neither endued
with any excellent natural wit, nor yet with any great portion of learning.
The Lord has passed by many thousands in this land far meeter for the place
then is poor John Whitgift. Well then, what if thou, having received so great
blessings at the Lords hand (being of all others in no comparison any thing
near the fittest for it, or the likeliest to obraine it) shall now show thy
self ungrateful unto thy merciful Lord God, or become a cruel persecutour,
and a tyrant in his church, a cruel oppressor of his children, shall not all
that thou have received, be turned unto a curse unto thee, even into thine
own bosom? Yea verily. For the Lord in one day is able to bring more shame
upon thee, and that in this life, then he has heaped blessings upon thee now
for the space of thirty years and upward. But when I do consider thy
pre-eminence and promotion, I do sensibly acknowledge it to be joined with a
rare curse of God, even such a curse as very few (I will not say none) in
Gods Church do sustain. And that is thy wicked and Antichristian Prelacie.
The consideration of which popedom of thine makes me think, that thy other
place in the civil magistracy, being in it self a godly and a lawful
calling, is so become infectious, that it will be thy bane, both in this life,
and in the life to come. And I am almost fully persuaded, that, that
archbishopricke of thine, together with thy practices therein, show verily,
that the Lord has no part nor portion in that miserabble, and desperate
caytiffe wicked John Whitgift, the Pope of Lambehith. Leave therefore both thy
popedom, and thy ungodly proceedings, or look for a fearful end.

My second and last advise is this in a word. Suffer no more of these haggling
and profane pamphlets to be published against Martin, and in defense of thy
hierarchy. Otherwise thou shall but commend thy folly and ignorance unto the
world to be notorious. Mar-martin, Leonard Wright, Fregneuile, Dick Bancroft,
Tom Blan. o Bedford, Kemp, Underhill, serve thee for no other use, but to work
thy ruin, and to bewray their own shame, and miserable ignorance. Thus far of
these matters.

And me thinks you see, nunckle Canturburie, that though I be but young, yet
I begin prettily well to follow my fathers steps; for I promise you, I am
deceived, unless I have a pretty smattering gift in this Pistle-making, and I
fear in a while I shall take a pride in it. I pray you, if you can, now I have
showed you my mind, that you would be a means, that my vather, or my
brethren be not offended with me for my presuming this of mine own head. I did
all of a good meaning, to save my fathers papers: and it would have pitied your
heart to see, how the poor papers were rain and weather-beaten, even truly
in such a sort, as they could scant be read to be printed. There was never a
dry threede in them. These sea-iourneys are pitiful I perceive. One thing me
thinks my father should like in me, and that is, my modesty, for I have not
presumed, to publishe mine in as large a print or volume as my father does his.
Nay, I think it well, if I can drible out a Pistle in octauo now and then.
Farewell, good nuncle, and pay this bearer for the carriage. July 22. 1589. With
as great speed as I might.

Your worships nephew MARTIN IVNIOR.


