THE HISTORY OF Antonio and Mellida. The first part. As it has been sundry
times acted, by the children of Paul's.

Written by I. M.

LONDON Printed for Mathewe Lownes, and Thomas Fisher, and are to be soulde in
Saint Dunstans Church-yarde. 1602.

To the only rewarder, and most just poiser of virtuous merits, the most
honorably renowned Nobody, bountious Mecaenas of Poetry, and Lord Protector of
oppressed innocence, Do, Dedicoque.
SINCE it has flowed with the current of my humorous blood, to affect (a
little too much) to be seriously fantastical: here take (most respected
Patron) the worthless present of my slighter idleness. If you vouchsaf not his
protection then, O thou sweetest perfection (Female beau^tie) shield me from
the stopping of vinegar bottles. Which most wished favor if it fail me; then,
Sinequeo flectere superos, Acheronta mouebo. But yet, Honors redeemer, virtues
aduancer, religions shelter, and pieties fosterer, Yet, yet I faint not in
despair of thy gracious affection and protection: to which I only shall ever
rest most seruingmanlike, obsequiously making legs, and standing (after our
freeborn English garb) bare headed.

Thy only assied slave, and admirer, I M.

The Play called Antonio and Mellida.
Induction.
Enter Galeatzo, Piero, Alberto, Antonio, Forobosco, Balurdo, Matzagente, and
Feliche, with parts in their hands: having cloakes cast over their apparel.
COme sirs, come: the music will sound straight for entrance. Are ye ready,
are ye perfect?

Pier. Faith, we can say our parts: but we are ignorant in what mould we must
cast our Actors.


Albert. Whom do you personate?


Pie. Piero, Duke of Venice.


Alb. O, ho: then thus frame your exterior shape,
To hautie form of elate majesty;
As if you held the palsy shaking head
Of reeling chance, under your fortunes belt,
In strictest vassalage: grow big in thought,
As swollen with glory of succesfull arms.

Pie. If that be all, fear not, I Will suit it right.
Who can not be proud, stroke up the hair, and strut!

Al. Truth: such rank custom is grown popular;
And now the vulgar fashion strides as wide,
And stalks as proud, upon the weakest stilts
Of the slight'st fortunes, as if Hercules,
Or burly Atlas shouldred up their state.

Pi. Good: but whom act you?


Alb. The necessity of the play forces me to act two parts; Andrugio, the
distressed Duke of Genoa, and Alberto, a Venetian gentleman, enamoured on the
Lady Rossaline: whose fortunes being too weak to sustain the port of her, he
proved always desastrous in love: his worth being much vnderpoised by the
uneven scale, that currants all things by the outward stamp of opinion.


Gal. Well, and what do thou play?


Ba. The part of all the world.


Alb. The part of all the world? What Is that?


Bal. The fool. ^ in good deed law now, I play Balurdo, a wealthy
mountbanking Burgomasco's heir of Venice.


Alb. Ha, ha: one, whose foppish nature might seem great, only for wise men's
recreation; and, like a Iuicelesse bark, to preserve the sap of more strenuous
spirits. A servile hounde, that loves the sent of forerunning fashion, like an
empty hollow vault, still giving an echo to wit: greedily champing what any
other well valued judgment had before hand showed.


Foro. Ha, ha, ha: tolerably good, good faith sweet wag.


Alb. Vmh, why tolerably good, good faith sweet wag? Go, go; you flatter me.


Foro. Right, I but dispose my speech to the habit of my part.


Alb. Why, what plays he?


To Feliche. Fe. The wolf, that eats into the breast of Princes; that breeds
the Lethargy and falling sickness in honor; makes Justice look asquint, and
blinks the eye of merited reward from viewing desertfull virtue.


Alb. What Is all this Periphrasis? ha?


Fe. The substance of a supple-chapt flatterer.


Alb. O, does he play Forobosco, the Parasite? Good i-faith. Sirrah, you must
seem now as glib and straight in outward semblance, as a Ladies buske; though
inwardly, as cross as a pair of Tailors legs: having a tongue as nimble as
his needle, with servile patches of glauering flattery, to stitch up the bracks
of unworthily honored.


Fo. I warrant you, I warrant you, you shall see me prove the very Perewig to
cover the balde pate of brainelesse gentilitie.

Ho, I will so tickle the sense of bella gratiosa madonna, with the titillation
of Hyperbolicall praise, that I Will strike it in the nick, in the very nick,
chuck.


Fell. Thou promisest more, than I hope any Spectator gives faith of
performance: but why look you so duskie? ha?


To Antonio. Ant. I was never worse fitted since the nativity of my
Actorshippe: I shall be hist at, on my life now.


Fell. Why, what must you play?


Ant. Faith, I know not what: an Hermaphrodite; two parts in one: my true
person being Antonio, son to the Duke of Genoa; though for the love of Mellida,
Pieros daughter, I take this fained presence of an Amazon, calling my self
Florizell, and I know not what. I a voice to play a lady! I shall nere do it.


Al. O, an Amazon should have such a voice, virago-like, Not play two parts in
one? away, away: it is common fashion. Nay if you cannot bear two subtle fro^ts
under one hood, I de or go by, go by; off this worlds stage. O times
impuritie!


An. I, but when use has taught me actio^, to hit the right point of a Ladies
part, I shall grow ignorant when I must turn young Prince again, how but to
trusse my hose.


Fe. Tush never put them off: for women wear the breaches still.


Mat. By the bright honor of a Millanoise, and the resplendent fulgor of this
steel, I will defend the feminine to death; and ding his spirit to the verge
of hell, that dates divulge a ladies prei^dico.


Exit Ant and Al. Fell Rampum scrampum, mount tuftie Tamburlaine.
What rattling thunder clappe breaks from his lips?

Alb. O, it is native to his part. For, acting a modern Bragadoch under the
person of Matzagente, the Duke of Millaines son, it may seem to suite with
good fashion of coherence.


Pie. But me thinks he speaks with a spruce Attick accent of adulterate
Spanish.


Al. So it is resolved. For, Millane being half Spanish, half high Dutch, and
half Italians, the blood of chifest houses, is corrupt and mungrel'd: so that
you shall see a fellow vainglorious, for a Spaniard; gluttonous, for a
Dutchman; proud, for an Italian; and a fantastic Idiot, for all. Such a one
conceit this Matzagente.


Fe. But I have a part allotted me, which I have neither able apprehension to
conceit, nor what I conceit gracious ability to utter.


Gal. Whoop, in the old cut? good show us a draught of thy spirit.


Fell. It Is steddie, and must seem so impregnably fortrest with his own content,
that no envious thought could ever invade his spirit: never surueying any man
so vnmeasuredly happy, whom I thought not justly hateful for some true
impouerishment: never beholding any favor of Madam Felicity gracing another,
which his well bounded content persuaded not to hang in the front of his own
fortune: and therefore as far from envying any man, as he valued all men
infinitely distant from accomplished beatitude. These native adjuncts
appropriate to me the name of Feliche. But last, good thy humor.


Exit Alb. A. It Is to be described by signs and tokens. For unless I were
possessed with a legio^ of spirits, it is impossible to be perspicuous by any
utterance: For sometimes he must take austere state, as for the person of
Galeatzo, the son of the duke of Florence, and possess his exterior
presence with a formal majesty: keep popularitie in distance, and on the
sudden fling his honor so prodigally into a common Arm, that he may seem to
give up his indiscretion to the mercy of vulgar ce^sure: Now as solemn as a
trauailer, and as grave as a Puritanes ruff: with the same breath as slight
and scatterd in his fashion as as as a a any thing. Now, as sweet and neat as a
Barbours casting-bottle; straight as slouenly as the yeasty breast of an
Ale-knight: now, lamenting: then chafing: straight laughing: then


Feli. What then?


Anto. Faith I know not what: 'rad been a right part for Proteus or Gew: ho,
blind Gew would ha don't rarely, rarely.


Feli. I fear it is not possible to limme so many persons in so small a tablet
as the compass of our plays afford.


Anto. Right: therefore I have heard that those persons, as he and you Feliche,
that are but slightly drawn in this Comedy, should receive more exact
accomplishment in a second Part: which, if this obtain gracious acceptance,
means to try his fortune.


Feli. Peace, here comes the Prologue, clear the Stage.


Exeunt. The Prologue.
THE wreath of pleasure, and delicious sweetes,
Begirt the gentle front of this fair troop:
Select, and most respected Auditors,
For wits sake do not dream of miracles.
Alas, we shall but falter, if you lay
The least sad weight of an unused hope,
Upon our weakness: only we give up
The woorthlesse present of flight idleness,
To your authentic censure; Othat our Muse
Had those abstruse and synowy faculties,
That with a strain of fresh invention
She might press out the raritie of Art;
The pur'st elixed joyce of rich conceit,
In your attentive ears; that with the lip
Of gracious elocution, we might drink
A sound carouse unto your health of wit.
But O, the heathy dryness of her brain,
Foil to your fertile spirits, is ashamed
To breath her blushing numbers to such ears:
Yet (most ingenious) deigne to veil our wants;
With sleeke acceptance, polish these rude Scenes:
And if our slightness your large hope beguiles,
Check not with bended brow, but dimpled smiles.
Exit Prologue. ACTVS PRIMVS.
The Cornets sound a battle within. Enter Antonio, disguised like an Amazon.
An. HEART, wilt not break! and thou abhorred life
Will thou still breath in my enraged blood?
Veins, synewes, arteries, why crack ye not?
Burst and diuul'st, with anguish of my grief.
Can man by no means creep out of himself,
And leave the slough of viperous grief behind?
Antonio, have thou seen a fight at sea,
As horrid as the hideous day of doom;
Betwixt thy father, duke of Genoa,
And proud Piero, the Venetian Prince?
In which the sea has swollen with Genoas blood,
And made spring tides with the warm reeking gore,
That gusht from out our Galleys scupper holes;
In which, thy father, poor Andrugio,
Lies sunk, or leapt into the arms of chance,
Choakt with the laboring Oceans brackish foam;
Who even, despite Pieros can cred hate,
Would with an armed hand have seized thy love,
And linkt thee to the beauteous Mellida.
Have I outliu'd the death of all these hopes?
Have I felt anguish pourd into my heart,
Burning like Balsamum in tender wounds;
And yet do live! could not the fretting sea
Have rolled me up in wrinkles of his browe?
Is death grown coy? or grim confusion nice?
That it will not accompany a wretch,
But I must needs be cast on Venice shore?
And try new fortunes with this strange disguise?
To purchase my adored Mellida.
The Cornets sound a flourish: cease. Hark how Piero's triumphs beat the air,
O rugged mischief how thou grat'st my heart!
Take spirit, blood, disguise, be confident:
Make a firm stand, here rests the hope of all,
Lower then hell, there is no depth to fall.

The Cornets sound a Synnet: Enter Feliche and Alberto, Castilio and Forobosco,
a Page carrying a shield: Piero in Armor: Catzo and Dildo and Balurdo: All
these (saving Piero) armed with Petronels: Being entered, they make a stand in
divided foyles. Piero. Victorious Fortune, with tryumphant hand,
Hurleth my glory 'bout this ball of earth,
Whilst the Venetian Duke is heaued up
On wings of fair success, to ouer-looke
The low cast ruins of his enemies,
To see my self adored, and Genoa quake,
My fate is firmer then mischance can shake.

Feli. Stand, the ground trembles.

Piero. Hah? an earthquake?

Ball. Oh, I smell a sound.

Feli. Piero stay, for I descry a fume,
Creeping from out the bosom of the deep,
The breath of darkness, fatal when it is whist
In greatness stomach: this same smoke, called pride,
Take heed she will lift thee to improuidence,
And break thy neck from steep security,
She Will make thee grudge to let Iehoua share
In thy successful battles: O, she is ominous,
Inticeth princes to devour heaven,
Swallow omnipotence, out-stare dread fate,
Subdue Eternity in giant thought,
Heaues up their hurt with swelling, puffed conceit,
Till their souls burst with venomed Arrogance:
Beware Piero, Rome it self has tried,
Confusions train blows up this Babell pride.

Pier. Pish, Dimitto superos, summa votorum attigi.
Alberto, have thou yielded up our fixed decree
Unto the Genoan Ambassador?
Are they content if that their duke return,
To send his, and his son Antonios head,
As pledges steept in blood, to gain their peace?

Alb. With most obsequious, sleek-brow'd intertain,
They all embrace it as most gracious.

Pier. Are Proclamations sent through Italy,
That whosoever brings Andrugios head,
Oryoung Anthonios, shall be guerdoned
With twenty thousand double Pistolets,
And be indeened to Pieros love?

Forob. They are sent every way: sound policy.
Sweet Lord.

Fell. Confusion to these limber Sycophants.
No sooner mischief's borne in regenty,
But flattery christens it with policy.
tacit. Pier, Why then: O me Celitum excelsissimum!
The intestine malice, and inueterate hate
I always bore to that Andrugio,
Glories in triumph ore his misery:
Nor shall that carpet-boy Antonio
Match with my daughter, sweet cheekt Mellida.
No, the public power makes my faction strong.

Fell. Ill, when public power stre^gthneth private wrong.

Pie. It Is horse-like, not for man, to know his force.

Fell. It Is god-like, for a man to feel remorse.

Pie. Pish, I prosecute my families revenge,
Which I Will pursue with such a burning chase
Till I have dried up all Andrugios blood;
VVeake rage, that with slight pity is withstoode.
The Cornets sound a flourish. What means that fresh triumphall flourish sound?

Alb. The prince of Millane, and young Florence heir Approach to gratulate your
victory.

Pie. We Will girt them with an ample waste of love;
Conduct them to our presence royally.
Let vollies of the great Artillery
From of our galleys banks play prodigal,
And sound loud welcome from their bellowing mouths.
Exit Piero tantum.
The Cornets sound a Cynet. Enter above, Mellida, Rossaline and Flauia: Enter
below, Galeatzo with attendants: Piero meets him, embraces; at which the
Cornets sound a flourish: Piero and Galeatzo exeunt: the rest stand still. Mell.
What prince was that passed through my fathers guard?

Fla. It Was Galeatzo, the young Florentine.

Ros. Troth, one that will besiege thy maidenhead,
Enter the walls in faith (sweet Mellida)
If that thy flankers be not Canon proof.

Mell. Oh Mary Ambree, good, thy judgment wench;
Thy bright electious clear, what will he prove?

Ross. Has a short finger and a naked chinne;
A skipping eye, dare lay my judgment (faith)
His love is glibbery; there is no hold ont, wench:
Give me a husband whose aspect is firm,
A full cheekt gallant, with a bouncing thigh:
Oh, he is the Paradizo dell madonne contento.

Mell. Even such a one was my Antonio.

The Cornets sound a Cynet. Rossa. By my nine and thirteth servant (sweet)
Thou art in love, but stand on tiptoed fair,
Here comes Saint Tristram Tirlery whiffe in faith.

Enter Matzagente, Piero meets him, embraces; at which the Cornets sound a
flourish: they two stand, using seeming complements, whilst the Scene passes
above. Mell. S. Mark, S. Mark, what kind of thing appears?

Ross. For fancies passion, spit upon him; figh:
His face is varnisht: in the name of love,
What country bred that creature?

Mell. What is he Flauia?

Fla. The heir of Millane, Segnior Matzagent.

Ross. Matzagent? now by my pleasures hope,
He is made like a tilting staff; and looks
For all the world like an ore-rosted pigge:
A great Tobacco taker too, that's flat.
For his eyes look as if they had been hung
In the smoke of his nose.

Mell. What husband, will he prove sweet Rossaline?

Ross. Avoid him: for he has a dwindled leg,
A low forehead, and a thin cole-black beard,
And will be jealous too, believe it sweet:
For his chin sweats, and has a gander neck,
A thin lip, and a little monkish eye:
Precious, what a slender waste he has!
He looks like a May Pole, or a notched stick:
Heel snap in two at every little strain.
Give me a husband that will fill mine arms,
Of steddie judgment, quick and nimble sense:
Fools relish not a Ladies excellence.

Exeunt all on the lower Stage: at which the Cornets sound a flourish, and a
peale of shot is given. Mell. The tryumph's ended, but look Rossaline,
What gloomy soul in strange accustrements
Walks on the pauement.

Rossa. Good sweet lets to her, pree the Mellida.

Mell. How covetous thou art of novelties!

Rossa. Pish, it is our nature to desire things
That are thought strangers to the common cut.

Mell. I am exceeding willing, but --

Ross. But what? pree the go down, lets see her face:
God send that neither wit nor beauty wants
Those tempting sweets, affections Adamants.

Exeunt. Anto. Come down, she comes like: O, no Simile
Is precious, choice, or elegant enough
To illustrate her descent: leap heart, she comes,
She comes: smile heaven, and softest Southern wind
Kiss her cheek gently with perfumed breath.
She comes: Creations purity, admired.
Adored, amazing raritie, she comes.
O now Antonio press thy spirit forth
In following passion, knit thy senses close,
Heap up thy powers, double all thy man:
Enter Mellida, Rossaline, and Flauia. She comes. O how her eyes dart wonder on
my heart!
Mount blood, soul to my lips, taste Hebes cup:
Stand firm on deck, when beauties close fight's up.

Mel. Lady, your strange habit does beget
Our pregnant thoughts, even great of much desire,
To be acquaint with your condition.

Rossa. Good sweet Lady, without more ceremonies,
What country claims your birth, and sweet your name?

Anto. In hope your bounty will extend it self,
In self same nature of fair courtesy,
I Will shun all niceness; my nam's Florizell,
My country Scythia, I am Amazon,
Cast on this shore by fury of the sea.

Ross. Nay faith, sweet creature, we will not veil our names.
It pleased the Font to dip me Rossaline.
That Lady bears the name of Mellida,
The duke of Venice daughter.

Anto. Madam, I am obliged to kiss your hand,
By imposition of a now dead man.

To Mellida kissing her hand. Rossa. Now by my troth, I long beyond all thought,
To know the man; sweet beauty deigne his name.

Anto. Lady, the circumstance is tedious.

Ros. Troth not a whit; good fair, lets have it all:
I love not, I, to have a jot left out,
If the tale come from a loved Orator.

Anto. Vouchsafe me then your hush't obseruances.
Vehement in pursuit of strange novelties,
After long travail through the Asian maine,
I shipped my hopeful thoughts for Britany;
Longing to view great natures miracle,
The glory of our sex, whose fame does strike
Remotest ears with adoration.
Sailing some two months with inconstant winds,
We viewed the glistering Venetian forts;
To which we made: when lo, some three leagues off,
We might descry a horred spectacle:
The issue of black fury strow'd the sea,
With tattered carcasses of splitted ships,
Half sinking, burning, floating, topsie turuie.
Not far from these sad ruins of fell rage,
We might behold a creature press the waves;
Senseless he sprauld, all notcht with gaping wounds:
To him we made, and (short) we took him up:
The first word that he spoke was, Mellida;
And then he swouned.

Mell. Aye me!

Anto. Why sigh you, fair?

Ross. Nothing but little humors: good sweet, on.

Anto. His wounds being dressed, and life recovered,
We began discourse; when lo, the sea grew mad,
His bowels rumbling with wind passion,
Straightswarthy darkness popt out Phoebus eye,
And blurd the iocund face of bright cheekt day;
Whilst crudl'd fogges masked even darkness brow:
Heaven bad's good night, and the rocks gron'd
At the intestine uproar of the maine.
Now gustie flawes struck up the very heels
Of our maine mast, whilst the keen lightning shot
Through the black bowels of the quaking ayte:
Straight chops a wave, and in his sliftred panch
Down falls our ship, and there he breaks his neck:
Which in an instant up was belkt again.
When thus this martyrd soul began to sigh;
" Give me your hand (quoth he) now do you graspe
" Th'vnequall mirror of ragg'd misery:
" Is It not a horrid storm? O, well shaped sweet,
" Could your quick eye strike through these gashed wounds,
" You should behold a heart, a heart, fair creature,
" Raging more wild then is this frantic sea.
" VVolt do me a favor, if thou chance survive?
" But visit Venice, kiss the precious white
" Of my most; nay all all Epithites are base
" To attribute to gracious Mellida:
" Tell her the spirit of Antonio
" Wishes his last gasp breathed upon her breast.

Ros. Why weeps soft hearted Florisell?

Ant. Alas, the flintie rocks groand at his plaints.
Tell her (quoth he) that her obdurate sire
Has cracked his bosom; therewithal he wept,
And thus sigh't on. The sea is merciful;
Look how it gapes to bury all my grief
Well, thou shall have it, thou shall be his toumbe:
My faith in my love live; in thee, die woe,
Dye unmatched anguish, dye Antonio:
With that he totterd from the reeling deck,
And down he sunk.

Ross. Pleasures body, what makes my Lady weep?

Mell. Nothing, sweet Rossaline, but the ayer's sharp.
My fathers Palace, Madam, will be proud
To entertain your presence, if you will daine
To make repose within. Aye me!

Ant. Lady our fashion is not curious.

Ross. Faith all the nobler, it is more generous.

Mell. Shall I then know how fortune fell at last,
What succor came, or what strange fate insew'd?

Ant. Most willingly: but this same court is vast,
And public to the staring multitude.

Rossa. Sweet Lady, nay good sweet, now by my troth
We Will be bedfellowes: dirt on complement froth.

Exeunt; Rossaline giving Antonio the way. ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Enter Catzo (with a Capon) eating, Dildo following him. Dil. HAH Catzo, your
master wants a clean trencher: do you hear?


Balurdo calls for your diminutiue attendance.


Catz. The belly has no ears Dildo.


Dil. Good pugge give me some capon.


Catz. No capon, no not a bitte ye smooth bully; capon's no meat for Dildo:
milk, milk, ye glibbery vrchin, is food for infants.


Dil. Upon mine honor


Cat. Your honor with a paugh? slid, now every Jack an Apes loads his back
with the golden coat of honor; every Ass puts on the Lions skin and roars
his honor, upon your honor. By my Ladies pantable, I fear I shall live to
hear a Vintners boy cry; it is rich neat Canary, upon my honor.


Dil. My stomack's up.


Cat. I think thou art hungry.


Dil. The match of fury is lighted, fastened to the linstock of rage, and will
presently set fire to the touchhole of intemperance, discharging the double
couluering of my incensement in the face of thy opprobrious speech.


Cat. I Will stop the barrel thus; god Dildo, set not fire to the touchhole.


Dil. My rage is stopped, and I will eat to the health of the fool thy master
Castilio.


Cat. And I will suck the juice of the capon, to the health of the Idiot thy
master Balurdo.


Dil. Faith, our masters are like a case of Rapiers sheathed in one scabberd of
folly.


Cat. Right dutch blades. But was it not rare sport at the sea-battle, whilst
rounce robble hobble roard from the ship sides, to view our masters pluck
their plumes and drop their feathers, for fear of being men of mark.


Dill. Slud (cried Signior Balurdo) O for Don Bessiclers armor, in the Mirror
of Knighthood: what coil's here? O for an armor, Canon proof: O, more cable,
more fetherbeds, more fetherbeds, more cable, till he had as much as my cable
hatband, to fence him.


Enter Flauia in haste, with a rebato. Catz. Buxome Flauia: can you sing? song,
song.


Fla. My sweet Dildo, I am not for you at this time: Madam Rossaline stays
for a fresh ruff to appear in the presence: sweet away.


Dil. Twill not be so put off, delicate, delicious, spark eyed, sleek skind,
sle^der wasted, clean legd, rarely shaped.


Fla. Who, I Will be at all your service another season: nay faith there is reason
in all things.


Dil. Would I were reason then, that I might be in all things.


Cat. The brief and the semiquauer is, we must have the descant you made upon
our names, ere you depart.


Fla. Faith, the song will seem to come off hardly.


Catz. Troth not a whit, if you seem to come off quickly.


Fla. Peart Catzo, knock it lustily then.


CANTANT. Enter Forcbosco, with two torches: Castilio singing fantastically:
Rossaline running a Caranto pase, and Balurdo: Feliche following, wondering at
them all. Foro. Make place gentlemen; pages, hold torches, the prince
approaches the presence.


Dill. What squeaking cart-wheel have we here? ha? Make place gentlemen, pages
hold torches, the prince approaches the presence.


Ros. Faugh, what a strong sent's here, some body uses to wear socks.


Bal. By this fair candle light, it is not my feet, I never wore socks since I
sucked pappe.


Ross. Sauourly put off.


Cast. Hah, her wit stings, blisters, galls off the skin with the tart
acrimony of her sharp quickness: by sweetness, she is the very Pallas that
flewe out of Jupiters brainepan. Delicious creature, vouchsafe me your
service: by the purity of bounty, I shall be proud of such bondage.


Ross. I vouchsafe it; be my slave. Signior Balurdo, will thou be my servant
too?


Ba. O god: forsooth in very good earnest, law, you would make me as a man
should say, as a man should say.


Fe. Slud sweet beauty, will you deign him your service?


Ros. O, your fool is your only servant. But good Feliche why art thou so sad?
a penny for thy thought, man.


Feli. I sell not my thought so cheap: I valewe my meditation at a higher rate.


Ball. In good sober sadness, sweet mistress, you should have had my thought
for a penny: by this crimson Satin that cost eleven shillings, thirteen
pence, three pence, half penny a yard, that you should, law.


Ros. What was thy thought, good servant?


Ba. Marry forsooth, how many strike of pease would feed a hog far against
Christide.


^o. Paugh; servant rub out my rheum, it soiles the presence.


Casti. By my wealthiest thought, you grace my shoo with an unmeasured honor:
I will preserve the soale of it, as a most sacred relic, for this service.


Ross. I Will spit in thy mouth, and thou will, to grace thee.


Felich. O that the stomach of this queasie age
Digestes, or brooks such raw unseasoned gobs,
And vomits not them forth! O slavish sots.
Servant quoth you? faugh: if a dog should crave
And beg her service, he should have it straight:
Sheed give him favors too; to lick her feet,
Or fetch her fan, or some such drudgery:
A good dogs office, which these amorists
Triumph of: it is rare, well give her more Ass,
More sot, as long as dropping of her nose
Is sworn rich pearl by such low slaves as those.

Ross. Flauia, attend me to attire me.
Exit Rossaline and Flauia.
Balur. In sad good earnest, sir, you have touched the very bare of naked truth;
my silk stocking has a good gloss, and I thank my planets, my leg is not
altogether vnpropitiously shaped. There Is a word: vnpropitiously? I think I
shall speak vnpropitiously as well as any courtier in Italy.


Foro. So help me your sweet bounty, you have the most graceful presence,
applasiue elecuty, amazing volubility, polisht adornation, delicious
affability.


Fell. Whop: fut how he tickles yon trout under the gilles! you shall see him
take him by and by, with groping flattery.


Foro. That ever ravished the ear of wonder. By your sweet self, then whom I
know not a more exquisite, illustrate, accomplished, pure, respected, adored,
observed, precious, real, magnanimous, bou^tious: if you have an idle rich
cast ierkin, or so, it shall not be cast away, if; hah? here is a foreheade, an
eye, a head, a hair, that would make a: or if you have any spare pair of
silver spurs, i will do you as much right in all kind offices


Fell. Of a kind Parasite


Foro. As any of my mean fortunes shall be able to


Balur. As I am true Christian now, thou have won the spurs


Feli. For flattery.
O how I hate that same Egyptian louse;
A rotten maggot, that lives by stinking filth
Of tainted spirits: vengeance to such dogs,
That sprout by gnawing senseless carrion.

Enter Alberto. Alb. Gallants, saw you my mistress, the Lady Rossaline?


Foro. My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, left the presence even now.


Casti. My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrewe her gracious aspect even
now.


Balur. My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrewe her gracious aspect even
now.


Felich. Well said echo.


Alb. My mistress, and his mistress, and your mistress, and the dogs
mistress: precious dear heaven, that

Alberto lives, to have such riuals.
Slid, I have bin searching every private rome,
Corner, and secret angle of the court:
And yet, and yet, and yet she lives concealed.
Good sweet Feliche, tell me how to find
My bright faced mistress out.

Fell. Why man, cry out for lantern and candlelight. For it is your only way,
to find your bright flaming wench, with your light burning torch: for most
commonly, these light creatures live in darkness.


Alb. Away you heretic, you will be burnt for


Fell. Go, you amorous hound, follow the sent of your mistress shoe; away.


Foro. Make a fair presence, boys, advance your lights:

The Princess makes approach.


Bal. And please the gods, now in very good deed, law, you shall see me tickle
the measures for the heavens, Do my hangers show?


Enter Piero, Antonio, Mellida, Rossaline, Galeatzo, Matzagente, Alberto, and
Flauia. As they enter, Feliche, and Castilio make a rank for the Duke to pass
through. Forobosco vshers the Duke to his state: then whilst Piero speaks his
first speech, Mellida is taken by Galeatzo and Matzagente, to dance; they
supporting her: Rossaline, in like manner, by Alberto and Balurdo: Flauia, by
Feliche and Castilio. Pie. Beauteous Amazon, sit, and seat your thoughts
In the reposure of most soft content.
Sound music there. Nay daughter, clear your eyes,
From these dull fogs of mistie discontent:
Look sprightly girl. What? though Antonio's droun'd,
That peevish dotard on thy excellence,
That hated issue of Andrugio:
Yet may thou triumph in my victories;
Since, lo, the high borne bloodes of Italy
Sue for thy seat of love.
Let music sound. Beauty and youth run descant on loves ground.

Matz. Lady, erect your gracious summetry:
Shine in the sphere of sweet affection:
Your eye as heavy, as the heart of night.

Mell. My thoughts are as black as your bearde, my fortunes as ill proportioned
as your legs; and all the powers of my mind, as leaden as your wit, and as
dustie as your face is swarthy.


Gal. Faith sweet, i will lay thee on the lips for that jest.

Mell. I pree thee intrude not on a dead man's right.

Gal. No, but the livings just possession.
Thy lips, and love, are mine.

Mell. You nere took seizin on them yet: forbear:
There Is not a vacant corner of my heart,
But all is filled with dead Antonios loss.
Then urge no more; O leave to love at all;
It Is less disgraceful, not to mount, then fall.

Mat. Bright and refulgent Lady, daine your ear:
You see this blade, had it a courtly lip,
It would diuulge my valor, plead my love,
Iustle that skipping feeble amorist
Out of your loves seat; I am Matzagent.

Gale. Hark thee, I pray thee taint not thy sweet ear
With that sots gabble; By thy beauteous cheek,
He is the flagging'st bulrush that ere droopt
With each slight mist of rain. But with pleased eye
Smile on my courtshippe.

Mel. What said you sir? alas my thought was fixed
Upon another object. Good, forbear:
I shall but weep. Aye me, what boots a tear!
Come, come, lets dance. O music thou distill'st
More sweetness in us then this iarring world:
Both time and measure from thy strains do breath,
Whilst from the channel of this dirt does flow
Nothing but timelesse grief, unmeasured woe.

Anto. O how impatience cramps my cracked veins,
And cruddles thick my blood, with boiling rage!
O eyes, why leap you not like thunderbolts,
Or canon bullets in my riuals face;
Oy me infeliche misero, o lamenteuol fato!

Alber. What means the Lady fall upon the ground?

Ross. Belike the falling sickness.

Anto. I cannot brook this sight, my thoughts grow wild:
Here lies a wretch, on whom heaven never smilde.

Ross. What servant, nere a word, and I here man?
I would shoot some speech forth, to strike the time
With pleasing touch of amorous complement.
Say sweet, what keeps thy mind, what think thou

Alb. Nothing. on?

Rossa. What Is that nothing?

Alb. A woman's constancy.

Rossa. Good, why, would thou have us sluts, and never shift the vestur of
our thoughts? Away for shame.


Alb. O no, thart too constant to afflict my heart,
Too too firm fixed in unmoved scorn.

Ross. Pish, pish; I fixed in unmoved scorn?
Why, I Will love thee to night.

Alb. But whom to morrow?

Ross. Faith, as the toy puts me in the head.

Bal. And pleased the marble heavens, now would I might be the toy, to put you
in the head, kindly to conceit my my my: pray you give in an Epithet for love.


Fell. Roaring, roaring.

O love thou have murdered me, made me a shadow, and you hear not Balurdo, but
Balurdos ghost.


Rossa. Can a ghost speak?


Bal. Scuruily, as I do.


Ross. And walk?


Bal. After their fashion.


Ross. And eat apples?


Bal. In a sort, in their garb.


Feli. Pree thee Flauia be my mistress.


Fla. Your reason, good Feliche?


Fell. Faith, I have nineteen mistresses already, and I not much disdeigne
that thou shold'st make up the full score.


Fla. Oh, I hear you make common places of your mistresses, to perform the
office of memory by. Pray you, in ancient times were not those satin hose? In
good faith, now they are new dyed, pinkt and scoured, they show as well as if
they were new.

What, mute Balurdo?


Feli. I in faith, and twere not for printing, and painting, my breech, and
your face would be out of reparation.


Bal. I, an faith, and twere not for printing, and pointing, my breech, and
your face would be out of reparation.


Fell. Good again, Echo.


Fla. Thou art, by nature, too foul to be affected.


Feli. And thou, by Art, too fair to be beloved.
By wits life, most spark spirits, but hard chance.
La ty dine.

Pie. Gallants, the night grows old; and downy sleep
Courts us, to entertain his company:
Our tired lymbes, brus'd in the morning fight,
Entreat soft rest, and gentle hushed repose.
Fill out Greek wines; prepare fresh cressit-light:
We Will have a banquet: Princes, then good night.

The Cornets sound a Synnet, and the Duke goes out in state. As they are going
out, Antonio stays Mellida: the rest Exeunt. An. What means these scattred
looks? why tremble you?
Why quake your thoughts, in your distracted eyes?
Collect your spirits, Madam; what do you see?
Do not behold a ghost?
Look, look where he stalks, wrapped up in clouds of grief,
Darting his soul, upon thy wondering eyes.
Look, he comes toward thee; see, he stretches out
His wretched arms to girt thy loved waste,
With a most wished embrace: see him not yet?
Nor yet? Ha, Mellida; thou well may err:
For look; he walks not like Antonio:
Like that Antonio, that this morning shone,
In glistering habilliments of arms,
To seize his love, spite of her fathers spite:
But like himself, wretched, and miserable,
Banished, forlorn, despairing, struck quite through,
With sinking grief, rowld up in seauen-fould doubles
Of plagues, vanquishable: hark, he speaks to thee.

Mell. Alas, I can not hear, nor see him.

Anto. Why? all this night about the room he stalkt,
And groand, and houl'd, with raging passion,
To view his love (life blood of all his hopes,
Crown of his fortunes) clipped by strangers arms.
Look but behind thee.

Mel. O, Antonio; my Lord, my Love, my

An. Leave passion, sweet; for time, place, air, and earth,
Are all our foes: fear, and be jealous; fair,
Lets fly.

Mell. Dear heart; ha, whether?

Anto. O, it is no matter whether, but lets fly.
Ha! now I think ont, I have nere a home:
No father, friend, no country to embrace
These wretched limbs: the world, the All that is,
Is all my foe: a prince not worth a doite:
Only my head is hoised to high rate,
Worth twenty thousand double Pistolets,
To him that can but strike it from these shoulders.
But come sweet creature, thou shall be my home;
My father, country, riches, and my friend:
My all, my soul; and thou and I will live:
(Lets think like what) and thou and I will live
Like unmatched mirrors of calamity.
The jealous ear of night eaue-drops our talk.
Hold thee, there is a jewel; and look thee, there is a note
That will direct thee when, where, how to fly;
Bid me adieu.

Mell. Farewell bleak misery.

Anto. Stay sweet, lets kiss before you go.

Mel. Farewell dear soul.

Anto. Farewell my life, my heart.

ACTVS TERTIVS.
Enter Andrugio in armor, Lucio with a sheepeheard gown in his hand, and a
Page. Andr. IS not yon gleame, the shuddering morn that flakes,
With silver tinctur, the east vierge of heaven?

Lu. I think it is, so please your excellence.

Andr. Away, I have no excellence to please.
Pree the observe the custom of the world,
That only flatters greatness, States exalts.
And please my excellence! O Lucio.
Thou have bin ever held respected dear,
Even precious to Andrugios in most love.
Good, flatter not. Nay, if thou give not faith
That I am wretched, O read that, read that.
Piero Sforza, to the Italian Princes, fortune.
EXCELLENT, the just overthrow, Andrugio took in the Venetian gulf, has so
assured the Genowaies of the justice of his cause, and the hatefulness of his
person, that they have banished him and all his family: and, for confirmation of
their peace with us, have vowed, that if he, or his son, can be attached, to
send us both their heads. We therefore, by force of our united league, forbid
you to harbor him, or his blood: but if you apprehend his person, we entreat
you to send him, or his head, to us. For we vow by the honor of our blood,
to recompense any man that brings his head, with twenty thousand double
Pistolets, and the indeering to our choysest love.

From Venice: PIERO SFORZA.



Andr. My thoughts are fixed in contemplation
Why this huge earth, this monstrous animal,
That eats her children, should not have eyes and ears.
Philosophy maintains that Natur's wise,
And forms no vselesse or imperfect thing.
Did Nature make the earth, or the earth Nature?
For earthly dirt makes all things, makes the man,
Moulds me up honor; and like a cunning Dutchma^,
Paints me a puppit even with seeming breath,
And gives a sot appearance of a soul,
Go to, go to; thou lie Philosophy.
Nature forms things imperfect, vselesse, vain.
Why made she not the earth with eyes and ears?
That she might see desert, and hear men's plaints:
That when a soul is splitted, sunk with grief,
He might fall thus, upon the breast of earth;
And in her ear, halloo his misery:
Exclaming thus. O thou all bearing earth,
Which men do gape for, till thou cramst their mouths,
And choakst their throts with dust: O chaune thy breast,
And let me sink into thee. Look who knocks;
Andrugio calls. But O, she is deaf and blind.
A wretch, but lean relief on earth can find.

Lu. Sweet Lord, abandon passion, and disarme.
Since by the fortune of the tumbling sea,
We are rolled up, upon the Venice marsh,
Lets clip all fortune, least more lowering fate

And. More lowering fate? O Lucio, choke that breath.
Now I defy chance. Fortunes browe has frowned,
Even to the utmost wrinkle it can bend:
Her venom's spit. Alas, what country rests,
What son, what comfort that she can deprive?
Tryumphes not Venice in my overthrow?
Gapes not my native country for my blood?
Lies not my son tomb'd in the swelling maine?
And yet more lowering fate? There Is nothing left
Unto Andrugio, but Andrugio:
And that nor mischief, force, distress, nor hell can take.
Fortune my fortunes, not my mind shall shake.

Lu. Speak like your self: but give me leave, my Lord,
To wish your safety. If you are but seen,
Your arms display you; therefore put them off,
And take

And. Would thou have me go unarmed among my foes?
Being besieged by passion, entering lists,
To combat with despair and mighty grief:
My soul beleaguerd with the crushing strength
Of sharp impatience. Ha Lucio, go unarmed?
Come soul, resume the valor of thy brith;
My self, my self will dare all opposits:
I Will muster forces, an vnuanquisht power:
Cornets of horse shall press th'vngratefull earth;
This hollow wombed mass shall inly groan,
And murmur to sustain the weight of arms:
Ghastly amazement, with vpstarted hair,
Shall hurry on before, and usher us,
Whilst trumpets clamor, with a sound of death.

Lu. Peace, good my Lord, your speech is al too light.
Alas, survey your fortunes, look what is left
Of all your forces, and your utmost hopes?
A weak old man, a Page, and your poor self.

And. Andrugio lives, and a fair cause of arms,
Why that is an army all invincible.
He who has that, has a battalion
Royal, armor of proof, huge troops of barbed steeds,
Maine squares of pikes, millions of harguebush.
O, a fair cause stands firm, and will abide.
Legions of Angels fight upon her side.

Lu. Then, noble spirit, slide in strange disguise,
Unto some gracious Prince, and soiourne there,
Till time, and fortune give revenge firm means.

And. No, i will not trust the honor of a man:
Gold is grown great, and makes perfidiousnesse
A common water in most Princes Courts:
He Is in the Chekle-roule: I Will not trust my blood;
I know none breathing, but will cogge a dye
For twenty thousand double Pistolets.
How goes the time?

Luc. I saw no sun to day.


And. No sun will shine, where poor Andrugio breaths,
My soul grows heavy: boy let us have a song:
We Will sing yet, faith, even despite of fate.

CANTANT. And. It Is a good boy, and by my troth, well sung.
O, and thou felt'st my grief, I warrant thee,
Thou would have struck division to the height;
And made the life of music breath: hold boy: why so?
For Gods sake call me not Andrugio,
That I may soon forget what I have bin.
For heavens name, name not Antonio;
That I may not remember he was mine.
Well, ere yon sun set, i will show my self my self,
Worthy my blood. I was a Duke; that is all.
No matter whether, but from whence we fall.

Exeunt. Enter Feliche walking, vnbrac't. Fe. Castilio? Alberto? Balurdo? none
up?
Forobosco? Flattery, nor thou up yet:
Then there is no Courtier stirring: that is firm truth?
I cannot sleep: Feliche seldom rests
In these court lodgings. I have walked all night,
To see if the nocturnall court delights
Could force me envy their felicity:
And by plain troth; I will confess plain troth:
I envy nothing, but the Trauense light.
O, had it eyes, and ears, and tongues, it might
See sport, hear speech of most strange surquedries.
O, if that candlelight were made a Poet,
He would prove a rare firking Satyrist,
And draw the core forth of impostum'd sin.
Well, I thank heaven yet, that my content
Can envy nothing, but poor candlelight.
As for the other glistering copper spangs,
That glisten in the tyer of the Court,
Praise God, I either hate, or pity them.
Well here i will sleep till that the scene of up
Is past at Court. O calm hushed rich content,
Is there a being blessedness without thee?
How soft thou down'st the couch where thou do rest,
Nectar to life, thou sweet Ambrosian feast.

Enter Catilio and his Page: Castilio with a casting bottle of sweet water in
his hand, sprinkling himself. Cast. Am not I a most sweet youth now?

Cat. Yes, when your throat's perfumed; your very words
Do smell of Amber greece. O stay sir, stay;
Sprinkle some sweet water to your shoes heels,
That your mistress may swear you have a sweet foot.

Cast. Good, very good, very passing passing good.

Fell. Fut, what trebble minikin squeaks there, ha? good? very good, very very
good?


Casti. I will warble to the delicious concaue of my
Mistress ear: and strike her thoughts with
The pleasing touch of my voice.

CANTANT. Cast. Feliche, health, fortune, mirth, and wine,

Fell. To thee my love divine.

Cast. I drink to thee, sweeting.

Fell. Plague on thee for an Ass.

Cast. Now thou have seen the Court; by the perfecction of it, do not envy
it?


Fell. I wonder it does not envy me.
Why man, I have been borne upon the spirits wings,
The souls swift Pegasus, the fantasy:
And from the height of contemplation,
Have viewed the feeble joints men totter on.
I envy none; but hate, or pity all.
For when I view, with an intentive thought,
That creature fair; but proud; him rich, but sot:
The Other witty; but unmeasured arrogant:
Him great; yet boundless in ambition:
Him high borne; but of base life: to' there feared;
Yet feared fears, and fears most, to be most loved:
Him wise; but made a fool for public use:
The Other learned, but selfe-opinionate:
When I discourse all these, and see my self
Nor fair, nor rich, nor witty, great, nor feared:
Yet amply suited, with all full content:
Lord, how I clap my hands, and smooth my brow,
Rubbing my quiet bosom, tossing up
A grateful spirit to omnipotence!

Cast. Ha, ha: but if thou knew'st my happiness,
Thou would even grate away thy soul to dust,
In envy of my sweet beatitude:
I can not sleep for kisses; I can not rest
For Ladies letters, that importune me
With such unused vehemence of love,
Straight to solicit them, that

Feli. Confusion seize me, but I think thou lie.
Why should I not be sought to then as well?
Fut, me thinks, I am as like a man*
Troth, I have a good head of hair, a cheek
Not as yet wan'd; a leg, faith, in the full.
I ha not a red beard, take not tobacco much:
And S'lid, for other parts of manliness

Cast. Pew waw, you nere accourted them in pomp:
Put your good parts in presence, graciously.
Ha, and you had, why they would ha come of, sprung
To your arms: and su'd, and prayed, and vowed;
And opened all their sweetness to your love.

Fell. There are a number of such things, as then
Have often urged me to such loose belief:
But S'lid you all do lie, you all do lie.
I have put on good clothes, and smugd my face,
Struck a fair wench, with a smart speaking eye:
Courted in all sorts, blunt, and passionate;
Had opportunity put them to the ah:
And, by this light, I find them wondrous chaste,
Impregnable; perchance a kiss, or so:
But for the rest, O most inexorable.

Cast. Nay then in faith, pree thee look here.

Shows him the superscription of a seeming Letter. Fell. To her most esteemed,
loved, and generous servant, Sig.
Castilio Balthazar.
Pree the from whom comes this? faith I must see.
From her that is devoted to thee, in most private sweetes of love; Rossaline.
Nay, god's my comfort, I must see the rest;
I must, sans ceremony, faith I must.

Feliche takes away the letter by force. Cast. O, you spoil my ruff, unset my
hair; good away.


Fell. Item for strait canuas, thirteen pence, half penny. Item for an elle
and a half of taffata to cover your old canuas dubblet, foureteen shillings,
and three pence. S'light, this a tailors bill.


Cast. In sooth it is the outside of her letter; on which
I took the copy of a tailors bill.

Dil. But it is not crossed, I am sure of that. Lord have mercy on him, his credit
has given up the last gasp. Faith i will leave him; for he looks as melancholy
as a wench the first night she

Exit.
Feli. Honest musk-cod, twill not be so stitched together; take that, and that,
and belie no Ladies love: swear no more by Jesus: this Madam, that Lady; hence
go, forswear the presence, travail three years to bury this bastinado:
avoid, puff paste, avoid.


Cast. And tell not my Lady mother. Well, as I am true gentleman, if she had
not wild me on her blessing, not to spoil my face; if I could not find in my
heart to fight, would I might nere eat a Potatoe pie more.


Enter Balurdo, backward; Dildo following him with a looking glass in one
hand, and a candle in the other hand: Flauia following him backward, with a
looking glass in one hand, and a candle in the other; Rossaline following her.
Balurdo and Rossaline stand setting of faces: and so the Scene begins. Fell.
More fool, more rare fools! O, for time and place, long enough, and large
enough, to act these fools! Here might be made a rare Scene of folly, if the
plat could bear it.


Bal. By the suger-candy sky, hold up the glass higher, that I may see to
swear in fashion. O, one loofe more would ha made them shine; gods neakes,
they would have shone like my mystresse browe. Even so the Duke frowns for all
this Cursond world: oh that gerne kills, it kills. By my golden What Is the
richest thing about me?


Dil. Your teeth.


Bal. By my golden teeth, hold up; that I may put in: hold up, I say, that I
may see to put on my gloves.


Dil. O, delicious sweet cheekt master, if you discharge but one glance from
the level of that set face: O, you will strike a wench; you will make any wench
love you.


Balur. By Jesus, I think I am as elegant a Courtier, as How like thou my
suite?


Catz. All, beyond all, no peregal: you are wondered at, for an ass.


Bal. Well, Dildo, no christen creature shall know hereafter, what I will do
for thee heretofore.


Ros. Here wants a little white, Flauia.


Dil. I, but master, you have one little falt; you sleep open mouthed.


Ball. Pewe, thou iestst. In good sadness, I Will have a looking glass nailed to
the the testarn of the bed, that I may see when I sleep, whether it is so, or
not; take heed you lie not: go to, take heed you lie not.


Fla. By my troth, you look as like the princess, now I, but her lip is lip
is a little redder, a very little redder: but by the help of Art, or Nature,
ere I change my perewigge, mine shall be as red.


Fla. O, I, that face, that eye, that smile, that writhing of your body, that
wanton dandling of your fan, becoms prethely, so sweethly, it is even the goodest
Lady that breathes, the most amiable Faith the fringe of your satin peticote
is ripped. Good faith madam, they say you are the most bounteous Lady to your
women, that ever O most delitious beauty! Good Madam let me kith it.


Enter Piero. Feli. Rare sport, rare sport! A female fool, and a female
flatterer*


Ross. Body a me, the Duke: away the glass.


Pie. Take up your paper, Rossaline.


Rossa. Not mine, my Lord.


Pie. Not yours, my Lady? I Will see what it is.


Bal. And how does my sweet mistress? O Lady dear, even as it is an old say,
It Is an old horse can neither wighy, nor wagge his tail: even so do I hold my
set face still: even so, it is a bad courtier that can neither discourse, nor
blow his nose.


Pie. Meet me at Abraham's, the Jews, where I bought my Amazons disguise. A
ship lies in the port, ready bound for England; make haste, come private.

Enter Castilio, Forobosco. Antonio, Forobosco, Alberto, Feliche, Castilio,
Balurdo? run, keep the Palace, post to the ports, go to my daughters chamber:
whether now? scud to the Jews, stay, run to the gates, stop the gundolets,
let none pass the marsh, do all at once. Antonio? his head, his head. Keep
you the Court, the rest stand still, or run, or go, or shoute, or search, or
scud, or call, or hang, or do do do, su su su, something: I know not who who
who, what I do do do, nor who who who, where I am.

O trista traditriche, rea, ribalda fortuna,
Negando mi vindetta mi causa fera morte,

Fell. Ha ha ha. I could break my spleen at his impatience.


Anto. Alma and gratiosa fortuna sia^e favor evole,
Et fortunati siano vnoti del mia dulce Mellida, Mellida.

Mel. Alas Antonio, I have lost thy note.
A number mount my stairs; i will straight return.

Fell. Antonio,
Be not affright, sweet Prince; appease thy fear,
Buckle thy spirits up, put all thy wits
In wimble action, or thou art surpised.

Anto. I care not.

Fell. Art mad, or desperate? or

Anto. Both, both, all, all: I pree thee let me ly;
Spite of you all, I can, and I will die.

Fell. You are distraught; O, this is madness breath.

An. Each man take hence life, but no man death:
He Is a good fellow, and keeps open house:
A thousand thousand ways lead to his gate,
To his wide mouthed porch: when niggard life
Has but one little, little wicket through.
We wring our selves into this wretched world,
To pule, and weep, exclaim, to curse and rail,
To fret, and ban the fates, to strike the earth
As I do now. Antonio, curse thy birth,
And die.

Fell. Nay, heavens my comfort, now you are perverse;
You know I always loved you; pree thee live.
Will thou strike dead thy friends, draw mourning tears

An. Alas, Feliche, I ha nere a friend;
No country, father, brother, kinsman left
To weep my fate, or sigh my funeral:
I roll but up and down, and fill a seat
In the dark cave of dusky misery.

Feli. Fore heaven, the Duke comes: hold you, take my key,
Slinke to my chamber, look you; that is it:
There shall you find a suite I wore at sea:
Take it, and slip away. Nay, precious,
If you will be peevish, by this light, I Will swear,
Thou rail'dst upon thy love before thou dyedst,
And called her strumpet.

Ant. She Will not credit thee.

Fell. Tut, that is all one: i will defame thy love;
And make thy dead trunk held in vile regard.

Ant. Wilt needs have it so? why then Antonio,
Viue esperanza, in despetto dell fato.

Enter Piero, Galeatzo, Matzagente, Forobosco, Balurdo, and Castilio, with
weapons. Piero. O, my sweet Princes, was it not bravely found?
Even there I found the note, even there it lay.
I kiss the place for joy, that there it lay.
This way he went, here let us make a stand:
I Will keep this gate my self: O gallant youth!
I Will drink carouse unto your countries health,
Enter Antonio. Even in Antonio's scull.

Bal. Lord bless us: his breath is more fearful then a Sergeants voice, when
he cries; I arrest.


Ant. Stop Antonio, keep, keep Antonio.

Piero. Where, where man, where?

Ant. Here, here: let me me pursue him down the marsh.

Pie. Hold, there is my signet, take a gundelet:
Bring me his head, his head, and by mine honor,
I Will make thee the wealthiest Mariner that breathes.

Anto. I Will sweat my blood out, till I have him safe.

Pie. Speak heartily in faith, good Mariner.
O, we will mount in triumph: soon, at night,
I Will set his head up. Lets think where.

Bal. Up on his shoulders, that is the fittest place for it. If it be not as fit
as if it were made for them; say, Balurdo, thou art a sot, an ass.


Enter Mellida in Pages attire, dancing. Pie. Sprightly, in faith. In troth he is
somewhat like
My daughter Mellida: but alas poor soul,
Her honor heels, god knows, are half so light.

Mel. Escaped I am, spite of my fathers spite.

Pie. Ho, this will warm my bosom ere I sleep.

Enter Flauia running. Fla. O my Lord, your daughter.

Pie. I, I, my daughter's safe enough, I warrant thee.
This vengeance on the boy will lengthen out
My days vnmeasuredly.
It shall be chronicled, time to come;
Piero Sforza slew Andrugio's son.

Fla. I, but my Lord, your daughter.

Pie. I, I, my good wench, she is safe enough.

Fla. O, then, my Lord, you know she is run away.

Pie. Run away, away, how run away?

Fla. She Is vanished in an instante, none knows whether.

Pie. Pursue, pursue, fly, run, post, scud away.
Feliche sing; And was not good king Solomon. Fly, call, run, row, ride, cry,
shout, hurry, haste:
Haste, hurry, shoute, cry, ride, row, run, call, fly
Backward and forward, every way about.
Maldetta fortuna ^hy condura sorta
Che faro, che diro, pur fugir tanto mal!

Cast. It Was you that struck me even now: was it not?

Fell. It was I that struck you even now.

Cast. You bastinadoed me, I take it.

Fell. I bastinadoed you, and you took it.

Cast. Faith sir, I have the richest Tobacco in the court for you; I would be
glad to make you satisfaction, if I have wronged you. I would not the Sun
should set upon your anger; give me your hand.


Fell. Content faith, so thou wilt breed no more such lies. I hate not man, but
man's lewd qualities.


ACTVS QVARTVS.
Enter Antonio, in his sea gown running. Ant. STOP, stop Antonio, stay Antonio.
Vain breath, vain breath, Antonio's lost;
He can not find himself, not seize himself.
Alas, this that you see, is not Antonio,
His spirit houers in Piero's Court,
Hurling about his agill faculties,
To apprehend the sight of Mellida:
But poor, poor soul, wanting apt instruments
To speak or see, stands dumb and blind, sad spirit,
Roul'd up in gloomie clouds as black as air,
Through which the rustie coach of Night is drawn:
It Is so, i will give you instance that it is so.
Conceit you me. As having clasp't a rose
Within my palm, the rose being taken away,
My hand retains a little breath of sweet:
So may man's trunk; his spirit slipped away,
Holds still a faint perfume of his sweet ghest.
It Is so; for when discursiue powers fl^e out,
And rome in progress, through the bounds of heaven,
The soul it self gallops along with them,
As chiefetaine of this winged troop of thought,
Whilst the dull lodge of spirit stands waste,
Until the soul return from What wast I said?
O, this is naught, but speckling melancholy.
I have been
That Morpheus tender skinp Cosen germane
Bear with me good
Mellida: clod upon clod thus fall.
Hell is beneath; yet heaven is over all.

Enter Andrugio, Lucio, Cole, and Norwod. And. Come Lucio, lets go eat: what
have thou got?
Roots, roots? alas, they are seeded, new cut up.
O, thou have wronged Nature, Lucio:
But boots not much; thou but pursu'st the world,
That cuts off virtue, fore it comes to growth,
Least it should seed, and so orerun her son,
Dull pore-blinde error. Give me water, boy.
There is no poison in it I hope, they say
That lukes in massy plate: and yet the earth
Is so infected with a general plague,
That he is most wise, that thinks there is no man fool:
Right prudent, that esteems no creature just:
Great policy the least things to mistrust.
Give me Assay How we mock greatness now!

Lu. A strong conceit is rich, so most men deem:
If not to be, it is comfort yet to seem.

And. Why man, I never was a Prince till now.
It Is not the bared pate, the bended knees,
Guilt tipstaues, Tyrrian purple, chaires of state,
Troops of pide butterflies, that flutter still
In greatness summer, that confirm a prince:
It Is not the unsavory breath of multitudes,
Showting and clapping, with confused dinne;
That makes a Prince. No Lucio, he is a king,
A true right king, that dares do aught, save wrong,
Fears nothing mortal, but to be unjust,
Who is not blown up with the flattering puffes
Of spungy Sycophants: Who stands unmoved,
Despite the iustling of opinion:
Who can enjoy himself, maugre the throng
That strive to press his quiet out of him:
Who sits upon Jove's footestoole, as I do,
Adoring, not affecting, majesty:
Whose brow is wreathed with the silver crown
Of clear content: this, Lucio, is a king.
And of this empire, every man's possessed,
That Is worth his soul.

Lu. My Lord, the Genowaies had wont to say

And. Name not the Genowaies: that very word
Vnkings me quite, makes me vile passions slave.
O, you that made open the glibbery Ice
Of vulgar favor, view Andrugio.
Was never Prince with more applause confirmed,
With louder shouts of triumph launched out
Into the surgy maine of government:
Was never Prince with more despite cast out,
Left shipwrackt, banished, on more guiltless ground.
O rotten props of the crazed multitude,
How you still double, faulter, under the lightest chance
That strains your veins. Alas, one battle lost,
Your whorish love, your drunken healths, your houts and shouts,
Your smooth God saue's, and all your devils last
That tempts our quiet, to your hell of throngs.
Spit on me Lucio, for I am turned slave:
Observe how passion domineres ore me.

Lu. No wonder, noble Lord, having lost a son,
A country, crown, and

And. I Lucio, having lost a son, a son,
A country, house, crown, son. O lares, misereri lares.
Which shall I first deplore? My son, my son,
My dear sweet boy, my dear Antonio.

Ant. Antonio?

And. I, echo, I; I mean Antonio.

Ant. Antonio, who means Antonio?

Ant. Where art? what art? know thou Antonio?

Ant. Yes.

And. Lives he?

Ant. No.

And. Where lies he dead?

Ant. Here.

And. Where?

Ant. Here.

Andr. Art thou Antonio?

Ant. I think I am.

And. Do thou but think? What, do not know thy self?

Ant. He is a fool that thinks he knows himself.

And. Upon thy faith to heaven, give thy name.

Ant. I were not worthy of Andrugio's blood,
If I denied my name's Antonio.

And. I were not worthy to be called thy father,
If I denied my name Andrugio.
And do thou live? O, let me kiss thy cheek,
And deaw thy browe with trickling drops of joy.
Now heavens will be done: for I have lived
To see my joy, my son Antonio.
Give my thy hand; now fortune do thy worst,
His blood, that lapt thy spirit in the womb,
Thus (in his love) will make his arms thy tomb.

Ant. Bless not the body with your twining arms,
Which is accursed of heaven. O, what black sin
Has bin committed by our ancient house,
Whose scalding vengeance lights upon our heads,
That thus the world, and fortune casts us out,
As loathed objects, ruins branded slaves.

And. Do not expostulate the heavens will:
But, O, remember to forget thy self:
Forget remembrance what thou once have bin.
Come, creep with me from out this open air.
Even trees have tongues, and will betray our life.
I am a raising of our house, my boy:
Which fortune will not envy, it is so mean,
And like the world (all dirt) there shall thou rippe
The inwards of thy fortunes, in mine ears,
Whilst I sit weeping, blind with passions tears:
Then i will begin, and we will such order keep,
That one shall still tell greefes, the other weep.

Exit Andrugio, leaving Antonio, and his Page. Ant. I Will follow you. Boy, pree
thee stay a little.
Thou have had a good voice, if this cold marshe,
Wherein we lurk, have not corrupted it.
Enter Mellida, standing out of sight, in her Pages suite. I pree thee sing,
but sir (mark you me)
Let each nore breath the heart of passion,
The sad extracture of extremest grief.
Make me a strain; speak, groaning like a bell,
That towles departing souls.
Breath me a point that may enforce me weep,
To wring my hands, to break my cursed breast,
Rave, and exclaim, lie groueling on the earth,
Straight start up frantic, crying, Mellida.
Sing but, Antonio has lost Mellida,
And thou shall see me (like a man possessed)
Howl out such passion, that even this brinish marsh
Will squease out tears, from out his spungy cheeks,
The rocks even groan, and
Pree thee, pree thee sing:
Or I shall nere ha done when I am in.
It Is harder for me end, then to begin.
The boy runs a note, Antonio breaks it. For look thee boy, my grief that
has no end,
I may begin to plain, but pree thee sing.

CANTANT. Mell. Heaven keep you sir.

An. Heaven keep you from me, sir.

Mell. I must be acquainted with you, sir.

Ant. Wherefore? Art thou infected with misery,
Seared with the anguish of calamity?
Art thou true sorrow, hearty grief, can weep?
I am not for thee if thou can not rave,
Antonio falls on the ground. Fall flat on the ground, and thus exclaim on
heaven;
O trifling Nature, why enspiredst thou breath

Mell. Stay sir, I think you named Mellida.

Ant. Know thou Mellida?

Mel. Yes.

Ant. Have thou seen Mellida?

Mell. Yes.

Ant. Then have thou seen the glory of her sex,
The music of Nature, the vnequall'd luster
Of unmatched excellence, the united sweet
Of heavens graces, the most adored beauty,
That ever struck amazement in the world.

Mell. You seem to love her.

Ant. With my very soul.

Mell. Shele not requite it: all her love is fixed
Upon a gallant, on Antonio,
The Duke of Genoas son. I was her Page:
And often as I waited, she would sigh;
O, dear Antonio; and to strengthen thought,
Would clip my neck, and kiss, and kiss me thus.
Therefore leave loving her: fa, faith me thinks,
Her beauty is not half so rauishing
As you discourse of; she has a freckled face,
A low forehead, and a lumpish eye.

Ant. O heaven, that I should hear such blasphemy.
Boy, rogue, thou lie, and
Spauento dell mio core dolce Mellida,
Di graua morte restor^ vero dolce Mellida,
Celesta saluatrice sovrana Mellida
Del mio sperar; trofeo vero Mellida.

Mel. Diletta and soaue anima mia Antonio,
Godeuole belezza cortese Antonio.
Signior mio and virginal amore bell' Antonio
Gusto delli mei sensi, car' Antonio.

Ant. O suamisce il cor in un soaue baccio,

Mel. Murono i sensi nel desiato dessio:

Ant. Nel Cielo puo lesser belta pia chiara.

Mel. Nel mondo pol esser belta pia chiara?

Ant. Dammi un baccio da quella bocca beata,
Bassiammi, coglier l' aur a odorata
Che in sua neggia in quello dolce labra.

Mel. Dammi pimpero del tuo gradit' amore
Che beam, cosempiterno honor,
Cosi, cosimi conuerra morir.
Good sweet, scout ore the marsh: for my heart trembls
At every little breath that strikes my ear,
When thou returnest: and i will discourse
How I deceived the Court: then thou shall tell
How thou escapt'st the watch: we will point our speech
With amorous kissing, kissing co^maes, and even suck
The liquid breath from out each others lips.

Ant. Dull clod, no man but such sweeet favor clips.
I go, and yet my panting blood persuades me stay.
Turn coward in her sight? away, away.
I think confusion of Babell is fallen upon these lovers, that they change
their language, but I fear me, my master having but fained the person of a
woman, has got their unfeigned imperfection, and is grown double tongued: as
for Mellida, she were no woman, if she could not yield strange language. But
howsoever, if I should sit in judgment, it is an error easier to be pardoned by
the auditors, then excused by the authors; and yet some private respect may
rebate the edge of the keener censure.


Enter Piero, Castilio, Matzagente, Forobosco, Feliche, Galeatzo, Balurdo, and
his Page, at another door. Pie. This way she took: search, my sweet gentlemen.
How now Balurdo, can thou meet with any body?


Bal. As I am true gentleman, I made my horse sweat, that he has nere a dry
thread on him: and I can meet with no living creature, but men and beasts, In
good sadness, I would have sworn I had seen Mellida even now: for I saw a
thing stir under a hedge, and I peep't, and I spyed a thing: and I peer'd,
and I tweerd underneath: and truly a right wise man might have been deceived:
for it was


Pie. What, in the name of heaven?

Bal. A dun cow.

Fell. Sh'ad nere a kettle on her head?

Pie. Boy, did thou see a young Lady pass this way?

Gal. Why speak you not?

Bal. Gods neakes, proud elfe, give the Duke rouerence, stand bare with a

Whogh! heavens bless me: Mellida, Mellida.


Pie. Where man, where?

Balur. Turned man, turned man: women wear the breaches, lo here,


Pie. Light and vnduteous! kneel not, peevish elfe,
Speak not, entreat not, shame unto my house,
Curse to my honor. Where Is Antonio?
Thou traitresse to my hate, what is he shipped
For England now? well whimpering harlot, hence.

Mell. Good father

Pie. Good me no goods. See thou that sprightly youth? ere thou can term
to morrow morning old, thou shall call him thy husband, Lord and love.


Mel. Ay me.

Pie. Blirt on your ay mees, guard her safely hence.
Drag her away, i will be your guard to night.
Young Prince, mount up your spirits, and prepare
To solemnize your Nuptials eve with popme.

Gal. The time is scant: now nimble wits appear:
Phoebus begins gleame, the welkin's clear.

Exeunt all, but Balurdo and his Page. Bal. Now nimble wits appear: i will my
self appear,
Balurdo's self, that in quick wit does surpass,
Will show the substance of a complete

Dil. Ass, ass.

Bal. I Will mount my courser, and most gallantly prick

Dil. Gallantly prick is too long, and stands hardly in the verse, sir.


Bal. I Will speak pure rhyme, and will so bravely pranke it, that i will toss love
like a pranke, pranke it: a rhyme for pranke it?


Dil. Blankit.


Bal. That i will toss love, like a dog in a blanket: ha ha, in deed law. I
think, ha ha; I think ha ha, I think I shall tickle the Muses. And I strike
it not dead, say, Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.


Dil. Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.


Enter Andrugio and Antonio wreathed together, Lucio. And. Now, come united
force of chap-falne death:
Come, power of fretting anguish, leave distress.
O, thus infoulded, we have breasts of proof,
Against all the venomed stings of misery.

Ant: Father, now I have an antidote,
Against all the poison that the world can breath.
My Mellida, my Mellida does bless
This bleak waste with her presence. How now boy,
Why do thou weep? alas, where is Mellida?

Ant. Ay me, my Lord.

And. A sodden horror does invade my blood,
My sinews tremble, and my panting heart
Scuds round about my bosom so go out,
Dreading the assailant, horrid passion.
O, be no tyrant, kill me with one blow.
Speak quickly, briefly boy.

Pa. Her father found, and seized her, she is gone.

And. Son, heat thy blood, be not frose up with grief.
Courage, sweet boy, sink not beneath the weight
Of crushing mischief. O where is thy dantlesse heart
Thy fathers spirit! I renounce thy blood,
If thou forsake thy valor.

Lu. See how his grief speaks in his flow-pac't steps:
Alas, it is more than he can utter, let him go.
Dumb solitary path best sureth woe.

And. Give me my arms, my armor Lucio.

Lu. Dear Lord, what means this rage, when lacking use
Scarce safes your life, will you in armor rise?

And. Fortune fears valor, presses cowardice.

Lu. Then valor gets applause, when it has place,
And means to blaze it.

And. Nunquam potest non esse.

Lu. Patience, my Lord, may bring your ils some end.

And. What patience, friend, can ruined hopes atte^d?
Come, let me die like old Andrugio:
Worthy my birth. O blood-true-honour'd graves
Are far more blessed then base life of slaves. Exeunt.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
Enter Balurdo, a Painter with two pictures, and Dildo. Bal. AND are you a
painter sir, can you draw, can you draw?


Pay. Yes sir.


Ba. Indeed law? now so can my fathers forehore horse. And are these the
workmanshippe of your hands?


Pain. I did lymne them.


Bal. Lymne them? a good word, lymne them: whose picture is this? Anno Domini
1599. Believe me, master Anno Domini was of a good settled age when you lymn'd
him. 1599. years old? Lets see the other. Etatis suae 24. Bir Lady he is
somewhat younger. Belike master Etatis suae was Anno Dominies son.


Pa. Is not your master a


Dil. He has a little procliuitie to him


Pa. Procliuitie, good youth? I thank you for your courtly procliuitie.


Bal. Approach good sir. I did send for you to draw me a devise, an Imprezza,
by Sinecdoche a Mott. By Phoebus crymson taffata mantle, I think I speak as
melodiously, look you sir, how think you ont? I would have you paint me, for
my device, a good fat leg of ewe mutton, swimming in stewde broth of plummes
(boy keele your mouth, it runs over) and the word shall be; Hold my dish,
whilst I spill my pottage. Sure, in my conscience, twould be the most sweet
device, now.


Pa. Twould sent of kitchin-stuffe too much.


Bal. Gods neakes, now I remember me, I ha the rarest devise in my head that
ever breathed. Can you paint me a driueling reeling song, and let the word be,
Vh.


Pain. A belch.


Bal. O, no no: Vh, paint me vh, or nothing.


Pay. It can not be done sir, but by a seeming kind of drunkenness.


Bal. No? well, let me have a good maff^e ring, with your own poesy graven in
it, that must sing a small trebble, word for word, thus; And if you will my
true lover be,

Come follow me to the green wodde.


Pa. O Lord, sir, I can not make a picture sing.

B. Why? z'lid, I have seen painted things sing as sweet:
But I hau't will tickle it, for a conceit in faith.

Enter Feliche, and Alberto. Alb. O dear Feliche, give me thy device.
How shall I purchase love of Rossaline?

Fell. S'will, flatter her soundly.

Alb. Her love is such, I can not flatter her:
Bu with my utmost vehemence of speech,
I have adored her beauties.

Fell. Have writ good moving unaffected rimes to her.


Alb. O, yes, Feliche, but she scorns my writ.

Fell. Have thou presented her with sumptuous gifts?

Alb. Alas, my fortunes are too weak to offer them.

Fell. O, then I have it, I Will tell thee what to do.

Alb. What, good Feliche?

Fell. Go and hang thy self, I say, go hang thy self,
If that thou can not give, go hang thy self:
I Will rhyme thee dead, or verse thee to the rope.
How think thou of a Poet that sung thus;
Munera sola pacant, sola addunt munera formam:
Munere solicites Pallada, Cypris erit.
Munera, munera.

Alb. I Will go and breath my woes unto the rocks,
And spend my grief upon the deafest seas.
I Will weep my passion to the senseless trees,
And load most solitary air with plaints.
For wods, trees, sea, or rocky Appenine,
Is not so ruthlesse as my Rossaline.
Farewell dear friend, expect no more of me,
Here ends my part, in this loves Comedy.
Exit Alb.
Exit Paynter. Fell. Now master Balurdo, whether are you going, ha?


Bal. Signior Feliche, how do you faith, and by my troth, how do you?


Fell. Whether art thou going, bully?

Bal. And as heaven help me, how do you?
How, do you in faith he?

Fell. Whether art going man?

Bal. O god, to the Court, i will be willing to give you grace and good
countnance, if I may but see you in the presence.


Fell. O to court? farewell.


Bal. If you see one in a yellow taffata dubblet, cut upon carnation valor, a
green hat, a blewe pair of velvet hose, a gilt rapier, and an orange ^^^ny
pair of worsted silk stockings, that's I, that's I.


Fell. Very good, farewell.


Bal. Ho, you shall know me as easily, I ha bought me a new green feather
with a red sprig, you shall see my wrought shirt hang out at my breeches, you
shall know me.


Fell. Very good, very good, farewell.


Ball. Marry in the mask twill be somewhat hard. But if you hear any body
speak so wittily, that he makes all the room laugh; that is I, that is I.
Farewell good Signior.


Enter Forobosco, Castilio, a boy carrying a gilt harp: Piero, Mellida in night
apparel, Rossaline, Flauia, two Pages. Pier. Advance the musiques prize, now
capring wits,
Rise to your highest mount; let choice delight
Garland the browe of this tryumphant night.
Sfoote, a sits like Lucifer himself.

Rossa. Good sweet Duke, first let their voices, strain for musicks price.
Give me the golden harp: faith with your favor, i will be vmperesse.


Pi. Sweet niece content: boys clear your voice and sing.


1. CANTAT. Rossa. By this gould, I had rather have a servant with a short
nose, and a thin hair, then have such a high stretched minikin voice.


Pie. Fair niece, your reason?


Ross. By the sweet of love, I should fear extremely that he were an Eunuch.


Cast. Spark spirit, how like you his voice?

Ross. Spark spirit, how like you his voice?
So help me, youth, thy voice squeakes like a dry cork shoe: come, come; lets
hear the next.


2. CANTAT. Pie. Trust me, a good strong mean, Well sung my boy.


Enter Balurdo. Bal. Hold, hold, hold: are ye blind, could you not see my
voice coming for the harp. And I knock not division on the head, take hence
the harp, make me a slip, and let me go but for nine pence. Sir Mark,
strike up for master Balurdo.


3. CANTAT. Judgment gentlemen, judgment. Wast not above line?
I appeal to your mouths that heard my song.
Do me right, and dub me knight Balurdo.
Ros. Kneel down, and i will dub thee knight of the golden harp.


Ba. Indeed law, do, and i will make you Lady of the silver fiddlestick,


Ross. Come, kneel, kneel.


Enter a Page to Balurdo, Bal. My troth, I thank you, it has never a whistle
in it.


To. Naie, good sweet cuz raise up your drooping eyes, and I were at the point
of To have and to hold, from this day forward, I would be ashamed to look thus
lumpish. What my pretty Cuz, it is but the loss of an od maidenhead: shall's
dance? thou art so sad, hark in mine ear. I was about to say, but i will
forbear.


Ba. I come, I come, more then most hunny-suckle sweet Ladies, pine not for my
presence, i will return in pomp. Well spoke sir Ieffrey Balurdo. As I am a true
knight, I feel honorable eloquence begin to grope me already.

Exit.
Pie. Faith, mad niece, I wonder when thou will marry?


Rossa. Faith, kind uncle, when men abandon ielosy, forsake taking of Tobacco,
and cease to wear their beardes so rudely long. Oh, to have a husband with a
mouth continually smoking, with a bush of furs on the ridge of his chinne,
ready still to slop into his foming chaps; ah, it is more than most intolerable.


Pier. Nay faith, sweet niece, I was mighty strong in thought we should have
shut up night with an old Comedy: the Prince of Millane shall have Mellida,
and thou should have


Ros. No body, good sweet uncle. I tell you, sir, I have 39. servants, and my
munkey that makes the fortieth. Now I love al of them lightly for something,
but affect none of them seriously for any thing. One's a passionate fool, and
he flatters me above belief: the second's a teastie ape, and he railes at
me beyond reason: the third's as grave as some Censor, and he strokes up his
mustachoes three times, and makes six plots of set faces, before he speaks one
wise word: the fourth's as dry, as the burre of an heartichoke; the fifth
paints, and has always a good color for what he speaks: the sixth


Pie. Stay, stay, sweet niece, what makes you thus suspect young gallants worth.


Ross. Oh, when I see one were a perewig, I dread his hair; another wallowe
in a great sloppe, I mistrust the proportion of his thigh; and wears a ruffled
boot, I fear the fashion of his leg. Thus, something in each thing, one
trick in every thing makes me mistrust imperfection in all parts; and there is
the full point of my addiction.


The Cornets sound a cynet. Enter Galeatzo, Matzagente, and Balurdo in maskery.
Pier. The roome's too scant: boys, stand in there, close.

Mel. In faith, fair sir, I am too sad to dance.

Pie. How Is that, how is that? too sad? By heaven dance,
And grace him to, or, go to, I say no more.

Mell. A burning glass, the word splendente Phoebo?
It Is too curious, I conceit it not.

Gal. Faith, i will tell thee. I Will no longer burn, then you will shine and smile upon
my love. For look ye fairest, by your pure sweets,

I do not dote upon your excellence.
And faith, unless you shed your brightest beams
Of sunny favor, and acceptiue grace
Upon my tender love, I do not burn:
Marry but shine, and i will reflect your beams, with fervent ardor. Faith I would
be loath to flatter thee fair soul, because I love, not dote, court like thy
husband; which thy father swears, to morrow morn I must be. This is all, and
now from henceforth, trust me Mellida, I Will not speak one wise word to thee
more.


Mell. I trust ye.


Gal. By my troth, I Will speak pure fool to thee now.


Mel. You will speak the liker your self.


Gal. Good faith, I Will accept of the cockescombe, so you will not refuse the
babble.


Mel. Nay good sweet, keep them both, I am enamored of neither.


Gal. Go to, I must take you down for this. Lend me your ear.


Ros. A glowe worm, the word? Splendescit tantum tenebris.


Matz. O, Lady, the glowe worm figurates my valor: which shines brightest
in most dark, dismal and horrid atchieuements.


Ross. Or rather, your glowe worm represents your wit, which only seems to
have fire in it, though indeed it is but an ignis fatuus, and shines only in the
dark dead night of fools admiration.


Matz. Lady, my wit has spurs, if it wete disposed to ride you.


Ross. Faith sir, your wits spurs have but walking rowels; dull, blunt, they
will not draw blood: the gentlemen vshers may admit them the Presence, for
any wrong they can do to Ladies.


Bal. Truly, I have strained a note above Ela, for a devise; look you, it is a
fair ruled singing book: the word, Perfect, if it were pricked.


Fla. Though you are mask't, I can guess who you are by your wit. You are not
the exquisite Balurdo, the most rarely shaped Balurdo.


Ba. Who, I? No I am not sir Ieffrey Balurdo. I am not as well known by my
wit, as an alehouse by a red lattice. I am not worthy to love and be beloved of
Flauia.


Fla. I will not scorn to favor such good parts, as are applauded in your
rarest self.


Bal. Truly, you speak wisely, and like a Iantlewoman of fourteen years of
age. You know the stone called lapis; the nearer it comes to the fire, the
hotter it is: and the bird, which the Geometricians call Auis, the farther it is
from the earth, the nearer it is to the heaven: and love, the nigher it is to
the flame, the more remote (there is a word, remote) the more remote it is from
the frost, Your wit is quick, a little thing pleases a young Lady, and a
small favor contenteth an old Courtier; and so, sweet mistress I trusse my
codpeece point.


Enter Feliche. Pier. What might import this flourish? bring us word.


Fell. Stand away: here is such a company of flibotes, hulling about this
galleasse of greatness, that there is no boarding him.

Do you hear yon thing called, Duke?


Pie. How now blunt Feliche, what is the news?


Fell. Yonder Is a knight, has brought Andrugio's head, and craves admittance to
your chair of state.


Cornets sound a Cynet: enter Andrugio in armor. Pie. Conduct him with
attendance sumptuous,
Sound all the pleasing instruments of joy:
Make triumph, stand on tiptoe whilst we meet:
O sight most gracious, O revenge most sweet!

And. We vow, by the honor of our birth, to recompense any man that brngeth
Andrugio's head, with twenty thousand double Pistolets, and the endeering to
our choysest love.


Pie. We still with most unmoved resolved confirm
Our large munificence: and here breath
A sad and solemn protestation:
When I recall this vow, O, let our house
Be even commanded, staind, and trampled on,
As worthless rubbish of nobility.

And. Then, here, Piero, is Andrugios head,
Royally casked in a helm of steel:
Give me thy love, and take it. My dauntlesse soul
Has that unbounded vigor in his spirits,
That it can bear more rank indignity,
With less impatience, then thy cancred hate
Can sting and venom his untainted worth,
With the most viperous sound of malice. Strike,
O, let no glimse of honor light thy thoughts,
If there be any heat of royal breath
Creeping in thy veins, O stifle it.
Be still thy self, bloody and treacherous.
Fame not thy house with an admired act
Of princely pity. Piero, I am come,
To soil thy house with an eternal blot
Of savage cruelty; strike, or bid me strike.
I pray my death; that thy nere dying shame
Might live immortal to posterity.
Come, be a princely hangman, stop my breath.
O dread thou shame, no more then I dread death.

Pie. We are amazed, our royal spirits numm'd,
In stiff astonished wonder at thy prowess,
Most mighty, valiant, and high towering heart.
We blush, and turn our hate upon our selves,
For hating such an vnpeer'd excellence.
I joy my state: him whom I loathed before,
That now I honor, love; nay more, adore.
The still Flutes sound a mournful Cynet. Enter a Cofin. But stay: what
tragic spectacle appears,
Whose body bear you in that mournful hearse?

Lu. The breathless trunk of young Antonio.


Mell. Antonio (aye me) my Lord, my love, my


And. Sweet precious issue of most honored blood,
Rich hope, ripe virtue, O untimely loss.
Come hither friend. Pree thee do not weep:
Why, I am glad he is dead, he shall not see
His fathers vanquished, by his enemy.
Even in princely honor, nay pree thee speak.
How died the wretched boy?

Lu. My Lord

And. I hope he dyed yet like my son, in faith.

Lu. Alas, my Lord

And. He died vnforst, I trust, and valiantly.

Lu. Poor gentleman, being

And. Did his hand shake, or his eye look dull,
His thoughts reele, fearful when he struck the stroke?
And if they did, I Will rend them out the hearse,
Rip up his cearecloth, mangle his bleake face;
That when he comes to heaven, the powers divine
Shall nere take notice that he was my son.
I Will quite disclaim his birth: nay pree thee speak:
And twere not hoopt with steel, my breast would break.

Mel. O that my spirit in a sigh could mount,
Into the Sphere, where thy sweet soul does rest.

Pie. O that my tears, bedeawing thy wan cheek,
Could make new spirit sprout in thy could blood.

Bal* Verily, he looks as pitifully, as a poor John: as
I am true knight, I could weep like a stoned horse.

And. Villain, it is thou have murdered my son.
Thy unrelenting spirit (thou black dog,
That took'st no passion of his fatal love)
Has forced him give his life untimely end.

Pie. Oh that my life, her love, my dearest blood
Would but redeem one minute of his breath.

Ant. I seize that breath. Stand not amazed, great states:
I rise from death, that never lived till now.
Piero, keep thy vow, and I enjoy
More unexpressed height of happiness,
Then power of thought can reach: if not, lo here
There stands my toumbe, and here a pleasing stage:
Most wished spectators of my Tragedy,
To this end have I feigned, that her fair eye,
For whom I lived, might bless me ere I die.
Mell, Can breath depaint my vnco^ceiued thoughts?
Can words describe my infinite delight,
Of seeing thee, my Lord Antonio?
O no; conceit, breath, passion, words be dumb,
Whilst I instill the deawe of my sweet bliss,
In the soft pressure of a melting kiss;
Sic, sic iuuat ire sub vmbras.

Pie. Fair son (now I Will be proud to call thee son)
Enjoy me thus; my very breast is thine:
Possess me freely, I am wholly thine.

Ant* Dear father*


And. Sweet son, sweet son; I can speak no more:
My joys passion flows above the shore,
And choakes the current of my speech.

Pie. Young Florence prince, to you my lips must beg,
For a remittance of your interest.

Gal. In your fair daughter, with all my thought,
So help me faith, the naked truth I Will unfold;
He that was nere hot, will soon be cold.

Pie. No man else makes claim unto her.

Matz. The valiant speak truth in brief: no

Bal. Truly, for sir Ieffrey Balurdo, he disclaimes to have had any thing in
her,


Pie. Then here I give her to Antonio.
Royal, valiant, most respected prince,
Let Us clippe our hands; I Will thus observe my vow;
I promised twenty thousand double Pistolets,
With the indeering to my dearest love,
To him that brought thy head; thine be the gold,
To solemnize our houses unity:
My love be thine, the all I have be thine.
Fill us fresh wine, the form we will take by this:
We Will drink a health, while they two sip a kiss.
Now, there remains no discord that can sound
Harsh accents to the ear of our accord:
So please your niece to match.

Ross. Troth uncle, when my sweet faced cuz has told me how she likes the
thing, called wedlock; may be I Will take a survey of the checkroll of my
servants; and he that has the best parts of, I Will prick him down for my
husband.


Bal. For passion of love now, remember me to my mistress, Lady Rossaline,
when she is pricking down the good parts of her servants. As I am true knight,
I grow stiff: I shall carry it.


Pie. I will.
Sound Lidian wires, once make a pleasing note,
On Nectar streams of your sweet airs, to flote.

Ant. Here ends the comic crosses of true love:
Oh may the passage most succesfull prove.

FINIS.
Epilogus.
GEntlemen, though I remain an armed Epilogue, I stand not as a peremptory
chalenger of desert, either for him that composed the Comedy, or for us that
acted it: but a most submissiue supplyant for both. What imperfection you have
seen in us, leave with us, and we will amend it; what has pleased you, take
with you, and cherish it. You shall not be more ready to embrace any thing
commendable, then we will endeavor to amend all things reproueable. What we
are, is by your favor. What we shall be, rests all in your applausiue
encouragements.

Exit.
