A pleasant new Nosegaye, full of many godly and sweet flowers, lately
gathered by Theodore Basille.

Eccle. 24. As the Uyne have I brought forth fruit of a sweet sauoure, and
my flowers are as the fruytes of honor and rytches.

The Nosegaye speaks.
What meanest thou my friend to gather
Flowers, which sone perysh and decay,
Their savors will not last eue^
As by experience se thou may.
For a little time they seem pleasant
But straight do they vanysh away,
Like things, which to vanite grant
As by experience se thou may
Leave therefore things transitory
And enhalse godly things always,
Which shall auaunce the unto glory
As by experience se thou may.
Receive me into thy bosom
If thou doste desire a nosegaye,
My flowers are full of delectacion
As by experience se thou may.
To know thy self thou may learn here
God and thy king truly to obey*
And to thy neighbor to be dear
As by experience se thou may.
Take me nowd unto the therefore
Bear me in thy bosom always,
Much pleasure have I for the in store
As by experience se thou may*
To the right worshypful master George Whetenhall Esquyer, Thodore Basille
wissheth continual health and prosperous felicite.
ALthough we have most urgent and weyghty causes, yea and those i^numerable
to extol, magnify, commend and praise the exceadynge goodness and bounteous
liberalite of our most merciful father, if we perpend, pe^sitate, weyghe,
ponder and consider his inestimable benefits, which he freely and without our
deseruynge daily gives unto us miserable creatures, yet if we weyghe all
things in a just balaunce, we shall easily and without any difficulte
perceive, y^ we are most bound to celebrate and praise his most blyssed name
for ye restorynge of his holy word at this time, brought to pass by his true
anointed Henry our most redoubted King, as by another Josias, whose graces
most excellent majesty that LORD of powers might prosper in all his divine
affairs and godly enterprises. For before God restored to the world the
Gospel and joyful tidings of his derely beloved son our LORD and Savior
Jesus Christ, incredulite as chief rulare reigned in our hertes, Hypocrisye
as a vain glorious Empress, bare dominion, Supersticio^, Idolatry, false
sects, men's tradicions, confidence reposed in humayne inuencions,
Pylgrimages, Offringes, Bulls, Pardonnes, dispensacions, Masses of Scala celi,
marchaundyse for merytes and works, byenge and selling of the divine
mysteries, with an whole sea of euelles mo, had creapte in, unto ye great
perturbacion and disquietnes of ye holy catholyke church, as I may pass over
the blind ignorancy and ygnorant blyndenes, into the which by this means we
were cast and tombled. How can it otherwise be? If the light of Gods word be
obscured extincte or quenched, Psalm. cxviii
which only is the lantern to our feet, and a light to our pathwayes, what
marvel is it, though the fearce and outerageous floudes of Idolatry and all
kind of supersticio^ break in and invade the bounds of christianite, yea and
ouerflowe the^. For as Faith, Hope Charity, Peace, Mercy, Patience, long
sufferynge, humilite, sobriety justice, spiritual liberte, obedience toward
the high powers, and all goodness reygneth, where the LORDS word bears rule,
so in like manner, where yt is expulsed, banysshed and exiled, Incredulite,
hatred, envy covetousness, ve^gea^ce, contencion, Glotony, droncke^nes,
rapacite, immoderate lusts, unclean affectes, carnal liberte, disobedience
i^surreccion, arroga^cy, pride, ambicio^, crudelite, ma^slaughter, theft,
false witness, hypocrisy, ignorance, blyndnes, sects, Heresye, and all that is
contrary to the commaundeme nt and will of God, bears dominion, and has
preeminence, as Salomo^ says, Prouer. xix
Where knowledge is not, there is no goodness for y^ soul. Again, when the
preaching of Gods word ^ayleth, Prou. xxix
the people peryshe and run clean out of order. Therefore it is written by
the Prophet, Esaie. viii.
make have to the law and witness. If they speak not according to this word,
they shall not have the morning light, that is to say, the true knowledge of
God. Mark. xii.
Rebuked not Christ ye Saduces, because they were ignorant in the holy
Scriptures, affyrming that they were deceived for lack of the knoweledge of
them? Ye are deceived, says he, because ye know not ye scriptures. Therefore in
ye gospel of John, Joan. v.
he exhorts al men to search ye scriptures, saye^g, search ye ye scriptures,
for they are they ye bear witness of me. And ye Psalmograph calls the^
blissed, Psalm. cxviii and.i.
which search ye testimonies of the LORD and meditate in his law both both
day and night The word of God must needs be an excellent and precious
treasure, saying it is the power of GOD unto salvation for so many as believe,
Roma. i. i. Tim. iiii.
saying also it is profitable to teach, to i^proue, to amend, and to
instruct, in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and prepared
to all good works. Who is able to express, what a precious relic and high
treasure the word of God is? Uerely it is that treasure, whereof Christ
speaks in the Gospel, Math. xii^
that lygheth hydden in the field, which, when a man once fyndethe, for joy
thereof he goes and sells all that he has, and byethe that field. And it is
no less treasure to the soul, than the corporal eyes are to the body, as ye
Psalmographe testifies: Thy word, Psalm. cxviii
O LORD, is a lantern to my fete, and a light to my pathewayes. For as that
man, that is depryued of his corporal sight, knows not how nor where to walk,
so like wise, he^ that wants the light of Gods word sees nothing, and
therefore walks he not aright but wa^dreth abroad like a sheep dispersed and
destitute of a shepparde. Matthew. ix
But as he that has the true and perfect sight of the eyes sto^blethe not,
but walks at all times without danger, so in like manner he ye is endued by
Christ's spirit with the light of y^ holy Scriptures wa^dreth not from that true
way, which says of him self, Joan. xiiii.
I am the way, the truethe and the life, but always is preserved, that he
walks continually in the kings high way, declynyng neither on the right
hand or on ye lift hand. He is not carried about with strau^g doctrine. Deuteronomy.
xii. Hebre. xiii. Math. xvi. Math. vii. Luke. vi.
His faith is bylte on a sure rock, therefore abides he fyrme, immutable,
steadfast, sure and constant, what so ever kind of te^peste assaylethe him.
The gates of hell can not prevail against him. Satan with all his army are not
able once to abduce and remove him from the true way. ii. Petre. i.
For the light of Gods word is continually before his eyes, where unto he
gives diligent attendance, which also he follows earnestly in all his
iourneyes, and therefore must he needs walk the true way, and never err. If
he be blyssed, fortunate and happy that has the natural light of his body,
how much more blyssed and heavenly at ease is he, that is illumined with ye
light of the LORDS word? whereof ye holy king David haui^ge experience prays
on this manner, open mine eyes, Psalm. cxviii
and I shall consider ye marvelous things of thy law. To walk in this light,
Christ exhorts us, saying, walk while ye have light, Joan. xii.
unless ye darkness come on you. He that walkethe in darkness, wotteth not
whither he gothe. While ye have light, believe on the light, that ye may be
the children of light. So many as be of God, love this light of y^ LORDS
word, and desire with all their heart to walk i^ it. But they that be of
Satan, hate it, and refuse to walk in it. Why so? Actum. vii.
Uerely for they are beast like minded, styffe necked, and in all things
resist the holy Ghost. The light they hate, be it never so pleasant and
wholesome, but the darkness they enhalse, love, kiss and kull, be it never so
tedious and horrible. Therefore shall they receive y^ greater da^nacion, as
Christ witnesses sayeng^, this is the condemnacion that light came into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light. For their works were euel.
Joan. iii.
Every one that does evil, hate the the light, neither comes he to ye light,
unless his works should be reproved. O how blessed are they, to whom it is
given to walk in this light. Again, how miserable, wretched and unhappy are
they, y^ spear their eyes at the coming of this confortable light, and will
not only not walk in it the^ selves, but also labor to the vttermooste of
their power to obscure and quench it, that it may appear and shine to none
at all. These are those people, Esaie. xxx.
which, as the Prophet says, provoke God to anger. These are the lyenge and
unfaithful children. Theyse are the children that will not hear the law of
the LORD. These are they, which say to them that se, se not, and to them that
look, look not for us those things that are right. Speak unto us pleasant
things, preach unto us tales of Robyn hood, take away from us the right way,
go out of the pathe, and away with that holy one of Israel from our face.
These are they, which hate him, Amos. v.
that reproves the^ openly, and abhore him that tells the truethe plainly.
These are they, which call evil good, Esaie. v.
and good evil, darkness light, and light darkness. bitter sweet, and sweet
bitter. These are they which are wise in their own eyes, and stand well in
their own co^ceate. But against all such as contemn the holy scriptures and
cast away the law of their LORD God, willing neither to enter the^ selves,
nor yet suffryng other, christ intonateth and tho^derethe on this manner, Luke.
xii.
woe be to you lawers, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye have not
only not entered in, but ye have also forbidden them that entend to enter. But
without doubt they shall no le^ger prevail. Job. xv. Esaie. xi. Daniel. viii
ii. These. ii.
For ye day of the LORD is at hand when he shall break Satan's head and
destroy both him and all his ministers with the breath of his mouth For he
will no longer sufferre this great wickedness and high abhominacion. He will be
known for ye God and Savior alone. He is that LORD which alone will be
exalted, Esaie. ii.
and all Idolles shall be utterly broken on pieces. He is that God, which will
no longer suffer his glory to be attributed and given to other. Esaie. xiii.
Jacob. ii.
He is ye lawer, which will expulse the darkenesses of men's tradicions, that
fight with his infallible verite, and bring in the glorious light of his
most holy word. To be short, he will detecte and overthrow all the Idols,
that obscure his glory, and set up his blyssed name to be praised and
magnyefyed for ever and ever. So be it.

Of this thing have we experience even at this time, in ye which that LORD
of puissa^ce has most puissantly by his derely beloved servant Henry our
most virtuous and godly King, subverted, topledde down, and overthrown a
great part of Antechristes kyngedome, so that by his divine polecy and godly
enterprise, Apoca. xvii.
that great whore of Babylon, the mother of all whore dome and abhominacions of
the earth, has lost her chief glory and renome, and is now become so vile,
that she is even made the habitacion of diuelles, and the hold of all foul
spirits and a cage of all unclean and hateful birds. Apoca. xviii
So that no man now will once by any of her m^rchaundyse. And without doubt
the time is at hand, Esaie. xii. Iere. xv. Apoca. xiiii. Psalm. cx^iiii* Psalm.
cxvi.
that Babylon shall have such a faull, that it shall not be able after this at
onye time to be repared. For the mouth of the LORD has spoken it, which is
faithful in all his words, and whose truth abides for ever and ever.
Neither ca^ this prophecy of Christ be made frustrate by any humayne polecy:
Math. xv.
Every plant, that my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by
ye roots. Who reioysethe not to hear these things? yea who triumphs not to
se the^? Blyssed are we to whom it has chaunsed not only to hear these
things ioyefully, but also to se them pleasauntly, and which hereafter shall
undoubtedly se such things mo, as shall may be able to provoke onye faythefull
heart seriouslye to rejoice. Uerelye although we be occasioned diverse ways to
give God immortal thanks for diverse gifts, yet me think we are most highly
bound to be tha^kefull for ye re^^^^ucio^ of his most holy word in these our
days. And woe worth them, that be unthankful in this behalf, except they
repent and amend.

iii. Reg. iii. ii. Para. ix.
The Scriptures show how yt in ye time of king Solomon, there was so great
ple^te of silver at Jerusalem, as there was of stones in the streets. What
carnal manne would not have delyghted to inhabit himself there? Yet verily
in my judgment we do far excel ye glorious abundans of Solomon and all his
in mundane treasures, to whom it is given not only to florysh with worldely
goods, but also with the incomparable treasures of the spirit. So that our
condition at this present does not a little excede and pass the state of those
Israelites, which lived so gloriously under the empire and dominion of Solomon.
Certes as concerning my self, let God be but a little merciful unto me, if I
had not rather chose to live under this our most Christen king with that
little nothing that I have, and to enjoy the benefyte of Gods word, than to
li^e under Salomo^, if he were now alive, and there to abunde with all
affluence and plente of all worldly rytches. I am sufficiently rytch, so long
as I have ye rytches of Gods word with me. And I doubt not, but that of this
opinion are so many as tender the glory of God and the health of their own
souls. Now seeing ye this incomparable treasure and inestimable benefit of
Gods word, is so bounteously given unto us, let us all together consent with one
mind to co^serue and maintain this most precious Jewel, that we lose it not
hereafter through our own necligence. Let us not hinder the^ that go about to
repare and byld again the Temple of our LORD god, but rather pray for the^,
that they may hau^ prosperous success, and bring their labors to a
fortunate end. Yea let us every one help to ye edificacion and byldyng of gods
house. If we can not make the waulles, yet let us fetch mortar and stones to
the Maso^nes for to make it with. Let us further the building so much as we
may, and not hinder it by any means, unless we be cursed of God. Let us cast
our money together every man for his portion to the making of this glorious
temple, that the name of God may be praised in it of the faithful for
evermore. Luke. xii.
If we be not able with the rytche man to cast great abu^dans of goods in to
the treasure house, yet let us with the poor widow of the Gospel at the leest
give two minutes, and God will surely approve and accept our good will. Only
let us not hinder the workema^shyp of it, but further it to the vttermoost of
our power, so shall the blessyng of God be among us, Esaie. xii.
and we shall dwell safely in his holy mountain, and the earth shall be
replenisshed with the knowledge of the LORD, eue^ as the water of the sea that
ouerfloweth the land.

And although there may be invented diverse ways to reedifye and bylde again
this house of ye LORD, yet me think to speak generally, the next and most
ready way to further it, and to bring it unto a good end, is to live
virtuously, and every man studiously to do that unto the which God has called
him. i. Cor. vii.
For with out doubt this our dissolute and remiss manner of living has
hitherto very much hyndred the byl^ynge of Gods temple, I will not say, that
it has driven away many, which would have been strennuous and valeante
laborers in the work of the LORD, if our sluggishnes had not persuaded the
contrary. In co^sideracio^ whereof, althoghe I am no fytte person to be a work
man in this behalf, yet verily I desire with all my heart that this byldynge
of the LORDS Temple may go forward, and I wyshe to the laborers thereof all
prosperous and fortunate things, that they may bring their work unto a
glorious and ioyefull end. And although I can not greatly further their godly
labors, yet will I not hinder the^, but help them to the vttermoste of my
possebilite in all things. Let other bring Ceder trees, silver, Gold, Pearl
and precious stones unto the byldynge and garnysshynge of this temple, I will
again for my part gather stones, fetch the timber, and make the mortar or do
such smal^ things, as my little stre^gthes shall be able to bear and suffer.

And that all men may have an experime^t of my good will toward the byldynge
of this temple, Eccle. xiiii. Esaie. xi. i Pet. i. Job. v. Jacob. i.
behold at this time I bring forth a nosegaye for to adourne and garnyshe the
Temple with all, having in it. v. flowers, yea and those not such as will wy there
away at ye heat of the Son but rather such as the beauty whereof will never
decay, nor be obscured with the fearce asperite of onye tempest. The first
flower is called, unfeigned Humilite. The second,
pure innocence, The third, faithful obedience. The fourth, Ready assistence.
The fyfte, Chri sten Charity. These be such flowers, as who so ever smells
well unto them, and replenyssheth his senses with ye odoriferous sauoures of
them, surely he shall right sone perceive, that there can no fl^ures be
gathered, yt shall make more unto the adournemente of Gods Temple, than these
aforesaid. For of the first he shall smell y^ right knowledge of himself, which
after the censure of all learned me^ is the beginning of all wisdom, and
learn to be humble, meke, and lowely, without the which how can any man
fortunately aspire and come unto any progress or furtherance in virtues. Of
the second, he shall savor how he ought to behave him self unto God, that
he may walk innocently, as it becomes him. Of the third he shall learn
true obedience toward his Prince. Of the fourth, he shall smell, what his
duty is toward his christen brother. Of ye fyft, how al these things ought
to be done. Ca^ any thing be found more precious for the garnysshyng of gods
Temple, tha^ this nosegay which bri^geth to al ye faithful such delectable,
sweet, mel^fluous, and comfortable savors? Who so smells well on this
Nosegay, shall neither offend him self, nor God, nor the Kings grace, nor
yet his neygheboure, but shall work all things according to the will and
pleasure both of God and man. Uerely I would wysh it not only to be borne in
the hands or bosoms of all christen me^ but also to be prynted and fast rooted
in their hertes, so might they be sure to live in this world a quiet godly
life, and after the departure to enjoy that glory, which is immortal. God
grant it may come to pass.

This my Nosegaye gathered of me i^ the space of three days at such hours, as
I could conuenientlye suffurate and steal away from ye institucion and
teaching of my Scholars, I now offer and dedicate to your right
worshypfull maystershyp, as a testimony and memorial of my right hearty good
will toward you, most instantly desiring you to accept it with such good
mind, as you are always accustumed of your natural humanite and ge^tlenes to
receive the gifts and presents of them which desire friendly and wyssh well
unto you. The gift is little I confess, and unworthy your bou^teous
liberalite showed toward me at all times. No marvel. For what should an
herb bring forth but flowers, pleasant for the time, but sone perysshyng? Yet
your Basille at this time has brought forth to you such flowers, as heaven and
earth shall sooner perysh, tha^ ye leest leaf of the^ shall so much as o^ce
wither away or loose the beaty thereof. Whereof I do not doubt, but that this my
ly till gift shall be acceptable unto you, if not for the price of it, yet for
the long continuance of ye same, and so much the more because at this time,
you are partly occupied in the adournynge and garnysshynge of that your new
garden with most sweet herbs and pleasant flowers. So that ye herbs of that
your garden, and the flowers of your Basille put together, will undoubtedly
make goodly and sweet savors, the one for the body, the other both for body
and soul, which thing that LORD might grant, Jacob. i.
from whom descends every good and perfect gift.

God preserve your good mastershyp long in health, with the right worshypfull
and virtuous Ge^tyl woman your wy^e, and al your familye. So be it.

The Nosegaye, Philemon, Eusebius, Theophyle, and Christopher talk together.
Philemon. THere wants not at this present time, which not only the^ selves
are but little studious, vigilant and laborous for the prosperous propagacion
and settinge forth of divine litterature and godly knowledge, whereby the
faithful are inserted, planted and engraffed in our LORD and Savior Christ
Jesus, but they also vituperate and disco^mend ye serious and payneful
endeavors of other, which with al main labor to dilate and enlarge ye kingedome
of God, and the glory there of, yea and that not without great danger of their
health, as I may add nothing hereto. With what spirit such persons be
inflated and puffed up, I will not here define. But certes they very much
aberre dissent and are estraunged from my sentence, judgment and persuasion.
For I desire and wysh with all my heart, that all men lyuinge were in the
bowelles of Christ, Colos. iii.
and that the word of Christ might opulently, rytchly and abundantly dwell in
them with all wisdom, and knoweledge, be they Turks, Jews, Sarace^nes,
Roma. ^. Joan. iiii.
or onye other, seeing that there is one LORD of all, sufficiently rytche for
so many as call on him in spirit and verite: We read that Moses desired ^o
greatly the health and salvation eue^ of the gross Idolaters the Jews, that
he esteemed his own wealth and favor of no price without their health and
prosperity, Exo. xxxii.
yea he wysshed to be blotted out of the book of life, if the people of Israel
were not also saved with him. O fervent charity and burning love. How many
ways sought our most gentle sauiour^ Christ also to bring his enemies to
repentance? Would not he have gathered them together, Mat. xxiii. Luke. xiii.
as a hen does her chycke^s, and yet they would not? Did not he deplore and
lamente eue^ with profuse and most large tears their obstinate blynd^nes and
blind obstinacy, Luke. xix.
wha^ he tofore saw the perelles imminent and that were ready to faule upon
them? Did not he pray for them, Mat. xxvii. Luke. xxiii.
even when they had hanged him on the cross? Did not he suffer his most
blyssed body to be broken, and his most precious blood to be shed for their
rede^pcio^, If they would convert and amend, yea and at the last give his
own life for their salvation? Romans ix.
O love incomparable. O charity without measure. What need I rehearse S. Paul,
which so intierly thyrsted the health of his kynnesmen the Israelites, that for
their salvation he wysshed not only to be secluded and banysshed but also
utterly accursed from christ. He rather desired himself to be deprived of
eternal salvation, tha^ that so many should be co^iect and cast into
everlasting da^nacio^. O true Apostle O spectacle most worthy to be looked on
of all Prelates, Bisshoppes and Curates. Here se we, how fervent our desire
should be toward ye saving health of our christian brothers. Uerely we ought
not to seake all means possible for to bring them unto consummate, absolute
and perfect knoweledge of Christ's most wholesome doctrine, but also even to
give our lives to bring them unto Christ, as S. John says. i. Joan. iii.
By this we have known love, because he has given his life for us, and we are
bound again to give our lives for the brothers. Therefore neighbors according
to the commandment of that most noble ma^ne, which said, Luke. xix.
labor until I come, for the right herty zele that I bare toward your
souls, I thyncke it my bounden duty, so long as we dwell together to talk
with you of the word of life, ii. Pet. i.
which is able to save your souls.

The Banckette.
Ye know that at Christmasse last paste, I made you a Bancket, where in I
proponed and set before you four dysshes. The first contained, into what great
misery we were cast by Adam. The second, how we ware freely saved by the
mercy of God ye Father through Jesus Christ. In your third dysh, I declared
how we might obtain and come by this unmeasurable bou^tie and great goodness
of god. In the fourth I showed you, what is your duty, after we have received
these inestimable benefits of God the father through Christ Jesus, Co^os. iii.
verily to put of our conversation, to become new me^, Ephe. v. Romans vi.
to be plenteous in good works, to dye unto sin, to live unto ryghteousnes,
and daily more and more to wax grande and ancient in Christ, that at the
last we may attain and come unto the very perfeccion of christianite. These
things ye have not forgotten, I am sure neyghebours.


Euse. God forbid brother Philemon, yt we shouldebe negligent in theyse things
that pertayne unto the health of our souls. So might we worthily seem to be
most ennemies of our own salvation. The potacion.



Phile. I rejoice very much at it. Moreover syns that time, ye know that not
many wekes paste I made you a Potacion for Lent, wherein I set before you many
godly things most worthy to be known concerning that time of lent. Of the
holy Sacrament of Penance and the parts thereof I talked much with you I taught
you also how ye should ^aste according to the will of God. I also openned
unto you the mysteries and significicacions of certain Ceremonies used in the
Temples for the time of Lent. Last of all I dedeclared unto you, how ye
should prepare your selves worthily to receue at ye time of Easter ye most
blyssed sacrament of the Altar. Al these things have I taught you, yea and
that not in vain, as your quotid^ane fruytes do manifestlye show. For ye seem
unto me daily more and more to express manners worthy your profession, so
that I perceive the word of God is not sent to you in vain, Esaias. lv.
but that it bri^geth for the much fruit in you unto the glory of God, the
conforte of the faithful and the salvation of your own souls If all men unto
their vttermooste possibilite would likewise endeavor them selves to bring forth
fruytes according to their knowledge, verily it should be an occasion that ye
Gospel of Christ should excite and store up meruaylous loves, so that it
should have in short space mo fre^des and fewer enemies; yea and they yt study
to have Christ's doctrine both truly known and earnestly followed, should
also no more be blasphemed, detracted, rayled upon and ill spoken of, but
rather animated and encouraged to proceade in their most godly and virtuous
enterprises.

Now neighbors seeing that hither to ye have been no forgetful hearers, but
obsequious followers and diligente doers of the things taught you, I thought
it not vnfyttyng to caull you once again unto me, and according to the time of
the year to give you a Nosegay full of most redole^t and odoriferous flowers,
A nosegay^.
which may both expel all pernicious and hurtefull savors, and also conserve
and keep your incolum^te and valeau^ce both of body and mind.


Theo. Nothing can be given to us more grate, acceptable and pleasant, than
this your gift now promised, neither can any thing at this present beatify us
on such sort.


Chri. No verily, this is without dout.


Phil. I shall be the gladder to i^part^ it to you. But neighbors know this
one thing, that even as your Banquet and Potacio^ were not made of corruptible
meat, Joan. vi.
but of such as permayneth, continues and abides unto eternal life, so
likewise this your Nosegaye shall not be made of such Herbs, as the flowers
whereof, will wyther away and dry up with the heat of the son but
puissantly abide for ever and ever so valeaunt, that no heat, no tempest, no
troublous wether, shall may be able at any time to obfuscitate or blemysh the
native beautye thereof. For out of the divine scirptures shall your Nosegaye be
selected, and it shall co^tayne in it five flowers. But now will I declare
unto you, what the names of ye flowers, and of what virtue, efficacye, strength
and power they be.


Euse. I pray you let us hear. The names of the flowers contained in the
Nosegaye, and the virtue of them.



Phil. Your first flower is called, Unfeigned humilite. and it is good to expel
all arrogance, pride, hawtynes and elacion of mind. It is of all virtues
easelye the Base and foundament, and without the which none consists in their
germayne and natural place. Your second flower shall be, Pure Innocence.
being profitable to make you for to behave your selves devoutly and
virtuously toward God, workyng that thing that shall be acceptable and
thanckefull in his sight, Luke. i.
that ye may walk innocently, before him all the days of your life. Your
third flower is called, Faithful Obedience. and shall aspire and breath unto
you such redolent and sweet odoure that ye shall thereby receive strength and
knowledge to do your duty unto our most victorious and most virtuous Prince
with all submission and lowlynes of heart. Your fourth flower is named, Ready
assistence, and it auaylethe very much to teach you, how ye ought to behave
your selves toward your christen brothers, Phil. ii.
that that affecte may be in you, that was i^ Christ Jesus. Your fyft flower,
which is the last, is called Christen Charity, and it is of so great strength
and virtue, that without it all the other be not much approved nor allowed
before God. Romans xiii. i. Tim. i.
For it is the perfect fulfyllyng of the law, and the end of the precepte,
as the Apostle writes. Of these five flowers shall your Nosegaye be made,
which I desire you, that ye will not disdain joyfully to accept and frendely
receive at my hand, as y^ gift of him, which most intierly wysshethe well
unto you.


Theo. We ware more than twyse ingrate, if we would not thanckefully, yea and
with enbrasi^g arms receive yt, which is co^ducible and profitable to so mani
necessary causes, and matters of grave importans.


Chri. Who has ever had so precious a Nosegay, as this shall be, which shall
teach us to be humble, lowly, gentle, meke, and replete with all submission,
which also shall aspire and breath unto us such savors, as whereby we shall
may learn to do our duties both toward God, our king, and our christen
brothers, which thing is the very whole sum of all christianite. Who so ever
shall have this nosegaye continually in his hand, and smell well of it, he may
be sure to be preserved from all pestiferous airs, so y^ he shall neither
offend god, nor his Prince, nor yet his neyghebour, but work all things
according to Gods most holy pleasure.


Phil. Well, I pray you be diligent. For now I entende to gather every flower
of your Nosegay in order and to deliver them unto you.


Euse. I pray you let it so be.


The first Flower / called / unfeigned Humilite.
Philemon. Your first flower is plucked out of the first Epistle of S.
Peter, i. Pet. v.
and it is this, Have Humilite and loulynes of mind engraffed in you. For God
resists the proud, but to the humble he gives grace.


Theo. This is a godly sweet flower, and garnysshethe the life of a christen
man very much.


Phil. The holy Apostle S. Peter i^ this place exorteth all christen me^ unto
humilite and lowlynes of mind. And this is your flour that I call, Unfeigned
humilite., even that lowelynes which proceeds from a pure mind with out any
Hypocrisye or doublenes. Pride is ^ head spring of all evil
And i^ gyui^g us exhortacion to enbrase humylyte, he also absterreth and
frayethe us from all arrogance, pride, and elacio^ of mi^d, which is y^ head
spring of all euel, and he shows the cause why we ought to enhalse Humilite,
and reiecte pride. For God, says he, resists the proud, but to the humble he
gives grace. What humilite is.
I shall make this more euidente anon by examples and Histories of the holy
Scriptures.


Chri. But I pray you before ye proceed in this matter declare unto us, what
Humilite is. De grad. Humilit.



Phile. Humilite, after the mind of S. Bernarde, is a virtue, whereby every one
brought into the k^^^eledge of himself, waxes vile and lothesome to himself.


Euse. He that on this wise is humble, can not norysh any pride in his heart.


Phil. Ye say truth. Why so much pride reygnethe now a days.



Theo. I marvel than how it co^methe to pass, y^ so much pride reygneth now
a days among us.


Phil. Uerely because the people are not brought i^to ye true knowledge of the^
selves. If they were, they would not sto^d so much i^ their own co^ceate as
they do, but rather be humble, lowly, gentle, and meke toward al men, even the
most simple and inferior. But in asmch as this knoweledge wants, therefore
are they inflated and puffed up with pride like unto Lucifer, which so exalted
himself, that he would have been like unto the most high God: Esa. xiiii.
The man of honor is proud of his promocion, the rytch man of his rytches,
the strong man of his strength, ye learned man of his learning, the
beautiful of their beauty. ^. Cor. iiii. Jacob. i.
etc. This comes to pass, because they know not, what they are of them
selves, and that all that they have is the gift of God, as S. Paul and James
testifye.


Chri. I pray you declare to us, by what means we may obtain this
celestial gift of humllite.


Phil. That ye may have the more courage to desire this most precious virtue,
and to practyse it in your living, I will first declare to you the excellency
of it, and show what great profyt ensuethe of it, and afterward declare to
you, by what means ye may come by it.


Euse. Let it be so*


Phil. The scripture shewethe ye when Adam and Eve had transgressed the
commandment of God in Paradyse through the subtyle persuasion of Satan, Genesis
iii.
and perceived the^ selves naked, Behold what synne^ does.
they ran away from the face of God and hyd themselves, that they might not
be seen.


Euse. We remember this well.


Phil. Behold now the Humilite of God, conjoined with unmeasurable mercy. The
goodness of God toward man.
He being God and such a LORD, as at y^ presence of whom al things both in
heaven, earth and hell tremble, shake and do reverence, humbly and lowly came
and sought the^ up, saying, where art thou Ada^? And not only this, but when
they were ashamed of their nakedness, he made them garments of skynnes, and put
them on them to cover their filthynes. Must not Humilite now be a virtue of
wonderful excellency, seeing that God himself did first of al practyse it?
^ote well.
Who dare boste him self to be the son of this celestial father * and yet
not endewedde with Humilite? GOD might have suffered them to have
perysshedde, or else taken vengeance on them streyghtwayes according to their
deserts but he would not, but rather gentylly and lowly sought them up,
apparelled them, and by this means preserved them. O example worthy to be
followed of all the faithful.

Moreover what Humilite and lowlynes was there also i^ his derely beloved son
our lord and savior Jesus Christ? Who is able to express his humilite,
lowlynes and mekenes? It is not without a cause said of him, learn of me,
Math. xi.
for I am meke and lowly in heart. For what does his whole life show but
humilite? Esaias. ix.
Was he not borne of a poor maid, even that blyssed virgyne Marye? Math. i.
Did he not suffer his most precious body to be wrapped i^ vile and simple
cloutes? Luke. i.ii.
Esaias. i.
Did he disdain to be borne in a stable, Luke. ii.
and to lie in a mau^ger among brute bestes? Math. viii.
Was not he subject and obedient to Joseph and Mary his mother? Luke. ix.
Math. ix.
Was not he circu^cysed and baptized for our sake? Was not he so poor, Mark.
ii.
that he had not where to rest his head? Did not he keep company with
Publicans, sinners and harlottes, Luke. v.
that he might bring them to grace? Math. viii.
whom other so greatly did abhor? Mark. i.
Did not he touch the Lepers, whom other would scasely vouchsafe once to
look upon? Luke. v.
Math. iiii.
Did not he frequent and use the company of al diseased, Math. ix.
that he might heal the^? Did not he go, Mark. v.
whyther so ever he was desired? Math. xv.
Did not he grant ye peticions of the faithful? Math. xxi
Did not he come riding mekely into Jerusalem upon an Ass without onye pomp
or pride? Mark. xi.
Luke. xix.
Did not he wash his Disciples feet? Joan. xiii.
Did not he being in the shape of God and equal with God make him self of no
reputacion, Phil. ii.
Mat. xxvii.
and took upon him ye shape of a servant, Mark. xv.
became like another man, and was found in his apparel as a man? Did not he
so humble himself, that he became obediente unto the death, even the death
of the Cross? Did not he suffer his most spytefull enemies to run and tear
his most blyssed body so cruelly, Mar^. ^v. Luke xxiii. Joan. xviii.
so vnmercyfully, so without al pytie, that they also did shed the most
precious blood of his heart? O unspeakable humilite. O lowlynes rather to be
wondered at, than able of any man to be followed. Neither wants this humilite
in him at this present. Roma. viii. Heb. vii. i. Tim. ii. i. Joan. ii.
Is he not eue^ now also content, although glorified, and received i^to ye
most blyssed throne of his celestial father, to becomme our intercessoure,
mediator and advocate? Joan. vi. Mat. xxv. Acti^^. i. i. These. iiii.
At the day of judgment also is not he content to come and featche unto
glory both the bodies and souls of so many as i^ this world have unfeignedly
believed in him, and studiously wroght his divine will?


Chri* Al these things are true that ye have spoken.


Phil. Were it not tha^ a thing of much absurdite and very unsitting for us,
which profess this our LORD Christ to be most alienated and estraunged from
that virtue, which he in his quotidiane conversation most principally
exercised?


Theo. Yies verelye. For S. John^ says, he that says, that he abides in
Christ, ^. Joan. ii.
ought to walk, eue^ as he has walked.


Euse. Truth it is, and Christ himself says, I have given you an example,
that as I have done to you, Joan. xiii.
so ye likewise should do.


Phil. Right well neighbors. Look ye do now therefore according to your
knoweledge.

Act^m. ii.
Furthermore what Humilite was this in y^ holy Ghost, to come down so
manifestly upon the Apostles of Christ at the feast of Pentechoste? to
replenyshe them with all gifts of grace and to enspire i^to the^ the knowledge
of so many tongues? was not this a wonderful token of Humilite? Does not that
most holy spirit, even at this day vouchesafe also to dwell in the hertes of
ye faithful, i. Cor. iii. ii. Cor. vi.
as S. Paul witnesses Do not ye know, says he, that ye are the Temple of
God, and the spirit of God dwells in you? Again do ye not know that your
members are the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you, whom ye have of
god, and ye are not of your selves? Seeing than that this virtue Humilite was
first used and practiced of God, and so still remains, how can it otherwise
tha^ be a thing of great excellency?


Euse it is truth. GOD grant us to remember these things, that we may not
only profess God by mouth, but also lively express him in our acts and
daily conversation.


Phil. Well as concerning the virtue and strength of this your flower, called,
Unfeigned humilite, it shall appear evidently unto you by declaring what great
profyt ensues thereof.


Chri. This thing is very necessary to be known. Let us therefore hear it, The
virtue and strength of humilite.
I pray you.


Phil. Humilite makes us to be humble and lowly both i^ heart and body. It
expellethe the foul vice of pride, and causes that Philantia, that is to say,
the love of our selves or the sto^ding in our own conceate, reygneth not in
us. It makes us to abstain from dissolute laughing. It causes that we speak
nothing unadvisedly. It provoke us to grant that we are more vile than any
other, and unworthy or unprofitable unto any good thing. It makethe us little
to esteem our selves, and all our enterprises, and hyghly to auaunce and set
forth other. It makethe us not to have any delectacion to fulfill our own
will. It gyuethe us an occasion to fear God, and to endeavor our selves to do
that, which he requirethe of us. It causes us to be obedient to our
superiors, and to give them all reverence and honor. It makes us patiently
to sustain all injuries and wrongs, that are done unto us. It engraffeth in
us all kind of virtues. So that it may right well be named, the mother and
nurse of al goodness and honest. Moreover Humilite bringethe the grace and
favor of God to us, as ye heard before of S. Peter, which says, i. Petre. v.
God resistethe the proud, but to the humble he gyuethe grace. It causethe ye
God has a respect unto us, as he says by the Prophet, Esaie. lxvi.
unto whom shall I look, but to the humble and broken in spirit, and unto
him that fears my words? It makethe that GOD hears our prayers, as the
Psalmograph says, Psalm. ^i.
God does behold the supplicacions of the humble, and he has not despised
their prayers. Also the wise man, Eccle. xxxv.
the prayer of him that humbles himself, shall pearse the clouds. It causes
us to be exalted, Luke. i.
as the most blyssed virgin syngeth, He has put down the mighty from
their seat, and exalted the humble. And Christ says: Luke. xiiii.
every one that exalts himself, shall be made low. And he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted S* Peter also says, humble your selves before God,
i. Pet. v.
that he may exalte you. Mat. xviii.
To be short, it bryngethe us unto the kyngedome of heaven. For Christ says:
Mark. x. Luke. viii.
Except ye turn and become as little children ye shall not enter into the
kyngedom of heaven, Who so ever therefore shall humble himself, as this lytyl
child, he is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.


Chri. This undoubtedly is an excellent virtue, and a flower of much strength,
and bryngethe to them that have it, many goodly pleasures and godly
commodities. Gene. iiii.



Phil. Again mark I pray you, what made the oblacion of Abel to be so
acceptable in the sight of God, but Humilite? Again, what was the cause, that ye
Sacrifice of Caim was abhorred of God, but his arrogante and proud heart,
stuffed full of rancour and malice toward his brother? What was the occasion
that Nohe with few other were saved from drowenynge, Genesis vii.
but that they were humble in heart and feared god? Again, what was the cause,
i. Petre. ii.
that all the whole world besides the^ were drowned, but their pride and
volupteous manner of living? Genesis xii.xv xvii xviii xxii
what provoked God so often to walk with Abraham, but his Humilite and lowlynes
of mind? What moved God to save Loathe and certain other for his sake from
that most grievous and terrible plage, Genesis ix ii. Pet. ii.
that fell on Sodom and Gomorre, but ye Humilite of him, conjoined with a
reverent fear toward god? Again, what caused God to take vengeance on the
Sodomites and to consume them with fire and brymstone from heaven, but only
their pride coupled with all kind of volupteous, beast like, yea unnatural
pleasure? What preserved Abraham fromme sleaynge his Son Isaac, Gene. xxii.
but his humble and obedient heart, ready to accomplysh the will of God in all
things? What made Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, with all the holy Patriarchs
to be so ge^tylly dealte with al and favored both of god and man, but their
Humilite? What was ye cause that David was made of a Sheppard a king* i. Reg.
xvi.
but Humilite. Again, what abiected Saul from his kingedome, i. Reg. xv.
empire and dominion, but his arrogant and proud heart, co^ioyned with
disobedience toward the commandment of God? What caused king Asa, iii. Reg.
xv. iii. Reg. xxii.
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias to work that which was good in the sight of God,
but their humilite, because they preferred ye will of God before their own
carnal judgments? Again, iiii. Re. xviii ^ix.xx.
what was the cause yt many kings, as Roboam, Jeroboam, Abia, Nadab, iiii.
Reg. xxi Eccl^. xlix. iii. Reg. xii. iii. Reg. xv. iii. Reg. xvi. iiii. Reg. i.
iiii. Reg. xvi iiii. Reg. xxi. Daniel iiii. Luke. i.
Achab Ochozias Achas, Manasses, Amo^, Ioiachim, Sedechias, Nabuchodonosor.
etc. did yt which was evil before God, but their puffed up hertes and proud
minds, castyng away all fear of God from their eyes? What exalted the most
glorious virgin Mary so high, that she became the mother of Christ, and was
alone found worthy to bear the son of God, but her humilite, as she
herself witnesses: My soul magnifiethe the LORD, says she. And my spirit,
has reioysed in GOD my Savior. For he has looked upon ye Humilite of his
hand maid, behold, because of this all generations shall call me blessed.
Again, Esaie. xiiii.
what did cast down Lucifer from Heaven into hell, Mat. iiii. Iaco. ii. Math.
xi. Luke. x. E^ai. xxix Abdo^. i. Esa. xxxiii. ^. Cor. i.
from joy into pain, but pride? What provoked Christ to chose poor fyssher
me^ and the vile people of this world to set forth the glory of his father, but
their humilite? How came it to pass, that those simple men, yea and even the
fools of the world were replete with godly knowledge, and the proud Pharisees
the galant Bishops, the huffe nosed prestes, the lusty lawers, ye sawsy
Scribes, with all the glisteryng sort of Hypocrites, which lived at that
time, could not attain unto this science of the divine mysteries, when not
withestandynge they chale^ged to them selves alone the knowledge of Gods law,
and ye true understanding of the same? Was not their pride and arrogance the
cause of this their blyndenes? What is the cause in these our days, Mark well.
that the proud papisticall Romanistes can not perceive ye verite of Gods
word, and here in England and such other like places even ye very poor and
base sort of people are godly learned and espy the truethe of Gods will? Is not
pride cause of ye one, and Humilite occasion of ye other? As I may return
unto the holy Scriptures and make an end, Luke xviii
what was the cause, that the Publicane went home more justified than the
Pharise, but that the one was humble, and the other proud? Ifwe mark
diligently, we shall easily perceive yt all good things have ever come to
pass through Humilite, and that pride has always ben ye original beginning of
all wickedness and myschefe.


Euse. Uerelye this is easy to perceive.


Phil. The excellency and virtue of this flour is so great, that it causethe S.
Austen to cry out on this manner, Ser. de super.
O holy and worshypfull Humilite, thou made the son of God to come down
into the womb of holy Marye the virgin. Thou made him to be inuolued and
wrapped in vile cloutes, that he might clothe us with the ornaments of
virtues. Thou dyddest circumcyse him in the flesh, that he should circu^cyse
us in the mind. Thou dydest scourge him corporally, that he might deliver us
from the scourge of sin. Thou dyddest crown him with thorns, that he should
crown us with his eternal Roses. Thou made hi^ to be sick which was the
Physician of all me^, healyng all things with his word alone, that he might
heal the^ that are sick. Humilite, says Saint Bernarde, De Co^syd. Lib. v.
is the steadfast foundacio^ of virtues, which if it be omitted and let pass,
the congregation and gatherynge together of virtues, is none other thing, than
a very ruin or decay of them. Epist. ad sororem.
For it debelleth and valeauntly overcomes the enemy of all grace, I mean
pride, which is the beginning of all sin. S. Gregory says also, Lib. xvii.
Moral.
that Humilite is the beginning of virtues in us, and that they which know not
Humilite, that is the mother of virtues, loose ye use and profyt of their
labor Again he says, Ibidem.
he that gathers together virtues without Humilite, may well be compared to
him, that brings dust into the wind. Thus have I declared unto you y^
excellency and great virtue of your first flower, and what commodities ensue
of it.


Chri. If these things hers taught were known unto al men, it would
undoubtedly encourage them to reiecte P^ide and enbrase Humilite.


Phil. Alas dear neighbors, wherefore or whereof should we be proud? Of our
wisdom or rytches? iii. Reg. x.
Who among mortal men was ever able to compare with Salomo^ either in
wisdom or rytches Yet for all that unto what point came he? iii. Reg. xi.
Did not he faull unto all kind of dissolute and volupteous living? Did he
not forsake y^ God of Israel, and fell unto Idolatry? It is not without a
cause said, Iere. xi.
Let not the rytche man glory in his riches, nor the wise man in his wisdom.
For what are rytches and wisdom, Of rytches and wysdo^ Note.
if they be not godly and justly used, but only instruments of tyranny and
unrighteousness? The wise man is endued with wit for this purpose, that with
his wisdom he should healpe the simple and plain people, which want the
perfect experience of things, or else that have no capacite to attain unto
the knoweledge of such trauayeles, as are expediente for them, and not to
deceive them, to craft with them, to poll and pyll them, and to make hauoke of
them. The ritche man also has rytches given unto him unto to this end, that
he should ye more franckely noryshe the pouerte, and distribute them to the
indige^t, and not that he should hourd them up in corners, glory in them,
boast and crake of them, and think himself better tha^ any other, because he
excels in thaboundance of worldly goods. Mark.
Both rytches and wisdom increase dampnacion to the possessours of them, if
they be not used, as God has commanded, that is, unto the profyt of our
neighbor* What cause have we than for to be proud of them? If we use the^
well, we do but our duty, if we do other wise, the greater is our damnacio^.
Again, Ofholynes and virtuous living.
may we be proud of our holiness and virtuous living? Who was more holy the^
David? yet for all his holiness committed he both manslaughter and whoredom.
ii. Reg. ^^.
Christ wyllethe us to recount our selves unprofitable servants, Luke xvii.
when we have done all that ever we can. Should we rejoice of worldly
honor, Ofworldly honor. Dani. iiii.
and be proud of that? Who may be compared to King Nabuchodonosor, whose glory
and renown retched up even unto Heaven for the fame of it? was not he dejected
and cast down so low, that he being expulsed from his empire, became a
brute beast, and did eat grass with the beasts of the field? Read the
history. Of martial affairs.
May we be proud of martial affairs, as of strong Castelles sure holds,
mighty Bulwarks, great Gunnes, sharp Spears, swyfte arrows, two edged
sweardes, innumerable thousa^des of valeau^te Soldiers? How unapt these
things are to have any perfect affiaunce or trust reposed in them, who so
reads the Histories of the holy Scripture, shall easelye perceive. Judith.
xiii.
Let this one History of ye proud Tyrant Holofernes suffice for this present,
which conqueryng all the world, was at the last moo^t miserably slain of a
woman, and all his men put to flight. A king shall not be saved, says David,
Psalm. xxxii.
by his own great host, neither shall a gyaunt be helped in the abundans of
his own strength. A horse is but a deceauable thing to save a man, it is not
y^ power of his strength, that can deliver him. Behold, the eyes of the LORD
are upon them yt fear him, and put their trust in his mercy Uerely except the
LORD byld the house, Psalm. cxxvi.
he labourethe in vain that bildeth it. Except the LORD keep the city he
watches in vain that keeps it. Of the favor of great men. Hester. vii.
What shall we say of the favor of great men? May we glory, boste, and be
proud of that? Read ye History of Amon, which was so hye in his kings favor,
yt he might do, what he list, kill, save, exalte, depresse, lift up, pluck
down, and as we say commonly, Omnium rerum vicis situdo est.
bind bears, and yet was not he shortly after cast out of favor on such
sort that he was immediately hanged on ye same gallows, which he had newly
prepared for another? May su^ptuous mansions and delicate fare cause us to be
proud? Of sumptuous mansions, and delicate fare.
Na verily. For what other thing is costly byldynge, than a great heap of
stones gathered together, Note.
pleasant for ye time, but shortly returnyng again unto duste? As for the
most delicious meats that can be gotten, after they be once chawed and
digested, what is more vile, more stynkyng, more unsavory, less pleasant to
ye eyes, Of gorgious apparel and goodly beutye.
and more odious to the nose? shall I speak of gorgious apparel and goodly
beuty? whereof so many now a days very vaynely and no less folyshly bost and
glory? Is any thing in them, wherefore we may lift up our brystles, and
auaunce our selves before other, even the most vile and deformed? I pray you
what other thing is gaye and gorgious raiment than a very instrument of pride,
as a certain learned man says. They were given us of God to cover our fylthy
nakedness, Lodouicus viues.
and we abuse them unto pleasure and volupteousnes. O preposterous judgment. O
extreme blyndnes. Glory not in thine apparel at any time, Eccl. xi.
says the wise man. As for the vanite and beautye, what need I make many
words? Mark well
It is more britle tha^ glass more transitorye than the flower, more
inconstante than the wind, more vain then the smoke, and more flyttynge away
then the time, to conclude, it is as the Poets call it, Fragile bonum, that is,
Lib. ii. de art ama^di. Pro. xxxi.
a frail good thing, so that it is not without a cause said of Solomon,
favor is deceytful, and beauty is a vain thing How does one little fever,
make ye woman of the world, the fowlest and most unpleasant in aspecte? And
to say the truth, is beauty any other thing, In Introd. adSap.
than as Lodouicus Viues says, as little thynne skin well colored. If the
inward parts says he, could be seen, how great fylthynes would there
appear, eue^ in the most beautyful person. Neither is the fayreste body in ye
world any other thing, than a donge hill covered with a clothe of white and
purple color. Menander.
For this cause the wise men of ye Greeks were wont to call a fair and
beautyfull woman Hyperiphainon cacon, that is, a plesau^t or glysterynge evil.
What shall I say unto the Nobilite and gentle blood, Of nobilite and gentle
blood.
as they call it? May this be an occasion of exalting our selves? Psalm. xxix
King David says: what profyt is there in my blood, seeing I go down unto
corrupcion? And the wise man says, why art you proud O thou earth and
ashes? Eccle. x. Genesis iii.
we are all earth and ashes. We shall return unto corrupcion, and be so
consumed, as concerning our bodies as though we had never ben. The Prophet also
says, all flesh is grass, Esa. xl. Jacob. i.
and all his glory is like a flower of the field. O LORD GOD, what cause have
we now to be proud of any thing in this world, seeing that all things are so
vain and transitory, nothing durable and perpetual? Certes if we consider
well the gifts, Of ye gifts of god.
wherewith God has indewed us, what soever they be, pertaining either to the
body or to the soul, we shall easily find that we have no cause to be proud
of them, but rather ye more humble, taking ever thought, how we may spend
well the talent committed unto us, Mat. xxv.
unless we be cast with that unprofitable servant of the Gospel into utter
darkness, where weeping and gnasshynge oftethe shall be. The more that we do
excel other in gifts, the more dangerous is our state, and the more
diligence ought we to give for the right bestowyng of the^. To whom much is
given, much shallbe required of him.


Euse. O ye vanite of this world. O ye bli^d iugeme^tes of ye people, which so
much glory i^ vayn frail and tra^sitory things.


Theo. It is not with out a cause said of s. John^, love not the world, ^.
Joan. ii.
nor those things y^ are in the world. If any man loves theworlde, the love
of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world, as the
concupiscense of the flessh, and the lust of the eyes, and the the pride of
the life, is not of the father, but it is of the world. And ye world passes
away, and the concupisce^ce thereof. But he yt does the will of God, abides
for evermore.


Chri. Now according to your promise, let us hear I pray you, how we may
come by this virtue Humilite, that we may enjoy the commodities thereof
eniuing, and exchew the inconveniences that rise of the contrary.


Phil. I will do it, and that in few words. How humilite may be obtained.


First that ye may unfeignedly have Humilite engraffed in your breasts, it is
expedient that we consider, what ye are of your selves. As towching your body,
ye are me^. Now what other thing is man concerning his body, but only, Of ye
body
as S. Bernard says, Libro de Mediat. What man is.
a stynkyng sperme or seed, a sack of dunge, and the meat of worms. Consider
this depely with your selves, and it shall cause you to delyght but little in
your body, be it never so strong, valeau^t, fair, goodly, pleasant in
aspecte, procere and tau^l. It is, says S. Bernarde, nothing but a stynckynge
sperme or seed, a sack of donge, and the meat of worms. What mean we than to
be sumptuous in the adourning and garnysshyng of the body? Genesis iii.
God to cover our nakedness at the beginning gave us cotes of Lether. S. John^
Baptiste also according to the first appoyntme^t of God, Mat. iii. Mark. i.
went clad in a Camels skin with a gyrdle of lether about his loins, Against
vain and sumptuous apparel.
But lether and cloth both ca^ not suffice us at this time, be it never so fine
and costious, except we add thereto al kinds of sylkes and veluettes. But
what do I speak of these things? Gold, Silver, Pearl, precious stones,
Ouches and what not is now and days worn even of inferior persons, when the
poor members of Christ have neither wherwythe they may cloth themselves, nor
yet conforte their hungry and thyrsty bodies. O lamentable case. And what shall
I say of the manifold and strange fasshions of the garments, that are used
now a days? I think Satan studieth not so much to invent new fasshyons to
bring christen men into his snare, Mark well.
as the Taylours now a days are compelled to excogitate, inue^t and ymagyne
diversities of fasshyo^s for apparel, that they may satisfy the foolyshe
desire of certain light brains and wild Otes, which are all together given
to new fanglenes. O most vain vanite. Some time we follow the fasshyo^ of
the French me^. Another time we will have a trick of the Spanyyardes. Noua
p^acent.
Shortly after that begi^neth to wax naught, we must therefore now have ye
Italyon fasshyon. Within few days after we are werye of all the fasshyons
that are used in Christendom, we will therefore now and God will, practyse the
manner of going among the Turks and Saracennes, would God that with the
Turks apparel, we ware not also right Turks and Infidels i^ our life,
co^uersacio^ and ma^ners. O ye England would once learn to be ashamed of this
vanite, and remember this saying of the Apostle, having meat and drink, and
wherewith we may be covered let us be contented. i. Timo. vi.
But surely this Hethenysh and vain garnysshyng of our body engraffeth high
Pride in us, whereby it co^methe to pass, that Humilite is clean exiled and
put to-flyght. That ye may not be accombred with this Pestilence, Note this
council.
remember the vtilite of your body, mark what fruytes it brings forth,
consider ye state of it, ponder from whence it came, whyther it shall, and what
shall become of it. If ye do this, it shall move you not to glory, nor to be
proud of any external thing, but gladly to embrase Humilite and lowlynes of
mind.

Of ye soul
Secondly consider also what ye are of your selves co^cerninge your inward man,
I mean your soul. Roma. v. Ephe. ii. Joan. iii. Genesis vi. ii. Cor. iii.
Has not that through Adam, be^fore it is regenerate by Christ, lost the
favor of God? Is it not a fire brande of hell, bond to eternal da^nacion, the
child of wrath, all carnal, breathynge wickedness, ymaginyng mischefe, bent
unto evil, and not able once for to thyncke a good thought?

Thyrdly after we be renewed by the most blyssed Sacrament of Baptism and
the holy Ghost, Of sin after Baptysme
remember how sone ye loose again that benefits through your own sin and
wickedness, which before ye freely obtained by Christ. This shall also move you
to cast away all pride and to be humble, lowely and meke, in the sight of God,
ever lame^tynge your misery, and flyenge continually unto God with your
fervent prayers for grace, mercy, favor and remission of your sins, unless
ye be dampened for your iniquity according to your deserts. Of ye pains of
hell.
It shall also not a lytyl profyt, to remember the pains of hell, which are
prepared for them that are proud and disobedient to the will of God. Of virtues
and qualities.
Fourthly if at any time ye desire of vain glory shall crepe in to your bosom
for the excellencye of virtues and qualities wherewt ye are endewedde, call
straight unto your remembrance this saying of the Apostle, what have thou
that thou haste not taken? If thou haste taken it, i. Cor. iiii.
why doste you rejoice, as though thou had not taken it? and this shall
pluck down your comb, as they use to say. For who is so mad, Note.
except he be like unto the Crow of Esope, to bost himself of other men's
feathers? The gifts that we have, be they never so excellent, are not ours but
Gods. He may take them away again wha^ it pleseth him. Thefore ought we not
to be proud of them, but use them unto that end, for the which they were given
us, ever remembering that if we use them well, there is a reward laid up for
us in heaven if we do not, we shall receive ye greter damnacion. So that we
have no cause to be proud of them, but rather the more humble, and lowly in
heart.

Finally in all your works, seem they never so good and perfect, yet thyncke
you, yt they are now done with so much purite and clennes of heart as they ought,
and therefore ye must humbly grant your imperfeccio^, and desire god to fulfill
that which lackethe in you for his Son Jesus Christ's sake.

If on this wise ye behave your selves neighbors in all your works, ye must
needs despise pride and enbrase humilite Yea if on this manner ye judge of
your selves, as I have here taught you, ye shall with out doubt be made
unfeignedly humble, meke and lowly. But without this knoledge of your selves,
know that ye can do none otherwise, but stond in your own co^ceate, brag of
your qualities, glory in your acts, be proud of your gifts, and ever
unthankful in the sight of God. S. Bernarde says, In Cant. Ser. iii.vii.
I know that no man is saved without the knowledge of him self, whereof
doubtless Humilite the mother of health springs, and the fear of the LORD.
For as the one is the beginning of wisdom* so is the other of health.


Euse. I pray God we may so know our selves, that we may deserve to have this
most excellent virtue engraffed in our breasts.


Phil. Neighbors one word with you, and than an end of this your first
flour. Remember that your flower is called, Unfeigned humilite, because ye may
not outwardely pretend humilite, and inwardely be inflated with Pharasaicall
arrogance, and puffed up after the manner of the proud Hypocrites, and
supercibious Pharisees, Mat. xxiii.
whom Christ and his Apostles rebuke so often in ye holy scriptures for their
feigned holiness. Be no painted sepulchers, outwardely fair, and inwardly full
of rotten bones, and al fylthynes. For many, Ep. xxvii.
as saint Jerome says, follow the shadow of Humilite, but few the truth.
Let all glosyng words be taken away, let all faynynge gestures cease. Patience
shows a man to be truly humble. Let your humilite therefore not only be
expressed with gesture and voice, but also let it proceed from ye pure affecte
of the heart. So may ye be sure to have God gracious and favorable unto you,
and ever to prosper in all your honest trauayles and godly affairs. Hitherto
have I spoken sufficientely of your first flower called, Without humilite
nothing comes well to pass
Unfeigned humilite, and I have been the longer about it, because I would be
glad to expel the poisonof Pride out of your hertes which raygneth almoost
universally beyond al measure at this day, and to engraffe in you this goodly
herb, which is so sweet and wholesome, that without it no medicine can ryghtly
be ministered. This being digested, all other are y^ more easy to receive.


Theo. Neighbor Philemon, thyncke not, but ye your words are reposed even in
ye lowest part of our hertes, and we trust that ye have not sown this seed of
Gods word in any stony ground, Math. xiii. Mar. iiii. Luke viii.
but in such good earth, as shall bring forth, some an hu^drethe fold, some
syxty fold, and some thyrtye fold.


Phil. It does me good to hear this, and to know your ready will unto all
goodness and virtue. For in deed neighbors we had never more need to work
well, and to do good deeds, This time has great need of good works.
than at this time. The christen religion begins utterly to decay. Alas we
speak much of Christ, but many live no part of Christ. Uice still reygneth,
virtue has no place. Well, I will give you your second flower.


Christo. I pray you let us have it.


The second flower / named Pure Innocence.
Philemon. BEhold here is the second flower of your Nosegay. Genesis xvii.
I am the almighty GOD. Walk before me and be perfect. And I will make my
couenaunte between me and the, and will multiplye the beyond all measure.


Euse. Was not this the saying of God the father unto Abraham?


Phil. Yies verily, and pertaynethe now unto us no less than it did at yt time
to him. Romans xv.
For what so ever things are written, are written for our learning. Ye shall
receive much pleasure of this your flower, if ye mark the virtue of it well.
First ye shall note that God calls himself the almighty God, whereby we may
easily discern him from those gods, Psa. lxxxxv
yea rather Idolles and dyuels, whom the Hethen did worship and call upon. For
our God is omnipotent, that is to say, almighty, plenteous in power, abundant,
o^ sufficient, full of all good, nedy of nothing. ^iii. Reg. xix
The Gods of the Gentiles are of no power, puissau^ce and strength full of all
imbecillite, weakness and misery. Our God made all things of nothing by ye
power of his word. The Gods of the Hethe^ make not, Baru^. vi. Psa. cxiiii.
but they are made of other and are none other thing than wood, stonnes,
silver, gold, or wicked spirits. Joan. iiii.
Our God is able to help so many as call on him in spirit and truethe. The
Gods of the Gentiles are not able for to help themselves, neither do they
hear any man, that call on them, as we may perceive by the prestes of Baal.
Our God lastethe for ever and ever even worlds worlds without end. iii.
Re. xviii Psalm. ^i.
The Gods of ye Hethen perysh and are more vain than the smoke. Thus se ye,
what a God we have. None either in heaven, Note here well of god.
earth or hell is able to compare with this our God. He alone is good, merciful.
gentle, pacient, long sufferynge, almighty, ryghteous, omnisufficient,
plenteous of power, and full of all good. In him all things abunde, nothing
wants. He is ye omnisufficient protector and valea^t defender for all them,
that repose their affiaunce and trust in him. Who therefore will not have a
pleasure to serve this God? Who is so mad to forsake this God, and to follow
any other? Who being godly minded will not seake the glory of this God? even
from the very heart? Who having but a carnell of Christen salt in his breast,
will not ha^ge wholly on this God, as alone altogyther sufficient for the
faythefull abundantly in all things whereof they have need, either pertaynyng
to the soul or to the body? Iere. xvii.
Cursed be that man, that puts his trust in man, and that takethe flesh
for his arm, and he, whose heart depart the from the LORD. For he shall be
like the Heath, that grows in the wilderness. As for the good thing that is
for to come, he shall not se it, but dwell in a dry place of the wyldernes,
even in a salt and unoccupied land. O but blyssed is the man that puts his
trust in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is himself. For he shallbe as a
tree that is planted by the waters side, which spreads out the root unto
moystnes whom the heat can not hurt when it comes, Psalm. i.
but his leaves are grene and in the time of drowte shall he not be careful,
neither shall he cease at any time to bring forth his ^ruite.

Secondely ye shall note, that after God has described him self to be
almyghtye, that is, passing all other in power, it is so great, infinite, and
unmeasurable, he expresses the duty of so many as will serve him, as they
ought. Walk before me, Our duty toward god
says he, and be perfect. Loo here is your flour Pure Innocence. He that
observes this precepte of god, can not displease, err or offend, butte
work pure innnocency before god. Walk before me, says he, and be perfect.
What it is to walk be before God



Theo. What meanethe God by that I pray you?


Phil. To walk before God is to serve him according to his word, so purely
and innoce^tly, as though GOD himself were ever present before our eyes.


Chri. This is a hard thing.


Phil. The yoke of Christ is sweet, ye burden is light, neither are his
precepts heavy. Math. xi. i. Joan. v. Roma. viii. Joan. viii.
For where the spirit of the LORD is, there is liberte. And if the son has
made you free, than are ye truly free. And if ye be endewed with strength from
above, than is nothing hard, but all things easy through the spirit, that
works in you.


Theo. I pray you declare unto us, how we may walk purely and innoce^tly
before God. ^ote



Phil. To walk before God is on such sort to i^stitute our life, as he has
appointed i^ his holy scripture, and not as carnal reason imaginethe, Romans x.
or good zeal wtoute knowledge deuiseth contrary to ye prescripte of Gods
word, as we have seen here to fore in our mo^struous Mo^ckes, which labori^g
to establish their own ryghteousnes, were not made obedient to ye justice of
God. That ye may walk before god, Offayth
certain things are to be observed, first yt ye have a sure, co^sta^t,
steadfast, true and lyuysh faith, to believe yt, which ye holy scriptures tech of
god, and of his works. Ye herd ye God is oi^pote^t, almighty, plenteous in
power, abu^da^t, o^ sufficient, full of all good: Psalm. xv.
nedy of nothing. This must ye believe undoubtedly, if ye will walk before
God. Ye herd also, yt as God is able, so will he healpe so many as call on him
in spirit and truethe. Thisalso must ye believe wtoute any hesitacio^ or
doutyng. Joan. iiii. Heb. li.
For wtoute this faith no man can please god, nor come unto him aryght. For
this faith is ye fou^dacion and ground of the christen religion. This faith
makes a christen man. Joan. xii.
This faith makethe us the sons of light. This faith provoke and callethe
unto God. This Faith trustethe not in her own ryghteousnes and good works,
but on the promyses of God. i. Joan. iiii.
This faith makes us to be borne of God. This faith mitigatethe y^ wrath of
God. This faith obtayneth al good things of God, Joan. iii.
as it is written, Joel. ii. Act. ii. Romans x.
he that believes on him has everlasting life. Believe in y^ Lord, says the
scripture, and ye shall be safe, and wtoute any danger. Age^, Every one yt
calls on ye name of ye lord, shall be safe For there is but one, LORD of all,
Gal. iii. Romans vi. Joan. i.
sufficiently rytche for so many as call on him. This faith makes us the
sons of God, as ye Apostle says, all ye are the sons of God, because ye
have believed in Christ Jesus. Again So many as receive him, he gave them power
to be made the sons of God, in as much as they believed in his name. Oze. ii.
This faith maryeth us to God, as he him self testifyethe, I will marye the
unto me in faith, and thou shall know that I am the LORD, Act. xiii. i. Pet.
v.
This faith purifyeth our hearts. This faith overcomes Satan. i. Joan. v.
This faith vanquissheth ye world. i. Cor. iii.
This faith makethe us the Temples of the living God. Esa. xxviii.
This faith will not suffer us to be confounded. Romans x.
This faith brings to us the mercy of God in all our aduersite. Esa. lvii.
This faith is the fulfyllynge of Gods commandments. Mat. xvi.
Romans v.
This faith makethe us the enheritours of the earth, and possessours of Gods
holy mountain This faith makes us to understand the truethe. Gal. ii.
This faith causes that hell gates can not prevail against us. This faith
iustifyeth us. This Faith brings all good things unto us. De fide ad Petrum.
This faith as S. Austen says, is the beginning of man's health, Libri. De
caim et Abel.
without this no man can reach or come unto the number of the sons of God
with out this all the labor of man is frustrate and void. This Faith, as
S. Ambrose says, is the root of all virtues, and that thou byldeste on this
foundation, that alone profyteth unto ye reward, of thy work fruit and
virtue. This faith, says he, is rytcher tha^ all treasures, stronger the^ all
corporal power, Libro de virginitate.
and more healthful than all Phisicions. This faith, as Chrysostom says, is
a lamp. For a lamp lyghteneth the house, In mat. xxv In illu^ simb Credo in
deum.
so does faith the soul. This faith of the Catholyke religion, is the light
of ye soul, the door of life the foundacio^ of everlasting health. Thus se ye,
what an excellent treasure this christen faith is, without the which by no
means ye can walk worthily before the LORD our God.

Moreover this your faith must be conjoined with a reverent fear toward God.
Of fear Prouer. i. Eccle. i. Prouer. ix. Psalm. xiii.
For the fear of the LORD, says the wise man, is the beginning of wisdom,
and expels sin. Note Psalm. cxi. Psalm. xxxii^
Without this fear no man can purely walk before God. For he that fears
God truly, fears also to displease him, yea he sekethe all means possible
to accomplysh the will of god, as the Psalmo graph says, blyssed is that man,
yt fears ye LORD, for all his delight and pleasure shall be in his
commandments. Unto this fear of GOD does David exhort us, saying, fear
ye the LORD all ye that are his servants. For they shall never want ye
fear him. The son honoreth the father, Ma^a. i.
and the seruau^te his Lord, if I be your father, What fear we ought to have
toward god.
where is my honor? And if I be your LORD, where is my fear, says ye
LORD of Hoostes? But this fear ought not to be a servile and bond fear,
procedynge from an vnwyllynge heart, but a reverent and gentle fear flowynge
out of love. Of love.
Therefore with this your faith and fear, must ye also have a sincere and pure
love toward God co^byned, so that ye shall both truly believe in God,
reverently fear him, and unfeignedly love hi^. Deuteronomy. x.
And this is it, that Moses wryghteth, and now O Israel, says he, what does
the LORD thy god require of the, but that you should fear the LORD thy
God, and walk in his ways, and love him, and serve the LORD thy God in all
thy heart and in all thy soul. Now have ye herd partly what it is to walk
before God.


Euse. I pray you, what remains there behind?


Phil. After that ye have conceived in your hertes this faith, We
muste-e^presse our faith, fear and love toward God by external good works.
fear and love toward God through the operacion of the holy Ghost, so that ye
have entered the pathe way of our LORD god, now does convenient time
require, that ye walk not only secretly but also openly before God, tha^ is,
that ye do not only inwardly in your hertes believe in God, feareand love god,
but also that ye outwardly show forth this your faith, fear and love buried
within you by external works, Math. v.
that men seeing your godly conversation, may then glorify your father, which
is in heaven For this is to walk before god, Mark well
eue^ to believe i^ god, to fear god, to love God, and to lead an innocent life
according to his holy word. Without this innocency and purite of life, Deuteronomy.
xiii.
I se not what al faith, fear or love profyt. Follow your LORD God, says
Moses, fear him and keep his commandments, and hear his voice, Miche. vi.
ye shall serve him and cleave unto hi^. The Prophet Miche also says, I will
show the, O man, what is good, and what the LORD requires, of the, even to
do judgment and to love mercy, and studiously to walk with thy God. Here se you,
yt if ye will walk before God, ye must do good deeds, lead a pure and
innocent life, study to accomplish Gods will, and in all points labor to
fasshyon your manners after the rule of gods word. Farewell they that bost so
much of faith, Agenste the vain bosters of faith.
and yet are wicked in all their works. They profess to know god, as the
Apostle says but with their deeds they deny him, seeing they are
abominable, disobedient and unapt to all good works. Tit. i.
Such bosters of faith do not only slander the true and christian faith, which
works by Charity, but also they deceive them selves, Gal. v.
seeing they hope freely and only to be justified by thatfayth, which is barren,
vnfruytfull and void of all good works. Note here.
Let them crake so much as they list of their faith and love toward God,
yet are they wicked gosp^llers. For ye love of god, says saint Gregory, is
never idle. For it works great things, Gregory.
if it be the love of god in deed, but if it cease to work, than it is no
love. Chrisostom
Chrysostom also says. The sons of GOD are not content to sit idle, but
the spirit prouokethe them to take some great and commendable work in hand.
Uerely as impossible as it is for a good tree tobe without a good fruit, wha^ the
time of the year comes, Note this similitude.
so impossible is it for true faith to be without good and christen works. And
as the spirit of God can none otherwise but do those things, that are
pleasant before God, so in like manner a faithful man, which is the son of
god, can not cease from workyng ye will of god. Let these rude raylynge readers
of the Gospel therefore be once ashamed of their faith and spirit, whereof so
greatly they crake, seeing they are altogyther vnfruytfull and wtoute all good
works. ii. Cor. v. Joan. xv.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. He that abides in me, Esa.
xii. Joan. vii. Math. vii. Luke. vi.
and I in him says Christ, brings forth much fruit. And he that believes
in me, as the scripture says, floudes of lyuysh water shall flow out of his
belly. Every good tree brings forth good fruit. He yt has not a lust and
fervent desire to work the will of God, and to fasshon his life in all parties
according to the holy law of God, undoubtedly he has not y^ christen faith,
neither pertayneth he unto Christ, though he bablethe never so much of
faith, i. Cor. iiii.
of God, of Christ, and of all the divine mysteries. For the kingdom of God is
not in word, Mat. vii. Luke. vi. Luke. xiii.
but in power. Not every one that says unto me, LORD, LORD says Christ,
shall enter into ye kingdom of heaven, but he that does y^ will of my father,
which is in heaven. Many shall say unto me, at y^ day, LORD, LORD, have
not we prophesied in thy name, and cast out dyuels by thy name, Psalm. vi. Luke.
vi. Joan. xiiii.
and wrought miracles by thy name? But than shall I say unto them I know you
not. Depart from me ye workers of iniquite. He that has my commandments
and kepethe them, he it is yt loves me. If any man loves me, he will keep my
word, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with
him. But he that loves me not, kepethe not my words. God has not showed to
us his manifold kyndnes, that we should live dissolutely and with out all
good order (for so were we unworthy any kyndenes at all) but that we should
earnestly and with all diligence e^ploy our selves to work his will, to satisfy
so much as lies in our power his godly mind, i. Joan. ii. Romans viii.
and to walk in all our conversation and living, as his derely beloved son w
alked. If he did not spare his only begotten Son, but gave him for us all
even unto the death, how unkind creatures might we righteously be recounted,
if we should not study with herty minds to accomplysshe his holy precepts?
Are they worthy to be called children, Joan. iii.
which neglecte their fathers will, and so greatly dissent from their Fathers
manners? Children ought to follow ye ma^ners of there father.
Our celestial father is holy, and shall we his children be profane and
unholy? Our celestial father is good, godly, merciful, pacient, and all
spirit, and shall we his children be evil, wicked, rygorous, impacient, and
all flesh? Be ye holy, says he, for I am holy. Certes god has not called
us unto uncleanness, Leuit. ix. i. These. iiii.
but unto sanctificacion. Nether has he delivered us from Satan and his army,
that we should live wyckedly, but practyse pure i^nocency and true godlynes in
all our life, as Zachary the Priest father to S. John^ Baptist says: Luke. i.
He has performed the oath, which he swear to our father Abraham, for to give
that we delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve hi^ without
fear all the days of our life in such holiness and righteousness as are
acceptable before him.

Thus se ye that if we will walk before God, Tit. iii.
we may not only believe in God, fear and love God, but also lead a pure and
innocent life, be ple^teous in good works, and altogether studious of true
godliness.


Chri. But I pray you, Why the scripture uses this word walk
why does ye scripture use this term, Walk, rather than any other?


Phil. It is not with out a cause: Ye know, he that stondeth still, moves
nothing forward nor hastes not unto the end of his journey. But he that
walks is ever going, and draws always nerer and nerer unto his iourneyes
end. In consideracion whereof, the holy Scripture uses this word, Walk,
Psa. lxxxiii Romans ii.
to put us in remembrance, that if we have begun well, in our profession, we
should not there cease and stand still, but go forth from virtue to virtue,
from faith to faith, until at the last we attain unto ye perfeccio^ of pure
innocency. Mat. xxiiii.
For he yt continues unto end, says christ, shall be saved. Age^, be faithful
unto the death, and I shall give the the crown of life. Apoc. ii.
This word we read in diverse places of the holy Scriptures, Christ says, walk
while ye have light, Joan. xii.
that the darkness does not ouerwhelme you. For he that walks in darkness,
knows not whyther he goethe. S. Paul also says, Ephe. v.
walk as the children of light, prouyng what is acceptable to the LORD.
Again, look that ye walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise, Colos.
iiii.
redemynge the time, for y^ days are evil. Hitherto pertayneth ye saying of
S. John, i. Joan. ii.
he that says leth in Christ, ought to walk even as he has walked. These
places with all other such like declare to us yt we ought so to walk in our
profession by encreasynge daily in virtues, that at the last we may be
perfect, and as S. Paul says, Colos. i.
make every man perfect in Christ Jesus. And this is it, that follows i^ the
latter end of the sentence. And be perfect. For we ought so to walk, Genesis
xvii.
that is, increase in all godlynes, virtue and honest, that we might be
perfect, as Christ says, be ye perfect, Mat. v.
as your heavenly father is perfect. Also Saint Paul, ii. Cor. xiii.
Rejoice and be perfect. Degrees of perfeccion.
It is one degree of virtue to love my neighbor, but it is an higher degree to
love mine enemy, but the most excellent degree above all, is so to love our
very enemies, that we can be contented not only to do them good, but also eue^
to give our lives to win them unto Christ. It is a point of mercy^ to help
my poor neighbor with my superfluous goods, but it is a point of perfeccion
to sell all that ever I have, and to give it to ye poor as Christ said to the
rytche man, If thou will be perfect, Mat. ix. Luke. xii.
go, and sell all that thou haste, and give it to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in Heaven, and come on thy way and follow me. It is a point of
godlynes to bear an honest heart toward the word of God, yet it is much
more, openly to confess it boldly before men, but the very perfect point of
godlynes is, not only to love and confess it, Mat. x. Mark. viii. Lu^e. xii.
but also manly to abide by it, eue^ unto ye very death, if need so requires.
Now therefore eue^ unto ye most and greatest perfeccion in all things ought
we to contend and labor, that we may walk before God, and be perfect.


Euse. I thyncke there be but few, that attain and come unto this perfeccion.


Phil. This your flower is in deed to the carnal man of a bitter and
unpleasant savor, i. Cor. ii.
but to the spiritual and truly regenerate, it smells sweter tha^ any rose.


Theo. God grant, that we may once be ancient in Christ.


Phile. Labor and God will help. Enter in at the straight gate. For wide is
the gate, Math. vii. Luke. xiii.
and broad is the way, that leadethe unto destrucion, and many there be, which
go in thereat. But streyghte is the gate, and narowe is the way, which
leadethe unto life, and few there be, that find it. ii. Tim. ii. Mat. x.xvi.
Luke. xiiii. i. Joan. ii. Gala. v.
If ye will live and reygne in glory with christ, ye must suffer with Christ,
ye must take y^ Cross of Christ and follow him. Ye must cast away all the
vain pleasures and pompes of the world, the concupiscences and lusts of the
flesh ye must mortifye, Satan and all his subtle suggestio^s ye must ma^fully
resist. ^. Petre. v. Jacob. iiii. Luke. xxiiii.
Ye must dye unto sin, and live unto ryghteousnes. For christ did not enter
into glory, before he had suffered, and thyncke ye the gates of heaven to be
ope^ned for you, if ye live in this world in joy, pleasure and after ye flesh?
Na verily ye may be sure. For ye Apostle says if ye live after the flesh,
Romans viii.
ye shall die. But if ye mortify the deeds of ye body in ye spirit ye shall live.
And this is it, that remains of your flour. Genesis xvii.
And I will make my couenaunte between me and the, and will multiplye the
beyond all measure. God commaundynge Abraham to walk before him, and to be
perfect adds this promise aforefayde, and has undoubtedly acco^plyshed it.
Let us also work before God and be perfect, and ye promise also shall be
fulfilled in us. God will multiply us beyond all measure both in this world,
and in ye world to come, as Christ says, there is no man y^ has forsaken
house, or father and mother, Mat. xxix. Luke. xviii
or brothers, or wife, or children for the kingdom of heaven, but y^ shall
receive much more in this time, and in ye world to come everlasting life.


Chri. GOD grant us so to walk, that we may be found worthy this eternal
life. A brefe rehearsal of this flower.



Phil. well neighbors, seeing that God is almighty, plenteous in power,
abundant, omnisufficient, full of all good, nedy of nothing, liberal, gentle,
merciful, ready to help at every hour, and wholly bente to beatifye and make
welthye so many as call on him in spirit and verite, Joan. iiii.
whom would it not delyght to do seruyse unto such a LORD, and to walk
before him and to be perfect, seeing that for our seruyse doing he will
increase and multiplye us, that is to say, give us in this world abundans of
all things necessary for this our life, and in the world to come everlasting
glory?


Euse. This is a sweet flower, that ye have now given us.


Theo. I beseech God, that we may smell well of it.


Chri. Yea and that the savor may long continue in us.


Phil. To that I say Ame^. For if this come to pass, ye may be sure to have
the favor both of God and man, which of all treasures is the greatest. And
of this shall ye not fail, if ye labor to walk before God and be perfect,
which I call, Pure Innocency, He that is pure from sin, and innocent or
harmeles in his conuersacio^, he must needs find grace and favor in the eyes
both of god and of all men. Therefore dear brothers cleave stedfastlye to this
one very God almighty by true faith, An exhorta^ion unto true faith and good
works.
as ye only Author of all good things, fear him reverently as a beneficial
LORD, love him tenderlye as a gentle Father, and so walk according to his
most divine pleasure in clennes of life and pure innocency without any
faynynge, dissimulacion or Hypocrisye, that ye may in this world be governed
of him in all your Acts through his most holy spirit, and in the world to
come enjoy the glory eternal.


Euse. Ame^ good LORD.


Phil. Your duties learned toward your selves and god, I will now declare how
ye ought to be have your selves toward our most Christen and excelente King,
and all other rulers that are sent of him. And this shall be the third flower
of your Nosegay.


Theo. Never in better time. It comes well in place. Let us se it, I pray you.


The third flower / called / Faithful Obedience.
Philemon. YE remember, I am sure, y^ name of your third flower.


Theo. Ye named it, Faithful Obedience.


Phil. Well remembered. Hold here it is. Let every soul be obedient to the
pouers that bear rule For there is no power but of God. Romans xiii. Sap. vi.
The powers that be, are ordened of GOD. Therefore who so ever resistethe the
power, resistethe the ordinance of God. And they that resist, shall get to
them selves damnacion. etc. How does the aspecte of this flour please your
eyes?


Chri. It is not only pleasant to the eye, but it also gives a goodly
odoriferous and confortable savor to so many as smell on it with purged noses.
For it shows how we ought to behave our selves both toward our most
redoubted King, and all other rulers, which are sent of him unto ye praise of
them that do well, ^. Pet. ii.
but unto the punishment of them that do evil. They therefore yt are faithful
subjects must needs rejoice i^ this flour unfeignedly.


Phil. Well said. Although neighbors I do not doubt, but that in your
conscience, ye are assuredly persuaded, that the christen magistrates and high
powers do reygne, rule, and have dominion, every one in their kyngedome, not of
their own tyranny, cruel violence and extorte power, butte of the authorite
of Gods word, and the just appointment of the high celestial king for the
great consolacion and comfort of his people, and for the innumerable
commodities of the Christen public weal, which of their no less virtuous
than ryghteous regiment and governance do ensue, yet for as much as in these
our days there have risen up wicked and ungodly spirits which deny the office
of the magistrates and high powers to be the ordinance of God, The
Anabaptists.
and affirm yt it can by no means stand with the Gospel of Christ. I will
first declare unto you and prove by ye holy scriptures, that the high powers
are ordined of GOD, The contents of this flower.
and that their office agree and in all points consent with the most holy
word of God, yea and that it is so necessary that without this regiment and
governance of the high powers, no public weal can remain in safe estate,
no frendshyppe can be mayntayned, Mark well.
no faith can be regarded, no order ca^ be kept, no propriete of goods can be
saved, no virtue can reign, no tranquilite ca^ consist, nor any goodness
continue, but all must needs grow out of order, and, as they say, go to
havoc, unto the great disquietnes and utter destruction of so many as dwell
in such wyld, rustical, brutall and beast like realm, where no ciuilite of
public order in mundayne things is observed. This once done, I will declare,
what your duty is toward our most soueraygne LORD the king, and all the
other rulers that govern under his dominion, that ye may live in this most
florysshynge Realm like true and faithful subjects with obedient hertes and
that not only for fear but for conscience sake, that by this means ye may
both acquyre and get to your selves quietness and rest, leadynge an honest and
peasable life without any disturbance, and also be an example to other, that
they with like obedience may be subject and serve our most christen Prince
according to the will of God.

To show that the authorite of ye magistrates and common officers is the
ordinance of God, whereof may I rather take a beginning, than of the public
weal of the Israelites? When God by his extent puissaunce and stretched out
power had delivered the people of Israel out of their miserable servitude,
wherewith they were grievously oppressed of the cruel and lyonlyke Tyrant
Pharao, did he not appoynte Moses to be their ruler, Exo. xiii.
gyde, captain and governor, that he having the preeminence and rule over
the^, should safe co^duite the^, rule and govern the^ after the will of God?
Would he have done this, if it had been a thing unjust, unmeet and unlawful?
Would he not rather have suffered his people to run astraye as masterlesse
hou^des and as sheep destitute of a sheppard or herdman without any order? Did
not Ietro also, a man of great virtue, Exo. xviii.
and replete with ye holy Ghost, when he saw Moses alone take all the pains
in hearing the causes of the Israelites from morning until even, say to him
these words? Look out among al thy people such as be wise men, and that
fear GOD, and such as are true, and hate covetousness. Make these rulars
over the^, some over thousands, some over hu^dredes, over fyftye, and over
ten, that they may always judge the people. Moses so did, and God approved his
act. Here se we other magistrates and rulers appointed also to serve in the
public weal besides ye head officer, which they also being lawfully chosen
and set in office, are approved before God. Deu. xxviii
After Moses were not Iosue, Othoniel, Aioth, Sa^gar, Delbora, Gedeon,
Abimelech, Thola, Iayr, Iepte, Samson, and at the last Samuel, Judges and
rulers over the Israelites? Ware not all these approved to be ye just and
lawful ministers of God. Did not Moses also before his death show to the
people of Israel, that afterward God should give them a king of the number
of their brothers, which should be their rulers as all nations have through out
all the world? Do we not here learn that all Nations at that time had kings,
and that kings are appointed and chosen by the eleccion of god? This is
sufficient for any faithful heart to prove, establysh, and corroborate the
authority of Kings and other civil magistrates. But let us harken more to
the Scripture.

1. Reg. viii.
When Samuel waxed old and could no more judge the people for his age, he
commended that office to his sons Joel and Abia, which answered nothing to
ye godly disposicions of their father, nether ordered the public weal
aryght, but lived dissolutely, volupteously and wickedly, receauynge gifts,
and peruertinge judgment, which caused the Elders and ancient of the people
to assemble, and come unto Samuel, that he might appoint the^ a king to rule
over the^ as all nations had. And did not Samuel shortly after at the
appointment of God an noynte Saul king over* Israel? 1. Reg. ^.
And from that time in a manner until the coming of Christ were there not
Kings among the Israelites of their own nation according to the prophecye
of Jacob? Genesis xlix.
and at Christ's coming ded not king Herod although a stranger, reygne
among ye Jews? Do not al these histories manifestly prove and approve ye office
of kings and other magistrates to be ye ordinance of God?


Euse. Those things are clerer than ye light.


Phil. I will now rehearse unto you certain manifest se^tences and open textes
of the holy Scripture, which shall evidently establysshe ye authoryte of ye
high powers, that Satan himself shall not be able to prevail against it, much
less his impes, which now of late are spro^g out of his diabolical side.


Christo. I pray you let us hear them.


Phil. Solomon speaking in the person of God, Pro. viii.
says on this manner, through me Kings reygne, through me Princes make just
laws. Through me Lords bear rule, and all Judges of the earth execute
judgment. Again the wise man says, hear O ye Kings and understand, Sap. vi.
give ear ye that rule the multitudes. For the power is given you of the
LORD, and the strength from the most high god. Are not these words plain
enough, to show that the power, which the civil magistrates and head
Officers have, is of God? as that noble king Iosaphat said to the^, whom he
appointed judges of the land in all the cities of Judah. ii. Par. ix.
Take heed, says he, what ye do. For ye execute not the judgment of man, but
of the Lord, and he is with you in judgment. Therefore let the fear of the
LORD be with you, and do al thing diligently For with the Lord our God there
is no unrighteous, nor respect of persons, nor desire of gifts. god hi^
self also says by the mouth of David, ye are Gods, Psalm. lxxxi.
ye are all the sons ot the most highest. Does not god here plainly say,
that the magistrates are gods, that is, such as bear the offices of GOD, as to
maintain peace, justice and good order, to punysh sin and to defend the
innocents. If they be the officers of God, and exercise his office, so that he
approves and allows their state and manner of lyuinge, how can any man
righteously condemn and reiecte their autho^ite and power Cursed be they, that
knowledge not from the very heart the high powers to be ordened of God, and that
there fore they ought to be obeyed and had in perpetual reverence and honor.


Chri. They grant that in the old law it was ye ordinance of God to have
civil magistrates, as Judges, Kings, and other rulers, but now, say they,
in the new Testament it is not lawful to have any preemine^ce or superiorite
For christ says, Mat. xxiii.
be not ye called master. For ye have but one master eue^ Christ. All ye are
brothers. Luke. xxii.
Again, ye kings of the Hethen have dominion on the^, and they that bear
rule over them, are called gracious Lords. But ye shall not be so. The
obiec^ions of ye Anabaptists.
But the greatest among you, shall be as the youngest, and the cheffest as a
servant, Lo, say they, here is all dominion and temporal power forbyddenne
among Christen people, and equality of power proponed and set forth to all
men.

And that we should doubt no thing hereof, we have, say they a manifest
example of Christ the teacher of all verite, which, when the people would
have made him king. fled away from them, Joan. vi.
and by no means would enjoy ye office, although being the very Messiah and
true anointed king of ye Lord Moreover he said to Pylate, Joan. xviii.
my kyngedome is not of this world.


Phil. O blind ignorancye, and ignorante blyndnes, with what eyes do those
Owls look on ye holy scripture? with what spirit does that generation of
vipers search and judge ye most sacred word of God? The confutacion.
With how fylthy and vnwasshed feet do those swynysh and beastlike parsonnes
enter into the sweet and pleasant fountaynes of y^ most pure scriptures? O
Lord GOD, what dares not blind Bayard attempt and take in hand? Mark well.
Christ came not into this world to reygne, but to serve, not to be a
te^porall, but spiritual king, not to rule with the sword, but with the breath
of his mouth, not to execute judgment on other, but to be judged hi^ self,
not to live as an erthly Prince, but as a ghostly minister of Gods word, not
to ^lea, but to be slain. Therefore was it convenient, that he should fulfill
his Fathers will, for the which he came down, and that once done to ascend
and go up again unto the glory of his father. Which all these things he did:
living all the time yt he was in this world humbly and mekely, showing ever
obedience, reverence and honor to the magistrates although Hethen, even unto
ye very death. And as he came to serve and not to be served, to obey and not to
be obeyed, so taught he his disciples when they began to contend of
superiorite, to be humble, lowly, meke, gentle, obediente, and not to go about
any temporal primacye, which only pertains to the civil magistrates, but to
be content with their office, The office of christ's Apos^les.
which was to preach Gods word, to open the mysteries of Christ's kyngedome,
to reprove the world of sin and unfaithfulness, to fight with the swerd of
gods word, to use not carnal but spiritual armours, to bring a gain such
as were gone astraye. To be short, wholly to be bent to enlarge the kyngedome
of God, and the glory of Christ's Gospel. This destroys not, but rather
magnifieth the authorite of ye high powers, saying Christ wylled them not to
take upon them the office of temporal regiment contrary to equite, i. Cor. iiii.
but only to be as servants and dispensatours of the mysteries of GOD. And
come of a good felawshyp, did Christ at any time show him self disobediente
to the public magistrates and head officers? Did not he confess that ye
power, which Pylate ye Judge had over him, Joan. xix.
was given him from above. Note that well, I pray you, and bear it away.
Math. xxii. Mark. xii. Luke. xx.
Did not he also pay tribute to Caesar, and willed other to do so likewise? Did
not ye Apostles also show themselves obedient to the high powers in all
points, yea and taught other me^ so to do? There is no power, Romans xiii.
says S. Paul but of god. The powers that be, are ordenned of God. Therefore
who so resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. And they that
resist, i. Pet. ii.
get to the^ selves da^nacio^. s. Peter also commands us to honor the king
and to be subject to him as supreme head, and to the other rulers that are
sent of him. For this is the will of ye Lord, The new testament also approve
the authorite of ye Magistrates.
says he. Are not al these authorities alleged out of the new Testament? Have
we not here both manifest textes and also evident examples to approve the
office and state of the high powers, so that it is now of no less authority,
than ever it was before, but rather greater and stronger, seeing it is now
also confirmed and establysshed by Christ and his Apostles? Let ye adversaries
of this ordinance of GOD learn to be ashamed, confess their disobedience,
become subject and give reverence and honor to all head officers as to the
ministers of god, even from the greatest to the least. For so is the will of
God, says the scripture.


Theo. It will be objected of these order destroyers: we wulde gladly hear by
the scripture, if any christian man, that had received the faith of Christ, did
ever bear rule and exercise te^porall dominion over his Brothers.


Phil. What is this? What do I hear? May not a christen man execute that
office, whereby virtue is mayntayned and vice exiled? Is he not more fit to be
a ruler that beleuethe in the true God, fears him, seeks his glory,
embraseth virtue, hates vice, loves his neighbor, tendereth the common
wealth, and seeks in all points to be a father among his subjects, tha^
such one as believes in Idolles, fears them, seeks th^yr glory, despyseth
the alone true God, hate the virtue, embraces vice, oppressethe his neighbor,
tearethe the common wealth i^ peses, and shows himself i^ all things a cruel
Tyrant among his subjects? What furious Erinnys has invaded and troubled ye
brains of these unreasonable creatures to resist the public Magistrates and
to condemn their authority, which they have received of God? But let these
honest men, and GOD will, tell me, was not Abraham, Iosephe, Judas, Moses,
Iosue, Gedeo^ Samuel, David, Ezechias, Iosaphat, Josias, with many other Christen
and faithful men? Yet did they execute the office of Magistrates and were high
powers, in deed allowed before God, workynge that, which was good in his syghte?


Euse. They were faithful, ^aye they we g^au^t, but not christen.


Phile. O monstures as though it were one thing to be faithful, and another
to be christian. Difference is there none between them and us, but this only,
that they believed in Christ to come, and we believe that Christ is come, and
has fulfilled the prophecies of the holy me^ ghostly enspired. All, says S.
Paul (he speaks of the fathers of the old Testament) did eat al one
spiritual meat, i. Cor. ^.
that is to say with us, and all did drink the very same drink of the
spiritual rock, which accompanied them, and Christ was y^ rock. It is a good
consequence therefore, that it is all one church both of them that believed
than in Christ and of them, which are now, which church is gathered together
i^ one and the very same spirit, so yt they be a like faithful and christian,
having one faith, one profession, one religion, one God, one Lord, one
savior, and one hope. But I will come to ye new Testament. Was not Nichodemus,
Joseph, and ye noble man which was Cha^berlayne and of great authorite
wtCa^dace yt queen of ye lord of ye Moria^s, which was baptized of Philip, and
received into Christ's flock, christian and faithful me^? Yet were they
magistrates. Was not Cornelius which called Peter unto him, and was baptized of
him, a christian man? Yet did he use public offices. Was not Sergius Paulus,
Erastus, with diverse other christian me^? And yet officers in ye co^mo^welth?


Chri. All these things are true.


Phil. Well tha^ let us conclude if it were lawful at ye time for a
christe^ma^to bear rule i^ ye commonweal hou is it now become unlawful, Is any
man more fyt to reign and rule among christian me^, tha^ he which is of ye same
profession, faith and religion? Is it convenient for the wicked and unfaithful
to have dominion over ye ryghteous and christian, rather tha^ they, which
desire nothing more tha^ the glory of god, and the health of their Christian
brothers? O extreme blindness. If that should come to pass, who wuld not wish
rather to be an unfaithful painim tha^ a faithful christian? Behold to what
point these wicked order breakers bring the Christen religion, while they will
seem to fight most chefelye for the glorious furtheraunce of it? O foxysh
Hypocrites. Who perceyueth not their subtylite? Who smellethe not their
craft? Who espyeth not their false hode? While they go about to syn without
punishment, to have al things in common, to live of the sweat of other me^nes
brows, to live freely in all kind of beastlike pleasure, to defyle other me^nes
wives, maidens, daughters and servants. etc. behold to what point these
gross^ Gospellers, these shameless Schismatykes, these brutall belly Gods,
bring the public wea^e of Christendom. God moughte once root^ such
Pestilences out of the earth, that we may according to our duty with all
submission of mind, and faythefull obedience, honor and magnify y^ pyblique
Magistrates.

Thus have I neighbors, grossly but faithfully, rudely but truly proved to
you by the i^fallible verite of Gods word, that the high powers are ordained
of God, and yt their office pleases God, and is agreeable in all points with the
holy scriptures both of the old and new Testastament.

Now according to my promise will I in three words, as they say, declare how
necessary the office o^ the public magistrates is for the right institucion
and prosperous preseruacion of the common weal.


Euse. I pray you let us hear.


Phil. The office of the high powers evidently declares, what innumerable
commodities and pleasures y^ christian public weal receueth by the^. Moses,
when he appointed certain rulers over the Israelites, Deuteronomy. i.
commanded the^ that they should judge righteouslye, and that they should not
be parciall in their judgments, but hear all indifferently, not estemyng nor
preferrynge the man of power and nobilite before the poor and base person, nor
yet fear the perso^ne of any man, for it is the judgment o^ GOD, says he.
Again, that they should receive no gifts (for gifts do blind the eyes of
the wise, Deuteronomy. xvii.
and deprave the causes of the ryghteous) but always pursewe and follow that,
which is according to justice, hau^ ever with them the book of ye law of the
LORD, read it all the days of their life, that they may learn to fear the
LORD their God, and to keep all the words of his law, and ordinances
thereof, that they may do them. Ie xxi. xxii. Esa. i. za^ha. vii.
The Prophet Jeremy also commands kings and other rulers to minister
righteousness, to deliver the oppressed from violent power, to keep equite not
to grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles nor the wydowe, nor yet to
shed innocent blood. Here may ye se in few words, How necessary ye office
of the civil Magistrates is.
how necessary the office of the public magistrates is for the right
institucion and prosperous preseruacion of the common weal. How expedient is
it, think you, in matters of co^trauersy, that all things be judged and
reconciled according to equite and justice? How necessary is it, that ye poor
oppressed be delivered from y^ violent blood soupers? How convenient is it,
that the stranger, wydowe and fatherles be helped and provided for? How
profitable is it, that unite, concord, love benevolence, frendshyppe, amite be
mayntayned? and debate, discord, strife, maleuolence, ire, wrath, contencion,
hatred, emnite be exiled? How necessary is it, ye virtue reygneth, and vice be
banyshed? How semely is it, that an order be kept, and confusion driven out
of the public weal* By the godly office and authorite of y^ high powers al
these good things are brought to pass, and without that, what can there
remain in any public weal i^ safe estate and comely order? Prouer. x^^
As Salomo^ says, where there is no governor, there the people must needs
decay. But where as are many that can give council, there is wealth, as
Chrysostom says, If thou takeste away the judicial seats and the offices of
the law, Hom. vi. ad Pop. de eo quod vtilis sit principu^ terror.
so have thou utterly destroyed all the order of our life. And as if thou
seperatest and pluckest away from the ship the master and stereman of it,
thou have drowned the ship, and as if thou leadest away the captain from the
army, thou haste made the Soldiers to be overcome of their enemies. So like
wise if thou take away ye rulers out of the Cities, we shall lead a life
more unreasonable tha^ the very brute bestes, ever snatchyng on^ at another,
bytynge and devouring one another, so that the man of the greater power shall
subdue the poorer, and the bolder shall overcome the meker spirited. They
therefore that go about to take away the public magistrates, may justly
seem to be ye most exstreme pestile^ces of ye commonweal, and to destroy yt,
which is no less profitable for our preseruacion, safegarde and health, than
the son, fire, or water is, or what so ever can be rekened most necessary
for this our nedy life. Behold what commodities we receive by the high power*
For by them is public innocence, honest behauour, godly learning, virtuous
knoweledge, syncer erudicion, necessary arts, fruytfull occupacions,
mayntayned. By the^ we live in tranquilite and peace. By them we enjoy our
own possessions wtoute any disturbaunce. By them we are preserved from all
injuries and cruel oppressio^s. By them our Realms are defended from the
i^uasion of cruel Tyrauntes. By them the glory of God floryssheth. By the^ the
Gospel of Christ triumphs, and all sects and heresies are extyrped and
plucked up by the roots. To conclude, by them God works his most divine
pleasure in his elect and faithful people, and all good things chau^se unto
us. For their judging place is the throne of God. Pro. xvi.
Their mouth and sentence is the organ and instrument of Gods truth. They are
the vicars of God. They are the lyuish Image of God. They are the ministers of
God for our wealth. Romans xiii. Psalm. xviii. Deuteronomy. i.
They represent the parson of God. They exercise the judgment ofye LORD. They
are the fathers of the contre. They are the pastors of the people. They are the
maynteners of peace. They are the rulers of justice, and patrons of all true
innocency. They therefore, which will not approve, commend and allow the
imperye, rule and dominion of the public magistrates and head officers, may
worthily be judged twyse fra^tyke, and to much estraunged from all kind of
humanite. Thus have ye heard in few words, how necessary the high powers
are for the right institucion and godly administracion of ye public weal.


Theo. We se now right well, that without they regiment and governance,
nothing yt is godly and virtuous can stond, but all wicked things must needs
spri^g up and arise in those Realms, where the public Magistrates want.


Phil. Truth it is, that ye say, well, now for the just and perfect
accomplysshement of my promise heretofore made, I will declare co^seque^tly
unto you, what your duty is ^owarde the high powers, I mean, our most
soueraygne Lord ye king and all the other rulers, that govern under his most
noble empire and dominion.


Chri. I pray you hertely let it so be.


Phil. Ye remember well, I am sure, that your flour, which I I gave you last,
is this. Romans xiii.
Let every soul be obediente to the powers, that bear rule. etc.


Euse. We remember it well.


Phil. Here is Faithful obedience required of you toward the high powers and
rulers of the common weal. Of faithful obedience.
For as it is their office to rule, so is it our duty to obey, and that not
faynedly but with sincerite of conscience and pureness of mind without any
dissimulacion or Hypocrysy. Note.
For there is no power but of God. Romans xiii.
The powers that be are ordined of God. Therefore Who so ever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God. And they that resist, shall get
tothe^ selves damnacion. Butte I pray you mark, what your flower says, Let
every soul be obedience to the powers that bear rule. Note that it is said,
Let every soul be obedient. Here se you, that no parson, be he spiritual or
temporal, as they use to call them, is excepted from obedience toward the
high powers. No parson is excepted from obedience unto ye powers.
All are under subieccion. All owe obedience, fear, honor and tribute to the
rulers of the common weal. None is free from this subieccion. For every soul
is here taken after the Hebrew phrase for all me^, and for so many as are
reasonable creatures, borne and appointed to live under a law. So that the
scripture here commands all men both spiritual and temporal, both godly
and ungodly, both wicked and righteous, both perfect and imperfecte, to obey
the magistrates and all such ordinances and laws, as are made of the^ for the
glory of God, and the commodite of the public weal, or else they accumulate
and heap up to the^ selves great da^nacio^, as S. Austen says, De correct.
Donatist. ad bonifa^. capi. vi.
who soever will not obey the laws of the temporal governors, which are made
for the establyshemen^ of Gods truethe, he gets great damnacion. The
spiritu alte also must obey.



Theo. Are the spiritual persons bound to be obedient also to the high powers
by the word of God?


Phil. Yea verelye, there is not one Bishop nor priest within this Realm of
England, which owes not so much obedience to the kings graces majesty, as
the most inferior subject and vile temporal man does. Neither does this
name spiritual, Archbishop, Patriarche, Cardinal, Bishop, Archedeacon,
Suffragane, Priest, Decon, etc. deliver them from subieccio^ and obedience, no
more than this word, Tayloure, Shoemaker, Draper, Merchant, Innekeper, water
ta^kerde bearer, Dawber, Cobbler* etc. does Let every soul, says the
Scripture^ be obediente to the Powers that bear rule, Here is none excepted,
no not that Romyshe Porke, which chalengeth so great authorite over all parsons
in the world, O abhominacion.
that he is not ashamed to suffer kings and Emperors to kiss and lycke his
pockye feet. O shameless Antechriste. Theophilacte upon the aforesaid place of
Paul wrytethe on this manner: Theophilacte.
Here he teaches all men, says he, that whyther he be Priest or monk, or
Apostle, they should be obedient to the Princes and high powers: Where is onye
excepcion now, I pray you? where are the pryuyledges, immunities, fredoms,
and liberties now become, which the Butcher of Rome was wont to give so
bounteouslye to his dear spiritual children, that they might sin with out
punishment, be free from payenge tribute, exempte from all temporal
iurisdiccion, ^e Lords and kings within them selves, hang and draw at their
own pleasure, and do what so ever their beastlyke lusts coueted? How well
followed they this doctrine of ye holy Ghost? Of what spirit, were they named
spiritual, which so manifestly fight with the spirit of god? With what
forheade durst they be bold to call the^ selves the successors of ye
Apostles, seeing that contrary to ye teaching and practyse of all true
Apostles, they were disobediente to the high powers, robbed them of their
authorite, led them captive and made the^ to serve their voluptuous and
beastlyke pleasures.


Euse. Undoubtedly there has been great abusion in the Clergy concerning the
temporal rulars.


Phil. It can not be denied but thanks be to our LORD God, which has in
these our days brought it to pass by the reuelacion of his divine verite,
that our most christen King, with certain other Princes, has very
tryumpha^tely gotten again and recovered their authorite given them of God,
whereof so many years they have unjustly be deprived by the furious tyranny of
that most cruel Romysh Bishop and his bloudye whelps.


Theo. The holy scripture, I am sure taught them no such disobedience.


Phil. No verily. It rather teachethe them obedience, as ye heard before. For
it is written, the king bears rule over all, iii. Esd. iiii.
and he has dominion over them, so that what so ever he says to the^, they do
it. Was not Aharon the high Priest obedient to Moses, Exo. xxxii.
whom God appointed rulare over his people, and did what soever he commanded
him. Wasnot the high Priest Achimelech and all the other Prestes obedient to
king Saul, i. Reg. xxii.
and called them selves his servants, and him their Lord, not once resistyng
the fury of the king, but rather chosyng to suffer death patiently under so
great a tyrau^t, than once to resist him disobedie^tly? What need I speak of
David, Salamo^, Ezechias, Iosaphat, ii. Pa. viii. ii. Pa. xix. ii. Par. xxix
xxx.xxxi.
Josias, Alexander, Demetrius, Antiochus. etc. which euerhad the Bysshoppes,
Prestes, Levites, and other spiritual ministers in subiecion with out any
resistance? How can our spiritualte than be free from obedience and
subieccio^?


Chri. Ye say truth But all these hystories hitherto alleged, i. Math. x.
xiiii. vii.
you have borrowed of ye old Testamente. We would be glad to hear this thing
proved by the authorite of the new Testament. For there have been, The
Anabaptists.
neither yet want, which thyncke it a matter of absurdite and a thing very
vnsittyng, that te^porall rulars should reygne over the spiritualte.


Phil. O disobedient hertes. Luke. ii.
Did not Mary ye mother of Christ and Joseph obey the commandment of Augustus
the Emperor, when ye whole world should be taxed and went into their Cite
Bethlee^? Math. xvii. Math. xxii. Mar. xiiii. Luke. xxii. Joan. xviii. Act.
xxiii. xxv.
Did not Christ himself teach obedience toward the high powers? Did not he
pay tribute? Was not he content to dye under ye temporal rulers, and confess
yt their power was given them from above? Did not the Apostles so in like
manner both teach and do? Did not Paul wyllyngly ever obey ye public
magistrates Flestus and Faelix. etc? Did not all the Bishops and ministers of
Gods word so likewise do and teach i^ ye primative Chirch, Dan. ix. Esa. xi.
ii. These. ii.
until yt wicked man ye son of perdicio^ came, which exalted him self above
all that is called God, in so much yt he syttethe in the Temple of God,
bostynge him self to be God? But the LORD shall slaye him with the breath of
his mouth, and shall put him to flight with the clerenes of his coming. Let
it come to pass, O LORD, yea and that shortly.

Furthermore was not this the Commandment of Christ: Math. xxii.
Pay yt to the Emperor that is due to the Emperor, what is due to the
Emperor, that is, to the temporal gouernoure, but obedience, fear, honor,
tribute. etc. How than cann^ any man be excepted from the obedience of the
temporal power, Romans xiii.
be he called spiritual or otherwise? Let every soul, says S. Paul, as ye
heard before, be obedient to the powers ye bear rule. Again he says warn
them that they submyt the^ selves unto Princes and to the higher authorite,
Titus. ii.
to obey the Officers, S. Peter also says, submyt your selves to all manner
of ordinance of me^ for the LORDS sake, i. Pet. ii.
whyther it be unto the king as unto ye chief head, or unto rulers, as unto
them that are sent of him for the punishment of euel doers, but for ye praise
of the^ that do well. For so is the will of God. Are not all these authorities
selected out of the new Testament sufficient to declare what obedience all
kind of people owe to the higher powers?


Euse. Yies in good faith, and that no man from this true and faithful
obedience is excepted.


Phil. Uery well said. So here do ye now learn* what is one point of your
duty toward our most redoubted king, What our duty is toward ye high
powers.
and other head officers


Chri. This is truly and faithfully with all humilite and submission of mind to
be obedient unto them, and gladlye to execute, perform and do, ye which they
commau^de and require of us.


Phil. Than do ye perceive right well that as it is the office of the public
magistrates for to rule, so is it your duetye to obey.


Theo. We perceive that right well, and that we may by no means resist the
high powers, in as much as they are ordened of GOD. Romans xiii*
For who so ever resistethe the power, resistethe the ordinance of GOD. And
they that resist, shall get to the^ selves damnacion.


Phil. It is well said. But I will now go forth to declare unto you, what your
duty is more toward the high powers.


Chri. I pray you let it so be.


Phil. It is not only required of us by ye word of God, Offea^*
that we should be obedient to the head rulers, but also that we fear them.
For Sayncte Paul among all other things, which we of very duty owe to the
higher powers, rehearses fear. So that it is our duty also to fear, unless
we atte^pte any thing, that should derogate their pryncelyke authorite, or in
any point displease them. For the rulers are not fear, Romans xiii
says he, to them that do well, but to the^ that do evil. Will thou not
fear the power? Do that is good, and thou shalt receive praise of it. For he
is the minister of god unto thy wealth. But if thou do that which is euel than
fear. For he bearet he not the swearde in vain. He is ye minister of God, a
taker of vengeance to punysh him that does evil. Wherfor^ ye must needs obey,
not only for punyshme^t but also for conscience sake. Pro. xx
And this is it that Solomon says the King ought to be feared as y^ roryng of
a Lyo^. Whosoever provoke him unto anger, offends agenste his own soul. Again
he says, my son fear thou the LORD and the king. Behold how he joins
the fear of God and of the King together because we should walk ever with a
reverent fear toward him, Pro. xxiiii
Mark well.
always being afearde either to thyncke, breath, speak or do, that should be
contrary to the Kings graces pleasure. How grievously they have be punyshed
that walked as sedicious parsons without any godly fear toward the public
magistrates, Numer. vi. iii. Reg. xvi.
the Histories of Dathan and Abyron, of Zambry and Baasa show manifestly.
Neither have we wa^ted experience of this thing now a days. For what, I
pray you, Experience of our time.
has ever ben muttered or secretly conspired against the kings graces
majesty at any time either among men of nobilite, or yet of the baser sort,
yt has not come to light, and wrought destruction to the Authors thereof? This
is undoubtedly the provision of God. God watches upon his ministers, yt no
evil chance unto the^.
GOD defends his ministers, as a good master does his servants. God
waytethe upon the Kings graces health. He defends him from his enemies. He
kepethe all his bones, Psalm. xxxiii. Math. x. Luke. xii.
as the Psalmograhe says, that not one of them shall be broken. He has
no^bred the hears of his head, so that not one of them shall perysh without
the good will of our heavenly father. He has with out doubt hitherto, and
shall continually preserve his most gracious majesty from all the craftye
conspiracio^s and subtyle assaults of all his enemies, so that they shall never
prevail against him, but his grace shall ever be preserved in safe estate, and
have perpetually the tryu^phant victory over all his enemies unto y^ great
glory of God, the fruytefull promocion of Christ's Gospel, Note this
s^^militude.
and the prosperous tranquilite and wealth of al us his most loving subjects.
For as it is impossible to hinder or let the course of ye Son or moon so is
it impossible for the^ to escape, which imagyne or work any violence or
treason against his grace. Certes there is no evasion nor way to escape, as the
wise manne says. For God always preserves his ministers, Eccl. vii.
and will not suffer them to escape unpunished, that co^te^ne disobey, or
labor to destroy his ordinance, Would God therefore that all men would
remember this saying of the preacher: Wysshe the king no evil in thy
thought, Eccl. x.
and speak no hurt of the rytch in thy priuye chamber. For a bird of the
air shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers shall she bewray thy words.
There is nothing hyd, y^ shall not come to light, neither is there any secret,
Math. x. Luke. xii.
that shall not come to reuelacion.


Euse. If they would set before the eyes of their mind this most godly and
wise sentence, than should they never offend, but ever fear once to think
any thing that should be prejudicial to ye kings graces honor.


Phil. Ye say truth. Provide therefore that ye your selves remember it well,
What fear we ought to have toward ye high powers.
and ever set before your eyes this fear, and that not constraynte, seruyle,
bond or churlysh, but reverent, gentle, obsequious, willing, yea and even
such a loving fear, as a dear Son has toward his most hertely beloved
father, so that ye would fear to offend though there were no law nor
punishment at all, even for the love that ye hear toward virtue, true
innocencye and purite of life. If ye have this fear, ye shall easly have the
true obedience and all other things, which most of al become faithful and
loving subjects. And with out this fear know that ye can none otherwise
but precipitate and throw headlonge your selves into all kind of mischefe,
parell, danger and destruction.


Chri. God might en grasfe in our hertes this reverent fear toward our
most excellent Prince, that we by no means may offend hi^ neither in
thought, word nor deed.


Theo. Amen, Ofhonour.
good LORD I beseech the.


Phile. Moreover besides this obedience and fear, we owe also to the high
powers, honor, as S. Paul wytnessethe in the aforsayd text. Romans xiii*
And S. Peter says, i. Pet. ii.
honor all men, love the brotherhead, fear God, honor the king. Here are we
also commanded to honor the king. What it is to honor the king.



Euse. What means the scripture by that, I pray you?


Phil. To honor the king, is not only to pretend and show an outward
humilite and humble obeysaunce toward him, as by puttyng of our cappe to him,
reverently to speak to him, to knele unto him, to grant him freely and
wyllyngly what so ever he requires of us, but also with heart and mind to
wysh well unto him, to desire all good and prosperous things unto him, to
pray for him, to desire long life unto him, to pray that God may rule and
govern all his councelles, enterprises and affairs, to watch diligently yt no
harm, disturbance or incommodite chau^se unto him, and in all our acts
either public or private, open or secret, to seake the honor of him, as of
our most soueraygne LORD. This honor showed David to king Saul, i. Reg.
xxvi.
which knowing Saul to be his utter enemy, and one that sought his life, would
notwithstondynge so much as once hurt him, nor yet suffer any other to do it,
although he had sufficient oportunite and occasion diverse times to have slain
hi^, if he had been so minded. The Lord forbid me, says he, y^ I should lay
mynhand on him. Again, kyl hi^ not. For who says he, shall lay hands on the
LORDS anointed, and be not gyltye? The LORD lyuethe, he dies not, except
the LORD smite him, or that his day be come to dye, ii. Reg. i.
or else go to battle, and there perysh He also afterward commanded ye
young manne to be slain, which came and told him, that he had killed king
Saul, thynckynge by this menes to have picked a great thank or obtained some
beneficial reward at David's hand. Note.
Here was true honor. For it is not lawful for any man being a subject to
arise against his Prince, and to avenge his own quarrel, be he never so much a
Tyrant, or sustayneth he at his hand never so great injuries and wrongs, but
patiently to suffer all things, yea rather death, Deuteronomy. xxxii. Romans xii. Heb.
x. Romans xiii.
tha^ he should once resist, leaving the vengeance unto him, which says,
vengeance is mine, and I will reward. For he that resists the ordinance of
God, gets to him self dampnacion. And they that dishonor the high powers,
shall fall into ignobilite, and prove a miserable end.


Chri. They therefore dishonor greatly the magistrates, which e^cite and store
up sedicions, make co^motions, and trouble the tra^quilite of the common
weal, wysshing that there were no temporal governor over the^, but that they
might lice^ciously do what so the^ lusts.


P. Such sekers of carnal and best like liberte hitherto have, and still shall
receive a reward worthy their labor. But learn you (most dear brothers)
utterly to reny and forsake the pestiferous and wicked ma^ners of such
sedicious Scismatykes and disobedient Rebellions, and study unfeignedly to give
that true obedience fear and honor to our most christian and bou^teous
Prince, yt the scripture requires of us, as I have taught you before, and to
so many also as are appointed of him to rule under his graces dominion. So
shall ye both please God, and also lead a good and quiet life in this world.


Euse. God forbid that the contrary should be found in us.


Phil. Now remains the fourth thing to be declared unto you, Of tribute
which all we subjects from the highest to the lowest owe to our most
excellent king.


Theo. What is that I pray you?


Phil. Uerely, trybute. For this causealso, says S. Paul, Romans xiii.
must ye pay tribute. For they are Gods ministers which maintain the same
defense. Give therefore to every man his duty, trybute to whom tribute
belongs, custom to whom custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs,
honor to whom honor pertayneth.


Chri. I pray you, what mean ye by this word, tribute?


PHIL. By tribute I understand all paymentes that are due to the civil
magistrates, What is meant by this word tribute.
as tenthes, fyftenes, re^tes, taskes, subsidies, customs. etc. All these are
we bound by Gods commandment to pay without any tumulte or grudgynge, and
that not without a cause. Note why we ought to pay tribute
For seeing that y^ high powers take so great pains for to defend us and to
keep all that we have in safegarde against the violence of our enemies, again to
mayntayn virtue and to expulse vice, which thing can not be brought to pass
without prudent, wise and learned governors, it is expedient that we, which
receive these commodities of them, do minister again unto the^ freely,
abundantly, and liberally, what soever they require of us for y^ preseruacion
of y^ public weal and mayntenaunce of their dignite. Neither can we deny
the^ this except we will transgress Gods precepte and fall into the danger
of damnacion, and show that we be most extreme enemies to our selves. Math.
xvii. Math. xxii.
For Christ willing to give us an example of this thing, paid tribute him
self, and commanded other so to do, saying: Pay that which is due to Caesar
unto Caesar, understanding by the name of Caesar every magistrate and temporal
power generally.

And that the kings grace may lawefully without onye scruple or grudge of
conscience take such charges of us as I rehearsed before, and that we ought
not once to mutter against his graces pleasure and will i^ this behalf, it is
manifest by these words, i. Reg. viii.
which god spoke unto Samuel: This shall be ye law or right of y^ king, says
he, that shall reign over you. Your sons shall he take for his charettes and
for horsemen to run before his Charettes, and to be rulers and Captains, to
be plowe men to till his land, and to be repers in his harvest, and to make
his harness, and such things as belong to his Charettes As for your
daughters, he shall take them to be Apoticaries Cooks and Bakers. Your best
land and vyneyardes, and oylegarde^s shall he take, and give unto his
servants. Of your seeds also and vineyardes shall he take the tithes, and
give unto his Chamberlaynes and servants. And your servants and your maids
and your best young men, and your Asses shall he take, and do his business with
all. Of your flocks shall he take the tithes, and ye shall be his servants.
Are not these words manifest and plain enough to declare what right, title,
and power by the word of God, our most excellent Prince has to challenge and
require of us such costs and charges, as he sustaynethe for the common weal,
and that all that ever we have, is at his commandment, and that we ought by
no means to resist or say him nay.


Chri. They are more clear than the Son, and more open the^ the light.


Theo. Yet have I heard some say, An obiec^io^
that we are made free by Christ, and ought to serve no man, nor to be
charged with payme^tes to any parson, but all things ought to be common among
christen men.


Phil. To answer unto every part of this your sentence, Theanswer
requires many words, and asks much time. But to be short, know that who so
ever mayntayneth that kind of doctrine, dissenteth much from the christen
religion, corrupts the word of God, sows false teaching, Our libert^ is
spiritual and not carnal
huntethe a carnal liberte, and desires to live in all kind of sin without
punishmente. Truth it is, y^ we are made free by Christ, but this our liberte
is spiritual and not temporal. By Christ we are delivered from ye da^nacion of
the law, Romans x. Gala. iii. i. Cor. xv. Ose. xiii. Heb. ii. Act. x. Joan. viii.
Gala. v. i. Pet. ii.
but not from the obseruau^ce ofit. By Christ we are made free from the power
of Satan sin, death, desperacion and hell, but not from the power of y^
civil magistrates. By Christ have we received our manumission and fredom^ from
the condemnacion of all those things, i^to the which we were cast by the si^ne
of our first father Ada^. So that by Christ we are spiritually made free, if
we abide in his words, as we read i^ ye Gospel of John^ and i^ diverse other
places of y^ holy scripture. But this spiritual liberte makes us not free from
our obedience and duty toward the temporal power, to whom we owe both our
selves and all that ever we have, as ye ^eard before. For this were a thing of
to much absurdite and contrary to all good order, and the teaching both of
Christ and of his Apostles. Yea so should God be the Author of confusion and
not of order, of dissension and not of concord. S. Austen says, In li^. ad
Romans prop^sit. lxxii.
if any man thyncketh, that because he is a christen man, he ought to pay no
custom or tribute, nor show any honor to the high powers, he falls into a
great error, and is very much deceived. Contra aux entium. xi. Quest. i.
Canon, sitributi^n.
S, Ambrose also says, if the temporal gouernoure asks tribute, we deny it
not, let the lands of the Church pay tribute. If the rulare desires the
lands, he has power to challenge the^, let him therefore take the^, if he will,
I give them not to the Emperor but nether do I deny them. Again he says, it
is a great and special document or point of teaching, whereby christen men are
taught to be subject to the higher powers, because that no man should thyncke
that y^ constitucio^ or ordinance of an erthly king ought to be losoned or
broken. Ibidem. Ca^ magnu^.
Math. xvii.
For if the son of God paid Tribute, of what great authorite art thou,
which thi^kest that thou ought not to pay? Theophilacte also says, In
Lucam. cap. xx.
that we corporally obey him, that has power on our bodies, whyther he be king
or Tyrau^t, it hyndrethe us no thing, that we should spirituallye well please
the God of spirits. Math. xxii.
For Christ says, pay unto the Emperor, ye which is the Emperors, and pay
unto god that, which is Gods. Mark that he says not, give, but pay. It is,
says he, debt. Pay therefore thy debt. Thy Prince kepethe the from thine
enemies, and he causethe that you lyueste in quiet. Thou therefore for these
things owe tribute to him.

Thus se you proved both by the holy Scripture and the ancient Doctors, yt
they, which profess Christ, Mark well.
are not so made free, but that they are bound to be subject and obedient to
the high powers in all godly and decent matters. Again, that al things ought not
to be common among them, or that they be excepted from such corporal charges,
as ye rulers require of the^, but that they ought to pay tribute, custom,
task, subsidye, or any thing else, that is required of them by the temporal
governors, seeing chefely it make^he so greatly unto their own auau^cement,
profit and co^modite. They therefore, yt deny these things or grudge to pay
them, when time requires and occasion is given, verily they are far from
true Christen men, and shall for their disobedience receive damnacio^, except
they repent and amend.


Euse. God forbid, but that every man should pay with a willing heart, what
so ever is required of him for the mayntaynau^ce and conseruacion of the
public weal.


Theo. Certes we were unworthy to live under the dominion of so puissaunte a
Gouernoure, if we should not in all points satisfy even unto the vttermoost
his godly and reasonable requests, seeing we have and still daily do receive
innumerable commodities and pleasures at his graces hand.


Phil. The charges which the Kings graces majesty sustayneth daily for the
wealth of al us his subjects, The charges, which the kings grace fu^tayneth
for ye common weal.
are infinite, and far exceade ye vnexperte capacite of the rude simple people,
as we may se before our eyes, and learn by the constant fame and common
report of all men (as I may leave of to spea^e of y^ byldyng of many Castles,
Block houses, strong holds, Bulwarks, fortresses. etc. and of men appointed
unto the defense of the same, with all things pertaynyng thereunto, again of
the common Schools and the techers of the^, of sendyng forth Preachers into
every part of his Realm, of procuring learned magistrates, of gyuynge
exhibicion to many virtuous and learned men, and of a thousand things mo,
which his most gracious majesty does for ye wealth of us, and for the
conseruacio^ of this his most florysshynge Realm) therefore ought we to
suppeditate and minister again unto him abundantly what so ever his grace
requires of us at any time, or else we grievously offend God, and walk not
according to the order of Charity, but are manifest tra^sgressours of Gods
most holy will, which commands us and all that we have to be subject to ye
Kings graces pleasure.


Chri. This is truth, and nothing more true


Phil. I believe verily, that what soever the subjects have, are the goods of
such a righteous and godly Prince, Note.
as we have now reynynge among us. Yea if the high powers were very
Tyrauntes, and altogyther unmerciful, yet might we deny them no thing at al of
our goods if they required them of us, Job. xxxiiii. Pro. xxviii.
but deliver them up into their hands freely, to be used as it shall please
them, being persuaded that it is for our sins, that God suffers such
Tyrauntes to reygne over us and therefore ought they to be obeyed in all
things, Esa. iii. Act. iiii.v.
that fight not with the word of God, nor obscure the divine glory, though
they seem to be never so full of tyranny and unmercifulness. But seeing we have
such a prince as loves his faithful subjects nolesse, than a gentle father
does his natural son, cherishes the^ no less, than a nourse does her
child, preserves them without danger no less than a trusty shepparde
seakethe to keep his sheep from the rauenynge teth of the wolf, and utterly
gives him self altogyther unto us and unto our commodite and profyt, what
should be the cause, that we might deny any thing to this our Emperor so
mercyful, so gentle, so bou^teous, so prudent, so wise, and so circumspecte in
all things, that pertayne unto our commodite and wealth. To much beastlyke
are they, yt consider not the bounte of so excellent a Prince. Blyssed is that
land, says the wise manne, Eccle. ^.
whose king is a man of nobilite, and whose Princes eat in due season for
strength and not for lust. But woe be unto that Realm, whose King is but a
child and whose Princes are earelye at their Banckettes.

Thus neighbors have I declared unto you according to my promise your duty
toward our most excellent king, and such as he appoynteth to be governors
under him. Look therefore that ye be obediente unto them, fear them, honor
the^, and pay what so ever is required of you. For unto all these things ye
are bound by the holy Scripture, which if ye do, the blessyng of God is upon
you: If ye do not, the curse and ve^geau^ce of God will fall on you, so that your
end shall be miserable both before God and man.


Euse. What soever ye have hitherto taught us, we will labor to the
vttermoost of our power to fulfill it in our quotidiane and daily conversation,
that we may walk blameles bothbefore God and our Prince.


Phile. Now does convenient order require, that I bring forth your fourth
flower to you, seeing that hitherto ye have learned your duty both toward
your self, GOD, and our King.


Theo. I pray you let us se it.


The fourth flower / called / Ready assistence.
Philemon. Behold here it is. Let every manne look not for his Own profit,
Phil. i^*
but for the profit of other. How does ye savor of this flower please you?


Euse. How so ever it pleases me, I think verily, the air and breath of this
flour is so strong, ye few at this present time can abide the savor of it.


Phil. Why so? It is the saye^ge of Saint Paul to the Philippians.


Euse. I know that well, but ye should rather have rehearsed this saying in ye
same Epistle. All seek their own auau^tage, and not that, which is Jesus
Christ's. For this flour do men now a days bear chefely in their bosom, as
we may se by daily experience. Their noses are stopped, and they have lost one
of their five wits, when any such flower is offered them for to smell upon, as
ye have now given us. They have rooted other herbs in their hertes, upon
whom they smell daily, Eccl. x. Lato. lib. i. Menander. Inuenalis.
even such as theyse are. Pecuniae obediunt omnia. Bonus est odor lucri ex re
qualibet. Semper tibi proximus esto. Tantu^ fidei, qua^tum pecuniae. Nummi
uirum faciunt. Virtus post nummos. Miser est, qui nu^mos non habet. Quisquis
habet nummos, secura nauiget aura Fortunamque suo temperet arbitrio. That is to
say, al things are obedient to money. The savor of lucre is good, how so ever
a man come by it. Be ever nearest and most friend to thy self. A man shall eue^
be so much trusted, as he has monye. Money makes the man. First monye, and
afterward virtue. He is a wretch yt has no money. Who soever has monye, may
go where he list, and do what so ever he will at his own pleasure.

The savor of these flowers, has so infected the senses of many now a days,
that they ca^ by no means smell on this flower, which ye have now given us.


Phil. It is the more pytye. Not withstondynge neighbors, be not ye infected
with like pestiferous contagion. Remember your profession, and follow not the
common fasshion, unless ye fall into damnacion, and lose the favor of GOD.

Smell well on this your flower, Phil. ii.
Ready assistence. Let every man look not for his own profit, but for the
profyt of other. For seeing ye have hitherto learned your duty both toward
your self* God, and our king, ye must now learn also your office and duty
toward your neighbor. For God has also given us a commau^deme^t to love our
neighbor. Leuit. x^x. Math. xxii. Romans xiii.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, says the scripture. That thou
will not a another should do to the, Jacob. ii i. Joan. iiii.
do thou not the same to him. And this commandment have we of God, that he,
which loves God, should also love his neighbor. For he ye loves not his
brother, whom he seethe, God, whom he has not seen, how can he love?

That ye might natiuely and unfeignedly on this sort love your^ neighbor, I
have selected this se^te^ce of s. Paul to put you in remembrance of your duty.
Phil. ii.
Let every man look not for his own profyt, but for the profit of other.
Mat..xxiiii



Chri. It is a very hard saying, and followed but of few iniquite does so
abound, and the love of many abateth and waxes cold.


Theo. Me thyncke, S: Paul would here have no man provide for him self, but
for other. And this is contrary to his own saying, i. Tim. v.
where he says, If any man does not provide for the^ that do pertayne unto him
he has forsaken the faith, andis, worse than an Infidel.


Phil. God forbid that any contrariete should be found in the words of so
noble and worthy Apostle. In your flower he does not forbydde you, but that ye
may with good conscience provide for your self and for yours But to admonysh
me^ of this so streyghtly as of the other, it was not nedeful nor expedient.
Mark well.
For we are naturally bent to seek our own profyt, yea and that many times to
the great hinderau^ce and utter decay of our neighbor, neither need we a
spur to prycke us forward in this behalf. Which thing, S. Paul replete
with gods spirit considering, exorteth men rather to seek for their
neighbors profyt, than for their own, meaning that they should not be so
bent to seek their own advantage, Phil. ii.
that they should utterly neglecte the profyt of their christen brother. For ye
very same mind ought to be in us that was in Christ Jesus which being in the
shape of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made him self
of no reputacio^, and took upon him y^ shape of a servant, became like a
another man, and was found in his apparel, as a man. He humbled him self, and
became obedient unto the death, eue^ the death of y^ Cross. Here is your
flower, Ready asistence. Here is an example that ye should be ready to assist
and help your neighbor at al times. How did our most blyssed Savior
Christ utterly neglecte and cast away, as I may so speak, his own glory,
honor and worship, to seek our health, conforte and salvation? This ready
assistence and help ought also to be in us, if we pertayne unto Christ. For
we ought to have y^ care for our neighbor, that Christ had for us, or else
we walk not according to Charity. This ready assistence also se we in that
Samaritane of the Gospel, Luke. x.
which seeing a certain man spoiled, robbed, greuouslye wounded and half
dead, had pytye on him, came unto him, bound up his wounds, powered in oil
and wine, and layenge him on his beast brought him unto an Inn, and made
provision for him. Here is a another godly example of ready assistence. Here is
a myrrour for all men to look in. Here is a pair of spectacles for to show
every man, what his duty is toward his neighbor. What our duty is toward our
neighbor



Euse. As how I pray you for an example.


Phil. Certes as this Samaritane did. To be bent at all times to healpe so
many as has need of our help, and to procure no less the health and
furtherance of other, than of our selves. As for an example. Art you a Judge,
The duty of a judge, Justice of peace.. etc.
a Justice of peace, a Constable, a Baliffe, or any other common officer: So
have you ye law in thy hand. Matters of contrauersye are brought before the.
Look therefore, that thou iudgeste all things according to equite. Be not
parciall. Favor not one part more than another. Show indifferency. Do as
right require. Give no wrong sentence, neither for fear nor love of any
parsonne. Practice none iniquite: Condemn not the innocent for lucres sake. Be
not corrupt with gifts. Eat not the poor man, neither devour thou his
substance, but help to sustain him in his right against the violence of the
wicked Tyrants and cruel oppressors according to thy office, if thou doste
this, than haste thou this flour, Ready assistence. about the, and doste to thy
neighbor, as you art bound by the commandment of God. If thou doste this,
that is, judge contrary to equite, suffer the poor to be oppressed for favor
or lucres sake, or else because thou bear a cruel heart and spytefull
stomach against the part, so gettest thou the great displeasure of God, and
hepest up to thy self everlasting damnacion.

Art thou a Bishop, The office of a Bishop pressed or spiritual minister.
pressed or spiritual minister of Gods word? look than well to thy office.
Remember that it is thy duty reverently to minister ye most blyssed
Sacraments of Christ's Church, and to preach the word of God to y^ flock
upon whom the holy Ghost has made the ouerseare, to govern the congregation
of God, whom he purchased with his blood. Act. x^. Joan. xxi.
Remember that it is said unto the, Pasce, Pasce, Pasce, feed, feed, feed. Feed
there fore thy Paryshe with good example of virtuous lyuinge. Feed them with the
pure Eua^gelion and true Gospel of Christ. Feed the^ also with corporal food
through the mayntenau^ce of hospitalite. Teach them to forsake all Idolatry
and supersticion, and only to cleave to the true and living God, the alone and
omnisufficient savior. Teach them to honor and call on the name of their
LORD God in all their adversities and troubles. Teach them faithful obedience
toward their superiors. Teach the^ to love their wives as their own flesh,
and to bring up their children and familye in the fear and nourtoure of the
Lord. Teach the^ to labor for their lyui^g, and not to takeaway any man's
goods unjustly. Teach the^ to testify the truethe, and to bear no false
witness. Teach them to be no man^lears, but to love al men with a pure heart.
Teach them to live of their own, and not to couyt that which pertayne to
other me^. Teach them to walk straight in the path ways of the LORD all the
days of their life, unless the fearce plages and cruel ve^geaunce of God fall
both upon the and them. Esaias. ^viii.
Cry, cease not. Show to the people their sins, offenses, and wickednesses.
Command the wicked to forsake his iniquite. Exhort the rytche man unto the
glad and ready distribucion of his goods to ye poor people. i. Tim. vi.
i. Pet. v*
Feed ye flock of Christ, so much as lyethe in thy power. Be an example of
the faith full in word, in co^uersacion, in love in spirit, in faith, in
purite and clennes of life. Give attendaunce to thy self and to doctrine,
continue in these. Reprove them that sin openly before all men, i. Tim. iii*
that y^ other may be afeard. Keep thy self pure, clean and honest. Suffer
affliccio^ and trouble as a goodsouldiour ofIesus Christ Study to show thy
self acceptable to God, i. Tim v. ii. Tim. ii.
a workema^ that needs not to be ashamed, deuydynge justly the word of
truth. Fly the lusts of yongthe, i. Tim. v^.
follow righteousness, faith charity peace with them that call on the LORD with
a pure heart. Reprove the enemies of truth fearsely, that they may be whole
in faith. Speak you those things, that become wholesome doctrine, but above
all things be an example to other of good works. Be not absent from thy
benefice. Zacha. xi.
Live not dissolutely at the university or else where. Be not that Spheppard and
Idol, that forsakes his flock, but give them meat in due time. Joan. x.
Suffer not ye wolf to devour Christ's sheep, whom he bought with no less
price, than with his own most precious blood. Defend the glory of GOD, and
not thine own dignite. Strive for the health of thy flock, Mark well.
and not for thy rytchers and possessions. The synful of thy flock, exhort
unto faithful repentance. The desperate provoke thou unto y^ trust of Gods
mercy. The weak make you strong. The diseased look thou heal. The bloudye
wounded look thou cure. The broken look thou make whole. The imperfecte, look
thou make perfect. The strong in Christ, look thou make au^ciente. To
conclude, if thou be a true Bishop, a faithful ouerseare, a dilligent Curate, a
trusty shepparde, rather give thy life, and spend all the blood in thy body,
than that one of ye least of Christ's flock should perysh through thy fault.
So may thou be sure, i. Pet. v.
when that Prince of sheppardes shall appear to receive the immarcessible
crown of glory, if you do not these things, which hitherto I have rehearsed,
than look thou for none other, but with that unprofitable servant to be cast
into utter darkness, where weeping and gnasshynge of teth shall be.

Art thou a rich man? The duty of a rytch man.
So has God set the in a perilous state, except thou be ware. To avoid there
fore all danger, look that with thy possessions and rytches, thou helpeste
the^ that have need. For unto this end has God indewed the with y^ goods of
this world. Be not proud for thy rytches sake, Eccl xxxv. ii. Cor. ix.
nor put not thy trust in uncertain rytches, but in the living God. Be
rytche i^ good works. Be ready to minister unto the necessite of other, yt
want For God loves a cherfull gyuer. Break thy bread to the hongrye, Esa.
lviii.
and lead in the nedy and poor wayfaring into thy house, wha^ thou see a
naked man, cover him, and thou shalt not despise thy flesh. Luke. vi.
Give to every one that askethe, and from him, that will borowe, turn not
away thy face, Psalm. xiiii. Esa. v.
but lend him thy monye, yea and that without any vsurye. Join not house to
house, nor land to land Couytte not to reygne alone in a town. Suffer other
me^ to live by the, yea and that of their own. Help them to make provision
for their family, yt they may keep the better hospitalite and be the more able
to help the confortles. Let not out thy lo^des and houses on such price, that
the fermers shall never be able to pay the, or else to do no good upon them So
let them hyer thy fermes, that they may not be empoueryshed, as they are now a
days for the most part, but rather enryched, yt they may be the more able
vertuouslye to bring up their children in good arts and godly sciences, to
help their poor neighbors, to keep hospitalite, and to bear the charges of
the common weal for their portion, when time requires. For this shall make a
florysshynge and wealthye Realm, abunda^t in all things. Thus shall thou also
greatly please God, and he again for this thy bou^teous liberalite showed
toward thy neighbors, will open his hand, bliss the and all that pertayne
unto the, favor the, and make the to be plenteous in all things. Deu. xxviii
So that what so ever thou go about, shall prosper and come unto a fortunate
and good end. Neither shalt thou need to doubt of theyse things. Titus. i.
Psalm. cxliiii
For God has so promised, which can not ly, but is faythefull in all his
words. If thou doste contrary hereunto, and abusest the riches, which god
has put into thy hand, and of whom he has only made the his steward, so
that thou art vnmercyful and hydest up thy treasure, and knoweste not for
whom, and will by no means bestow them, as God has appointed the, than be
thou certain and sure, that like an unmerciful thief and cruel bloudye Bocher,
thou shalt be hanged in hell. Esa. lxvi.
The fire, wherwt thou shall be tormented, shall never be quenched. The worm,
that shall gnawe thy conscience, shall never dye. The pains shall be infinite,
nether shalt thou at any time be releued of the^, but with that unmerciful
rytche gloton in the Gospel of Luke, Luke. xvi.
lyghe cryenge and waylyng in perpetual torments worlds with out end.
Therefore beware betymes and say not but yt thou art warned.

To be short, consider with thy self in what state and condition God has
set the, and use that ever unto ye glory of God and the profyt of thy
neighbor. For know that what so ever God has given the, he has given it
the for the profytte of thy neighbor also. Has God given the strength? than
must thou help the weakness of thy brother. Art thou wise, and eloquent? So
must thou make good, that which wants of them in thy neighbor Art thou
rytche? So must thou conforte the nedy. Art thou learned? So must thou
instruct and teach the ignorant. Art thou a rulare? So must thou be
favorable to the^ of the inferioure sort. Art thou a man of nobilite? So
must thou not despise the^ of ignobilite. Have thou creditours and detters? So
must thou not draw the^ cruelly straight ways into the law, but favor
them, entreat them gentylly, and give the^ respyte, until they may^ pay the
conuenie^tly without danger or loss of their substance. Haste thou received
any talente or gift at all of God? Use that same to the profyt of thy
neighbor, and so shall thou well please God. To make an end, be the very same
to thy neighbor, A good lesson
that God is to the. Consider what kyndnes God shows to the, and show thou
the very same again to thy Christian brother. And wylt you hear me? Be even
another Christ to thy neighbor.

Thus much dear brothers, have I spoken concerning this your flower, Ready
assistence. of the which ye may easily learn to know your duty toward your
neighbor, and how ye ought to behave your selves in all points toward him
according to the will of God.


Theo. Undoubtedly neighbor Philemo^ ye have given us many godly lesso^s. I
beseech God, we may so walk in our conversation and in all our acts toward
our neighbor, that we may in all things follow and practyse this your most
godly doctrine, and be ready at all times both in thought, word and deed
redely to assist and help our neighbors, no less tha^ we desire that god
should assist, help and socoure us, wha^ we have need.


P. It is very godly spoken. God gyueyou grace no less to do and work Now
remains your last flower to be given to you.


Chri. I would very gladdely se it.


Euse. The very same also do I desire.


The fyfte flower / called / Christen Charity.
Philemon. i. Joan. iii.
AT hand it is even here ready* Take it I pray you. Let Us not love in word
nor tongue, but in vvoke and truth.


Theo. This flower may be called Christen Charity in deed aright


Phil. It is not without a cause, that I have given you this flower. For the
savor of all your aforsayd flowers profyteth without this but little. Behold y^
excellency of Charity.
This flower is the very same to your Nosegay that a precious stone a costious
pearl, a goodly owch, is to a ryng or any other Jewel. With out this flower
all ye other will sone wyther away, and come to naught. But so long as the
beauty of this your flour lasts, so long can not your Nosegaye decay and
perysh. Ca^ any thing be good and godly, where love and Charity wantethe? And
because ye should know, yt I mean none unfeigned love, I have named your
flower, Christen Charity. For our Charity and love ought not to be carnal,
fleshly, beastlyke, worldly, What love we ought to have among us.
feigned, unclean and flyttynge, but spiritual, ghostly, christian, heavenly,
true, pure, and abydyng for evermore. And this is that Christian Charity, whereof
your flower speaks, i. Joan. iii.
Let us not love in word nor tongue, but in Work and truth. Without this
Charity S. Paul affirmethe in his Epistle to the Corinthia^s, that no work,
i. Cor. xiii.
seem it never so good and godly, profyteth onye thing at all. Romans xiii. i.
Tim. i.
Read y^ Chapter wha^ ye come home. Certes this Charity and christen love must
needs be an excellent thing, seeing it is the end of the Commandment, and
the fulfyllynge of all the law, seeing also that Christ in his last sermon,
which he made to his Disciples a little before his passhon exorteth us with so
many words unto it. S. John^ fereth not so greatly to auau^ce and commend
Charity, Joan. xiiii.xv.xvi. i. Joan. iiii.
yt he affirms God to be Charity, saying, God is Charity, and he that
abydethe in Charity, abides in God, and God in him. Unto this true and
Christen Charity. S. Peter also mouethe us on this manner: ^. Pet. iiii. Romans
xii. Co^. iii.
Before all things, says he, have fervent charity among you. For Charity
covers y^ multitude of sins. And S. Paul says, above al things have
Charity, which is the bond of perfeccion. For he y^ has this christian Charity
can none otherwise but love God with all his heart, What y^ love of god does.
mind, strength, power and soul. He can none otherwise but forsake the
world, the dyuell and the flesh, and cleue to God alone as a true and
faithful wife does to her husbond. He will by no menes swear by y^ name of his
lord god, but reverence honor, worship and praise it. He will not break the
Sabbothe day, but sanctify it according to the word of God. Again, what y^
love of our neighbor does.
he that loves his neighbor sincerly, will by no means hurt him, nor work
any euel against him. He will not disobeye his superiors. He will commyt no
manslaughter, whoredom, theft, nor bear any false wytnes nor yet couyt that,
which should be hynderau^ce to his neighbor, but he will gladly and with a
free spirit do unto the vttermooste of his power, what so ever the Scripture
requires of him, as Christ says, if any man loves me, he will keep my word,
and my father shall love him, and we will come to him and dwell with him. He
that loves not me, keeps not my words. Io^n. xiiii.
He that has my Commandments and keeps the^, he it is that loves me, and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him and show my
self unto hi^. How does this your flower please you?


Euse. I never smelled a sweter and more pleasant odoure in my life.


Theo. I pray you rehearse it once again. i. Joan. iii.



Phil. Let Us not love in word no^ tongue, but in work and truth.


Theo. Is not this the saying of S. John in his Epistle?


Phil. Yies verelye.


Theo. Me thinks that he gives here a commandment that we should not
love in word nor tongue but in work and truth.


Phil. Ye say truth.


Theo. It is not lawefull than for us to e^presse the love that we bear in
our hearts toward our neighbor by manifest, open and evident words? as
to speak gentylly, to common frendely, and to wysh well with loving words to
all men?


Phil. S. John in this place forbyddethe no more gentle speech and loving
communicacion, Phil. ii.
tha^ S. Paul in your other flour did forbid to make provision for you and
yours. But his mind is this, they which will crake and boste by outward words,
yt they love God and their neighbor, and yet show it not in works and
truethe, they are liars, and have not in the^ the christen Charity, which the
Scripture commends so greatly in every place. Such are like the^, of whom S.
Paul speaks on this manner, they say they know God, but with their deeds
they deny it plainly, Titus. i.
seeing they are obhominable, disobedient and minded unto no good works. i.
Joan. iii.
He that has the substance of the world, says S. John, and sees his brother
have need, and is moved with no compassion toward him, how does the love of
God abide in him? As though he should say, albeit a man craketh never so much
yt he loves God, Mark well.
yet if he fulfylleth not that, which God commands him, how dare such one
boste that he louethe God? A man loves so much as he works. If he works
no thing, another does he love any thing. For as S. Gregory says in a certain
homely, Gregorye.
the love of GOD is never idle. For he works great things, if it be love,
but if it seaseth to work, i. Cor. xiii.
than is it no love in deed. Love, says S. Paul is pacient and curtious. Love
enuiethe not, love does not frowardely. Love is not puffed up, deals not
dishonestly, seaketh not her own. Love is not provoked to anger, thinks not
evil, reioysethe not of iniquite, but reioyseth in the truth, suffers al
things, beleuethe all things, hopethe all things, abydethe all things. What
a point is this of love, to say that I love God, Note this well.
and yet run a whorehuntynge after strange Gods?

Again what a point of love is this to say, that I honor ye name of God,
and yet blaspheme it with most shameful and abominable oaths? What love is
this toward my neighbor to say that I love him and yet will do no thing for
him, when I se him in necessite? Is this love? Peryshe moughte such love.
Against these wicked Hypocrites and open dissemblers does S. John in this
place thonder, i. Joan. iii.
wha^ he says let us not love in word nor tongue, but in work and truth.
There were in the time of the Apostles many false Christians, which by words
pretended much love both toward God and their neighbor, and yet did they
express and show none at all by their outward deeds. Such have we now a days
also among us, which styffely affirm that they love God and his word, yet do
their works prove the contrary. The scripture rejects that love which is
feigned, and is not in spirit and truth, that is to say, first engraffed in
the heart, and afterward declared by manifest and evident works, worthy such
a love. Therefore neighbors, if ye will smell aryght and to your conforte of
this your flower Christen Charity, provide that your love benot feigned. Let it
not only be in word and tongue, but also in work and truth. Ofloue toward God.
First as concerning your love toward God, it shall appear in nothing more
manifestly, than if you labor with all main in all your works to seek the
glory of God, the honor of his most blyssed name and the promocio^ of his
holy word. Again as towchynge your neighbor your love shallnot be feigned
toward him, Ofloue toward our neighbor.
if ye help him in all such things as he has need of, as for an example. If
ye perceive him ignorant in the law of God, teach him Gods word, bring him
unto Christ, teach him where, of whom and by what means he shall obtain health
and salvation? Declare to him what y^ true and christian faith is? and of what
great strength, virtue, efficacy and power it is. Exhort him unto the true
good works, which god approves by his word, and leueth not unrewarded. Psalm.
xlix.
Charge him to fly unto y^ name of God as unto a strong Bulwark in all his
aduersite and trouble. Furthermore if ye perceive that he is given altogyther
to wickedness and will not gladlye hear any wholesome admonicion, yette cease
not to pray for him, Genesis xvii*
as Abraham did for the fylthy Sodomites and Moses for the disobedient Jews.
Exo. xxxii.
Yea though he be your extreme enemy and seaketh your life, Luke. xxiii. Ac^.
vii.
yet wysh well unto him, pray for him, and desire God to forgive him, as Christ
and Steven did. Again if ye perceive that he is poor and has need of your
help, fail not to succoure his miserye and to help him in his need even to
the vttermoost of your power, to make an end, if ye perceive that your
neighbor has need of any thing that ye are able to do for him, I charge you
in Gods behalf, that ye with all expedicion, help and conforte hi^. If ye do
this, tha^ do ye smell aright on this your flour, Christian Charity, and shall
receive rewards abu^da^t for your good deeds, but if ye do it not know yt
though ye bost never so much in word and tongue of your love toward god and
your neighbor, Note.
yet shall ye go to the dyuel headlong like abominable Hypocrites and wicked
dissemblers, and shall receive greater damnacion than they which never knew
truly no part of God, seeing your love is only in word and tongue, but not in
spirit and truth.


Euse. As concerning our love toward God, we will employe al our industrye
and labor to have that love toward him, Joan. xxii.
which Peter had when he said unto Christ, LORD thou knoweste that I love
the, and as towchynge our neighbor we will labor no less heartily to love
him, than Ionathas did David, ii. Reg. xviii
which as the Scripture says, loved him as his own life.


Phile. Theyse are goodly examples undoubtedly neighbors. Look therefore that
ye follow them. If ye bring out of your love such deeds, as Peter did, tha^ may
ye be bold to say, that ye love God unfeignedly. Again, if ye show by your
outward works such love toward your neighbor, as Ionathas did to David
tha^ need ye not fear to say, yt ye love your neighbor in work and
truethe, and so are ye perfect and true christen men, and may be certain
after the departure out of this transitorye life, if ye so continue unto the
end, for to receive the crown of life, which the LORD has promised to them
that love him, Iaco^. i.
as S. James says.

Here is now your Nosegay perfect. For I have given you al your five flowers,
as I promised you at your first coming.


Chri. We thank you right hertely for this Nosegay


Euse. I think such a Nosegay was never given before of onye man to his
friend, as you have now given us.


Theo. I beseech GOD give us grace so to smell on this Nosegaye, that the
sauoure of it may ever abide in us, and never depart nor go away from our
hearts. So may we be sure neither at onye time to offend our selves, God, our
King, nor our neighbor, but lead such a life, as wherewith both God and man
shall be well pleased.


Phil. All this that ye have hitherto spoken is true. For I have taught you no
thing of mine own brain and fantasye, but only the pure word of God, and
the sentences and minds of ye holy and catholyke Doctors. Therefore I pray you
hertely good neighbors be as diligent to observe and keep these flowers as I
have been studious to gather them together for you, so shall I both thyncke my
labor well bestowed and ye also of all pleasures shall do me the greateste.
Well I will now rehearse to you in few words, what your whole Nosegaye
contains in many.

Your first flower is called Unfeigned Humilite. Hereof have ye learned ye true
knowledge of your selves, A brefe rehearsal of the Nose gaye.
and that ye ought not to be proud of any thing, but enbrasynge Humilite and
lowlines of mind always confess that what so ever ye have, be it never so
good and precious, it is the gift of GOD coming down from the father of
lyghtes, and that therefore ye ought studiously to labor above all things
that it be bestowed according to the will of God, Iaco* i.
that is, unto the glory of God the profitte of your neighbor and the
salvation of your own souls.

Your second flour called, Pure Innocence. Of this ye have learned your duty
toward God, and how ye ought to walk before him according to his word and
be perfect.

Of your third flower, which is, Faithful Obedience. Ye have learned your
duty toward our most puissaunt and excellent king, and all those civil
magistrates and head officers, which are appointed to rule and govern the
matters of the public weal under his graces majesty. Ye learned also, that
by the word of GOD ye owe to them obedience, fear, honor and tribute.

Your fourth flower, called, Ready assistence* taught you your duty toward
your neighbor, and how ye ought to serve him according to the rule of the
Gospel, seakynge no less his profyt than your own.

Your fyfte and last flower, called, Christen Charity, declared to you that
without this true, christen and pure love, all your other flowers profyt but
little, neither can any work being done of a malicious heart and out of
Charity please God. Again ye heard, that your love both toward God and your
neighbor was declared to be unfeigned, if ye did express it outwardly in such
works as are prescribed of God in the holy Scriptures, this is the whole sum
of your Nosegaye.

Now dear brothers, I beseech you by the great mercyes of God, yt ye will by
no means suffer ye smell, odoure and savor of these herbs to faull out of
your breasts, but that you always bear this your Nosegay about with you, and
smell on it at al times without ceasyng. For these are those flowers, which shall
preserve you from all pestiferous and contagious airs, from all perelles and
dangers, from al mischau^ces and evil fortunes. They also shall enspire and
breath into you such confortable odoures and sweet savors, that ye shall by no
means be so infected, that ye may either offend your selves, God, the king,
or your Neygheboure, but what so ever ye work, shall be accceptable both to
God and man. What will ye have more? Thus much have I done now for you
neighbors, and am ready at al times to do, what soever lyethe in my power, when
occasion shall be given, desiryng you favorably to accept this my good will
toward you, as of one, which wyssheth no less well to you tha^ to him self,
tendereth your health no less than his own, seakethe your true knoweledge in
Christ Jesus even as his own, to conclude, which is ready at all times both
to give him self and all that he has, so that ye may be in the most glorious
bowels of our Savior Christ, and therein continewe until the day o^ his
tryumphant apperyng. Which thing (most dear brothers) that it may come to
pass, I will not cease neither night nor day to power out my prayers to our
LORD god, that he may be present always with you by the assistence of the holy
Ghost in all your godly enterprises, which thing also I most hertelye desire
you, that ye will likewise do for me.


Euse. To give you condygne and worthy thancke, for your manifold gentletes
toward us, we are not able. But this dare I promise you in ye name of us all,
that what so ever shall lygh in our powers to do for you at any time, we will
be glad with all our hertes to do it. And to the vttermoost of our strengthes we
will labor to practyse and fulfill yt in works, which ye have taught us in
words.


Phil. So doing neighbors, my good will shall not only continue still, as it
is toward you, but also encrese daily more and more. Well, now before your
departure, I will desire you to tak^ y^ pains ^o drink with me after this our
long talk and large co^municacio^, yt ye may go home again from me being fed
both spiritually and corporally.


Theo. We thank you neighbor Philimo^


Chri. Praised be god for this our goodly and pleasant Nosegay.


Euse. AMEN. For he alone is worthy all the honor and praise.


Give the glory to God alone.
Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear, by John^
Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno. Dn^i 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septennium.






