A second Sound, or Warning of the Trumpet unto Judgment.

Wherein is proved, that all the tokens of the Latter day, are not only come,
but welneere finished.

With an earnest Exhortation, to be in continual readiness.

By Anthony Marten Sewer of her Majesty's most honorable Chamber.

When ye see these things come to pass, be ye sure that he is even at the
doors.

Mark. 13. PRO LEGE ET GREGE LOVE KEPYTHE LAW, OBEYS THE KING, AND IS GOOD
TO THE COMMEN WELTHE

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Andrew Maunsell. 1589.

To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
Most renowned and mighty Prince, It pleases your highness, after a long
winters abode in some one of your Princely Palaces, (the storms of cold
being past, and the pleasant spring tide come) to remove your householde into
a fresh and wholesome air. And for a warning to your officers, and servant of
your Court, you do cause the Trumpet to be three several times sounded,
against you descend from the higher part of your mansion. But if it happen to
be long before the second warning of the trumpet be given, the third is no
sooner sounding, but your own Person is then coming. Then must all your
servants be ready to wait upon you: you are the Sovereign, and not to expect
for any. They that be not ready at the same instant, are not worthy of such
a Prince, nor to have reward for such a service. Even so the most invincible
King of glory Christ Jesus, who by his holy spirit, has been present in this
worldly mansion, with his household the Church welneere 1600. years while it
has abidden many sharp and bitter storms, and has been as it were
imprisoned within the Palace of this wretched world, is now minded speedely to
remove the same into his own Country, a pleasand land, and place of
felicity. The first warning of his remove, he sounded by his Apostles, when
his fame was spread over all the world, by the first preaching of the Gospel.
The second he has proclaimed by the preachers of his word, whom he revived (as
it were) out of the dust, within these 70. years. And together with them, are
sent all the promised tokens of his coming. Howbeit the day being so far
spent, before his second warning, we shall see himself speedely descend from
above with the third sound of the trumpet, and in the voice of an Archangel.
And those that watch for him with their lamps burning, he will receive, and
the rest he will exclude from his kingdom, and from the reward of his service.
Wherefore your Highness, being one of his principal servants, nay, at this day
the chief Steward of his household, it shall be a perpetual honor to your
kingdom, a not able blessing to your subjects, an unspeakable benefit to the
Church, an acceptable service to Christ, yea an eternal felicity to your self,
if the light of your lamp do continually shine, and the oil of your works
do perpetually abound, that now at his coming, ye may be ready to enter
with him into that glory which he has promised to all those which be
faithful servants.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and Servant: Anthony Marten.

A second Sound or warning of the Trumpet unto judgment.
OFten and sundry times did God foreshew unto our forefathers in the old
Testament, the first coming of his Son into this world, and the taking of our
nature upon him most plainly and evidently did he declare unto them, that
Christ by his death should restore us unto life, and that by his resurrection
and ascension, he should make perfect the work of our salvation. In like
manner did he with no less perspicuitie set forth unto them, the return of
our Savior unto judgment, and that all men should rise again unto
immortality, and render an account of all their works and actions. All this
did he promise them by his Prophets, justify in his person, and confirm
firm by many marvelous signs and wonders: such as were never heard of
before since the beginning of the world. Yet did the obstinate Jews harden
their hearts and believed not. Wherefore God made them no more nation, but
scattered them into all lands, in such wise we see them at this day to be a
scorn and derision unto all people.

Neither can the example of these men so often rebuked by us for their
incredulity, so greatly blamed for their obstinacy, so sharply reproved by
us for their cruelty, so justly despised for their ignominy, any thing amend
us in the same things wherein we condemn them. For what promise have they, and
we have it not performed? What Prophecy had they, and we have it not
fulfilled? What true Religion had they, and we have it not restored? What
word, what testimony, what signs, what miracles, what mercies, what graces,
and what benefits had they, and we have them not a thousand times more
increased. Yet are we altogether either incredulous of the promises, or
doubtful of the performance, or else careless and desperate of our own
deliverance. And this makes us to lean to the fables and deceaueable
doctrines of men, more then to the true Prophesies of the word of God, and to
the commandments of Christ and his Apostles, who have declared the second
coming of Christ, and that in such plain and evident sort, as they have
showed the very time when, the manner how, and the things themselves that
should withholde: the signs and tokens that should go before, and all other
certainties whatsoever are necessary for man to know, as concerning the same.
And by this means, if the judgment of God and final destruction of the world
do come suddenly upon man before he be aware, there is no ignorance to be
pleaded, there is no excuse to be regarded, there is no darkness of the
Scriptures to be alleged. For it all the holy Bible, there is not any one
thing that the mercy and goodness of our God has set down more amply,
taught more plainly, and set forth more expreslie, for the assurance of our
faith, than the tokens of Christ's coming.

And as the preaching and publishing of the Gospel by the Apostles, ministers
and disciples of Christ, in the first ages after his ascension, was the first
warning of the Trumpet, sounded at that time unto all Nations against the
resurrection of the flesh, and of Christ's return again unto judgment: so the
reviving of the Gospel, and revealing of Antichrist by preaching of the word;
together with the other signs and tokens that Christ himself told us should
come to pass before his second coming, is a peremptory warning that shall be
given unto all flesh. For the last sound of the Trumpet, shall be no more
properly a warning, but an hasty and sudden coming, a crying unto
judgment, and appearing of Christ in the clouds, a perishing of the heavens,
and a consuming of the earth and all the works thereof with fire.

Wherefore I mean here to put the Christian world in mind of all those
tokens, as near as I can by that order, which Christ himself and his Apostles
well near 1600. years past have declared in the word of God. And therein I
will examine how many of those signs and tokens be past, and how many of
them do yet remain to be fulfilled. Then will I see, whither this be not the
very time that Christ has prescribed to return again: or if the time be not
yet full complete, whither it be not so very near thereunto, as it is most
certain that the same shall not be long deferred. Lastly, I will do my best
to stir up the minds of all men to repentance, and to prepare themselves
with all the diligence and duty they can show in this life, to go forth of
meet with that great Prince of glory Christ Jesus.

Albeit our forefathers in every age since the time of the Apostles, had many
signs and tokens, whereby every one might look for the day of the Lord in
that age werein he lived; and the rather because Paul said in his time, that
the examples of the old Testament were written for a warning unto us upon who^
the ends of the world were come; 1. Cor. 10, 11,
yet because the perceived by the words of Christ, that there were other
tokens to be performed, which neither they had seen, nor yet did well conceive,
they might not so boldly prescribe the day of the Lord to be at hand, as we
may now affirm it to be. For although Saint Paul (as I have showed) did say
that the ends of the world were come upon them in his days, yet lie bad the
Thessalonians that they should not be deceived by any spirit, or word, or
letter, to think that the day of the Lord was then at hand. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.
For he taught them that there should be first a falling away from the faith:
and that Antichrist should be revealed before the coming of Christ. Which
things were not to be performed within the compass of so few years, but
required a longer time, and many other matters depended thereon. Now howsoever
this prophecy of Antichrist may seem to take a latter place in the holy
History after some other signs and tokens of Christ's coming, yet if we have
regard to the first times when the Bishop of Rome was declared to be that
Antichrist, it may take the first place before al other signs, accomplished
after Christ his ascension. Nevertheless if we mean so plain and perfect a
revealing of Antichrist, as it shall be no less evident unto al other nations
of Christendom, than it is now unto us, who do sensibly see and perfectly
know him to be the very man of sin which was prophesied before (whereunto
the holy Ghost had respect, in putting this sign after others in the place of
Matthew, Mark and else where) then may it be called the last sign or token of
all. Because, as the publishing of the word over all the world, grows by
little and little, so the perfect revealing of Antichrist unto all Nations, is
daily more and more plainly and evidently discerned thereby. And in this
respect, the preaching of the word with the consuming of him shall end both
together, at the very coming of Christ, and not before: because the Scripture
says, that the spirit of the Lords mouth shall consume him, but the brightness
of his coming shall utterly destroy him. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
And both this, and the rest of the tokens that depend on the same, are most
evident and undoubted testimonies of the latter dav. Wherefore I will first
show how all those things are performed partly in other time before, but most
especially in this age of ours. Within which time also I will declare all the
rest of the tokens of Christ coming to be in a manner fully complete.

When the kingdom of Christ was increased, and grown to the full by preaching
of the Gospel, and that the Bishop of Rome began also to grow great in Italy,
by decaying of the Empire, and by the gifts and donacions of Princes, then did
also the same Bishop fall from true religion to superstition; from the right
service of God, to false worshipping; from sincerity, to hypocrisy; from the
rules of Gods word, to the reasons and decrees of men. And as his greatness
increased, and the Emperors power diminished, so the Apostasy of that Church
was the more discerned, and Antichrist of Rome the more revealed: and so when
Rome, the seat of the Empire was utterly removed from the temporal Magistrate,
and wholly invested in the Pope, and that the Pope claimed to be the universal
Bishop, there was now nothing to hinder, but that all men might discern how
far the Church was fallen from God, and who was very Antichrist the Author of
the same. Howbeit, though he by this means showed himself to be that
Antichrist, which both the Prophets and also Christ and his Apostles had so
manifestly described before hand, as there can be nothing in the Scriture more
plain, yet can it not be said, that Antichrist was fully revealed, till this
latter age of ours; both because the infinite measure of his iniquity was
never before fulfilled, with so great power and signs and lying wonders, as it
has been now within these few ages past: and also because he made princes his
ministers and vassals, to see that his commandments were observed, and his
honor, dignity and power maintained; and that none should be so hardy as to
bring his name in question, or to find fault with any part of his
superstition.

But when it pleased God of his infinite mercy to put into the hearts of Kings
and Princes, prudently to snake off his intolerable yoke from their shoulders,
and to send forth preachers of his word, that should openly pronounce him to
be very Antichrist, and to prove it to his face out of the word of God, that
he is that man of sin foreshewed in the Scripture, then it might truly be
said, that there was no impediment between him and home, but that he is
perfectly, infallibly, and expressly discovered, taught and known to be
Antichrist among all them that profess the Gospel of Christ.

Wherefore, the matter being so true, as both the word of God it self
affirms, and the testimonies and proofs of innumerable Writers extant
inuincibly confirms, I need not wade any further herein, than is necessary
to induce the matter I have in hand For this being true, that the Apostacy of
that Church drawing to an end by preaching of of the word; that all the
impediments, which kept Antichrist back, that he could not be so manifest to
the world being removed; that Antichrist himself is now in this age of ours
most evidently discyphered, and that those be the principal and most apparent
signs of he Lords coming, whereof the rest or many of them depend, and might
not be showed till these were fulfilled; we are now to see what other tokens
the holy Ghost has set down in the word written, that should be showed a
little before the day of judgment.

Our Savior Christ says, that before the end of the world Nation shall rise
against nation, Math. 24. Mark. 13.
and Realm against Realm, and there shall be famines, and pestilence, and
earthquakes in certain places.

When Antichrist has long and quietly held the possession both of the
temporal and spiritual swords, when he has many years taken upon him the
office of Christ, to be the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and to have the
domimon as well of the souls as of the bodies of men, it is great and horrible
grief unto him to loose so high a dominion, and to stoop from the office of
God which he takes upon him, among men, to become as an other man: and
therefore he deuiseth by all means to punish and disquiet the Saints of God.
Whom he may bring into his power, them he vexes, them he tormenteth, them he
burns, them he destroys without all pity or mercy. And if they be such
as for their authority and greatness he cannot, or by reason of the
protection of others he dare not bring under his tyranny, he stirs up Kings
and Princes of his confederacy, to make wars upon them. Or if that fail, he
moves their own subjects to rebel and put themselves in arms against them.
Whereby he has at this day set in an uproar the whole Christian world;
kingdom against kingdom, and nation against nation, and one people against
another, that he may the easier (as he thinks) defend his proud and
insolent government, his false and superstitious religion, and the seat and
dignity of his Popedom. Neither can that place of Scripture of Nation rising
against Nation, and kingdom against kingdom, be more necessarily understood
of any other wars to be made between Prince and Prince, than such as
Antichrist raises up for religion sake. Neither did I ever hear of any
wars before this age of ours between the nations and kingdoms of Christendom
for Christ his cause: that is to say, for the true worshipping of him, for the
preaching of his Gospel, for the difference in opinions, for the liberty of
the conscience, and for the trial of the true Church: and that so earnestly
and continually and without hope of reconciliation; till now that Antichrist
for the saving of his dominion, has made all these commotions and troubles in
the world, which cannot be decided till Christ in his own person come to try
his own cause in judgment. But for all other temporal causes the Nations and
Princes of Christendom have one risen against another ever since the time that
Christ ascended up into heaven.

Wherefore this is the sense and meaning of these words of Christ: Toward the
end of the world when Antichrist is revealed, and that he fears to forgo
his Crown and dominion, he shall stir up the Princes that be his
Confederates to war upon the Nations and Cities that profess the Gospel,
that what he is not able to do of his own power, nor by his false and forged
miracles, nor by gathering of his general Councels, nor by pronouncing of his
excommunications and curses, nor by the wrong interpretations of the
Scriptures, nor by the writings and disputations of his school Doctors, nor by
sending abroad of his Seminary priests and hypocrites, that will he endeavor to
do by the help of other princes, under pretense of doing God good service. And
this notable token foretold of Christ as touching his second coming, we see
is already at hand, and is like every day more and more to be verified to
the great effusion of Christian blood.

In like manner, as concerning famine pestilences and earthquakes, foreshewed
by Christ in the second place, they are not so fitly to be referred to any
of those which houe ben in times past, before this man of sin was revealed.
For those have been heretofore many, great and horrible, ye and at sometimes
in some places almost universal. But those which have happened, and shall
happen in our time, when Antichrist shall be more and more revealed, superstition
abandoned, the power of the beast decreased, the kingdom of Christ revived,
the Gospel freely published, and the second warning of the trumpet sounded,
those be undoubted testimonies and tokens that the day of the Lord is at hand.
Such have were now had within the compass of these few years, even many, and
great, and horrible: sometimes in particular Cities and Countries, and sometime
in whole Provinces of Christendom.

What wonderful famines have we had in places distressed and besieged by the
champions of Antichrist, both in France, the Low Countries, and other
Christian Provinces; not sent immediately by the finger of God, but constrained
for the most part by the cruelty of Antichrist: by whose means it is to be
proved, that beyond the horror of all famines that ever I heard of, or read,
men have been constrained to pull out the dead carkases buried in graves, to
make sustenance for their bodies.

Pestilences also there have been many and great, besides those former signs
and tokens: In England; in France, in Spain, in Italy, and welneere in every
country of Christendom.

We our selves also have lately heard and felt great and fearful earthquakes,
to put us in mind of the promise of Christ, and therefore to assure our selves
of his speedy coming unto judgment, least if we provide not for the same, we
be sodeinly taken tardie, and for our wickedness be cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, that never shall be quenched.

In the third place is showed, what anguish and trouble the Saints of God shall
endure for Christ's sake; especially when they have made it manifest to all the
world, that the Pope of Rome is that son of perdition, which exalts himself
above God. For then does he seek by all manner of means to kill and destroy
them: by imprisonment, by torment, by fire, by sword, by poison, by laying in
wait, by treason, by charging them with heresy, by taking away their good
name, and by causing them to be hated of all people: evermore imagining with
himself, that by these persecutions, he shall so wast and destroy them, that
at the length the remembrance of them shall be clearly extinct from the face
of the earth.

Howbeit the more blood he spilleth, the more the Church of God increases; and
the longer thinks to put off the day of judgment, the sooner shall it be
hastened for the chosen sake, and for the destruction of the wicked world, and
of him in the midst thereof.

Fourthly, when the world shall perceive so great troubles to arise by
preaching of the Gospel, and that no temporal benefit comes thereby; that
it causes kingdoms to be at wars one against another, that there be as
great or greater famines, plagues, and earthquakes as ever, that iniquity
abounds more that ever, that the love of men and faith toward God, is less
than ever, that Gods displeasure is more grievous than ever. Finally that the
Pope for all the preaching against him, can no more be removed out of his seat
than ever: the ungodly seed of Antichrist are so offended therewith, as they
betray into wicked hands their own countrymen, their kindred and acquaintance,
yea they hate their own brethren, and seek their destruction. And this did
Christ foreshewe to happen in the end of the world.

Fifthly he declared, that at the same time many false Prophets should arise
and deceive a multitude. For when Antichrist perceived, that he might not
prevail by any of those vile and violent means that he had practiced, but
that his power nevertheless decreased, and his al hominable superstition and
idolatry was daily more and more disclosed, he erected certain Seminary
places for learning, with good maintenance to the same, for all those that
would resort unto them of all nations, to the end they might be sent home
again, after they have been certain years ripened and rottened in
superstitious doctrine, that by their fained hypocrisy, and by their false
fables and prophesies, they might reconcile all those that were fled from the
Antichristian faith, promising them so many and so great matters, as their
holy Father by his Commission had given them in charge: And these ministers of
his be they which Paul the Apostle said, To have the form of godliness, but
deny the power thereof: and have by their false prophesies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
carried away many poor souls captive into hell, and themselves also are
damned for ever without repentance. And this token of the Lords coming is
now likewise fulfilled.

Again Christ has declared, that before the judgment day, iniquity shall
abound, and the love of many shall wexe cold.

But what kind of iniquity do we think shall abou^d before the second coming
of Christ? Verelie al kind of sine and wickedness, that ever was in the world
since the creation of the same, not only the secret sins that proceed from
man's heart, whereby the whole man is corrupted, but the public offenses and
enormities done by man against man, against God, against the Church, against
the Common weal, and against all justice, godliness and Religion. And is it
any marvel, why all wickedness should abound now toward the end, more
than ever before? why the charity of man toward man, why the love of man
toward God, why the zeal of man toward godliness, should now be less
than before? though now the word of God be more plentifully preached that
before; the sacraments more sincerely ministered than before heresies and false
worshipping more so^udlie convinced than before: the true Church from the false
more evidently discerned than before, Antichrist himself more plainly detected
than before; and our salvation now more near at hand than before? No verily.
For now is the time that Christ prescribed, and never before. Now is Satan our
old enemy loosed, now it Antichrist his servant revealed.

For ever since the time that the kingdom of Christ has been revived by
preaching of the Gospel, the Dragon having the time of his thousand years
captivity welneere expired, and perceiving his dominion to be but short, is
come forth to aid and strengthen, and heal the wound of the beast, against
the Saints of God, and against the Lamb. Who joining their forces together,
seek by their crafty and lying hypocrisy, not only to bereave men of their
salvation, by deceiving and bewitching of their souls, and by driving them
forward to all manner of sin and wickedness, but also to destroy their
bodies and all, by bringing in upon them all manner of cruel Inquisitions,
wars, torments, miseries and deaths that man can devise. Wherefore the
nature of man being ever more and more corrupted, since the fall of Adam, and
therewithal driven by the violent inticement of sin, and persuasion of the
devil, it is not possible without the mighty assistance of Gods spirit, but
that iniquity should not only abound, but even now be grown to the full.

And to speak more particularly of the sins, against God, against man, and
against our own selves; I say, that they do now by means of Antichrist and
his adherentes more infinitely abound, than ever. Whereby it may evidently
appear, that the dissolulution of all things is at hand. Was not Lucifer an
Angel of light, and desired in his heart to be but equal with God? And is
Antichrist any more tha^ man, somewhat lower than the Angels, and yet exalts
himself above God? Did Adam break any more commandments of God then one,
when he was ashamed and cast out of Paradise? But do not we daily break all
the commandments of God, and yet are not once ashamed of our nakedness? Was
not Cayn counted a reprobat, because he was angry with God, and killed his
own brother about the accepting of their sacrifices? But are not we every day
vexed and disquieted against God, if but the least attempt that we go about
succeed not according to our desire? But be there not also as grievous and
horrible paricides and murders among us, even for the smallest and least
occasions? Was it not counted a monstrous and horrible Idolatry of the
Children of Israel, when they forgot God that had brought them out of the land
of Egypt, and worshipped a golden Calfe which they themselves had made, because
that Moses the servant of God and their general Captain, was but forty
days absent from them. Again, is not the Idolatry in these days of them
that profess the name of Christ, beyond al comparison greater, when they
forsake him that redeemed them from the power of Satan, and do daily worship
stocks and stones, and a piece of unleavened bread, when as Christ himself
their head and Captain is continually present with them by his holy Saints
and Godhead, until the end of the world?

Was not the infidelity of the Children of Israel counted exceeding great,
when as they believed not the promises of GOD, who had done so great wonders
for them, both in Egypt and at the red Sea? For which cause they themselves
were destroyed, and their children were made to wander forty years in the
wilderness for the sins of their fathers. But is not the infidelity of the
Christians in our time much more horrible, when as GOD has done for them far
greater things, then ever he did for the Children of Israel, even by sending
his own Son for their sakes into the world, to deliver them from the
slavery of Satan, and everlasting destruction of body and soul; where he
keeps them as the apple of his eye, from being consumed of the nations round
about them; when he talks with them daily and familiarlie from heaven out
of his holy word, when he feeds them from above with his own precious
body; when he indueth them with grace supernatural by his holy spirit;
when he blesses them with all his benefits both bodily and ghostly; and yet
are not we more unfaithful, unthankful, and unfruitful, than the Children of
Israel? They believed not, because the time of the promises unto them made,
was not yet performed: we believe not when all the prophesies delivered to us
in the Scriptures, be already fulfilled. They grudged and wauered, when they
were wandering in the desolate wilderness, wanting many pleasures and delights
of this deceiving life: we mistrust, though we now be in a delightful and
pleasant land, and abound in all worldly comforts that can be devised for man.
They misdoubted the first coming of Messiah, because the words proceeded from
the mouths of men: but many of us believe not his second coming, though he
himself have absolutely promised, and showed the tokens of the same, by his
own holy word. And so iniquity and incredulity abound this day, beyond all
the ages and times of the world. Wherefore the Lord must of necessity come to
deliver his people from the intolerable burden thereof.

Again, was not the disobedience and murmuring of Israel against God, and
against Moses his Lieutenant, so incomparable great, as the earth opened and
swallowed up the principal leaders of that conspiracy, and all their
habitations and families? Yea, so angry was the Lord with this sin, that had
it not been for Moses sake, he would then have dispatched the whole
generation of them from the face of the earth. But if we will but look into
the Christianity, and see what disobedience there is to the commandementes of
God, what continual murmuringes against him, what daily discontentments with
the blessings that he sends: what rebellions, conspiracies, and seditions,
against the Princes which be his Lieutenaunts, yea, what treasons and
trecheries against the royal person of their Souereignes. Nay what banding
there is against Christ and his Church, to root out both him and his holy
word, that neither of them should have any more being in the world, we shall
find that the burden of iniquity is at this day so exceeding heavy, as the
foundations of the world being so far out of course, must needs fall to ruin
and desolation.

Moreover, within what age and memory of man is is known; in what writings
ethnicke or christian has it been found; nay, by what place of Scripture can
it be proved, (especially since the former destruction of the world by
waters) that the sin of lust and fornication did so generally invade the
whole world, as it does at this present day? What sin does so speedely
procure the displeasure of God, the destruction of the ungodly, and the final
end of all things by fire, as does the flame of lust and concupisence? But
what needs me to recite the greatness of this sin, when the vengeance and
punishments that God has brought, and daily does bring upon fornicatours and
adulterers, both among Infidels and Christians, in every age, and in all
families and kingdoms, does evidently show the same. And albeit we know, that
for this sin specially, God burned up the cities of Sodom and Gomorrhe into
ashes; that he slew in one day three or four and twenty thousand Isaclites,
for committing that abomination with the daughters of Moab: albeit I say, we
know that this sin so sore displeases our God, impaireth our credit,
wastes our goods, weakneth our bodies, dulleth our memories, tormenteth our
minds, and works al manner of woe both to soul and body in this life, and
keeps us from inheriting of everlasting life in the world to come: yet do we
in this age take such vile and filthy pleasure therein, as we exceed all the
abomination of Sodom: and therein the world may seem to match all the
Generations that have gone before us. And the greatest cause why God has not
yet powered upon us the same or greater vengeance than he did upon our
forefathers, is because he has now but a short time of patience, and then
comes the day of vengeance. For he has already sounded his Trumpet unto
judgment, he has signified by his prophets, he has pronounced by his
Preachers, he has published by his signs and tokens, and he has opened
plainly by the word of his promise, that he comes speedily like a Lion
upon his enemies, and to reward with destruction and vengeance, all them that
work wickedness.

But I am ashamed to speak of the loathsome and horrible sin of drunkenness
and surfeiting: For although there be diverse other sins, wherein for the
vileness of them, men may be compared with brute beasts: yet in this sin,
men without all comparison excel all beasts and living creatures in the world.
For beasts being void of all reason, yet do they know what is necessary and
sufficient for them: and therefore do they rarely or never take any more
sustenaunce than is meet for their health, although they have never so great
plenty ministered unto them. But man, that is endued with reason and speech,
the two principal things whereby he is discerned from other beasts, and
whereby he has the dominion of them; during the time that he is occupied in
the sin of drunkenness, he is not only deprived of that excellent
knowledge and government, that God has given him above other creatures, but
while his head is ouercharged with wine, he has neither the power of
understanding, nor the sense of feeling, that other beasts have. O most
horrible and cruel sin, O monstrous disease of the flesh, how easelie
might thou be left, what little need has man of thee, and yet what
dangerous and deadly enormities do thou bring upon him, both against
himself, against his neighbor, against the Commonweal, and against the
commandments of our gracious God? He that is ouerloden with wine and strong
drink, foultreth in his speech, reeleth too and fro, falls on the ground, or
tumbleth into the ditch; the world goes round about him, shame does not lay
hold on him, but others are ashamed for him. The presence of persons does not
fear him, every man scorneth him, every man shunneth him, every man
derideth him, but nothing does grieve him.

Again, he whose head is not so deeply drowned in drink, but is over merry
therewith, and has fraighted his body, and pampered his belly, as well with
meat as drink, how slow is he to all virtue, and how prone is he to al kind
of mischief? Poverty, woe, strife, sorrow, bralling and wounds without a
cause, follow them that delight in wine and delicate fare. And, Prou. 21,
Prou. 13.
Through gluttony comes sickness, and by surfeiting, death.

O that men would also weight the greatness of this sin, by considering the
mischiefs that it brings. For besides that it destroys the health of the
body, and shorteneth man's life, it also alienateth the mind, provoke anger,
stirs up lusts, consumes riches, discovers secrets, peruerteth judgment:
it causes sloth in the body, dullness in wit, weakness in the memory, and
unwillingness to every good action. The abundaunce that is consumed by this
one only vice, would supply all the wantes in the Common weal. The
forbearing of one meal within this kingdom of all the people but once in a
year, would feed a mighty Army a whole month. The sparing of one dish but
once in a day, of them that have many dainties at their table, would satisfy
the poor that lie in misery at their gate. The superfluity of fare, that is
spent in one days interteinment, would give relief to all that be lame and
impotent. The money that is spent in strong and needless drink, would pay all
the duties that belong to a Prince. Nevertheless, so vile and corrupt is the
nature of man, so desperately does he run into his own fleshly desires,
that though he knew his poor and needy brother should perish for want,
that his Country and Common weal should be in distress, nay that his own
life should lie upon the abstinence of one meal, or forbearing of one match at
drinking, he would not leave his greedy appetite. Although men at this day are
ashamed to see such beastliness in others: Albeit they are grieved when they
hear of the drunkenness of Noah, when his two sons covered him: of Lot,
when he lay with his own daughters. Although they know that death was
pronounced against Aaron, Leuit. 10.
if he drunk wine or strong drink; Genesis 25.
That Esau lost his birthright for the greediness of a mess of potage; That
Balthazar in his drunkenness saw a finger upon the wall, Dan 5.
that wrote the final end both of him and his kingdom; and that the drunken
banquet of Benadab, 4. King 20.
was the destruction 32. Kings with all their Army. Albeit that woe is
pronounced to them, Esaias. 5.
that rise up early to follow drunkenness; that wine makes a man scornful
and unquiet; Pro 20. Ezech. 16. Gal. 5.
that fullness of meat was one of the great causes why Sodom was destroyed:
and finally, that no drunkard nor glutton shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven, yet are not men by all these warnings moved, yet do they follow the
wickedness thereof, and that with more greediness than ever before. All their
felicity is in banqueting, all their pleasure is in drinking, all their
delight is in their belly, all the pastime of their life is in gluttony and
good cheer, Esaias. 22.13.
Come (say they) let us eat and drink, and be merry: for to morrow we shall
die. Nothing at this day but eating, nothing but drinking, nothing but pouring
in of cups from morning to night, and from night to morning, and so al their
life long, without respect of time, or place, or holy dya, or Sabbath day;
without fear of laws, without fear of life, without fear of God, and
without fear of damnation, or any hope of salvation. Wherefore this vice
being greater than ever, requires a greater vengeance, and speedier coming
unto judgment, than ever.

But I tremble at this day with horror and grief, when I hear the name of
the Lord to be so commonly and continually taken in vain, and to be
dishonored in every corner. For, whereas we are straightly charged, that we
should not swear, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath;
so wicked and perverse is the nature of man, so cross and contratie to the
will and commandment of God, so untoward to that he should, and so ready to
that he should not, that whatsoever he is most forbidden, that does he most
ensue. If there be any corner, whereinto he may start from the impunitie of
man's law, thither does he run headlong without regard of any divine
prohibition, and without fear of Gods terrible judgment and condemnation. And
for this cause, where a public weal has made no express law for the
punishment of swearing, there men make no conscience of any oath in the world;
there heaven and earth is no oath with them; there the creatures of God are
nothing with them; there the Lord of hoasts is nothing with them; the name of
his blessed Son is nothing with them; nay, all the precious members of our
Savior that suffered for us, are too little for them to be a testimony of
all their untruths, of all their vilanies, of all their abominations that
they work in the world. But if they promise or vow any thing which they have
any mind to perform, or if they would justify themselves in any thing
wherein their conscience cleereth them, that will they affirm by that little
truth and faith which they have: But if they be stirred up unto fury; if
their blood be warmed with surfeting and drunkenness; if they be greedy of
revenge against such as have offended them; if they promise to meet upon any
wicked enterprise, if it be for the saving of a small penie in their purse, or
for defense of their credit in a plain untruth, in every trifling matter, in
every vain enterprise, in every idle game, and communication, and action, that
will they confirm with the most vehement and mighty oaths that they can
devise. The blessed and divine soul of Christ, the precious and dear blood of
the Lamb immaculat, and all the glorious and excellent members of Christ: nay,
be Majesty of Christ, and of the Father himself, are nothing in their vile
and vnpurre lips. This I say is the naughty nature of man, to be ever
contrary to the commandments of God. If GOD had commanded us that
whatsoever we promise, or affirm, or answer, or justify in this life, we
should call heaven and earth to record, or his creatures, or himself, or some
of his bodily members, we should never have heard an oath in this world. But
because he forbad us all these things, and that our affirmation should be
nothing but yea and nay, therefore we most impudentlie abuse all his
creatures, and most shamefully blaspheme the name of GOD, in all our words, in
all our affirmations, iustifications, and actions: and therefore shall all these
be a testimony against us in the day of judgment.

Look well unto it therefore, ye that be these luftie and wilful swearers in
the world, ye that call the Lord of hosts so often to witness with your
untruths and vanities, be ye sure that the Lord is not deaf, but does hear
you: he has registered and written up all the idle words that ye have spoken,
in your banqueting, in your surfetings, in your gamings, and in all the loose
and lewd behavior of your lives: he has written in the face of every
creature, all the testimonies that ye called them to witness with you; much
more shall ye find printed in his presence, nay, ye shall have it engraven
both in your own conscience, and in the Majesty of his person, all the
wilful and rash oaths, whereby ye have called him to record: and unless you
speedely repent you in this life, and cease for ever to blaspheme the name of
God as ye have done: ye shall shortly come before the supreme Judge, where it
shall be so hardly laid to your charge, as ye shall wish that the mountains
might cover you, and the earth shadow you from the presence of God, whom you
have so highly displeased. For the horrible sin of swearing is so continually
accustomed in your mouths, and the name of God and of his holy members, is so
abused in your actions, as he can no longer endure the wickedness thereof, but
will hasten himself unto judgment.

Now, if these sins, besides many others that I might recite, do so abound
at this day in the hearts of men, and do break out so mightily in their
actions, as the things themselves declare, that the day of judgment is at hand;
what shall we say of the sin of covetousness, the root and welspring of all
other mischiefs. Wherein men at this day do so far exceed the measure of
our forefathers, as the later we are borne, the more corruption we have
received: and the nearer to the day of the Lord, the less affection have we to
heavenly things, and the more desire of worldly vanities. And albeit this
sin of coveting, be set down as a capital crime in the holy Scriptures, yet
do we make small account of the same. Howbeit, if the children of Israel fled
before their enemies, Iosu. 7.
only for the covetousness of Achan, and that Achan himself was iudicially
and formally executed, because he had hidden to his own use some things that
were accursed; if Nabal the Carmelite for his covetous mind, 1. Sam. 25.
in denying some sustenance unto David and his servants in time of necessity,
was stricken by God that he died; finally, if Gehezi the servant of Elizeus, 4.
Kings 5.
was punished with a foul leprosy, for requiring and taking but a small gift
of Naaman the Sirian, whom his Master had frankly and freely a little before
healed of the same disease what deserves the insatiable mind of Christians in
our time, that without all measure or end, without fear of God, without
regard of religion, with out remorse of conscience, without sense of other men's
griefs, be it right or wrong, whether it concern God or the Church, the
Prince or the Commonweal, the father or the son, neighbor or stranger,
friend or foe, life or death: if it may turn to our owneprofit and commodity,
we seek by all manner of means to attain thereunto, though we die for it in
this life, and be sure of damnation in the life to come, without all remorse of
conscience, or any care of restitution, Howbeit all this comes to pass,
that the word of God may not be frustrate, which says, that in the latter day
iniquity shall abound, and the love toward God and man shall decaie: And the
abundance of all sin does grow from this very root of coveting and
greediness of riches. But in very deed the means that this sin has had
to come to such ripeness in these our days, have been far greater than ever
in any Age before; For even since the time that it pleased God to show forth
all other signs and tokens, which he had promised to come against the end of
the world; what ways have men attempted, what arts have they devised to
fulfill their greedy appetite and desire? Be there any lands that they have
not searched, or any seas that they have not sailed? Be there any dangers
that they have not ventured? Is there any cold or heat that they have not
endured? Is there any world that they have not compassed; any mine that they
have not opened, any blood that they have not spilled; nay, any people that
they have not destroyed to attain to their desire? Do they not travel more
willingly, more often and farther, from the uppermost face of the earth to the
nethermost part of the same, from the Sun rising to the Sun setting, from
the South to the North, and to all the ends of the world, and all for the
insatiable desire of gold and silver, read claie and white, than they would
do for the sauegard of their own life? And yet the more they have, the more
they want; the more they want, the more they covet: In such sort, as if the
earth and sea were emptied of their treasures, I suppose that they would seek
to Heaven for temporal riches, which they cannot beelead unto for the
salvation of their souls. Wherefore this vice of covetousness is now so
primie full, as it craves an end and dissolution of the world.

Now come we to the last token and restimonie of the coming of Christ,
namely; That the Gospel shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto
all nations: and then shall the end come.

As I wrote before, that the revealing of Antichrist and man of sin, which
sits in the Temple of God, should be the first token of that second coming
of Christ: so the preaching of the Gospel over all the world, both by the
circumstance of the Evangelical history, and by the consequence of the
things themselves, must of necessity be the last token before his coming.
And this is also confirmed by John in the Revelation, when he says; Apoc 14.
That he saw an Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach to all nations, kindreds, and people, and saying; Give glory
to God, for the hour of his judgment is come. And immediately after this
preaching of the word, an other Angel cries, Babylon is fallen, that great
City is fallen, that made all Nations drink of the Cup of her fornication. For
if there be no other way to make Babylon to fall, to reveal Antichrist the
enemy of Christ, and to banish the Apostasy of the Church procured by the
same Antichrist, but the preaching of the word and free course of the Gospek
the^ is there also no other way to enlarge the kingdom of Christ, and to gather
the Saints of God into one, but only the free course and publication of the
Gospel: which by little and little shall consume as it has gebun the spirit of
error and apostasy of the Church, till the brightness of Christ's presence have
utterly destroyed the same, and all the authors and abettors thereof. Wherefore
whatsoever other tokens shall be at the very coming of Christ (as no doubt but
there shall be many both in the Sun and Moon, and stars, and in all the
creatures of God, as behooves in so great an alteration and consummation of the
world, Mat. 24. Mark. 13.
and as Christ himself has most effectually set down in his holy word) yet
this publishing of the Gospel in all the world shall undoubtedly be the very
last token before his coming, as it is evidently set down by the holy Ghost
himself, when he says, And then shall the end come: And when the Angels after
preaching of the word said, Apoc 14.
The hour of judgment is come: thrust in thy sithe and reap, for the harvest
is ripe. As if he should say, When Antichrist of Rome, which exalts himself
above me, shall be revealed to be the principal head that has caused so great a
falling away from the truth in my Church, he shall trouble and persecute you
to the death: he shall make nation to rise against nation, for upholding of his
damnable heresy, and he shall cause you to be hated for my sake: but fear
not my little ones; for when ye shall see all these troubles to happen, be ye
sure that my coming, and your redemption draws nigh. For my word shall run
out very swiftly, and in a short space consume that which he by his hypocrisy
and tyranny had in many years contrived. He that has caused al Princes to
drink of the poisoned cup of his fornication, him will I suddenly destroy
with the breath of my mouth. Yea, and least ye should any longer be deceived
by his false signs and deceiuable errors, my word shall be published in all
the world, and then is the time of my coming, then is the harvest of the earth
ripe, and then will I thrust in my sickle and reap. And this publication of
the Gospel over all the world is the second sound unto judgment. For as our
Savior Christ gave the first sound, when he sent forth his Apostles, and
commanded them to teach all nations, Math. 2^.
and to baptize them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, and to plant Churches in all those places which received the word of
truth: and that the fame of Christ and sound of the Gospel went forth at that
time to all lands, where any people did inhabit. So now, all things being
fulfilled, that the Scriptures had promised, should come to pass between the
first warning and the second; The Gospel of our Savior is begun again to be
renewed and published over all the world, and that more freely and without
peril then ever before, by reason of the godly minds and good endeavors of
Christian Magistrates. And this I say is the second sound of the Trompet:
besides which, we are to expect no more till Christ himself enuyrond with
thousands of Angels, and in the Trompet of God and voice of an Archangell shall
descend from heaven, and command the dead to arise, and shall gather his elect
from the four winds, and from every part of heaven and earth, and from the
deep places. And as this publishing of the Gospel is a most assured token of
his coming, so by reason of the effects thereof, it is more notable then all
the rest. For it seems to be but simple in show, but it is wonderful in
operation. It is contained in plain and familiar terms, but it searches the
very root of the heart. It appears but foolishness to the ungodly, and to
them that perish, but it confounds the wisdom and craftines of this world.
It is but small and of no reputation amongst men, but it drives proud and
mighty tyrants from their feats, and exalts into their places them which
submit themselves unto it. It is but weak in sight of the world, but it is the
power of God unto salvation in them that believe, and it cutteth more sharp
than a two edged sword, overthrowing all the imaginations, 2. Cor. 10. verse.
4.5 6.
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having ready
vengeance against all disobedience. And it is no new Gospel that is now
preached, but it is the old Gospel newly published. It is the same that the
Apostles taught and planted, but the ingratitude of the world left and
contemned. If any nation at this day have been kept in blindness; if any have
been held from the benefit of the Gospel, their own sins and abominations
have been the cause thereof, for that they have wilfully withheld the truth in
their own unrighteousness, and have despised both God the Father and his Son,
and have wrought despite unto the spirit of grace. For the creation both of
themselves, and of all the visible things of the world, might make both God and
his eternity manifest enough unto the^: yet would they not acknowledge him,
but have followed their own imaginations, and have turned the glory that is due
unto the only wise and incorruptible God, either unto creatures far inferior
to themselves, or else they have worshipped devils and damnable spirits,
forsaking the true God that made both them and all the world. Besides this they
cannot plead ignorance: For undoubtedly, the sound of his Gospel has first
or last gone into all lands. And though perhaps later into one country than
into another, that has God done in his wonderful wisdom and providence, who
beholds all the nations in the world at one view, sees into all their
actions, beholds all their hearts, perceives who be inclined unto any
goodness, and who have given over themselves to a wilful and reprobate mind.
And as he beholds all men, so he calls all men, some at the first hour,
and some at the last; that he may have mercy on whom it pleases him, and may
shut up under infidelity those that are hard hearted. Nevertheless, if there
be any nation that heard not of Christ in the first sound of the Trompet by the
Apostles, nor in all this time that the preaching of the Gospel has been
discontinued, yet now there is not doubt but in this second warning and
publication of the word of God, through the prosperous successes of our blessed
Soueraign, and by the care that she and other godly Princes of the reformed
Churches have to advance the kingdom of Christ, there shall be no corner
within the whole circumference of the earth, but in short space shall not only
have the sound of the Gospel, but a perfect publication and spreading of the
same, with a full knowledge of Christ. For the Gospel shall be published over
all the world, and then comes the end. And undoubtedly, if the Gospel had
been preached and taught unto the people of America, and the lower India, by
the Spaniards and Portingalls, when they first found out those nations, with
such plainnes and simplicity, as is done by us in the reformed Churches,
without adding of Images, or superstitions, or vanities, no less peevish and
ungodly, then the abominations that those Infidels themselves had before used,
the kingdom of Christ had long before this day been received and spread over
all those large and ample Territories. Wherefore the more grievous shall be
their damnation, that have so mocked and deceived them: and the greater is the
mercy of God if he impute not their ignorance unto them.

Now that we have breefly declared all the signs and tokens, which the holy
Ghost has promised in the Scriptures to come to pass before the end of the
world, we must also with the like perspicuitie, examine whether this be not
the time, or very near thereunto that Christ shall come again in glory to
judge both the quick and the dead, which is the second part of this discourse.
For albeit that he has set down all these tokens of his coming so exactly
and in such order, as it is impossible, but that any man capable of reason may
understand when the last token is fulfilled: yet has he also confirmed the
same by other invincible reasons, drawn partly from such things as we
sensibly and daily perceive, and partly from his own power and
omnipotency. Learn (says he) of the fig tree when the branches be tender,
and has put forth leaves, for then ye be sure that the summer is (...) hand.
Again, Heaven and earth shall perish, but my word shall not perish. As if he
might say: When all these tokens that I have spoken of be fulfilled, ye shall
be sure that I will then come: and the last token before my coming is, That
the Gospel of my kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto
all Nations: And there shall not be a kingdom in the world, but either at the
first sounding of my word, or at the second, shall hear that I am the Savior
and redeemer of mankind. Behold I have spoken it: Heaven and earth shall
pass away, before one jot of my word pass. These I say be the very tokens
and times before his coming. Albeit to speak of the hour, or day, or month,
nay of the year it self wherm he will com, were high pride and presumption:
seeing there is neither man nor angel that knows it. But this we know for
certeintie: that many Ages past, the Gospel was published welneere in all
Asia, Aphrica and Europe: a number of which Nations for their unthankfulness
were deprived of the benefit thereof, and many other are fallen into great
Apostasy. Also we see it plain, that in this age of ours, the glad tidings of
Christ, has after some sort bin carried unto all the barbarous nations in the
nether part of the world: and we live in continual hope that in short space it
shall be more si^cerly and more universally published tha^ hitherto it has bin;
which being proclaimed, we may then be bold to say, that Christ is at the
very point of his coming. And yet nevertheless all that is no hindra^ce, but
that it behooves us both thus day, and to morrow, and every day and night and
hour, to watch and be ready with our lamps burning, left the Bridegroom take
us upon the sudden and unprovided of oil; and so while we expect yet some
longer time of his coming, we be quite excluded out of the kingdom of
heaven. Al these things have I affirmed and proved out of the infallible word
of God, and by that which we have seen with our eyes, and do understand of our
own knowledge to be already come to pass, most agreeablie to the word of
God. Whereby we may be assured, that if any thing be yet to come that the
Scriptures have promised touching the end of the world, the same shall shortly
and in his due time be performed. And this was my special purpose in this
Treatise to prove: that because the foolish, ungodly, and unbelieving nature
of men, is in these days beyond all other ages and times before, so curious to
search and inquire for the time of Christ's coming, which time God has
reserved to himself; I might draw them, (as much as is possible) from seeking
the same at the hands of men, (from who^ without the help of Gods spirit,
there proceeds nothing that is certain, or true, or godly) and send them to
the most true, and certain, and undoubted prophecy of the word of God.
Nevertheless I am not ignorant, that there be also many humane reasons, many
probable co^iectures, many temporal signs and tokens, and many sufficient
arguments concerning the end of the world, that do concur with the prophecy
of the scriptures: al which as long as they serve to justify and confirm
whatsoever Christ, the Prophets and Apostles have promised concerning the
same, we must rather give credit unto them, than reject and condemn them.
Among which are al those reasons which are commonly made to ratify the saying
of Elias, that the world shall not continue the full of 6000. years: which
prophecy though it be not in the scriptures, but cited by the Rabbis, yet
because all the other parts of the same Prophecy have succeeded every thing in
his due time and that it does so well co^curre with the tokens, that Christ
showed for the end of the world, and with that saying of Christ, Those days
shall be shortened for the elect sake: we must embrace the same as a true
prognosticate, religiously descended from that holy Author.

But in very deed in this prophecy of Elias is contained a large field to
prove the neerenesse of the day of judgment: howbeit I will not walk much
therein, because I know it has been exactlie handled of many. Only this I
say; that the Scripture it self confirms, and infallible reason proves,
and so many tokens both of heaven above, and of the earth beneath testify
that the world shall not last to the end of six thousand years.

And so much the rather, when we plainly see all the tokens of the latter day
to be now welneere fulfilled. And I have proved, that there are not above 70.
years past or thereabout since the last and most revealing of Antichrist: That
is to say, since he was openly, freely and without fear published to be that
son of perdition. Within which time, the tokens that Christ spoke of
concerning the end of the world, are already showed, and lack but little of
a perfect fulfilling. And do we think, that when so great and so many things
have been accomplished in so short a space as 70. years, that the very little
or nothing which remains, should be in performing 400. years and more, which
are to finish up the number of 6000. years? Or may we not not refer that
saying of Christ (This generation shall not be past, till all these things be
fulfilled. And again: For the chosens sake these days shall be shortened) as
well to this third age of the world, as to the destruction of Jerusalem, which
was but 50. years after? As if he should say: In this latter age of the world,
and especially toward the end thereof, when Antichrist is revealed, and
Satan which is the devil is loosed, there shall be so great famines, plagues,
and earthquakes, so great and hortible persecutions, such leagues and
conspiracies of Princes against my Church, so many false Prophets to deceive
the world, such hating and betraying one of another, yea and such trouble and
vexation on every side, besides the iniquity that shall then so mightelie
abound; that if it be possible the very chosen may be deceived.

Wherefore, for their sakes I will shorten those troublesome days, and will cut
off a part of this latter age, so that it shall not be equal to the other ages
that went before.

Besides, what wonderful alterations have we heard of and seen in the world,
since the memory of man? What change in the nature of the creatures? what
mutation both in the actions and affections of men, and in the accidents of
this life and occurrents of estates; such as our forefathers in many hundredth
years before never heard of? All which things, since they most and chiefly
happened or began about the time that the Gospel in our age was revived by
preaching, and when the kingdom of Christ began to be restored, they be
manifest tokens of the end of the world.

Has not these many and mighty Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Denmark,
Swethland, Poland, Germany, Belgica, and a great part of the large kingdom of
France (all which be as much as the rest of Christendom) retired themselves,
and been reclaymed within this space from the Romish bondage, and from
Antichristianitie to the true worshipping of Christ, by believing of the
Gospel preached unto them?

Was not the Art and skill of Printing devised by Christians, and specially
practiced in our time; by the means whereof, though not only, yet chiefly all
other Religions in the world are found to be most shameful and Idolatrous:
and only the true and sincere worshipping of Christ magnified and extolled in
all the world? Were not all the learned tongues and languages renewed by
Christians in our time, from a rude barbarism (wherein they had many ages been
a sleep) to an excellent and perfect form both of speaking and writing?

Is not the desire of Christians in our time, more earnestly bent to seek a
perfection of all Arts and Sciences, and a more exquisite form of Religion
then ever was in any age before us since the sincere times of the Primitive
Church?

Were not all the order and manner of Instruments and habiliments of war and
warfare in our age, well near contrary to that it was before; especially by
the devise of gunnes, which the devil together with his deliverance out of
bondage, devised for the speedy destruction of mankind, and great effusion of
blood; all making way to the second coming of Christ our King?

Was not the finding out of the new, or (as I may say) of the nether world, by
the endeavor and travel of Christians in our time, one of the most wonderful
accidents that has happened since the time of Christ: and even as a sign and
token before the latter day; that GOD which has shut up those nations so many
ages before in unbelief, would now yet in the latter time call them to the
knowledge of his Son: if any perhaps would hearken to his word, that they
also might be saved, and healed by the death of Christ?

Is it not likewise a special token of the end of the world, that such
extraordinary Stars and Comets, such strange and rare Conjunctions of the
Planets, such meruellous remouings of earth, whereof no mortal man can give
any natural reason; together with mighty ouerflowinges of the Sea, whereby
whole Countries and people are destroyed?

But is it not as great a sign and token hereof, that within so few as
fifteen years now to come, there shall happen five Eclipses of the Sun,
besides many others of the Moon; such and so terrible as the like never
happened within so short a space since the beginning of the world?

Does not also the sudden decay of man's strength, and stature, and age,
together with the unwilling mind he has to all godliness, virtue, and
charitable actions, prognosticate unto us any less than the things before?

Moreover, do not the trees, the plants, the herbs and fruits, and all other
senseless things of the earth, which should be for the comfort of man, most
sensibly show unto us by the decay of their strength, of their taste and
virtue (which not long since they had in greater measure) that within a short
time, there shall be no more use of them? Nay, does not the earth it self
complain, that she has powered out of her bowels in a manner all the store of
her treasures and commodities, wherewith she was fraighted for the use of man?
Yea, do not all the creatures of God earnestly expect when the Son of God
shall appear, that they also may be delivered from the bondage of corruption?

But shall we not account this also to be a great sign of the end of the
world, that it pleased God in this age and never before, both to indue man with
knowledge, and to lead him, as it were by the hand, about the whole compass
of the earth: That when he had seen all, and compast all, and yet found all to
be nothing but trouble, and vanity, and vexation of mind, by sea and land,
and in all places where he came, he might glorify his Creator and Savior,
which had given so excellent guiftes, and virtues, and knowledge, and
civility, and so just a Religion unto his Christian people, before so many and
so great nations, which in comparison of them, lived without God, without
faith, and without all humanity; and might the rather be drawn from the love
of this earthly mansion, to long for the day of Christ, and to be translated
to a more joyful and everlasting habitation?

To be short: The number of Prophets that GOD does daily send to admonish all
people of the latter day, and to give them warning to be in a readiness; because
they teach no lies, but such things as they find in the word of God, are no
less to be believed then those that prophesied of the first coming of Christ.

To make an end hereof, the opinions, or rather firm belief of sondrie
several learned and wise men, so far distant asunder by places, but so
nearly conspiring together by the unity of their judgments, and consent of
their spirits as touching the coming of Christ, do declare, that the
Bridegroom is eue^ now coming, and crave us to wayt for him all hours of the
day and night, that we may enter with him into the marriage feast.

Where be now these Atheists? where be these mockers? where be those that
walk after their own lusts, and say; where is the promise of his coming?
Behold the winter blasts are now gone, and the comfort of the spring is come:
The Lord shall come speedily forth like a Lion out of his den, and will be
avenged of them that speak blasphemy, and will destroy all the workers or
wickedness: Behold the Arc is now welneere finished, the number is
accomplished, the Church established, the chosen confirmed: The trumpet has
sounded: The kings son must be married: The feast is prepared, the bidden
guests have refused: All sorts of people in all the high ways of the world are
gathered, the wedding is furnished: The king and the bridegroom are coming:
The earth and the sea shall yield up their dead: the son of man shall appear
in the clouds: he shall come with exceeding glory: Angels without number shall
attend upon him: All nations of the world shall draw unto him: The godly
shall triumph and rejoice in him: The generation of the wicked shall tremble to
see him: The godly shall stand at his right hand, the wicked on his left:
Heaven shall be opened, the earth shall be consumed, the sea shall be dried: The
Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and all the powers of heaven shall be
moved: The son of God shall sit on his throne, the wicked shall receive the
judgment of death, and the faithful be carried into the everlasting
Kingdom. Wherefore the Lord shall come and not tarry. He promised signs of
his coming, and those signs he has sent: He promised that he would come
immediately after those signs; wherefore those signs being accomplished,
he will come, and that suddenly like a mighty tempest. For heaven and earth
shall fail, but one jot of his promise shall not fail. Wherefore, insomuch as
we see so many of the promises already fulfilled, let us be patient in the
rest, and not murmr against him as the Children of Israel did in the
wilderness, least a sudden destruction come upon us, as it did upon them, and
we be cast alive both body and soul into the bottomless pit.

They which believe not in the coming of Christ, do imitate the foolish
example of Julius Caesar, who being often warned before to take heed to himself,
least some great treason were wrought against him in the Ides of March, made
but a mock thereof the same day that he was slain: saying to some of his
familiars, which counseled him not to go that day into the Senate house; Why
(says he) they have told me this good while, that I should be in danger when
the Ides of March were come: they are come, and yet I am safe; I says one,
they are come, but they are not yet past: And so by his own folly and
negligence he was the same day slain. In like manner, these that do but mock
at the Lords coming, do see (indeed) that all the signs which were promised
should come to pass, are found to be true: but yet because Christ is not
come, together with the signs, they think perhaps that he will not come. But
o ye fools; ye see them to be come indeed: but ye see them not yet finished,
neither shall ye see them so soon ended, as ye shall see the promise of his
coming justified.

Some motions ye had perhaps this last year, to think upon that day, more
than ye be accustomed, because of the great expectation of the Prophecy of the
year 1588; and for that ye heard by many probable reasons and conjectures of
men (drawn from the consent and agreement of times, from the conjunctions of
planets, which threaten either final destruction or wonderful alteration, and
from the equality of numbers in the years of the world 5550 and 5555, which
iumpe with the years of Christ 1588 and 1593) that either the world should then
end, or else very strange things should then happen. Howbeit this year being
past, ye seem now to live more securely, ye fear God less, ye care less
for religion, ye delight more in vanities, ye sin more greedelie, ye
provoke Gods wrath more greeuouslie, ye run more headlong into damnation:
and ye sing your old tune; Where is the promise of his coming more
reprochfullie, than ever ye did before.

Nevertheless, if so many and so strange things happened that year, as the like
did not in so short space in many ages before? and me^ having no more knowledge
thereof, tha^ that which could be gathred by conjecture of the stars, and by
co^paring time with times, what effects do we think shall follow upon the sure
and infallible prophecy, warranted by the spirit of God himself in the
canonical scriptures? If the stars that are but creatures, can point to the
time when God will work such mighty operations in other of his creatures, as
against that year they did: whereby the proud and lusty minds of mighty
Monarchs are abated, whereby puissant and strong armies are dissolved, whereby
the most invincible nauies and strong castles of the sea be destroyed, whereby
the leagues and co^spiracies of princes shall be made frustrate, whereby they that
have played so many horrible tragedies in the Church, and have caused the blood
of so many hundred thousands to be spilled, shall the same year finish their
days, some by blood, some by death: Nay if the pore herrings of the sea, have
this year brought us letters of warning from God, written upon the skins of
their little bodies, that Christ comes and that quickly, what think we shall
the performance of gods eternal promise, or the least word that proceeds out
of his mouth bring to pass against all the tyrants and blood suckers of this
world, against all the enemies of his Church and religion, against all them
that make but a mock at the glorious coming of Christ, against all the strong
and mighty Cities of the earth: yea, and against the consummation of the whole
globe of the world? But ye my masters that give so great credit to the
reuolutions of the heavens, and to the threatening of the stars and planets,
look well to your selves from henceforth, for besides that the Lord has
promised very shortly to com himself and call you to a reckoning, he has put
also into his creatures new accidents, the effects whereof shall continue not
one but one and twenty years at the least (if the Lord come not before) and
those greater than have ever bin since the world was made, the straungenes
whereof shall amase you, and the effects thereof shall trouble you, when ye
shall see the Sun and Moon so often and in so short time eclipsed; when you
shall see the brightness of heaven at noone time darkened; when God shall power
out his wrath abundantly by plagues and famines, by winds and tempests, by
fearful ouerflowings of waters, and by the ruin and destruction of some
Provinces; when ye shall perceive the strength of all creatures diminished,
when the earth will not bring forth her benefits, when by this time all truth
and righteousness will be vanished, all love and society among men will be
dissolved, when all men will altogether love themselves, and no man will any
whit love another, when natural affection of men toward their own will be
prostrate, when all obedience to God and to Magistrates, to parents and
masters, to Kingdoms and Commonweals will be abolished, when nothing will
be done for duty and conscience, but all for fear and necessity, when all
truth, all charity, and all goodness will be abandoned; and when there shall be
nothing but pride, envy, dissimulation, oppression, lust and covetousness in
all the whole earth; when the earth it self will crave at the hands of GOD,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and deliver me from this intolerable burden,
which the foundation that I am builded upon, namely, thy heavenly word, is not
able any longer to bear. Wherefore, If Christ have discovered unto us, upon
whom the latter ends of the world are come, all the signs and tokens which he
promised of his coming, If he have sent Preachers into the world to proclaim
the Gospel of his kingdom; If he have revived as it were his own name
again, that lay hidden in Images and dumme Idols; If he have resumed unto
himself his own authority, that was attributed unto men and Saints departed
out of this life; If he have revealed that man of sin that takes the whole
office of Christ upon him; If he have sent all the plagues, and famines, and
earthquakes, that his wisdom and counsel devised best for the fatherly
correction of his people before the judgment: If nations and kingdoms which
are either enemies to his Gospel, or strangers from his Church, have banded
themselves against the Lord and against the generation of the godly: If the
father have been against the son, and the mother against the daughter, and
brother against brother, for the name of Christ: If many false Prophets have
come in the name of Christ, and taught the people shameful forgeries when the
Lord never sent them: If men betray one another, and hate and persecute one
another for their conscience sake: If iniquity be so filled up with the
measure of it self, as it can hardly be any more augmented: Finally, if the
preaching of the Gospel, be at this day carried from one kingdom to another
welneere unto the end of the world; and all these things to be the tokens of
Christ's coming: And if so many strange things have happened besides in
these our days, that have not done the like in many ages before, and all
these in the Church, and concerning the Church, and most agreeable to the time
of Christ's own prophecy. Then is the second warning of the Trompet sounded
unto judgment.

It is high time therefore to awake out of sleep, and to slumber no more in
the cogitations of ungodliness: It is time that we should cast off the cares
of this life, and make our selves ready for the day of the Lord: It is time,
yea more then time that we should cast away the works of darkness, and put
on the armor of light: It is time that we should lay away all filthiness
and sin; for now is our salvation nearer then when we first believed. The
axe is now put to the root of the tree: that even now, we must either bring
forth fruit, or else be cut down and cast into the fire. Behold, now is the
acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, now will the Lord show
himself a mighty GOD, and his name shall be magnified in all the world. He
came at the first, and we knew him not: behold, he comes again, and all
men shall know him: he came before simply to take our nature upon him, and to
dye for our sins; but he comes again, as a conqueror to be revenged of
his enemies, and as a bountiful Prince to reward his Subjects: He came into
the world, which he himself had made, but the world would not receive him,
because it was not worthv of him. Wherefore having wrought the work of our
redemption, he ascended up unto his Father, where by his holy spirit he has
governed, kept, and preserved his Church one thousand and well near six
hundred years, and now he comes in his own person to call all men to an
account, and to cite all men to his Judgment; and those that have used their
talents well in this life, shall be sure of an eternal reward in his kingdom:
Math. 25.
but if they have been negligent and unprofitable servants, and without care of
the Lords coming, he will cast them into the uttermost darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. There shall be no Lord, no King, no Emperor,
nor Pope upon the earth, that shall be exempt from this Judgment. Can any
Prince or Magistrate of the world compare himself in brightness and glory unto
Lucifer that glorious Angel, yet he might not escape the judgment of GOD, but
the higher he was in glory, the greater was the shame of his fall.

Remember therefore O ye Christian Princes and Magistrates, and ye that have
charge and rule of Gods people; whom God has made his Liutenants general
within your own dominions, remember that the Lord is coming, and will call
you to an account before the throne of his Judgment: The greater your
Kingdoms and Territories be, the greater is the reckoning that he requires of
you: and the more absolute you be in commanding all, the more are you bound
to give an account for. Ye are the Caesar's, to whom Paul appealed, from you
lies no appeal to any superior in this life. As the Lord has delivered unto
your custody the greatest number of Talents, so he looks to reap at your
hands the greatest gains.

It pitieth me to temember the woeful and grievous state of all mortal men in
this miserable life, the desperate and dangerous case wherein they live, the
often and imminent perils that they fall into, the manifold temptations,
vexations, and disquietnes of mind that they are brought into, the continual
inticements of the flesh and the devil that they enter into, besides the rash,
and furious, and ungodly actions, that they desperately run into; That when
they shall shortly stand before the Tribunal seat, and their own conscience
justly accusing them thereof, there shall be no wisdom, no policy, no
counsel, no eloquence of the tongue, that can excuse or satisfy the least
offense of this life: This is the general state of all mankind.

But alas for grief, that Princes should both now, and then also before the
Judgment seat, be in more woeful case, than all other persons and subjects of
this mortal life; That they should be in greater danger than all men living;
that they should be subject to more miscarying and mishaps; than all men
living; that they should have more vexations, disquietnesse, and cares of
mind, than all men living; that temptations of the flesh, that prouocations
unto lust, and desire of pleasures, should take more hold of them, than of
all men living; and that the way unto all ungodly actions should be more open
unto them, than to all men living: And of all these things must they shortly
yield an account, together with all men living. And yet behold when the Awdit
is ended for this, and a Quietus est for all matters concerning themselves,
there is a new indictment framed against them, wherein they must be called to
an other reckoning. Then shall the Register of all their government be read
before them: then will it be seen whether they have ministered Justice unto
their people: That is to say; Whether they have heard the fatherless and
oppressed, when they have cried unto them; Whether they have taken notice of
such appeals, as have been made unto them; Whether they have punished ungodly
and corrupt Judges, which sold their subjects for silver, and the righteous
for a poor reward; Whether they have spared the innocent blood, and not
pardoned them that run on still in wickedness; Whether in all their public
enterprises, they have respected the glory of GOD, more than their own
commodities; Whether they have nursed, protected, and defended the Church of
GOD to the uttermost of their power; Whether they have preserved it from all
heresies, errors, schisms, and corruptions; Whether they have punished those
Rulers of the Church, that cause the truth of GOD to be evil spoken of, for
their ungodliness: Finally, whether in all their actions, both at home and
abroad, private and public in the Church and Commonweal, they have done
all things with a faithful and sinceere heart, and with the testimony of a
pure and good conscience. Which if they have, they shall be coheires with Christ,
and shall reign with him in glory and felicity for evermore: otherwise they
shall stand among the guilty sinners, and receive judgment of condemnation
according to their merits.

Next unto Kings and absolute Princes, must come to a reckoning before the
chief Judge Christ Jesus, the Governors of the Church, and Rulers of
Provinces and particular places, to whom the Prince for his own discharge
has committed his authority, to see that GOD be truly served, and Justice
among his subjects duly executed.

And therefore ye my reverent Fathers of the Church, ye, whose office it is
both to teach, and feed, and govern the Church under your charge: Christ
will shortly call you to a straight account; First, whether ye came into your
office by a plain and direct way, or else stole into it by some corrupt and
sinister means; Whether ye desired the office of a Bishop for the goodness
of the work, or for the gain and profit of the living; Whether ye set
before your eyes, the benefit of the Church, and advancement of the Gospel,
more than the honor and dignity that is attributed unto your calling.

The second Article wherein ye must try your selves before the Supreme
Bishop, is, Whether you have endeavored as far as in you lies, to cleanse
the whole Church under you, of all ungodly worship and worshippers in the
same: And whether ye have been careful to appease al schisms and
controversies to the uttermost of your power; whether ye have sincerely and
diligently preached Christ, as he has prescribed in his holy word; whether
ye have weeded out of your whole governments, all infamous, ungodly,
schismatic, yea (and as much as in you lies) all unlearned Pastors, which
either by their wicked examples offend, corrupt and mar their flock, or else
be altogether careless and negligent of them; whether ye have executed all the
censures of the Church, with a faithful and single heart and hand, without all
favor and corruption, for the advancement of the glory of God, and edifieng
of die whole congregation.

Item, whether you have removed or reformed all such your Commissaries and
other mean officers, (if any such you have) that by their corrupt and
auaritious proceedings, have caused the most just, most holy, and most pure
religion of Christ, to be blasphemed and hated among the enemies of the
Gospel: and have given so great an offense to the rest of the Church, as many
have run into grievous schisms and very damnable opinions, by reason of the
same.

Likewise in all just appeals made unto you, whether you have in charity and
conscience endeavored with all care and diligence to reform all things that
have been wronged by your inferior officers. Finally, whether ye have fed the
hungry, clothed the naked, and lodged the harborlesse; and whether to the
proportion of your living, ye have been as liberal to the poor and impotent
members of Christ, as careful to advance your selves and yours with worldly
riches and honors. And thus, whether ye have in all things endeavored to the
uttermost of your power, both by your sound doctrine, by example of your own
life, and by your faithful and upright government, to walk worthy of your
vocation, and have kept the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. In all
these things shall ye shortly be examined and tried before the triumphant
Judge Christ Jesus. Again, ye that be the governors of Provinces, and all
other Judges and great officers, upon whom depends either the lives, or the
goods, or the causes of other Subjects; albeit the most of you have long time
escaped the temporal sword, yet shall you not now escape the last judgment of
God. For the blood of the fatherles and widows have cried up to the Lord of
hoasts, and he comes to take an account of your ungodly and uncharitable
judgments. Shall not your own consciences in that day accuse you, as much as
a thousand witnesses; that you fled from judgment and perverted equity; That
ye build up Syon with blood, Malach 3.
and Jerusalem with wickedness; That ye heads have judged for reward, and that
ye Priests have taught for hier, and ye Prophets have prophesied for money:
That ye have contemned the low estate of the poor, and feared to execute
Justice against the mighty: That ye have often prevented the truth of the
cause, by a contrary impression and conceit in your mind: That ye have been
more carried with the fair intisement of man's eloquence, than with a plain
and simple declaration of the truth, That ye have either stayed your judgment
by letters, or wearied your suitors by charges, or consumed them by delays, or
discouraged them by your speeches, or mocked them by your vanities, or driven
them to despair by your injustice. Finally, that ye have not only seen the
bribing and extortion and scraping of petty clerks and inferior ministers,
which ye might have redressed, but that ye your selves also have bin partakers
of their sins. Shall not all these things be laid open before your eyes in
that great and terrible day?

Generally, all ye that be rich and abound with goods and possessions in this
life, leave off the greedy desire of money, and dispose well of the riches
that ye have: Make ye friends while ye may, of your unrighteous Mammon, that
ye be not taken short when the Lord comes. For he is speedily coming, and
will take a straight account of all you, that have abused your stewardshippes,
and have not bin faithful in that was committed unto you. He has sounded his
Trompet now this second time, and has given you a lawful warning, he has
told you often before, and he tells you now again at the last, that you
heap not unto your selves treasure upon the earth, where the Canker and rust
do corrupt, and thieves break in and steal, That if riches increase, you
should not set your heart upon them, Psalm. 62.
That riches help not in the day of vengeance, and he which trusts in them
shall have a horrible fall. That though ye think, Psalm. 49.
that your dwelling places shall continue for ever, yet ye shall dye and leave
your riches to others, That because thou have trusted in thine own treasure,
therefore thou and thy Princes and Priests shall be carried into captivity,
That he which stops his ear from the cry of the poor, Prou. 21.
he shall cry himself and not be heard, That the deceiptfulnes of riches,
choketh up the word of GOD, I am. 5.
and makes it unfruitful, 1. Timot. 6.
That we should not trust in the uncertainty of riches, Psalm 112.
but in the true and living God, That he which disperseth his goods, and gives
to the poor, his righteousness shall remain for ever, That blessed are the
rich which be found without blemish, and have not put any trust in money and
riches. And a thousand such other profitable warnings and promises has he
given you. But ye have hardened your hearts, and think that ye shall never come
to an account, how ye have bestowed them. Werefore the Canker and rust of them;
yea the vain and frivolous bestowing of the^ without profit to your
neighbor, or benefit to the Church or Common weal, shall be a witness against
you at the day of Judgment. Yea the supreme Judge himself, all the holy
Angels and elect of God, shall testify against you: nay, your own conscience
shall accuse you, when you see before your eyes those whom ye despised and
oppressed; And the Lord himself in that day, shall say unto you: you are
they upon whom I bestowed so many benefits, when as I might have given them
unto others far more worthy then you: I made you stewards of my treasures,
to dispose them as might be most agreeable to mine own honor, for the relief
of your poor brethren, which are members of my body, whom ye sometime
derided and iested at, and thought their life to be but madness, Wis. 5.
and their end to be without honor: But now ye see, that I have chosen them
before you, and made them heirs of my salvation. You in this life had
abundance of all good things, but because ye used not those things as I had
commanded you, but abused them to your own lusts, I testify against you,
that the poor which before time endured all the penury and misery of this
life, shall now possess the inheritance of my kingdom, and ye shall be
turned out. They, in stead of the cold, hunger, nakedness, and trouble, which
they suffered upon the earth, shall now enjoy all honor, glory, pleasure, and
felicity for evermore: But ye which exalted your selves in the pride of your
riches, and dreamed of no other happiness, but temporal honors and treasures of
the earth, ye shall now from henceforth feel nothing but everlasting pains,
and griefs in hell, and be tormented with the devil and his Angels. Ye see
the poor continually before you in the streates, the maimed and miserable go
from door to door, the impotent Lazars lie at your gates, the poor
farherlesse children and widows in continual want. They desire but the
scraps that fall from your table, you shut you cares against them, and in the
distress of their soul they cry unto God: and shall not God deliver them in
the time of their trouble, and call you to an account for them in the day of
Judgment? O unkind and ungrateful nature of man, beyond all the creatures
that God has made! The birds of the air that be lame or old, or not able to
seek food, are fed by the labor of other birds: The wild beasts that be
sick and impotent to take any pray of themselves, are fed by the pray of
others; But shall men so degenerate from their own nature, and from the kind and
nature of al other beasts of the field, that having over and above that which
should sustain themselves and their family, they will not feed the hungry,
nor cloth the naked, nor help the maimed and impotent. Wherefore those beasts
and fowls of the air shall rise in the day of judgment against them; nay all the creatures of God that are obedient unto man, and serve for his life and
sustenaunce, shall be a witness against them in that woeful and dreadful day of
the Lord.

Neither shall those rich, whether they be men or women, escape the judgment
of God; which gathering to themselves abundance of treasure, defer all their
good deeds til the time of their death, and determine then to dispose all
things after a good and charitable manner: seeing for the most part, either
their life is so dainlie taken from them before they have set all in order; Or
while they live, they are spoiled of that they have; Or else some other
mischaunce comes after their death, that things cannot be disposed according
to their will: But especially, since in the mean time, they have suffered
many Christian souls to perish for lack of their help. Again, what thank
is it to them to be liberal then, when they must of necessity leave their
riches unto others, and cannot use the same any more themselves.

Neither will the Judge in that day, so straightly inquire how they bestowed
the riches which they had at their death, as he will examine whether they did
the works of charity in their life: Namely; Whether they had pity on the
fatherles children, and widows, when they cried unto them; Whether they helped
the lame, and blind, and impotent, that were not able to shifte for
themselves; Whether they gave fuel and clothes to them that were cold and
naked; Whether they relieved poor prisoners, when the iron entered into their
souls; Whether they gave Physic to the sick, and surgerie the wounded;
Whether they lent their money freely without hope of gain; Whether they eased
the common burden of the poor in time of famine: Whether they helped their
Country and Common weal in time of necessity; Whether they ministered unto
the Saints in their adversity; Whether they put their helping hand to the
upholding of Religion: And finally, Whether they did all these things with a
single eye, and faithful heart, not to be seen of men, but for pure love to
Christ and his members: And then if they have any thing left at their death
to be spared from their own family, let them bestow the same in such wise as
may most tend to the glory of God, to the edifieng of the Church, and benefit
of the Common weal: And God shall restore them a thousand fold in the life to
come. But if they saw all those necessities of their brethren, and did shut up
their compassion from them, and thought all too little for themselves while
they lived; all the good deeds at their death shall not be imputed one jot
unto them, but they shall have their po^tio^ with hipocrites, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: For they that have showed no mercy unto others,
shall have judgment without mercy to them selves:

Generally, there is no estate nor degree of person whatsoever in this life,
that shall escape from this judgment, but all shall appear before the seat of
GOD, and they that have not walked with an upright and sincere heart before
him, nor have believed effectually, nor lived fruitefullie in Jesus Christ,
whereby their sins might not be imputed to them, shall answer before him,
not only for all the actual sins that they have committed against God,
against their neighbor, and against their own souls, but they shall also
yield an account for every idle and vain word, that they have spent all the
time of their life, and so to receive judgment for the same.

Thus are all mortal men and women cyted to appear before the Judgment seat
of God to answer for themselves. There shall then be no excepting of persons
before him: but Emperors, Kings, and Princes, their subjects, servant, and
vassals, all, both Magistrates and people, the highest Prelates and poorest
Ministers, Lords and tenants, masters and servants, parents and children, old
and young, one with another shall all stand before the face of the Lord to
receive their judgment; and either for their ungodliness to be accused and
condemned, or else having walked with a perfect heart before him, they shall be
justified and saved by the death and redemption of Christ.

Wherefore seeing al these things shall thus happen, and that shortly, and how
suddenly we know not: and seeing the day of the Lord will steal upon us like a
thief in the night, 2. Pet 3.
when the havens shall pass away, and the earth and all the works therein
shall be utterly burned with fire: seeing we shall immediately be carried away
unto judgment, and seeing the Lord is not slack, but will speedily come as
he has promised, what manner of persons ought we to be in holiness and godly
conversation? How ought we to purge our lives from the dead and damnable works
of this world to serve the true and living God? How well furnished ought we to
be at all hours with all the armor of God, that nothing but truth may
proceed out of our mouths: That all our actions be defended by justice and
upright dealing: That we may tread all our steps in the Gospel of peace;
That we may have a strong faith to withstand the devil and all the temptations
of this life; That we rely wholly upon the salvation of Christ; and that
the word of God may dwell plentifully in us; wherewith we being endued, we
shall be ready at every instant to meet the Lord when he comes in the
clouds with power and great glory. But what shall the Lord say to them that
be so careless and negligent as they will not watch one small time in prayer
and meditation for his coming? Shall they not in that great day be accused of
the greatest unfaithfulness in the world? Yea, shall they not be condemned of
foul and beastly ingratitude; when for the pure love that he bears to us,
he has so sensibly before hand showed us of all these things that have
happened, and has willed us to watch and be ready with our Lamps burning,
because the Son of man will come at such an hour as we know not? O
ungrateful and faithless generation, may he say, it repents me that I
have been so kind and loving to you, and that I have bestowed upon you so
large and ample benefits, when ye were dead in the burden of your sins, and
were in thraldom of the devil, and of all your mortal enernies, and had no
other way to be relieved but by me, I humbled my self from the throne of my
Majesty, and took your nature upon me: I came not as I might have done, like
a great Prince and Monarch of this world, but was content to abase my self to
be borne of a poor woman, to be brought up like a poor child, to walk in
the form of a poor servant, and to live poorly from the day of my birth to
the day of my death. I endured nakedness, and cold, and hunger for your
sakes, yea thirty years together and upward did I abide all the calamities of
this life for your sakes, I submitted my self to the law of man, and observed
every jot and title of the same for your sakes, I fasted forty days and
forty nights for your sakes, I wrought great miracles and wonders in the
world for your sakes: And when the time of my passion was come, I sweat water
and blood for your sakes, I was scourged, buffetted, and beaten for your sakes,
I abode a crown of sharp thorns upon my head for your sakes, I endured
spitting, railing, and despightfull words against my self for your sakes: And
in the end I suffered amost shameful and cruel death upon the Cross for
your sakes. For you and your salvation have I done all this, and yet ye will
not believe the signs that I have showed, nor prepare your selves to watch for
my coming. Therefore I will come so suddenly upon you, as it shall be too
late for you to repent; and whom I find not watching and prepared for me, him
will I cast into the uttermost darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

Wherefore my dear brethren in Christ, when we have diligently weighed and
considered these things; how justly, how innocentlie, and how purelie ought
we to show our selves in all the whole course of our lives, looking daily
and hourelie for the appearing of our Savior, that we may be blameless in
the day of his coming. It is for our learning and edifying that all the holy
Scriptures are written, that all the teaching, instructions, and warnings
therein are given, that all the miracles of God from the beginning have been
showed, that all the examples of our forefathers have been published, that God
from the beginning was so mindful of our redemption, and that he sent his own
Son for our salvation. It is we that he has been so careful to preserve so
many ages together, in the midst of so many crooked and perverse nations, and
from the hands of so many cruel and bloody tyrants. Who were preserved in the
Arc from the first destruction of the world by waters, but we? Who were saved
from death in the great famine of Egypt and countries adjoining, but we? Who
were delivered from Pharao, from the inhabitants of Chanaan, and from many
other nations with a mighty and stretched out arm, but we? Who were preserved
in the great and horrible persecutions of the Primitive Church, from being
utterly consumed of tyrants, but we? Who were safely kept by God as the apple
of his own eye, in so great and general Apostacy of the Church, but we? Who
were again delivered by God from the power of Antichrist, and were endued with
the knowledge of his truth, but we? Nay, who have received so many tokens of
the end of the world, and warnings of Christ's coming, as we? For the heathen
have no knowledge of his laws, And they that be strangers from Christ, fear
not his judgments, And all they which sinned without law, shall perish without
law. Again, if judgment begin first with the house of God, what shall become
of them that believe not the Gospel?

Why do not we then with all faithfulness and willng heart receive all these
Oracles sent us by God? Why do we not thankfully accept his benefits? Why do
we not believe his promises? Why do we not prepare our selves for his
judgments? Why do we not weep and bewail and lament for our sins? Why are
we so stony and hard hearted, that there is No example of temporal
punishments in other, no feel of Gods wrath in our selves, no threatening of
Gods vengance to come, no remembrance of punishments past, no remorse of
conscience for our sins, no promise of temporal blessings, no assurance of
eternal rewards: neither signs in heaven above, nor tokens in the earth
beneath, nor the hope of everlasting salvation, nor fear of perpetual
damnation, that can once effectually move us to amend our lives, and make us to
forsake the sin that reigns in our mortal bodies; although we know die
kingdom of heaven to be never so near, nay, even at the very door. Wherefore
I fear me it will be pronounced against us, that was sometime against the
unbelieving cities of Judah. Woe be unto you Christians, and especially you
that have taken upon you to reform my Church, and to have my Gospel preached
among you, woe I say be unto you: For if the signs and miracles that have bin
in your time, and among you, had bin done among the Turks and Infidels, yea
among the most sauadge Indians of the world, they would long since have
repented insackecloth and ashes! O that we would open the fountains of our
heart, and power in contrition into our soul! O that we had a flood of tears
to bewail the multitude of our sins! O that we would have but some part of
that affection toward our selves, that the creatures of God have toward us!
For they mourn and lament for our sins, they long for our deliverance because
of our sins; The earth trembles and quaketh because of our sins; The Son
and the Moon want of their light and beauty, for our sins, The Heavens
power down floudes of destruction for our sins; The plants and herbs lack
their virtue and operation, for our sins: The winds go forth of their
places, and the seasons of the year keep not their wonted course, for our
sins: yea, the natures of all creatures are in a manner changed for our
sins. But what shall I say more? The Angels of God do mourn for our sins:
The very souls of the righteous do lament for our sins: And it greeueth
the spirit of God himself, that we persist in our sins: But all this
moves not our senses, nor yet melts our own hearts for our sins:

All that we speak, all that we write, all the labor we take, is in vain: For
our heart is as hard as the Adamant, and our soul refuses counsel. Every
man speaks of the mercies of GOD; Every man acknowledges his benefits?
Every man has the word of God in his lips; Every man cries Lord, Lord;
but no man does the will of his heavenly Father; Every man confesses the
tokens of Christ to be come, but no man prepares him self his coming: No
man makes atonement with his brother, no man shows the fruits of faith, no
man forsakes his wicked life, no man keeps his vessel pure and holy to the
Lord. Every man blames, every man reprooueth, every man condemns
shameful acts in others, but no man amendeth any one sin in himself. O
gracious GOD, why should thy people thus forget thee? why should they be
thus stiffnecked against thee? why should they so deeply dissembled with
thee? why should they make as though they believed thy word, when they be so
far from reforming of their lives? why should they be so ravished with
earthly delights, that perish in a moment, and contemn the hauenlie joys,
which continue for ever? why should they be thus distraught from the sense
and feel of happiness, to follow the delights and pleasures of their own
fancies? Shall the care of transitory riches of this world, drown the desire
of glory in the world to come? Shall the ugly and deceaueable lusts of
sin, that breed long and bitter repentance, prevail above the beautiful
contemplation of thine eternal Godhead? Shall this vale of misery, (wherein
we see nothing but sin and wickedness, nothing but care and vexation of
mind, nothing but perilles by land and sea, at home and abroad, in bed and
at board, in freedom and in bondage, in poverty and in wealth, in honor and
disgrace, at all times, and in all places, both in life and in death) be more
deeply printed in our heart, than the Kingdom of Christ; wherein the body
shall be changed from corruption to immortality, from dishonor to glory,
from weakness to strength, from a natural body to a spiritual body;
wherein all pains and sorrows shall be vtlie vanished, and all quietness
and tranquillity of conscience shall dwell for evermore? Nay, shall the
affection which we bear to father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or wife,
or children, or lands, or goods, or to have die whole earth at our beck and
commandment, once separate us from the love that is in Christ Jesus; from the
company that we shall have with his holy Angels, from the fellowship of all
the godly and elect people, and from the continual fruition of Gods divine
presence and Majesty? GOD forbid.

What is the cause then that we so greedelie embrace and lay hold upon these
transitory things? Nothing verelie, but the corruption of our own nature,
the following of our own sensual pleasures, and the instigation of the
devil; who labors now toward the end of the world more strongly than
ever, to draw all the souls that he can into damnation with himself; of whom
we, to our great shame, stand in sear, as though Christ our Conqueror had
never redeemed us, as though he that had once saved us, could no more defend
us.

But alas, why should we not continually and unfeignedly pray unto God to
assist us, and with the strength of his holy spirit to defend us from all
our wicked enemies, that in him, and by him we may have grace to vanquish and
overcome, whenever we are pressed or disquieted either in body or mind.

But as concerning sin, albeit we for our own parts have made such a
covenant with death, as whatsoever be said unto us we will not amend: and have
entered into such a league with hell, that we will not be saved: albeit we have
refused the mercy of God, that calls all men to repentance, and would all
men to be saved; yet after we have once received the knowledge of the truth,
and have been baptized in the name of Christ, and have promised to live in his
true faith and fear, let us never so tread under foot the Son of God; nor
work such despite unto the spirit of grace, that through our ungodly and
sinful life, we should make the Gentiles to hate the name of Christ for our
sakes, and by this means to keep both out selves and others too out of the
kingdom of Christ. Which otherwise, if they saw our just and sincere
conueration answerable to the form of our profession, they would join them
selves unto the body of Christ, and so magnify his name over all the world.

Shall not the zeal of our forefathers, who in comparison of us that have the
light of the Gospel, lived but in darkness and in the shadow of death, be a
notable testimony against us in the day of judgment; since they feared god
more reuere^tly, served him more willingly, obeyed him more dutifully, and
loved him more fervently the^ we? Since they had more compasston upon their
pore brethren, more devotion unto al good works, and more regard to their own
salvation then we? Since they had less dissimulation, less craft, less
hypocrisy, less malice, less covetousness, less wickedness in their life
then we?

Compare the great zeal of our predecessors, with the cold devotion that we
have in these days; and we shall be ashamed of our selves. The good deeds
which were done by them, were done simply, either for the love they bare to
God, or (as they took it) for the honor of his service and religion, or of a
compassion to their poor brethren, or for the safety of their own souls, or
of a zeal they bare to their parents departed, or for a benefit to the Common
wealth, or to ease the burden of their successors, or for the furtherance of
Schools and learning, or for some such other, either good or wel-meaning
intent. But on the other side, what little good soever we do, we do it,
neither of a lone toward GOD, nor of a charitable mind toward our neighbor,
nor of any remorse of conscience in our selves, nor yet of any affection
toward our native country; but all that the most of us do, we do it either
for vain glory, or for pleasing of other men's humors, or to be seen and
praised of men, or to avoid the clamor of the world, or by compulsion and
commandment, or for fear of shame and punishment, or by importunate suit that
is made, or because we know not else what to do with that we have. Wherefore,
the former with their blind zeal and supposed good intent, shall rise up in
the day of judgment and condemn us for the fruitless ostentation and
boasting of our faith. If the men of Niniuie which repented at the preaching of
Jonas, and the Queen of the South, that came so far to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, shall rise in judgment against the Jews, that would not believe and
amend, for all that could be said unto them by Christ and the Prophets. What
shall so many Prophets and Preachers of God do against us in that day, who
daily and hourelie and continually rebuke us for our sins, and stir us up
by all means to amendment of our lives, showing us that the day of the Lord
is at hand.

O Jesus, why should we now be further from the obeying of thee, than when we
were further from thee? Shall the brightness of thy presence, and the light of
thy blessed word which lighteneth every man that comes into the world, and
whose property is to give light and salvation to all them that will receive
the same, shall it shine (I say) upon such stony and gravely hearts, as
have no power to bring forth true repentance, nor any fruits of a godly life?
And shall the Devil so prevail against them, for whom thou have shed thy most
precious blood, that suddenly (upon the revealing of Antichrist, and sending
of new Ambassadors from thee, to put things in order against thy coming) he
shall turn the hearts of all men from all goodness and virtue, to vice and
cruelty; alter the natures of things from better to worse; bring in Schism,
Atheism, Treason, and all ungodliness into the world, and make iniquity flow
beyond measure over all the banks of the earth? Howbeit, Lord if this be thy
will, and that by no other means thy holy word should be verified, namely,
that wickedness should so mightily abound before thy coming: If thy promise
should on this wise be fulfilled: If thy chosen must on this manner be tried;
and that this should be one of the last tokens of thy coming; we accept all
these things as Oracles sent before, and we assuredly look for thine own
self in person to follow.

Wherefore ye my brethren of the Church of England, for whose cause specially I
have written this second warning, or sound of the last Trompet, bear in mind
all these things that I have declared unto you: Examine your own consciences,
whether ye have not tasted of the blessings of GOD, in measure more
abundantly, in favor more apparantlie, in mercy more infinitlie, and in
signs and tokens more wonderfully, than any nation in the world. Again,
consider with your selves, how all these graces and mercies have been requited
of you. Whether there be any nation of the world more unthankful for Gods
benefits, more forgetful of his promises, more disobedient to his
commandments, more negligent in their callings, more factious in practices,
more contentious in Religion, more inclined to Treason, more uncharitable in
action, more cold in devotion, more rash in enterprises, more restless in
vanities, more greedy in getting, more careless in spending, more slow to
virtue and more forward to vice: And finally, more desperate to all kind of
mischief, then commonly the people of this kingdom are. Wherefore, if the
mercies of God did not daily salve the deadly wounds and diseases of our
soul, we should long before this time have come to a fearful and horrible
end. But that the Lord does yet spare you, impute it not to your own desert,
but to his great mercy. That ye perish and consume not in his wrath, it is of
his mercy: That ye live vnplagued of your enemies, is of his mercy: That ye
loose not his Gospel and true Religion, is of his mercy: That we see our
Elizabeth reign in holiness, health, and prosperity, is long of his mercy:
And yet for all this do we reject his goodness, discredit his promises,
dishonor his services, disallowe his tokens, continue in sins, divide the
Church with Schisms, and slander the truth of the Gospel by our ungodliness:
yet for all this do ye cry, Peace, Peace, and think that all shall go as well
with you at the last, as it did at the first: And consider not the merciful
patience and long suffering of the Lord, and how he calls you to repentance.
For ye shall al dye with everlasting destruction, unless ye speedily show
forth the fruits of repentance. And the patient forbearing of temporal
punishment of your bodies in this life, does breed the greater weight of
perpetual shame and damnation both of body and soul in the life to come.

Far more easy should it be for us, if our sins had not deserved greater
punishment, that it would please the Lord fatherly to correct us while we
are here, either with public wars, plagues and famines; or else with
private sickness, penury, imprisonment, and with loss of goods and
possessions: if he would feed us with the bread of tears, and with the water
of affliction; if he would exercise us with all kind of misery, and so purge
and try us as it were by fire; yea, if he would humble us as he did
Nabucadonosor, and make us to eat grass with the beasts of the field, and to
water us with the deaw of heaven, till our hearts were wholly turned unto him
again: rather than do fill us so abundantly with all manner of temporal
blessings: With health in our bodies, plenty in our coffers, joy in our
families, favor with our Princes; to have praise with private persons, and to
have authority in kingdoms: but therewith to be deprived of the grace and
mercy of God, of Christ's promised salvation, and in steed of the pleasures
of this life, to receive pains intolerable both of body and soul in the
life to come.

Wherefore o my brethren remember what ye are, where ye are, and whether ye
go. Ye are of those, for whom the world was made; For whom the remnant was
saved in Noah's flood; For whom God has showed a thousand miracles in Aegipt,
in the red Sea, and in the wilderness; For whom Christ lived so many
years in this wretched world; and for whom he suffered so shameful death
upon the Cross: Ye are the seed of Abraham, and generation of the blessed:
Ye are of the Church, and members of Christ's body: Ye are the vessels of
the holy Ghost, if ye live holilie and vnblameablie: And ye are of them, to
whom the promise of everlasting life was made.

Remember also, that ye are in this transitory world, a place so lately
made, and which shall so shortly perish; wherein there is nothing but lusts
of the fresh, lusts of the eyes, and pride of life. Remember that a thousand
years with the Lord are but as one day, and that all your whole life is not
one hour of such a day. Remember that ye are in a place full of miseries,
cares, and troubles, among a crooked and perverse generation, among a people
that have sold them selves to commit wickedness, and that with all greedy
desire: That a man's days pass away like a shaddowe, and his years like
vanity, That though he be the mightiest Prince and Monarch of the world, yet
when age and infirmities creep upon him, he desires to be losed from the
burden of this flesh.

Again remember the place whereunto ye shall tend: For ye are here but
pilgrims and strangers for a little season; And as many of you as are
Christ's, must home to your own Country of Heaven; A place of liberty, a
place of felicity, a place of everlasting pleasure; Where time shall be no
more time; where night and darkness shall be banished; where ye shall
neither hunger nor thirst; where ye shall neither lust nor desire; where it is
impossible ye should die any more; where the Lord him self shall be your
food and portion, and the light of your countenance; where the measure of
your joys shall be full, and where ye shall live in pleasure and felicity for
evermore.

But on the other side, as many of you as are called Christians, and are not
of the flock of Christ, as many as refuse this salvation offered you, in not
believing as you ought, and living as you should, As many of you as trust not
wholly to be saved by the merit of Christ Jesus, but justify your selves by
your own works: Naie, all you that boast of your faith in Christ, and yet
mortify not your carnal members, nor walk in the steps of his
commandments: As many as make Christ Jesus but a stranger to you, and seek
for other Mediators than his own self: As many as frame unto the Church a
monsterous head upon the earth, besides our own merciful head Christ Jesus in
heaven: As many as will make the decrees of man's corrupt judgment, equal
with the most holy and sacred word of GOD: As many as refuse to lay hold on
Christ by faith, and run for help unto Images and dumme Idols: As many as
frustrate the benefits of Christ's death, by redeeming their sins with money
and pardons: As many as think to obtain their requests by a set number of
verbal prayers, without any earnest meditation of the merit and promise of
Christ: As many as profane that glorious body of Christ Jesus, by
worshipping of any creature for and in the name of him, and so cut off the hand
of faith, whereby we hold fast by him as he sits on the right hand of his
Father: Briefly, as many as know that God must be worshipped in spirit and
truth, and yet will cleave to the apish toys and foolish superstitions of
Antichrist. Finally, as many as walk after their own ways, and not as the
Lord himself has commanded in his holy word: All these must likewise home
to their country; a place of torment, a place of eternal trouble, a cruel and
terrible habitation, continually to be vexed with burning fire and most
intolerable heat, mingled nevertheless with palpable darkness; not for a time
and season, but perpetually and for ever there to remain, under the dominion
of Lucifer and his Angels, whose works they followed, and whose commandments
they obeyed.

Wherefore, if there yet remain in you any spark of godliness, any love of
Religion, any duty toward God, any hope of the resurrection to come, any
desire of salvation, any fear of damnation: if all faith, all conscience, all
goodness, and all religion be not quite extinguished; revive your minds,
lift up your hearts, ascend unto Christ by faith; Set your affection upon
things above, and not upon things beneath; Cast away all vain and idle
cogitations, reform your lives, forsake your sins, return no more to your
filthy pleasures, give over your superfluous vanities, cleanse your selves
from all ungodliness: and as you have hitherto given over your members to
serve uncleanness, so make them now to be servants unto righteousness.
Crucify the old man in you, that the body of sin may be utterly destroyed.

Come out from Babylon, and be no more partaker of her wickedness, touch no
more uncleanness, and the Lord will receive you. Every one of you abound in
charity one toward another, even as Christ has loved you and has given
himself for you. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new
man, which is shapen in holiness and righteousness. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith: and know for certainty that Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates. Cleanse your hearts from all filthiness and sin, and
go forth to meet with the Bridegroom. So shall all your former sins be wiped
out of his remembrance. Ye shall be his people, and he will be your God. He will
separate you from the wicked, and set you on his right hand. He will protect
you in this life from al your enemies, and in the life to come, will give you a
kingdom of everlasting happiness: Come therefore Lord Jesus, Come quickly,
for the salvation of thy chosen, and gladness of thy people.

FINIS.

