A SERMON PREACHED AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD,
RICHARD SENHOUSE, Lord Bishop of Carlisle;

In the Metropoliticall Church of YORK, the six and twentieth of September, 1624.

By RICHARD MARSHE Master of Arts, and Vicar of BIRSTALL in Yorke-shire

EXODUS 4.13. O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will
send.

LONDON, Printed by H. LOWNES for MATTHEW LOWNES. Ano 1625.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, TOBY Archbishop of York, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan, my gracious good Lord.
MOST Rd.
THis poor thing was bred and borne in your service. It might have had the hap
to have been still-borne: but now it has cried, and was heard in as reverend,
honorable, learned, wise, and in as frequent and as attentive an Auditorie, as
ever shall be seen in these parts. It has cried, and I pray God some say not,
It was the voice of the Crier, preaterea nihil: yet many of best judgment (in
love with it, before they knew what to call the father of it) will needs say,
that it may live, and do good. There are two things to help the Bookseller;
your Graces name, and the name of my Lord of Carlisle: for, not a Priest, nor a
Levite, nor scarcely any other Passenger, when he observes the Preacher to be
your Chaplain, and the Sermon to be preached at his consecration, but he will
(though afterward he neither wish oil to me, nor to my lamp) yet readily,
like a good Samaritane, take out two pence, and give to my host. If it may
thus do good in Gods Church, I have my desire, and far beyond my first
thoughts. God he knows, when I first spoke or thought of sending forth
servants, I little dreamed of sending forth a Sermon thus far: but now I am
glad of the occasion, that thus thrust forth into the service of the church, I
may withal profess (by your good leave) my devoted service unto your Grace;
and let the world know, that I am

Your Graces poorest and unworthiest Chaplain, R. MARSHE.

MATTHEW. 22.3, 4. And he sent forth his servants, to call them that were bidden
to the wedding; and they would not come. Again he sent forth other servants,
saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner, etc.
HAving elsewhere (not far hence, nor long since) made entrance into this
Parable, and spoken of the former Verse, the marriage of the Son of God: the
solemnity of this day, and the frequencie of this Assembly (unto both which it
was necessary I should have respect, when I knew my service required in this
place) both these (me thought) might not be ill fitted out of the words of
this text, where God sends his servants to fetch in guests to the wedding, to
call and to tell them that were bidden etc. For if we have any thing in this
case to tell, it is best to tell it in Sion, to publish it in Jerusalem, and
in the great City; and if we be sent to seek and to call in guests, no place
so fit as the great Assembly, to call on the City before we go into the high
ways and hedges, here launch into the deep, Luke 14.23.
let go our nets, and make a draught.

And as for the great business now in hand (if you please to join the last
Sunday with this) al^ is but what the text here tells us, a solemn sending of
servants to call them that are bidden unto the wedding: yea, whereas there is
in the text mention of two messages, sending and sending again, sending
servants, and sending other servants: so it falls out, as you had here the last
day an ordinary sending, the Ordination of Ministers; now you attend an
extraordinary sending, the Consecration of a reverend Father: a solemnity
which we have not often seen in this place, an extraordinary sending of a
more than ordinary (for many respects, more than ordinary) servant. He that
runs therefore, may read some happy correspondence between the work of
the day, and the words of the Text; that at least for the Text sake (however
the Sermon prove) for the Text sake, you may say, Sicut audivimus, sic etiam
vidimus; As we have heard, so have we seen: and as we have seen, so have we
heard here in the City of our God. Indeed let no man doubt, but what God says,
he will in due time perform, though it were a greater matter than either
sending of servants, or spending of his Oxen and fatlings, though it were the
giving of his only begotten Son; that all men may see on Gods side, omnia
parata, all things now ready. Oh that GOD might see us ready also, and that
nothing were wanting, neither provision, nor messengers, nor guests to furnish
that great marriage!

The Text, thus suited unto the present occasion, divides it self with the
Assembly, part Clergy, part Laity; Messengers and Guests.

The Clergy are the servants sent to call them which were bidden, and those
other servants, sent with instructions to tell them that were bidden, Behold
the dinner is prepared, etc.

The Laity are the Guests bidden, and called, and still called and bidden,
expected and provided for, and still provided for and expected. The Clergy are
sent, the Laity are sent for. The charge to the Clergy, is, Go; to the
Laity, Come. It is the fault of the Clergy if either they be not sent; or
sent, do not go; or going, do not discharge their message. It is the fault of
the Laity, if either they do not receive us; or receiving, do not hear; or
hearing, will not come to the marriage. The text speaks most of the Clergy,
and if the Sermon (for once) do so too, I hope no man will complain;
Complain, said I? no, you delight to have the Clergy touched, and it is for
your advantage; for whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.22
all are yours, if you be Christ's, as Christ is Gods.

For the Clergy then, you have here, first, their Sending: he sends, and sends
again. Secondly, their Title; servants and other servants. Thirdly, their
Office, and the end of their sending, to call them that were bidden. Lastly the
Manner of their calling, to tell them, Sic dicit dominus, thus says the Lord.
For as they are sent to call them that were bidden, so they must in calling,
tell them nothing but what they are bidden. (And sent soorth his servants). It
is his goodness to send, and it is good and necessary for us, that we be sent.
It is his goodness to send, specially if we consider to whom he sends; vocare
vocatos, he sends to them that were bidden. It was a favor once to bid them;
now to send to them, is an especial goodness: but what is it when he sends
again, as it is in the next verse? therefore of this more properly in that
place where it is grown more ripe and full.

And now nothing fitter to be observed than the necessity of our sending, that
we be sent, and have a just commission to call in them that were bidden. For it
were strange if we should chance to bring in some guests, and then the Master
of the feast should answer them as Eli answered Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.5.
I called not, lie down again: Or as he says to one here at the 14. verse.
Friend, how came thou? so he should say to another, Friend, who brought thee
in hither? That were much shame to the guest (it is a shame to take a lower
room, but turpius eijcitur, it is much more shame to be put out of the room),
it were a shame for the guest, and a danger sure for the messenger: 1 Samuel
21.14.
Quare adduxistis (says Achis) wherefore have ye brought this mad fellow to
me? David, that did but counterfeit madness, escaped the danger, whilst the
servants, who were so mad to bring him in, got a rebuke. They seldom speed
better that are too forward; and it is likely they overshoote their mark, that
outrun their commission, and are upon the way before they know whither to go.
Eccles. 5.1.
He who requires us to take heed unto our feet when we enter into his house,
would have us also to look as well to our feet when he sends us forth, and
neither to bring the sacrifice, nor carry the message of fools. A messenger
may be too hasty; witness the Amalekite, who brought the news of Saul's death,
and died for it: 2 Samuel 1.15
which Ahimaaz (it seems) remembered, and therefore though he would fain run
(when another was appointed) with news to David, 2 Sa^. 18.23
yet he dares not without commission from Ioab. For if it be destruction, to
be over-just and over-wise ( Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over-wise: Eccles. 7.16.
why should thou destroy thy self, says the Preacher?) sure, to be foolish
overmuch, to be rash, and too precipitate, must needs be the neck-break, the
highway, or rather a leap, than a way, unto destruction. Non amo nimium
diligentes, might be written over the door of God's House: and we may well be
jealous of them, who are not timorous in so great a business. The greatest
servants in God's House, have been slow and unready to undertake this office.
Moses, when God will make him a messenger of glad tidings and deliverance unto
his people, how did he seek by all means to be excused, and (if it were
possible) to shift it off! First, Who am I? and then, Who art thou? and then,
They will not believe; and then he wants eloquence: and when all impedime^ts
are removed, and the rough ways made even, yet would he feign put it off to
another, with Mitte quem missurus es: O my Lord, send, I pray thee, Exodus, 4.13
by the hand of him whom thou will send. Send any body, so he may escape
sending. No wonder though Jonah ran away, rather than he would carry a message
of destruction to Niniveh, when Moses was thus loath to carry the message of
deliverance unto God's own people. Would you see any others sent forth and set
forward? Esaias 6. Jeremy 1.
Look and see Esaias cry out of polluted lips; Jeremy, that he is a child, and
cannot speak. One for all (the Apostle, who had had his part in this
Ministration above all his fellows) cries, 2 Cor. 2.16
Ad haec quis? Who is sufficient for these things? Surely none, unless he be
sent. But and if ye consider the weightinesse of the office, sending (you will
say) is too little: he must command and charge them, 2 Timothy 4
as St. Paul does Timothy: he must encourage them, as he did Moses; enable
them, as he did Esaias; imbolden them, as he did Ezechiel. Sending is too
little: he had more need to lead them by the hand, as he does his people; or
bear them in his arms, Ose 11.8.
as Ephraim. Sending is too little: and therefore it is in the Text, not a
simple sending; but emittere, to send them forth; that is somewhat more: and
yet there is a better word to this purpose, Mat. 9. Extrudere, to thrust out
laborers into his harvest. He must do with his servants, if there be no
remedy, as he does with his guests, compel the one to come in, and the other
to go out. It was too cold a temper (perhaps) for a Soldier and a General,
but very fit (me thinks) for a Priest or a Preacher to say to the Spirit of
God, Judges 4.8.
as Barak said to Deborah, If thou will go with me, then will I go: but if thou will not go with me, I will not go.

To be an Ambassador in the affairs of Princes, is not for every man: nor is
every man fit to be Ambassador and Orator for the Almighty, and for Christ,
and in Christ's stead to negotiate his marriage. Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.29. Heb. 5.4. Romans 10.15
No man (sure) may take this honor to himself, but he that is called of God:
nor can any man preach, except he be sent.

This is a confessed truth of all hands: but (I know not how) truths that are
for proof most easily confessed, are for practice oftentimes as easily
neglected. For, notwithstanding the burden of our calling, there has been
complaint made of old (I wish it do not concern us in these Times), that men
would rush into this profession, as if it were into the Poole of Bethesda;
where the first come was best served. They run ad Sacerdotium, ad
Episcopatum, says Policraticus, as if some Officer had made solemn
Proclamation, Occupet extremum scabies, The devil take the hindmost. If this
be the kingdom of heaven, it is in some danger to be taken by violence.

We envy not the number: we wish you were all a Royal Priesthood. We envy
not the number: we wish that all God's people could prophecy. We envy not the
number: but we advise men to beware what they take in hand. Nadab and Abihu may
not kindle strange fire; Levit. 10.2 Number. 16.32
nor Corah and his company suffle themselves into the Priest's office; nor Saul
offer sacrifice; nor Vzziah burn incense; nor Vzzah put forth his hand to the
Arc; 1 Samuel 13.13 2 Chr. 26.16 2 Samuel 6.7
nor any man run God's Errand unsent. He complains earnestly (and that oftener
than once) against those Prophets which run and speak for him, and he has
not sent them. I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
unto them, yet they prophesied. Ier. 23.21 Ezech. 13.6. Leo apud Policrat.
It was an observation, if not a law, of old; Indignus sacerdotio, nisi fuerit
ordinatus invitus: He was held unworthy, if he were not found unwilling to
this office.

Ecclesia ab (...): the Church is nothing else but a company called out of the
world: and as the Church is called from among other men; so from others of the
Church, are there some who have a special Calling, to be Callers and
Messengers betwixt God and his people.

These (that you may know them, or at least they may know themselves) they
receive Ability from God, Authority from men. Ability from God: I do not
mean by immediate inspiration, and dabitur in illa hora; but by careful
education in the schools of the Prophets: with Daniel, they must by books
understand these things. Dan. 9.2 See Ecclus. c. 39.1, etc.
For thus does God vouchsafe some measure of those many necessary graces
required in so high a calling, unto them whom he sends: and then they that have
Authority in the Church, finding such Ability, do by Imposition of hands mark
them for this office, and as it were digito monstrare, point them out to the
Church, that thenceforth they may know them for the messengers and servants of
the most high God, Acts 16.17.
which show unto us the way of salvation.

They who find in themselves no such ability, and yet would feign be
messengers, should be advised to stay awhile. The church has had as weak
ones, I grant it: and I dare promise, that when she stands in as much need
again, she shall send for them, dictatores ab aratro; from following the ewes
great with lamb, to lead the people; from the plough, to the pulpit. In the
mean time, our Savior's advice is good; If they itch to be building, let them
sit down, and cast the cost beforehand. Versate diu quid far recusent, quid
valiant humeri: Hor. de art.
take no more upon you than you are able to bear. If their hearts indite some
good matter, let them choose it aequam viribus, answerable to their power,
though it be but implere locum idiotae, to occupy the room of the unlearned,
and to say Amen. 1 Cor. 14.16
They mistake the chapter: it was in the former chapter, not in this, Dominus
opus habet; Mat. 21.2, 3.
but here the case is altered, and we are bold to say, Dominus non habet opus,
the Lord has now no need to ride either upon an ass, or an asses colt into
Jerusalem. It is pity the Church should give hands, where God has given no
feet: such cripples were fitter to lie at the gates of them temple, to ask
alms, than to go into the Courts, or climb up into the Sanctuary of the Lord.
You know how wary God was in the time of the Law, and how he has excepted
against all defects or blemishes. Help then, you Reverend Fathers, and lay
hands suddenly on no man, neither make your selves partakers of other men's
sins. Luke 14.21
The maimed, the halt, the blind, may make guests in the later end: but they
are very unfit to make messengers.

And as in the first place they should be enabled: so in the second place they
must be orderly authorized, whom God sends. The old vulgar Latin speaks ill of
the house of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 16.15
and (on my conscience) it does them wrong to say, ordinaverunt seipsos. The
truth is, they did addict and devote themselves unto the ministry, but not
ordain themselves Ministers: that had been against all good order. Their
ordination (if they had any: for some would fain deny it) they either had from
the Apostle himself (which is most probable), or from Apollos, or from some
such as Saint Paul had left there with like authority as he left Titus in
Creet, Titus 1.5
to set in order things which were wanting, and to ordain Elders in every
City, as he had appointed. For to what end did the Apostle leave such authority
with Titus; or give charge to Timothy to lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy
5.22
but to make choice of faithful men, who should be able to teach others also;.
if, 2 Timothy 2.2 2 Chro. 23.9
like Ieroboam's priests, every man that would might consecrate himself, or,
like the Anabaptists, still run by revelation? The Anabaptists, in not
distinguishing betwixt the time of miracles, and of a settled government in the
Church, dreaming that should be a permanent rule in the Church, that if any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, he must have audience, 1 Cor. 14.30
and let the first hold his peace; thus running after revelations, and seeing
vain visions, they have outrun their wits, Ezech. 13.7.
they have outrun the Church, and further made themselves unmeet for any
society of men. And though they have outrun us, yet some among us run fast
after them, who, so far as possibly they can, disobey and disdain them that
have the oversight of the Church, and speak evil of all that are in any
ecclesiastic authority. Turbulent, supercilious spirits; to thrust themselves
into office in that house, whose Order and Government they are beforehand
resolved not to approve; that come into the church as Cato into the Theater, to
go out again; or like Momus, to quarrel that they know not how to mend; or
as if this marriage feast were the Centaures feast, unde nemo sine cicatrice;
whence, in stead of favors, every one must carry wounds and scarres.

I know well, facit hoc illos hyacinthos, this makes them dear unto the
people, Iuvenal.
and hence (perhaps) they suck no small advantage: but the servants whom God
sends, are not so base and mercenary; nor do they think themselves sent to
please the people, who are seldom heart-whole toward authority, but rather to
teach and guide them by all means into the way of peace and of obedience. They
therefore, who either are not duly sent, or do not dutifully demean
themselves toward that authority by which they were sent, must be taught,
that they who have authority to send, have authority also to call back, Tit.
1.11.
to restrain, and to stop the mouths of such as teach for filthy lucre things
they ought not. The Weesell, says he, lickt the File till her tongue bled:
then thinking she had got blood of the File, she lickt on, till she had no
tongue: Let them speed so, that with bloody tongues still lick the authority of
our Church. Saint Paul says, I would they were cut off: Gal. 5.12.
I wish but their tongues, or rather their talk than their tongues cut off,
that do disquiet you.

And sent forth his servants.] Sending is the first thing: their title,
servants, is the second; and it seconds well that which is said of sending.
They are servants, such as may not go unsent, no more than they may be idle
when they are sent: they must give account both who sent them, and what they
have done for him that sent them.

But to go on: They are servants, they are no lords over God's heritage, 1.
Pet. 5.3.
to do what they list; nor is the inheritance their own to use at pleasure:
but they are servants, such as must both take pains, and give account, and
then may expect a reward. And it is well that they are servants; he might have
had messengers which had scarcely been servants: but these as they are no
absolute lords, so they are no utter strangers, only to tell you you must go,
but cannot tell you how, or to point you the way, and not to go along with you;
but servants, household servants, emissi, sent forth (in the Text), and
therefore such as know the way in, and can guide you and bring you unto their
Master's house, and to the place where you would be.

There are four things chiefly required in good servants; Faithfulness,
wisdom, diligence; and patience: Faithfulness, to know what to do, wisdom,
to know how to do it; diligence, to keep doing, and patience is good in
servants, especially in messengers, servants sent forth, that know not what
afflictions abide them, or what may befall them by the way.

For the two first, what is to be done, and how it is to be done, the Text
tells us in Calling and Telling. The name of servants shall now only serve to
stir us up to Diligence, and (if you will) to bring us down also unto
Patience.

As obedience is the life of service, so Diligence is the life of obedience;
and as Vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, Pro. 10.26.
so is the Sluggard to them that send him: Sal infatuatus, Matthew. 5.13.
he is like to Salt that has lost his savor, or dead Wine that has the name
of Wine, but wants the spirit. He who has such a servant, may say he has
gotten Sampsons weapon; in stead of a sword or a staff, the jaw bone of an
Ass: an instrument for eating, but neither for fighting nor for working. Ease
and pleasure belong to Lords and Masters, Care and diligence unto servants and
messengers; and therefore our Savior makes inquiry for such a servant to set
over his household, as will give them their portion of meat in due season, Luke
12.43.
and will be found so doing: to be found so doing, requires a constant
diligence. And if it seem any whit easy to give them meat only in due
season, hear what S. Paul says (who was himself in labors most abundant)
hear him with an adjuration (for the Scripture has none more earnest) call
for in season, and out of season. They are quite out of season, 2. Tim. 4.1, 2
and over-diligent, which run unsent; but in servants that are sent, all
diligence, all celeritie is but seasonable, not to communicate with flesh and
blood, nor tarry to salute any man by the way. Gal. 1.16. Luke 10.4.
Apelles painted his servant with Hearts feet, and his hands full of tools,
swift and ready, (Impera, and actum puta) if you say, Go, he goes; or Come, he
comes; or Do this, he does it. The name of Servants, is sufficient to enjoyne
us all care and diligence; but it adds unto our charge, if you ask what
kind of servants? For look what servants you can imagine to have greatest
charge, and to them are we resembled in the Scriptures: Is the Stewards place a
place of charge and care? why let a man so esteem of us, the Ministers of
Christ, 1. Cor. 4.1.
as stewards of the mysteries of God (says S. Paul). Is the Ambassadors place
a place of trust and of travel, of diligence and danger? Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ (says he). 2. Cor. 5.20.
Are the Angels ministering spirits, and such as do excel in strength to do
his commandments? They change places and titles with us, when they be sent
forth, to us they become ministering spirits, and we when we are sent forth,
what are we then but bodily Angels? But these (the world will think) are
places too eminent, over-loftie comparisons; Stewards, Ambassadors, Angels! who
would not be servants, so they might serve in these rooms? Look lower, and you
meet with Shepherds, Watchmen, Builders, Husbandmen, Fishers, Laborers,
Messengers, and the like; these also the Scripture uses, to put us in mind of
diligence, and even in these I may say, Brethren, you see your calling: God not
only by many precepts letting us hear our charge, but also by these frequent
and obvious resemblances letting us see our calling, and what it is which he
requires at our hands.

They are unprofitable servants therefore (nay, the best must confess that
they are unprofitable) yea ungracious and unsensible servants, who in this
calling can give themselves over unto ease and pleasure, and both forget what
they hear with their ears, and neglect what they see with their eyes, Oculis
subiecta fidelibus, which should move more and more strongly, awake them from
their Lethargy, and supine neglect of their service. These slow-bellyed
Cretians, who are all bellies, and neither hands nor feet for diligence, nor
eyes nor ears for instruction, have already drunk Lethe, which (they say) is
the first river of Hell, and without amendment they shall proceed to the rest
of those bitter waters and lakes that burn with fire and brimstone. It is just
to cast such sleepers into utter darkness, there to sleep perpetually, if
they can have leisure for weeping and gnashing of teeth.

With our Diligence, it is necessary that we join Patience. A slothful
servant, a slothful messenger will deceive him that sent him, but an impatient
messenger will trouble both him that sent him, and them to whom he is sent. An
unquiet, impatient messenger is like Moses rod, Exodus 4.3.
a rod when he laid it down, and a serpent when he should take it up; able to
make him start and fly from it. It is no good vessel for this heavenly
treasure, which is of so hot a temper; nor any good clay for these vessels,
which will say unto the Potter, Romans 9.20.
wherefore have thou made me thus? We must resolve (if ever we will return
with comfort) to go on in our message, through honor and dishonor, through
good report and evil report. Phil. 4.11.
We must learn in what estate soever we are, therewith to be content, to give
back at no perils, to shrink at no weariness, nor painfulnes, nor
watchings, 2. Cor. 11.
nor hunger, nor thirst, nor fastings, nor cold, nor nakedness: To be troubled
on every side, 2. Cor. 4.8.
and not distressed; perplexed, and not in despair: being reviled, 1. Cor. 412.
to bless; being defamed, to entreat. They were too hot (they were too hot
to make Parish Priests) that presently called for fire from heaven: Such
messengers the Pope may send (to the general and eternal shame of
Christendom) into the Indies, into Hispaniola, and to the rest of those
armelesse, harmless people, not to covert them, but to pluck up, to root
out, and to destroy; not as sheep among wolves, but as wolves among poor
sheep appointed to the slaughter; Esa. 8.1.
not to call them to the marriage, but to make speed to the spoil, haste to
the prey. Our office is to suffer with meekness them that are contrary
minded, 2. Tim. 2.25.
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth; and, whilst we
aim at nothing but the discharge of our calling, 2. Cor. 12.15. 2. Tim. 4. 2.
Cor. 11. Act. 5.41.
willingly both bestow, and be bestowed, suffer afflictions gladly, glory in
our infirmities, and rejoice to be found worthy to suffer any thing for the
Name of Christ. For we are not only his servants that sends us, but (though I
have all this while forborne to tell you so) we are their servants also unto
whom we are sent: for we preach not our selves (says the Apostle) but Christ
Jesus the Lord, 2. Cor. 4.5.
and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. Our Savior, before he sent his
servants, told them what they might expect; and S. Paul, a servant of chiefest
note, tells us how he sped. Matthew. 10. 2. Cor. 11.
Our Savior tells of wants, and distresses, and persecutions; S. Paul makes it
good, and tells what perils, what sufferings (of all sorts) he had passed. Our
Savior says, he sends us as sheep among wolves; and S. Paul tells us what
Wolves he found, what Lions mouths he escaped, what beasts he fought withal
at Ephesus, 1. Cor. 15.
after the manner of men. Our Savior says, we shall be hated of all men; and
S. Paul says, we are made a gazing-stock to the world, to men and Angels. 1.
Cor. 4.
Our Savior says, we must look for no better entertainment than he had,
the servant as the Master; S. Paul says, we are made the filth of the world,
1 Cor. 4.13.
the off scouring of all things. Enough of this: but to qualify it, take his
conclusion in the next verse, Non confundere, sed monere, it is not to shame
us, but to warn us. We have need of these warnings. A religious and an
indulgent Prince blesses us with many Halcyonean days: but if ever those
punishments fall, which both our enemies and our own sins and security
strive to pull upon us, we shall then want comfort. Howsoever, we have need of
patience, and little hope or time is there for pleasure, seeing we are sent to
call them, who so long as there are Farms, or Oxen, Luke 14.18, 19, 20.
or Women in the world to detain them, will not come.

We are sent to call, that is the end of our sending: but before we come so
far, I must entreat you again to look upon our sending; for he sends
again (says the Text) rursus misis alios servos, verse. 4.
he sends again, and sends other servants. That he sends again, shows a
diversity of time: that he sends other servants, makes a diversity of their
persons, though there be still a community and fellowship in the service.

And first for the time; there must needs be a Rursus, a sending again, a
succession of Messengers whilst there is a succession of men: many
Messengers, that their sound may go out unto the ends of the world; and
likewise a continuance of Messengers, that may remember his name from
generation to generation. Thus there were other Priests after Aaron, other
Prophets after Moses. Our Savior has promised to be with his Messengers unto
the end of the world; Mat. 28.20.
which, because it cannot be true here of their persons, must be made good in
their successors: and the Apostle tells of gifts given at the first sending,
which must continue to the last ending, Ephesians. 4.8, 13.
till we all come in the unity of faith, etc. there must needs be therefore
a rursus, a sending again.

And yet this rursus cannot but seem strange: For, does God value his
servants, their doings, their sufferings, their disgrace, their rejection,
their blood which is openly shed, at so small a rate? or shall we think him so
insensible of his own dishonor, that he knows not what disgrace it is still
to send, and send again, to them who were bidden once before? Ire iterum in
lachrymas, iterum tentare rogando; Virg.
as if he meant to speed for his importunity, and so he may speed, he will put
up any indignity, any loss; he cares not what become of his servants, so he
may have guests.

He sends indeed again and again in the former chapter, in the Parable of the
Vineyard; but that is another case: there you cannot blame him; he does as you
do, sends, and sends, and sends (I would you did no worse) for rent, Matt. 21.
and fruits unto his farmors. Any man would do so: but for guests, as here,
who would trouble himself so much, and not rather disclaim them utterly; and
if he sent again, send to forbid them for ever, and swear unto them in his
wrath that they should never enter into his rest? David send once to visit
Hanun, 2. Sam. 10.
but his servants found such entertainment, as when he sent again, it was to
spoil and to destroy, 1. Chr. 20.
to cut the people with Sawes, and Harrowes, and Axes, to destroy those
murderers (as it follows here in this Parable) and burn up their Cities.
Ester 1.19.
Assuerus never sent again for Vashti; but because she once refused to come,
she was for ever cast off, and her estate given to another better than she. God
might have done so with this stubborn and stiff-necked people: and if he
could not eat his morsels alone, he might have sent at once for some others
more thankful; have let out his Vineyard unto some other husbandmen, where
he might have fruits in due season; and have called them to the marriage, who
would be glad to be refreshed with the crumbs which fall from his table. Why
should he so far forget himself, as give them leave once again to deny
him, but, having neglected their peace, and the day of their visitation,
thenceforth have rained upon them brimstone and coals of fire, and either not
speak unto them, or speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure? God is not so swift to take vengeance, Lenta ira deorum, vengeance
from heaven is sad and therefore slow. God is content to send, and send again,
and not to forsake them who are once his people, for a rursus, or an iterum.
Yea, that which is but iterum here, in the next chapter grows to a Quoties,
how often would I have gathered thy children together? Matt. 23.37
And quoties is not much now, for it was at quid ultra long ago, Esa. 5.4.
what could be done more for the Vineyard, that I have not done for it? Iterum
misit, he sent again. He is blind, that does not see God here make good
what once he spoke of himself, (nay he proclaimed it with many words, that
all the world might hear and take notice) that he is Multus benignitate,
abundant in goodness. It was goodness to send, Exodus 34.6.
but abundant goodness to send so often. so often, so long to stand at the
door and knock, as if he would wait their leisure, and stay thy tide of
their good disposition.

Any man will easily confess, that this was too much for God to do unto the
Jews, and in the mean while considers not, that, mutato nomine, change but
the name, and it is true of us. Or we need not change the name, we are the
Jews; We are the circumcision (says the Apostle). True in regard of the
favors of God, Phil. 3.3.
transferred from them to us; and true also in respect of our disobedience, and
uncircumcised hearts and cares, wherewith we fulfill the measure of their
iniquity.

I will not enlarge my self; only let me demand who is he amongst us, that
has not given God leave to send unto him often, and to expect long? or what
message can we expect from heaven (except the message of a sudden and final
destruction) which has not been often told us by his servants? It were some
ease (perhaps) unto our consciences, if we could conceive our selves to be of
that number, who never heard of his will: but this torments us before the time,
that we know, and know that the servant who knows his Masters will, and does
it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Multitudo miserationum fit
magnitudo, and cumulus damnationum; Many mercies will pull on many stripes,
and every iterum from him is an item to us, augments the number and measure of
his favors, ladeth our reckoning, and in the end will add weight unto our
condemnation.

And that a great deal more, if you consider whom he sends: for as it is
iterum misit, so it is alios servos, another sending, and other servants; to
take another repulse, and that in other servants, aggravates the offense. But
why should he send other servants? were not the first good enough, or wise
enough, or fit enough to carry the message? He sent other servants for his
fruits in the former chapter, because the husbandmen dealt so rudely and so
roundly with his messengers, as they that had gone once, were little fit to go
again. That was no welcome message, and they to whom it was sent, were
Farmors, rustica turba, such as would deny Latona water, Ovid.
if she traveled by them, or the Israelites passage, or David and his men
relief: but here the message is full of courtesy, and the parties called to
so great a marriage (we might hope) had some more humanity. It is possible
therefore that there was some fault, or some want in the servants. Ahaziah sent
once, and again, Captains with their Fifties, to Eliah, but they sped ill;
they were too peremptory, and stood too much upon the King their Master: The
King has said, and, Thus has the King said; that would not serve. The third
sped by other means; 2. Reg. 1.9, 11, 13.
He fell down on his knees before Eliah, and besought him, and so brought him
to the King. There is some choice to be made of messengers, especially where
the message is weighty; and such would be sent as can discern, quae
mollissima fandi tempora, Virg.
quis rebus dexter modus, how to minister (I mean) a word in due season; and
not to betray the cause they have in hand, but serve the times nimbly, take
hold on all advantages, and show themselves such as our Savior requires, both
wise and faithful servants. The truth is, in this case, God left nothing
unattempted to win them, Luc. 12.42.
or at least to leave them inexcusable: he sent unto them wise men, and
Scribes, Priests and Prophets; he still sent them others, and change of
servants. He sent unto them all his servants (faith Jeremy) daily rising up
early and sending them. Jeremy mends the matter well; Ier. 7.25.
in stead of our iterum, he puts in quotidie; in stead of alios, he puts in
universos. Again, he sent other servants; that is nothing: now he sent
quotidie, diluculo continent er (says the Prophet) daily, early, continually,
and all without exception.

But are not the words of the Psalmist (will some man say) true in this case,
Psalm. 147.20
He has not dealt so with other nations? Sure I am, we have no cause to
complain; he has sent to us again, and other servants: the Lord has given
unto us his Word, and great is the company of Preachers. We have store of other
servants, not only alios numero, for multitude, but alios dotibus, alios
gradibus; there is difference in their ability, and difference in their
authority; in their gifts, and in their places.

And first we have alios servos, i. aliter ornatos, men otherwise fitted, and
furnished for the discharge of this message. That Spirit which blows where it
lists, and distributeth to every one freely, and as it will, bestows
diversity of gifts for the gathering together of the Saints, and feasteth them
that are called unto the marriage, in the very calling, with the Manna of the
word diversely dressed and served-in. Feasts are often not furnished with such
variety. The message is the same in the mouths of all God's servants. We have
alios servos, alios nuncios, but not aliud nuncium; other messengers, but still
the same message: yet is our delivering and handling of it always somewhat
different. As we say of men's faces, All are alike, and all unlike; Facies non
omnibus una, Ovid.
nec diversa tamen: so may you say of our Sermons, All bring the same message;
but whilst every one strives, according to his own proper gift, to prevail
with you, it begets an admirable and most pleasing (it should be also a most
winning) variety, which makes the Word taste like whatsoever you can desire.
We have them that pipe, and we have them that weep; them that will eat with
publicans and sinners, and them who are more austere. We have sons of
thunder, and sons of consolation; some from Mount Sinai with the terrors of
the Law, and others from Mount Tabor with the joies of heaven; some bitter and
sharp (like Archilochus or Hipponax with their Iambicks), able to make an
obstinate sinner hang himself, Hor.
qualis Lycambae spretus infido gener, aut acer hostis Bupalo; others, whose
discourse falls like rain into a fleece of wool, or quale sopor fessis in
gramine, as sleep upon a weary traveller. We have some so fluent, as if they
had lately drunk new wine; others so plain and homely, as if they expected no
other reward but a cup of cold water: some abundant in labors; some eloquent
and mighty in the Scriptures: some, with Amos, fitted for Heardsmen; and some,
with Esaias, for the Court; able to bind Princes in chains, and Nobles in links
of iron. Some for planting, some for watering: some skillful Master Builders,
to lay a foundation; others to build up the house, or to trim up the building.
Instant ardentes Tyrij, all as busy as Bees in prayer with God, in conflict
with the adversary, in discourse with the people, do you not see how we sweat
in the work? so as it must needs be confessed, that if our Gospel be yet
hid, it is hid to them that perish; and if the guests will not come, 2. Cor.
4.3.
it is because they will not, not because they have not had other servants, which
have tried all ways to win them, and to bring them to the wedding. Diversity
of gifts, and difference of administration, heaps of Teachers, flocks of
companions; the Word preached in season, and out of season; the meat fitted for
every pallat, and made savorie, such as your souls cannot but love; milk for
some, and stronger meat for others: our calling adorned in every one (if ye
would but see it) either with gravitie, or zeal, or society, or simplicity,
or learning, or happiness of invention, or strength of judgment, or
faithfulness of memory, or gracefulness of deliverie; something or other, I
say (if you would but see it) to commend the messenger, and to further the
message; must make you all confess, that the fault is not in him that sends,
nor yet so much as the world would have it imagined, in them that are sent in
such abundance and variety.

How chances it then that we speed no better? I will tell you: We can speak;
but (alas!) to what end is it? to beat the air? We can write; but to what end
should we stand writing in the dust, for the wind to scatter it, or frame our
letters upon the gliding water? Our calls, our exhortations fly in the wind
like Sibillaes Oracles: our Sermons are like Songs in the night, you will hear
a little, but not lose your sleep. The Text says, he sends other servants:
Jeremy says, he sends all his servents. The world thinks he sends too many:
Your table is made a snare unto you, and that which should have been for your
advantage, is an occasion of your falling: you have taken a surfeit of the
message, and can no longer endure wholesome doctrine: our message is the same,
and your entertainment is the same; all is lost, all is spilt, because we are
forced to tun up all our new wine into your old bottles.

Again he sends other servants.] Other in quality; and again, alios
gradibus, others also in authority. the meannesse of the messenger is
sometimes disadvantage to the message, and therefore in the former parable,
last of all he sent his son to see if peradventure they would reverence him.
And as the son differs much from the servants, so among the servants we
cannot imagine but there must be an imparity, and difference of degree. God
sends for his guests, Number. 22.15.
as Balack did for Balam, yet again, more, and more honorable; some that are
worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5.17.
and whose office it is to rule well, as well as to labor in the Word and
doctrine; and to have the rule over you, Heb. 13.7, 17.
as well as to speak unto you the word of God. For sending, and sending
again, and servants, and other servants, and still servants in the plural
number; to let us know, that they are many whom he sends: who (unless he wipe
his nose upon his sleeve) would imagine as paritie, an isotimie among so many?
God is the God of order, and parity is the mother of confusion; confusion, of
destruction. Oh let it fall upon the enemies of God, that so their forces,
distracted and disordered, may be soon defeated, whilst Gods Church is
always acies ordinata, Cant. 6.
as an army under Banners, where order is most serverely kept, and who repose
much (much of their safety) in their discipline.

Thus under the Law, it is well seen how thou, my God, wentest in the
Sanctuary. There were Levites under Priests, Vid. Number. 3. 1. Chron. 24. Nehem.
12. and Matt. 2.
and Priests above Priests, and one high Priest over all that Province (I
think we could be content to yield the Pope so much, but vastos non implet
hiatus, a Province, or a Patriarchship will not serve him) Prince of the
Princes of Levi, Number. 3.32.
and above all the Judges in Jerusalem, whether Priests or secular, 2. Chron.
19.
in all matters of the Lord. And this authority (by your leave) he had for
order and government, and not as a type of Christ's regal and judiciarie power,
who was not a Priest after the order of Aaron, but of Melchisedech. Now as
there was distinction and degrees in the Leviticall Clergy, where some had
authority to command, others a necessity to obey, and every one kept his
distance: so it cannot be otherwise among the Ministers of the new Covenant;
but having gifts differing, according to the grace given, some must wait on
their ministering, Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
and some rule with diligence: and as among the guests, some are advanced with
Friend, sit up higher; Luc. 14.10.
so among the servants which fetch in the guests, some stand higher and nearer
their Master: and if any will exalt himself, he must be made, with shame, to
take a lower room.

This difference in authority and degree, is necessary both for the guests,
and for the messengers. For the guests, it is necessary there should be some
enabled to raise up seed to their dead brethren, and that the Church should
have children instead of their Fathers (they were no children, but fathers, who
first applied these words of the Psalm to this purpose) whom she may make
Princes in all lands. Aug. Hieron.
And further, that some should have the keys of discipline, to see that holy
things be not cast to Dogs; to come among offenders with a rod, to cut off such
as are unquiet, to deliver them that are scandalous, Gal. 5.12 1 Cor. 5.5 Gal.
5.9
to Satan, and by all means to provide that a little leaven do not sour the
whole lump.

And as for the guests, so for the messengers, quis custodiet ipsos custodes,
is a good question in the Satyr: there had need be some to keep the Keepers,
to oversee the Seers; as in a great Harvest there are some servants, who not
only work themselves, but also oversee the rest of the laborers. Suppose the
Laborers become loyterers; suppose there either want messengers, or the
messengers wander from the right way; suppose pastores turned to raptores,
Bernard. Psalm 144.8
servants and shepherds to thieves and robbers; suppose their mouths talk of
vanity, and their right hands become right hands of uniquity; suppose the
Prophets become Foxes; suppose an accusation exhibited against a Presbyter;
Ezech. 13.4 1 Timothy 5.19 1 Timothy 1.3 Tit. 1.11
suppose some do teach other doctrine; suppose some teach for filthy lucre,
things they ought not; suppose there be some foolish questions, and contentions
afoote; Tit. 3.9 Acts 20.30
suppose some speak perverse things, to draw disciples after them: must there
not needs be a Timothy or a Titus, to give hands, to ordain Elders, to receive
accusations, to avoid, to prohibit, to stop the mouths of some, Tit. 2.15
to speak, exhort, rebuke with all authority? There must needs be in the
Church some who have both power of ordination and jurisdiction to send forth
other servants, and to have an eye to their service; to sever some for the
work, and others from the work; to appoint who shall carry the message, and
to whom and by whom it shall not be carried. Both these parts of authority
the Apostles did long retain in their own hands, 1 Timothy 1.20 1 Cor. 5 2 Thessalonians. 3
until upon necessity they must have both substitutes in their absence, and
successors after their death: and then they did not only make Priests, to
administer the Word and Sacraments; but also Bishops, to ordeine Priests, and
to govern excommunications: that so Jesus Christ our Master, Angelus foederis,
the great Angel of the Covenant, might be with them to the end of the world,
Mat. 28 1 Timothy 6.14
and Timothy might keep this commandment unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ; not in their personal service, but in succession, and the just
deputation of new servants. These two parts of authority do sever Bishops from
the other Clergy, and set them as Stewards over the whole house: and as the
Deaconship is a good degree to Priesthood, 1 Timothy 3.13
so Priesthood is but a degree to the office of a Bishop. There may be
sometimes a community of the names, but that makes no confusion of the offices;
nor can the Presbytery brag any more of the names of Bishops, than Bishops
may do of the names of Angles: for to Bishops, under the name of Angles, and
to them only (as appears by many circumstances) does our Savior write, Apoc.
2.

So if you shall hear that some good men of old have equalled the power of the
Clergy, you must understand them of the Word and Sacraments, and not of
government; or when you see the Presbytery lay on hands with the Bishop, you
must know, it is only in attestation and approbation of his act, not any
communication of his authority. And as for any allowance of names, it needs
not trouble you; Custom is the mistress of speaking: neither is it the names,
but the authority and superiority of Bishops, that has been questioned, of
old, by Aerius, an aerie whining Heretic, who full of humane indignation to
see Eustathius preferred to the Bishopric, which he, magis concupiscebat.
(says Epiphanius), Epiph. contra haer. l. 3. c. 1. haeres. 75.
more earnestly desired, he devised to level Bishops with other Priests. And
of late his old exploded error has been revived by some fiery Reformers, who,
finding much fault with the Popish Clergy, dealt with this so reverend Order,
as the Devil did with his damms leg, when he should have bowed it straight, he
brake it quite asunder: desperate Physicians, that can find no remedy for the
headache, but to cut it off, and unmercifull Reformers, that will make the
son to bear the iniquity of the father, and all posterity to suffer for
some faults in their predecessors. But the government of the Church by Bishops,
and the different authority of the messengers in our Church, as it is well
grounded in Scripture, fairly builded in Ecclesiastic history, strengthened by
Canons of the best Councels, and every where beautified with attestations, and
submissive declarations of Fathers: so the strength of it is much manifested by
the opposition of the adversaries. some of them men of special note, and whose
reputations (no doubt) win a great deal of credit to the cause, like the
Elders against Susanna. But as those Elders did bewray themselves, because they
did not agree of the tree; so these Elders (they love that name) are not yet
agreed what tree should shadow us, nor what they would have in the room of
Bishops: some cry one thing, some another, and many of them that help to hold
up the cry, know not (as it was in Demetrius tumult) wherefore they are come
together. Act. 19.32.


It is easy to say much in this case; if any man love these wars, musquam
habitura triumphos, wars of trouble, and no triumph, it is easy now to say
much, where a great deal too much is said to our hands: the shot and powder
spent on both sides, might have been better bestowed upon a common adversary.
but I may neither go on in this, nor go off to that which follows. Let me
tell you, if God send other servants, and of higher place, he looks they
should be better respected, and that you should obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13.17.
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may
do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. De
nobis facile est; use us at your pleasures: but them who rule both you and us,
you cannot without disprofite to your selves, disquiet to the Church,
discredit to the Almighty, so easily slight and vilify. Hinc dominicae
vinculum pacis rumpitur, etc. Unity, peace, Cypr. de zelo et livore, vid. and
l. 3. ep. 9.
charity, verity, all are lost by this means, says Cyprian. Causa omnium
malorum; this is the root of all mischiefs in the Church, says Chrysostom.
the contempt of Ecclesiastic authority, and disobedience to Bishops the God
sends unto us, other and greater servants, and they have all but little
respect. What a degenerate slaverie is it in men, to fear and honor Lords,
and not to reverence their fathers?

One thing more remains in these sendings of servants, and other servants;
that still all are servants: what other diversities soever there be, yet in
this there is a community: whether they keep the Keys, or they be but
doore-keepers in the house of God, they are all tied to service. Who then is
Paul? 1. Cor. 3.5.
and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave
to every man. But I must make an end: My Lord elect, may this be your memento
in stead of sic transit gloria mundi, or memento quod homo es: the one has
been used to Popes, to quench their vainglory; the other to Emperors, to
put them in mind of mortality: in stead of any such, admit this from the
Text, Memento quod servus es, Remember still your service. This day you shall
be sent with a new Commission, but still to do him service: you shall be made
another servant, but still a servant. Your service is changed, rather than
removed; increased, rather than changed: you are called from the Pulpit to the
Chair, but neither freed from the Pulpit, nor much eased by the Chair. Ad
Cathedram, ad curam; the Chair in the Church, Bern.
and the Care of the Church, go together: Whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant, says our Savior. Matt. 20.26
More service here than soveraignety: ad Episcopatum, non ad Principatum; yours
is a Pastoral, a paternall government, not a Princely regiment, or compulsive
dominion. We are all here sent to call, not to compel them to come in. Non sic
(says our Savior), not so as the Princes of the Gentiles, not so as Zebed us
sons, either with tyranny to use these places, or with ambition to seek
them, Worthy of double honor from men; 1 Timothy 5 Ioh. 5.44
but seeking only that honor that comes from God. This is a true saying, if
any desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. Work, and
Service; 1 Timothy 3.1
but I crave pardon, your Lordship has many more powerful monitors, not only
within you, but also from without: the hearty welcome of your own country,
the expectation of the Clergy, the promises of the University, the favors of
a most gracious Prince, will dicere Archippo, Col. 4.17
still put you in mind to take heed, and to fulfill your Ministry, that he who
finds you faithful in a little, may in due time give you more authority.
Luke 19.17


To you, all my brethren of the Clergy, enough has been said both of our
sending and service: yet let us not forget this, that seeing God is so diligent
in sending and sending again, servants and other servants; we should be as
diligent in discharging the message, in going and going again, trying all
means, and calling continually, become all things to all men, if by any means
we may win some. Et tanta curetur solicitudinequant a petitur ambitione,
Policrat.
not more ambitious to be made messengers, than studious to discharge the
message. Bernard says, in a case where the Holy Ghost is very punctual to
lay down every circumstance, Credo quia noluit nos negligenter audire quod
ille studuit tam diligenter narrare; I do believe he is so diligent in telling,
Bern. uper Missus sest.
because he would not have us negligent in hearing; so say I; I am well assured
he would not have us to deliver the message sparingly, or coldly, when he sends
his messengers so carefully and so copiously.

Lastly, unto you who will be no messengers, yet (I hope) would feign be
guests; Let the multitude and variety of the messengers, the continuance of
their sending, the sweetness of the message, the kindness of the Master; let
some of these, let all these move you, if not to count their feet beautiful
that bring unto you these glad tidings, yet not to fill their faces with
reproach; if not to give them double honor, yet not to entreat them
shamefully; if not to make them partakers of all your goods, yet not to muzzle
their mouths. Philem. 19.
We dare not say how much you owe us, we dare not tell you what you should do
for us; you have taught us to bear a lower sail: we only entreat you therefore
to forbear, and stay your petulant and laxative tongues, your sacrilegious
hands, your ravenous hearts, which long to take the houses of God in possession,
and leave no entertainment for his messengers. I conclude: Then did the Church
flourish, when the Clergy did only look at the charge of their office, and
the Laity admire the dignity of their calling.

God for his mercies sake so fit us every one in our several callings, whether
messengers or guests, for the marriage of his son, as we may be knit unto him
here by faith, and enjoy him eternally hereafter in glory, when we shall no
more be sent forth from him, but follow him whersoever he goes; to whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, etc.

FINIS.

