MARTINS Months mind, THAT IS, A certain report, and true description of the
Death, and Funerals, of old Martin Marreprelate, the great makebate of
England, and father of the Factious.

Containing the cause of his death, the manner of his burial, and the right
copies both of his Will, and of such Epitaphs, as by sundry his dearest
friends, and other of his well willers, were framed for him.

Martin the Ape, the drunk, and the mad,
The three Martins are, whose works we have had.
If Martin the fourth come, after Martins so evil,
Nor man, nor beast comes, but Martin the devil.
1589.

The Epistle Dedicatorie to Pasquine of England.
FRiend Pasquine, most hearty Commendations. For I cannot but both hartelie
commend me to you, Pasquines Countercuffe.
and commend you also* The Cuffe you lately gave to Martin the yonker, in
steed of his glove, was so smartly given, and sat so close to his ear; as I
must needs praise both your courage, and cunning in cuffing. And for that both
he, and his good brother, shall not want Cuffes to keep themselves warm
withal this winter: I have given them both, now one Cuffe more: which albeit
in truth be but a whirre^; yet am I clasping my fist as fast as I can, to give
them one pair of Cuffes more, that shall be so soundly set on, as I doubt
not shall make them stagger.

Martins sons say Martin is dead; I know it to be no fable: and have sent
you here the true transcript of all that worthy and memorable history,
containing, his Sickness, last Will, Death, Anatomy, Burial, and Epitaphs,
with all other Implements belonging thereunto. Herein I have made them but a
little merry, 1 Old Martins Months mind.
as they do us, and bobde them with their own babble, which I know must please
them (for they are very pleasurable Gentlemen as their father was). In the
next that shall be very shortly (which I term The suing of Martin Senior
his liuerie) we shall give them a Cuffe shall make their ears tingle: 2 The
suing of young Martins liuerie.
but in the third which shall be Martins models, (for he is in the building
vain as his father was) containing the mischiefs of Martinisme both to the
Church and state; 3 Martins modells.
we shall reach them a rappe, as they will never clawe of, except they scratt
off the skin from the very bones, til they come to the Crows and Pies to
help them: and will prove in good earnest, what themselves report of
themselves which is better than the best Jury (prophesying with Caiphas) that
they are the very botches and blaines of both those bodies.

In the mean space ( Pasquine) remember your promise. It grows fast toward
January: it were time your Almanacke were out; Pasquins Almanac.
and for that it seems you have some skill in Astrology, (if it may be) by
your calculation, let us have a glimse at the least, of the fools phisnomies.
Thus much may we conjecture, without any figure, that they are some young
Devils, and that their purpose is to make some hot work with us, (and
therefore no marvel that they have been so fiery heretofore) that have chosen
a Salpeter man for their foreman, Martin makes gun powder.
and a gunne powder house (an hell on earth) for their printing shop. But I
hope they shall not want Matches to sindge them with their own fire, and to
blow up their powder and all about their ears.

But especially ( Pasquine) for that they are so busy with other men's doings,
and themselves only, The Mirror of all modesty, honesty, courtesy,
humility, patience, and all sanctity, Pasquins Legend.
remember your Legende in any wise. The lives of such Saints must needs be a
singular piece of work, and edify much; especially against the seven deadly
sins which they never transgress. Martins never transgress the 7. dead^^
sins.
Pride, for they despise all but themselves. Lechery, for three at a clappe,
their heaths can yield them. Sloth, for though they be seldom idle, yet they
are never well occupied. Gluttony, for they would devour all. Covetousness,
for they are never satisfied. Wrath, for they do nothing but quarrel. Envy,
for they cannot abide any to have ought, but themselves. Their four Cardinal
virtues.
But especially for the four Cardinal virtues: Fortitude, for they hide
their heads. Justice, for they would take from every man his own. Wisdom,
or else I report me to their witty conceits. And Temperance, for they govern
their passions passingly well. Their three Theologcall virtues.
But for the three Theological virtues they excel, of all that ever I heard
of. Faith, for I doubt me whether they be of any. Hope, which is to see the
overthrow of all. And Charity, for they detest and damn all but themselves.
And though they were at the first, and be still, passing impudent, and neither
fear nor shame to say any thing, hiding their heads, and being out of the
reach of all controlement: (for Qui semel impudentiae fines transierit, eum
been and kn^uiter, oportet esse impudentem) yet ( Pasquine) since they are now
become contemptible, amongst the most and best, let us trample on them as the
dirt of the street; being in very deed the dross and dregs of the Common
wealth. And so longing to hear from you, as you shall from me again, (God
willing) very shortly, I bid you farewell.

Your fast friend, and fellow in Arms Mar-phoreus.

To the discreet and indifferent Reader.
IT is a world to see this world ( good reader) Never deeper dangers in hand,
Martins unseasonable contentions.
nor less advisedly regarded. Never sleighter toys in head, nor more
seriously followed. Never greater Tragoedies tendered abroad, nor lighter
Comaedies trauersed at home. Never so many means of discord from others, nor
ever so little concord among our selves. The people never greater benefits,
nor more unthankful; never more quietness, nor more unquiet. The Prince never
more gracious, the subjects for a great part never so ungracious. And to be
short, never better laws, nor wiser Magistrates; yet never such liberty in
speaking, impudency in writing, nor mischief in working, both privately
against particular persons (and those of the best) for their defacing, and
publicly for the undermining of the Church, and overthrow of the common
wealth as now. The Authors hereof, Martins cunning and crafty proceeding in
his affairs.
though they shot at both at once, (whereof the one was and is used but as the
underground work to blow up the other whereupon it stands which in the sueing
of Martins liuerie shortly shall be made manifest:) and desired to see the
cleaving of the pin, withal the expedition that might possible be (wherein
God be thanked their haste was more than their good speed): yet proceeded they
therein cunningly by degrees, as the Fox did with the Lion: first peering at
him a far of; then looking on him, but behind a bush, till at the last,
finding his roaring to be without biting, he presumed to ^ett cheek by iole
with him: Or as that varlet did, that by often striking at the picture painted on
a board, that could not control him; adventured in the end to strike through
and murder the man himself.

For first of all, The four forms of old Martins school.
some of them which were the Petties and Punies of that school, whereof old
Martin was the master; though then he was but as some blind and obscure parish
Clarke that taught in the Belfrie, The first form.
not presuming, Admonishers.
as he does now, to press into the Church, (that place in respect of the
appurtenances being fitter for him) began but rawly with their little a, b, c.
And though their fescue even* then pointed at Capital letters: yet for that
time, the farthest lesson they took forth was but Title point in the end;
neither could they come so far as Estamen, because God for beginning, was no
part of their Cross row. Who like quaint Querristers (for they love Music
as the Ape the whippe) first entered with their Solfaing notes, but not one in
rule, (for they love that neither in word nor deed) and raught only at the
rags; which yet made some iagges in the seameles coat. And like the Saint
Nicolas Clerks on Salsburie plain (I use the similitude, for that Martin
loves Sarum so well) stepped out before us in the high way, and bid us stand.
In the admonition to the Parliament.
And these could not abide round heads to wear square cappes, that yet could
brook a round trencher (especially at another man's square table): nor a
standing collar answerable to the neck, that would wear bowcases, and whole
butterie hatches themselves upon their backs. Nor a woman to wear a kercher
but an inch beneath the chinne, that would wear themselves hattes of the
Babilonian block, a foot in length at least above their heads. No cross in
the browe at Baptism, but never so many, at any time in the bag. No bells,
but Libells, and bables of their own. No Homelies read, but their own Hom-lies
preached. No praying, either for women laboring with child, or thanks giving
for women delivered. No more praying against thunder and lightning, than
against sparrowe blasting. Their own godly speeches.
They would correct Magnificat, not knowing Quid significat. They could not
like of any Benedictus, for they were (and yet are still) in their Maledictus
and Malefactus altogether, neither could they then, or yet can they skill of
any thing else. But these men were but bench whistlers, and shot but at short
butts, and but for points after an halfepenie the dosen, for that they would
not sit out, but be counted gamesters, and be thought to be able to shoot
in a long bow, though but a bolte; or in a Crossebowe, though never so small a
quarrel. Yet these were good fellows; for they craved but half, for that
they thought some had too much; (as the manner of such make shifts is to do):
and they had some reason for it, for Oxonium petit aequalia is an old said
saw, and Soluatecclesia, was a fair and gentle text for that purpose.

Next after these, The second form.
followed another crew, somewhat more than a good deal quicker than these;
Pistlers.
who being past their A, b, c, sought to put together (and thought withal to
put us altogether by the ears) and began their crooked descant, consisting
only of discords: and these like lusty cutters, Old Martin in his Epistle.
drawing out and brandishing their blades and threatening us with stripes yea to
make our very hearts to ache if we would not yield, adventured to lay hold
fast on our purses, and like strong thieves in deed proffered to rob us of
all our monnie. And the Captain Cuffe of this bouncing band, was the old
Sheepbiter, the ancient Gentleman this our young masters Father: who then was
^^pt from the Bellfree, up into the Chauncel of the Church. (O that the bell
rope had not staide him by the way) and under took the traversing of greater
matters. He not content to pluck of the clothes, pricks at the bodies. Old
Martin through out al his works.
He will pull the Archbishops and Bishops out of their doors by the ears. He
will down with their houses, though the Gentleman's ancestors never built them.
He will tumble down the Churches, for barnes and stables will serve his
devotion well enough. He must have their Manors and lands, to make himself,
and his beggarlie bratts and shifting hang b^es, Squires and Gentlemen. He
will sweep away all both the fish, and the fry at one draug^t, with his
netts; and as it were dry up our very rivers with the breath of his mouth;
and carry whole Countries before him; and snatch up houses and woods, and
dales, and hills, and people, and all, into his budget: so as none shall dwell
with him upon the earth. Naie he goes farther, and setting his face against
the heavens, he makes a mock of the Saints of God; Old Martin in his Epistle.
yea the mother of Christ, (with his single sold Sirs) and the Scriptures
themselves he beastly abuses to his hick scorners iestes.

This man, In his Pistle tacking on a blind jest of a Benefice, to a text of S.
Peter.
like a mad dog runs at every man without regard, and with foming
mouth, and venomous teeth, biteth not by the shinnes, but the very throat, ^e
cares not whom; not only those, whom ^ee counts his enemies (the worst
better than the best of his hey gobetts) but those also, whom he says
vntruesie men call; Puritans, Martin Iumor in These.
and himself, accounts his half faced friends, he snarleth at; and terms
Traitors, for that they first set them on work, (as he pitifully
complaining, shows unto us), and now are ashamed of them (as they well may)
and will not gallop with them so fast as they do upon the spur, and without
the bridle beyond all honesty and discretion. Martin Senior in his Pistle in
the margent.
Nay his own pufellowes (whom indeed himself best knows, and with whom he
may be boldest) he coteth with his own liuerie, Martinistes saucy knaves, by
Martins own testimony.
and calls saucie knaves: which me thinks, sits close to their backs, without
pleite or wrinkle, and fitteth them so well, as no Tailour in England could do
it better. And yet he reuealeth the faults of others so whotlie, and reuileth
them so bitterly, as if that name at no hand appertained to him, or any of
his. The right of spring of him, that is termed Sathanas, the accuser of his
brethren, and a very limme of him, that is called Fur and homicida, a thief
and a murderer, for he comes not but to steal, and kill; and his marks are
no dead marks, but livings, and lives; and his arrows all are forkers, and
made for mischief, though fethered yet (as hereafter you shall hear) with
woodcocks whing.

After him, The third form.
as if hell had been broken loose; Barbarians.
out runs another rabble, of the same house and famelie, in the collateral
line of leudnes, Brown, Barowe, and Greenewood, that very three headed
Cerberus the dog of hell: and these being of the former consort for taking of
our purse (for that we should not be able to see belike to make Hue and cry
after the thieves) would have us whoodwinckt, See D. Somes answer to their
positions.
and therefore being very asses themselves, would needs have our Universities,
the only means of our knowledge down. And so might they also the better
afterward, scatter what heresies soever they should devise, (for that is their
only occupation) as it were in that palpable darkness, and beastly
barbarism, without controlment. These men, must needs (and so do) dislike of
all degrees; worthy themselves to proceed by no degrees, but roundels. The
Clergy, they will not afforde so much as an hole to rest in; unworthy
themselves to have any hole (save the pillorie) to put their heads in. The
Prince, may not meddle, (say they) in matters of religion. Neither must the
people tarry for the Prince, or Parliament in Church matters: (neither should
the hangman for such rib^lds). Churches, they will have none. Sacraments, they
care for none. Ministers, they need none. They make all, and do all; and are
all themselves. All set prayers, are babbling and blasphemy, and such prayers
only as themselves make Ex trumperie, is the only pure, and perfect praying.
As for the Lords prayer, that is but a toye, and a plain mocking of the Lord
to say it. Yea that it is better for a man to lie with his Fathers Wife
(Quaere by the way whether that also be not an artiticle of their religion);
than to resort to the Church, or come into the congregation, to public
prayer. Lucian the Atheist, was never so irreligious; nor ever Julian the
runnagate so blasphemous. And these coming out as it were with their three
man's song, would confound all, and make a black fanctus of the matter:
shooting out their venomous shafts, with mischeeuous heads, sharpened upon
Martins most malicious whetstone. For that they have issued from Martins
school, and are fellows in feelde with them, and fight together, against both
the Church and State, in one and the self same quarrel, shall evidently be
proved in Martins liuerie. These are the very Locustes, that came from the
smoke of the bottomeles pit, to darken the Sun, and the air, with faces
like men but teeth like Lions, and tails like Scorpions, to sting men, being
not men infatuate, but beasts intoxicate, or rather very devils incarnate,
sent out to deceive and disturb the world.

And now last of all (and would GOD it were so) out steps me their Abaddon,
The fourth form.
a badde one indeed and the very worst of all, Seditious.
Martin Senior for sooth, the old Martins son and ^eire (worshipped might he
be) and together with him, a brother of his, one Martin Junior, a pretic
stripling, (as he terms himself; and pretty striplings indeed would they
be, if they were clean stripped, and well whipped, and trimly trust up withal),
as very varlets both; (they shall pardon me, if for themselves, I borrowe
their own phrase): as ever was their Father, or great Grandfather, or any of
that lewd lineage before them, and these men's Cater Cosins, on the surer side.
And these, to fill up the iniquity of their forefathers, disdainefullie scorn
the Majesty of Princes and set light of them: Martin Iu. in These.
and the one of them, abusing that most reuerendname, to the rascal his
father, one of the very scumme of the people: calls him a man of a kingly
nature; Martin Sen. in cens.
and not only that, but in plain and flat term makes a test of Princes:
and the troub^^ng of the State, and offending of her Majesty, be turns of
with a frumping, forsooth, as though it were a toie to think of it. Page 3.
And the other scoffeth at her Majesty's authority, scorneth her displeasure,
iesteth at praying for her, Page 23. C^nsur.
reuileth her laws, threatens her Magistrates; page 22. These things shall
evidently be proved in Martins liuer^e.
nay her Majesty her self; musters her subjects; sturreth up Clergy men,
Gentlemen, and people: and plainly with open mouth and full cheeks, blows
up the trumpet to rebellion; and as it were with banner displaied (though
lurking in his den) does enter the field, He braggeth that he has 100000.
disciples in the realm, and those the strength and sinews of the land.
and gives the defiance, except he have his forth; and pretending his
Pistle, bends his Pistol at us. Naie further, (that plainly proves him to
be a right limme of Antechrist) he rusheth into men's consciences, and sitts
him down in the seat of Gods secrets, and tell us, Martin Sen. in cens.
that such an one shall have a fearful end, for that forsooth, he resists
their shameful beginnings. It shall be the bane to such a one, both in this
life, (as if he had a purpose to kill him) and in the life to come, (as if he
had the power to damn him. And what is the offense? To moderate and marshall
such miscreants as himself, and his mates are? An heinous matter. I marvel
then what shall become of Master Recorder of London, that every month,
dispatcheth many less hurtful, and some much more honest, than the most of
these are. Nay the Lord has no part in such a one; whose grace (I use that
phrase in despite of both the Martins and all the Martinists) has more grace,
than all the rabble of such Rakehells, and most miserable, Martin the Iu. in
conclus.
and desperate kaitiues. I do return, but their own very words, that
themselves lent unto those that mind not to borrowe them, nor to be in their
debt. And these lusty youths, not contented with the pon, threaten us the
penknife: nor being satisfied with our purse, hackle at our throat. And these
are (as Martin the more speaks more truly than himself is aware of
touching himself and his yoke fellows) most rebellious, Martin Senior his own
words of himself and his fellows cens. page 6. and shall sufficiently be
proved in his Liuerie.
and disobedient to all good proceedings: Traitors and enemies to her Majesty:
They will overthrow the states: to the which they shall add thus much (to
make it a perfect and a most true period) they show in their writings, that
they say in their hearts, there is no God.

For (to leave further stirring of this stinking sink) it is now come to this
pass, The substance and end of Martins lessons.
that if these men may have their swaie, (but we hope first they shall have
their swing) we shall have left us, I will not say, No cap, no coats, no
money, no house, no living, but (better no life) no learning, no Magistrates, no
Prince, no Church, no Sacrament, no prayer, no nor God, for us to worship, or
fear at all. These men, would I call (as I well might) Monsters; save that in
these mischeeuous days, wherein our Europa, i^ become an Africa, in bringing
daily forth new monsters, I can account them but ordinary Vermin. But very
fitly have they taken their name of Marring; that profess nothing else but
marring: both the names of men* and quiet of the common wealth, and peace of
the Church, and livings of the Church, and Churches themselves: and the
rewards of learning, and places of learning, and degrees of learning, and
learning it self: and the laws of the land, and the authority of the Prince,
and last of all (for what can be left after for the Devil himself)
sacraments, Ministers, prayers, yea the Lords prayer; and so set their brazen
faces against heaven, and bend their forces against the Lord himself. For they
are not only now come to shoot at rouers, and seek out at every bowte a
new mark; but begin as fast as they can, (leaving the obscurer hobbs that
first they began with, to shoot a maine for the vpshot, at the fairest marks
of all. Martins Cards.
They are now in hand to shuffle the Cards (as ill as they will seem to love
them) and to confound all, to amend their badde games, having never a good
Card in their hands, and leaving the ancient game of England ( Trumpe) where
every coat, and suit are sorted in their degree, are running to their Ruff
where the greatest sort of the suit carries away the game: and to their Mawe,
where the five fingers is a card of great strength, and though the King and
the Queen be in the deck; yet the knave must command all and bear the
swaie. Martins Dice.
And that thou may know them to be good Dicers, too; when their Dice are fo
cunningly coggd: as though they cast Sins for the most part, yet they may
in the end with a tripsie Tray, carry all away smoothe; and come once to the
sweepestake, and make a bare boorde, and how they mean than to proceed (if
they pass) shall be a Mumchaunce for me; that are like (as wiser heads no
doubt do see) to hazard all. For then the Dice are like to rule all; be the
caster never so cunning, and his heap never so great before him. Which point
perhaps they will carry the cleanlier, covering it with this cloak that (as
they pretend in other matters of less moment by them) to reduce all to the
precise form of the Primitive Church; so for this matter especially, they
being as it were our new Apostles (and very Apostolic are their writings no
doubt, and their pistles sauoureth much of the phrase of the Apostles
epistles) all must be sold, and brought to their feet; that they may set their
feet, on the highest head. For this generation is like the Iuie, that from the
root grows up, and roundeth it self, as it were for pure love; about the
Elm, and never leaves to creep up, till it ^ath advanced it self to the
highest of all, and sucked out the sap clean, and dried it up. The green
leaves make a fair and a glorious show, but in the end, when it has clunged
close, and climbed aloft, it marreth al both top and trunk.

Thus have I showed thee (gentle Reader) a short sight of Martins school the
degrees of his forms, the sum of his lessons, and the drift, both of the
master and scholars: and for so much as, the old Martin is dead, (as straight
thou shall hear) were it not that we are bound rather, for the quiet of the
Church, and safety of the state, as well to wish the utter extirpation of al
such intractable and seditious scisme sowers, as to work withal, by all
orderly means we may, to effect the same in time convenient, before it be
grown to so great a head, as will trouble the wisest heads, and the highest
head perhapps to help it: we might otherwise pray, with the old woman of
Siracusa for the good health and welfare, Martin must be prayed for.
of these two young Slipps his sons, least after them come out unto us, the
great devil their grand master Beelzebub himself, whose next forerunner, out
of all doubt this race of Martins is.

And these are the yonkers that we now undertake; The Martins are almost
become banc^rupts.
the old Martins reverend son and heir, and his worshipful Brother; who
being both but newly come to their Fathers lands and goods, (I mean his good
and are full of them, and therefore can make no one form of themselves. And
this also, with many other as material points, shall in the next at large be
proved.

These fellows, Martin answers nothing but with whoopes and haloes.
have heretofore been answered to their chiefest matters (which God knows
were both few and frivolous) by (...) of the best sort, (an unfit match for
these of the basest baggagerie) both gravely, and learnedly. But as the Ape,
the more sagelie you look on him, the more he grinneth; and (...)
substantiallie you reason (...) him, the less he understands: so these
Panions, scorning all modesty, and rejecting (...), delight in nothing, but in
their most miserable vain, of resting and foolerie.

It is therefore thought the best way (for experience and time tries al things)
and some wisemen were before of that Judgment, The best way of answering
Martin.
and the wise man himself does so advise us, and Martin the fool himself is
of the same opinion, to answer the foole^, according to their (...). For I
have here at this time only played with their foolish coxecombe; purposing in
my next, to decipher their knauish head also: and when they shall put off their
fools coat, and leave snapping of their wodden dagger, and betake themselves
to a soberer kind of reasoning, (which will be very hard for such vices to
do) to accept of their glorious glove. Till then; we will return them the
Cuffe, in stead of the glove, and hiss the fools from off the stage, as the
readiest means to outface them; though (besides that they hide their heads)
they be most impudent, and cannot blush. For what face soever they set on the
matter, these Iigges and Rimes, have nipt the father in the head and killed him
clean, seeing that he is overtaken in his own foolerie. Martin the vice
condamneth the Plaiers Eigulus, sigulum.
And this has made the young youths his sons, to chafe and fret above
measure, especially with the Plaiers, (their betters in all respects, both in
wit, and honesty) whom saving their liueries (for indeed they are her
Majesty's men, and these not so much as her good subjects) they call Rogues for
playing their enterludes, and Asses for traveling all day for a penny; not
remembering that both they, The Martins right roges.
and their Father, playing the fools without any liuerie, are roges indeed, by
the laws of this land; and that for nothing, now two years together; are the
veriest Asses of all the rest.

And yet shall thou find (good Reader) in this jesting with him, (but
especially in the next) that the fool is bobbd withal in good earnest, and
that he is proved a plain Hermaphrodite, Martin an Hermaphrodite.
that is both a foolish knave, and a knauish fool also; and the veriest fool
in the world, if he be not as very a knave withal, may soon see, to what
pass, both religion, and the state would shortly come, if Mad Martin, and his
mates marrings, and his sons shiftings, might by such as are of might, (which
the GOD of all might forefend) be made account of.

These jests, that now we deal withal, are partly the old man's monuments; but
especially the elder sons censure, and the yongers Theses. The occasion of
this worthy work.
The first occasion indeed, grew of this latter, published by the dawling
Martin Junior, by means (as himself says) of certain maimed, and imperfect
Articles, The death of Martin the great.
which he found dropped out of some man's (belike the hangmans) budget, Mar. the
Iu. in These. in the conclusion.
(whereof you shall hear more in the next) wherein he imagines his Father
(whose articles they were) to be dead; Martin Sen. in cens.
and that the elder says also he ca^ not gainefay; which is the ground work
and foundation, of our building, here for this time. What he omitted I have
supplied; touching the cause of his death, and manner of his burial; for that
I would be loathe so memorable matters, should be buried with him, (which is but
an Introduction to other matters that shortly shall follow, and sit somewhat
nearer them; His ^iuerie and Modells.
upon the truth whereof thou may much better build I wis, then upon their fond
and phroenetical fancies; whereupon they would have thee, (if thou were so wise)
to found thy faith.

To conclude; mark Martins life, and his proceedings; and thou will say, his
death, and funerals were answerable unto it. And since he is dead: let him be
buried also, in thy conceit, and so let his vain works, together with his
remembrance, lie still (as he does) and (...) as carrion. And as for these
young Martins, both the one, and the other, and all the brood of such beastly
bratts; assure thy self, they are not long lived: that in the noses of all,
that are not stuffed to much with the Pose of prejudice, but can smell any thing
in the world: do even now, stink above the ground alive. Fare well, And if
thou will fare well indeed: Beware of Martin.

A true report of the death and burial of Martin Mar-prelate.
Incipit faeliciter.
GOod news to England. Old Martin the Marre-all is dead and buried. He
tells you the tale that knows it to be true. I pray GOD never worse news
come either to Court, or Country, and all good people say, Amen.

You long (I know) to hear the cause, and manner of his death, whose life and
doings were so infamous; and many (I doubt not) will think, (and probably
too) that it should be in reason some strange, and violent death, that is
befalne him; that was so monstrous and immoderate in all his proceedings; and
that either in the fire, water, or air, that so troubled the earth while he
lived upon it. The very truth I will tell you (for pity it were to belie the
dead) from point to point, without altering so much as a pinnes point, as near
as my memoric will give me leave, and therefore listen.

Many are the reports scattered abroad of both, Sundry reports of Martins
death.
(as commonly in such great accidents is accustomed) and all false. Some say
he was taken by the Spaniards, and burnt in the Groyne, and they that report
so, say that he brought the cause thereof from hence with him, not for
religion, but some other causes that now I omit. Some, that he was hanged by
his own company at Lisbone for a mut^nie, which was very likely to have
been true also, that ever was given to factions and mutinies, while he lived
here. Some, that coming thence, having before ouerdronke himself with the hot
wines of those Countries (which he could not but love well, being so seldom
sober for the most part as he was) he died of a surfeit, and was thrown over
board, and so was double drowned both within and without. Some, that riding in
his visitation his horse stumbled, and he brake his neck which other some say,
was in some other sort, as that he wandering to that purpose in the manner of a
Gipson, for that he would not be known, was taken, and trust up for a roge,
and that only known to his companions. Indeed, I deny not, any one of
these happes were likely enough to have befalne him, and not without his just
deserts: and most men say, it was well enough, which way soever of these he
ended, and worse (if worse might be). Howbeit, it was not that so well, as
they do ween for, (being perhaps reserved for his two sons hereafter) but
neither better nor worse than I will tell you.

Martin Junior his son, who knows the truth as no man better, yet loath to
have it published, for that it touches his, and his friends credit very
neerelie; seeks to shadow it, with other some-saies: and that you may know
him to be no bastard, (though perhaps yet base begotten, for even at this Age
he doubts who was his Father, Martin Iu. in conclus.
and therefore must we take him to be terrae filius) not so much as one word
true.

Some say (quoth he) that he died at the Groyne in service of her Majesty and
his Country. Martin Senior in censur.
But what says Martin Senior his son and heir, and this man's brother to
that? He die at the Groyne: nay heel be hanged, earth die there. Lo Martin
Junior, your bigger brother (besides the reverend remembrance of his, dear
Father) gives ye the flat lie; for that he died not there. And no marvel. For
he never lived in the service of her Majesty, and therefore who will believe he
died in it? He never carried so good a mind to his Prince and Country,
faithfully to fight for it, that would so spitefully write against it, and
seek so wickedlie to undermine it; whose overthrow he sought (in his kind)
at home as hotly, with his shot of ink and paper, as the master of the Groyne
did abroad, with his of powder and pellet. And therefore say no more so (
Petrie Martin) no man will believe it: neither have Those others (you talk of,
Martin Iu. in These. in the conclus.
( The man in the moon belike, and the carter of Charles waine) any just
Motives, inducing them to be of that mind. Indeed there died many an honester
man, and much more profitable members of the Common wealth (the greater though
our grief yet their glory that valiantly triumphed over their cowardly
enemies, and constantly rendered their lives in their Princes and countries
service, which none of you all will ever either live or dye in); and if Martin
your father and you two Martins his sons, and your mates, had excused them;
it had been a great good turn, both for the Prince and country; especially
there, where one trouble State might have played upon another, and so a good
riddance made of both together.

After this, as knowing himself how ridiculous a suppose that is he requires
in scorn, of his N^nkaes the BB. (see how like the old Ape this young Munkey
pattereth) whether they have not el^selie Martin Iu. in These.
murdered the Gentleman in some of their Prisons and strangled him) knowing him
to have kept himself far enough from their fingers, as these youths
themselves minding to be neither valiant Martins (though they like lusty
Martins talk so much of venturing their lives in the quarrel, and vaunt them
selves to be the best subjects of the Realm, nor constant confessors, though
they brag so much of the goodness of their cause, which they gloriously guild
with the fl^^nting phrase of Sincerity, and damme others to the deep pit of
hell for not advancing it) do, and will do, I warrant them, (and they be not
caught in the snatch against their will) for fear of a Lambathisme; Martin
dares ^ not land in his likeness at La^beth staiers.
which of all things in the world they cannot abide.

Howbeit pretty youth, I must needs confess the Tippet you talk of (as il as
he loves them) was very due unto the^, (though a much meaner man, than any of
those might have fitted his neck withal) and you his son and your fair
brother withal, as good a gentleman as he, may live to enjoy it, and that as
your right by course of law, being a portion of the inheritance, that your
father l^ft unto you. But it seems your father was not borne unto it, for
that he died not possessed of it ( the more is the pity) but purchased it
since, belike by his own penie.

Or have you not given him ( quoth Martin the Medium) an Italian fig? n^ no
Matt. Martin Iu. in These.
That Is a Machiuillian trick; and some of your mates are better acquainted
with it. Martin might die of figs but not of reasons.
Marie for all sorts of Figs I will not swear, let them enquire it; for
Martin was a great surfeter.

Or have you not choked him with a fat Prebend or two? His sons may be
choked with le^ cost.
Much les good Sir, that were a death for an honest man; neither is there any
one of all your crew, that would not be glad to die that death: but it will not
be, except you will be enstald in a hempen whood, (for you love neither silk
nor miniuer) and of that condition (young Martin) I dare assure thee four; and
thy elder brother (as reason is) double the number, for double fee^.

But to leave thy flim flam tales, and loytering lies (that can do no other
if a man should hang thee) the truth is this; which my little Martin knows
as well as I, and you that are old Martins friends, report it of my word; for
it is as true as steel.

After that old Martin, The true manner of old Martins death.
having taken a most desperate cause in hand, as the troubling of the State,
and overthrow of the Church, (both which attempts at once, Alexander the
Copper Smith, that did Paul so much harm, would never have adventured; nor
Herostratus, that burned Dianas temple, by many degrees came near unto) and
being therefore (and well worthy) sundry ways very curstlie handled; as
first dry beaten, T. C.
and thereby his bones broken, A whip for an Ape.
then whipped that made him winse, then wormd and launced, that he took very
grieuouslie, The Theater.
to be made a Maygame upon the Stage, and so bangd, both with prose and rhyme on
every side, as he knew not which way to turn himself, and at length clean
Marde: Marre-martin.
the grief whereof vexed him out of all cry; and that if he were taken, it was
to be feared he should be made a Bishop (of the fields) which name he never
loved, and to wear a tippet, that he ever detested: but especially being
drawn so dry (so as he could say no more,) Martin Iu. in conclus.
whereby his radical moisture began to fail him, and his vital powers in such
sort to decaie, as he saw that he could not long continue; but especially,
that his labors being so great, took none effect, but was termed, by some a
Vice, by some a Viper, This Period Martin is long, but it contains great
store of necessary matter, and therefore you must bear with it.
by some a Scismatique, by some a Traitor; and that every stage Plaier made a
jest of him, and put him clean out of countenance, yea his own familiars
disdained to acknowledge him, and so had both friends and foes, both good and
bad, even the whole realm (save a few of his faction) that cried out shame
upon him (having besides of old as many diseases as an horse both HH's and
PPe's that had time out of mind possessed him, albeit he bare it out long with a
lusty courage): the old gentleman began at the length, (being discouraged in
his courses) to droope (as sorrow and shame tameth both man and beast) and to
mislike himself (for he terms himself unwise, Martin Iu. in These, In the
Proeme.
that is to say, a Noddie for meddling with it) and through mere mellanchollie
fell into a fever ( lurdaine) whereby he grew so costiue, In conclus. Martin
costiue.
as nothing came from him in three or four months space. And so having taken
his bed, he fent for his Physicians, (whereof he had some choice) that knew
very well the constitution of his body, (though not so fit to see into a
water) who albeit at the first touch of the pulse, Martins Physicians.
that went very disordredly, perceived that he was past cure: yet loath to
loose so profitable a member to their commensing common wealth, they ministered
to him a potion, Martin Iu. in concl. No such pills as Praehends.
( for pills he could swallow down none) whereby (as it falls out with such
as are long bound) he voyded certain uncertain and imperfect Articles for a
farewell to Book making: Ibidem.
but afterward when they perceived that the force thereof wrought so strongly
upon him, as that it purged away all the conscience, wit, and honesty he had;
and that Purgarentur ea, Ibidem.
quae purgari non oportuit (a deadly sign, grounded vponan undoubted maxim
of their Physic) they came unto him, and with tears in their eyes, told him
that there was no way with him but one; and therefore wished him to set his
worldly affairs in order, The (...) resolution of Martins death.
that no controversy might grow amongst his, after he was gone.

Wherewith Martin, Martins answer to the Physicians.
fetching a deep sigh: Nay (quoth he) do what I will, I may not hope for that,
unlikely it is, that I should make peace after my death, that did naught else
but make bate while I was alive. And withal, calling his sons (these two
scapethrifts to him, who like a couple of good and virtuous Babes stood
grinning all the while, as glad they should enjoy their fathers Patrimony,
and be chief Martins themselves) and wringing the elder by the hand, with
another great sigh, said to them as follows.

Oh my sons: I see my doings, Martins oration at his death to his two sons.
and my course misliked of many, both the good, and the bad; though also I have
favorers of both sorts) marie very few of the good indeed). The Bishops and
their train, Martin Iu. in These. In the Proeme.
though they stumble at the cause; yet especially mislike my manner of writing.
Those whom foolishly men call Puritanes, like the matter I have handled; but
the form they cannot brook: His fathers own words.
so that herein, I have them both for mine adversaries. And unwise I was, I
confess, to undertake the matter. And not only that, but (which much more
grieueth me) I perceive that every stage plaier, The causes of old Martins
sickness, sorrow and shame.
if he play the fool but two hours together, has somewhat for his labor:
and I that have taken as great pains, as the veriest fool of them, have
travailed with my toys, now these two years, and gained nothing, save that I
have gotten many thousand eye witnesses of my witles and pitiful conceits,
Martin Iu. in conclus. Martin Senior in work for C.
and ameuerie where noted for an ignominious fool and dig^ised Ass.

I had thought that my works sauced with those i^sts would have had both
speedier access to the greater States, The great states beholding to Mar. that
think their grave heads cannot be moved to weighty matters but by jests.
and better success with the common people; for the humors of men in these
days, especially those that are in any place are given thereto. But sure I
was deceived: The one, are wise, and like of no such fooleries: and the other,
now weary of our stale mi^th, that for a penie, may have far better by odds
at the Theater and Curtain, and any blind playing house every day.

These things with other which I will keep to my self, that more nearly touch
my conceit (for my conscience alas is purged and gone) to tell you the plain
truth, have broken my heart, and I am now no man of this world: which I must
tell you in counsel, I take in good part, for that in very deed, Martin
feared a shrewd turn.
I feared a worse turn: that if you my sons take not the better heed, may
hap befall you.

And though I can scarce speak any more: yet will I strain my self, to use a
few words unto you (for that none but you and our friends be here) which
receive from me with good regard, as you tender the stuffing of your doublet
collar, being your fathers last farewell; that may do you good, if you have the
wit, or grace (which I much doubt) to mark them well.

Three things there are (my sons) that were my bane, Three causes of Martins
death.
and whereby (which grieueth me most of al) I did greatest hurt to the cause I
undertook, and most grieuouslie offended, both God, and the world.

The first was my foolerie; 1 Foolerie.
unfit (in truth) for the matter I handled. For though I know jesting is
lawful even in the greatest matters, Martin Senior in work for C.
and that the Lord is she author both of mirth and gravity, yet after that
some of our companions, had dealt sagelie in the cause, and gained good credit
with some of some sort; in lept I (like a woodcocke I must confess). with
twatling tales, Martin Senior in his Pistle and work for C. and Epitome.
of Sir Iefries Aletub; and of Ganmer Gurtons needle; and of beef and brues;
and rubbing of boules; and cus^ins, and liuerie coats; and leadeu shooing
horns, and wooden daggers, and ^xecombes, and such like tr^mperies: with my
fond phrases of parsous, Fukars, and Currats, Confocation house,
Paltripolitanes: so, ho, how, h^: h^: Tse, Tse, Tse: The quintescence of
Martins wit.
whoop and hall^we: fleering, leering, ieeringe and such paltrie peering (that
I am now ashamed to talk of) in my Epistle: and in my work for Cooper, Py,
hy, be, hold my cloak some body: I will so bumseage him; and the foolish tales
of the King of M^ie at H^^ct^^de; and the boy with the red cappe there: and
such other twittle twattles; that indeed I had learned in Alehouses, and at
the Theater of Lanam and his fellows; and in one hour ouerthrewe, what the
wiser sort had been working, and with heave and shooue, had reared up and set
on end, many years before. Martin mard all with his foolerie.
And therefore my sons beware of that. The wooden dagger may not be worn
at the back, where S. Paul's fword, hangs by the side: neither can he well
find fault with the corner cap; that wears the furd night cappe on his head,
Martins wardrop, a wooden dagger and furd night cap.
as I did. These gambols (my sons) are implements for the Stage, and beseem
Iesters, and Plaiers, but are not fit for Church plotters, nor common wealth
casters, such as we are: which I must now confess was one my foul errors.
And therefore (my good sons) avoid it, as you tender the service you have in
hand; and hope one day, to sit alost in your long wished for Consistory,
amongst your lay Lordings, which your father has lost for ever, through his
foolerie.

The next means of my misery, was my Ribaudrie. 2 Ribaudrie.
An homely term (specially of my self) but it is now no time to dissemble;
and I will conceal nothing, that may tend to your instruction; whom I would
feign bring to some wit and grace, if it might be, which I could never yet do.
And herein I must confess, I called them, Asses and Old Martin throughout all
his works.
Dunces; that I knew far better scholars than my self. I noted small
faults in them, as bowling, and by my faith, Martin Sen. in his Pistle.
and such other trifles: and knew far greater in my self, and my purest
brethren. Wherein, my part (I confess) had been, first privately to have
warned them: whereas now, I have both broken the rule of the Gospel, and given
the enemies cause to speak eurill of the Gospel, which I cannot denic, they
soundly preach. I have most intemperatly, raised against them, with most
shameful and unseemly terms, The flower of Martins sweet phrases.
as Swinish, and Antichristian rabble, proud, popish, presumptuous, profane,
paltri^, pestilent, and pernicious Prelates, wainscot faces, Doltes, Asses,
Beasts, Patches, knaves, kaitiues, lewd swagges, ambicious wretches, and many
other like most filthy phrases, which now grie, ueth me to the very heart to
think of, fitter (I confess) for Bedlem, than for our pretended purity.
Wherein, Martin now sees himself in his own ^lasse.
I have not spared (the more knave I) (and with that he struck himself on the
breast) such as her Majesty has made special choice of, for her Counsel;
whereby also, I hindered our cause more at that time, than I did foresee: and
therein to be plain, I showed my self the greatest Ass of all. A
Macheuillein trick of the Martinists yet in practice.
Again (which worse was) many of them I slandered against mine own
knowledge; and thought it enough, if I might but devise against them the vilest
things of the world, to bring them in hatred with the credulous multitude: (a
di^ellish trick, my sons, which I learned in Machiuell, Old Martin in his
(...) etc.
but take heed of it for it asks vengeance). As some to be Papists, whom I
knew to be sound Protestants: some to favor the Spaniards, who I knew
detested them: Some to be traitors, who my conscience told me were good
subjects: yea (if I should speak the truth and shame the devil) far better
than my self: whereby what I lost, you may consider of; but gained naught else,
save that, which commonly liers do; which was, when I spoke the truth, no
man would believe me, no not the veriest kennell raker, nor vilest rascal that
was in a country, except he were of our crew; The greatest part of Martins
thousands are such.
of which sort indeed, we have no small store. But sons, let these few
words serve herein: for I am weary of this rehearsal, that has been the
very knife to cut my throat: and therefore (and you be wise) see that no such
sharp stuff, do pass your weesell. And the best (when all is done) is to
mend our selves; Martin Iu. in These. In the prome old Martins own words.
that the Lord knows have the greatest need thereof, even of all others, the
best of us, be they never so bad.

The third, and last means that has brought Blasphemy. Blasphemy.
For being once entered into the vicelike vain of foolerie; and making no
respect of men: I was carried most wickedlie, like a wretch as I was, in a
scorn against the saints: of GOD, the Scripture of GOD, and GOD himself. I
called mine own mates, Sainsts; and his Saints Sirs: wherein I spared, In his
holy Pistle.
neither David, nor Peter, nor Paul, no nor the blessed mother of Christ her
self: oh vile varlet that I was, (and therewith he whimpered and put finger in
the eye, which was some sign of grace) whom the spirit of God himself said,
Martin mocks the Saints.
speaking within her, that all generations should still call blessed.
Preserreth his own Saints.
For she is blessed, and a glorious Saint: and I a shameful wretch, and most
miserable miscreant. Yea the Scriptures themselves, I made a mock of: Iesteth
with the Scriptures.
for to a text of S. Peter, I tacked on a blind jest, of the Bishop of
Rochesters benefice: and made a fools motley of it, like a profane and
blasphemous kaitife as I was: whereby I moved all sorts of people, In his
Lucianlike Pistle.
that professed any religion, to detest and condemn me for a most manifest
Atheist: of which humor, I fear, many of our hottest favorites be.

But let that rest: and let them look to it themselves, and others, whom it
concerns: and to end with you, of whom I have greatest care (being the lively
image of my self whom I must leave behind me that may continue the memory of
our house): this is the short and the long, and the sum of all. Avoid these
three rocks, whereon your father has made his shipwreck: Foolerie,
Ribaudrie, and Blasphemi^. Be quiet at home; we have troubles enough abroad.
It is no time now to play the fools: Wise men indeed care for no ^ooles.
wise men's heads are occupied about great matters, and they have better means
to make them merry. And touching the matter you strive for, Martins mark.
take heed what you do: you shoot at Church livings; you hope to have the
spoil. See what has come by it in Scotland: Forsee what will become of it
here: forget not the last partition. Omnia in aduersum spectantia, nulla
retrorsum. Remember the shreddes that fall into the Tailors hell, never come
back to cover your back. (I m^ane the claws of our ravenous brethren) If you
play the goose, and lend them a fether to fether their shaft withal, they will
shoot you through: Martin plays the goose.
and then will you creake out too late, as he did, Hei mihi quod propr^s
pennis pereo. And so will you Sons both, like a couple of goosecaps, (if you
look not to it) as your father did, with your own goose quil. Let the^ once
cut a helm for their hatchet, but of a branch of you, and they will cut down
all the wood handsmooth: for the which you can blame nothing, but the foolish
handle. The Aegle, watches for Jack dawe, till he have broken the shell,
Martin like lack dawe.
that he may run away with the kernel. So as, though they persuade you to
chatter like Pies, yet they will make right Jack dawes of you. They will praise
you, as the fox did the foolish Crow: and call you fair birds, as white as the
driven snow, and make you open your mouth to sing, after their pipe, that they
may deceive you of the meat, you have in your mouth. And when they once have
i^ they will then say to you, Nec vocem (stulte) nec mentem habes. A^ue Peri
phrasis of Martin.
That is, (Martin) you have played the fool for us, and you shall have a
fools reward: that is, a flap with a fox tail: and then shall you be as
very dogbolts, as now the other are dunces, with them. They will commend you
to the skies, as the Woolfe did the Conie, and the Ram; and say to you, O you
are no ravenous beasts; you content your selves with grass; you eat no flesh;
you feed, and clothe others: but at the last, he will eat you both ( quoth
Rei^old the Fox who is mine author). Martin the Father and his two yonglings.
For his two sons are; Empty belly, and Never be full, and himself is
called Devour all. To conclude, (for it is now no time to fiddle out fables,
though it be the fittest learning for your capacities) The beasts you hunt
withal, must have all. And this will be the end of all, after your hot
hunting; So^^ hoc audito abierunt tristes non ausi mutire contra lupos. And so
I will end: for these are the things, that have ended me.

And therewithal, lifting up himself on his pillowe, he commanded the elder
Martin, to go into his study, and to fetch his Will, that lay sealed in his
deske, A fit Label for a ^^beller.
and bound fast with an hempen string: which when he had brought, he commanded
to be broken up, and to be read in their hearing; which was as follows.

After he had begun with the usual style; Martins Will.
next touching his body, (for it should seem he had forgotten his soul: for
the party that heard it told me, he heard no word of it) he would, should not
be buried in any Church, The place of his burial.
(especially Cathedral, which ever he detested) Chapel, nor Churchyard; for
that they had been profaned, with superstition: but in some barn, outhouse,
or field, (yea rather there then fail dunghill) where their privy prophecyings
had been used; without bell, pomp, or any solemnity; save that his friends
should mourn for him in gowns, and whoods, of a bright yellowe; the whoods
made of a strange fashion, for no ordinary thing contented him (belike with a
crest after Hoydens cut) and Minstrells going before him; The manner of his
burial.
wherein he would have a Hornepipe at any hand, Mourning apparel.
because he loved that instrument above measure: the rest he referred to their
discretion; but a Rebuke, and a Shame, in my opinion, Mastins Music.
were the fittest fiddles for him. Minister he would have none to bury him,
but his son, or some one of his lay brethren, to tumble him into the pit. He
would not be laid East, and West, (for he ever went against the hair) but
North, His manner of lying.
and South: I think because ab Aquilone omne malum; and the South wind ever
brings corruption with it. Tomb he would have none, Grave.
(for fear belike that his disciples finding the monument, would commit some
Idola^^ie to it) nor Epitaph upon his grave, Inscription.
but in some post, or tree, not far from it, he would have only engraven;
M. M. M. Whereby his sons say, he meant; Memoriae Martini magni. But I think
rather, this; M^nstrum Mundi Martinus.

This being thus provided for, afterward ensued his bequestes, Martins
Legacies.
in manner and form following.

Martin Senior, my eldest son, and Martin Junior, my younger son, His
Knauerie and Ribaudr^.
jointly, al my knauerie, full and whole; together with my Ribaudrie, with my
two Manners of lying, His two Manners of lying and slandering.
and slandering, annexed thereunto, to be equally divided betwixt them: and
for want of heirs of their bodies, unlawfully begotten (or else in this land
they are not inheritable) to my heirs at large, of the house of Martinisme:
requiring them to use it more wisely, and in other cases than I did.

His Foolerie.
and his consort, of whom I first had it: which though it be now outworne and
stale, Lanam look to your Legacy.
and far inferior to his, yet to him it belongs of right, and may serve
(perhaps) for young beginners, if it be new varnisht.

His scolding and railing.
Dame Law. and to her good gossips, of the household of Martinisme, and to their
heirs female for ever.

S. Pooles; His Vicaredge of S Fools.
And for that I could never abide nou residents, he shall be resident thereon,
during his life; the Patronage thereof, always reserved to my two Sons.
Provided alwaie, that ^one shall have (...) but a Martinist; A good prouiso.
and he not to be admitted by any Bishop, but by the lay Martinists of the same
Parish: wherein I will have no difference to be made, betwixt the veriest
fool, and wisest man; but all men shall have their voices indifferently;
because it is a matter that concerns al, and eueric one particulerlie, of
that family.

Item, I bequeath to my dear cosen P^ag. my His Cradle.
and cast linen; for that I hear, he is like to prove a father of many
children, whom I doubt not one day he will make all Martinists.

Item, I bequeath to Greenewood, Brown, and His house by London.
and abutting upon three high ways, whereupon stands a Cottage, built
triangle wise, with the appurrenances; only for the term of their three
lives; reserving the reuersion thereof, to my two sons, and the heirs of
their bodies as before, Inheritance to the Martinists.
and for want thereof, to my heirs at large, of the family of Martinists for
ever.

Item, I bequeath to my lay brethren, my works His works of Machiuell.
wishing them to peruse, and mark them well, being the very Thalmud, and
Alcoran of all our Martinisme.

Item, I bequeath to all the friends and favorers Rings for remembrance.
on the inside; Nitimur inuetitum: and on the outside, St^^crum plena sunt
omnia: wherein I will have Waldgrane the Printer, and Cliffe the godly Cobbler,
especially to be remembered.

His plots and modells.
of Churches, and Commonweals, (a matter of great importance) to the number
of twelve, for every month of the year one, both for the one and the other,
to our chief builders, (you know their names) to dispose of at their pleasure.

His Wardrop.
equally to be distributed betwixt my two sons: provided, that my eldest
son shall have my best suit; as Coat, whood, Coxecombe, and babble, and all
the rest suitable thereunto.

His Entralls.
my senses to Bedlem; my conditions to Newgate; my heart to the beasts; my
bowels to the birds; and my body at the discretion of my overseers: that is,
(I say) neither in Church, Churchyard, nor Chapel of ease, nor any place
appointed by order, for that purpose.

His goods.
especially my imperfect works, and wast papers, I give and bequeath to my two
Martins, whom ioyndy I make my exequutors, and I appoint my especial good
friends Prichard and Penrie to be mine overseers; His oue^see^.
and to each of them an Aduouson: To the former of small Wittam: and to the
other of little Brainford, now in the possession of Page and Wig. for he has a
plurality; reserving the Patronages, and with the conditions as above.

And for that I know the Ciuilians are not my friends: The proving of his Will.
for in my foolerie I called them See-villaines, (which was foolishlie done of
me, for they might see us, as well as others) and that I shall hardly have any
thing proved at their hands; and my will being a prerogative case, for that my
doings are dispersed over the whole land, will hardly pass with such
expedition, as is convenient: let my exequutors perform the legacies, and let
them prove it, or disprove it, at their pleasure. For you may live to see the
day, (if you handle your matters wisely) which day I hoped my self to see,
when all wills shall depend of your wills, and come to be proved in your
Consistory.

Witnesses P. T. B. E. M. F. G. K. Witnesses.

Copia vera.
This being done; it was not half an hour, Martins death.
but he began to faint: and turning about on his left side, he belked twice:
and as my friend Pasquin reports very truly, the third time he belked out
his breath.

The Physicians, His Anatomy.
for that they doubted of his disease, though they knew he wanted no
imperfections, would needs have him cut up, where they found a wonderful
corrupt carcass.

His Heart, His Heart.
great, yet hollow; (as before many gessed) especially to the peace of the
Church, and quiet of the State. Lungs.
His Lungs, huge and made to prate. His Spleen large, Spleen.
that made him so gamesome. His Gall, Gall.
wonderfully overflowed with choler, that made him so testie, and waiward
withal. His Stomach, Stomach.
full of gross and salt humors, that procured him that same Caninum appetitum,
that he had, and unquenchable desire, to devour all. His Entrails full of
filth, Entrails
notwithstanding he had uttered so much before (marie of late days indeed, as
you heard, he voided nothing). I pass over the rest, whereof there was not one
good part, but all disordered (as he showed himself alive) and clean rotten.
Tongue.
I had forgotten his Tongue, which was wonderfully swollen in his mouth; I
think by reason of his blasphemy.

But when they came to open the Head, Head.
(a strange case) they found no crumme of brain within it.

Wherefore having bestowed his bowels in a ditch, (for they might not carry
them farther from the place) and filled up his hungry belly (that could never
be full, Spicing.
while he was alive) with coal dust; for spice they would not bestow, (his
carrion being not worth it) and saw dust they could have none: They wrapped him
in a blanket, (like a dog to be canuasde) for that all others are lapped in
sheets, Shrude.
(and he loved ever to be singular) and so threw him under board.

The next night after, His Burial.
(for the horrible stink thereof, because his body was so corrupt) and for
that he durst not in his life time be seen by day, being a night bird; they
carried him forth in the dark; and by reason he died excommunicate, and they
might not therefore bury him in Christian burial, and his will was not to
come there in any wise; they brought him unawares to a dunghill, Mar. Grave.
taking it for a tumpe, since a Tomb might not be had, and there cast him in.

And so, if any man will know where Martin lies; let him understand, that he
is endunged in the field of Confusion^ enditched in the pit of Perdition: and
cast over with the dirt of Derision: and there lies he; and so I leave him,
with this Catastrophe. Sic pereant comnes
Martini and Martinistae.


And this is the very truth of Old Martins death, which if the young Martins,
or any Martinist of them all deny; I cast him here my Mitten upon the quarrel.

The true Copy of such Epitaphs as were made by old Martins fu^otites, and
others for him.
YEllout thou earth, and ye two lights of heaven;
Ye Graces three, and Elements four on hie:
Ye senses five, six song noates; Sciences seven,
Eight parts of speech, and Muses nine mourn by:
Weep our ten Tribes, with sects ten times eleu^n:
Ring out thy Noone, (O twelve a Clock) and ^rie.
But chiefly wail our orders four and twenty,
Martin is dead, our Master dear and deintie.
Grex Martinistarum.
NOw Martin's dead, the tipe of all our hope:
And that our building leanes, and lies aslope:
If men might hang, when they have lust thereto,
I know for my (...), what I would straight do^.
quod. Pen.
ARt dead Old Martin? farewell then our schools,
Martins thy sons, are but two paltrie fools.
quod. Pri.
A Dieu both naule and bristles, now for ever;
The shoe and soale (ah woe is me) must sever.
Bewail mine Aule, thy sharpest point is gone.
My bristle's broke, and I am left alone.
Farewell old shoes, thombe stall, and clouting lether,
Martin is done, and we undone together.
quod. Cliffe the godly Cobbler.
AWay with silk, for I will mourn in sack.
Martin is dead, our new sect goes to wrack
Come gossips mine, put finger in the eye;
He made us laugh, but now must make us cry.
quod. Dame Law.
MY hope once was my old shoes should be sticht,
My thumbesygilt, that were before b^pitcht,
Now Martins gone, and laid full deep in ground;
My gentries lost before it could be found.
quod. Newmanthe Cobbler.
Sundry other Epitaphs his friends have made for him, but they run secretly
amongst them, and none may see them, but such as are of that famelie. But these
that follow are framed by some friends of theirs that are yet unknown, but wish
to be better acquainted with them.

YE Martin beasts, bewail this woeful ha^;
Both Martin Apes, and dronken Martins all;
Martin your mast, alas has caught a clap,
And Martinisme, with him, is like to fall.
quod. R. M.
FArewell old Martin, and three Ms. with thee;
Mirth, Madness, Mischief, in the highest degree.
quod. R. C.
THou did reprove me, for my dogs of late;
Thy self being worse, than any Curre I keep.
My dogs bite none, but where they justly hate:
Thou those, that never hurt thee, bitst most deeepe.
But had thou lived, my dogs had hun^ed thee,
Now thou art dead, all carr^on they do flee.
quod. D. K.
LAment you fools, ye vices make your moan^,
Ye Ribaulds, railers, and ye lying lads:
Ye Scismatiques, and Sectaries, each one:
Ye Malcontents and ^ke ye mutinous swads:
Ye Machiuelists, Athiests, and each mischievous head:
Bewail, for Martin your great Captaine's dead.
quod. N. N.
HA, he, tse, tse py, hy, see fortunes wheels,
So how, Mad Martin has turnde up his heels.
quod. R. L.
London lament, the East, that sticks on sand:
The West, that stands before the stately hall:
The North, the boure, that's bound with triple hand.
The South, where some at Watring catch a fall,
Newgate, and Bedlem, Clinke, and Bridwell bray,
And ye Crows cry, for ye have lost your pray.
quod. R. R.
YOu say, that Martin at the Groyne was mard;
It was not so, as I for truth have hard.
But whether so, or no, it is all one;
A great good turn so bad a beast is gone.
quod. W. T.
MArtin the great, what? rayler, fool, or lier,
Is dead. How? Dround, or burnt, or hanged w^^ he?
No, these are kept for his eld'st scuruie squire
And younger brat; as you may shortly see,
quod. T. L.
MArtin denide that Christ went down to hell:
Yet he himself is theher now descended,
Then did he more, than Christ (belike) could well:
But all this doubt shall in this sort be ended:
Christ did descend, and did return thence too,
Which he cannot, and therefore less can do.
S. I.
The lamentation of the Salt-peeter man.
MArtin I would, long since, thou had been dead,
And thy two sons fair buried close by thee:
Then had I not by thy fair words been led
To this foul place, that now i^ happened me:
But were I out; ere shackles I would shake,
Of all your bones gunpowder would I make.
The Authors. Epitaph.
HIc iacet, vt pinus,
Nec Caesar, nec Ninus,
Nec magnus God winus,
Nec Petrus, nec Linus,
Nec plus, nec minus,
Quam clandestinus,
Miser ille Martinus,
Videte singul^.
O Vos Martinistae
Et Vos Brounistae,
Et Famililouistae,
Et Anabaptistae,
Et omnes sectistae,
Et Machiuelistae,
Et Atheistae,
Quorum dux fuit iste,
Lugete singuli.
At gens Anglorum,
Praesertim verorum,
Nec non, qui morum,
Estis bonorum,
Inimici horum,
Ut est decorum,
Per omne forum,
In soecula soeculorum,
Gaudete singuli.
FINIS.
Quoth. MARPHOREVS.
The conclusion to the two young Martins.
ANd now pretty youths, that your Fathers funerals are ended, we shall have
some nugifriuolous leisure to talk with you; which shall be doubt you not
with speed convenient. For as there want not desperate Dicks amongst you, to
write, and (if opportunity served) no doubt to work anything, Martin shall not
want Antagonists.
be it never so mischievous: so are there you shall well know it, some
Sco^uolas that have vowed by all lawful means to remove, such proud and
pestilent Porsennaes, as you, and your mates are, from the desperate seege of
our walls. In the mean space, that you may continue your fathers sweet
memory, and good credit, amongst us; play still the desperate, and shame^s
Swadds as you have begonn; for you couch your Coddsheads; and your paper cannot
blush, nor your selves neither, if you durst show your faces, being past grace.

Only, one pretty grace you have, (specially you Sir Martin the More. K.)
that if any man anger you (as some did of late, Martins chief grace.
and more doubt you not will a little better) your Asses heels, are up
straight, and you winse, Martin learn^ to climb gibbe^^s.
as if you had a swarm of Bees behind you, and you skip up straight to the
top of some gibbett; where indeed you may be bold (being all tenements
belonging to your chief mansion house) and in the name of another, you play
the part of your own proper person, which is (as your other brother tells you)
as if you should be taken by the Constable, for cutting of a purse; you would
by and by cry out, and say to him; O Sir your nose sitts not right on your
face, which, albeit, it be a pretty theeuish grace: yet you use that so like a
fool to, Two foolish tricks of Martin.
as it loses the grace, that (for want of (...) grace) otherwise it might
(...) had For first (...) Wi^^ (...), when you know not who bo^d you, you
strike him that first (...) your foolish head. You are so afraid of Sa^^^ that
you (...) (like a woodcock) ^^^ie thing that gird^ you comes from thence, for
that there first began your bane.

And then like a Noddie, because one says that your works should pass the
way of all wast writings, The whip for the Ape.
you give him his own word again, and make him Gr^^me of a close (...),
which office if he had (but he leaves it to such cl^anlie ma^es as your nowne
good self) the fees I dare say for him, ( Martin) should be yours. And
because he tells you of the gallows, that both you deserve, and cannot but
befall you: you come in with the fame again; which shows you to be but a
doltish dunce, and make us a speech fitting your own self.

But Sir, see you learn your lesson perfectly, and have it without book ad
vnguem, A f^iendly admonition to Martin Senior.
when it may stand you in steed, that when you come to your climing, that is
up Newgate, up Hurdle, up Holborne, up Tiburne, up cart: Martins climing.
(as if you follow your rebellious vain, that shall be proved, you are like
shortly to do, if you happen upon your Saltpeter man's and your two fugitive
printers good luck) and to take real, and actual possession, not of the
single gibbe^, but of the triple trestle, your undoubted inheritance, that your
father left you, which ye reserve (as reason is) for your self, and your
friends as your only Prerogative, Martins Pr^^ogatiue.
you may pron^unce it perfectly, to the edifying of your brethren, and make a
better end than you have done a beginning.

In the mean space we have pro^ided you steed of a single) a triple Epitaph,
(in Martin Seniors Epitaph.
to be engraven, not on your grave (for you will never come to the worship, to
have so much as a ditch, or a dunghill, as your Father had to lie in) but in
the three posts, of your place Paramount, in worship of the Father, and his
two sons, which is as follows.

Who marks the scope whereto
vile Martins words do tend:
Will say a rope of right,
must be at last his end.
Upon the first post.
HEre swinge^^ he,
One of th^^ hree,
Well known to be,
rebellious mates.
But this, le^d swad,
His match nere had,
No not his dad,
for foe to states.
The second post.
His heart, in mutiny,
His tongue in blasphemy,
His life in villainy,
was his desire,
By nature an Athiest
By art a Machiuelist,
In sum a Sathanist,
lo here his hire.
The third post.
Ye birds of the Sky,
Both Crow, and pie,
Come, and draw nie.
behold a feast.
Tiburne your host,
On his triplepost,
Has made a roast.
and killed a beast.
And so (gentle Martin) much good do it you: you see your fare for this time,
and you are hartelie welcome. Take this in good part, the next course shall be
provided for your own^^ooth, and glutt you better.

Farewell Pasquin, and dispatch.
FINIS.

