The Be hiue of the Romish Church: A Co^mentarie upon the six principal
points of Master Gentian Heruet, a Romish Catholic his book, which is
divided into six parts, as in the Argument does appear. And an Epistle made
by the Author of this book unto Franciscus Sonnius, late Bishop of Antwerpe.

Translated out of Dutch into English, by George Gylpen the elder.

Good Reader be so bountiful,
in reading this, to note and view,
The wit and wisdom wonderful,
of the most learned Louen crewe.
2 Thessalonians. 5. Prove all things, and keep that which is good.

Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the vinetree, by Thomas Dawson,
for John Stell, dwelling at the Dukes place, by Creechurch. 1579.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber


To the right Worshipful, wise, and virtuous Gentleman, Master Philippe
Sidney, Esquire, the abundance of Gods grace, and all spiritual blessings.

IF notable knowelege (Right Worshipful,) if perfect experience, if singular
authority, if deserved dignity, finally, if any excellent and spiritual
ornament of Nature (or rather of God) be sufficient to win credit, and to
purchase praise: then must this be a necessary consequent, that where many
gifts of Gods grace do jointly concur and run together, there credit has
continuance, and praise possession. Such a one is he, who by no less labor
then learning, and by no less learning then judgment, not only attempted,
but also finished (to his no small commendation, being a worthy Gentleman, and
having enough in civil and politic affairs otherwise to bestow his study,
and his time,) this most profitable and true christian work: which, though by
reason of the manifoldnesse of the matter it be wearisome to read, yet with
such weight of wisdom, diverse ways declared, that tediousness is so
attenuated and diminished: that (as a footeman, having far to go, makes
less account of his labor, if the way be pleasant: and by the present view
of comfortable obiectes, is so ravished with delight, that he thinks not upon
the length of his journey:) in this book, things are so tempered, that (as the
best sawces being made of sweet and sour, do please the taste) the reader
shall feel him self in such sort affected, that albeit the perusing thereof
shall seem passing painful, yet (circumstances accordingly considered, and
point by point precisely pondered) it shall prove exceeding fruitful. Again
(Right worshipful) as in building, not he which seeks rather to be sumptuous
then substantial, but he which endeavors to be both substantial and
sumptuous, deserves most commendation: so in writing, not he which hunteth
after the finest phrase, and sweetest style, neglecting (in the mean time)
sensible matter, sauouring of judgment: but he, which has the capacity,
both pithilie like a Logician, and pleasantly like a Rhetorician, to leave
some proof to the world of his wit and knowledge, is to be had in
admiration. In which thing, because he is excellent, by whom this book was
written, it imports more then I am able to utter: which, (whatsoever it be) I
leave to the ce^sure of the wise. And now (Right worshipful) somewhat
superficially to touch the work it self: which I may well resemble to the
Anatomy of man's body: wherein as we may see the wonderful wisdom of God,
in the creation of mortal man, how he has powered life into the principal
parts, as it were into certain vessels, and covered them with flesh, which
I may boldly compare to clay, for the better preservation and safe keeping of
the same* how cunningly the whole body of man is builded and knitte together,
with sinews, veins, artires, ligatures, gristles, bones, muscles, and such
like: so in this book, being but a manuell, the very secrets of the Romish
Church are so discovered, (which in the opinion of the Pope and his
consistory, is high treason, and unpardonable,) that very babes and sucklings
may behold their abominations, and spitte at their villainous practices, to
them selves aduantageable, to the church of Christ offensive, and to the glory
of God nothing more derogatorie. This notable book therefore (Right
worshipful) I have presumed to publish abroad, under your patronage and
protection, not doubting that it should want credit, if it were not
ouershadowed with the countenance of some special personage: but for that your
disposition being so virtuous, as that you are a mirror among men, and your
course of life so praiseworthie, as that you may be well thought a blossom of
true Nobility: your worshipful mind also being beautified and enriched with
such rare ornaments, as that you among the rest, glister like a star:
therefore unto your woorships hands have I bin encouraged to present this
worthy book, translated and printed at my proper costs and expenses, not in
hope of any extraordinary profit, (which how little I think upon, let him
judge that knows all things,) but that the Church of Christ, being not yet
grown to perfect age and strength, may reap some special benefit by the
same. And thus having laid open, very bluntly, but plainly, my simple (but
yet honest) meaning, I commit your worship to the grace of God, which as it
has hitherto (no doubt) been your direction, so I hope it shall, and (God
grant) it may be your loadesman to life everlasting. Amen.

Your worships at commandment John Stell.

To the Reader.
GOod Christian Reader, think it not lost labor to read this little book,
which as it bears the name of a Be hiue, so it contains good stoare of
wholesome honey. Nevertheless, take this short admonition by the way, that in
reading the same, thou play not the part of a Spider, which out of sweet and
odoriferous flowers sucketh deadly poison: for what is that else but to abuse
a benefit, and to make that evil to thy self, which by nature is good? I
know it spites the Papists, that their iuglings are espied: and I believe
they will be so far from singing a Requiem for his soul, by whom it was
compiled, or from pity to purchase him a pardon from the Popes good grace,
that they could find in their hearts, to appeal to the Spanishe
inquisition, and by their torments far passing the pains of Purgatory, to
constrain both him, and them that shall read it, to cry Peccaui. O
charitable Catholics. Be they such cursed cattle in deed? Alas for pity: God
keep us out of their claws. Will not Peter pence salve up the sore? O, yes
marie, that is meat for their mouths. But will they frette and storm in
such sort? Tut a point, they have had the rain too long, it is time that
they bite on the bridle. But farewell Papist: R* this pill, o it will scowre
and purge. Thus Gentle Reader (to conclude) thou have such a book, as will
make thee privy to all the practices of the Babylonicall beast, (Rome I mean)
the den of Dragons and devils: which if it were translated into other
tongues, by the industry of the learned, as it is in none, but in Dutch and
English, it would increase choler so abundantly in the Pope, the College of
Cardinals, Monasteries of Monks, Fraternities of Friars, Nestes of Nonnes, and
the rest of the Pharisaical Fry, as whole handfuls of Helleborus, or pounds of
Colloquintida can never avoid: and (wot you what?) that will pull down their
mother the holy Church upon her knees, with thought and sorrow. Well, I
leave the benefit of this book to thy diligence in reading. And thus farewell.

Thine in Christ, John Stell.

This is a clear and perfect interpretation of the Epistle of Master Gentian
Haruet, now lately set forth in French, and in Dutch, and directed to those,
that are fallen from the true Christian belief.
WHerein the full foundation, and profounde establishing of the holy Romish
belief is declared: all new heresies confounded: the might, authority, and
worthiness of the Church of Rome, expounded, and by Scriptures confirmed: all
dissentious articles put to silence, and a plain demonstration, where the
right Church is to be found. In sum, all the articles of the holy
Catholic Romish belief, are here drawn out of all sorts of flowers in the
holy Scripture, old Fathers, Councelles, Decrees, and Canons, gathered
together, and as in a sweet Be hiue, brought all in one: and in the last is
set forth, the manners, conditions, nature, and essence of Bees, the honey and
honiecombe of this Be hiue, collected out of the best old writers, as well
Grecians as Latinistes.

Made and brought together by Isaac Rabbotenu of Louen, Licentiate in the
Popish laws.

To the right worshipful, holy, profounde, and learned Doctor, and Magister
noster, Master Franciscus Sonnius, now most worthy Bishop of
Shertoghenbosch, health and blessing from God, Afterward Bishop of Antwerpe.
and the Pope our most holy father.
RIght worshipful, loving, and holy father and bishop, when I do well
consider, and think upon the noble, commendable, and worthy deeds, which
your honor (with the good help of the most famous and devout Cardinal
Grandvelle, and other good subjects of the most holy Apostolical Catholic
Popish church of Rome,) have (within these niene or ten years) taken in hand,
and almost brought to pass, touching our ancient and wellnigh overthrown
Romish Religion, to proppe and underset the same with new pillars, and strong
styles* binding it with well twisted ropes, and cords of the Spanish
Inquisition: I must needs, and of right (in the name and behalf of all my
countriemen and inhabitants of the base countries of Germany) give you worthy
thanks, for the great alterations and changes, which within these few years
have happened and chanced to the proof, within the said low countries. For,
had not your Honor, about the year 1558. in the time of the most holy Pope
Iulie the fourth, stoutly and diligently traveled and obtained that these
our base countries might be provided for with new Bishops, to serve for
Inquisitours and accusers of heretics and Huguenotes. Surely, the case was
such, that the Popes holiness, with all his boothes and shoppes, must out of
hand have been trudging out of these countries, and all by reason of this new
Gospel, which men would needs set forth: whereof your Bishops Myter, crosier
staff, and your laudable Inquisition, have not read much, (considering that
your Honor can content your self with your Portesse, and a can of good
rennish wine) whereof if it had so come to pass, a most pitiful case must
needs have followed: As especially, that a man should scarce afterward
have found any one, that would have said Mass for money: yea, the Priests
themselves began to be so ashamed of their shaven crowns that in some places,
they would have been glad to cover them with cow doung, as in an old
prophecy is declared. The Bishops, the Prelates the holy Monks and Chanons,
the Inquisitoures and all idle officers of the spiritual courts, should not
have had any more work. I omit how that the famous doctoures of Louen, the
Licentiates and Bachelors of Divinity should drink no more Vinum
Theologicum, or Vinum Cos, Vinum (...), the (...) that (...) do (...) lie.

Vinum Co^, (...) is to (...) good colo^^ smell, and (...).


that is to say, of the persons fat: but must have taken patience with small
ale and single bear, whereof they might soo^e have gotten the Collica passio.
And where (I pray you) should the four holy begging orders have become. And
especially the devout Franciscanes? should they not all (in general) have gone
and hanged their cowles upon the hedge? And then what should have become of all
the godly ornaments of the Church, as brave altars, gylte christ's, holy
relics, brave images, Copes of gold, silver, and silk, and other more such
like jewels, wherewith all the Churches and holy Saints as well As well she
Saints, as he Saints.
Feminine, as Masculine, are decked up and trimmed, which all the Bishops have
promised by solemn oath to maintain and defend, to the uttermost of their
powers. But what is all this to the purpose? The Mass, the Mass (I say) yea,
the holy blessed mass lay so extreemely sick, that men began already to
sing a Requiem over her, the holy Saints, did not get any more liberal
offerings, more sensinges, nor more pilgrimages. Yea, the people began already
to pull down images from the alters. No man would give any thing for pardons,
nor for the Popes bulls: Yea, the hole staple of pardons, especially
purgatory, began to wax could. The Pope himself was esteemed for an
howlieglasse: The Decrees, and Decretals, the Sophistical gloses, the
sentences, the Quotlibets, and such like toys of the scholars and doctors
of Louen, were cast behind the benche: Satisfaction, and full recompense were
no more made any accounte of: Auriculer confession was almost murdered: Shroue
tuesday, and Jack a lent had almost broken their necks: all the holy and
goodly Processions with the stately stations, Perambulations and going about
the streets, were esteemed for boys play: the holy Sacrament was no more
devoutly carried up and down with fiffes and drums. In conclusion, all the
holiness, of the Catholic Church of Rome began to fall in the ashes: and in
place thereof you should hear nothing else, neither in the towns nor without,
yea, nothing was read but the Bible, or Saint Paul. The people would pray to
none other, but to GOD alone, neither would have any other mediator, but
Christ Jesus, no^ put their trust and confidence in any other things, but in
his merits: No reioycinges but in his Cross, death, and passion. They did
only esteem for Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, yea, and did use
the same very simply without any stately station or ceremonial bravery,
without coniuringes of the devil, without spittle, without salt, without
greasinges, and also without albes, surpleses, or coapes, without singing of
Per omnia saecula saeculorum, or Dominus vobiscum. They would go no more to
shrifte vnde^ their ghostly Father, but to God above or else before the whole
congregation: They did not pass any more for absolution, they would not
pray any more for the silly souls, which lie in Purgatory, but every one
would ground his prayer upon the holy scripture: They would acknowledge but
one supreme head of the Church, namely, Jesus Christ the Son of God: They
would have Bishops, renouncing the name and office of tyrannical Inquisitors,
to preach the gospel, to leave of their trapt Horses and Mules, and go on
foot: They did esteem all manner of meats, good and lawful, first saying
grace in their mother tongues: neither did they much regard the eating of
flesh in Lent, no, not even on Good Friday: In Sum, they went wholly about to
bring in a new reformation of religion and discipline ecclesiastical, the like
whereof was never seen of the holy Church of Rome, nor of our forefathers:
They took in hand to restore all again, to the old and former state of the
Apostles and Evangelists. what pity, what care, what sorrow, had this been to
our dearly beloved mother the holy Catholic Church of Rome, and to all her
good subjects? But praised be our blessed Lady of Antwerpe, your honor did
well foresee, and in time diligently withstand that inconvenience, in that you
have placed the inquisition in the land, driven away the Gewses or Heretics,
laid the Magistrates in prison, They were called Ge^ses, (...) of (...),
against the Papists.
banished and brought to the Butchers stall the Gentlemen and good subjects,
made a way and open passage for the Spaniardes into the land, set up fire and
swoorde in token of victory, and in every corner reared up gallows, and
plentifully shed the blood of those new Evangelists: In Sum, your
diligence, your quick expedition, your great zeal, your new Bishops, and
your holy Inquisition, have so well advised, counseled, persuaded (or rather
forced) our Souereign Lord the king his Majesty much rather to see the
destruction of his Patrimoniall land, the ruin of his Subjects: yea, the
imprisonment, and death of his own only son, then to permit the holy
Catholic Church of Rome to suffer such shame: and that in place of the Popes
decrees and decretals of the Mass book Hortulus animae, and such other
service books, the Gospel, and holy Scripture, only should succeed, and take
possession. Therefore your Honor is highly to be praised for such noble acts:
And every man is duly bound herein, to assist and further you in your
enterprise, to the uttermost of his knowledge and ability.

This (Right Honorable and blessed Bishop) is the cause, which has moved me
poor and unworthy brother of Saint Frauncis order, to dedicate and send this
my simple present to your honor, to the end that I (with this my small gift
of good will) may somewhat (though but a little) help to strengthen and
repair the decayed walls of the Romish Church, and establish again the
right and perfect foundation of our most holy father, the Pope. Therefore
having a while ago: seen and marked that in the City of Antwerpe was a small
book set forth in French and Flemish, entitled and named A Letter Missiue:
Or, An Epistle directed unto the Apostates and Backsliders, from the true
Christian belief, compiled and made by Master Gentian Heruet, etc: And for
that the same book was greatly desired, and very much esteemed of all good
and Catholic hearts: I have (with all diligence and circumspection) perused
and read over the same: wherein I have found in effect, that in the same is
briefly declared and set forth the whole ground and foundation of the holy
Romish religion, which your Honor, even with fire and swoorde, to the
subversion and utter ruin of the whole land, does seek most zealously to
maintain. And I am thereby persuaded, that the same book was most worthy to
be read over of all men, to the end that all startbackes from the faith, might
return into the right way: and the good faithful Catholics thereby
strengthened and confirmed. But now considering the said book to be very
short, and something dark for a matter of such importance, and likewise had
either none or very few proofs out of the Scriptures, Councels, holy
Fathers, and Decrees of the Popes: therefore I have thought good to set pen
to Paper, and to set forth and declare the same at large, that nothing
needful should be lacking. Moreover considering that it is most necessary,
to declare something more at large, especially touching the woorthines, and
authority of the holy Church of Rome, and the true exposition of the holy
Scripture: whereupon the sum of all our matters do depend, for that we
have always been forced to call upon the Church, and especially now, when
there is none other shield or defense left unto us: therefore have I traueiled
briefly to show of this matter, where the sure ground and foundation lies, by
what Scriptures, by what holy fathers, by what Councels, and by how many
Decrees every point is defended: and likewise how and in what manner the
Scripture and the holy Church of Rome are joined together, and Catholikelie
understood in such order, as the same shall in no wise serve the Heretics
any thing at al to their purpose or advantage. And for so much as this work is
sucked out of sundry sorts of flowers gathered together: therefore have I
named it, The Be hiue of the Romish Church, thereby to give to understand*
that as the honey Be, does not gather her honey out of one flower alone, but
out of many and diverse: So does not the Church of Rome stand upon one
Scripture, Bible, Councels or books of Decrees, but does catch and snatch out
of each of them, that which best serves her purpose, as hereafter every man
may plainly perceive, and in the end of this book shall understand more at
large, whereas the special causes are set forth, why and wherefore we have
christened this book with such a name. And now, having understood that your
Honor did a good while ago set forth a certain book, against the
confession of the faith of these new Gospellers, I did very earnestly travel
to get the same, trusting that it might (perhaps) have eased me of this my
labor, for that I thought your Honor should have set forth these matters
there at large. But after that I had superficially and lightly read over the
said book, (not having the luck to keep the same long by me.) I was the more
willing to set forth this my Be hiue, for that I saw it should serve very
well, to the opening and more plain declaration of the foresaid book, which
your Honor has made and published: considering that your honor is busy in
every place with the authority and dignity of the holy Church, of her
ordinances or constitutions, additions, or traditions, and of the spiritual
exposition, which she has made upon the Scriptures: and perceiving nothing
to be clearly set forth, whereby one may find out these constitutions and
ordinances, whether in the Scripture, in the Fathers, in the Decrees, or in the
Councils: so that a simple man might always stand in doubt, what you will have
esteemed and holden for the commandments ordinances, or traditions of the
Church, and what men shall call the Church, and likewise what rule or
inviolable order this holy Church does commonly keep and use in the
exposition of the scriptures, but I think your Honor did leave this undone,
as our said Master Gentian Haruet did, especially, because it was to small
and slight a matter for you to trouble your mytered head with all. And
therefore have I gladly taken upon me this pain and travel, and have
clearly set forth in this my book, upon what ground and foundation all
these things are builded: So that the necessary use of this book is
unspeakable as every good Catholic shall well perceive of him self. And
for so much as herein is not written any thing, but it does agree as well, yea,
better with the said book made by you, the^ with Gentians book, I would
gladly have it set forth, as an Exposition, Gloss, or Co^mentarie upon your
foresaid pretty book: but considering that I had not any copy of your said
book in my custody, and fearing also least your Honor might have been
offended, that any man should take upon him to expound or comment upon your
writings, which are as clear as hellishe sun, even as your own name Sonnius
does signify: so that I have proceeded with my first determination, thinking
it sufficient for me, if I might hide this my travel under the wings of your
Honor, like as under the same, all our new Bishops have been hatched. Most
humbly beseeching your Honor, to accept this my simple gift in good part,
and as becomes such a worthy Bishop to do, trusting yet (within short time)
to set forth more such works, and thereby so preciselie to expound all the
books that are set out by your Honor, and other doctoures of Louen your
companions, that a blind man may feel them with his hands: yea, and without
spectacles or candle, conceive what great holiness lies hid in such coafers.
You may (if it please you) in the mean space accept this my work, as an
explanation and commentary, upon your book, which to do rests at your
pleasure and good will. And herein I commend your Byshopps Myter and crosyers
staff unto the tuition of our holy Father the Pope, who preserve and keep
your Honor with all your brethren our new Bishops, in prosperous estate and
proceedinges against all Heretics.

Datum in our Musaeo, the v. of January, being the even of the three Kings of
Collen, at which time all good Catholics make merry, and cry, The King
drinks, in anno 1569. Your Honors welwilling servant in all that lies in my
simple power, Isaac Rabbotenu of Louen.

The argument of this book: Wherein the Epistle or Letter missiue of Master
Gentian Heruet, is divided into six parts, and the meaning of the same
brieslie declared.
THis deep grounded and most learned Epistle of the right worshipful Doctor,
Master Gentian Heruet, directed to those, that are declined and fallen from
the holy Romish Catholic Church, is divided into six special and
principal parts: whereof the first is:

1 That the Heretics and Huguenotes cannot repute them selves for faithful
people, so far forth as they do not believe all things, which our loving
mother the holy Church believes, without whom no salvation can be obtained:
and especially, for that they will not believe the Transubstantiation of the
bread into the very body of Christ.

2 The second is knitte to the first: namely: They maintain injuriously,
that we ought to allow nothing, but what is maintained by Scripture.

3 Thirdly: They do not believe nor allow of seven Sacraments, especially*
Auricular confession, the sacrament of Matrimony, and the holy ointment of
Unction.

4 Fourthlie: They do the Catholics great injury: insomuch as they repute
them for idolaters and worshippers of idols.

5 Fifthlie: They seek nothing else, but fleshly liberty, and their own
appetites.

6 Sixthlie and lastly: Their Preachers are unlearned Doultes, and lead a
lewd, loathsome, and wicked life.

In these six points is briefly rehearsed the whole ground and foundation
of the holy Catholic doctrine, taught by the Romish Church* and is so
gallantly established: yea, and all the Heretics so finely fetch over the
coals, that there remains not a iotte to be spoken of any further. Yet,
seeing the ground and meaning of this Epistles Author, did stretch chiefly to
challenge the Heretics forth into the field, and then Championlike, to
combat with them: (like as he shows that not long since the noble Knight,
Master Nicholas Villegaignon, who by his writing thought to egg forth
Master John Calvin, and by that mean to have won a perpetual fame, and
everlasting memory.) It is even in like sort fallen out with this good
fellow, as it did with the said Villegaignon. For his hap was, the better
to fit his purpose, to set down (as he before mentioned) many doubtful
parts, very dark and obscure reasons, yea, and some somewhat gross,
supposing herewithall (as with a baight) to draw the fish into his net.
Whereby (alas) it came to pass, that his good and godly meaning was spelde
and construed a wrong way, and the Heretics did seem to make a mock of it,
as though he were unworthy to have an answer to the same, considering that
he did show very little scripture or authority to affirm his matter: Even
in like manner as they had in times past iested with the foresaid Villegaignon.

Therefore it has seemed both good and necessary unto us, and for the
preferrement of the holy Romish Church, most auaylable, that this present
Epistle should be at large declared: and very strong and apt authorities to
be brought in, for every part and parcel of the same, collected as well out of
the Scripture, as out of the bes^ and fittest books of the ancient Fathers,
Councels, and Decrees, wherewithal our loving mother the holy Church is most
supported: to the end we should the better conceive the costly hidden
treasures, which are comprehended in this short Epistle: and that each might
use the same to his most advantage, and for a public instruction, hoping
(thorough this holy and meritorious work) to purchase heaven, and withal to
redeem and set free two or three souls out of Purgatory.

Here follows the declaration of the first part of the Epistle of Gentian
Haruet: wherein is treated, what the holy Church of Rome is: wherein her power
and authority does consist: and how farr^ the same extends: then is
concluded, That the Lutherans and Huguenotes can not be esteemed or taken for
true believers: but must be banished and burnt for Heretics.
The first Chapter. Wherein is plainly declared, that the Luthera^^ and
Huguenotes are Heretics, and ought to be burnt: notvvithstanding, that as
well by Scripture, as by many examples, they shevve themselves to be the very
Church of God.
AND to the intent that we may orderly deal, Lutheran^^ and Huguenotes are
Heretics*
beginning first with one piece, and after proceeding with an other: our
Master Gentianus does here in his (...) charge, set forth such a noble
grounded and sharp witty reason, to found and build his arguments upon,
that the Heretics and Huguenotes stand already so amazed and ashamed, as a
horse that has overthrown his carre.

You poor Heretics (says he) how can you be of a true belief, if you do
not first accept the twelfe articles of the faith? And how should you accept
them, seeing you will not believe the holy Catholic Church?

For consider this, he does take to serve his turn, a most certain and
undoubted point, That no man can believe the holy Church, but he must jointly
withal receive and accept all, whatsoever the said Church does set forth and
believe. And this is greatly to be considered: seeing hereupon does rest the
most spe^ial ground and strongest bulwark of the holy Church of Rome. For
these Heretics can very steadfastly say, Church of God and Heretics.
that they themselves are the church of God. And to (...) that, they introduce
and bring in many goodly textes out of the Scripture: but they allege them
only according to the letter: even as though the Church were nothing else, but
an assembly or congregation of holy men, that is to say, of such as through
faith or belief are by the blood of Jesus Christ blessed and chosen to be the
sheepefolde of Jesus Christ the true and only shepherd of our souls: Ioh.
10.3, 4, ^, 14, 25.
into which fold none are received, but such alone as will hearken to the only
voice of that only shepherd, and follow and go after him only, forsaking
and not knowing the voice of any stranger.

Whereby they will now conclude, that our great Master the Pope, with all the
right honorable Bishops and Prelates, (which have of them selves set forth
many goodly ordinances, John 10.1^
whereof Christ never knew word) should be those very strangers and
hirelings, which seek only the wool of the sheep, and have served God
feignedly, setting forth and teaching the commandments and doctrine of men:
yea, Mat. 15.9.
that they should be the thieves and murderers, that have not entered in at the
right door which is Jesus Christ, Ioh. 10.9.
but are crept in a wrong way, to steal, kill and destroy. And therefore do
they cut us clean off, notwithstanding what soever we allege of the Church
of God, and of her authority, power and woorthines. But they allege out of
the Prophet Jeremy, That al is but lies and deceyt whereupon we establish our
selves, crying with ye Jews, Iere. 7.4.
The Church of God, The Church of God, The Church of God. And hereupon do they
bring us forth and allege their Paul, saying, Ephesians. 2.20.
That the only true ground and foundation of the Church of God is established
only upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: so that who soever he
be that falls from the same, can not be accounted for a true member of
Christ's Church. And then they bring forth an Esaie out of a corner, and an
Ezechiel, an Oseas, with diverse other out of the old Testament, which they set
al together on a heap, and will defend themselves therewith, that the steadfast
succession and that long continued race of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and
Archbishops, are in no wise that right token, and that vncounterfeyt mark of
the Church, but ye only the sincere word of God: when as that is in our
mouths and in our hearts, and in the mouths and hearts of our children,
Esai. 59.21.
accompanied with the right use of the Sacraments, according to the perfect
ordeining of Christ Jesus, who is the only head of the Church and congregation:
in whom all people are jointly united, every one according to the measure of
the gift which he has received of the head, Ephe. 4.15, 16.
to the full growth of the whole body in love. Well, well: when they have done
all their prating, Colo. 1.18. and 2.19.
yet must this needs be true: That they are but Heretics, and smell after the
faggot, the good year and all, the cause why: For that they do not believe all
that the holy Church does believe, and without the Church is no salvation: but
all such as fall from her, must be burnt like fagottes: for to that end have we
a plain text of Scripture, which says thus: John 15.6. which witness is to
this purpose set forth of John Audre as Panormitanus, Hostiensis, Bernardus
Lutzenburgen. in the 4. book of the Heretics in the 5. part, and by other more
Catholic wr^ters.
Who soever does not abide in me, shall be cast out of the vineyarde, as a
branche, and there wither: and men gather those branches, and cast them in the
fire, and burn them.

And this same is apparent out of the second point of this Epistle now
following: Whereas Gentianus does openly confess, that at al times and for
ever, there have bin some men which have held the same opinions, and set forth
the like learning, that these Lutheranes and Huguenotes do now follow. But he
answers the matter thus: That such have always been banished and cursed for
heretics: and all this is very true. John Patriarch of Constantinople.
For ever since that John the Archfather, Patriarch of Constantinople, began to
take upon him to be the universal Bishop of all Bishops within Christendom:
which attempt the Pope of Rome did in the beginning stoutly withstand: and
that then afterward Boniface the third did obtain that title for him self,
Bonifac^us ^. the first head of holy Church. Phocas.
and was by the Emperor Phocas declared Chief or superior Bishop over all
Christendom, and ordained the head of the Church: which thing was brought to
pass in the year of our Lord 680. From that time forward (I say) there have
always been many factious and busy fellows stirring abroad, which as well
by writing, as preaching, have withstoode the Pope, and condemned his doctrine,
decrees and ordinances, even by the Scripture: yea, and blazed and set him
self forth for an Antichrist, Popes acco^^^^ for Antichrists
alleging (even as our Heretics now do) that men ought to repose themselves
and buyld upon the sincere word of God only: and further, to hold and esteem
all ordinances of the Popes (not agreeing with the Scripture) for deuilishe
doctrine. But, as before is declared, such have always bin reputed and
condemned for Heretics. Therefore, to the end that no man shall think this
to be now a new dealing of the holy Church, to condemn these Lutheranes and
Huguenotes for Heretics: and likewise, that no man shall suppose, that this
their doctrine and Articles, which they set forth are first grown in their
gardens: I will theref^^e make here a brief discourse of such, as have here
before set forth these matters, as well by mouth, as by writing, to make it
plainly appear to the world, that there is not one Article which they bring
forth, but i^ has been long before ^et a b^^che openly* and that the holy
Church of Rome has both punished, and condemned it for heresy.

Then to begin withal, it is plain, that the Greeks have always da^pe^ly
withstoode the holy Pope of Rome, The Greeks against the Pope of Rome.
and would never acknowledge him neither for Pope, nor for the head of the
Church: like as yet even in these days they do not: in so much as in the year
of our Lord 1328. at which time Pope John the 23. had written very wisely and
sharply, to the Greeks, Johannes the 23. pope.
and by many words defended the cause, That first there was but one only
Church, whereof he ought to be the head, under whom all Christendom ought to
submit them selves: they did again send him this answer which follows. The
Greeks do answer pope John. This does John Man-deuil write of in his 7. book.


We believe verily, that thine authority is great, over thine own subjects:
yet we can not well bear with thy loftines, and unmeasurable pride: neither
allow thy insatiable covetousness. Therefore the devil be with thee, for God
is with us.

Notwithstanding that some of their Ambassadors did in the Council of
Ferrara, in the time of Pope Eugenius 4. agree thereunto: E^genius 4
but without consent or commission of their Church, which did afterward call
back, and adnihilate the same. But long before that time, not only the common
people of the Greeks, but the Emperors them selves likewise, were adversaries
to the Pope of Rome: about the setting up and praying to Images. For about the
year of our Lord 730. the Emperors Constantine 5. and 6. and Leo Isaurus,
Constanti^us. Leo.
did with full advise and consent of the Council, as well out of the
Scripture, as of the ancient Fathers, conclude:

That men should in no wise, for the service of God, Images forbidden and
despised.
neither set up, nor pray to any Images: but did likewise utterly break down
and destroy al Images before made and set up.

The cause wherefore the Popes did divide the Empire
For which cause the Popes of Rome did conceive such malice and hatred against
them, that from thence forth, they sought al manner of means and ways to
divide and overthrow the Emperial state: like as in continuance of time they
brought it so to pass. And likewise, not only the Greeks, The Greeks and the
Germans did withstand the forbidding of priests to marie, ^il Boniface 8.
did set it up by force. Berthramus
but the Germans also, did long time withstand the forbidding of Priests to
marry, till at length the Popes (and that specially Bonifacius 8.) did by
maine force bring it to pass, and establishe the same.

In the year 840. one Berthrame, a stout and a learned man, rose up, who did
manfully withstand the Romish doctrine, as touching their Transubstantiation,
dedicating to Charles the French King, brother of Lothorius, a notorious book
made for that purpose: and did likewise in an other book confirmed by the
Scriptures, Nota.
and strongly defended by the holy Fathers, set forth the doctrine of
Predestination, which these Heretics do now so earnestly stand upon. And
about the year 869. did Johannes Scotus follow him, Io. Scotus.
writing against Transubstantiation, Bere^garius.
even as Beringarius about the year 839. had done the like. And in ye year of
our Lord 964. Huldricus Bishop of Auxburge.
Huldrike Bishop of Auxburge, by his writing revoked again the said
commandment of forbidding Priests to marry. After whom, about the year
1240. Bernard started up, Bernardus.
who wrote very much of Predestination, and against Freewill: nothing unlike
the doctrine of the Lutheranes and Huguenotes: yea, and did very stoutly strive
against the Priests and Prelates, calling them, The servants of Antichrist:
and making of the Prelates, Pilates. Johannes Sarisburien.
Whom in the year 1157. Johannes of Sarisburie did follow, and wrote a book
called Obiurgium Clericorum: and another named Polycraticus: wherein he does
pull the whole Clergy vengeably over the coals, and sets them out for
Phariseis and false teachers: calling the Pope, Antichrist: and Rome, The hoore
of Babylon. And likewise a little before that, had Arnolde the Bishop of Brixen
set up earnestly against the Priests, denying flatly, that the sword of
government should any whit apperteyne unto them: yea, even at the same time
was there one Peter Bloix, Petrus Bloix.
which wrote openly thus:

That Rome was the right Babylon, whereof S. John did prophecy: and that the
Officialles of the Romish Court were deuilish Griphines: Deuilish Griphines.
and the Priests, very Calves of Bethel, Baals Priests, Aegyptiacal idols:
and that every thing was to be sold at Rome for money.

About the same time in the year 1160. started up in France a quick fellow,
and a worshipful Burgess of the Town of Lions, named Petrus Valdo, Petrus
Valdo.
who having studied the Scriptures very diligently, began to set up a new
doctrine, which did hit as just upon the doctrine of these Huguenotes, as might
be. He left many Disciples after him, in so much that a remnant is remaining
yet to this day. After that came Petrus de Vinea, Petrus de Vinea.
Chauncelour to the Emperor Frederike 2. and was in the year 1240. who went
about likewise to rob our holy father the Pope of his entitled authority
and jurisdiction, ray^ing upon him out of measure. And after came Guilielmus de
sancto Amore, Guilielmus de sancto Amore.
in the year 1260. who laid load exceedingly upon the Prelates, Monks, and
Friars: and did reckon them for subjects of Antichrist. Whose opinions were
after in the year 1275. by one Laurence an English Doctor at Paris, stoutly
defended and confirmed. Again, in the year 1306. came abroad one Petrus
Cassiodorus, a Gentleman, Petrus Cass.
and very well learned: who did altogether spil the potage. For his writing and
doctrine was, even as though he had studied all the days of his life in the
books of Luther and Calvin: and he made of the Pope a Nabuchodonosor. After
that, in the year 1314. did follow one Dulsimus of Nauarra. Dulsimus.
And in the year 1315. Arnoldus de villa Noua, who carried water all over one
bridge. And at last, in ye year 1383. came forth the great Archeheretike John
Wiclef, John VViclef.
who threw all the spindles of the holy Church of Rome in the ashes: for he was
a natural Zwinglian, or Caluinist: and of him sproong up John Hus, John Hus.
in the year 1405. which was the father of all Lutheranes. He it was which
came with Hieronymus of Prage to ye Counsel of Constance, Hieronym. de Praga.
there to defend his doctrine by scripture: but there he was taught a new
lesson: for in place of disputation, they were both burnt at a stake. And yet
that notwithstanding, their doctrine ever since that time has been accepted in
many places: and by many stout fellows confirmed. Like as there was one
Nicholaus Clemangis, Nicholaus Clemangis.
a Doctor of Paris, and Bishop of Bayone in France: Oldecastell, Lord Cobham,
Oldecastell.
and Knight of the order of the Garter: and within a little while after, one
William Wight in England: VVight.
and Paul Crawe, Paul Cravv
with many other, in the country of Rome, Hieronymus Sauanerola in Italy,
Hieronym. Sauanerol^
and a number of other more: all which yet were by the Church of Rome banished
and condemned for heretics: yea, and where they could be gotten, put to death.

In sum, all such, as at any time have taken upon them, to set forth any like
matter against the Church of Rome, have always been of the most holy Popes
banished and accursed, together with all them which would by any means
mainteyne or defend them. In so much, that Emperors and Kings: yea, whole
countries have (for withstanding the Pope) been excommunicated and condemned
for heretics: yea, and (which is of greater importance) one Okam, Okam and
Dante.
and Dante, good Catholic men, were by Pope Benedict 3. condemned for
Heretics: only because they did maintain, That Emperors hold their Empires
of God, and not of the Pope: and yet notwithstanding, that in all other matters
they did thoroughly profess the Popes doctrine.

I say nothing, what is meet to be done to these new Heretics, who go about
to root out and destroy the whole foundation of the Romish schole, and take
upon them to face us out with their Paul, with their Esaie and their Jeremy.
What a mischief! Do they not know that those fellows, whom they allege and
bring us forth, were likewise esteemed for Heretics, as well as they are
themselves? Yea* in so much that one of them was hanged, another was burnt, the
third cloven thorough the midst with a saw, the fourth set upon a wheel,
etc. And therefore are we no more moved for them, than for a bladder full of
beans.

For the holy Church of Rome would never accept their doctrine, but upon this
bargain and condition, to wit, that she might always apply the same as she
should think good, and as might best come to pass for her self: and that no
reuoking, nor reuolting, nor appellatio^ should be made against her doings: no,
nor that the name of Jesus Christ should in that case serve: like as shall by
us shortly in the part next following be declared at large. For this verily is
most true, that if our blessed Lord him self, would have followed the
exposition and co^mentarie, The Phariseis gloses.
which the Priests, Phariseis, and Doctors had at that time made upon the
holy Scriptures, in the name of the holy Church, he had never been crucified,
or hanged upon the cross. But because that he would (full wisely) go and
bring in new matters, and so set up a new reformation, according to the text
and doctrine of the Gospel (like as these Heretics go about now to do)
therefore did they deal so hardly with him. Notwithstanding that, now since
the holy Church of Rome has so finely handled and set forth this new religion
of Christ, and brought it unto such a trim frame, that now it is very gladly
received of every one in a manner: yea, and if it were so, that these Huguenotes
would accept the same, setting it forth likewise, surely, men would no more be
so ready to bring them to a stake, as heretofore they have done: yea, and
pretend hereafter to do.

But now, to come to our matter again, it is necessary, that we well
consider, and substantially declare, wherein the worthiness and authority of
the holy Church does specially consist: and what commandments, traditions, and
ordinances of the same, men must receive and accept, without all contradiction
or gainsaying.

And this (for so much as our Doctors of Louen are troubled with so many other
profounde and deep questions, that they have not the leisure to set out this
point effectually) is notwithstanding, the right ground and foundation of all
their building: yea, and is most needful to our salvation, and to the
extirpation and rooting out of all heresies. For it may be demanded, Whether
men shall hold for commandementes and traditions of the Church, only and
alone, that which is plainly set forth in the scriptures of the old and new
Testamentes? Or else, that which the old holy Fathers and Doctors, as
Augustine, Chrysostom, Hierome, and such like have left behind them in their
books and writings: or a great deal rather, that which has been concluded in
the holy Councels: either else that which the holy Popes of Rome have ordained
and enjoined: or, last of all, that which is scraped together out of the one
and the other: all laid in one Pastie, and baked in one Cake: and which is now
in our days observed in the holy Catholic Church of Rome?

The 2. Chapter. Whereby is declared that the Church, with her power and
authority, can not be enclosed with in the pales of the holy Scripture, but
that the Church may add to the Scripture, or take from it, what she thinks
good: and thereupon are many examples, and profou^d reasons alleged.
Upon this demand and profound proposition, very much might be said: The
church is above the Scripture.
but we will make short of the matter. And to begin withal, we conclude with
our Master Gentianus, and with the holy Counsel of Trent, That all they which
would enclose the power and the authority of the Church within the limits
and bounds of the holy Scripture, (as though the holy Catholic church of Rome
could read no further, than is spelled before to her in the Bible) are evil
and naughty heretics: yea, they are even of those Apostataes or backsliders,
to whom our Master Gentianus has written this his Epistle. For as touching
that, for the defense of their opinions, they bring forth, how it is written,
That none shall either put to it, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 12, 32. Pro. 30.6. Apo. 22.18.
This is thus set forth by Ioh. Ecki^s in his book called Enchiridium loco. com.
Guilielmus Blindasinus
or take from it one jot: that is simply spoken to the Jews Rabbines only:
so that they should not take any such thing upon them, as to change any words
of the text, and to correct Magnificat, like as they have presumed to do, as
me^ may see clearly and without a candle, by the honorable Bishop Guilielmus
Blindasinus, in his book entitled, De optimo genere interpretandi: w^^ch is
to say, Of the best and surest manner of expounding or interpreting. For therein
he does show very plainly, that al Hebrew textes of the Bible are falsified,
and embaced, by the Jews: yea, and the like is done to all the textes in
Greek of the new Testament, by some Heretics and enemies of the truth. So
that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor any of the old Doctors, should
have had the right Bible, but only our most holy Catholic Church of Rome,
which only was borne under the right Planet, and she alone has shot down the
Popingaie. Therefore must the text, before specified, be understood and meant
of the Jews alone, and of such like Heretics, which have so falsified the
textes of the Bible.

But you may not gather by this, that the holy Church of Rome is not licenced
to ad unto the Scripture, whatsoever she does mark to be yet lacking, and to
innouate, change, and remove all that tends not perfectly to her purpose. For
you see daily, that she does freely take upon her so to do: and furthermore,
she does punish for rank Heretics, all such as will not allow and accept her
adding, and changing, for the perfect word of God.

Men do know very well, The ten co^ma^deme^ts falsified. Look in the
Catechism or the su^me of our believe, printed at Antwerp by the commandment
of the King of Spain. Item, look in Thomas de Aquino upon the ten
commandments, and upon all the catholic doctors every one of them. All which
have clean left out the second commandment* in the lettting forth of the
ten commandments. Mat. 26.27. Man. 14.23. Lu. 22.17. 1. Cor. 11.2^ Mark,
touching this, the Master of the Sentences in the 4. book the 12. did. 4. ca.
And upon the Encherid. of Eckius in the book of Bernard of Luxen. In the 12.
part of the 4. book of Heretics, and in all other Catholic writers, who do
specially treat of this matter.
that she has finely conveyed out of the Register of ye ten commandments,
the second commandment, which was, That no Images should be made, nor
fashioned: because she did perceive, ye Heretics would allege ye same, to the
hinderance both of he and she Saints, which stand upon the altars in the
Church.

Furthermore, because men should not lack the number of ten, she has taken
the last commandment, speaking of desire, and divided the same in two, and so
made the tails agree just. And likewise, notwithstanding that our Lord Jesus
Christ had openly commanded, That the Communion should be ministered, as well
with wine as with bread: yet the holy Catholic Church of Rome, considering the
great danger which was therein, for that the wine might be spilt: or being in
the winter, freeze: or be turned into sour vinegar: if it should be long kept
in a Pixe, or little Sacrament Box. And especially, considering that when they
should have dealte the Wine abroad, the common people might have thought,
whether that the long racked body were without blood, or at the least, that
there could be no right and perfect Transubstantiation and changing of the
bread into the very body of our Lord Jesus Christ. In this behalf has she
considered further, and has been better advised than our Lord him self was:
and so has forbidden the lay people the Chalice. This stands in the third
book of the Councils, in the Council of Constance, in the 14. session.
For thus the Council of Constance does decree, That notwithstanding Christ,
after supper, did ordeyne and minister unto his Disciples the most blessed
Sacrament under both kinds of bread and of wine. And although that in the
first ancient Church of the faithful, the same was always used under both
kinds: nevertheless, seeing that the contrary use and custom is not without
great occasion, and willingly now put in ure, for the avoiding and eschewing of
some inconveniences and perilles: therefore shall all Patriarchs, Prelates,
Archbishops, and Bishops, curse and excommunicate all such, as shall take
upon them to minister unto the common people the Sacrament in that manner. And
so far forth as such do not turn and recant, then they to be delivered into
the hands of the temporal Judges to be by them arbitrally executed. And
hereupon did the President of ye Council, named Ostiensis, in the name of all
the whole College of Cardinals, and all other Bishops after him, answer,
Placet: which is to say, So it pleases us. So that it is evident, that the
ancient manner and good meaning of the Church may clean alter and utterly
abolish the commandment of Christ, and the old custom of the Apostles, and
their Disciples. We do likewise see, yt notwithstanding S. Paul (by inspiration
of the holy Ghost) commanded, 1. Cor. 7.9. and 2.
That whosoever did feel that weakness in him self, that he could not live
chaste, should take a wife: for that it was better to marry than to burn. And
he did (in a manner by special words) command the same to the Bishops and other
Ministers of Gods word, saying: That they should have their wives and their
children brought up in the fear of God. And further, That marriage is holy, 1.
Timo. 3.4. A charge to the bishops Heb. 13.4. 1. Tim. 3.4.
and commendable in all men: yea, he did esteem, The forbidding of marriage,
for a doctrine of devils.

And yet, all this notwithstanding, our holy Mother the Church of Rome, seeing
deeper into the matter: and for the eschewing of many inconveniences, This is
set forth in plain words in the Decrees of the Popes in the Chap. Proposuisti,
in the 82. did. and in the Chap. Decreminus the 22. did. and in the chap.
Tene. the 31. did. it is likewise in the book of the Sentences, in the 17.
did. ^n the 4 chap.
has expressly and slatly commanded Priests, Bishops, and al spiritual
persons, that they in no wise shall take upon them the state of Matrimony,
teaching precisely the contrary to the doctrine before specified, That the
state of Matrimony, is nothing else, but plain uncleanness, filthy, and
shameful: yea, a great and foul spot unto carnal copulation: In so much,
that such, as give themselves thereunto, cannot be acceptable before God: for
that it is written: Who so lives after the flesh, cannot be acceptable before
God: and have therefore concluded, that it is not decent, that a holy Priest,
who is the temple of the holy Ghost, should become a slave to the lying with a
woman, and to fleshly lust. Like as in the Popes decrees and Decretales is
specially set forth.

Moreover, touching the same point, it is concluded in the said Decrees, In
the 4. Epist. of Pope Cere. in the first book of councils fol. 422 col. 2. and
423.
That the doctrine of the holy Church, is now more perfect, than either the
doctrine of Jesus, the son of God, or of his Apostles, has been in times
past. For thus the text says, Before that the Gospel was corrected, amended,
and expounded, This stands even thus word for word in the book of Decrees in
the chap. Sors no^ est, causa. 26. quaest. 2.
there were many things permitted, which now, since the time is come, that
all the doctrine is made perfect, are clearly abolished and taken away, as
especially, notwithstanding that the marriage of Priests was neither by the
Law, by the Gospel, nor the doctrine of the Apostles, forbidden, yet has the
holy Church flatly forbidden the same.

We do likewise plainly see, that Jesus Christ has straightly forbidden,
Math. 5.32.19, 7. Mar. 10.4. Luke 16.18. 1. Cor. 7.10,
any dispe^sation for Matrimony, and has specially declared, That who soever
does leave his wife (except it be for adultery) and does marie another, is a
whooremonger.

Truly, if it were not that our holy mother the Catholic Church of Rome, had
full power and authority above Gods word, and above ye special commandment of
Christ: she would never have taken upon her to have changed nor put down this
marriage of priests.

Now let us further see, that the most holy and honorable Popes Julius,
Innocentius, and Colestinus, being with a great number of Bishops and Prelates
stately and iudicially assembled in ye holy Ghost, in S. Peter's church at Rome,
have concluded, judged, and pronounced, whatsoever Christ notwithstanding had
thereof spoken and said. That if so be there were any which were married
together, Christning breaks matrimony of the common and lay people.
and had christened the children at ye fount, the one of the other before
should be divorced: and the woman to have her marriage good restored back
again, and within a year after, it should be lawful for her to marie another
man: and for him to marry another woman.

Eue^ as our holy father ye pope of Rome, Deus dedit does openly testify in a
letter, Deus dedit.
which for a perpetual memory is written in the book of Councels, word for
word: and likewise entered in the Register of the Popes decrees and ordinances:
yet, over and besides this, In the chap. Peruenit, causa 31. quaest. 1.
the holy Church has concluded, that if any Nonne, Baggine sister, or other,
should marie a husband, the Bishop of that Diocese, where they dwelt, should
divorce them, Conc. Trib. the 6. chap. and in the decrees in the cap. Impu. and
in the ca. Si quis sacr. cause. 27. quaest. 1. In the chap. Hac ratione cau. 31.
qu. ^.
and cause the Nonne to return and take upon her again her vow of chastity.
Like as in Concilio Triburino, and by the Popes laws is concluded and
commanded. Out of the same authority has the foresaid holy Church likewise
concluded, That what woman soever after the decease of her first husband,
should marry again, she was an open and common harlotte, not regarding at
all that which S. Paul in his time had written directly to the contrary: Romans
7.2.3. 1. Cor. 7.9.28. 1. Tim. 5.14.
yea, had moreover straightly charged and commanded the young widows, That
unless they could well live a continent and chaste life, they should marie
again.

After this, did not S. Paul, or rather the spirit of God by the mouth of S.
Paul, directly forbid any strange language to be used in the Churches and
congregations, Strange languages in the Church.
ordained for the service of God: neither in prayer, nor in thanksgiving, nor
in singing, nor in prophesying? Yea, he did greatly rebuke the Corinthians for
so doing in their congregations. 1. Cor. 14. the whole chapter thorough.
And yet men plainly see, that the holy Church of Rome, does minister her
Masses, her Mattens and Euensong, prayers, and song, al in Latin: and some
times therewith does mingle, Greek and Hebrew words. In such sort as that,
not only the common people, but the Priests and Bishops likewise do not
understand it.

Yet will the holy Church have it so done, yea, and puniseth such as would
otherwise use it, like damned heretics. Like as out of Eckius, Piggius,
Hosius, E^lcius in his Encheiredion.
and other Catholic writers is manifest and plain to be seen. Figius in
libro cont. Hosius in a certain book which he set out of this matter only.
Then hereby of necessity must follow, that the Church has a full and
resolute power over the express word of God, above the commandment and
ordena^ce of Jesus Christ, and above all the scriptures of ye Prophets and
Apostles. But what need is it (I pray you) to bring so many and diverse
ensamples one by one, for the deference of this matter? Sithence we see
evidently, that she in all her devotions, Gods services, and ceremonies, does
alter the express words of the Scripture: yea, does openly and wilfully
ouertread it, even as though it were done in spite and anger of the holy
Scripture in the Bible.

For by the holy Scripture it is openly, and upon great pains Deu. 4.2.5
32.12.4, 8.13.32. Iere. 11.4.8. Esai. 1.12.2^.13. Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.20, 21, 22,
23. Exodus 20.4 5.22. Deu. 12.8.9 Leuit. 26.1 Deuteronomy. 4. whole thorough. Deuteronomy.
16^22 Esai. 40.41 42. whole through. Iere. 10. Abacuk. 2. Ps. 115. and in other
innumerable places.
earnestly forbidden, That in the serving of God, first no commandments,
traditions, nor devises of men shall be used, nor take any place, but to rest
wholly and only upon the special commandments of God, and to do thereafter:
Finally, to turn neither to the right hand or to the left.

Secondarily, not to make or have any Image or similitude* carved or molten,
nor shall use the shape or likeness of any such, thereby to show or set
forth the spiritual form and incorporable majesty of God, by earthly things,
and dumb and dead creatures.

Thirdely, that no man shall use any witchcraft, sorcerie, 1. John. 5.21 Leui.
19.26 De^t. 18.10, 11.
or enchantment of any creature, to the intent to give to the creatures that
be senseless and void of life, any might or worthiness, other then by
nature is prescribed unto them. Which thing is likewise by all Councels and
Synodes, as well Judicial as Canonical, openly and straytelie forbidden.

Here against (notwithstanding) has it pleased our dearly beloved mother,
Con. Laodicen ca 30 Con. Cart. cap. 39. cap. Non oportet. cap. Auguris. cause.
26 quaest. 5. L. Vnica co. de thesauris lib. 10 cap. illos. 26. quaest. 2.
the holy Church of Rome, to use her full and inestimable authority and power,
and so without having any respect at all to that which is above written, has
(to begin withal) set up a certain kind of serving of God, which is
altogether contrary to the good opinions, traditions, and ordinances of all
men. For besides that the blessed Mass, is by diverse Popes, Cardinals, and
Bishops, at sundry times, and in sundry places, raked up in a huge heap, and
with many pieces and patches of men's devises, like to a beggars cloak sowed
together besides so many traditions of idle heads, which the holy Church of
Rome has received for a perfect serving of God: as fasting days, years of
grace, differences and diversities of days, of meats, of clothing,
consecrating of Churches, of altars, of candles, pilgrimages, Letanies,
Kyrieelesons, Images, Processions, holy ashes, holy Paceegges, and flanes,
palms and palm boughs, Albes, Copes, Maniples, Vestme^ts, Miters, Staves,
fools hoods, Shelles, and Belles, Paxes, licking of rotten bones, carrying of
the Pixe about, and praying to a lump of doaw, fasting upon certain special
days, creeping upon knees before a Cross of wood, buying of Bulls and
pardons, mumbling of Pater nosters and Aue Mary's, by tale, upon a pair of
Beads, before a dumb image, shauing of crown and beard, to give blessing
with two fingers: and ten thousand more such prankes.

Yet, above al, this is by the holy Church (as it were in spite of God and his
word) ordained, That every man being a good Catholic, may appoint and choose
for himself a Saint and patron, erect a new image, and specially build a new
chapel, and an altar, set up a new and particular religion, wear a peculiar
or special kind of garment, assume and take a several use of meats and
ceremonies: finally, and to conclude, do what soever his good meaning and
intent persuadeth him unto.

Secondarily, it is so, that our dear mother will not set up any serving of
God, but she must of necessity have thereunto all sorts of images, as well
carved as painted: and worship the same by kneeling and praying with burning of
candles, with kissing and licking, with pilgrimages, and other such like
devotions. And in setting up the said images in all high ways, in all
streets, and in all corners, even as for an evident token and protestation,
that they neither do once think upon Gods commandment set forth in the holy
Scripture, neither will be subject or bound to the same.

Thirdly, all her divine service, Coniuring.
all her ceremonies and devotions, and all her holiness, is grounded in
co^iuring of creatures, and worshipping the same: and in flat sorcerie and
witchcraft, in working whereof they speak unto the dumb creatures, as though
they had as much understanding as the Priests themselves, and so do abuse the
blessed name of God, and the textes of the holy Scripture openly, and without
respect.

The water is by them exorcised or coniured by these words: This coniuratio^
you shall find word for word in the Mass book.
I conjure thee thou creature of water: In the name of the father, the son,
and the holy ghost, to the end thou become a chosen water to take away all the
power of the devil, and that thou may drive away and confound the devil
him self with all his wicked Angels, etc.

The oil and the balm are coniured and bewitched, with much mumbling, blown
upon with many breathings, with three times crying, All hail holy oil, three
times, All hail holy annoyntment, and three times, All hail holy baulme, And
then it is kept for a most holy thing in a fine vessel therefore made, and so
carried along the streets by the Priests, with great devotion and prayer.

The salt is coniured in this manner: I do conjure thee thou creature of salt,
More coniurations.
by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, and by the same God,
which commanded Helias to cast thee into the water, to take away the
vnwholesomnesse of the water, that thou may become an exorcised or coniured
salt, Nota.
to the salvation of the faithful, and to work the preservation both of body
and soul, to all them which shall enjoy thee: and that all the subtlety,
wiliness, and filthy intents of the Devil: and that all wicked spirits may
flee from that place where thou art scattered and cast abroad. And then is this
salt mingled with the foresaid water, to be the right purger and sanctifier of
the people, wherethrough all the power and might of the devil is withstood,
and our daily sins therewith finely cleansed.

Now, besides all this, she does exorcise and conjure certain herbs, upon
certain days, to the health both of body and soul, and to drive away all
dangerous hurt, all devilish bewitching, all pestilence, vnwholsomnesse, and
corruption of the air. She does conjure and exorcise the candles, the wax
and the tallow, to the qualifying and extinguishment of thunder and lightening.

Also she does exorcise and conjure beads of wood, of stone, of corrall, and of
all other stuff: whereby they receive great power against sin, the devil
and hell. And (which is more) she does not let these things be thus coniured
by the Pope and Priests only, but the Pope may (whenever it shall please
him) give the like power and authority, to whom soever he will, be it man or
woman. This may well appear and be perceived of all men, by the example of a
worthy matrone of Spain called Senora Maria Osorio, Senora Maria Osorio.
who did obtain of Pope Paul 3. license and power, for her self and twelve
of her blood, to conjure and holowe such beads: and these beads were of this
might, that whenever any person did say a Pater noster thereupon, although it
were done without devotion, or once thinking of the matter: yet did they
thereby obtain forgiveness of the third part of their sins. And for this
cause were the balls of these beads made of Copper, and set in the Church,
where was set out by them in print, their full might, with all their properties
and nature, as is before declared: so as at this day men may openly see by the
common people, which come and say their Pater nosters upon their beads there,
holding their hands upon those balls, that thereby they may obtain the
forgiveness of their sins.

Now, over and above all this, Christning and coniuring of Belles.
the Belles are not only coniured and hallowed, but are also baptized: and
have appointed for them Godfathers, which hold the rope (wherewith they are
tied) in their hands, and do answer and say, Amen, Bonifa. 8. C. alma matter
F. adijcimus, de senten in sexto And Gregory 9. Ea permittim, in decreta. 4 de
Sententia excommunicat. Peruse like wise Philippum Francum upon the said Cant.
Alma matter. F. adijcimus nu. 4. and other Canonists. Caldar. in tract de
interdictis. in par. un. ^7 John Called. Albert. de Rosat. in dictionario sup^r
verbo Campane.
to that which the Suffragane or Bishop does speak or demand of the Bell. And
then they put a new cote or garment upon the Bell, and so conjure it, to the
driving away of all the power, craft, and subtlety of the devil, and to the
benefit and profit of the souls of them that be dead (specially, if they
be rich, and can pay the Sexton well:) and for many other like things. In so
much that the Belles are so holy, that so long as the Church or the people are
(upon any occasion) excommunicate, they may not be rong. Like as by Pope
Bonifacius 8. and Gregory 9. is manifestly ordained: although yet it is (of
special grace) permitted, to toll the Aue Maria, as Johannes Caldarinus has
trimly written.

And this (I assure you) is no small matter. For Doctor Albericus de Rosato
does declare, that the religious had amongst themselves at Rome, a long and
weighty dissension, whereupon great processes were mainteyned, Processes for
the knolling of Aue Maria.
and all about this: namely, which of all the Orders should first knolle the
Aue Maria in the morning* which processes did long endure, till at the last it
was concluded, and adjudged, that they which were first up, should first knoll.
Even after the manner of kine, who always let the foremost go before, and the last
follow after. Why (I pray you,) has it not been seen, that the Spaniardes
(which are the first sweet and most dear children of the holy Church of Rome,
coming now of late to Groninghen in Friseland, did there christen, conjure,
and hallow their Ensigns: Christning of ensigns.
naming one Barbara, another Katharine, etc. I say nothing, how they conjure
the devil out of young children, which are brought to be christened: even as
though the young children (to whom Christ does witness the kingdom of heaven
to belong, and be those which with their fathers are contained under Gods
promises, and made clean by the blood of Jesus Christ) were possessed with the
Devil.

The Mass (I pray you) what is it, but a plain coniuring, sorcerie, or
witchcraft* Wherein the bread and the wine, which are but dumb creatures, are
(by the breathing of the Priest, and the power of five words) converted into
flesh and blood. So that it is most apparaunt, that all her Religion, all her
divine Service, and ceremonies, are full of witchcraft, sorcerie, and
coniuring: full of ydolatrie, setting up of Images, and giving them
worship, full of men's traditions, institutions, and devises: and in
conclusion, full of all that, which by the holy scripture is openly reproved,
and plainly forbidden. So that (verelie) these Heretics must needs be very
blind, if they do not well perceive, that the power, the ordinance, and
authority of the holy Church of Rome, neither can, nor will be shut in, nor
hedged about, with the pales and walls of the holy Scripture. For, see here:
this is that, which the steadfast pillar of the Theology of Louen, Iodocus
Tiletanus himself has openly written: Iodocus Tiletanus not contented with
the Gospel.


We are not satisfied (says he) with that which the Apostles or the Gospel
do declare: but we say, that as well before as after, there are diverse
matters of importance, and weight accepted and received, In his book written
against the confession of the preachers of Antwerpe.
out of a doctrine which is no where set forth in writing. For we do bless the
water, wherewith we baptize, and the oil, wherewith we anoint: yea, and
besides that, him that is christened. And (I pray you) out of what scripture
have we learned the same? Have we it out of a secret and unwritten ordinance?
And further. What Scripture has taught us to grease with oil? Yea, (I pray
you) from whence comes it, that we do dippe the child three times in the
water? Does it not come out of this hidden and vndisclosed doctrine, which our
forefathers have received closely, without any curiosity: and do observe it
still, etc?

But what need have I to travel much for the establishing hereof: seeing
there is a general rule in the holy Church of Rome, That the Pope may
franklye This is also specified* in ^ecisionibus rote, in decisio. 1. number. 3.
in nouis and Anton. Maria in addit. 1 decis. rote nouas de Bigamis nu^ ^. and
is likewise defended by the Iurist Ca^olo ruino in cons. 109. number. 1 in the 5.
book, and of Sigismu^dus Neapolitanus.
ordeyne and command contrary to the writing, doctrine and ordinance of the
Apostle Paul? Considering likewise in especial, that (as Eckius in Encherid.
Locorum communi^, in the chap. Ecclesia.
Eckius has set down) Christ did never command his Apostles to write: but
to preach. True it is that Paul does defend, saying: 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.
That the blessed word of God is set forth, and is sufficient to instruct,
to teach, to punish, to amend: yea, and wholly apt, and sufficient, to make
men wise enough for their salvation, and to instruct them sufficientlye to all
good works. And that, who soever shall teach any other Gospel, than that
which he has taught, (though he were an Angel from heaven,) is accursed. 1.
Gal. 8.9.
But all that must be understood of the time, wherein he was, whilst the
Church was yet in her infancy or childehoode, and lay in the cradle. For it
was yet necessary for her then, to drink such milk, Cap so^s. non est. 26.
qu^st 2.
being yet unable to digest the strong and gross meats of holy Prelates and
Doctors of the holy Church of Rome: For that her stomache was yet too weak
and quasie.

And in effect, men do clearly see, that notwithstanding the saying of Paul,
That in Christ Jesus, Col. 2.2.3.4 5.6.7.8.9.10. and 20.21.22.
and in the knoweledge of him, all the treasure of wisdom and knowledge lies
hid: so as the faithful ought not to receive any institutions, or doctrine
of men. Yet a long time after the Apostles, yea, above seven or eight hundred
years after their decease, our mother the holy Catholic Church has found
out a wonderful and unspeakable new hoorde of wisdom and knowledge, through
which a man may come to perfect justification, and to an angelical life: and
above that get in store a heap of deseruings, and good works, to help a
good friend withal at a pinche: and yet to release a dozen or twain of
silly souls out of Purgatory. And these be they especially: The rules or
(...), Domini^ke, (...), and Barnarde.
The holy order, and full perfection of Saint Fraunces, Saint Dominicke, Saint
Barnarde, Saint William, and many more of the same stamp: which sort men knew
not to speak in the Apostles time, when men were satisfied with the pure and
unmingled milk of God his word, 1. Pet. 2.2. John. 14.29 John. 15.15. This
is specially written in the 5. book (...) de^re. in the Bull of Pope Nicholas
4. beginning exiit qui senec his. 1. de verborum signis.
like new borne children (as Peter does bear witness:) yea, for these rich
treasures were not revealed to Jesus Christ him self, who taught nothing but
that which he had received out of the bosom of his father: and the same did
he deliver fully and wholly over to his Apostles. But of this could he say
nothing: for this was too dainty a dishe for his mouth, and therefore must be
kept for the last course, against the time that the holy fathers, of full
perfection, and Gods dear friends Saint Fraunces, This stands plainly in
their Legends* and in the book made of the might of our Lady Rosa Crans which
Alanus did make by the inspiration of Marie the Egyptian or of Egypt.
Saint Dominicke, Saint Barnarde, and Saint Alane, (who had sucked our blessed
Ladies breasts, as well as Christ him self, and walked about the town with her
as the bridegroom with his bride) should appear. For what needs much
rehearsal of so many evident visions, which happened to that holy woman
Briget? Or of the notable miracle of the wild Marie Egyptian? who ran
through woodde and wilderness, over hills and dales, stark naked like a
wild beast? Or of the goodly and pleasant orders of Saint Clara: the which
our dear mother the holy Church has received for very precious Canticles,
with great triumph. Well, go to now, read the whole Bible over and over, and
I will be bound to give the Theologians or divines of Louen, a pottle of
wine, to make merry withal, if they ca^ find out there, that either Christ, or
his Apostles, did ever know, that who soever does die in a Gray friars cote,
shall neither come in Purgatory, To die in a gray friars habit.
nor in Hell. And yet notwithstanding, not only Radulphus Agricola, Albertus
Pius, the Prince of Carpi, and Pope Martinus, would die in such an habit, and
be buried in it: but likewise, many other Kings, Dukes, Earls, and Barons: as
in the book of the conformities of Saint Francis is specified, and with the
Popes Bulls established: Conformiti^ies.
Conformita. 83. Or likewise, what knew they, that he that should die in a
white Friars Scapularie, should be saved? like as our blessed Lady did
declare to Simon Stock. In hoc moriens saluabitur. That is to say, Who dies
herein, shall be saved. Like as in every place in their Churches is painted
forth. Or what knew they, that Alanus should make the Rosarie of our Lady,
which must be esteemed as the Gospel? like as the good Catholic men
Tarthemius and Leander have written and witnessed.

Well, now do we not plainly see, that the holy Church of Rome has but a
while ago found out marvelous holiness of this new Religion of the
Jesuits, never heard of before: Jesuits.
who have found out a way of full perfection, which neither prophet, nor Apostle
could never spy out before? For this was found out first in the year of our
Lord 1537. by a Spaniard, borne in Biskay named Don Egnatio Leguiola, Egnatius
Leguiola.
who with twelve companions, whom he named to be his Apostles, went up to Rome,
and from thence to Venice, prete^ding to go on fourth to Heirusalem: but
finding at Venice no shipping ready, he returned back again to the holy
city of Rome: where as this costly treasure was then marueilously published
and set abroad. Notwithstanding that, a little while before, to wit, in the
year 1523. one John Peter Guarraffa, Garaffa.
then Bishop of Quietta, had found out the stamp or pattern of the same: who
afterward coming to be Pope him self, did set forth, and by his Bulls
established this order of Guiettens, for the most pure order: In so much that,
all those which follow this order, do far pass all Angels in holiness.
This is specially written in the 5. book Sacri De^re in the Bull of pope
Nicholas 4 beginning: Exi^t qui semina^. Nec his quis. ^. de ve^b. signi^.


I let alone Angels, for they do far exceed Saint Frances, to whom the
Angels are nothing to be compared: as by the holy Church is judged and
determined, according to the setting forth of his Vineyard, and golden
Legende. And for that he did live a much more perfect life, than Christ him
self as the Decretalles do specify.

And yet are there but three vows to make in the order of S. Frauncis, to
wit, Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity. But in this new order of Iesuiten
or Guietine^, over and besides these three vows, before named, they profess
yet a fourth vow, (to the end to give a pushe far beyond all other
Religions) which is: That they are bound, and shall at all times be ready, to
run and trudge from one country into an other, like poor pedlers and
rogues, to what part soever it shall please the holy father the Pope of Rome to
send them: yea, although it were even to the worlds end: like as men may see
and know, that they are already run to the Indians, and Pir^ue, therewith
to merit heaven.

Yet, besides this, the holy Church has of late found out another new
perfect order, whereof neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever once dream:
and it is named Pauline, Pauline. Gastaline.
or Gastaline, which was first found out, about the year of our Lord, 1537.
by a certain Countess of Mantua in Italy, called Ghastalia, by the good
counsel and instruction of that holy Monk, brother Baptiste of Cremona, the
Preacher of his order: Which religion does contain a new way and mean,
whereby a man may mortify him self and his fleshly lusts: and thus it went
to work: There was an old wife called Iulia, which would take ye young men and
maids and (after that they had been by making proof and skirmishing a while,
Iulia causes the young men and maidens to lie in one bed together.
well trained up) lay them then together in a bed. And for that they should
not one byte another, nor kick backewardes with their heels, she did lay a
Crucifixe between them, to keep them asunder: and there must they set foot
to foot, and strive so long, till they had wholly mortified their flesh. And
hear now what a miracle chanced:

It happened so, that there was an other old wife at Venice, (...) old wife of
Venice.
which had a great mind to preasse and train up young men to this kind of
war: who wrought a trim feate, whereby she did greatly strenghthen this
perfect Angelical holiness. For she caused two great books to be made, both of
equal bigness, and like fashion: whereof the one was a Bible, A subtle fashion
of a Bible.
and the other was hollow wtin, as a little chist, made in all points like a
book, with claspes and al, which she filled with flat bottles full of Malmesie,
and with good fine Marchpanes, which she her self made, of the brawne of
Capons and Partridges, with Sugar and Almondes (like a lickerous Lady) and
then gather into a pretty Cell, with these two books, and there sat prounking
and tarying alone in her devout contemplations, sometime five or six days
together, praying for her Champions, and reading full devoutly till ye bible
was quite empty: not eating or drinking any thing else all that while. Was
not that well fasted? And was not such a wonderful miracle sufficient to
establishe the strength and worthiness of this new religion of Champions?
Truth it is, that she was at the last (when the matter was known) banished
out of Venice: but that was not done for her holiness, but specially, because
there were a great many of amorous letters found about her, which were of
great importance. For else (alas) what could have been said to her heavy and
pitiful penance, whereof the like is daily done? You may see them sometimes in
Italy go along the streets, with a great rope about their necks, as if
they were dropped down from the gallows: and sometimes they wear a sawsige
or a swines pudding in place of a silver or golden chain. Is not that
sufficient, to deserve heaven by?

But, if I should go about to express every particular religion alone, which
our mother the holy Church has found out, beside the Scriptures: I should
have work for this seven years. Wherefore, it is not needful. For all good
Catholic men do know well enough, that our holy fathers the Popes have
sufficient authority, to bring in and establish new religions and rules of
perfection, as many as it shall please them: although it be plain, that the
whole Scriptures never make mention of any such: as it is most evident, by so
many diverse orders and religions, which have been by their holiness set up,
brought in, and established. As, there are the orders of the Basilians,
Augustinians, Benedictines, Names of diverse orders of religion.
Dominicanes, or Iacobines, Carthusians, Carmelites, or Lady brothers,
Seruitours or Servants, Graie Friars, Obseruantes, Conuentuales,
Penitentiaries, Minimers, Of men's cloisters.
Capucines, Mendicantes, Cluinares, Camaldulenses, Valembrosences,
Cisterienses, Barnardines, Coelestines, Gibertenenses, Milicenses,
Castellenses, Burfaldenses, Mountoliuetes, Castinenses, Arme^tes, Regulars,
Premo^stratenses, Whilliamites, Lateranes, Georgians, Iohannians, Trinitaries,
Indians, Ambrosia^s, Magdalines or Lazarines, red Augustins, Helenians,
Sophians, Visitensers, Wincesbaterers, Gregorians, Constantinopolitanes,
Columbins, Crossed brethren, Starred brethren, Fratres Clauoru^, Blackfriers,
Smocked friars: Btethre^ of the holy Sepulcher, Brethren of the vale of
Iosaphat, Brethren of S. Joseph, of S. Rusius, and seven thousand like. Of
which number the most part have their mates and companions in the women
Cloisters: of which some be Bagghines, other close Nonnes: Orders and cloisters
of women.
other called Sisters, and ye fourth are called Chanonesses: who have likewise
their Patronesses, as S. Clare, S. Bridgit, S. Lucia, S. Agnes, S. Marie
Magdalene, S. Valdrud, etc. All which have been received and established by our
holy fathers the Popes, for good and holy.

Over and above these, they have ordained many sundry Heremitages and orders
of Heremits, as of S. Anthony, of S. Hilarie, of S. Makarius, S. Theon, S.
Frontinian, S. Horus, S. Helenus, S. Appellomius, S. Paul the Hermit, S.
Martarius, S. Piamo^tius, S. Castomianus, and many more of the like rabie. Now
are there more added to these, ye holy Giides or Confraternities, as The
fraternities of S. Roche, of S. Hubright, of S. Sebastian, of S. Coronne,
Brotherhoods.
which go cladde in blew: of S. Anthony, in black: of S. Martin in white: of
S. Dominick, in black, etc. And to the end that the heritage should not be
without Rutters or Pensionars, they have appointed certain new religious
orders of holy Knights likewise: such as are the knights of the Rodes, or of
Malta, Dutch Knights, the Templers, Knight brethren.
the Knights of S. James, our Lady Knights, Saint Georges knights, knights of
Jerusalem, Calitrauenses, Montenienses, Gartarienses, etc. But truly, I had
need of vi. hundred tongues and two hundred pens, and a mouth of steel, with
an iron voice, if I should declare all the diversities of orders and religions,
which our holy fathers ye Popes have set up, not only without, but directly
against ye holy Scripture: and yet without naming of the Popes themselves, or
their Cardinals, Prelates, Archbishops, Bishops, Metropolitanes, Suffraganes,
Archdeacons, Deacons, and such like strange beasts, whereof neither Prophet
nor Apostle ever heard.

Nay, I dare say, that if the Apostles had but once seen, or heard, the
hundred part of these new religious orders and professions named, they would
have been afraid of them. For, seeing that S. Paul could not suffer, that
amongst the Congregation of the Corinthians, some should call them selves the
Disciples of Peter, other of Paul, the third of Apollo: how would he then
have been afraid, and out of quiet, when he should have seen or heard, of
such an innumerable company of new and diverse names, professions, religions,
Gods services, and rules of perfection: whereof some were clad and apparelled
in black, some in white, some in gray, some in green, some in blewe, some in
red, some in furs, and in all manner of diverse colors: and every one of them
did esteem his own order and rules for the best, and most worthy to be
regarded. He would surely have thought him self to have been come into a new
world. Therefore it is a great folly, that men will found them selves only
upon that, which the Apostles have taught or written: considering that the
world is now changed, and that the holy Church has found out and established
new religions, new commandments, and new articles of our faith, whereof the
Apostles never knew. For otherwise (believe me) if nothing else were esteemed
but the bare Scriptures and writings of the Prophets and Apostles, then should
all the Decrees and Decretalles, all good holy Ordinances of the Church of
Rome, all the goodly Councelles which have been kept and holden, by the order
and commandment of the Popes: yea, all the before specified orders and
religion of Friars and No^nes, the Heremites, Gildes and Knighthoods, be
utterly overthrown: yea, all their merits and supererogations, would not be
worth an Oaten cake, if men should begin to esteem and accept the holy
Scripture alone, for a true and sufficient rule and direction: and then should
Luther have done well, when he caused the decrees and de^retals to be burnt.

O, no, truly, We must above all maintain those in reputation: yea, even in
greater estimation, It is sin against the holy Ghost, to do any thing
against the Popes decrees.
than the word of God it self: for who soever does sin against the word of
God, his sins may be forgiven him: but he that does sin against the
Decrees of the Pope, does sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore his
offense shall never be forgiven him.

Therefore, it is undoubtedly a great oversight of them, that would compass
and pale in the holy Church with the bounds of the holy Scripture, seeing she
may step or leap over it with a staff, or without any fear: and as often
as ever she will.

Yet it is true, that sometimes she does help her self with the scripture:
for if there were no scripture, how should one know whether there must be a
Church or no: or whereby should a man discern ye true church of God from the
church of Antichrist? Yet does she always rule the Scripture, and makes
thereupon such a gloss, as best serves her turn: yea, that is more, she is
the very occasion that any belief or credit is given to the scripture: as is
pleasantly set forth by the holy and right honorable Bishop Guilielmus
Blindasinus, in his book called Panoplia: Johannes Blindasinus
wherein he concludes with strong and invincible reasons, That me^ were not
bound to believe the word of God, nor to be subject unto it, if it were not,
that the holy Church has so commanded. For, what do we think, yt the word of
God is so strong of it self, as to publishe such things thorough the power of
the holy Ghost, if the Church of Rome did not first give her verdicte in the
matter? No marie, I warant you: for so the Heretics do understand it. For
these Heretics will bring the church of God in subjection under the scripture:
and therefore do they allege out of Jeremy, That the word of God is like a
fire, Iere. 23.29.
and like a hammer, which breaks stones in pieces: and that it is lively,
mighty, Hebr. 4.22.
and sharper than a two edged sword, and goes through even to ye soul, and to
the sinews and joints, and is a searcher of the thoughts and intentes of the
heart: and therefore (say they) it has no need of any man's witness, as Christ
him self has said: but that those which do ye will of the father, John 5.34.
John 7.19.
shall lightly know (by inspiration of ye holy Ghost) whether the doctrine be of
God. They say likewise, It does give light to al things: for it is a lamp to
lighten the feet of the believers: whereby they must walk through the
darkness of this world: and they say, yt man's wisdom and understanding, how
great, how wise, 2. Pet. 2 19. Psa. 119.1^3
how holy soever the same can be, is plain darkness, in comparison thereof.

Well then, if it be so, that the darkness can not lighten the light, but
that the light it self must lighten all things, then in very deed can not the
word of God receive any light of the opinion or authority of man: but it
self must be the light, whereby men may know, which is the Church of God, and
which is the Synagogue of dissemblers. And therefore they conclude according to
the word of the Prophet Esaie, That men must follow after the Law, Esai.
8.20.
and the witness, which is, the written word of God: and that whosoever does
not walk after that, shall never see the day spring. But, as I have already
said, all that is plain heresy: for our dearly beloved mother the holy Church
of Rome will be chief Judge her self over the holy Scripture. So that the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, is now no more the foundation of ye
Church, as it was in the time of Paul: but contrariwise, Ephe. 2.20.
the Church, with the authority and the traditions of the same, is the only
foundation of the Scripture. For even so might the Jews before time advance
themselves likewise, by the estimation and authority of the Church, alleging
that the law and the witness, whereof ye Prophet speaks, could have been of no
estimation, but by reason, ye same was consented to the^ by the Church: and
that men should never have known, neither the Law, or the witness, or Gods
word, if it had not been by them, and their forefathers set forth and
declared, what they should accept for Gods word: and that the Church with her
light had lightened the Law and the witness. And so the Church of Rome
does now also say, That the word of God has no estimation, but that which
it has borrowed of the Church: for otherwise (as she says, and as all good
Catholic writers do declare) how should we know, that the scripture were the
word of God, if it were not that the holy Church had so allowed and judged it?
Wherefore should we more believe the Gospel of Mathewe, or Mark, than the
Gospel of Nichodemus, or Thomas? For there stands plainly written in the
Decrees, That neither the old nor the new Testament were received of me^, for
this cause, or that cause: Capitulo. Si Roman. parag. quib. ad hoc. did. 19.
nor for that it must be esteemed for an undoubted rule and perfect knot: but
only because that the holy Father Innocentius, Pope of Rome, had so judged it,
and so would have it. Therefore ye may well think, that God could not plant
and establishe his holy word in men's hearts, by the inspiration of his spirit
(as S. John the Apostle would prove) if it were not that ye holy Church had
therein helped him. John 2, 27.
So that in this case, God is greatly beholden unto our dear mother, the holy
Church, for her good will and faithful service. For if she had accepted the
Fables of Aesope, and of Howleglasse, the gospel of the Distaffe, and of
Fortunatus purse: the gospel of Nichodemus, or the Alcaron of Mahomet, or else
the gospel which certain Monks at Paris, in the year of our Lord 1220. had
made, and set forth, being full of al filthiness and blasphemy, Euangeliu^
aeternum at Paris.
naming it, Euangelium aeternum, that is to say, An everlasting gospel,
requiring the Pope that it might be by him canonized: and so set it forth for
the eternal word of God, This does Mat Pa^^s. write being in those days a
writer of Histories.
but it ws denied the^, as hap was: but if it had been so (I say) yt the pope
and the holy Church would as well have allowed it, as they did ye holy
scripture, with the Mass book, with the seven Psalms, and with the Rosarium
beatae Mariae, who could have said, No, to them? And that should then have been
the word of God: yea, and therewith must God have been content. Well, go too
then, seeing that men did herein credit the writing and seal of ye church,
wherefore should they not the^ give as great credit to them in all other matters?
For even so does the text of the foresaid decrees, argue, saying with plain
words: In so much as men do receive and accept the old and new Testamentes,
In the foresaid ca. Si Roman. did. 13.
because that Pope Innocentius has ordained and judged: so it does necessarily
follow, that the Decretalles of the Popes of Rome, must likewise be received and
accepted: the rather, for that Pope Leo has likewise ordained, That whosoever
does set him self against them, his sins shall never be forgiven him, etc. It
is very true, that by this argument it must likewise follow, that all the Jews
Caballes and Talmood, and all their dreams, must as well be received, as ye
five books of Moses, and the books of the Prophets. For it is most true, yt
as we have received ye new Testament of ye christian church, so has ye christen
church received ye books of the old Testament of ye Jews Synagogue. And now,
even as our Romish church has received ye writing of ye Apostles, and judged
ye same for true: so likewise has the Jewish church judged ye books of Moses
and of ye prophets for true, and received the^ for authe^tike. Now then, as
men do herein believe, and allow the Jews writings, and seal, so must we
also, (following the rule of our Doctors of Louen) believe ye said Jews, in
all that they say and teach: and thereby now should our Romish Church come
short home. But we do not esteem such co^sequencies: It is but Philosophy:
and the Popes of Rome are no Jews. Therefore, that which they do and ordeine,
has an other manner of countenance, than that which the Jews have ordained.

Therefore must our former argument remain fast and immovable: especially
considering, that the Church of Rome is fullye credited in the one: therefore
must she (of necessity) be as well believed in the other. For truly, this
argument is the trimmest and finest stuff whereof John Blindasinus has made
his Panoplie, which is as muh to say, as his Full furniture of weapons and
harness. For by this is proved, yt S. Francis Vineyarde, In the 3. ^^oke and
(...), beginning: Fra^^^scu^ sublin. ^ur.
The golden Legend, The book called, Conform. S. Franc. And the Mass book,
must be as much esteemed (in all respects) as ye very scripture of ye Bible:
yea, in ye book called Confo. S. Fran. (which was made by Barthol. of Pisa, and
is allowed for good in ye chap. of Assis. In ye year 1389.) is written, That the
same book is better, Confirmites of Saint Francis better than the Gospel: yea
S. Francis is set in Lucifers chair above Angels.
tha^ ye Gospel: for that Saint Francis is placed in Lucifers seat, above all
the companies of Angels, at the upper end of all.

Also there follows out of the same, that the common sort of people may be as
well instructed in the knoweledge of God, by dumb Images, and mumming
representations, as by the preaching of the Gospel: and that men must as well
christen the Belles at the Font, as the children which are shapen after the
likeness of God, and bought by the precious blood of Jesus Christ: that in
baptising shall be used spittle and ointment, as well as water: that the holy
Sacrament shall be carried about the streets in the Procession, with Baners
and Pipes, as well as it shall be taken and eaten in the Congregation of the
faithful, in remembrance of the death of the Lord. In sum, men are as
deeply bound, to do that which the holy Church, and the Popes of Rome have
dreamed, set up, and commanded, as that which by the express word of God,
and by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is specially commanded. Yea,
and (I pray you) why should it not be so? Seeing (out of the same argument it
must of necessity be concluded) that ye word of God cannot be Gods word, but
it must first by the church be thereto shapen and fashioned. For note well, this
word is with special words of our learned master Iodocus Tiletanus in writing
thus. Iodocus Rauesteyn Tiletanus in his book written against the confession of
the preachers at Antwerpe, printed in Anno. 1567


That the word of God alone contained in the holy Scriptures, of the old and
the new Testamentes, together with the three Symbols or Creedes, as of the
Apostles, the Council of Nice, and of the father Athanasius, yea and thereto
join the three first Councels, are not the rule and perfect knot of the truth,
whereby it is apparent, that in no wise men can perfitely know, whether these
be the word of God, or no, without the traditions or setting forth of the
Church, which does assure us of all this, without any Scripture, etc.

In sum, the truth can be no truth, nor the light, light: yea, God can be no
God, except that the holy Church of Rome, that is to say, the holy Pope of Rome
with his bishops and prelates, do consent thereunto. So yt it is no marvel, that
they can of a piece of bread make a God and creator of heaven and earth. For if
it were so, that they should say: that at noone day it were dark night, we
must straight ways believe the same as an article of the faith, and by and by
without delay, get us to bed. For we say by a certain common proverb, That
when all the world does affirm that a man (as by example So^nius, or
Blindasinus) is a swine, he must out of doubt trudge unto the swinestie, and
there eat only draffe. How much rather the^, when the holy Church, with that
worthy company of Bishops, Abbats Prelates, and Cardinals (gathered together
at Trent, or elsewhere) do command any thing, are not we bound to receive,
believe, and obey the same without any denial, and by and by to say Amen
thereunto? And herein may men perceive a great miracle, which (I do assure you)
is greater by ye head tha^ any miracle that ever was don by the Apostles: to
wit, yt the child was borne before the mother: yea, that the mother commes of
the child. For it is most certain, and well known, that the word of God is the
seed, whereof the Church of God does spring and is engendered, as the Apostle
Peter witnesses: considering that the Church is nothing else but a
Congregation of such, 1. Pet. 1.23.
as do faithfully believe Gods word, and firmly stick unto the same: where
thorough they are also called, The Congregation of the living God, The pillar
and stay of the truth. So that the word is the right mother of the Church.
Well, now see, here goes the holy Catholic Church of Rome before the word
of God, and his truth, which is as much to say, the child goes before the
mother: yea, the word can have no might, no credit, no estimation, nor no
being in the world, unless it be by special grace borrowed of her daughter
the holy Church. As the foresaid Blindasinus, This has also amongst other been
openly defended by Siluester Pr^erias chief^st ^ard of the popes court in his
book written against Martin Luther.
Hosius, Sonnius, Piggius, Eckius, with all other Catholic Doctors have
forceably concluded, and irreuocably determined: taking this for a most true
and undoubted article of the faith, yea, for the most special ground, whereupon
they and all their writing is founded, which is, That men may not believe the
word and truth of God, otherwise than by the appointment of the holy Church of
Rome, which of duty must always go before, and lead the daunse, which is as
much to say, that you can not ride to Louen, but you must set the Wagon before
the horses.

And therefore whenever the Church does ordeine any thing, that is contrary
to the Scripture, (as is before said) we will give the Scripture an honest
passeport or safe conduct, and a great many of farewels. and cl^ue to the holy
Church like a Burre. For the srcipture cannot defend this cause, but the holy
Church of Rome can bring a man to the stake. And it helps not to allege and
bring in Augustinus in the 19. Epistle ad Ianuarium, in the book of baptism,
against the Donatists in the 3. chapter, it is brought in again the 95. chap.
Quis nesciat distin. 9. Item in the book of the unity of churches in the 3.
chapter. Item in the book named de Genesi ad litteram. lib. 2. chap. 1. Item
in the book de peccatorum meritis. l^b. 1. cap. 22. In the book de natura and
gratia. cap. 51. and in his* 19. Epistle to S. Hierom. and is brought in in the
cap. Ego solis did. 29. Item against Criscouium Grammaticum. lib. 2. cap 32.
Item the 21. Epistle to the Bishop Fortunatus, and in the 112. Epistle to
Paulinus. Item in the 3. book against Maximinus in the 3. chapter, and in many
other places mo.
Augustine here, who has written in diverse places. That we ought to believe
the holy Scripture only without any contradiction, and to try and prove all
other writings and doctrines, how substantial soever they be: yea, all
Councels, decrees, and ordinances, by the holy Scripture, as by the only true
and vncounterfeyted touchstone, and abolish and put away utterly all,
whatsoever does not therewithal agree: for that all smells altogether of
heresy.

And where as he says further. That when soever the Church does give ear to
any other voice beside the only voice of her bridegroom, she is then become
whorish, and a wedlock breaker: yea, and that they are all accursed, which go
about to seduce the Bride of Christ, from her Bridegroom, to the doctrine and
institutions of men, that is the plain doctrine of Heretics. For if that were
so, all the before specified rules, ordinances, and decrees of the holy Church
of Rome, should be thrown down, and trodden under feet: yea, it must needs
follow, that the holy Pope is accursed, and a very Bawd, which has made of
the holy Catholic Church of Rome, a foul shameless whore: Fie, fie, nay we
will none of that. August. upon these words of John, whosoever has the bride.
c and Athanasius in the beginning of his book against the infidels. Origene in
the 7. homily or sermon upon the prophet Ezechiel, and in the 7. homily upon
Esaias, Hilarious upon Matthaevv. Irinaeus in his 2. book Cap. 56. against
Valentinus. etc. and in his 72. Epistle.
Let Augustine much rather be an Heretic, and all those that are of his
opinion, as master Athanasius, Origin, Hilarious, Irinaeus, Tertullianus,
Cyprianus, Chrysostomus, and Hieronymus: let them rather be burnt even al upon
a heap.

Although it be easy to judge, that if they were living now in these days,
they would be loathe to permit any such gross stuff, either to be vttred
with their tongues, or published by their pens: or if they did, they must
trudge with other into the fire. Yea, and Tertullian in his book de
Praescriptionibus Haereticoru^. Cyprianus in his sermon of the baptising of
Christ, and in his 3. Epistle ad Ce^i^i^* and is brought in in the chap.
Si^olus. did. 5. wherewith does likewise agree Cap. Si frustra cadem
distinct. Chrysostomus in the 4.9. Sermon upon the 24. chapter of Matthew.
Item upon the 95. Psalm. Hieronymus upon Matthew. cap. 32. and upon Esai. cap.
Vino. Distinct. 37. and cap. Non adferamus 24. quaest. 1. Ambrosius upon the 4.
chap. of the epistle to the Corinthians.
Ambrose must recant, and call back again, or eat up with salt, that which
he has openly written, That al doctrine whatsoever, which has not been set
forth and taught by the Apostles themselves, is* full of abomination and
knauerie.

Therefore, all helps not, that they come forth with their writings, thinking
thereby to outface our dear mother the holy Church of Rome. It is a very
young woolfe that never heard any noise: she does no more esteem these
bragges, than if it had thundered at Colen: for she will be still on cockehorse,
let them toss and turn it the best they can.

The.iii. Chapter Wherein is set forth, that the Church of Rome has
likewise power and authority, over the ancient fathers, and may receive,
condemn, interpret, and use them as shall please her holiness.
The holy Church is above all ancient fathers.
ANd now hereby does specially appear, that ye holy Church of Rome has not
power and authority only over the scripture of the old and new Testaments:
but also over all the writing and doctrine of the old fathers, as there are
Irinaeus, Tertullianus, Basilius, Gregorius Nazian. Origin. Cyprian. Albin.
Eusebius. Arnobi. Ambro. Lactant. Cyril. Epiphanius, Theodoretus, Vigila^tius,
Appollinarius, Hieronymus, Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Cedullius, Possidonius,
Prosper, Sidonius, Gelasius, Gregorius, Al^uinus, Haymo, Bartramus, and other
mo such like. Books of the ancient fathers falsified.
For one she acceptes as good and Catholic, an other she reiectes as naught
and an Heretic: some she allows with additions of certain gloses, and
Postils: other she referres to every man's judgment. Upon some she has
fathered (as their own) certain strange books, made at the least four or
five hundredth years after they were dead: And others she has clean plucked
and robbed of their feathers. In sum, she does toss them and turn them even
as she will: and winds them up as short as a clewe of yarne. And wherefore
should she not, I pray you? For she might have condemned them all for
Heretics, if she would, and in place of them have taken in and received the
writing and doctrine of Nicholaus, of Bion, of Apelles, Seuerus, Montanus,
Sabellius, Paulus Samosatenus, Manes, Meletius, A^ius, Marcellus, Macedonius,
Euonius, Eutiches, Nestorius, Donatus, Pelagius: and such other mates. But now
she has given them that honor, that they are taken and counted for Catholic
teachers: and these last she has condemned and banished for devilish heretics
and false teachers. Not because that ye one had truly set forth the sincere
word of God. And the other directly the contrary: (for so she should again
submit herself under ye scripture:) but because it has so pleased her.

And therefore it is no reason, that those, to whom she has given such honor,
should now go about to ouercrow her holiness, and force her with their writings,
as though she ought to be subject thereunto, No, no, they must stoop
themselves, how learned or godly soever they have been: and the holy Church
must always have the authority and superiority. For it is written in the
decrees. Cap. Si Roman, did. ^^.


All whatsoever any other teachers have taught and written, that is to be
received or rejected, according as it shall please and be thought good to the
Apostolical seat of Rome. For the Pope is master over al, whatsoever any man
can teach or write.

Therefore ye see that ye holy Church may choose, and pick out of the old
fathers, what soever she finds for her purpose: and what soever she
perceives against her, she may put out finely with a dash of a pen, and so
esteem it for false meant: as for example: Whenever the old fathers do
(with flourishing reasons, and by a figurative manner of speaking) extol and set
forth the Sacrament: out of that will she gather her transubstantiation. And
whereas they do nominate the Sacrament an holy offering or sacrifice, of that
will she fetch out her Mass with all the appartenances. And whenever any
thing is set out by them, to the la^d and praise of the true servants and
Preachers of Gods word, thereof does she make a kingdom of priests, and a
popish Monarchy is to say a realm or region, governed at the will and
discretion of one man only.
Monarchy. And when as they do highly praise the holy Saints and martyrs
deceased, therevpo^ commes abroad the praying to saints. And in such places as
they do earnestly set forth and highly praise good works, and godly living:
thereupon can she by and by build up the pleasant Palace of free will: and
then she sails with a fair wind. And then are the old Fathers followed in
all points: yea, there is nothing else talked of here nor there, but, The old
fathers, The old fathers.

But now on the contrary part, whereas Augustine in his book de
Praedestinatione sa^ctorum, in the book de bona per seuerantia, de natura and
gratia, de fide and operibus. de perfectione iustitiae, thoroughly. Item in his
retractations. Ite^ upon the 70. Psalm. and upon the 31. Psalm. and in many other
places mo.
S. Augustine does write whole books of ye Predestination of saints, of the
special and undeserved mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, that faith only
justifies: of the weakness and dullness, yea of the damnablenesse of man's
free will, and of the adnihilation of our deseruings: all that is nothing else
but heresy, and going astray. Whereas Ambr. upon the epistle to the Romans,
and in the book of Isaac and the souls. Chrysostom in his sermon of adding
to the holy Gospel upon the words of Paul to the Philippians. on the first.
It is no matter how, so that Christ be preached. And in the 4. Homily or
Sermon of Penance.
Ambrose and Chrysostom do teach, yt we shall not take men or dead creatures
for our aduocats before God, but only Christ. And where Augustine in his book
of true Religion, and in the Book called Confessiones. In the 10. Book and
42. chapter. Item in his 4. book to Boniface in the 4. chapter.
August. says that we shall not pray unto Saints, nor erect for our* selves
particularly any Chapels or Altars, nor pray before Tumbes: as the said
Agustinus in his first book of the use and profession of holy Church. 34
Chapter, and in the 44. Epistle written to Maximinus.
Augustine and Leo do bear perfect witness, that neither the dead, nor
deserving of Saints, can any thing help us, to the forgiveness of our sins,
but only the death and merits of Jesus Christ. And as Augustine upon John in
the 24. treatise. Leo in his fiftenth Epistle to the Palestins.
Epiphanius does esteem it, for a shameful heresy, and an abominable
blasphemy of God, that men should pray either to Marie Gods mother, or to
any other Saint: but that must be covered with some blewe gloss for a cloak.
As also the said Epiphanius in the the third part of the third Book of
Heresies, in fifty and one Heresy. This does Epiphanius set forth, in the
Epistle written to John Bishop of Jerusalem, which Epistle is set forth by
Saint Hierome, like as appears in the third volume of his Books.
Theophilactus upon the twenty and five Chapter of Matthew.
Epiphanius does utterly chase the images, as well of Christ, as of any
other Saint, out of the Church, and breaks them in pieces, forbidding men
plainly to suffer any such abominations.

And as Ambros. upon the epistle to the Romans, the 1. chap. of the death of
the Emperor Theodosius, in the 3 part of his books August. in his 49 epis. to
Deo gratias presb. and upon the 113 Psalm and whole thorough in his book de
ciuit. dei. Lactantius whole thorough in all his books and specially in the 2.
chap of his 2. book, and in the 5. book of Gods justice in the 8 chap. Origin
in his 4. book against Celsus. Athanasius in his book against infidels. Clem.
in the 6. book Stromaton, and in the book called Protrepticos. Hieronymus in
the explanation of the 65. chapter of the prophet Esai. Chrysostom in his
sermon upon the 2. and 11. chap to the Hebr. and in his 2. sermon of Lazarus.
August. in his 54. epist. to Maced. and in his 66 sermon. of the time, and Hypog.
the 9. book against Pelagius.
Ambrosius, Augustinus, Lactantius, Origenes, Athanasius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
with many other, do teach plainly, that God will not be worshipped with any
likenesses or images, either painted or carved. The holy Church is deaf at
this, and will in no wise understand it. Where as Cyprianus, Hieronymus,
Chrysostom. and Augustinus, do say and defend, that after this life is
neither any more time nor place to make amends for our sins, or obtain any
mercy or forgiveness at Gods hands: there she shrinks back into her shel, and
lettes her hoode hearken to that. And where as the said Cyp in tract de
simplicitate praelat. and is rehearsed. cap. loqui^. dom. 24. quaest. 1. Hier.
upon the epist of Tit. 1. cap. Chrysostom. hom. 35. and the 20. chapter of
Matthew, and stands cap. vlt. dom. 40.
Cyprianus and Hieronymus do stoutly teach, That al Ministers and true
Preachers of Gods word have like power, in what place soever they be, whether
it be at Rome, or at Naples, or among the Indies, or in Tartaria: all that is
pedlers French to our holy mother the church of Rome, whereas Gregorius does
plainly write, and in diverse places says, That whatsoever he be, that names
himself a general Bishop, or The chief head and principal of all Bishops, he
is the very messenger of Antichrist, and the Gregorius in the epist. ad
Eulogiu^ Patriarch of Alexandria, and in the 35. epis. to John Bishop of
Constantinople, and in the 6 book of the epistle to Maurice. ca. 94. Pelagi^us
ca. nullus did 99. Gregorius in the 4. book of letters. cap. 80. Col. 2.
against the Bishop of Constantinople, wherewith Augustine does likewise agree
in his third book against Dotius, in the third chapter, saying* Let no man
take upon him to be bishop of bishops. Tertullian in the 4. book against
Mer^io Augustinus. against Amantius, in his first book 12. chapter Cyprian in
his 2 epistle unto Pope Cornelius. Augustinus in the Book sententiarum. of
Prosperus and is set forth cap. dum frangitur de consecra. did. 2. and in his
26. treaty upon John. Hieronymus in the *3. chapter upon Sophanius. Gelasius
in the cap. compe^imus de consecra. did 2. and many other mo.
son of the devil, for that neither he nor no man living, can bear the
name of a general Bishop, without the utter defacing of the service of the
Church. But that must be understood with a prouiso, to wit, The Pope of Rome
always excepted.

Now, whereas k Tertulianus, Augustinus, Theodoretus, and many other more, do
expound these words of the Sacrament This is my body, sacramentally, and
say, that it is a figure, a sign, and a seal of the body of Christ that was
offered up and broken for us: then is there nothing to say, but God help you.
There is no body at home. Whereas they do generally with one consent teach
and stoutely maintain, that the Supper of the Lord ought to be ministered
unto all men under both kinds: that smelles of a Ratte, the Cow is broken
loose. Whereas Irinaeus in his 5. book against heresies, which is of Are^as,
and Andreas, bishops of ^esaraea afterward followed. Tertullian. in his book
against the Jews, in the 3 book against Merchio Hieronymus, in his epistle to
Marcellus.
Irinaeus, who wrote that (about a hundred years after saint John the Apostle)
the number of the beast whereof Saint John speaks in his Revelation or
vision, does mean by this word Latinos, the Romish or the Latin Church and
regiment: and ye Tertul. and Hieronymus, do expound the beast with seven horns
for the city of Rome: that is al bibble babble. In sum, whenever they set
forth or teach any thing that sou^ds not well in the ears of our dear mother
the holy Church, she lettes them be packing, without any mention making of
them: or else she correctes them thoroughly, considering yt they are but men,
and may err. And wherefore? For that she is not subject to the writings of the
fathers, neither can her authority be subject to their judgment: but she (as
we have said before) is above the fathers, and governs them, turns and
winds them as she will, and forces them eue^ as she thinks good. And
whatsoever they have written, must be sifted through her si^e, to pick out
thereof the finest flower. For otherwise (seeing that the old fathers do
oftentimes differ amongst themselves, and other whiles write contrary to that
which they have set down before: and always (for the most part) have done
directly against the opinion and dealing of the holy Church of Rome,) how
should: yea, how should men make good cloth of such yarne, if it were not
that the holy Church of Rome did give her judgment and sentence on their
doings, and did chewe the pappe before in her own mouth, to put the same with
more facility and easiness into ours her sucking babes, as it were with a
Spoone, giving us that which she allows for good, and casting the rest away
which tastes not well in her mouth, into a corner. The sum of all is, that we
may not make any foundation of our faith upon the writings of the old
fathers, unless they have first been under the hands of the holy Catholic
Church of Rome, and be by her ouerseene, and set forth, as shall seem good to
her holiness.

The iiii. Chapter. Wherein is set forth, that the Church of Rome is not
subject to any Council: but may approve, or disanull them, according as she
shall think best for her own benefit: And this is confirmed by many
examples and profounde reasons.
But now are there some such gross fellows, The Holy Church above all
Councels.
which notwithstanding they do see, that the Church is above the Scriptures,
and above all the doctrine and Writings of the old Fathers, yet they think,
that her power and authority may be (as it were) compassed in, and paled
about by the Councels: So that there should be nothing received for a
commandment of the church, but it must first be concluded by a Council. And
what soever were once there concluded and agreed upon, with that, neither the
church of Rome should meddle, nor the Pope have any thing to do. Yea, mary,
these good fellows, O they come in due season: they might a great deal better
have tarried at home. For consider, seeing that all the Prophets and Apostles,
and likewise the old Fathers altogether: yea, and Jesus Christ the very Son
and truth of God himself, could never so bind nor make subject the holy
church, that she should yield and submit her self to their writing and
doctrine only: how do these fellows think then, that the Councels should
have greater power to bring her within their park and pases, considering that
they are men which have so often times erred: yea, and swarued clean from the
truth? We know^ well enough, that the Council Ariminense, Sirmiense, and
Seleucense, did in the time of Constantine the great, fortify the heresy of
the Arrians, with their Decrees. The second Council of Ephesus, did cleue unto
the Heretic Eutyches, and did blasphemously and confusedly mingle the two
natures of Christ together. The council of Carthago, in the time of Cyprian,
which was holden before the first council of Nicene, did conclude, That
heretics ought to be christened again? But what needs all this? Was not
Christ him self judged and condemned in a general council at Jerusalem,
which was the chosen city of God? And yt the councels have often times erred,
and may lightly err, it appears plainly enough, by ye witnessing of Gregory
Nazianzene, General council never came to any good end.
who was accustomed to say, That he never saw counsel that te^ded to a good
end. Yea, do we not see, how there have bin many councils, whose proceedings
have bin flat against the doctrine and institutions set forth by our holy
mother ye church: and yet would defend their doings by ye holy scripture? But
what a good year! Can ye councils prevail against ye church of Rome, they
having no power nor authority at all, other tha^ is given them by our holy
father ye pope? How (I pray you) should yt then hang together, yt they should
be placed at ye upper end, not only above ye pope, but above the whole church?
Is it not written in ye book of the decretals, Cap signifi. ffaiunt, and de
electione and electi postea.
That no counsel can in any thing forbid the holy church, nor set any
commandment over her: considering that all councils have bin at her
appointment, and received their power and authority from her holiness? And
that in all statutes, ordinances and decrees of the councils, the authority of
the Pope is excepted and exempted? See we not likewise, yt in the council of
Lateran, it was concluded, In the counsel of Lateran holden at Rome, an. 1519.
and 20. in the end of the 2. ses. and 1. council of Trent in the 2. decree of
the 4. sessio^.
and likewise in the last counsel at Trent confirmed, That the Pope is above al
councils, and the statute and ordinance of the counsel of Basil (before time
made to ye contrary) was clean taken away, and abolished: Notwithstanding,
Pope Nicholas consented and was willing to the making of the same. In this
behalf, it was very wisely considered of the holy Fathers, assembled in the
said Council of Trent, Council of Trent.
whereas before they would fully conclude upon any article, they did send all
that they had determined upon, in a sack, or small pack to Rome, to have of
the Pope a Bull of comfirmation thereunto. For, out of that proceeded a
wonderful brave and pleasant melody: because that therein our holy father the
Pope did cou^terfeit the personage of God the Father. And the holy council of
spiritual fathers there assembled together, were likened to the holy Ghost: so
that the common people were wont to say, that when they sent their stuff
toward Rome, The holy ghost was shut up in a male: The holy Ghost shut in a
male.
as the Poet Homer writes, that in elder days Aeolus the king of winds, did
give unto his good friend Ulysses, a male, wherein all the winds were shut and
packt up together, ye Western wind only excepted, which he must needs occupy
him self, to bring him home. And even so went the matter between the holy
ghost and the wind of ye holy fathers of Trent,

And now, when the father and the holy Ghost were agreed in one, and that the
bulls were sealed, they sent them with expedition and have to their dearly
beloved sons, the Kings of France and Spain, and required of them by a
Spanishe Inquisition, to procure the said Bulls and Decrees to be thoroughly
observed and kept in their Countries. So that the father, " Or, Tyrannical
torture.
the son, and the holy Ghost, were all one heart and one soul: And have
jointly received and established all the Decrees of the said counsel. And how
(I pray you) could it come to pass otherwise: considering that the Bishops and
Cardinals, are created by their holy father the Pope, and have promised, and
are bound by a strong and special oath, not to take upon them, nor to
conclude any thing, without having first the counsel and consent of their
Creator: As it is well and precisely set forth and concluded of our holy father
Calixtus, writing, That it is not in any wise permitted to the Bishops, Capi.
Non decet. did. 1^
to withstand the Church of Rome in any point, or to do, or attempt any thing
against the same. Yea (says he) as the son did come to fulfill the will of
his Father: even so are all Christian people bound to follow and fulfill the
will of their dear mother the Church of Rome, whereof the Pope (without all
doubt) is the head.

And this was the reason and occasion which moved ye right honorable Cardinal
Reignold Poole, In the Book of the Council in the 14 15. and 16. quest.
one of the three Lieutena^ts of the Pope, in the said council, to write with
great discretion and authority, That the whole convocation of the people, or
common sort, gathered together, have no authority in the world to conclude,
determine, or decide upon any matter, or matters, presented before the council:
but that the same belo^gs properly to the Pope, who only is Gods Lieutenant or
Deputy, and shepherd of the lost and straying sheep. Upon this intent alone
(says he) is a council called free, common, Look in the leaf following.
or general: and not that therefore every one in general is free and licensed
there to set forth his or their own opinion, or to determine or conclude any
thing: for that is specially forbiden by the Council of Constance, in special
and plain words: That no man, In the counsel of Consta^ce, in the 15. session.
of what state and condition soever he be: yea, although he were an Emperor,
a King, Bishop, or Cardinal, shall presume, or take upon him to speak or
dispute against any matter which the holy Fathers (by the inspiration of the
holy Ghost) are purposed and intended to establishe, upon pain to be
excommunicated and banished: yea, to be cast into a dongeon.

Upon these considerations, was John Hus and Hieronymus of Prage also burnt:
because they would dispute by the Scriptures, upon those matters, which the
holy Fathers had in hand to reason and conclude upon. It is a common saying,
He does wisely, that is warned by another man's harm. And yet,
notwithstanding this example of John Hus, there was in the last council of
Trent, a Bishop so stout, that he presumed boldly to say, That we ought not to
call the Pope, The most holy Father: but simply, The holy Father: considering
that Christ did not name his heavenly Father any otherwise, tha^ holy Father:
John 17.
and for that the Pope can not be greater than God, whose vicar in earth he
names him self to be.

But if ye same Bishop had not quickly stopped his mouth, that word would have
bin a dear word to him. For they were about to have put him straight way in a
hole, where he should have learned to know ye popes authority better. And
likewise, Read hereof Pet. Pau. Ver. who was a great while in that counsel him
self.
had not Petrus Paul. Verge. bishop, with other brablers, packed away betimes,
they would have played the like part with every one of them, as they did with
John Hus at Constance. For although he was a Bishop: yea, and had before been
a Legate, and the Popes Deputy, yet he must have learned to know, that the
Bishops, That is, Touch not the head:
Prelates, and Cardinals, were not called thither to control and take up with
taunts their holy Father and creator, That is, For so it pleases us
the Pope of Rome: much less to correct Magnificat, out of Paul's writing: but
rather simply, Inclinato capite, to say, Placet, unto that, which in the name
of the holy fathers might be proponed to them: and then further, to help to
keep ye bread from moulding, like as a great while ago, by a Poet was
prophesied upon them, saying: Nos numeri sumus, and fruges consumere nati, etc.

That is so say: We are a great number,
And belly gods borne:
Deuourers of victuals,
Consumers of corn.


Now, seeing that the Bishops and Prelates, have no other voices in the
Council, but bare words, accounted for syphers, to increase the heap: how
much less shall any thing be permitted or granted to the Lay men, which are
not there received nor seen, neither in the Brew house, nor Bake house. In
sum, the Council is not called Oicomenicum, or General; Wherefore the
Council is called General.
as though every man might come and thrust in his nose there. Wherefore then?
Because it is as an image or pageant unto us, and as a demonstration or show of
a play or interlude, which does represent and set out before our eyes the
common and general Church of God, which hearken fully and wholly unto the voice
of their shepherd, namely, ye Pope of Rome: as was well noted and marked by
the foresaid Cardinal Reignold Poole. And it was likewise openly set forth, in
the Bull of the said Council of Trent, that it is, and ought to be of right,
named a General or common Council, for this occasion, because all christendom
generally are bound to hold, In the Bull De editio. of the counsels which
begin thus, quum prop. and was set forth an. 1545 the 6. of December. in the name
of pope Paul the third.
and to celebrate ye same with devout prayers.

And to that end, they are by the Pope earnestly put in remembrance, that
they go to shrift, and fast upon the Wednesday, Frydaye, and Saturdaye: And
then on the Sunday be howseled, and go prunking in the Procession, and deal
their alms: or at the least say five Pater nosters, and five Aue Mary's: by
the virtue whereof, they shall receive a sufficient pardon of all their sins,
etc. What can they desire more? For as touching the sitting in the Chapter
house, and there Sententiam subverbo placet proferre: that is, To say Amen,
These are the words of the Bulls of Indictio^
and to nodde at that, which is pronounced unto them: that is permitted only to
such, as of right ought to do it, or to whom it is granted by special
privilege: as chiefly to the right honorable, the brethren of the Pope, to
wit, the Bishops and Archbishops, and his dear sons the Abbats, and other
such like, as he him self does set it forth in the Bull Indictionis. Bulla
Indictionis.
Therefore truly were the Dukes of Germany, and the Protestants in a wrong
box, when they said, That it was no Free, and General, or Common Council.
For a sheep with one eye, would have marked that, that it was neither
forbidden them, nor no man else in the world, to come to Trent, there to
spend their money, to hold the Council, and celebrate it, with hearing of
Masses, with Fasting, and with the saying of five Pater nosters, and five Aue
Mary's: yea, the whole pardon was as well granted unto them, as to any
Bishop or Prelate, or other that was there. But that was not the place where
the muscles lay: They would gladly have had many voices in the Chapter
house, and not to have declared their meaning with that word ( Placet)
only: but that they might likewise have disputed freely, and brought in, and
alleged the Scriptures of God: yea, they would have had it flatly granted,
that the Pope of Rome should not have been head and President of the Council:
but that every thing should be concluded out of the word of God.

But (believe me) the holy fathers, and the Pope, were not so foolish: they
did see more deeply into the matter. For, if they had once taken and put
that horse heame or collar about their necks, then were all the fat in the
fire, and so the whole Church of Rome would not afterward have been worth the
paring of a rotten apple. No, no, I warraunt you. They will take heed of that.
For there is one point which you shall never wrest nor wring out of their
hands, which is, That all Councelles are lame, maimed, creeple, and blind:
yea, utterly void of any power, unless the holy Pope of Rome be their
President, directing and governing the same, as he thinks good. For he is the
very eye, and the five wits of the Councelles: Therefore was it in the said
Council of Laterane, Read the Bull of the Council of Laterane, set forth in
an. 1512. in name of Pope Iul. 2.
very circumspectly concluded, That though all Cardinals, Bishops, and
Prelates were assembled, although they were barrelled up together like herring:
yet can they not hold any Council without the authority, will, consent and
commandment of the Pope, if they should otherwise do, they should be plain
heretics, and ungodly men: yea, they should be esteemed, thought, and taken as
Chore, Dathan, and Abiram. The same was also before that, forespoken and
concluded by the holy Father Pelagius 2. who did openly set forth, This is
written in the book of Councels in the 2. book and in the Decrees chap. multis
den. did. 17*
That all Councels, which were holden without the Popes consent, and
commandment, are not to be reputed or accounted for Councels, but for
Conciliables, that is to say, for Riots, and unlawful assemblies.

And that is the same which the Popes, Marcellus, Julius, Damasus, Gregorius,
and other mo, did likewise jointly ordeyne and determine, as is plainly to be
seen in the book of Decrees, in ye 17. distinction: Chap Imo dum, in the 17.
did.
where it is in like manner by the Scriptures* confirmed: As for example, out of
the 81. psalm, where it is written, I have said, you are Gods. Again, What
soever you bind in earth, that is bound in heaven, etc. And it is also
established and made sure with strong reasons: For that worshipful brother
Thomas Vio, did openly declare in the said counsel of Laterane, That those
which go about to make the Pope subject to the councils, do even like unto
them, Look in the fo^^said Council Lateranen. in the 2. ses.
that would make the father obedient to the child: the head inferior to the
foot: the captein servant to his soldiers: and the shepeheard underling to his
sheep. So yt now, Christ is no more made any account of in ye councils, nor
his word any whit esteemed: but ye pope has all the charge and authority alone:
he only is enseigne bearer, and he does set al in order. And upon that occasion
it was determined, That ye counsel of Pisa, being assembled without ye Popes
consent, was no assembly of Jerusalem, but of the tower of Babylon, yt is to
say, A curse and confusion. In su^me, it is apparent, yt al councils and
ordinances in ye world, and do nothing against the Popes might, nor against
the authority of the Church: for she has ouergrowen the rod: She cares
neither for scriptures nor Cou^celles: she has the holy Ghost pinned on her
sleeue, and may do even what so ever she will.

And therefore it is, that when soever the Pope does set forth any Bulls,
then does he commonly add this clause or conclusion to the same: Non
obstantibus constitutionibus, and ordinationibus Apostolicis, coeterisque
contrarijs quibuscunque, that is to say: Notwithstanding all constitutions,
ordinances or commandments Apostolical, nor any other thing what soever,
contrary hereunto.

Like as does specially appear by the Bull of Pope Paul 3. set forth at the
Counsel of Trent, in the year 1544. the 23. of February. So that he will not
give to all the Apostles, to all the holy fathers, nor all the Councelles,
scarce one good word: yea, rather, he mockes, and plays bo peep with them
all, and so goes on forwards with his business: For otherwise, if the matter
were not thus handled, I would not give a pudding, for all the power and
authority of the holy Church of Rome.

For, to begin withal, these Heretics would give her a rappe upon the pate
with the Council of Mantua, The Counsel of Mantua.
which was holden under Pope Alexander the second, in the time of the Emperor
Henry the fourth: where was concluded: That all those, which by Simonie, that
is to say, by briberie or gifts had obtained any spiritual promotion, or
office, should be deprived. Simonie of the Clergy


Aha, the mother of God: where can you find, now a days, any Chaplein or
beneficed man, Bishop, or Cardinal, that climbeth to that preferment, without
moneie or rewards?

Secondarily, they would come and plague us with the Council of Rome, Council
of Rome.
which was holde^ in the time of the Emperor Phocas, where was ordained
irreuocably, and never to be called back again, That all such, as with any
gifts or rewards, or other like promises, were mounted up, Simonie of Bishops
to wear miters, should be banished and excommunicated. Yea marie sir, it were
better that ye Councels were al at the gallows, tha^ the holy church should be
subject to that order.

Then after this might they come in, and dashe us in the teeth, with the
Council of Triburine, Triburine.
which did forbid any money to be taken for buryings: Burying.
what a gods name, who could digest that morsel?

And to this they would add the Council of Basil, Cou^. of Basil the 21 ses.
where was plainly and sharply ordained, That ^he Court of Rome shall not
take any money for any Dispensations, Elections, Postulations, Presentatio^s,
nor any other Ecclesiastical offices, authorities, benefices, hallowings,
blessings, no not for the very Pallium, or Bishops mantle: neither to be paid
under the color of bulls, seals, nor a^nuales, by what color or pretense
soever they might be done. Aha, friend: What an Eclipse would that breed in
the Popes purse?

They would also come forth with ye Council of Mentz, Council of Mentz.
which was holden in the time of Carolus Magnus, where was ordained, That there
should be given again, and restitution made of all the goods and lands, which
by bequest, last will, or testament, had been left to any of the Spirituality,
tending to any loss or hinderance of the right heirs. Gods populorum! That
were too bitter a Pill to swallowe and digest.

Then would they assault us, with the Council of Laterane, Con. of Laterane.
whereat by Pope Nicholas 2. and fourteen Bishops, was very solemnly, and
irreuocably concluded. That the Pope of Rome should be chosen by nomination,
the whole common people assembled together, the spirituality, with the College
of Cardinals present. And if it should be proved, that any man should by
rewards, gifts, bribes, or any other indirect means, attain to the same
room, the same should not only be banished, The Pope an^ heretic and
Apostata.
but should likewise be taken for a shameless heretic, a backslider from
Christ, and an Apostata. So that it should be lawful to pull him out of his
seat, etc. Aha, my masters, what a piece of work were that? By that means
they might overthrow, and clean root out the holy Church of Rome.

Moreover and besides, they would prove, ye pope Eugenius was by ye council of
Basil, iudicially condemned for an horrible Heretic, and a shameless knave:
and was deposed from his seat, as a wicked vile villeyne, who yet
notwithstanding was after, by fine handling and pretty practices of simonie,
and also with force helped again into his seat: and of him ever since, until
this our time are al Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes, yea, and all priests in
general, bred and sprung up like a litter of pigges farrowed of a fruitful sow.
Al which, one with an other, head and tail, should be banished, and esteemed
for heretics, and ungodly knaves, if it were so, that the Councels might bear
any swinge, against the authority and estimation of the sea of Rome, and our
mother the holy Church: but yt I assure you would be to fearful a matter. And
therefore must we (of necessity) conclude, That the Councils can in no wise
ouerrule ye Church, nor by their co^mandments or ordinances co^pel her to any
thing, no more than a Spiders web can hold or keep fast a Pie, or a Crow. But
al Councels must be subject to the holy Church, even as an obedient child is
subject to his mother: yea, and they must always daunse after her Pype.

Therefore, when as these Heretics and Huguenotes, do bring in a great heap
of these Councels, to stre^gthen their doctrine withal, against the Romish
Church, they do but break their brains in vain. They may well (...) auace,
In the* 36. chapter of the council Eliberi.
that the Council Eliberinum in Spain, which was holden about the year 300.
in the time of Constantine the great, did plainly ordeine, That there should
be no Images in the Churches, nor in no wise to paint, Images forbidden.
or carue any thing to be prayed unto.

And they may allege, that in the twelfe Council of Toledo, in two Councels
of Constantinople, the one under Constantius the fifth, the other under
Constantinus the sixth: and likewise, in a Council in France, under Carolus
Magnus, did all with one voice, consent in the same. But we can not hear on
that side.

They may likewise bring in apace, In the first book of Councels. ^oli. 627.
chap 3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. and so following to 25. Con Affric. can. 81 82.83.
Mileuitano can. 3.4.5. and in the decrees, can placuit vt quicunque ca.
quisquis dixerit gratiam de co^secra. did. 4.
and allege, That the Concilium Auristanum, did clearly overthrow man's free
will, and justification by works: teaching that all our righteousness, all the
good works that we can do, and all that is in us, must be imputed to the only
goodness and undeserved mercy of God: that it is not in our natural power to
prepare our selves to mercy: but that we must receive al eue^ as beggars by
mere gift through meeknes of the spirit. But in all this they do but loose
their labor: and it is even as much, as if they would cut the air in twain:
for we do not esteem al they can say worth a rushe.

That being done, they may bring in apace for witnesses, the Councels
Affricanum, and Mileteranum, wherein saint Augustine did set forth such stuff,
as were enough to shame them, all praying to saints utterly overthrown: for
that there was by perfect proof and express Scriptures proved and concluded,
That neither is, nor ever has been on the earth so holy a man, (Christ
only excepted) which has not been spotted with sin himself, and had need
continually to pray for remission and forgiveness of his own sins. So far
does it differ from that then, that the Saints should have any sparkle of
deseruings remaining overplus. But al these authorities are not worth a nut
shell: neither will we receive their witnesses.

Moreover, whereas they make much a do with us, that the first council of Read
the Churchly history of Socrates, the 11. Cap. of the first book* and
Sozomen. in the 22. chap. of the 2. book, and the decrees Cap. Nicena Syno
did. ^1. and Con.
Nicen did consent, That it was lawful for priests to marie, and that the
Council of Began. Can. 1.4.9.10.14. and in the decrees Si quis discernit.
Di^^incti. 28 ca. Si quis nuptias. cap Si quis vel virginitatem. cap. si quis
proprer Deum. did. 30. and cap. Si quis vitupera^. did. 31.
Gangren did curse and banish all such, as under the color of any cloister,
religion, or spiritual state should forsake their wives, or deface the state
of matrimony, Read the decrees* ca. quoniam in Romano. Did. 31.
Whereunto the Council called sexta Synodus, co^senting, did further and above
that ordeine, That no man should require of any priest, to make the vow of
chastity, unless they of themselves were willing so to do. But all this is even
as much as to knock at a deaf man's door.

And if that they also (out of the said Council of Con. Ga^. can. 2. and in
the de^crees. can. Si quis carnem did. 30
Gangrensis,) and out of the Council of Con. Ancyrano. 27.
Ancerano) kept about the same time of the Council of Nicene, will go about to
persuade us, that they that eat flesh upon the Friday, or in the Lent, should
not be punished nor condemned: yea, and that in matters of Con. Gra^. in the
conclusion of the Council.
marriage, and eating of meats, we may not charge men's consciences, by the
virtue of any new law or bond: all that is of Dauie Duttons dream, and we
(...) wise give any ear unto it.

Furthermore, they will brag much, upon the first Councels of Con. Nice. in
the* 6. Canon, like as Ruffi* does set it forth in his history.
Nicene, and of Con. Co^st^^t. can. 2. beginning Qui vl^^ a quamque Dioc^sim
sunt Episcopi etc.
Constantinople, for that they did ordeine, That the Bishop of Rome shall not
have any authority or i^risdiction out of his own borders, (to wit, the
lands nigh adjoining to Rome.) And again, upon the Council of And peruse the
counsel of Africa, in the first book of the councels the^e you have these
orders can. 92. and at the end of the councils, are the letters of the counsel
written to the Popes, Bonifacius and Cele^tinus.
Africa, whereas the craft and falshoode of the Popes of Rome, Sosimus,
Bonefacius, and Coelestinus, were known and declared, (who had sought by
falsifying of the Council of Nicene, to maintain their authorities.)
Whereupon it was ordained, That no man should for any matter of difference
appeal to Rome, or over the Sea. Which was also established in the Council
Mile^etano. We have run to long before the dogs, to be afraid of these
matters. Therefore they may go shoe the goose, and make children afraid with
that, which they bring forth out of the third Council of Con. Can. ^ Can. ^.
Carthago, In the co^. of Mil. ca. 21. Read also can. prisb. 11. quaest. 4. and
can. psalm. 4. vt presb. 2. quaest. ^.
and of the Council of Con. Aff. can. ^ and in the decrees ca. 1. did. ^9.
Cap. Con. di 10. ca nulfas est did. 1^.
Africa: As that no man might take upon him to be called The chiefest of the
Bishops: or, The chief Bishop: or, High Priest: yea by the Roode, well said:
we have our answer ready enough for that matter, which is, That men may in
no wise take upon them to keep or hold any Council at all: yea, though they
were never so well defended, both by the* Scriptures in the Bible: and by the
holy fathers: unless they do well and fully agree with the holy Church of
Rome: for she has full power and authority to alter all Councels, and to make
them void, of no value, nor effect: even as she shall think good: and to
explane them as shall serve best for her purpose: yea, to tumble and toss them
topsie turuie, even as shall best serve her turn.

And therefore, where as men presume so much to allege and bring in, the
ordinances of the Popes, Gelasius, Ca. Considimus 25. quaest. 1. canulli. 25.
quaest. 1.
and Hilarious, which say, that the Sea of Rome is more subject and obedient
to the Councels, than any other man: either the Council of Basile, The
council of Basil above the Pope.
wherein was determined and concluded, That the Council is above the Pope:
yea, and that the Council may depose the Pope: All that is not worth a
straw. For all the Balls that are served on that side the Tenise Court, are
easilye smitten back and turned at the rebounde, with half a word speaking:
to wit: Saluo in omnibus iure Romanae Ecclesiae: Which is too say, The right
and authority of the Church of Rome, in all points reserved. For this is the
very tai^e of every Council, wherewith they are turned about as with a
rudder, eeuen whither the Pope will have them.

The v. Chapter. Wherein is taught, that the canons and decrees of Popes, can
not bind the Romish Church, but that she is s^ill above all decrees, and may
break and adnihilate the same, The Romish church and the Pope above a^canons
and decrees. Cap. 4. Cap. violatores. 25. quaest. 1. ca. nemini. 17. quaest. 4.
ca. de libel^is. did. 20. cap. null. fas est. did 19. This is set forth with
plain words in the chapter Ideo perm^t tente ff. his i^a. 25. quaes. 1. Read
like wise cap. preceptis. dis 12. and ca. Si quis. 17. quaest 4.
so as she shall think good.
THis same must be understood of all the former decrees, and canons of all the
Popes deceased. For although it be clear, that they are inspirattons of the
holy ghost, against which it is not lawful for any man to speak: so as
whosoever does despise them, is void of the Catholic and Apostolic belief:
yet that notwithstanding, they cannot therefore by any means close or shut up
ye authority of the Church. And wherefore? For that there is one common rule of
the holy Church set forth, for an undoubted article of our faith, which is,
That the Romish church is she, which does give to all Popes decrees, their full
power and might: provided always, that she her self, is not in any wise
subject to ye same, by reason that she has a full power always to make such
decrees and ordinances, when soever it shall please her, as having power, and
being head over all Churches, from which point no man may dissent. So, after
this manner, does she give and grant to the decrees, Popes against their
own decrees.
full power and authority, with this exception, That she her self will in no
wise, incline or yield to the same: but that she may do any thing against the
same, whenever it shall please her. Even like as Christ did teach the people,
as having might, authority, and power of himself, and not like unto the
Theologians, or Phariseis, which durst neither put to nor diminishe or take
from the same. And even after this manner it follows with the Popes. They give
the decrees their authority, and yet notwithstanding this may they do (as
masters and Doctors of the law) even when they list, against their own laws
and decrees* and therefore the decrees and Canons do not conclude any thing
at all, without this exception, That the Church of Rome may always understand,
interpret, and expound the same, as she shall think good. And hereupon it
commes to pass, that in all decrees, one of these tales is joined, to wit,
Reserving always the right and title of the Church of Rome: or, So far forth
as the Church of Rome does thereof allow* And so has the high and renowned
Iurist or Lawyer Philippus Decius written: Philip. Decius in ca. 1. no* 49. de
constit.
namely, That all decrees and Canons are (by Gods appointment) subject unto the
Pope of Rome. It is very true, that the holy Fathers and Popes, Gelasius,
Felix, Cap. confidimus. 25. quaest. 1. ca. constit. did. 10 ca. contra statut.
ca. sunt quida^ 25. quaes. 1. ca. ideo permittente 25. quaest. 1. ca.
Iusticiae. 25. quaest. 1.
Sosimus, Vrbanus, and Leo 4. have concluded, That all the decrees and
ordinances of the Pope, being contrary to the old and former decrees and
Canons, should be void and of none effect. And whereas Gregory has
likewise ordained, That whenever any Pope will have his Decrees observed, then
must he e contra, observe the decrees of the Popes his predecessors. But upon
that ye gloss says, Hoc non credo: Upon the before written chapter, constable.
did. 10.
which is, I do not believe that. And is not that answer grounded upon good
reason? So that we may boldly conclude, That the holy Church will not be
bound nor pend in by any Decrees. She is like unto a Catte, she can not be
forced or compelled. For else might these Heretics, and Huguenotes choke the
holy Church with her own decrees. For they would bring forth this Canon, Vt
quid Canon: De consecr. did. 2.
prima quidem Canon: Non hoc corpus: and such other like. Thereby to teach,
that there is but one ghostly or spiritual food set forth in the Sacrament,
which is received only by faith, The sacrament a spiritual food.
and not eaten nor swallowed up with the teeth. Further, they would come out
with the decree in the chapter, Legin^us: ff. Quid enim, did. 93. thereby to
prove, That all Bishops have like authority, Bishops like in authority.
in what place soever they be, whether at Rome, or at Canterbury: and by that
means should all the authority of the Pope become creeple and lame: which
were a pitiful case. By this the lay people ought to receive in both kinds.
They would go about to teach out of the Chapter Vbinam. distinct. 96. that
they ought likewise to come into the Councelles, and to have their voices in
the Consistory: Cap. co^perimus de constable. dis. 2. Fra Petrus ca. lacrimae. ca.
sacrifici^ ca. dici ca. magna pi^tas. ca. facilius. ca. conuertimin. and mo
other de penis tent. did. 2.
even as well as the anointed Priests: which might bring in a great
confusion and disorder. They would maintain by ye decree of pope Gelasius,
That the cup in the Sacrament, ought likewise to be ministered to the Lay
people, according to the institution and ordinance of Christ: for ye Gela. does
esteem the^ for terrible blasphemers of God, and robbers of ye church, which in
that case do not follow the special commandment of Christ. They would with
the decree in the chapter Placuit de consecra. did. 4. bring freewill to the
gallows. Ca. Si quis docuerit. ca. Si quis discernit. did. 28. and ca. Si
quis nuptias. did. 1^* ca. Nicaena. ca. Si quis vituperat. did. 31. ca.
deliciae. ca. quisquis ca. quod dicte did. 41 cap. Si quis carnem. and cap. Si
quis presb. did. 30. ca cleric. cap. pastor. ca. viduas. 1. qu. 2. ca. gloria
episcopi. ca. concesso 12. quaest. 2. and cap. duo sunt genera ca. cleric. 13.
quaest. 1.
They would rid Auricular confession out of the way, and utterly confound the
defending of Priests to marry, and quite abolish the forbearing of flesh:
yea, they would throw down fastens even, and Jack a Lent, and break both
their necks.

Besides all this, they would pluck down all Bishops and Prelates, all
Abba^s, Monks, and Chanons, from their riches, welthinesse, and merry days.
And would make of them poor beggars with Pokes: because it is ordained by
special words in the Decrees, That spiritual persons shall not enjoy any
lands or possessions. And even so would they dispossess the holy father the
Pope, of all his patrimoniall goods and heretage, whereof Saint Peter (by his
testament) has put him in plentiful and peaceable possession: and would leave
him nothing but this bare devise or proverb: Aurum and argentum non est mecum,
That is to say, I have neither gold nor silver by me. And so, where he is
now a rich God, they would in stead thereof, make of him a poor devil:
and then they would drive all Priests and Parsonnes, Monks, Friars, and
Nonnes, into their Churches and Cloisters, even as men would drive a heard of
swine into their Styes* and that by force of the decree: Cap. Clerici. causa.
14. quaest. 4. and cap. peruenit. did. 86. and more such like, which are
written in the 86. distinction.

And now note another thing, which is worst of all: they would mainteyne, that
all Priests, Monks, and Chanons, with all the hellish, shorn, and greasy
swarm, are ex^^^able and shameless heretics: yea, accursed and false thieves*
and that al Cardinals, Bishops, and Popes, have effectually and Ipso facto,
forfeyted all their offices, authorities, benefices, and prebendes, according
to the decree: Si quis: did. 69. cap. Null^^. cap. Baptisando. 1. cap.
Quicquid cap. Placuit. and an innumerable company and, too long to rehearse.
So that herewithall should our dear mother the holy Church of Rome be clean
rooted out, and spoiled of all her goodly treasures, riches, possessions, and
governments: and in the end should utterly loose her credit and countenance:
and being forced to play the bankrupt, should be driven into an hospital, there
to end her sorrowful and miserable days.

Therefore let every man, which will pretend to be a good and faithful member
of the holy Church, look well about him, that he in no manner of wise, for any
thing that may be, do extol the decrees so high, that the holy Church of Rome
should be subject unto them: but let our holy mother always remain
vnhindered, at liberty and free, that she may freely, as touching all
Decrees, Canons, writings, and ordinances, dispense, ordeine, judge, dispose,
order and reserve: and in sum, bind the devil upon a cushen: for she neither
may nor will be constreyned in any matter: considering that she is like unto
these old Foxes, which can not be taken in any trappe: She can leap over
all gates, and hedges, over all ditches and quagmires, over al parkes and
pales, and she has no other order nor rule, but what she thinks good, even
her own devotion, her good intent, etc. And to conclude, that which she
perceyueth to tend most unto her pleasure and profit.

The vi. Chapter. VVherin is concluded, out of that which is aforesaid, that
the benefit and profit of the Church of Rome, is the only rule and direction
of all scriptures, decrees and Councels.
Hereupon may we boldly conclude, and out of that which is said before make a
most true and infallible general rule, The holy Church of Rome the very knot
of all writings decrees and councils.
That neither the holy Scripture of the old and new Testaments, nor the
writings and doctrine of the old fathers, nor Councels, nor Decrees, nor any
other institution or ordinance in the world, can be specially holden for the
certain rule of faith, whereunto the Church is bound: nor yet for the
traditions and institutions of the holy Church, which all Catholic men are
bound to believe, upon pain of damnation. But the estimation and benefit of
the holy Church of Rome, is the only principal and most sure rule and direction
whereby all Scriptures, councels, ordinances and decrees must be guided and
governed. Yea, it is the very prick, the white and the but, wh^reat all good
Catholic christian people must shoot al their arrows, and lay their just
leuel. Therefore, whenever the holy Scripture will serve, the turn of our
dear mother the Church of Rome, she may accordingly use it: and wherein so
ever the Councels can do her any service, she may command them: and when the
old Fathers say any thing, that can further her cause, she may allow it and
let the rest go.

Also, wherein soever the decrees may further her purpose, she may have them in
reputation, and make them equal with Gods word. But whenever the Scripture
does make against her, she may find a gloss, or an Allegory upon it, and so
cover the matter with a blewe mantle. And when the old Fathers write any
thing, which soundes against her holiness, she may thrust them out of the
doors, and send them packing. And wherein soever she does mislike of the
Councels, she may admit and approve other councels against them, and so drive
one thunder away with another. And when soever the decrees tend any thing
against ye maintenance of her honorable state, she may boldly deface the^, and
set an earmarke on the^, which she calls Palea, yt is to say, Chafe, or
Straw: or else she may sau^e them with something, and add unto them a gloss
of Accursius* or Panormitanus: or of John Andraeas, which will bring ye matter
in frame.

As for example: Whereas almighty God does by his holy word command, That
no man shall make any image or likeness, This is so set forth in the counsel
of Nice in action 4. and is likewise set out by Eckius in his Man.
that is spoken only for the Jews. And as the Council of Africa (only because
of the ambition of the Popes of Rome, who would have questions and suites to
come before them, and there be determined) did ordeine, This forbidding
stands in the first book of the ^ouncelles Con. Afric. can. ^2 and the
letters of the popes which had procured to have all appeals sent to Rome, are
set out in the end of the councils.
That no man should transport any matter over Sea, by appellation, and such
like. Thereupon shall her Ca. Plac. vt Pres. 2.4.6.
Gratianus graciously gloss, excepting only, such as shall appeal to Rome.
And whereas Pope Ca. Comperimus de con. did. 2. and the gloss upon the word
aut integra.
Gelasius does command, that every one (which will not shamefullie separate
the Sacrament of Christ) shall minister the supper of the Lord, under both
kinds, to wit, of bread and wine. That must be understood only, upon al
priests: and so like upon all other.

And when as they can find no good gloss to cover the matter withal, then it
is sufficient to say, Even so does the gloss answer upon the demand in the
Cap. Constitutionis, did. 10. whereas is said, That no Decrees are of value,
which dissent from the good seed.
Non credo: I do not believe it: or, These bytextes does the gloss bring upon
the decrees, That every man shall receive the Lords supper incontinent as the
consecration is done, cap. peracta de consecratione. did. ^.
Hoc antiquum est, This is ancient, and happened In illo te^pore, In that time,
etc. In sum, she will use the matter so handsomely, as shall make most for her
own advantage. Then you may perceive well enough, that she is like the honey
Be, which will sit upon every flower, and fetch out of every one of them yt
which serves her turn, to fill her hiue with pleasant and sweet honey: and
what soever is not appliable or agreeing to her purpose, that she leaves
untouched. Therefore, the foundation of the holy Church of Rome may very well be
called, A Be hiue, having the property of a tubbe, wherein al manner of
pleasant things are put.

The vii. Chapter. VVherin is declared, that the Church of Rome can likewise
help her self with the opinions and doctrine of the old Heretics, in
follovving the same, when it serves for her purpose.
Now, so far it is from our dear mother the holy Church, to be afraid to
spring over the pales of the holy Scripture, holy church helps her self with
the opinions of heretics.
ancient Fathers, Councelles, and Decrees: that often times she will go and
solace her self in the pleasant meadows and green fields of the old
heretics, which have always bin extreme enemies and directly contrary to
the holy scripture and the Fathers: and of them does she borrowe very many
goodly iewelles, Read Augu^t. in the book of Heresies, and where he writes
against the Pelagians Ephesians ^.8. Phil. 2.13.
too furnishe and beautiefie her Gabanet, or be Hiue withal, For it is well
known and evident, that she has learned of the Heretic Pelagius, That we
(notwithstanding the fall of Adam) do still possess a free will, and have
power to Justify our selves, and to fulfill all the commandments of God, if
we our selves will: and That it is not the only grace of God, whereby we are
justified, Romans 3.24.
as Paul does teach: but an helper only, after that we of our selves have
prepared our selves thereunto. Also, In the counsel of Trent in the 7. sess.
Can. 10. and in the 14. ses. can 8.
That Christ did by his death merit: for original sin only: and that for all
other our daily sins, we our selves must answer and make sufficient amends.
Of the Messalians, or Euchites: and likewise of the Pelagians, Theodoret. in
the 4. book of the Heretics.
she has gathered, that baptism alone, does not make us perfect Christians:
but is only necessary to wash away our original sin, and to help us out of
our first shipwreck. Cap. omnes fideles. dis. 3. cap. ^. de poenit. dis* and
in the 4. book of the Sent. in the 14. did. ca. 1
But if we fall again, and so run in danger of a second shipwreck, the^ we
must seek for another pla^ke to help us out of hazard. She has likewise
sucked out of ye breasts of ye Messalia^s, to mumble out her Mattines, The
seven Psalms, and the Pater noster by* number upon a pair of beads, and with
a burning candle: pretending thereby to obtain great pardones, and to do unto
God great service. Also, whereas she does use spittle in baptizing after that
the devil is coniured: Theodoret. in his 4. book cont. haeret.
that she took of the Messalians, who did teach, That men might drive away
the devil with spitting. Of the Saturnialles, Ebeonites, Tatians, and
Encratites; she has learned, That the state of Marriage is unclean and
spotted: and that such as will please God, and be clean purified, must wholly
refrain them selves from it. Also, That there is great holiness in absteining
from eating of flesh, and using of certain other meats: although she has
set the things out under another color, to the end men might not know from
whence they come. Besides this, she has borrowed of the Montanistes many new
fasting days, Apollonius in his book against the Montani^s. and Eusebius. in his
5. book, cha. 1^
which she has commanded and confirmed, to be observed, upon pa^ne of great
punishment: and beside that, on or ceme^ts. In the school of the Coloredlanes,
she has learned to pray to the holy Virgin Marie, Theodor. in the 3. book
Epipha^. in the second part of 3. book in the 51. Heresy. Theodor in the 1.
book
and to immolate or offer up her oblations. Of Marcus the sorcerer and
Heretic, she has learned to use in her service, and sacrifices, certain
strange words, in Hebrewe, and other languages. Of the Anthropomorphites, to
painte God the Father in the form of a man, with a gray beard. Of the Gnostikes,
and Carpocratians, to set up images of Christ, and other Saints, Irinaeus in
the 1. book against Heresies in the 24. Chap.
and to worship the same with censing, and other manner of devotions: unless
men will say (as Eusebius in ye 7. book of histories in the 18. chap. does
declare) that this erecting of images did first spring from ye Heathen. And
last of all, she has learned of Simon the sorcerer, and father of al
Heretics, Act. 8.19.
to give Bishoprikes, and Benefices, Mass, Mattius, and Sacraments for money,
and yet not to sell them. For it is but a simple bargain or contract, which
the Lawyers call, Do, vt des: I give, that thou may give again: Even like
to Simon, who would give money, to receive ye holy ghost. So that it is very
plain and apparaunt, that she can help her self well enough with the
doctrines and opinions of Heretics: and suck out of them, what she thinks
good, to carry into her Be hiue. Yea, she does in many things agree with
the Alcaron of Mahomet, and with the Turks religion: Azoar. 1.
as specially, in many pilgrimages, in praying unto dead Saints, in the
observing of fasting days, in diverse sorts and orders of Monks, and
particularly, in the doctrine of Freewill, and justification by works. Now,
whether they have borrowed that of Mahomet, or he received it from them, by
reason he had a holy Monk, one Sergius, for an assistent and companion: I
refer that to the judgment of the Doctors of Louen. Thus much once by the
way, that it is easy to be noted, that it is all one per dominum, and all
diet in one fat: and that she is like to a cunning spinner, which can make
good thread of all sorts of flax.

The viii. Chapter. Declaring that the Church of Rome has likewise borrowed
many things of the jews, which she does set forth and hold as articles
of the faith.
The holy To. church borrowes many things of the Jews.
Now, as touching the Jews, she has not forgotten to follow them sundry
ways: and that is apparent enough, in that which our master Gentianus has
declared in this work. For he will maintain, that the Transubstantiation of
the bread into the very body of Christ, and the changing or turning of the
substance of the wine into his very blood, may be proved by the testimonies
of the Iewishe Rabbines. And that is without doubt: for one of their Rabbines
named, Rabbi Moses Hazardan, writing upon the 136. Psalm, where the Prophet
says, O Lord thou give all flesh their food, says thus: This text does
fully and wholly agree with that which is said in the 34. Psalm: Taste, and
see how pleasant the Lord is. For the bread or meat which he gives to every
man, is his flesh: and with the tasting, or with the eating, it is turned into
flesh Out of this has a good Monk and a Catholic writer concluded, That this
Jewish Rabbin did well understand Transubstantiation: Petrus Galatinus in his
book Of the Secrets of the Catholic truth. in the 6. chap. of the 10. book
which he does yet again confirm by another, named Rabbie Cahana, who
utters marvelous and wonderful speculations, upon that text of Moses, where
Jacob did promise to his son Judah, an unspeakable and unmeasurable quantity
of wine and milk, by these words: He shall bind his foales to the vinetree,
and his asses to the noble vine branches: he shall wash his clothing in wine,
and his mantle in the blood of grapes: his teeth are whiter than milk. For out
of these words of Jacob, does the foresaid Rabbi conclude, That the ass
does here signify Messiah, into whose body and blood the wine shall be
changed. See now, is not this a strong and an invincible foundation, against
which the gates of hell can not prevail? For that agrees even as well
together, as a fiste in Gentianus nose.

Besides this, are established out of these Rabbines, the suburbs of hell, and
by them declared, That ye holy Fathers are lodged there, against the coming of
Messiah. For that could the Rabbines finely fish out of that, which is written
in the book of Ecclesiastes: This you shall ^^^de written in one of their
books called Midiasc^h^l^t, which is* to say, The explanation of the
Ecclesiast^s, or sentences of Solomon. Eccle. 7.13.
There are some just, which are killed in their righteousness. Does not this
serve well for the purpose?

Furthermore, out of the Thalmoode is proved, that Marie, our Lord JESUS
Christ's mother, was conceived without original sin. For one of their
Rabbines called Rabbi Judas, Simons son, does so speculate, saying, That the
In the book called Galirasepa, which is to say, The explaner of the hid or
secret things
matter whereof the mother of the Messiah should be generate, was formed before
that Adam fell, and so preserved from generation to generation, without
polluting. And this does he teach out of the Psalm, wherein is written: O
Lord, seek out the plant which thy right hand has planted. Is not that
merue^^ously well alleged, and the nail hit right on the head? Verily, it may
very well be compared with an other doctrine of theirs, where they say, That
God in the beginning did make two Whale fishes, a male and a female, and
fearing least they should bring forth a monstrous generation, he killed the
one, and so laid him in pickle against the coming of Messiah: Read Munster in
his Hebrewe Dialogue of Messiah.
at which time he will kill the other likewise: and then shall the Jews make a
banquet thereof, and have noble cheer: for the one Whale fish they shall eat
fresh, and the other well powdered. And I marvel, whether they will not bid
our dear mother the holy Church of Rome to their banquet. But in that they may
well enough bear one with another: it is enough for us to k^ow, that they have
likewise established the foundation of their belief and doctrine upon the
Thalmoode of the Jews: which is a marvelous great book, wherein all their
Caballes, that is to say, all the doctrines and monumentes of their Rabbines,
all their dreams and visions, al their profound and bothomles speculations,
and strange iestes, are heaped up together like a dunghill. But now, for that
we shall not need to rehearse every thing particularly, it is most true, that
the nation and Caballa of the Jews is the best ground, and the truest well
spring of all the ceremonies of the holy church of Rome. For that is specially
set forth and noted in the book of Dec^ees, where it is written. That she has
borrowed her Ember days of the Jews, Cap. Ieiunio. did. 76.
whose order and manner (says the text) is the original spring whereunto the
holy church must stick fast.

Yea (I pray you) who is so gross and dull of wit, that can not conceive of
him self, that she has had of the Jews the very example or pattern, whereby
she has made and counterfeited, so many fair and goodly ordinances, statutes
and ceremonies? Whereby she has workmanlie wrought all her silken, gilce, and
embrodered copes, vestementes, and myters, even as with a fine needle: and all the rich relikes, prounking jewels, altars, candlestickes, candles, and
torches: and to be short, all the goodly ornaments, which you may see in the
church, were made by the example and pattern of them. And their Sancta
Sanctoru^, that is to say, The Holy of Holiest, or The most Holy place upon
earth, which she has pacte up at Rome, in a corner of a chapel, at S John de
Laterane: whereof has she gotten that, but only of the Jews, in whose Temple
at Jerusalem, the innermost and most secret place where God did sometimes
appear, called in their language, Roodes radaschim, that is to say The holy
of holiest? For in place of that, they had there the Arc of the promise, with
the covering, called The Mercy seat, or Propitiatorium: wherein was kept a
viole with Manna, and the flourishing rod of Moses: which things our dear
mother the holy church of Rome can not come by: and therefore has she set up
another chest, with relikes in it, wherein she does keep very gingerly and
devoutly, the foreskinne or Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, with his
slippers, and his navel skin, as plainly appears by the verses, which
stand written before the same place, which are these under written: Circumcisa
caro Christi, sandalia clara:
Ac vmbilici, viget hic praecisio chara.


That is to say: The foreskinne of Christ,
And his slippers likewise:
With the skin of his navel,
In this cofine lies.


Read over and peruse the decrees thoroughly in the 1. did. de co^secrat. and
speciall^ the 2. chap. Item the did. 21.23.77. thoroughly, and many other mo.
Item peruse thoroughly the book of Durandus, and specially where he speaks of
sacrifices and altars.
Now, after all this, have we not borrowed of the Jews, even our holy father
the Pope, and all our Priests and Deacons: yea, all our Temples, Churches,
offerings and sacrifices? ye^ marie have we: or else all the holy fathers and
Popes have falsely lied in their hearts, which have scraped together the books
of the decrees: yea, and then must Durandus, What? do I speak of Durandus?
yea, (I say) all our stout Catholic doctors have dallied with us, whereas
they give us to understand, that they have borrowed all that of the Jews. But
what is this to the purpose? Truly we have learned in their Phariseis seat
and Synagogue, That such must be hanged, which break the Emperors placarde:
and will rather depend upon Jesus Christ, than upon the ordinance of the
Church. Have not the Doctors of Louen likewise borrowed of them the name of
Rabbottenu, Touching this lo^ke upon the scripture. John. 12.12. Matthew. 23.7.
or Rabbini, that is to say, Magistri nostri, which sounds in our mother
tongue, as much as Our masters: provided always, that men may not say Nostri
magistri, for that were herisie, but we pronounce it after the Jewish phrase,
setting Nostri after Magistri, as if we should say, Masters ours, and not Our
masters. Item, that men must set them at the upper end of the table? and the
killing of Prophets and Martyrs, and th^n make them goodly tumbes? for
therefore it is that they do maintain the shrines of the Martyrs in such
prayer and worship, in witness (as Christ himself said) that they are the
children of them which have murdered the Prophets of God, Mat. 27.6.29.31.32.
and the martyrs or witnesses of Christ Jesus, and will follow the steps of
their forefathers, but it is not needful to rehearse all things particularly,
considering that the holy Church has set forth a general rule hereof in the
book of decrees. For in the same text, where it is said, That they have
learned of the Jews to annoint their altars, and to trim them with many
proper things, is argumented and reasoned thus: Cap. consecrat. Si qualiter
ergo de consec. did. 1.
Seeing that the Jews which did but serve in a shadow and dark figure, did
notwithstanding all those things: how much more ought we being by duty bound
to do the like: to whom the very truth is manifestly revealed. Whereby men
may plainly perceive, that is very lawful for the holy Church: yea, and that
of duty she ought to do all things, whatsoever the Jews have done
heretofore. So that it is no marvel, that she has of her self set up so many
new ceremonies, and sacrifices, and brought in so many Patrones and Baalims,
Baalim, is as mu^ch to say in Hebrew as a Captain, a defender, a master, or
such like: and therefore they did name dead persons and other creaturs which
the people did choose to be the^r patrones or capteines, and advocates, Baalim.
builded altars, and erected chapels in all high places and ways: and that
she does daily kill the Prophets, and does crucify Christ again in his
members. For seeing the Jews have done so, she is much more bound to do it.
And upon this point is the before alleged text very plain and clear, saying
thus: Hereby it does appear, that men may allege and bring in good arguments
and instructions upon the examples of the Infidels. Which does serve our
purpose very well, to the setting forth of this our purpose, considering that
hereby is apparaunt, that matter which we have in hand, to wit, that our mother
the holy Church, is not subject to any Bible or word of God: and much less
to any Councels or Popes decrees: but may dongue her ground with all kind of
dyrte, and may make her Be hiue fat.

The ix. Chapter. Wherein is declared, that the holy Church of Rome has
gathered many things of the doctrine and examples of the Heathen, which she
has converted and turned to her own commodity and profit.
YEa, here it is plainly to be seen, The holy Romish Church does follow
many examples of the heathen.
that she does not help her self with the Jews only: but likewise with all
sorts of false doctrine, religion, and examples. So that it is evident, that
she has followed the steps and Religion of the godless Infidels, as well
Romans as other, wheresoever the same might serve her turn. For out of the
round Temple at Rome, which is called La Rotunda, which was in those days by
the Heathen dedicated to all the Gods, and to that end was named by a Greek
word Pantheon: thereof has she made (following the said Heathen) a Temple
for our Lady, and all the Saints. All Saints in place of all heathen gods.


But is were mere foolish to stand upon one example, thereby to prove a matter,
whereof all the books, and the whole Theology of the Catholic men is full
even to the top. For the very foundation it self of their doctrine and
divinity, is much more deeply grounded and built upon the doctrine of
Aristotle, than upon any, either Prophet or Apostle: by this same token, that
at this present, a Doctors hoode, or the Caputium of a Theologian or Divine at
Louen, is called Aristotle's breeche or Codpeece. Yea, and moreover, the most
part of all our Scotistes, Thomistes, Albertistes, Occamistes, Realistes,
Nominalistes, and other Doctors, are sprung up, of Aristotle, of Plato, of
Porphyrius, Auerroes, Abeupace, and such other like Saints, even as out of
their head spring and principal well.

In so much also, that the Doctors and Theologians of Colen have very wittily
conclud^d: That Aristotle has been Praecursor Dei in naturalibus, sicut
Ioha^nes Baptista in diuinis: that is to say, Aristotle was the forerunner of
God in all things natural, as John Baptist was in things divine and
supernatural. And for this cause, This does P. Barnardo of Luxenburgh witness
in the book called Catalogus Haeveticorum.
amongst other, has the holy Church condemned Martin Luther, for that the
doctrine of Aristotle (which is the very mother of the divinity of the
Louanistes, Sorbonistes, and Colenars) was by him rejected, and nothing set by.
After this does the worthy Bishop Dura^dus testify, Durandus in the book
called Rationale diuinorum of^icior* in the first book in the Rubrike De
Dedicatione Eccle.
That the holy church did learn of Nabuchodonozor, to halowe their churches,
and altars, even like as he caused his golden image to be hallowed and
consecrated, which he would have all people and nations to pray unto.

So that it ought not to seem strange to any man, that the Church (according
to his example) does likewise cause Heretics to be burnt, which will not
pray to her images, considering that he caused the three young men of the
Hebrews, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, to be thrown into the hoate burning
oven, because they denied to pray unto his consecrated golden image. But what
need I to trouble my self much with these matters? The children in the
streets do know well enough, that a great many of the ceremonies of the holy
Church of Rome, are gathered out of the ordinances and religion of Numa
Pompilius king of Rome. For the decrees, You may read this in the book of
Decrees cap. Clericos ff. pont. did. 21.
and the book of Sentences do very cunningly set forth, that from thence they
proceed: and that, in these days, men call the Pope in Latin, Pontifex,
because Numa Pompilius caused his high Priests so to be named. In the 4. book
of the Sente^. ^etri Lombardi in cap 10.
From thence likewise the generation of Priests has issue. For like as Numa
Pompilius had his Flamines, Numa Pompilius.
Arches^amines, and Protos^amines appointed: even so now has the holy church
her Sacerdotes, that is, her Priests, her Archipresbyteros, that is, her high
Priests: and her Protonotaries: In the 7 book of the (...) at (...), an 54
cap. 2. did. 21.
as by plain words is to be seen in the book of decrees. So that Eberardus
Bishop of Saltzburgh, about 200. years ago, at a general assembly (called a
Rii^x day) did very well and rightly, in naming the Priests of Rome, Flamines
Babyloniae, Petras de natali. lib. 7. ^ap 3. D^ran (...) diuino of^^. b 7.
Rubr. de festo S. Petri.
that is to say, Babylonish Priests. And has not our bear mother the holy
Church ordained the bonefire of Peter ad Vincula, in place of a holy day,
whereon at the same time the Heathen did make bonefires to the honor of the
Emperor Augustus? Johannes de Voragine in h^stor. ^ombar^i, cap. 105. Bapti.
man^uan. fast. 8.
And likewise the other saint Peter's day, which is commonly calls Saint Peter's
Seat: is not that come in place of another bonefire day, Durand. rational
diuino of^i. lib. 7 Rubr. de ca^^ed. Petrus de catho. lib. 3. ca. 140. Bap.
Mant. f^^t. 414.2.
which the Heathen did observe at the same time? And Ca^dlemasse* (I pray you)
what is that else, but a kind of Candlemasse which the Heathen did use, whereon
they, even at the same time of the year, used fire with burning of torches and
candels, in the worship of Ceres, Proserpina, and Flora? And of whom have they
learned (I pray you) that every man must serve God, according to the usage of
his own country, and as his fathers have done before him, but only of
Pythagoras, and of Plato? Pythagoras in the first verse of his golden verses,
or aureorum carminum.

Plato in his book called Timeus, whom many as well Greeks as Latins have
here in followed. Ezech. 20.18.19.


A thing directly contrary to the commandment of God, who says by the mouth
of his Prophet Ezechiel: You shall not live after the commandments of your
fathers, neither observe their statutes, neither pollute your selves with their
idols: for I am the Lord your God. You shall live after my commandments, and
you shall observe my statutes, and follow them. Where have they fished out the
Legende of Saint Margarete, but only out of the fable of Andromeda, or Hesiona,
the daughter of Laomedon? And what is their S. George, S. George.
but a dumb or mumming Perseus, or an Hercules on horseback? Chrystopherus.
And her Chrystopher is a new Polyphemus or Nessus. And her seven Sleepers,
are not they of the kindred of Endymion? After all this, what does this mean,
that they have so specially commanded, That all their altars should be set
toward the East, but that they will directly herein follow the example of the
Heathen, who in honor of the Sun, whom they named Apollo, did in all their
prayers and offerings turn them selves towarde^ the East? Considering
especially, that God had for the same cause forbidden the Jews, to be like
unto the Heathen in that point, as to turn their faces toward the East. But
the holy Church (as touching this matter) was much wiser tha^ God: This does
Guido de monte Rocheri^ write in his book called Enchei^id. sacerdot im, that
is to say, The Manuel of priests in titulo de Sacramentis Eucharist.
for she w^ll hereby give to understand that Christ is risen or sprung from
the highest: and that after the doctrine of Aristotle and other Philosophers,
the East is on the right side of heaven, where as Christ, at the day of
judgment, will place his elect. Is not this a deep speculation? Who would
ever have thought, that such doltish Asses, could have found out such a great
and profound secret, which God him self did never think on?

The x. Chapter. Which concludes, that the Church of Rome has gathered all
these before named pieces together, and taken out of them, what she ha^h
thought good, which are called [Traditiones Romanae Ecclesiae] that is to say,
The traditions of the church of Rome, and the foundation of our beleef^.
But if I should now bring in all things particularly, to pro^e, Traditions of
the holy church
h^we that our dear mother has (very finely and subtily) brought in and
mingled the Philosophy and Poetry of the Ethnikes, with her Religion, and
Gods service: I should have work enough for seven years. Therefore this is
sufficient for us, that by this it may well be perceived, that she has
gathered her holiness and ceremonies, as well out of the Heathen authors, as of
the Jews, and old Heretics, and brewed the same all together so cunningly,
that it is a marvelous pleasant cup of drink, to swallow down without any
chewing. So that now we may stoutly conclude upon the former question, what
that is for a beast, which men call Traditiones Ecclesiae, The traditions of
the Church of Rome. Seeing we now well perceive, that her foundation and ground
stands not upon the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephe. 2.10.
(like as Paul would in his time have maintained:) much less then upon the
Councels, Fathers, and decrees: but it is partly founded upon the Scripture,
being first well glosed and sophistically handled: partly out of the chiefest
writings of the old fathers: partly out of the scomme of the Councels and
decrees: partly out of the fine flower of old Heretics: partly out of the
Caballa of the Jews Rabbines: and lastly, out of the Theology of Numa
Pompilius, the Philosophy of Aristotle, and out of the examples of the Heathen.

This was even thus concluded at the last council of Trent, in the 3. session.
where as the determination of the Church was made equal with the Scripture.
Now all gathered together on a heap, and baked in a cake, are called
Traditiones sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, The traditions or commandments of the
holy Church of Rome. Which upon pain of damnation of the soul, and the body,
to be burnt in fire, must of necessity be believed of al men, and holden in as
great reputation, as the word of God it self, which is written in the holy
Scriptures.

Therefore it is, that the books of the holy Catholic subjects of the
Church, The Indians have in one part of the country a manner of garment made of
the feathers of Popingates of all colors, and the more fantastical and
changeable that their garment is, the more it is esteemed.
as Eckius, Piggius, Hosius, Bunderius, Asotus, Ruardus Tapparde, Johannes
Latomus, Johannes a Louanio Franciscus Sonnius, Gulielmus Blindasinus, Iodocus
Rauestein a Tileto, and other more, are finely set forth and bravely decked
with feathers of all colors after the Indian fashion, and trimmed up with all
costly stuff, even like Saint James wi^h his shelles: and sometime they fetch
a witness or authority out of the Scripture by the neck, sometime out of the
fathers: then a Council out of a corner, and a decree of some Pope or Bishop:
sometimes they bring out an example from the Jews, and an allegory, or some
tri^le out of the Thalmoode: and now and then a sy^logisme out of Aristotle or
Porphyrius, or else a verse out of Virgil, or Ovid, and such other like,
skipping and leaping like Monkies, from one place to another, and so help
themselves with hands and feet, and with all the ^^^mes of their body.
Provided always, that they hang still as fast on their principal foundation,
as a thief on the gallows: to wit, That the holy Church cannot err, nor by
any means go out of the right way. For as long as they hold that end fast,
they can never loose the threede. And it is but folly to talk: the Heretics
must needs be taken in the trappe: for if by chance they escape out at one
hole, they are by and by caught in another. After this, they brewe you a noble
and pleasant drink, iumbling the old fathers and the new together, the true
with the false. And if they can once catch an Augustine, or an Ambrose, by the
neck, then will they after that bring in a trim toy, of the fine letters of
Clemens, and Anacletus, which a dronken Monk, and unlearned buffell, did
babble out somewhere on a Saint Martins even, and mingle therewithal the
goodly fables of one Dionysius, whom they call Areopagita, which one of the
seven sleepers have found (I wot not where) behind a bank: then also come
they lustily forth with a Thomas de Aquino, or a Scotus, and join with him a
Bricot, or a Holcot, or a Peter de Broda, to keep him company. And lastly,
for a sauce, they bring in upon that their Legendum Aureum, and then Dormi
secure, and so make thereof a Compost, or, as it is called at Louen, a Brodium,
such as the Heretics must needs bur^^, if they taste but one spoonefull of
it. And this is the invincible Panoplia, or Stratage^ma, that is, The
defensible furniture and fighting weapons of war, which the right honorable
Bishop Guilielmus Blindasinus uses. This is the Verbum no^ scriptum, the
unwritten word or verity, which all Catholic writers do always stand
upon: this is Consuetudo sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, that is to say, The usage
and old custom of the holy church of Rome, whereon they boast themselves a
great deal more, than any town does of their privileges. This is
Traditiones patrum, The traditions of the fathers, of which the children do
boldly boast and brag: In sum, this is the ground and foundation of the
hellish Catholic Romish belief, whereupon our dearly beloved mother the holy
Church does stand so fast, as it will be very hard for all the devils of
hell to blow her off with all their bellows.

The xi. Chapter. Which teaches, how that upon this foundation, Heretics
must be examined. And what questions are to be proponed unto them in the
inquisition.
THerefore the order and manner to dispute with Heretics now adays, The
examination of Heretics.
is no more to bring in many Scriptures or Councels against them, for therein
would they be too ready and ripe reasoners: but we must only lay before them
the good intents, ordinances, and statutes of the holy Church. And it is
sufficient to prove that, by any one of the arguments before specified: for
whenever men can allege only one, whether it be out of the Fathers,
Councels, Decrees, or out of Aristotle, or Virgil, then it is cock on our
side, and the battle is won. But now contrariwise, whenever the Heretics
go about to overthrow any article of the belief by the holy Church brought in
and established, it is not therefore sufficient, that they prove it to be
contrary to the Scripture: for that is but one witness. And it is a common
proverb: Vnus testis, nullus testis, One witness, no witness: but they must
prove it to be directly against all these before rehearsed, or else they
remain in the sack: and by this means shall we (without doubt) get the
victory and upper hand over all our enemies. For by this foundation are all the Lutheranes, and Huguenotes, condemned, banished, and accursed. Upon this
ground they are delivered over into the hands of temporal officers, as rank
Heretics. Upon this foundation are they at the last pitifully murdered and
burnt. And wherefore? For this is the very foot whereupon men do condemn for
Heretics, all such as do not believe al, whatsoever the holy church believes.
It skils not out of what ground they have fetched this: whether out of S.
Francis vineyard, or out of the golden Legend, and lives of the ancient
Fathers, or out of the Decrees and Decretals: that is all one, so that it tend
to the benefi^e and establishment of the holy Church of Rome. For as it is
before declared, that is only the foundation of the holy Catholic and Romish
Christen faith. Therefore whatsoever depends thereupon, must (of necessity)
be esteemed, received, and taken for a special article of our belief: and
whosoever will not so accept it, they are damned without mercy: yea, although
they had both Paul and Peter ten times for their advocates: and ten dozen of
Bibles on their side will not serve: for they shall never be demanded, whether
they do believe the Scripture and the Bible? or whether they hold the writing
of Paul for the word of God? or whether they do not acknowledge themselves
to be poor, miserable, lost, and condemned creatures, by the fall of Adam, and
the children of wrath and damnation? And that God of his mere mercy and pity
(without any deserts) has loosed and redeemed them? For all this is but
brabbling, it shall not be demanded of them, whether they do not steadfastly
believe, that they only (through the only oblation of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, once offered upon the cross) are justified before the face and
judgment seat of God? For that is of no importance. And much less shall it
be demanded of them, whether in time of their need, they do call only upon
the only living God, through the mediation and intercession of our only
mediator and intercessour Jesus Christ? For that is altogether Lutherall. What
shall be demanded of them then?

How men shall examine Heretics.
First, and before all, whether they do not believe that the holy Church of
Rome, is the Lady and Queen over all Churches, and that the Pope of Rome is
the head of the same? And whether they do not believe all, whatsoever this
Church believes? After that, if they do not believe in the holy Mass, in
Purgatory, in the miracles of men Saints, and women Saints? Also, what they
do think of the holy Relics? As for example, If they do not believe in the
foreskinne of our Lord Jesus, which is at Antwerpe? in a second, which is at
Rome: in a third, which is at Bezancon: in a fourth, which an Angel brought
once from Jerusalem, into the town of Aken: and lastly; in one which is
seen and worshipped in an Abbay at Poytears in France?

Item, whether they do not believe in the Cribbe which is at Rome in our Ladies
Church, and in our Lords shoes, which are likewise at Rome, in the holy place
called Sancta Sanctorum?

Item, in the Dice wherewith they did play upon his coat, whereof some are at
Triers, and some at S. Saviors in Spain? In the Sponge wherewith they gave
him vinegre to drink, which is at Rome at S. John's de Laterane? And in the
tail of the Ass, whereon he rode, which is set forth with great devotion at
the town of Genuen in Italy, etc? What account they make of the three Kings
which lie at Colen: and yet are likewise at Milane in Italy: of S. John^ head,
which is to be seen at Ghent: notwithstanding that they of Ameens con^ende,
that they have it?

Item, what they esteem of Joseph's breeches which are at Aken, with our Ladies
smock? And further, what they think of our dear Ladies needles, her sowing
thread, and her workebasket, which lie in her silver chist at Halle, where many
goodly miracles have been showed: and of her girdle, which is there likewise:
by virtue whereof so many women have conceived with child: and of her milk
which is so plentiful in many places, that seven of the best kine in Holland
are not able to give so much milk in ten years. Of the holy blood at Bridges,
of the holy Sacrament, of miracles at Bruxols, at Saint Goels church, which is
a pre^te little round thing made of very bone of iuorie: and yet our dear
mother believes, that it is very flesh and blood. After this shall be demanded
of them, what they do believe, of all the glorious Saints. As Saint Lieuen, S.
Gom^er, S* Rombol^, S. Goele, S. Iob^ of W^semale, S. Joyce in Flanders, where
men get children, and mo such other like Saints and Patrones of the holy
church* which have wrought so many miracles, as in very deed no man can tell.
And if the^ do not believe all this, then the matter is clear, that they bear
the whole burden on their backs. And wherefore? Because they do not believe all that the holy church does believe, and therefore they can be no good christen
men. Therefore is Master Gentianus, worthy to be shrined in gold, and set
upon an altar, seeing that he has with few words so substantially taught
the very right way to bridle and bring under these heretics, and to put them
all in a cloak bag: specially those which do not believe whatsoever the
Church believes: all such are unbelieving and damned Heretics.

The xii Chap. Wherein is declared, that the Lutheranes are with this
foundation so valiantly assalted on all sides, that it is not possible for them
to escape any way: and what is the last argument to be objected against them:
is, declared and proved by the example of Transubstantiation.
WHat marvel is it then, that a simple young man, whom he calls Brother
Ligier, durst not dispute against Master Gentianus? For who dare be so bold as
to look such a stout Goliath in the face? I let alone speaking to him: no, and
I would not counsel the Huguenotes to take upon them so to do. For whereas
they think perhaps, with a sling to hit this Giant in the forehead with the
corner stone of Gods word, and to fell him down to the ground: yet must they
know, that all the matter is not ended there. For in place of one, there will
starte up by and by, and innumerable company of stout and valian: Champions,
which will assault them on all sides. For besides all the holy fathers, the
Popes of Rome, besides all the noble and right honorable Cardinals, all
forkeheaded Bishops, all fat Abbats, and proud pra^ing Prelates, there will
yet come (as Gentianus here does brag) a great company of men Saints, and
women Saints, glorious Martyrs, comlie Confessors, and excellent Doctors of
the Church, which the Pope him self has canonized, and bestowed places upon
them in heaven. These surely (in consideration of the benefits they have
received at his hands) will (for the mainteining of his doctrine) hazard both
cappe and cowle: Then siw^her, there will come such a company of goodly
miracles, which surely are so perfectly and also vnreproueably registered in the
golden Legend, that the Heretics must nodes be packing away, if they will do
wisely, and follow good counsel. For if it were se^, that this could not yet
help, then should come in the Doctors of Louen with their great coppintankes,
and Doctors hattes, with their Aristotle's breech on their heads, and his
Liripipium about their necks, Sorts currit, is as much to say, Arguments: and
words called also, for that Petrus Hispanus and other writers of the Louens
Sophistry do for the most part use those examples in their Dialectica, and
are always busy therewith.
and they will bring in all their Syllogismes, their Sorts currit, their
Quidditat^s, Realitates, Formalitates, Ecceitates, Identitates, Secundas
intentiones, Instantias, and many more of like learning, which they will
quickly shoot up in the air, in such sort, that the multitude of their
arrows will darken the Sun: And at the last, they will pluck out of their
quiver, a strong and a swift bolte or argument, which the scholemen call This is
an argument or prophecy of faggots.
Argumentum a fasciculis, that neither Bible nor Testament, neither Peter nor
Paul, Sorts currit in these are all feinid names, which the divines always use
in their subtle disputations, to the end no man shall understand them, but
their own scholars.
shall be able to help the poor heretics: and so they must altogether daunse
into the fire, and be burn^ to ashes. This is most true and apparent, and
needs no proof or witness. Notwithstanding, seeing that Gentianus him self*
to show his stoutnesse and noble courage, does allege and bring forth a
certain example* as it were for an attempt or skirmishe: therefore will I take
the same upon me, and explane it further: ^o the end, that every man may see,
with what strong weapons our dear mother with all her soldiers, horsemen and
footmen, is furnished. And thus says Master Gentianus here, That the
Lutheranes and Huguenotes can in no wise be reputed and taken for right
believers, so long as they do not believe, that the bread and the wine in the
blessed Sacrament of the altar (as soon as ever the five words are spoken
over them) are no more bread and wine, Thom. de Aquin. in the 3. patte Summar.
Item, in the 4. book of the Senten. and in the Extrauaga^* in titulo de cons.
missar. all thorough. And ca. Ego ^ereng. through the co^. did. 2. and in the
Clementines, de reliq. and veneratione Sanctor. and by all Catholic doctors
but by and by become the very perfect body and blood of Jesus Christ, as
long, and as broad as it was hanging upon the cross.

Now then, who dares once kick or winche against this? Or how can these
Heretics wrestle against this? whereas, to begin withal, generally the holy
Catholic, Apostolical, Papisticall, Romish Church, with her Pontifical
seat and crown, with all her Cardinals ha^tes, Bishops myters, Abbats slaves,
Priests crowns, Monks cowles, and Doctors hoodes, do not only believe so,
but likewise do specially command, and will so have it in deed: that al other
persons shall so likewise believe, and that upon pain of deadly sin? Well
then, it is a sealed ^loth* there is no more to say to the matter* For
Johannes Scotus has him self said absolutely, That if those five words
should be spoken in a market place, I^hannes Scotus in the 4. book of
sentences.
or in a Bakers house, where much bread were: or in a seller, where much wine
were: the said bread would by and by be turned into flesh, and the wine into
blood. Yea, this has been proved by many wonderful tokens, as you may see,
The sacrament of miracles at Bruxels.
and hear at Bruxels, in Saint Goels Church, where the Jews stand painted,
which did stick the holy Sacrament there through with daggers, and the red
blood came running out. For you may yet see red spots painted upon it. At
Padua.
And at Padua in Italy in Saint Anthonies Church, stands graven upon an
altar, Saint Anthony of Padua, going alongest the street with the Sacrament:
and some Jews that were there did mock it, and would not kneel down, and by
and by there came an Ass alongest the street, which seeing that it was very
flesh and blood, This does Thomas de Aquino set forth: and the Legend of
Gregory, and Vincentius Lirinensis, and all other Catholic writers.
did fall very deuoutely upon his knees, and did open his mouth so wide, that
Saint Anthony of Padua did est^eme the same for such a great miracle, as does
wholly confound these Heretics with hide and hair thrust in their throtes: as
is in his Legend set forth more at large* Was not that a goodly and wonderful
miracle? What will these Heretics say to this, when that Asses do believe it,
and yet they esteem it not? We read likewise of Saint Gregory: how he being
busy at Mass, and having spoken the five words, the holy Sacrament was
soudeinly (through his prayer) converted and turned into a fleshly and visible
finger: and that for a good Gentlewomans sake, which could not well believe
that it was flesh. Likewise, it is written, A miracle of the five words.
that there was a good and a devout woman, which had heard in secret of her
Curate the five words: and being with her Gossep kneeding of doaw, to make
bread, she rehearsed by chance to her Gossep the secrets of the Mass, which
she had learned of the Priest: and soudenly all the doaw was turned into flesh:
and the water, wherewith she had wrought the doaw, into very blood: in so much
that the poor women were maruellously affraide, and were so bloody as though
they had lien ten years in the butchers slaughter house. It is very true,
that it will not frame so well with beggars, who having understood this matter,
would gladly have pla^ed the like pa^el to the intent to have made of the
cra^tes of bread which they had begged, with the saying of these five words, a
good flesh hotchpotch or gallemawfrie: This he writes in his book called the
description of Italy. in the 184 leaf* the copy whereof was printed Anno
1550. and the same book is privileged by the Pope of Rome.
but it would not fadge, because they had not the good intent, which the
Priests have, when they say Mass: which intent, the Curate had surely put
into that good Gossep secretly, in shriuing her. Now is it not plainly written
in the book of that holy Monk Leander Alberte of Bullein, that beside the
lake called Lago de Bolsena, as a Priest was saying his Mass, that holy
Offertorie or oblation did drop a great many drops of blood upon the altar,
and upon the white piece of cloth called the Corporal: after this, it skipt
and leapt out of the hands of the sacrifising Priest, and away it went,
swiftly fleeing all about the Church like a bird, still dropping drops of
blood upon the Marble stones, which are seen there yet to this day.

Men may find a hundred thousand such like miracles set forth in many
goodly, laudable, and praise worthy Histories, and golden Legendes, and
specially in the History of the notable, learned, wise and discrete man
Lipomani, who (I dare say) would not willingly lie, if he could hit upon the
truth. Then all these miracles, and all the foresaid Saints, and jolly
roysters, would even jointly together, be upon the bones of these heretics.
After all this, the Jews Rabbines would march forward into the field, with
their Caballa, and with their Thalmood, and stoutly defend our
transubstantiation. The Ethnik poets (and specially Ovid) would likewise follow
all a flant to help us: for they will never suffer their cunning (whereby they
caused their Hecate and their Jupiter, Elicius with certain words in their
sacrifice to come out of heaven in spite of their teeth) to be plucked from
them. And beside that, they would likewise join with us, to defend their
Metamorphosis, that is, their Transubstantiation. And they would bring at their
tails, a band and noble supply of 113. Bishops, who altogether in a Councel^
at Rome, have concluded, That it must be so: And that it is the very flesh of
Christ, not only sacramentally, but the very body in deed, and as they
term it, Sensualiter, that it to say, That men may feel and taste it. It is
broken with hands, and with teeth torn, eaten and digested. Hereupon they
have accursed all those that do not so believe. And with them should be
coupled all the great, wise, and profound Doctors, and sententious writers, to
wit, Paschasius, La^cfrancus, Thomas de Aquino, Scotus, Innocentius, Comestor,
Amarcanus, Gerson, Gabriel Biel, Durandus, Alexander de Ales, Occan, Petrus
Hispanus, Albertus Magnus, Raimundus Lullius, Petrus Lo^bardus, Petrus de
Aliaco, Petrus de Bella pertica, Rabanus, Panormitanus, Bricot and Halcot. And
these would draw forth with them, all the good Catholic men, that have been in
our time. And these noble Cardinals specially would make a great stir in the
field, as Thomas Caritanus, Reginaldus Polus, Stanislaus, Hosius: and these
deep Doctors, Master Syluester Prierias, Thomas Radinus, Ambrosius
Catharinus, Iacobus Hoochstratanus, Johannes Cochleus, Johannes Eckius, Iacobus
Latomus, Magister noster de Quercu, Ioha^nes a Louanio* Iodocus Tiletanus,
Ruardus Tappard ab Enchusia.

In sum, all the Doctors of Paris, of Louen, of Collen: yea, all the
Licentiates and Bacchelers, all these would set so stoutly on every side upon
these Heretics, that they may thank God, if they get from them without
leaving a limme behind them: For they would (undoubtedly) tear them in
pieces, with their teeth, and swallowe them up whole hair and hide, even as
they do with their god: Or if it were so, that they could not well bring that
to pass, by reason that the Heretics are more heavy to digest, than their
god in the Mass is, then there would come to help them, Master Deane Romist,
the Procurour General, with a great company of Catchpolles, and hangmen, with
staves and stakes, with fire and sword, with straw and fagottes, and would
set them on fire, and so burn them up by clusters: and then their disputing
were at an end. Then also were S. Paul packt up in a male with all his
Prophets and Apostles. Would not the matter go well then with these Heretics
and Lutheranes? No, no, it is much better for them to tarry at home with their
Paul, than to deliver him again a fresh into the hands of the Jews. In
sum, our Master Gentianus has great reason, that he, like a strong and
invincible Goliath, does so stoutly ouerbragge and outface all the whole heap
of these Caluinistes, Zwinglians, and Huguenotes: yea, so courageously, that
they dare never be so bold, as to come again in their sights, to dispute
against the fagots. So that now his conclusion and knitting up of the matter,
ramaines f^^st and unremovable, as specially, That they are misbeleeuing
Heretics, seeing they do not believe all what soever the holy Church
believes, and so consequently do deny the xii. Articles of the faith.

The second part. Now does follow the exposition upon the second part of
the Epistle of Gentian Ha^uet, wherein is disco^^sed the ^ight and sufficiency
of the Scriptures, and specially of the exposition of the same. And fu^^her, all the points of the Romish belief, are approved by the Scripture.
The Preface, wherein this treaty is divided in two parts.
NOw follows in order the second part of this epistle which Master Gentianus
does (...) be a fastidious s^rup^se, that is to say, A morse^ which he can not
well swallowe without chewing, as specially, that the Heretics will maintain,
That we ought not to receive any doctrine besides the word of God, set forth
in the holy Scriptures. But now there rests no more difficulty in this
matter: for we have prepared for him in the former article such a pill, that
he will lightly slappe it up, considering what a wide throat he has. For we
have substantially and steadfastly hereupon concluded, and also pronounced
sentence irreuocable, That the Scripture cannot ouerrule our dear mother the
holy Church, nor bring her under subjection. And therefore we will not break
our heads about this matter, but will refer and leave it to the judgment of
our Masters of Louen: intending now to entreat of the understanding and
meaning of the scripture: wherein we have two principal points to set forth
and determine upon.

The first, that we declare what is the power and authority of the holy
church, in setting forth the Scripture, and to apply it to her advantage. The
second, That we by plain examples declare, and prove, that she has finely
set forth this power and authority, in the establishing of all the
commandments of her doctrine, ceremonies, and all manner of devotions: so
that she does not enjoy in her service any one thing great or small, but she
knows finely to fetch the foundation of them out of the plain text of the
holy scripture, and out of that to make the matter so clear and manifest, that
you may see it even as well in the dark, as with a candle. These two points
we will set forth plainly before the eyes of all men, with the help and
assistance of the sweet dear Lady of Halle, and all the sweet he Saints and
she Saints at Antwerpe, being there placed upon the hie altar: and thereto we
will call for the help of the holy Ghost, devoutly saying an Aue Maria.
Oremus. Aue Maria, etc.

The first Chapter. That the holy Church of Rome only has power to expound
and set forth the Scripture after her will, and as she does understand it. And
of the keys and keybands which she has received to that end: and that every
man ought to be content with her exposition.
Now, as concerning the first part, our famous Doctors and Licentiates of
Louen and Paris, do jointly teach, This did the Catholic doctors set forth
openly at Worms, anno 1557.
That the holy scripture is a du^mbe teacher, a book of dissentio^, a dark,
uncertain, doutful, and dead letter, a nose of wax, and a leaden rule. Which is
as much to say, The holy scripture a book of brabling, and a nose of wax.
that a man may pull it, bow it, wind it, and turn it which way it shall
please him. And therefore they conclude thus, Ergo, the ground and letter of
the Scripture is no direction or guide, but that office belongs only to the
right understanding and meaning thereof. Now, the interpretations of them
appertein to our dear mother the holy church of Rome only: And because she
has it in deed, every man shall be contented with her interpretation, without
any further canu^sing, ^i^ting, or examining of that which is written: yea,
she does plainly fo^bid the common sort and Lay people, to read the
scriptures in their mother tongue. For consider this, they have found in
effect, and by experience, that the Heretics and Huguenotes have always the
Scripture in their mouth, and take upon them to defend and justify by plain
and evident textes, all that they say or believe. And they pass not a pin
for all the hid and profound interpretations, which the holy Church of Rome
has finely found out, and profoundly set down, concerning the same.

Now, that spites them out of measure: and to say truth, how can they
tolerate or suffer such a thing? yea, when al is said, what mischief do these
Heretics mean, that they think them selves wiser than all the holy Fathers,
the Popes of Rome? with so many Cardinals of excellent renown, and honorable
Bishops, with such innumerable bands of learned men of Louen and Paris? Or if
so be likewise, that they do not pass for all their Myters, Staves, Hattes,
Crowns, Cowles Capes, and Liripippes: yet must they needs remember them
selves, that holy Pope Pius the fourth, now lately dead, did in the
confession of the faith, which he with the consent of the whole Council of
Trent published and set forth, even as a watch word or special mark,
whereby men might discern true Catholics from false Heretics: as in plain
and express words is written. And first: I acknowledge the holy Catholicall,
Apostolical Church of Rome, to be the true mother of all Churches and
Congregations. And after that: The Divines of Trent.
I believe the holy Scripture, according to such understanding,
interpretation, meaning and signification, as our mother the holy Church has
always allowed for good, and at this present does allow: to whom only of right
does apperteine to give unto the Scripture, a right understanding, sense, and
interpretation. And hereupon I do promise, that I will never understand, nor
interpret the same otherwise, than according to the interpretation of the
Fathers. This same have the holy fathers at Trent irreuocably concluded:
commanding, That no man shall otherwise understand, nor interpret the
Scriptures, than our mother the holy church has in times past, and does at
this present understand them. Now here you have a full decision, a settled
determination, and an irreuocable sentence, upon our question: by virtue
whereof, neither delay nor appeal can follow. For you do hear, to begin
withal, that the word of God is not of such value or dignity, that it is of
it self worthy to be believed: unless it be deckte and set forth with the
glosses and interpretation of the holy Fathers of Rome: So that hereof is to
be gathered, as all Catholic Doctors also have written: That the Scripture
and word of God is obscure, dark, variable, uncertain, uneven, raw,
unfurnished, and unhandsome: but the glosses and interpretations of the holy
father of Rome, and of the great Clerks of Louen are clear, lightsome,
steadfast, sure, true, even, plain, fully furnished, and in all points very
handsome and sufficient. It is true, that the pretense of Christ and of his
Disciples, was to utter and declare to every man, their doctrine (or at least
so much of it, as does apperteine to the salvation of man) in all plainness,
simplicity, and truth, without any dissimulation or darkness. For to that
end and purpose did Christ choose simple fishers, and other plain dealing lay
people for Apostles and Evangelists: and did therefore thank his heavenly
father, that he had revealed his heavenly wisdom and knowledge to simple and
plain mening men, Mat. 11.25.
and not to the sharpwitted and deeply learned philosophers of this world. 2.
Cor. 4.2.8. 1. Cor. 1.17. and.2.1.2.3.4. Chrysostomus in the* 4. homily of
Lasarus.

In the preface of the Gospel of Matthew. and Augustine in his 2. and.3.
Episto Volusian.


In like manner also did Paul set forth his doctrine before the simple people,
in all simplicity and plainness: yea, he gloried of his simpleness. Whereupon
the chief of the old Fathers, were provoked diligently to put the lay people
in mind, that they should be diligent and ready to pervse and search the holy
scriptures, and not to think that they did perteine only to the learned.

And yet notwithstanding, we must now either say, that their intent and meaning
was not well grounded: or else, that the chance is now changed. For we see,
that now in these days the Scripture is hid from the Lay people, as a thing
dark, doutfull, and of no sufficient foundation: in place whereof is intruded,
and thrust in the peoples hands, glosses, and interpretations, decisions, and
determinations of the holy Church: so that thereby it is good to consider,
that the scripture is not only dark, but also rough, uneven, hard, and
stony: in so much that the Catholic children of the church of Rome might
lightly stumble upon it, and break their shinnes: or else perhaps be seduced
and drawn awry from their right Catholic belief. But the foresaid decisions,
and glosses are as eeuen, Gloses as plain as rocks.
smooth and plain, as the rocks of S. Goddardes mountain: yea, they are the
very Planers, wherewith the roughnes of the Bible scriptures is shaven off, in
such sort, that they may serve for all purposes of work, to the building up
and pulling down of the Catholic faith. Therefore, above all things, we must
stick fast to their glosings, and cleave close to their interpretations, and
have little regard what the plain and clear textes of the scripture bring with
them. Now this is the first point that you have to consider, out of the rule
before specified. The second you may likewise gather out of this: That no man
in the world has power to interpret the Scripture any otherwise than as
hitherto it has been interpreted, by the holy Popes and Bishops, and by the
Theologians and Bachelors of Louen: for else to what purpose were it, that men
should bestow such cost on those same Magistri nostri, in making them pleasant
bankets, to proceed Bachelors or Licentiats, if it were not that thereby they
had free grant and license, T^ssing and turning of holy Scripture.
to wind and writh the textes of the Scripture with so phisticall arguments,
even as they themselves think good? Then we may thereby well perceive, that
such as are neither Bacchelers, Licentiates, nor Doctors, presuming of their
own wit and will to set out the Scripture, according to the letter, that is to
say, after the single and profound ground of the plain text, and so apply
them to the detrime^t of the holy Romish church, are all rank Heretics:
seeing they go about to rob the holy Church of Rome, of her power and
authority: which is a thing in no wise tolerable. For it is most true, and
without doubt: yea, as true as the holy Gospel of the Distaffe: as is
plainly to be proved out of the books of all Catholic writers, That when our
Lord Jesus Christ did deliver into the hands of the holy Church of Rome, The
keys of the kingdom of heaven.
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, he did yet give her beside those an other
string of six keys, wherewith she might open and shut all the Cupbordes of
the Scripture, even as it pleased her, and as she thought good for her own
advantage. And when as one key will not serve, she may prove another: In
sum, and for a final conclusion, so travel in that behalf, that she get
the lock open. Four of these keys, most chief and principal are called
Imperatrices, because they will open all the locks in the house.

The first is called Expositio literalis, that is, Expositio literalis.
An interpretation according to the letter: which key our mother the holy
Church has least of all occupied: but rather had left it lying a long time
behind the Chest: insomuch that it was all rustie in a manner, and clean
marred. At last the Lutherans gat it into their hands, The Lutherans have
found one key.
and setting it before them as a pattern, made other like it: insomuch that
they have opened all the locks, and by that means have brought all the
secrets of the holy Church to light, and so have of their own private motion
and accord taken upon them, to allege the scripture to their furtherance, and
to the holy church of Rome her hinderance: so that she has now quite lost that
key.

The other key is called Expositio moralis, That is, Expositio moralis.
A legal or moral interpretation: or, An interpretation according to the Law:
with which key they have locked up fast all the Chestes and treasures of
merciful justification through belief in Jesus Christ: and in place thereof,
have unlocked and set open the maledictions, cursses, and threatenings of the
law of Moses.

The third is called Expositio Tropologica, or Allegorica, that is to say,
Expositio allegorica.
An hid and allegorical understanding or interpretation, with which key,
they lightly wreste all the Scriptures, that the Heretics can bring in against
them: for that therewith they find out straight way, some figure or allegory,
wherewith they deck and set out the matter finely, and so cover it with a
course carpet. And further likewise with this key she has brought abroad the
most part of the Scripture, wherewith she has fortified and made strong all
her Catholic ceremonies, beautiful prunkings, and pleasant ordinances, as by
proceeding from piece to piece we will declare.

The fourth key is very like unto this, but it is of more strength, and is
called Expositio Anagogica, Expositio, Anagogica.
that is to say, An interpretation which draws the Scripture by the neck,
even whither a man will: and it is the best and most beneficial key, that the
Church does occupy for her advantage: for with this key she makes of the
Scripture a Weathercocke, The scripture made a weathercocke, and a nose of wax.
which turns about with every wind: and a nose of wax, which she can bow
every way: as by the examples hereafter set forth you shall plainly perceive.

Now has she besides these, two other keys, which are not right Imperatrices,
but do serve particularly, either of them to his own several lock: whereof
the one is called Typica, and the other Physica, that is to say, Typica.
Physica.
figurative and natural. For these two keys she does use most in the Schools
and Cloisters: and therewith she fetches (out of a corner) wonderful sharp
witted Ppilosophies, and deep speculations wherewith she mountes aloft so hie
into the air, that she neither touches h^auen nor earth. And with these, she
has (for the most part) opened all the Almeries of the Caballa, and Thalmood
of the Jews, and out of them fetched all sorts of delicate meats and dainty
iunckets, as (without doubt) there were wonderful iestes and strange
mysteries shut up in them.

All these same keys (except the first, The five keys are (...) with
sophistry.
which lay behind the Chest, being now in the hands of Heretics, and in
their custody) she has tied fast together with a pair of Keybands, which she
calls Sophistica, that is to say, Sophistry or babbling, whereon they are so
fast bound, that without that Keyband it were impossible to make them tarry
together, nor to do the church of Rome any service: but would by and by fall a
sunder, and so be utterly lost: for this Keybande is very cunningly wrought,
and of strong Buffe leather knotted together with many subtle snarles and
buttons, so that it is not possible to be undone: which snarles and buttons the
chief workmen of that art call Syllogismes, and Quotlibets, and they stand so
thick and so strongly fastened together, that many cunning masters in
braiding of snarles and buttons, as well of Louen as of Paris, have gone about,
with all the wit they had, to undo them, to the end they might use the keys
as they would: but they could never bring it to pass. For the holy Church of
Rome, doubting least the Heretics might yet catch from her any more keys,
as they did once, causes more new knottes and buttons daily to be made to
them: yea, and gives the masters of that science great wages. For he that can
best braide and make them up, he gettes for his reward a Doctors hood, or a
fat Prebend: and sometimes a Bishops miter, or a Cardinals hatte: so that it is
a great oversight of these Huguenotes, and Lutherans, that they think to make
all things clear, with their one key, and will with that only expound the
Scripture, all care and regard of the other keys put by and neglected. Yea,
they make no accounte at all of this Keybande: but will understand every
thing as they are learned by the letter, none otherwise than they are set
forth in the Scripture: rightly and agreeably to the sincerity of the faith:
1. Cor. 3.6.
and according to the judgment of Paul. Where yet notwithstanding is plainly
written by the said Paul, That the letter does kill, but the spirit
quickens. Nevertheless it is true, that they bring in this testimony of
Paul against us, saying, That Paul did there, by the letter, understand
nothing else but the Law, and the curssings of the Law: and by the Spirit,
nothing else, but that by the mercy of God, we are quickened and made alive
through faith in Jesus Christ, which is in the Gospel by Paul and by all other
faithful ministers of the word (plainly and without any obscure and dark
meaning, or hid allegory) set forth, and preached openly before all men, as
Paul him self does give plainly to understand, saying, 2. Cor. 3.6.
That he was made able to be a Minister of the new Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit: and that the ministration of Moses was a
ministration, of death and of the Letter: but his ministration was a special
ministration of life and of the Spirit. But we care not for all this. For the
holy Church will have it to be understood otherwise: as to say, That by the
Letter is to be understood, the special, bare, and plain text of the
Scripture, even as it does sound in the natural ground and setting forth
literally understood, according to the sincerity of our belief: and as by
the Lutherans and Huguenotes it is alleged against us. For this letter does
kill, as you may well see, The letter (...) the (...).
that those which will so understand and set forth the Scripture, are killed.
But The spirit, that is to say, The ghostly, hid, and sharp witted
interpretation, which our loving mother the holy Church has made upon it, (let
it be allegorical, or anagogicall, or what it will,) this is only that
which makes mighty and living: because this alone both agree with the
judgment of the holy Church of Rome. And all they which do truly follow her,
those are permitted to live in all liberty and wealth: yea, although they do
not believe that there is a God. Therefore, whosoever will not accept this
interpretation of the holy church, and understand the scripture ghostly or
spiritually as the Catholics do understand and interpret the same, he is a
damned Heretic, and his process is at an end, although he had all the textes
of the scripture very plain, and the whole volume of the Bible on his side:
for the textes can not help him without the glasses, he is but a dead man:
yea, though he had an hundred lives lying in a Chest: especially, if he come
once in the hands of the holy Inquisition, he must abie for it: it is but
lost labor to talk further thereof.

And for this cause I do marvel, that our good master Gentian, will break
his head about this matter: namely to prove, That the Scripture alone is not
sufficient for our mother the holy Church, as though that matter were not
plain and evident enough, sithence we may daily both see and feel it. And yet
notwithstanding commes he out here with his profounde speculation, in such sort
as he has almost therein forgotten himself. I cannot judge otherwise, but
that the unmeasurable zeal which he bears to the welfare of his dear mother
the holy Church, must have perforce tumbled him topsie ^uruie overthwart the
field, that he did not well see what he said: he is like to kine, which are
st^ung and chaced with a waspe or horseflie, they run on following their
noses like mad beasts, and shun neither stock nor stone. For here it seems
that his wits be ravished. For where he does say, That the doctrine of the
holy Trinity, Gentian does blaspheme the Trinity.
cannot be proved by the Scripture: that is far too gross. Otherwise, we
must condemn the four first Councels of falshoode, who did by approbation
conclude upon the same out of the holy Scriptures, very strongly, and with
undoubted testimonies of truth: yea, and if we could as well defend the Mass
with plain textes of the Scripture, as the blessed Trinity may thereby be
confirme^: a great many priests (no doubt) should not eat so lean brewes as
now they do. It is true, that this word Trinity, neither this word
Consubstantiall, The holy Trinity approved by the scripture.
that is to say, Evangelical, in being and substance, is not so printed in the
scripture. But the Huguenots say plainly, that they will not make any
brabbling about these words, but will simply follow the true ground, meaning,
and substance of the Scripture. Now it is plainly wri^ten, That there are three
in heaven which give witness, 1. John. 5.7. Mat. 28.19. Ephe. 4.5.
to wit, the father, the word, and the holy ghost: and that these three are
al one. There is likewise written, That there is but one Baptism, and one God:
and yet notwithstanding, we are commanded that we shall be baptized, In the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. So that it is
apparent, that the doctrine or approbation of the Trinity, was not sowed out
of the Popes thumb, as purgatory and the holy Mass were, but are plainly
alleged in the scripture after the letter. The like is to be said touching the
two sacraments of Baptism, and of the Supper of the Lord. For although this
word Sacrament is not found in the scripture: yet the substance, the being,
and the ground of the doctrine is (without exception) concluded out of the
scripture, according to the letter and plain words of the text. Genesis
17.10.11.13. Exo. 12 13.27. Romans 4.11. Col. 2.11.12.
For the Circumcision and the Pascall lamb, are openly called, The promises of
God, and do signify the promises of God left in lively remembrance of his
mercy, and to the co^firming of our justification by faith. And now does Paul
teach, 1. Cor. 21.25.26.
that Circumcision is signified in Baptism: and that the sacrament of the
Lords supper is likewise appointed by Christ, in remembrance of his death and
passion. Whereupon it is called The new promise in the blood of Christ, 1. Cor.
7.5.
and ministered in place of the Pascall lamb. Insomuch that heretics (out of
that) do teach, That baptism, and the supper of our Lord, are only
sacraments, that is, holy tokens of Gods promises, made in the blood and
passion of Jesus Christ. Confirming of more value than baptism.
Which we cannot say of that holy oil, nor of their holy confirmation, and
other Sacraments which our dear mother the holy Church has instituted of
great devotion, and joined them to the two first for an help or assistance:
yea, and the same likewise established and defended, That Confirmation by her
instituted, Cap. nouissimo de consecrat. did. ca. de his vero de consecrati.
did. 5 in the fourth book of sentences, in the.7. did in the 1. and ^. chap.
is much more worthy than baptism, which Christ himself commanded: And why?
Forsooth because it cannot be ministered or executed by any simple or common
Priest, as baptism may: but only by a Suffragane or Bishop, and that it makes
one full christened, and does give the holy ghost more plentifully and
effectually, than baptism does, which was instituted by Christ. As in her
decrees and book of Sentences is in plain words written.

Now, besides all this, the heretics do also say, That we are not able to
allege or bring out of the holy Scripture, so much as one word, which
speaks of the Mass, nor of annoynting of priests, nor of their sin
offerings, of their priests office, of their pardons, and Popes bulls, no nor
of the Pope himself, nor of the praying to Saints, and images of our Lady,
nor al those saints, which do so many goodly miracles, nor of their purgatory,
nor of their auricular confession, nor of their whorish chastity of Priests,
Monks, and Nonnes. In sum, they will say, it is nothing else, but men's
inventions, and devises of devils, which the priests have called to
remembrance, to bring in money by heaps, and to pamper their panches with
dainty dishes: but is not this a spiteful matter? And yet our master Gentian
lets that slip untouched, where he should have proved, That all these
points, are as well concluded out of the scripture, as the twelve articles of
the faith. He says in deed, that Jeremy had said before, Ierem. 31.33.
That the new law of the Gospel should be written in men's hearts: whereby we
will conclude, that men ought not to seek them in the scripture, but in the
head and heart of the Pope of Rome, and of his holy Prelates: for that the Pope
has all laws, both of God and man, shut up in his bosom and breast, as
hereafter shall be declared more at large. But this serves to no purpose against
the Heretics: for they are so lusty, that they would make M. Gentian ashamed
hereof, if he had any shame in his body. Which I do not judge of any such
great doctor, who has long ago put off his shamefast shoes, and laid them
aside: nay ^ast them clean away. But yet in very deed, they will prove out of
Paul, Iere. 31.33. Heb. 10.17. 2. Cor. 3.3.8.9 11. Act. 20.26.27. Ephe. 3.^
4.8.9.10. Col. 1.2^. G^l. 1.9.10.11 12. 2. Tit. 2.2. and 3.14.15.16.17.
that this new law of the Gospel, whereof Jeremy does speak, is nothing else
but the ministration of the Gospel, which Paul did minister in his preaching,
and set forth abundantly in his writing, which remains and continues for
ever. And that did Paul openly witness, That he had neither forgotten nor kept
secret any thing, of that, which might serve to salvation: but that he has
uttered and truly set forth all the same before the Congregations jointly
together. Insomuch that he, before the holy Pope, which came afterward, should
not have left one jot behind. Whereupon should follow, that the law of the
Gospel, which the Pope does carry in his bosom, is altogether of an other
Gospel, much differing from the law of that Gospel which Paul did preach, or
whereof Jeremy did speak: and then should the Pope be accurssed, by the
saying of Paul to the Galathians: Gal. 1.8.9.
Whosoever does preach any other Gospel than that which I have preached unto
you* let him be accurssed: yea, although he were an Angel out of heaven. But
yet the Pope of Rome does not think, that this does touch him: for that he is
something greater than an Angel of heaven, as we shall give you to understand
in due time and fit place. Now, that which he brings forth out of John, to wit,
that Christ said* That the Apostles could not yet understand all, John.
16.12.13 John. 14.16.17.26.
and that the holy ghost should descend and instruct them further: is somewhat
more apparent. But yet for all this, he is never the near. For he cannot with
this stop the mouths of Heretics, by reason that they will still object and
say, that this was spoken before the Apostles had received the holy ghost: but
after they had received him, then did they put all the instructions which they
had learned of the holy ghost, in writing, to the end that through that which
is written, all men might be saved, by faith in Jesus Christ (as by the said
John is precisely written) without this addition, John. 20.31.
that they should have need to watch any longer after the Popes Bulls, or
Masses of Requiem. But it is even as I have told you, our master Gentian has
been so wildely pricked forward with that zealous spirit, that he did not see
well what he said. For he is a man that has whole drifattes full of wit: marie
the bottoms are out. And therefore will we help him again out of his dream,
omitting all such unprofitable tittle tattle, and purposing for the second part
of this matter which we have in hand to teach, That whatsoever our mother the
holy Church has brought to light, studied, invented, or found out, since the
Apostles time, is altogether so surely and substantially grounded, timbred,
bricked and walled upon the plain text of the holy scripture, (so far as
they be spiritually understood, according to the interpretation of our mother
the holy Church) that it were not possible to erect any castle or tower more
surely upon the highest sandhill in all Hollande. And this (I assure you) will
be a goodly piece of work, whereby I shall deserve much, and be partaker
of a great many goodly pardons and indulgencies: and shall besides that become
very necessary and serviceable to the comforting of our sorrowful mother the
holy Church, and to the extirpation and rooting out of all erroneous opinions
of newely vpstart Sectaries and Heretics, which do yet think, that they
have the Scripture on their side. But they will have but foolish countenances,
when they shall see, that the whole Scripture, with the interpretations of the
holy Fathers, does at the least close up as well with our doctrine, as a ring
in a Swines snowt.

The ii. Chapter. Declaring, that the son offering of the Mass, and the order
and office of Priests, and Mass Priests, is gathered out of the Scripture,
if it be rightly understood, according to the interpretation of the Church of
Rome.
THen, to begin withal, Offering up the Son in the mass.
we will dig the holy son offering of the Mass, out of the holy
Scripture, and prove, that she has thereon a deep and sure foundation.
Consider now, it is plainly written, That when Christ had broken the bread,
and given it to his disciples, he spoke thus, and said: Take, Eat, This is my
body, Math. 26.26. 1. Cor. 11.2. This word is set fourth by all catholic
writers to this purpose, as you may see in the council of Sen. holden against
Luther in the.xi. decree in the Int^^im of the Emperor Charles, in titulo, De
sac^^i. Missae. and generally by all the Doctors of ^^uen, of Colen, and of
Paris, as E^kius, Pig^us, Bunder. Ru^rdus, with other mo.
which shall be broken for you: Do this in remembrance of me. Do you well
perceive now (ye poor Heretics) that Christ does here command to singe
Mass? for that same word, Do this, is just as much as if he had said, Offer
my body in the Mass to God my Father, for the living and for the dead. And
that is first strongly set forth by the Poet Virgil, who says thus: Cum
faciam vitula, that is to say, When I shall do it with a calfe. Look now by
this word Do, he understands nothing else, but only To do or offer a
sacrifice and sonneoffring: Ergo, it must needs follow, That Christ did
understand it no otherwise, than the worshipful Catholic Doctors of Louen and
Paris have very well declared, and irreuocablie concluded. For our dear mother
the holy church has received, approved, and strongly established their
doctrine, institution, and prescript for an article of our faith.

So that it appears, that the Mass is very ancient, seeing it was used in
Virgils time: Mass used in Virgils time.
saving only that they did offer either Calves flesh, or Ox flesh: whereas
now our Priests do celebrate their Mass with man's flesh and blood. And
hereupon you may note further, that these short and sweet words, ( Do this
is remembrance of me) has a wonderful emphasis or force: For out of the
ground of the same has the holy Catholic Church of Rome fished, That the
Apostles were Priests or Prelates with shorn crowns, and did sing Mass: and
thereof it is, that all our Priests are created. For, Do this, is as much to
say in their language, as, Become Priests: and see that your fingers be
anointed, with holy oil, that you may devoutly say Mass.

And for this has the holy Church of Rome commanded, That none of the La^e
people shall receive the Chalice, because our Lord did not here speak to any
of the Lay or common people, as the Apostle Saint Paul did in his time, when
he willed the whole Congregation and Church of the Corinthians, to do as
Christ Jesus had done. But the Apostle Paul did mean simply, and only
those, which were able to sing the holy Mass, as our Priests and Prelates
are, who only ought and may drink out of the Chalice: as you may more
perfectly and plainly perceive, by the writers upon the book of Sentences,
and by all the before named Doctors of Louen, of Paris, and of Colen.

Moreover and besides this, we can strongly confirm the Mass offering, out
of the Prophet Malachie, who (in the 1. Chapter, and 11. verse) says thus:
From the rising of the Sun, Mala. 1.11. Look prouinciale Conc^l. Senonens.
in the 11. decree, where this scripture is alleged upon that purpose. Look
likewise upon Ecki. Bunder. Pigium, Latomum, R^ardum and such other like. 1.
Pet. 2.5.19.
unto the setting of the same, is my name honored amongst the Heathen, and in
all places is my name sacrificed, and a pleasant offering offered up: that is
to say, The offering and sacrifice of the holy Mass. For that can not fail,
so long as it pleases our mother the holy Church to have (and will have it)
thus understood. And although it be so, that Peter has otherwise interpreted
it, saying, That all faithful are that holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
offerings, wherewith God is pleased, through Jesus Christ: yea, they are the
chosen generation, the kingly Priesthood, and the holy and elect people, to
set forth the worthiness of him, Apoca. 1.6. Apoca. 8.4.
which has called the^ out of darkness unto his wonderful light: Wherewith
John the Apostle does also accord, saying, That Jesus Christ has made all
faithful Christians, kings and Priests to God his father: and applies this
sacrifice to their prayers, and Psalms: And although it be so, tha^ the
Apostle had so said to the Jews, Heb. 13.15.
That we should offer up unto God the offering of thanksgiving, which is the
fruits of our lips and tongues: yet notwithstanding, the holy Church is not
therewith satisfied, because great disorder might follow: for that then there
should be no mo priests which could serve in the Mass: and therefore she has
strongly concluded, that this place of the prophecy of Malachie, may not any
otherwise be understood, than by the second council of Nice, the council of
Constance, the council of Trent: and further, as by all Catholic men, as
Thomas de Aquino, Scotus, Durandus, and by all the Doctors of Louen, it has
been understood, and interpreted. Judging without doubt, that all these
profounde learned Doctors, together on a cluster, as having greater measure of
wisdom and learning than the rest, did understand Malachie far better than
Peter and John, who were but simple fishers, In the.4. book of Sentences in
the.24. did. cap. 1.
and had never been Students in the famous and renowned University of Louen.
And yet, if it were so, that Peter were not content, yet has the holy Church
given him to understand, that his foresaid reason must be understood and
meant of the Priests only: and not of the general congregation of Christ.

Moreover, and beside all this, these words of Paul, where he says, Roma.
10.12.
That we should deliver or offer up our bodies, a living, holy, and an
acceptable sacrifice unto God, which is our dutiefull serving of God, etc. has
she violently and forceably wresled to the Mass, and the offering of the
Priests: commanding, that those words should do daily read in the Canon of
the Mass* and that at every word, a cross should be made, to the end that
they, by the power and virtue of the cross, might altogether transform and
change their natural vsages, and so serve the turn of the holy Mass. For,
if men will understand them, according to their nature, after the letter: to
wit, That all perfect Christians must offer up to God, their bodies, in all
holiness, by that it should seem, that Paul has otherwise understood
Malachie, than the holy Church does understand him. And then should S. Peter
have done evil, when he soung his first Mass at Rome, upon the altar, which
is yet there to be seen in the holy place at Saint John's de Laterane. And
now our Lord has said, Oraui pro te Petre, ne deficeret sides tua* O Peter,
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail: So that Peter then can
not have done amiss, when he did sing Mass. And hereupon is to be concluded,
that the Mass is founded and grounded upon the scripture.

And yet we see further, That in the scripture there are two sorts of
Priesthoodes spoken of: In the foresaid Council of Senon, decree II and in the
Emperors Interim and in summa fidei Ch^^st^anae, set forth by the commandment
of king Philip, an^ further by all Catholic Doctors, who do all generally
addict the two authorities and off^ces of priesthood to our Priests.
The one is the order of Melchisedech, and the other is, The order of Aaron,
who came of the tribe of Leui. Now, both these two orders seem to have been a
figure of our Priests. Which does appear by this: That our Priests have in
their Mass (by virtue of the five words) changed the bread into the body of
Jesus Christ: then they go and offer him up to God the Father: praying and
beseeching him, that he (with a merciful and pleasant countenance) will
behold the offering up of his only begotten and living Son Christ Jesus: and
that he will accept the same, even as he accepted Abels offering, These are in
a manner the proper words used in the mass after the consecration.
and the sacrifice of Abraham, and of the hie Priest Melchisedech. Who will
now cast in any more doubts, whether they be the right Priests, placed in the
rooms and seats of Melchisedech and Aaron? Nay, they do far pass both
Melchisedech and Aaron: seeing that they do pray for the Son of God him
self, and are a mean, not only between God and man: but also between God
the Father, and Christ Jesus his Son, which in an Euangelical degree, they do
resemble to the sheep and the lambs. So that by this it is apparent, that the
meaning of our mother the holy church, is, That Christ is to be accounted for
nothing else, but the sheep which Melchisedech did offer up: Contrariwise, the
Priests are the true Melchisedechs, which do offer up Christ, and pray for
him. For when all is said, what other thing did Melchisedech (I pray you)
foreshewe, but only the figure of the holy Pope of Rome? who is the chief
Priest, the Summus Pontifex, Ca. cleros pontifex. did. 21. and in the.4. book
of Sentences. did. 24.

De vsu pallii ad honorem.


The high Bishop, which does create all Priests and Deacons, and set up all
spiritual orders, giving and appointing to every one of them their charge what
they shall do. Then must he needs be the right Melchisedech, whose
Priesthood is not to be resembled to other priests. For this is set forth in
the Decretalles, even thus in plain words: and Durandus has set out the same
at large, in his book called Rationale diuinoru^ officioru^. Therefore, that
which the Apostle would say to the Hebrews, Rub^ic. de ministerio and ordine
Ecclesiae. Heb. 7.14.17.
That as Melchisedech was a figure of Christ: And accordingly, Hebr. 8.4. and
9.25.26.27. and 10.1.2.12.13.14.15.16.17.
as Melchisedech has neither had any successor nor lieftenant, that even so
Christ had neither successor nor lieftenant, but should him self in his own
person exercise his everlasting Priesthood, being once entered into that
heavenly holiness, through the power of that one offering, to wit, his own
body and blood: which offering being once fully accomplished for the remission
of our sins, can never be renewed nor done again. But all this does not
serve the purpose, touching out matter: for if that were true, then the Mass
would be nothing worth, and our Priests might go with empty stomachs, and in
the end be glad to get them into some hospital for a refuge, or at least to
get their living with painful labor: which would be a pitiful case,
considering that they have never been used to any labor, but simply to say
Mass, sing Euensong, and to mumble over their Mattens, and therewith to
deserve first a living here on earth, and afterward heaven for themselves,
their pretty wenches, and their young bastardes. Therefore does our mother the
holy Church conclude, that the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, did
not well consider the pith and ground of the matter: for otherwise, if he had
well known, how that Melchisedech had offered up bread and wine, he would
then without doubt thereupon have concluded with the Church of Rome, That there
must be Priests to sing Mass, and to offer up Jesus Christ in form of bread
and wine, unto God the Father. For if this were not (as the Doctors of Louen
do teach) then could not the offering of Christ Jesus endure and last for
ever, Look on the foresaid Council Sinonense, in the 11. decree, in the
Emperors In^erim. In the council of Trent, and in all Catholic books. All
which do defend, that the order or office of Priesthood could not endure
eternally, if it were not that the priests follow^ in the sam^ office* and do
daily off^r up his body to the Father in the Mass.
after the order of Melchisedech: as our Master Gentianus has very wittily
here noted. Consider (I pray you) if Christ had no Vicar nor Liefetenant, as
the said Apostle pretendes, how could he be an everlasting Priest, and
continue his Priesthood evermore, in the person of the most holy Pope of Rome?
How could he offer up his body a new daily in the Mass? Therefore, he may
thank the Priests greatly, that they, after his departure hence, have taken
upon them his place. And for so much as his offering could not of it self
sufficiently serve the turn: therefore have they found out another son
offering of the Mass, whereby they apply or join his offering to men as with
a plaster: notwithstanding, they do not name it only Sacrificium
propitiatorium, that is, A sacrifice of mercy: but also, Sacrificium
applicatorium, Heb. 7 8.9.10. Chapters.
that is, An offering plaistered, or put to. Was not that a great oversight of
our Lord, that he had suffered such pains, and yet al his suffering could not
have helped us, if the Priests would not have given us that same addition by
their Mass offering? Peruse thoroughly the chap. 7.24. and 27. cap. 8.4. and
cap. 9 25.26.27.28. and ca. 10.1.2.12.13 14.15.16. etc.
Therefore must the Apostle needs have been much ouerseene in his Epistle to
the Hebrews, when he took upon him so earnestly to prove, that Christ had
no need of any Deputy, and that his sacrifice or oblation could not be
renewed nor offered again: but that it is given to us, and made ours through
faith: or perhaps he was so busily occupied with the Hebrews and Jews, that
he did not once think upon our holy Mass, no nor had not the leisure to
read over the books of the Catholic Doctors of Louen, nor the ordinances of
the holy fathers of Rome. For if he had read those, he should have learned
something else: as specially, that the principal point of the priesthood of
Melchisedech, did rest in the bread and wine which he set before Abraham and
his Soldiers, to stake their hunger and thirst. For of this bread, and of this
wine, has our dear mother the holy Church of Rome made a sacrifice: and out
of that concluded, that the Priests must likewise have bread and wine to
change the same into flesh and blood, and so to offer it up. But the Apostle
had never heard any such news: and therefore he is to be borne withal: but
these Heretics, who have read over all these things, with our Doctors: yea,
they have it at their fingers ends: and yet they make but a mock at it: those
fellows truly, are worthy to be looked at under the brows, and to have
their heads set betwixt two ears.

Proceeding now, as touching the order of Aaron, Aarons Priesthood, did. 21.
cap. 1. in lib. 7. did. 14 cap. 8. In the 2. chap. of Council.
he (without doubt) was a figure likewise, not of Christ, but of our Priests.
For there is written in the Decrees, and in the book of Sentences, That as
well the hie Priests, as the Pater noster priests, were all ordained by
Moses, when as he, by the commandment of God, did institute Aaron an high
Priest, and did anoint his sons under priests. The council of Aken, or
Aquisgrain, has also plainly concluded out of Isidore: That the order of
Priests have their beginning of Aarons children: Council of Aquisgraine*
and that those which in the old Testament were called offering Priests, are
the very same which now are called Mass priests. And those which at that
time were called Hie priests, are now our Bishops. So that it is easy to be
noted, The Priests of Caiphas race.
that they are all of Caiphas his progeny.

For as touching that, which the Apostle does say to the Hebrews: Hebr 7.11.
and 8.7.
That by the coming of Christ, the order of Levy was clean taken away: that
can not be true: considering that yet at this day, the holy Church has her
Levites: as out of the 7. Chapter of the said Council, This appears also in
the book of Sentences, did. 24. cap. 1.
and out of the 2. Chapter of the 21. Distinction does plainly appear: where
it is said, That the Levites are in Greek called Diaconi, and in Latin
Ministri. And now these must needs be our Deacons. And therefore in the third
Council of Bracaren, it was concluded in the 5. Chapter of the said Council:
That only the Levites, Levites are Deacons and pardoners.
and not the Priests, might be pardoners, and carry about with them on their
shoulders, the relics of Saint Anthonies swine, and such other like, having
on their Albe, which is to wit, a long shirt above upon their coats, as was
permitted to the Levites only, in the old testament, to carry or drive the Ark
of the promise.

Is not this a sufficient proof? you are welcome home. Did. 21. ca. 1.
And likewise, that the other Priests are also come out of the order of Leui,
does sufficiently appear out of that which is before rehearsed.

Therefore is the Apostle much ouerseene in his Epistle to the Hebrews, where
he will take upon him, to maintain, that the order and succession of the
Levites should be wholly taken away and adnihilated, or at least, he must be
thus understood, as that the order of Leui is not taken away, any otherwise,
but that in place of the Jewish Levites are entered in the Priests and
Pardoners: and in place of their sacrifices, is the Mass crept in. For
consider, that which he does write in his 5. and 8. Chapter, Heb. 5.1.8.
concerning the Leuite priests, saying, That every hie Priest is ordained to
offer gifts and sacrifices: pretending thereby to prove, that then Christ must
also have something to offer: that the holy Church of Rome understands to be
her Priests, Look in the foresaid Council Sinonen. de. 11. and the Emperors
Interim, and likewise upon Eck. ^at^m. and other Catholic writers.
as though the Apostle would have said flatly, That the Romish Priests are
ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices. And for that cause the catholic
Doctors have that text continually in their mouth, for the verifying of their
Priesthood. So that it is evident, that the Leuitical Priests are risen up
again in our Priests. And although the Heretics do mock at al such
allegations, saying, that that text is directly against us, because the Apostle
will thereby prove, Heb. 8.4.
that by the offering and Priesthood of Christ Jesus, all other offerings and
Priesthoods are taken away and adnihilated, considering that Christ could not
be a Priest, so far as there were any other Priest that did represent and
patronize him: yea, and although he were now here on earth, we pass not for
that. For we will by and by bring out against them the plain text of the
decrees, out of the Council called, Sexta Synodus, where it is said, That
James, the brother of Christ, after the flesh: In Canon. Iaco^ frater dom. de
consecra. did. 1.
and Basilius the Bishop of Caesarea, did jointly bring in the Mass, and
joined it to the scripture. Surely, if James the lords brother did establish
the mass, the^ it appears, that it is come from the Apostles: and therefore
need we not any more testimonies of scripture or other authorities. For
whereas the Heretics will seem to overthrow this, saying: That it is an
evident and detestable lie: considering that Basilius was Bishop of Caesarea,
James and Basilius knew not of the Mass.
well nigh three hundred years, or there about, after the death of S. James: so
that by reason thereof, he cannot have established the Mass with S. James:
Unto that we answer, That they are too much nosewise for us: our dear mother
the holy church goes not so preciselie to work. An inch breaks no square: It
skilles not for three or four hundred years, more or less, when otherwise it
serves her turn. Notwithstanding that, she has two diverse ways to answer
their demand. For she may ^ay, that there fortuned a great miracle, to wit,
that S. James the Lords brother, did rise again from death, about 300. years
after he was buried, to come and help Basilius to sing Mass: or she may
likewise say, That James did in his time establishe the Mass: but because
there were no altars to be found, by reason there was not yet as then any
relics of Saints, which had wroght miracles: and that men might not without
being furnished with certain relics, Placuit vt altaria de consecra. did. ^
erect any altars to serve Mass upon: it may be, that the Mass knitt^ up in
an Atturnies bag hanged up upon a pin in some corner, till the coming of
Basilius, which was about 300. years after: like as otherwhiles they hang up
some processes at Machelin upon a nail a hundred years or two. In sum, let
it be as it will, it is all one. Once we conclude hereby, that the Mass was
ordained by James the apostle. And it is to be thought, that James had learned
it of Clement pope of Rome, These letters are written word for word in the
beginning of the first book of councels.
who had written two pleasant letters unto him, wherein he does specially treat
of the seat of the B. of Rome: and that Peter through his deserts or merits,
was become the foundation of the Church: and so forth declares at large, how
the Mass shall be devoutly done, what apparel, what hallowing, and what other
necessaries shall be used in the doing of it, in what clothes the Sacrament
shall be laid, that it may be kept clean from Mouse dongue, and that no
worms nor mothes come at it: as in the first part of the councels, in the
second letter of Clement, is by express words specified. Whereby may be
noted, what great and heavy troubles this good Clement had, and what manner of
Prophet he was, considering that he set out in writing, all the ceremonies of
the holy Church, which were not found yet in 700. or 800. years after
Clements time. And therefore it is, that our dear mother the holy Church does
make so high an holiday of these decretall letters of Clement, and of other his
companions, that she h^th out of the same established a great many of her
ordinances and holy ceremonies. In sum, it is plain and evident, that the
holy Mass has her ground and foundation without the Scripture.

The.iii. Chapter. That the name and Ceremonies of the Mass are fished out of
the holy Scripture.
The name of the Mass is out of holy Scripture.
Now, as touching the name of the Mass, that has likewise her beginning,
undoubtedly out of the holy scripture: notwithstanding, that there are many
and diverse opinions of the same. For it is not very long ago, that certain
great doctors of the Sor^onish schole at Paris, did (out of that, that is
always written at the end of all the Epistles which Saint Paul has written,
from whence they were sent, sounding in the Latin tongue, Missa est, Missa est.
etc.) conclude, saying, That Paul did thereby give to understand, whither
men should go to hear high Mass on the Sunday.

And now besides this, there was a Magister noster, which said, that the
Apostle Andrew had a Mass book, and had spoken of the Mass: for John
reherseth that Andrew said to Peter his brother, John. 1.42.
That he had found the Messiah, or the anointed Christ, of whom Moses does
bear witness. And this soundes in the common translation in Latin thus,
Inuenimus Messiam quod dicitur Christus: which words this wise doctor did
expound thus, Mossias is Missa.
We have found out the Mass which Christ has done. Is not that well hit? God
help us. Who dare now from henceforth be so stout, as to say, That the Mass
stands not in the scripture? But now, because that these Heretics will
needs be so nosewise, and will understand all languages: insomuch that they do
mock hereat, saying, Petrus Lombard. in the 4. book of Sentences, did. 13.
chap. 1 and did. 24. cap. 3
that Messiah does not signify a Mass* but The Messiah, that is to say, The
anointed: Now Peter Lombard, the writer of the sentences does set down
another opinion and judgment, saying: That this name Missa, is as much to say,
as Sending: and is so named, for that at all times there is an Angel sent out
of heaven, to consecrate the Corpus domini, that is, The Lords body, by whom
the Priest does send his consecrated God forwards toward heaven, at such
time as he has used these words following in the Mass: Omnipotens Deus, iube
haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui, in sublime altar tuum, etc. that is
to say: O almighty God command that this may by the hands of thy holy
Angel, be carried up to thy high holy altar, etc.

And out of this he does further conclude, that whersoeuer that Angel does not
come, it cannot be said that there is a Mass. But truly this must be but
mere dalliance, for if that were true, that they must tarry for the Angel,
there would not be one Mass to be found in the whole world: where
notwithstanding there are Masses soung daily by heaps. And therefore has our
dear mother the holy church driven in another nail here, and concluded in the
Council of Senona, Missa is an Hebrew word, and uncertain what.
that Missa is an Hebrewe word: now, what it does signify is uncertain. For,
notwithstanding that the same Council says, that it betokens a clean
offering: yet does not that well agree with the Hebrewe tongue, unless it were
so that it were named Nisset. Missa after the Hebrew is Nisset.
But it appears much rather, to have come of Massah, which in the Hebrewe
does signify Heaviness, or Curssing: or else of an other Massah, Missa of
Massah* a curssing.
which is interpreted, Seeking: because the Priests do with five words seek
God, to see if he will come into the bread. Even as the children of Israel did
seek God in the wilderness Raphidim, Exodus 17.7.
to know also whether he were with them, or no: by reason whereof the place was
called Massah, that is say, Seeking: notwithstanding, that it may be much more
strongly founded out of Daniel, Dan. 11.38.
who speaking of the Romish Empire, says, That they shall have a new God
Maosim, to whom they shall pray, and do worship, with gold, silver, and
precious stones, that is to say, A God of strength, and of force. Missa, is
Maos^^.
Wherein without doubt, he does speak of the Masse-God, which is a God of such
power, that he causes all them that will not honor him, to be burnt. In
sum, it is apparent, that the name of the Mass is fetched out of the
Scripture.

Ca. altaria si non fue^in^. de conse. did. 1.

Mass to be done upon a fo^re cornered stone.


Now further, whereas the Mass may not be long, but upon a four cornered
stone well foreseen with crosses, and coniured with holy words: all that is
likewise fetched out of the scripture. For Paul speaking to the Corinthians,
says, That they ought not so to glory in themselves for the sacrament:
considering that the people of Israel, (who notwithstanding were pitifully
destroyed by the hand of God) had also even the like sacrament in the
beginning, 1. Cor. 10.4. Psalm. 114.22. Es^^e. 28.19. Mat. 21.42. Mark. 12.10.
Luke. 20.17. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.6.8. Mat. 15 4*6. This is even so
conc^^ded and est^^lished upon the gloss in the ^ecree, in the chap. altaria
si non de consecrat. did 1. and in the book called En^hei^idion sacer^otum of
Guido de monte Rocher^i.
and were also baptized, and had likewise received the spiritual meat, to wit,
Manna, and drank the spiritual drink, which did flow out of the Rock: and
says further there, in most plain words: And the stone was Christ, that is
to say (after the spiritual interpretation of the holy Church) That the Mass
must be soung upon a stone. Item Christ is also called A corner stone: and
(which is more) his grave was hewn out of a stone, as Mark does wi^nesse:
Ergo, it must needs follow, that no Mas^e may be soung without a stone. And
because he was wound in white linen clothes, therefore must white linen be
used in the Mass.

And so forth, concerning all such Ceremonies as are used in the Mass: you may
(touching these) read the book of Durandus, or of Innocentius, de officio
Missae, or the book of Guido de monte Rocherii, called Encheiridion
Sacerdotum, that is to say* the manuel of Priests. For there you you shall
find plainly set forth, that all the parts of the Mass are finely founded
and established upon the scripture. And to begin withal, At what hour Mass
must be said.
you shall find the times appointed for the Mass, that it must be done at
three of the clock: because it is written, that the Jews did at three of the
clock cry, Crucify him, crucify him: or at six of the clock: for that at
six of the clock they did crucify him: or at nine, because that then he gave
up the ghost. For although it be so, that the Jews at that time did reckon
their hours otherwise than we do now: so that three of the clock was with
them, as viii. or ix. of the clock before noone, is with us: and their six, as
our xii. at noone: and their ix, as our three, at after noone: yet
notwithstanding, our dear mother the holy Church does not g^e so narrowly to
work with her reckonings. It is sufficient that simply the names do agree,
and then she lettes the rest go where it will.

After this now as touching the apparel, and other consecrated or hallowed
stuff, Albe*
you shall find her Albe, or long white garment in the Scripture, specially
where it is written: But he that continues to the end shall be saved. Mat.
10.12.24.13.
For that long garment does signify long lasting, or long continuance.
Concerning the girdle, where it is written: He that fears God, shall prepare
his heart, Eccle. 2.20.
etc. By the girdle which does tucke up the clothes, is meant the fear of God.
Item, the Maniples are fetched out of that saying, in the Psalm: Those that
sow with tears, Psalm. 126.5.6.
shall reap with joy, and bring home their sheaues with gladness, etc. For
the sheaues are called in the Latin tongue Manipuli, so that David did there
speak of the Priests maniples. And the stole which they have about their
necks, commes out of the saying of Paul: Bear in your bodies the dying of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.10.


And last of all the head is founded out of the saying of Peter: 1. Pet. 4.
But above all things have perfect love among you. Let us live a perfect life.
Which is as much to say, according to the exposition of the holy church: Let us
put on a Cassuffle, Cassuffle*
when we sing Mass.

And yet, besides all this, you shall perceive, that the most part of all that
which is read in the Mass, is fetched out of the Psalms, and other places of
holy Scripture, here and there, by patches and pieces swept together, and
trimly tied on a heap, as if a man of a great many pieces of gold, as of
Ducates, Crowns, Rosenobles, and Portagues, glued together with dirt, would
make a goodly door for a Swinestie: yet it is most true, that every
particular piece, has a particular Pope, which did join it to the rest, and
so were sewed together, insomuche, that it is a right beggars cloak: as is
well known to all men, and as may easily be proved by the Decrees and
Catholic Histories. And to be plain, there is not any thing, great or small,
but they are able to bring in Scripture for it: as we can lightly prove by the
foresaid Authors, if need were. But we had rather, that those that long for
such meat, should go to the Market themselves, and buy that they like best,
and let it be dressed at the Tavern, or Tippling house, according to their
own di^t. It is enough for us, that we have given them to understand, who can
serve them of such vitaile, and then further as the case shall require, to
prove plainly, that the Mass is founded wholly on high, even upon the flat
Scripture.

The.iiii. Chapter. Teaching that the transubstantiation of changing of the
bread into the very body of Christ, and the wine into his blood, is grounded
upon the Scripture, after the interpretation of the Church of Rome.
The transubstantiation anno 1168. confirmed for an article of our belief.
NOw, as touching transubstantiation, that is to say, the plain changing of
the bread into the very body of Christ, notwithstanding the same was by the
holy father Pope Innocentius 3. first set forth for an article of our belief,
about the year of our Lord 1198. as by the Decretals is apparent: yet have we
plain proofs thereof in the Scripture. For first, Christ in the sixth Chap. of
John says thus: (...) 6.55.
My flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink: that is to say (after
the interpretation of our dear mother the holy Church) My flesh is truly,
sensibly, and bodily taken and eaten, under the accident of the bread: and my
blood is certainly received and dronken under the accident of the wine. The
explanation of the Sacrament.
For although Christ indeed do otherwise interpret it, teaching that this
eating and drinking, is to be understood, of coming to him, and of believing
in him: John. 6.35.
I am (says he) the lively bread: Whosoever comes to me, shall not hunger,
and whosoever does believe in me, shall never be athirst. Again, It is the
spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: The words which I
speak unto you are spirit and life. Yet all this notwithstanding, so long as
the holy Church of Rome will have it to be understood of her
transubstantiation, as Syluester Prierias high Steward of the palace of Rome,
has specially noted in his golden Rosarie, wherein he has gathered all the
pleasant Roses and flowers of the Catholic interpreters together upon one
heap: and considering that the holy Church cannot err: Christ must have
patience, and transubstantiation must take place. But we have yet a much
clearer text, to wit, where Christ himself says: This is my body: for by
those words does the holy Church of Rome plainly understand, that the same
which before was bread, is now no more bread, although Paul would call it
bread a thousand times: but is changed into the very body of Jesus Christ,
as long, and as broad, as it was hanging upon the Cross. And for that cause
it is, that she does disallowe all the expositions and interpretations, which
Basilius, Tertullianus, Theodoretus, Augustinus, and other holy Fathers have
set forth upon the same: saying, That those words must be figuratively
and sacramentally understood, as Christ himself has plainly said: I am the
vine: or, as Paul says: The stone was Christ: and as GOD spoke to Abraham,
saying: This is my promise, Cut off the fore skin, etc. Which is as much to
say, that the bread should not change his nature, nor the very body of
Christ be there present, but only that it should be a true and holy
token, a Sacrament, a warrant and pledge, a Seal and assurance, whereby we
are assured and fully certified, that he has given up his body and blood
for our salvation. And for this cause do they call it, a figure, or token, and
in the Greek Typus, and Antitypa, that is to say, Special tokens. But I do
tell you, that the holy Church of Rome will not allow any such
interpretations: unless it were so, that men would understand them as
Damascenus does interpret them, and as was in the second Council of Nice
concluded by the Fathers: to wit, That the bread should be such a seal,
pledge, figure, and holy token, only before it be consecrated: which is to
say, It should be a Sacrament, before it is become a Sacrament.

For, that this is their conceit and meaning, it is apparaunt out of this,
That long before the bread and the wine be consecrated, or made a holy
Sacrament: they do offer up the same unto God, for remission of sins, as
well of the living, as of the dead. The Canon of the Mass.
For in the Canon of the Mass: yea, before the bread be turned into flesh,
or the five holy words of consecration be heard, the Priest does pray, That
God will accept that offering of bread, Look in the Mass book in the Canon
of the Mass.
and through that deliver him from eternal death: And then, That he will
bless the said offering of bread in all points, and make the same, holy,
profitable meat, and acceptable: That is, may become the body and blood of
Jesus Christ. Yea, and before he has yet put the wine into the Chalice,
immediately after the Offertorie, he says thus:

The prayer of the priest at the elevation and consecration of the Offertorie.
O holy Father, almighty and everlasting God, take and receive this unspotted
sacrifice, which thine unworthy servant does offer up unto thee for my
sins, and innumerable misdeedes, for my forgetfulness and unthankfulness:
yea, and for all these which are here present, and for all faithful
Christians, as well those that be living, as those that be dead, that it may
be acceptable, auailable, and effectual unto the salvation both of me, and of
them, unto eternal life, Amen.

And in one of the secrets which is commonly read upon the 24. Sunday after
Trinity Sunday, he says thus:

O Lord, take and receive mercifully this offering, Another prayer to the same
effect.
through which thou art pleased, contented, and pacified, and have received us
again unto salvation, through the almightinesse and vnspeakablenesse of thy
mercy, etc.

Consider now, here does our dear mother the holy Church, ascribe unto this
bread, all things which may be attributed unto our Lord Jesus Christ, the
only begotten son of God: as to say, That God is become merciful to us, for
the bread sake, and has pardoned us our sins: and that before the bread be
consecrated, or in any point transubstantiated or changed. What marvel is it
then, that they do make a God of it, after the five words be spoken over it,
and yet make a Sacrament of it, before it can be a Sacrament? For as they can
of a piece of bread make God himself, and of nothing create something:
wherefore should not they likewise be able to make of no Sacrament a Sacrament:
and of a Sacrament, no Sacrament? That is to say, that a simple piece of bread
should be a holy token and seal of the blood of Jesus Christ, even before
it be made holy and consecrated. And then Econtra, that the Sacrament of the
body of Christ, shall be no more either a Sacrament, or token, but even the
very body of Christ it self? So that the holy Fathers must needs have
understood it so, especially, when they say that this Sacrament is but a
token, a seal, and a pledge, specialy before it is become a Sacrament. For
after that it is once a Sacrament, then (no remedy) our dear mothers will is,
that it shall be flesh and blood, and not any longer neither bread nor wine,
to signify the flesh and the blood. And therefore does she not make any
account of the exposition of Christ Jesus himself, who (after he had said of
the bread) This is my body: and afterward of the Chalice of Cup: This is the
new Testament in my blood: thereby declaring, that those words, This is my
body, must be so understood, as if he had said: Luke, 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
This bread is the new promise in my body, which shall be broken for you.
For of that should follow, that the bread, after the consecration, and
likewise after the speaking of the five words, should still remain bread,
and so be but simply a Sacrament, and true token of the body of Jesus
Christ: as showing unto us the promise of God, made in the breaking of the
body, and shedding of the blood of Christ Jesus our Savior, as was said of
the Circumcision: This is my covenant which I do make with you, to wit, for
that the Circumcision is a sure and holy promise, a pledge, and seal, through
which the promise of God is very strongly and substantiallie made unto the
faithful. No, no, I assure you: that likes the holy Church of Rome nothing
at all. She will lay fast hold upon the first words of Christ, and not seek
after any exposition or gloss, how necessary soever they be. And for that
cause shall Paul go without any Audiuit, when he comes in with his
interpretation, and says, That the bread which we do break, is the communion
of the body of Christ. For thereby it should also seem, that it remains
bread still after the consecration: and that it is not the body it self, but a
remembrance of the body* which thing the holy Church in no wise admits nor
allows, for life nor death. But especially, she will not accept nor like of
the interpretation following, wherein Paul proceeding does declare, how and
wherefore the bread is the communion of the body of Christ, saying, For all we
which eat of one bread, become one body.

Now truly, that sounds not well: for we do not al become one body in
substance, as the holy Church will have the bread become the very body of
Christ in substance. But then the similitude, which after that he introduces
or brings in, is to far out of the way. For he says, That those which
feed of the altar, are partakers of the altar: and that those that offer up to
idols, are partakers with the devil. And so making a comparison of the table
of the Lord, and the table of the devil: as though the Priests could not eat
up that body of Christ otherwise, than as idolaters eat up the devils: and as
though these words, Eat that body of Christ, did signify nothing else, but
this, through the power of the holy Ghost to be made one body jointly with
the body of Christ, as the ungodly idolaters, by power of the wicked spirit
are united with the devil: That is to heinous an heresy: and therefore we
may not stand upon this similitude: for it sounds di^ectlie against our
Transubstantiation.

But when you will have a substantial similitude, you must search and seek it
out of Scotus, and Thomas de Aquino, or Panormitanus, and such like. For they
bring in for this purpose, a goodly similitude of a Tavern, or common Inn,
where they sell wine: For as there is commonly a pot, a garlande, The
Sacrament compared to a wine Tavern.
or Iuie bush hanged out, betokening that to be a Tavern: and the Tavern
does signify, that there is wine plenty: So likewise you see here the
outward accidents of bread, to wit, the roundnesse and the whiteness, which
do signify, that under the same is contained the very body of Christ, which
is to be resembled to the Tavern. And this body of Christ does further
signify the holy Church of Rome, which is made one with the body of Christ,
which they call Mysticum corpus Christi, that is to say, The spiritual or
mystical body of Christ: and this is that sweet wine which the Priests
drink in that Inn or Tavern. And after this they do likewise bring for a
similitude, the water which in Cana of Galilie was plainly turned into wine:
which similitude does so wonderful well serve for this purpose, as to set a
fifth wheel in a wagon. But it is pity that the Priests have not other five
words, whereby they might do that too. For then should the similitude serve
their turn much better, if that they might (when they would) convert and
turn the water into good wine: for that they might therewith the better scour
and refresh their dry throtes, when they are become very hoarse with singing
of their service. And it is very true, that they do what they can for that
purpose: for on Saturday, being Easter eeuen, they pray unto God, that he
will also do so much as to turn their Beer, saying, This is the very prayer
of the priest over the Beer, from word to word, as it stands in the Mass,
and as Munst. says
O Lord, holy Father, almighty and eternal God, which have made both heaven
and earth, wherein the water is contained: I pray thee, and instantly beseech
thee, in the name of Jesus Christ thy only begotten Son, that thou (of thy
goodness) wilt bless and make holy this Beer, as thou did bless the
dinner of Abraham and Isaak: and as thou did bless the six pottes in Cana
of Galilie, which were changed from water into good wine: even so change (for
thy servants sake, which do believe in the Catholic faith) this substance of
Beer into pleasantness and mirth, The changing of the Beer.
thorough the same, etc.

But alas, what can all this help, when it will not so come to pass? For they
have not this cunning: and therefore they must needs have been deceived, and
so drink up the blood upon raw flesh. For men may say all what they will,
and Paul: yea, Christ him self, may bring forth what interpretation they
list, but the holy church will stand to the first words, This is my. body:
and upon that will she live and die The text is plain enough for her, she
has no need, either of gloss, or interpretation. And therefore unto all the
interpretations which these Heretics bring in, whether it be out of the
Scriptures, or out of the ancient Fathers, we will answer, This is my body:
and stick as sure to that, as the Cuckoe to her song.

The v. Chapter. Treating of the great st^ife and difference which is a^mongst
the Romish Doctors, concerning the words of the Sacrament: and yet all they
agree and stand fast touching the Transubstantiation. Herein are likewise set
forth some textes of Scripture, whereby Transubstantiation is established.
IT is very true, that our Catholic Doctors and subtle masters of
Divinity, Difference among the Catholic Doctors touching the Sacrament*
can not (even they them selves) find any good resolution of these words,
neither can make them serve the turn well, touching their Transubstantiation,
but that there does always fall great difficulty and disorder therein. The
books stick out in every side like a spindle in a bag: in so much that they
snarre and jar amongst themselves in this matter, Of the great trouble and
disagreement among the catholic Doctors, as touching the words of the
Consecration, read Syluester Pri^rias in his golden Rose* in tract. 2. di^
pa^asceues.
like dogs and cattes: yea, Quot capita, tot sensus: How many heads, so many
opinions. And yet notwithstanding, they all jointly cry together, This is my
body. The text is clear, and needs no gloss: yea, they cleave as close to
Transubstantiation, as claye to the cart wheel. Although they can not tell
which way to frame this plain text. For to begin withal, they all flatly fly
from that which was concluded in the foresaid Council of Rome, that is, That
the very body of Christ should be Sensualiter, that is to say, Sensibly, and
visiblie eaten, and with the teeth chewed in morsels. For to that they all
affirm flatly, No: and that it is a false lie, notwithstanding it is set out
in the Decrees very substantially. For (say they) the body of Christ can no
more be bitten, eaten, nor digested: he can not now die nor suffer any more,
nor be broken in pieces: he does live eternally. Which is apparent by this
token, that yeerelie upon Corpus Christi day, our dear mother the holy church
does in her usual Hymn or Sacramental Carroll sing these words following: Sub
diuersis speciebus,
Signis tantum and non rebus*
Latent res eximiae:
Caro cibus, sanguis potus,
Manet homo Christus totus*
Sub vtraque specie:
A sumente non concisus,
Non confractus nec diuisus*
Integer accipitur:
Sumit vnus, sumunt mill,
Quantum isti, tantum ille,
Nec sumptus absumitur, etc.


That is to say: Under signs most plain to see,
Substance none which seem to be,
Things lie hid most excellent:
The flesh is meat, the blood is wine*
A perfect Christ in either sign,
Remains of the Sacrament.
He is not dealt in morsels small,
Divided, cut, nor hurt at all,
But whole he is received:
A thousand taste, a thousand eat,
And all alike feed of one meat,
He wastes not though digested.


Now see here, thus do they deface their own Councels and Decrees, and make
all the holy Fathers of the Council of Rome liers. After this, come in Scotus
and Innocentius the fourth, and they will defend (a Gods name) That it
consists not in the five words, to hang the vell about the cattes neck: but
that it is much rather done through the benediction or blessing that goes
before. So as the Transubstantiation and very changing does not proceed
through these words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body: but through the
benediction or blessing which went before.

Petrus de Aliaco upon the 4. (...) of Sen^. qu^^. 5.
And Peter de Aliaco says likewise very plainly, That if it were so, that the
consecration should be by virtue of these five words (as the holy Church of
Rome does say and believe) then should not Christ Jesus have spoken the truth,
when he said: This is my body: considering that it was not yet his body, but
must first become his body. The other are earnestly against this. Armacanu^
in the 9. book ca. 5
Now Armacanus very willing to please both parties, says, that they both
have reason, namely, That our Lord should not have spoken the truth, and yet
that it should be even so as he had spoken and said. Occam in his Quodlibet
questions, has found out wonderful sharpewittie testimonies and authorities,
which a blind man should hardly have seen without a pair of spectacles: for
he says, That when Christ said: This is my body, he meant then to speak the
same of his body: yet notwithstanding upon certain exceptions and conditions,
to wit, That the Priest which should utter and speak such words after him, as
soon as he had said the first pretty word (This) should then immediately upon
a sodeine think upon two things at once: the first, This is my body, which
now at this present shall be secretly hid under the substance of bread, shall
become mine own body hereafter: the second, This body which is now hid
under the substance of bread, that is my body, even now at this present time.
And this only should prove true, after he had thought upon these two
propositions both at one instant. And it seems, that Armacanus was also of
the same opinion. Petrus de Aliaco, having first very subtilie pratled of the
matter, does notwithstanding yet at last fall out of the cart, and finds
fault with the opinion of Scotus, grounding him self fast upon this point
and purpose, That the five words are those which make the sport, and
transubstantiateth or turns the bread.

Alas (says he) it is a sentence which is not true, The explanation of Petrus
de Aliaco.
and yet notwithstanding it is no lie: but is neither fish nor flesh. In
sum, it is as much to say, as, Give the Doves drink. Thom. de Aquin. 5.
part, q^est. 78. article 5.
Thomas de Aquino says, That our Lord, by that first word, Hoc, This, did not
teach any thing certeinlie: but meant to say simply and in a gross manner
thus: That which is here under the substance of bred, let it be what it can, it
is my body. And whereas some will withstand this, saying, That the same is
nothing else, but bread, till such time as it be transubstantiated or changed,
unto that he answers, Not so. For this sentence (says he) is not fully
concluded, till the last syllable, to wit, Vm, be pronounced. Vm, the last
syllable of these five words, Hoc est corpus me^m
And therefore no judgment can be given of the verity or falsitie, till such
time as the five words be fully pronounced. For then is the matter first
clear, and the bread perfectly changed into the body of Christ.

Richardus de sancto Amore says, In his book of the Trinity.
That these words, This is my body, is just as much as to say thus, The
thing, whereinto this bread and wine shall be changed, is my body. Other
again will say, that Christ did not by this word Hoc, This, mean the bread:
but simply, the accidents or qualities of the bread, to wit, The
whiteness, The thickness, and The roundnesse: and that these words, This is
my body, is as much to say, as, My body is here hid under the accidents or
qualities of the bread.

The holy Bishop Durandus is of another opinion, namely, Durandus, read the
16. chap. of the second part
That Jesus Christ did once consecrate, by his secret power, which is hid and
vnkowen unto us, and not by power of these words. But yet should he
(notwithstanding) after that have set forth by the five words, the form and
manner that men should use to play this part of Transubstantiation after him.
In so much that the Priests should now consecrate by an other power and
virtue, than Christ Jesus did.

Contrary to this, Comestor is of opinion, Comestor*
That Christ consecrated with the same words, but that he did first whisper
them out secretly between the teeth, and so changed the bread into his body,
and the wine into his blood, which being done, he spoke the same words alowde
to his Apostles.

Now let see what good Beer you can brewe of this, and join al these wise
heads together, to try which of them is the wisest of all, and who has shot
down the Popingaie. Truly, for my part, I believe never a one of them all.
For the Catholic Doctors of our time, have been forced now again a fresh
to fetch out of a corner, other new, and vengeance wise fetches and strange
tricks wherewith to maintain the matter and make it good against these
Heretics: and yet are not at this present agreed amongst them selves: neither
can they tell whereupon to settle and ground them selves. Bishop Gardener of
VVinche^ter.
For that good Gardener (a Goliath amongst the Catholics) did set forth a great
book upon this matter, and has found out many quickwittie resons, saying,
That our Lord, when he spoke these words* did mean a thing which is not to
be found: and he does name it, Indiuiduum vagum, that is to say, A little
incomprehensible wind, or moth, which flies hence away in the air. In
sum, it is even as much as a little nothing, hanging by a small silk thread.
And then he says further, That this word, Hoc, must be understood of such
an Indiuiduum vagum, or flying moth.

I believe verelie, that he has drawn this out of Democritus well, who
says, That truth lay buried in a deep hole: and so in the mean space does
teach for a verity, That there are many little wavering things, always
shaking and flying in the air, which he does call in Greek Atomi, signifying
Indiuiduum, or Insecabile in Latin. And out of these flying or wild vesekens
should the world, by operation of it self, be made and brought together. Which
fantasy that good man Epicurus, and all Epicuristes have likewise followed,
and stoutly defended. And even so will our Gardener likewise maintain, That
this holy breadgod should be made of an Indiuiduum vagum, Gods bread made of
an Indiuiduum vagum or wild veseken
and that Christ knew well to speak of that matter: although the Bakers might
very well protest against that, and say, That they have made it of good wheat
meal: yea, of the finest wheat flower with dogs grease, and not of a wild
veseken, which is no where to be found. But Johannes de Louanio, that worthy
and profounde learned Magister noster, Johannes de Louanio.
who has so long carried the wisdom of Louen in his head, that in the end
his brain did wax feeble, and he stark mad, that man in his book which
he did write upon this matter, says, That herein chanced a great miracle,
to wit, that the bread is no more bread: but that there does remain only
the qualities of the bread hanging in the air, without ground or bottom, as
if a Cow should hang upon a cherie tree: and that yet likewise there remains
amongst these qualities a perfect substance of bread: so that it is still
bread, and yet notwithstanding it is no bread.

In sum, you shall find as many pears as plummes. Yea, is no: and No is
yea. Chickens eat haie, and with them horse turdes and good sweet figs are
all one.

There are many both hie and low speculations, amongst our Doctors, who yet
travel continually (like Asses) to undo this knotte, and yet can not bring it
to pass: For the deeper they wade in the matter, the more they are wrapped and
entangled therein. For they perceive very well, that it will not come to any
good perfection, so that the bread should become the very body of Christ: for
that then it must needs follow, That the bread died for us, and that a dead
and liuelesse creature should be our God and Savior: and yet would they very
feign bring the matter to pass, so that they would seem to stick to the word
of God: and yet for all that, maintain and uphold their Transubstantiation
also. They do well consider, that they can not justify the words, unless
they do expound them sacramentallie, and figuratiuelie, as the Heretics do,
who make no great matter of vengeance witty questions. But our Doctors and
faithful Catholics will never come to that bait, they will rather spend both
hide and hair, than they will recant and give over their opinion: yea, it were
also an eternal slander for our dear mother the holy church, and a mean
whereby she should sustain to great damage. For Transubstantiation is the very
best fisheponde and shambles that belongs to her kitchen: and therefore will
she defend that with tooth and nail, and in no wise suffer it to be plucked
out of her hands. Wherefore it is no marvel, that our Doctors had rather
invent new miracles one upon another, and make new and strange glosses never
heard of before: yea, turn all topsie turuie, neither touching the heaven,
nor the earth, and brall and chide one against another like whoores, knaves,
and cutpurses, than they would consent and agree to do such a spiteful
displeasure to their entirely beloved mother the holy Church of Rome, as to
join with the Heretics, her mortal enemies, to fetch out of Paul, or out of
the old Fathers, a sacramental exposition, and thereby to do injury to the
worthy Transubstantiation. They are yet besides this, in great difference and
dissension about many questions depending upon the same matter: These
questions you shall have in the wri^ters of the Sen^en. upon the 1. and 2. cap.
of the 12. did. and upon the 1. cap. of the 13 did. in the 4 book of the
Sentences.
for they cannot conceive whereupon the qualities of the bread are founded or
grounded, considering that it is no more bread: and then, that it cannot be
said, that the body of Christ it self should be round, white, savor, and
weigh, as bred: then, whether this weight, this roundnesse, and this color
remain hanging in the air without any prop, or that they are clean
consumed, or where they remain? Item, when the offertorie or Oste is broken,
what is there broken, whether the accidents and substance of the bread, or the
very body of Christ it self? Item, whether this transubstantiated body is so
quickly gone, Whether a rat or a mouse do eat the body of Christ.
when there comes a Mouse or a Ratte to gnawe upon it, or when Mothes or
worms do breed in it? Thereof they dispute a pace, whether the substance of
the bread does then, with his accidents and qualities, get him home again,
or that the Rattes or Mice do gnaw upon nothing else, but only upon the
accidents and qualities, without touching the bread. It is very true, that the
master of the Sentences did leave off this point very slenderly. For these are
his words:

Verelie it may well be said, that unreasonable beasts do not eat the body
of Christ, although it seems they do so: In the book of Sentences the 1.
chap. did. 11.
but then, what is it that the Mouse takes, or what is it that she eats?
That does God know.

Yet notwithstanding, those other doctors, which have written upon the book
of Sentences, are not therwithall satisfied, but will yet have a further
consideration of the matter: especially considering, that the gloss of
Henricus de Vrimaria, A mouse and a sinner in the 1. chap. of the 9. did. in
the 4. book of the Sentences.
written upon that text, says thus: That the mouth of a Mouse is not so
unclean, as the mouth of a sinner, And all they generally do teach, that the
sinners do without doubt eat the very body of Christ: Ergo Potlid.

Now besides this, yet can they not agree amongst themselves, to know
whether all the words which they of themselves have added, which are not
written by the Evangelists, do serve necessarily to the Transubstantiation,
or no? For Thomas de Aquino, will stoutely defend, That they are most
necessary thereunto, and that without them the Tarte cannot be well baked.
Now against this, Bonauentura, and master Henricus de Gandauo, with diverse
other, writing upon the fourth Book of the Sentences, say that these words
serve only to beautify and set forth the other for comeliness sake: but it
is needless for Scotus to write his opinion, considering that it cannot be
certainly known, whether they be very needful or no. And yet
notwithstanding, he does conclude, that the Priest is bound to say them,
neither more nor less, than as if they were most necessary to the framing or
making of the Transubstantiation. And Guido de monte Rocherii, does flatly
confess, That he knows not what to say to the matter.

Then further they are in contention, Wine with water transubstantiated.
whether the water which they do mingle with the wine in the Chalice, is first
changed into wine, and after that into blood: so that there should be two
transubstantiations at once? Or that it is incontinent and by and by turned
into blood, as well as the wine? And if it become blood, as appears it
should, by the example of the two Gosseps, of whom I spoke before, by what
power that can be so, seeing Christ did not meddle with any water, nor the
Evangelists do not write any thing thereof? And then, if the Priest should
put more water into it, than wine, (which they do not gladly, This question
you shall have in the writers of the Sentences, in the 5. chap. the 11. did. in
the 4. book.
or willingly:) whether then the Transubstantiation should take full effect,
or that it would stay, for doubt of drowning in the water?

Item, if by chance, after that the wine be consecrated, and turned into blood,
one should put into the Chalice as much wine more, whether then the first wine
should be no more blood, but become wine again, or that it should be blood
and wine mingled together: either that it should all together be turned into
blood? Item, whether a Priest may say and serve Mass with vinegre, or veriuce,
or with must, or whether for need with beer: and whether that the beer
(after the five words spoken, Look in the book called Encheiridion
sacerdotum, in the 3. chap. de sacramento Euchar.
and all parts of the transubstantiation well played) could do his office as
well as the wine, and leap soudeinly out of one substance into another? Item,
if there were thirtene or fourtene Offertories, Ostes, or singing cakes, laid
upon the altar, and that the priest could tell no better than my maid, and so
told but twelve, and upon that intent do pronounce the five words, thinking
that there were but twelve: then whether all the thirtene should be consecrated
and transubstantiated: considering that the intent and meaning of the Priest,
is wholly necessary to the transubstantiation: or that never one of them
should be transubstantiated, considering that the one has as much vantage as
the other, and not any one of them more base or bastard than an other, seeing
that they all did hear and understand the words of the Transubstantiation
indifferently, one as well as another.

There are yet (besides these) many other like difficulties, sufficient to
make devout catholic men to doubt, touching this foresaid article of
transubstantiation: for (I assure you) they trouble the heads even of our
masters of Louen, and are oftimes occasion that they must drink two or three
quartes of wine the more, and sometimes be so drunk, that they fall from the
benche, and catch a red nose: yea, and sometime that they dispute the hair
from their heads, through the great zeal wherewith they are warmed, whereby
they often fall into dronken diseases, and sometime into Plurisies, whereof
diverse times they die: and so the Church of Rome does fail of her best
pillars. And yet for all this, as concerning the highest and most principal
article of transubstantiation, they al danse after one pipe, and agree as well
in one, as Herod and Pilate. And as touching the rest, they remit that to God,
to take care for: for after that they have brought forth many cunning tricks,
and deep witty speculations, and bralled about those a long time, and in
vtramque partem, that is to say, pro and co^tra, to and fro, have reasoned on
both sides very Magistraliter, that is, Maisterly in deed. In the end they
make this conclusion: Sed quomodo hoc fit, In the 4. book of the sentences in
the before named did.
nescio, Deus scit: that is, I cannot tell what to say to the matter, I cannot
conceive how that may come to pass, God knows all: And yet notwithstanding,
they do always conclude this to be an article of the faith, whereof no man must
doubt. For our dear mother the holy Church will have it so. And yet in the
mean space, for the better stay of devout consciences, and something to
establish these great doubts, they have jointly found out a new practice to
prop up their general building of Transubstantiation, to wit, first a great
beam which they call Concomitantiae: and then a long rib, called, The steadfast
intention of the holy Church: wherewith they do so strongly prop up this
building, that not only Christ's body, Whether a Priest being half dronken,
and in a dream, can make the body of Christ, etc.
but the whole Godhead may s^and upon it without falling. And if it were so,
that the priest did dream, and had no regard to his Mass: yet have they a
remedy for that. For the good intent of the holy Church is so sure and
unremovable, that the intent of the Priest is not greatly to be accounted of,
but may well enough go walk abroad, and see if there be any good cheer
toward, and that his maid keep good rule at home, which is a jolly matter. For
otherwise, if the priest were yet half drunk with good cheer the eeuen
before, or that his maid had chafed him, or that but only a fly did come and
sit upon his nose, he might perhaps thereby forget his good intent, even as he
was speaking the holy words, and then should not that bread bec^me a God:
which were a perilous matter. For the simple people should then pray to a piece
of bread, in place of their God and creator. Therefore comes the holy Church
now in for a help, and does set forth for a perfect article of our faith, that
it is likewise sufficient for every one to believe, whatsoever the Church
beleues, although they know not what it is. Guido de monte Rocherii.
And again it is sufficient that the holy church have generally a perfect
determination, that wheresoever Mass is don, there is the bred changed into
God, although it were so that the priest did think only upon his maid, or on
his kitchen. In sum, there is not a hole, but the hellish Church has a peg
to stop it withal, she can turn every thing to the best: so that there is no
more difficulty. And if the Doctors and Licentiates, do chide and brall
among themselves, that makes no great matter: we ought to commit all these
weighty causes, to the judgment of the holy Catholic Church, and must
simply and jointly believe, That as soon as the five words are spoken, that
which the Priest has in his hands is turned into God, let it then be what it
will, either very bread, or the accidents of bread, or an Indiuiduum vagum,
that is, a wild veseken. That is no matter at all to us, it is sufficient that
we know it is our God, which we must pray unto in the Mass. For the text is
plain: This is my body, there needs no gloss upon it. And although it be
so, that all the Doctors of Louen, of Paris, and of Colen, cannot understand
it: yet it is sufficient for us, that we have fetched our transubstantiation out
of it, and set it forth irreuocably. Although we have yet many mo other
plain textes, whereby to defend it: which are very plentifully set forth by
the worshipful Eckius, and other worthy pillars of the holy Catholic
Church: as specially that which is written in Jeremy, That when the ungodly
Jewish Priests and false Prophets went about to bring Jeremy to death, because
he did earnestly condemn their ungodliness, they said thus one to another:
Let us mar his bread with wood, or let us destroy the fruit together with
the tree, and root him out of the kingdom of the living. For this now has
our dear mother the holy Church turned for the best unto our Mass priests,
as though they had holden this Counce^l together, and said: Mittamus lignum in
panem eius, Iere. 11.1^
that is to say, Let us cast wood into his bread, understanding thereby, that
they will counterfeit (in their Mass) the passion and death of Jesus Christ,
who suffered upon the cross, with a piece of bread. And to this end do they
cause these words to be soung yearly in the Passion: whereupon she has
resolutely concluded, That the bread is changed into the very body of Christ
Jesus: as is to be seen in the foresaid book of Eckius, and of other stout
Champions of the Romish Church. Yea, and likewise to prove that this
Transubstantiation is neither so wonderful, nor unnatural, as the Heretics
exclaim, that does Eckius teach out of the Scripture, where the devil said to
Christ: Mat. 4.3.
If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Consider
now, is not that a plain declaration, whereto no answer is to be made? And by
this it is well to be thought, that the devil would gladly have had a Mass in
the wilderness, but only that it could not be for lack of bread. And this
may possibly be the cause, wherefore our mother the holy Church does (upon all
the altars, and in all thee books, where this story is in hand and dealt
withal) clothe the devil in a friars cowle, to the end men may know, that he
was an holy Heremit, The devil did Mass in the wilderness.
or an Anchor, which did very devoutly say Mass in the wilderness, and
therefore does look out so Masselike. But when he saw he did lack bread, then
he sought and made means to our Lord, to see if he would erect a new
transubstantiation. And now, because this temptation of the devil is in the
Hebrewe tongue called Massah, (as is before rehearsed) therefore it is not to
be thought unlike, Massah is Missa.
that our Mass has thereof borrowed her name. For as Satan said: Command
that these stones be made bread: so say the priests in their Mass: Command
that this bread be made a body, or flesh.

Wherein the Priests are something more likerish, than their master was: for
that they will not be contented with dry bread* but that has his
understanding and meaning. Howbeit thus much it is in effect, That our dear
mother the holy church, has out of this Massah, or temptation of the devil,
very strongly established her Transubstantiation.

The vi. Chapter. Establishing the sufficiency of the Sacrament under the
substance of bread alone.
WE have heretofore set forth, that the holy Church of Rome has directly
against the commandment of Christ against the use of the Apostles, and against
the long continued custom and manner of the primative Church commanded, That
the Lay people should not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but under
one kind only, to wit, of the bread: as it is plainly set forth in the decree
at the Council of Constance, here before declared. But now because it shall not
seem that she has much a do to wrest a text or twain of the Scripture, and
to bring them in to serve her turn, she does therefore allege here manifest
texts wherewith she does set all things net, fine, and in perfect frame.

This word being thus alleged (...) in his manuel in the ^^ chap. of John, and
all whatsoever is betw^ne both of the drink^ng of his blood, he has left in
the pen.
To begin withal, it is written in the 6. of John, This is that bread which
comes from heaven, that he which eats thereof should not die. I am that
living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world, etc.

Note here, now does he meddle but with the bread (says Eckius) Ergo the Lay
people need not the wine. That soundes as well, as if a man should make this
argument: Christ says in the 15. of John, I am the true vine, John. 15.1.5.
you are the branches, etc. Here he speaks only of the vine, and not of the
bread: Ergo the Lay people need not receive the Sacrament under the substance
of bread, but only under the substance of a vine. Is not that very well
reasoned, to catch the Heretics in a trap? After that we read, that Christ was
known in Emaus unto two of his disciples, Luke 24.30.31.
by breaking of bread: and there is not one word of drinking: Ergo the Lay
people may not drink out of the Chalice. And if any man think that Christ
should not there have ministered a sacrament (as the Heretics will say) that is
a lie: for our dear mother the holy church has determined otherwise,
declaring that he did minister the Sacrament two times, once at Jerusalem, for
the Priests, In his manuel or ^nchei^dion (...) communium, in the cap. of
Cardinals, th^re he says that 27 of Christ's disciples were all Cardinals.
at his last supper: and another time at Emaus, for the Lay people, after his
resurrection. And although it is certain, that these two disciples were
Cardinals, and not Lay men, as Eckius in deed does finely maintain in a
certain place: yet what is that to the purpose? Did you never see Cardinals
that were no Priests? That is no news. There are now a days that are but
young children, and newly crept out of the shelles. And when all this is said,
there is no where written, Look in the foresaid book of Eckius, and upon
other Catholics which do found upon this argument.
that these two disciples had shaven crowns, or the priestly character or
cognizance: Ergo then must they needs be Lay people. Now thirdly, we pray thus
in the Pater noster, Give us this day our daily bread, and we do not speak of
any wine: wherefore then should the Lay people desire to drink wine in the
Communion? And although the priests themselves sing the same words in their
Mass, and yet notwithstanding are not content with dry bread: that cannot
serve the turn. For the prrests must needs have some prerogative, because
they are the beloved children of our mother the holy Church. Fourthly, ^uke in
the Acts of the Apostles writes: That those which believed, Act. 2.42.
continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayer: which streight-way after he sets out more amply, saying: And
sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to al men, Act. 2.45.46
as every man had need. And they continued daily with one accord in the
Temple, and brake bread in every house, and did eat their meat together with
gladness and singlenes of heart, praising God. Out of this does our dear mother
the holy Church conclude, That the cup ought not to be ministered unto the Lay
people in the Supper of the Lord, because that here is no mention made of
wine, but only of bread. For although in many other places of holy scripture,
all kinds of meats and drinks are understood under the name of bread and
eating: yet that can not take place here, considering that our dear mother the
holy Church has otherwise interpreted the same. And Paul has directly
written, That all men should esteem the Apostles and Preachers as Ministers of
Christ, 1: Cor. 4.8.
and disposers of the secrets of God. For out of this does our dear mother the
holy Church teach, This is set forth by brother Barnard of Luxenburgh, to this
end, with the arguments following in the register of Heretics, in the 12. part
of the 4. book.
That the Priests are to be resembled to God, and are mediators between God
and the people, and so by this means may freely change or alter the
Sacraments, as they shall think good. Is not this a subtle and double dealing
with the Scripture? Wherefore then do these Heretics say, That we have no
scriptures wherewith to defend this our doing, whereas we bring in sacks full of
Scripture, as all men may see.

And then, touching that they will beat us with our own rod, saying, That
the Church her self has always done otherwise, as may appear out of the
ancient fathers, Councels, and Canons, we care not a point for that: we hang
that on the hatch. For all that is past and gone, the world is now in another
state than it was then. For in those days, they were for the most part all
ready to shed their blood for the christian belief. This is written by the
foresaid Barnard Professor of divinity in the same place before written.
And for that cause did they drink the blood of Christ, as the Catholic
Doctors have written, according to the doctrine of Cyprianus, saying, how can
they shed their own blood for Christ's sake, Cyprianus in his 3. epistle and
2. book written to Caecilius.
if they do not drink of Christ's blood? But now there is no more tidings of
those matters: for the holy church of Rome will not lose one drop of her blood:
considering that she has enough to do for the defense of the holy Catholic
faith, to shed the blood of the Lutherans and Caluinists, Psalm. 72.1.
like water in the streets. And therefore it is not any more needful that the
Lay people should drink the blood of Christ out of the Chalice under the
substance of wine. They can digest it well enough raw, as it was shed out of
the body of Christ Jesus: yet for all that, the priests have this advantage,
that they may drink the blood of Christ both ways. And yet is not the blood
of Christ in the Sacrament, taken quite away from the Lay people. For when they
do eat the whole body, with flesh and bones, it is certain, that they get
in the blood wall. For the before named Bonauentura does make mention of a
certain miracle, of one which would not believe that there was any blood in the
holy Ost, Did. 4. quaest. 2.
or singing bread, used in the holy Mass, Ecki^s in his Manuel or
Encheiridion locorum.
and sodeinly there came blood running out. And likewise Alexander de Ales does
declare, that upon a time when the people would have received the Sacrament
under both kinds, there was sodenlie before them a platter full of blood,
whereof the good devout people being meruellously abashed, were glad to
content them selves with the one. And that the blood (undoubtedly) is with the
body, we have here before by many other miracles declared, sufficiently
proved. Therefore have the Lay people no occasion to complain, as though the
blood of Christ were denied them: for even the Priests them selves are
contented with one kind, on the good Fridaie next after the shire Thursday,
Eckius and Barnardus in the places before spoken of and named.
when they have had their sops in good Bastard or Romnay. For then the next
day, being good. Friday, they sing a dry Mass, and keep a Mouses banquet, as
well as the Lay people do at Easter. A dry Mass on good Friday
Before time likewise, in the Jewish church the Lay people had no part of the
drink offerings, but the Priests only. For although that Chrysostom says,
In the 18. Homil. or sermon upon the 2. Epist. to the Corinthians.
touching this matter, that this is now changed, and that in this Sacrament the
Lay people must enjoy the like meat and drink as the Priests do,
Chrysostomus.
so as now the one has no more advantage than the other, as they had in the
old Law: yet can not the saying of Chrysostom any thing serve in this
place. For against Chrysostom will we set Brother Barnard of Luxenburgh,
professor in Theology, and John Eckius, with all other good Catholic writers
of our time, who have otherwise written and determined of this matter. And as
touching that which the Huguenotes do allege out of Paul: yea, out of Jesus
Christ him self, saying, That Paul did command all christen people, to do
according as Christ had ordained, and as Christ had said: Drink all of this:
We do answer to that, That this was only a simple permission, This is the
answer of the before written Barnardus brought upon this place
and not a special commandment: as he says in another place: Destroy this
temple, and I will build it up again within three days: for that is no
commandment, but only a permission, as if he said: If it be so in deed,
that you will destroy this temple of my body, I will not forbid you, but I
will build him up again, etc. In like manner does our mother the h^lie
Church say, that these words, Drink you all of this: And, As often as you
drink this, you shall declare the death of the Lord: Those words are thus to
be understood, as though he had said: I do not will you Lay people to do
so, but the Priests only: notwithstanding, if you will do it, and that the
Priests are contented withal, I will not then be against it. Thus you see
the game is won. Now let us to an other matter, tending to the like end.

The vii. Chapter. Which does treat of full satisfaction for sins, of the
deserts of good works: also of the merits of Christ's passion, and of
Justification: of the difference between mortal sins and venial sins:
and of the assured hope of salvation.
Now, Of merits and justification.
seeing that we have sufficiently spoken of the holy Mass, and the
Sacrament of the altar, and that our mother the holy Church of Rome does
moreover teach and set forth for an article of the faith, That we, by
desert, hearing a Mass, and receiving the Sacrament, may make full amends for
our offenses, and sufficiently satisfy for our sins: therefore it is now
very necessary, that we something treat of satisfaction for sins, and of
deserving by good works, the rather, because the Heretics do with their
scriptures so trouble us, touching this point, as they turn both the spit and
the roast meat into the ashes: in so much that we shall loose both the sheep
and the fleece, if we suffer this to be so plucked from us. And therefore it
is necessary to put all good Catholic children in remembrance, that in no
wise they do give any ear to the Heretics, touching this point, for fear
lest thereby they should be brought out of the right way, and so by receiving
their goodly reasons and multitude of scriptures, be persuaded from their due
obedience to the holy Church of Rome. And to the end that every man should
be warned, and not by negligence sodenlie taken in a trappe, therefore shall I
set out (something more at large) their meaning touching this point, to the
end that every one may see, whether our dear mother the holy Church have not
just occasion so bitterly to curse and banish their doctrine.

Then, to begin withal, they do take upon them to defend and maintain by
Scripture, That all sins are deadly and mortal, All sins are ^eedle
sl^nes, 1. John 3.4.
because that sin is the breaking of Gods commandments, as S. John says:
And, That who soever does not observe all, whatsoever God has commanded in
his Law, is accursed. D^ut. 27.26. Galat. 2.10.
For S. James does witness, Iam. 1.10.
That who soever transgresses in one point of the Law, is guilty in the
whole: considering that the same God which c^mmaunded the one, did also
command the other. In so much that all those which commit sin, Ephesians. 4.18.
Col^. 1.21. Romans 5.12. 2. Cor. 15.56.
are through sin alienated and estranged from the life which is only to be
had at the hand of God, and so must fall into the hand of heath, seeing that
The reco^pense of sin is death, Romans 6.23.
according to the saying of S. Paul, whereby all men (without any exception)
which are under sin, Romans 3.8.9.10.11.12.22. Roma. 5 2. Gala. 3.21.
are likewise under the bondage of eternal malediction, death, and damnation:
considering that all have sinned and are fallen away from that life which is of
God, into his wrath, and do thereby become (if the special mercy of God were
not) the children of wrath, of cursing, and of death: yea, Ephe. 2.3. Galat.
1.3. Ephe. 1.5. Colos. 1.21. Roma. 10.2^ Ephe. 5.16.
and justly may be called the very enemies of God. Out of this they conclude,
That in the wide world there is no mea^e, nor counsel to be found for the
payment and accomplishment of our satisfaction, Roma. 3.18. John. 1.29. 1. Pet.
1.19. Esaie. 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Esaie. 53.4.5.6.7 Gala. 4.4. Gala. 3.17. Cor.
5.21. Act. 2.24. 1. Pet. 3.18. Colo. 1.15.16. John. 1.1.2. John. 1.4. Ioh.
3.15.16.18.36.4.14.5 24.6.35.40.7 38. Roma 3.22.26.28 30.4.5.24.5.2. Gala. 2
16.17.20 3. thoroughly. 5.6. Phil 3.9. Colos. 1.12.23. Roma. 3 24. Ephesians.
2.8.9. Roma. 4.4. Tim. 1.9. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5 1.8.1.32.33.34. Heb.
10.22.
but that all must be discharged to the uttermost farthing: which is as much to
say, that all people are under the eternal wrath, curse, and damnation of
God: considering that the sentence of God being once pronounced, must endure
for ever: and a man being dead, and once taken away from life, can never
restore him self again to life. And thus (say they) there is no more to be
said, but al flesh are debtors unto God. But hereby is the mercy of GOD made
manifest, that the punishment of our sins, is laid upon our Savior Jesus
Christ, the unspotted lamb of God: that he has suffered for us, and taken
upon him our sins: that he, being become man, and having put on our nature,
has borne the burden of this curse, this wrath of GOD, this death, and this
hell and damnation, and through his divine and eternal power (for that he
also was the only Son of God: yea, even God him self, and the very
author and well spring of eternal life) has over come and clearelie taken
away the same, and has freely, and without deserte, by his mere mercy,
given unto all those which do faithfully believe in him, life and
justification. In so much that they now, in the person of Jesus Christ, as
partakers of his body, Roma 2.16. Galat. 4.6.7. 1. John. 4.19. Esa^e. 49.15.
Roma. 4.7.8. 2. Cor. 5.19. Roma. 3.25.4.7. Luke. 1.77. Colos. 1.14. Heb. 8.12.
Esaie. 43.25. Ezech. 36.22 Psalm. 103.12. Iere. 31.34. Esaie. 43.23. Ezech.
36.12. 1 John 2 2. 2 Pet. 1.19. Psalm. 99.5. Esaie 53.5. 1. Timot. 2.5. 1.
John. 2.2. 1. Cor. 6.20. Romans 1.33. Act. 4.12. Colos. 2.10.
boldly appear before the Divine Majesty of GOD, being assured, that God is
their good, merciful, and most loving Father: and does no more charge them
with the burden of their sins, but most mercifully forgiueth them their old
and odd debtes, and pardons them of the punishment which they have deserved,
not thorough any of their good works, merits, or deserts, but through the
power of the merits and deserts of our Savior Jesus Christ, wh^ has made
restitution for that which he never had: and has not only taken upon him to
discharge our debtes, but also to suffer our punishment, and has borne the
same wholly in his own person: so that he is iusti^e called, Our ransom,
Our Pastor, Our pledge Our full satisfaction, and the costly p^ice of our
salvation, without whom there is no salvation, no ransom, nor redemption in
the world. And therefore say they, That who soever will begin to account or
reckon with God a new, and make satisfaction or payment unto him, Galat.
5.2.3.4
whether in whole or in part* of that which they are indebted unto him, those
are wholly quite of Gods mercy, and bind them selves soul and body to the
full observing of the Law, and do clearelie take away and renounce (as much
as apperteineth unto them) the merits of Christ: notwithstanding that (by the
just judgment of God) sin is so abominable, that it can not by any means
be recompensed, or fully satisfied, but only by eternal death and
damnation, or else by the sweet and most precious offering of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, which is (before God the Father) a sufficient
satisfaction and remission for the sins of all those that have their full
trust and confidence therein. Romans 8.55. Heb. 9.24. and 10.12.
And also they do acknowledge, That God does in the mean space correct his
children in this world, 1. Pet. 1.7. 1. Pet. 5.6. and 4.12. Heb. 12.5.6.7.
Psalm. 30.7.8. 1. Cor. 11.32. Romans 5.3.4. Heb. 12.2. Colos. 1.24. Romans 8.17.28
2. Tim. 1.8. Mat. 22.23. Mar. 12.29.
and proves their faith by many and diverse troubles, crosses, and
afflictions: partly, for that they shall learn to know very well their
misery and calamity, and thereby be provoked the rather spedilie to fly to
his mercy for succor: partly, that thereby they may become like unto their
master and head Christ Jesus: and with him die from sin, and rise up in
newness of life, and hereafter live and reign with him eternally: but they
will in no wise consent, that these troubles, crosses, and afflictions, should
serve any thing for satisfaction or remission of sins, no not so much as for
the least sin that can be thought upon. And likewise they clearly dissent
and disagree from us, saying, That all the good works that any man can do,
during all his life, can not serve him to any purpose for the remission of the
least sin that ever he committed: considering that al men (without exception)
are of mere duty bound to obey God, to love him with all their hearts, with
all their might, with all their power, in body and soul, with thanks, and in
all that lies in them: and to love their neighbors as themselves: in such
manner, as though they had accomplished all this, Gala. 2.10. 1. Cor. 8.46. Roma.
3.9.10.11.19.22. Roma. 5.12.17.19. Luke. 17.10.
(which is impossible for any man to do, for that we are dead in Adam, and
that all the thoughts of man's heart, and all the conceits of his mind are
mere mischief and malice against God, even from the beginning) in so much
that they should yet remain unprofitable servants, Roma. 8.7. Gene. 6.5.8.21.
John. 3.6.
and should have done no more than they of very duty were bound to do: So
far does it differ that they should be able thereby to satisfy God, and
make amends for any such offenses, as they heretofore have committed. For if
they should come in reckoning by works, then we must make a perfect reckoning,
Roma. 4.4.11.6.
and not half a reckoning (say they:) otherwise works were no works: but
contrawise, when men do seek for mercy, and not for justice, Phi. 3.7.8.
Gala. 15.16.
then must they (with Paul) forsake all their works, all their righteousness,
their holiness, and all whatsoever they have done, and account the same as
nothing, to obtain justification by faith, through God mercy: for otherwise
mercy were no mercy. Roma. 11.6.
And after this, they proceed on further, and conclude in this form and
manner:

Gala. 2.16.3.11.12. Roma. 10.5. Esaie. 1.12.58 5. Iere.
7.12.13.14.9.13.14.10.8.18, 22.
Now, seeing God will not accept any justification by those works which he him
self commanded in his Law, how much less will he accept these works which
other men have devised, and fetched out of their own heads, which he never
commanded? As, to hearing of Mass, to run from one Church to another, to
trudge from one altar to another, to go on pilgrimage* to wear hairecloth, to
whippe them selves, to pull a Friars hoode over their head, to make vows,
which God never allowed, with such other like works, which the holy church
does esteem for very meritorious, and calls them Opera supererogationis,
that is to say, Superfluous works, Works of the Catholics.
for that God never commanded them: and therefore men may hereby do more than
they are of duty bound to do. These (say they) shall not only be
unacceptable before GOD, for good payement, but shall rather be esteemed for
false coin: yea, be imputed for very slandering and blaspheming of God,
Esaie. 1.15. as before.
and for a flat forsaking and despising of the shedding of the blood of Jesus
Christ. O what a matter is this! O help blessed Lady of the 7. Oaks! Help S.
Lewen, S. Rombold, S. James of Co^postell, with all your scallop shelles, and
pilgrims staves: help all you sweet men and women Saints, whose relikes are
devoutly prayed unto by our dear mother. How can it be, that she should be so
ouerseene? should then all good catholics have hitherto reckoned, and still do
reckon without their host? should our forefathers have deserved none otherwise
by building Cloisters, Abbeys, Trentals, Masses, and such like devotions?
should all that be lost? O no, I defy that. We will rather forsake the whole
Scripture, Peter and Paul, with the whole rabble of them, than that such a
slander should rise and take place in the holy Catholic, Apostolic, Popish
church of Rome. For if that were so, then should all our Decrees and decretals,
all our Sentences and Se^tentiaries, al orders and ordinances, old customs,
vsages, privileges, and old proceedings of the holy church, all masses, with
the appurtenances, al priests and priestly doings, and so one devil with
another be clean overthrown. And then it must needs follow, that the
Lutherans, Zwinglians, and Caluinistes, shall yet again bear the swing, and
all the shorn swarm of holy shauelings, with all the Sophisters and
Theologians of Louen, with all the new Bishops, Abbats, Monks and Prelates,
give place. To what purpose then (I pray you) should the Duke of Alba with his
Spaniards serve, having taken so troublesome a journey upon him, to stand the
Bishops instead of Sargeants and hangmen: and to set up the ruined Romish
church in her authority again? O no, no, we will never be given to understand
and believe, that the scripture does teach this: for otherwise the scriptures
must be heretical, and directly against the holy church: and then should the
scriptures have deserved to be burnt, as well as the Huguenotes. Well, surely our
Doctors of Louen have likewise perused the scriptures, and our new Bishops do
daily read their service and Mass book, at lest when they have leisure: but
they find not this written there: and therefore it is to be thought, that either
the heretics have other Epistles and Gospels, than is written in our Mass
book, and read in the church: or there is more malt in the mill, than the
miller will be acknowen of. For although our mother the holy church is content
to grant the heretics, that Christ is our right redeemer, and has
sufficiently satisfied for our sins (because it shall not seem they have
utterly forsaken Christ, and thrust him out of his seat) yet is not that so to
be understood, that he only must be taken for our full ransom and
satisfaction, or that he should have fully made our peace with God the Father,
through the offering up of his body and blood: so as we should now (through
his merits) be esteemed for righteous, and the children of God, and have an
assured belefe, that God has (for his sake) forgiven us all our sins, and is
to us a good and loving Father (as these heretics will needs prove by their
Bible.) No, no, it will not go so easily to work: we must go otherwise to
work: we our selves must pay our debtes with our own money, and satisfy God
sufficiently for our sins, or otherwise all would be naught. For it does not
beecome the mercy of God (says the council of Trent) that he should forgive
us our debtes for nothing, In the.24. session, de satisfactionis necessitate,
etc. Cap. 2.
without any former satisfaction. And although it be so, that Paul does take
on him to defend, These are the proper words of Paul to the Romans in the.4.
Chapter. 2.5.6.7.
that Abraham has no just occasion to presume of him self before God of any
desert or former works: yea, and says, That he that works not, but does
steadfastly believe in him that does justify the ungodly, to him is his belief
for righteousness: as David also says, touching the justification of those
to whom God does impute righteousness without any works, by these words: Blessed
are they, whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed
is that man to who^ God imputes not sin: These are the very words of the
council of Trent the.6. session. can. de. iustificatione.
yet, that holy ghost of the counsel of Trent has concluded the contrary,
saying thus: Whosoever will defend and maintain, that the ungodly are
justified by faith only, and that for the obteyning of Gods mercy, his works
are not needful, let him be accursed. And our Doctors of Louen have once for
all acknowledged and judged, That God may not impute righteousness to any man
through faith, unless he be righteous of him self. For consider, this is the
conclusion of the worshipful and profound learned Magistri nostri, Ioice
Raue^stein of Thielt in his book which he now (a while ago) did write against
the Lutherans of Antwerpe.

This pretended righteousness (says he) does tend first against natural
reason: In the book called confessiones sieve Doctrina q^ae nuper aedita est a
ministris ecclesiae Antwerp. Imprinted at Louen per Petrum Sanguam. 1567. and
is written in the.24. leaf.
for it cannot stand with any natural reason* that one which had no wisdom in
his head, should yet notwithstanding be called wise: either else righteous, who
has no inward righteousness in him self.

Secondarilie, it is slanderous against the holy Ghost, who has testified
and witnessed of many men in the scripture, that they were righteous before
God: and so should the holy Ghost be attached for a false witness.

Thirdly, it does differ from the doctrine of the Catholic Fathers.

Consider now, here we have a clear judgment and irreuocable sentence:
whereupon it must rest, That Paul has spoken amiss, in saying, that God
does ascribe righteousness to the ungodly without any works. For, what is the
meaning of this asc^ibing our alowing? Our sharpwitted Magistri nostri of Louen
can not by their natural reasons, nor with al then Syllogismes, Quotlibets, nor
other speculacions, conceive the same: no nor will permit that God should
impute righteousness, or yet cover sins through the merits of Christ, to one
that were not righteous of him self by deeds, and that had sufficiently
satisfied for his sins by his deeds: so that God is not licenced to name
things that are not, as though they were, as Paul ascribes unto him: or to
deck us with a righteousness and obedience which we have not deserved our
selves: Romans 4.17.
our dear mother the holy Church of Rome does esteem it for a foolishnes,
untowardness, and blasphemy against God, that Christ only should be our
wisdom, our righteousness, our holiness, and our only redemption. She will
have it, that we shall even of our selves, and by our selves, have our own
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption before God, at least, if we
will be esteemed for righteous. She does esteem it for a foolish and
faithless trust, that one should trust to the righteousness of any other
than him self. She will have it, that every one shall be justified by his
own righteousness, and by his own merits, and therewithal satis^^e and pay
all the sins and offenses, wherewith he may be by any means justly
burdened. It is true, That original sin has some preeminence, and that it
may not be tried to the uttermost point. For notwithstanding that original
sin, Romans 5.12.17.18. 1. Cor. 15.21. Ephe. 2.3.
is that which makes us the children of wrath, and brings us to death, yet will
our mother the holy Church stay a little, and pale in Gods determination, They
are the words of the Council of Trent, in the 7. ses. titul. de
satisfactionis necessitate and finctu. c. ^
and persuade the best betwixt both, saying, That it does not well become the
righteousness of God, that he should deal with those which before baptism
have (through negligence) fallen into sin, in the same manner, as with those
which after the baptism have willingly and wittingly defiled the Temple of
God, and made sad the holy ghost.

She does plainly acknowledge, that even at the first hour of their birth,
they have deserved death, and are fallen into the curse and wrath of God: yet
for all that, she will take upon her to be a mean between parties at variance,
and be like unto Butter which bettereth althings, and therefore will have this
hold, That God as touching original sin, shall be satisfied by washing away
the same by baptism, not receiving or requiring any other satisfaction or
ransom for that matter, and for this has she also named Baptism, The first
plancke whereby we are saved in our shipwreck. But I assure you, as touching
all other sins, she does sing us a new song, as follows:

In the 7. session at the council of Trent de bapt. cano. 10.
Si quis dixerit, peccata omnia, quae post baptismum fiunt, sola recordatione
and fide suscepti baptismi* vel dimitti, vel venalia fieri, Anathema sit: That
is to say, Whosoever will maintein, that all sins committed after baptism,
Sins committed after baptism.
should either be forgeuen, or at least may be forgeuen only through faith and
power of Baptism, let him be accursed.

Here you may see now, that this planke alone is too weak, to bear us out of
the water, so that Baptism is not (in any wise) the Lauer or bath of those
that are borne a new, wherein Christ should have purged and clean washed his
spouse, that she might become without spot or wrinkle, as Paul goes about to
teach: Tit 3.5. Ephe. 5.26.
but only for so much as does apperteine to the first spotte wherewith we are
borne, Math. 3.11. Mar. 1.4. Luke. 3.3. Act. 13.24.19 4. Romans 6.3. In the.14.
session, can. 2. de sacramentis poenitentiae.
and no further. Neither is now any more a Baptism of conversion and
penance, as it was in the Apostles time. For the holy Fathers assembled in the
Council of Trent, have accursed all those that shall call it a Lauer or bath,
and Sacrament of conversion and repentance. And therefore have they provided
an other planke for us, wherewith we may swim out of this water, (as lustily
as with a couple of Hogs bladders:) to wit, the Tree of penance, consisting
of three branches: namely, Confessio, that is Shrift: Contritio, that is
Hearts sorrow: and Satisfactio, In the 4. canon of the same session, and in
the book of sentences. lib. 3. did. 4
that is Full satisfaction, and a plenarie payment for our sins. For this is
the Saint Christopher that can carry us over the Sea: and through this shall
we receive once at our Baptism the garment of innocence, and being
afterward bespotted with sin, wash the same off again, and bring all into
the right way. Therefore it will be said, according to the understanding of our
dear mother the holy Church, as many holy Catholic Champions have both
said and written, That Christ has made full satisfaction for original sin,
and has fed us when we could not yet sly, but now that our feathers are full
grown, we must sly of our selves out of the nest, and help our selves: That
is to be understood, We must from henceforth satisfy and sufficiently
recompense for all our sins our own selves, For this is the opinion and
meaning of many holy Champions and pillars of the holy church of Rome, as
does evidently appear by the before written example of the two pillars. But
yet notwithstanding, when all is well considered, this is not yet the very
right tune and harmonious noise, which the holy Church commonly uses in this
daunse: for out of this might follow, That God should impute righteousness to
those which are not righteous in them selves: and through Christ's merits, and
for his sake, forgive sins without any other satisfaction. I tell you, our
mother the holy Church will not meddle with this pretended righteousness: She
will not remain in Gods debte, but will clear the score, and cut off all the
nicks of the tallie. Therefore has she a little patched up this, and
concluded, That men shall likewise satisfy for some part of original sin,
and so fully satisfy God, because he shall not hereafter report, that he has
forgeuen and pardoned the same, for nothing, but for Jesus Christ's sake only.
For weigh this well, this is the utter determination and conclusion of our
masters of the Sentences, These are the very words of the school writers,
like as they are set by Gabriel in the.3. book of Sentences. did 20. in
the.5. conclusion.
That although the merits of Christ are the most special desert, through which
Gods mercy, and the way into the kingdom of heaven is granted unto us, yet
this notwithstanding, is in no wise to be reckoned for the only, whole, and
full satisfaction and deserving: Whereby it does evidently appear, that always
with the merits of Christ, there must be joined some deeds and works of
those, which receive the mercy and reward, whether it be for themselves, if
they be of age: or for another which is not yet come to full years of
understanding: which deeds are called Meritum de congruo, vel condigno, that
is to say, A deserving worthily obtained, or, A l^ke worthy deserving.

Original Sin.
Consider then, now does it follow, that for the redeeming of original sin,
some meritorious works are adjoined: and specially the merits of the
Sacrament, which (as our mother the holy Church says) do give unto men
mercy, Ex opere operato, that is to say, For the worthiness of it self,
Concilium Tride^tinum ses 7 de Sacramen. can. 8.
and deserving by works. For whosoever will say and defend, that the
Sacraments should not Ex opere operato, or by their own worthiness, present
and give mercy unto us: but that faith or belief in Gods promises, should be
sufficient for the obteining of mercy, (as Paul says that Abraham did believe
the promise of God, Romans 4.8.12.
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, and did then first receive the
Sacrament of Circumcision for a seal to this freely given righteousness) he
is by the Council of Trent accurssed, and excommunicated. And because it shall
not seem, that the Sacrament of baptism is not sufficient to deserve the
forgiveness of sin, Ex opere operato, considering that the child which is
christened, does not there work, The deserving by the Godfathers in Bapt^sme.
whereby it may deserve any thing: therefore does our dear mother the holy
Church say, That the Godfathers deserve it for the child. And to the end that
this deserving may the more freely be put in the reckoning against the
accusations of the devil, therefore has our mother the holy Church decked it
trimly, and hanged much costly ware about it, as specially strong and mighty
coniuring, Christening of children papistically.
and commanding of the devil, wherethrough he is forced to remove straight
way, and give place to the holy ghost. Item, with many holy crosses, which
the Priest does make over the foreheade, over the eyes, the nose, the ears,
the mouth, the breast and the shoulders of the children so christened: by the
might and power whereof, the devil and original sin, are chaced seven mile
from thence, so that his accusation is not esteemed worth a straw. After this
is the child gresed on the nose and ears, with the priests snot and spittle:
which spittle does bring a marvelous strength with it, as men may well
conjecture: so that of necessity it must thereby receive the mercy of God.
And in the end is given unto it a white cloth, or a coyfe, and a wax candle
burning, which the Godfathers do receive in the name of the child, which
surely is marvelous acceptable and welcome unto God, as the holy Church does
bear witness, every Easter eeue, singing unto the wax Candle, which the
Priests do at that time hallow: This is in the Mass book. in oratione ad
been dicendum ignem in Sabatho sanct. pasch.
Talia igitur Domine digna sacris altaribus tuis munera offerimus, quibus te
laetari religio Christiana non ambigit: That is to say, Therefore Lord do we
offer unto thee, such worthy presents and gifts upon thine altar, wherein (as
Christian Religion nothing doubts) thou do greatly delight and rejoice,
etc.

How must he then rejoice herein, when he shall see all these precious gifts
and goodly ceremonies together, whereby devout persons have greatly reformed,
and trimly set forth the ordinances of his son Jesus Christ? Will not he with
a good will forgive both original sin, and also the rest of the whole debte,
seeing he is so w^rshipful^y pa^ed with wax, with tallow, with cream, and
with spittle? And then does not he forgive for nothing, and only for the
merits of Christ (as the Heretics say) but he is satisfied with ready
payment. And if he will not yet be therewithal content, then we will fill his
hands with a heap of deseruings of holy Saints of both kinds, for which
only he must undoubtedly forgive the whole debt, yea although it were as much
more, insomuch as there shall not be left one jot unsatisfied.

But how now, may some devout Catholic heart think, is Christ then nothing
at all accounted of, nor regarded, by our dear mother the holy Church? O yes
by Saint Marie, for she does use him specially to stop all holes withal.
For if so be that neither our paiments and satisfactions, nor the merits of
saints would be sufficient to discharge the whole debt, but that there should
remain some behind unpaid, then that must be laid on his neck. But if we be
of our selves sufficiently furnished to satisfy all that rests, or if we
can by some of the Saints, to whom we have good devotion, get a good surety
or pledge which will answer for all: then we shall have no need to trouble
Christ much, we can spare him well enough. Then only, if we having done our
best to satisfy all our selves, or to find a sufficient surety, and yet can
not bring either of both to pass, then says our dear mother the holy
Church, that Christ must come forth, Vt suppleat nostros defectus, that is to
say, To supply our defaultes, and to stop all holes. But now, because all
this does seem very unhandsome, and that Christ might perhaps take this in
evil part, and perchance forsake us, and cast us clean off, and send us back
again to our Baalim, and other Patrones, at whose hands we have first sought
help, as he has oftentimes given warning by his Prophets, Iere. 11.11.12.
so as then by that means we should fall betwixt two stools in the ashes, and
so be forsaken on all sides: To avoid this danger, the catholic doctors have
a little strengthened the rampire, and baked the cake after another manner, as
may appear in the said book of Iodocus of Rauenstein, where he writes:

Whereas men do charge us, that we teach that Christ should have satisfied
only for original sin or other sins committed before baptism, In the.80.
leaf of the before specified book of Iodocus Rauenstein written against the
confesion of ye preachers at Antwerp.
and that then the Mass should satisfy further for the other sins, our
meaning is not so: and if there be any such which do so understand, or have
any such opinion, we utterly renounce their doctrine.

And truly their particular judgment ought not to be applied to any former
judgment of the Catholic doctrine touching the Mass: for the very meaning of
the holy man Thomas de Aquino, was never such: as appears plainly out of that
which he writes in the third part, upon the first question in the 4. ^rticle
whereof he writes:

It is most true, that Christ came into this world, not only to take away that
sin, wherein naturally all the posterity of Adam are borne, but likewise to
the cleansing of all other sins.

And in the 49. question of the said third part: Christ (says he) has
released us from our sins, Causaliter, that is, Concerning the cause, to wit,
for that he is the only cause of our releasment, through which all our sins
are to be forgiven, as well those past, as these present, or to come. And then
again: For So Much as the passion of Christ, is a sure* general, or common
cause of the forgiving of sin, it must needs follow, that it be annexed to
the washing away and purging of the sins which we our selves have committed,
which is don by baptism and penance, and other sacraments which have power
through the passion of Christ, etc.

In sum, this is their meaning, That as the sins wherein we fell before
baptism, have not more advantage than the other, but must all alike be helped
thorough penance and Sacraments: which are the right satisfaction, and true
raunsomming, through which God is made at one with us, and has forgiven us our
sins. And yet they have not gotten this power only of themselves: but for
that Christ has (through his merits and passion) deserved the same: so that by
this order, Christ has now his part in all things, seeing that he (in all the
merits of the Mass, satisfactions, and other good works,) is always by our
dear mother the holy Church called to be one. And this office is committed
unto him, that he shall always trudge up and down, to and fro, far and
near, with the merits of good works and satisfaction, as a common messenger,
and travel so as they may continue in their full estimation and worship. And
for that cause it is, that in all their blessings, hallowings, consecrations,
coniuring, and bewitching, in all Collects, Secrets, Complets, and in all
Ceremonies of the holy Church, wherein they pray unto God for the forgiveness
of sins, for everlasting life, and for all other good gifts, either
spiritual, or temporal, which she requires in consideration, and the power of
her alms deeds, fasting, and abstinence, through merits, keeping of
holidayes, and by the strength and power of her hallowed waters, salt, candles,
palms, herbs, oil, tallowe relics, holy clothes: and also through the
might of the Sacraments, the Mass, and merits of Saints, and such other like
things: and yet always in the end they add this conclusion, Per Christum
Dominum nostrum, that is, Through Christ our Lord. As though they would say,
that those Ceremonies and creatures, which they offer unto God, are the right
mark to shoot at: but Christ must give the aim: or else, that those are the
true mint or coin, wherewith they make payment to God, and do fully satisfy
for their debtes, and that Christ is he which does value and allow the money
for current. And that this is the very meaning of the holy Church of Rome, it
is plain to be noted out of the decrees of the Council of Trent* Wherein are
accursed and excommunicated all those which will maintain, In the.6. session,
can^. 10. d^* ^ustificatione.
that the obedience and merits of Christ should be, Formalit^r, that is to say,
Evidently, only, and of themselves, our justification, so that we should be
fully justified before God, and esteemed for the children of God only through
the obedience and merits of Christ. For this do they ascribe only to our own
righteousness, whereunto we are moved of God, when we have prepared and made ready
our selves to re^eiue the same: which righteousness is our own works, former
deseruings, and satisfactions, and say that we have wo^ne this only out of the
merits of Christ, that this our justification by deserts, as penance,
satisfaction, and other good works which we do, are by God accepted, and so
^ntered in his reckoning book for good wares, and sufficient payment, with
which judgment Iodocus Tiletanus hitteth iump in this sort:

We deny utterly that the righteousness and obedience of Christ, In the
foresaid book written against the Ministers of Antwerp of their confession in
folio* ^1.
should be the only cause* through which we are formaliter, that is evidently
and thoroughly justified. But like as the first man Adam, through his
unrighteousness and disobedience was the only cause, that all we which are
come of him* have every one his own sin within himself, through^ which he
is of himself and apparently a sinner, and an unrighteous person: even so
likewise it is to be understood, that the righteousness and obedience of Christ,
is only a meritorious cause, wherthrough all those which through faith and the
sacraments of faith, are borne anew in Christ, do now receive to themselves a
righteousness of the father, to wit every one his own proper and inward
righteousness, through which he is justified of himself, and has obediently
satisfied the righteousness of the Law, etc.

Whereby is notably to be understood: first that Christ is not our
justification, and likewise that we must forsake and give over our own
justification (as Paul persuadeth) to be partakers in the justification by
faith, which is in Christ Jesus: 1. Cor. 1.50. Iere. 23.6.33.16. Phil. 3.8.9.
Roma. 10.3.
but contrariwise, we must justify our own righteousness, as the Jews did
before time, and so seek our salvation at our selves, and in our selves, as
before we have had sin and damnation upon and in us. Secondarily, out of the
same we understand, that we are not borne anew, only through Christ, but
through belief and the Sacraments, in Christ* that is to say, That Christ is
the only cause that our works are our full accoplishment, and satisfaction,
which are under this word Sacraments contained and understood: and yet of their
own might (as is before said,) Ex opere operato, can bear us anew, and
justify us. For this (by our dear mother the holy Church) is the perfect and
natural description of the Sacraments, That a Sacrament is properly called,
not only that which is a sign or token of Gods mercy, The master of of
sentences in the.4. book.1. did. cap.
but also, Forma, that is, the very effect and substance of the hid mercy,
so that it does both signify the same, and is cause of the same. So that the
Sacraments do not only signify sanctifying, but also of themselves sanctify:
and do (as the gloss specially sets forth) make us righteous, Ex opere
operato, that is, Henricus Brima^ius. upon the same distinct.
Out of the merits of our works, and of our selves. So that the Sacraments,
containing under them our deuocions, and our own works, are the only natural
and proper cause of our salvation, and do make us Formaliter righteous: but
Christ only Causaliter, that is, for that he comes in as a general and
far fetched cause. They are the principal, they have the rudder in hand, and
stir the ship: but Christ may yet help to row, as a gr^met or simple mariner.
though this friendship be used to him for his credit, that he is called to be
one of the Council, to have his advice, how is best to stir the ship: yea,
and m^n report by him, that he (amongst the rest) is one of the most principal
occasions that the ship keeps a good course, where otherwise it might either
be lost upon some sand, or broken in pieces against a rock. And therefore,
when any good and devout Catholic man lies a dying, we do not use to break
his head much with Christ, nor to trouble him greatly with faith and hope
(which he ought to have in the death and passion or Jesus Christ:) but he must
specially be put in remembrance of shrift, to receive his God; and to be
anointed: and then after to have a wax candle by him, with a Crucifixe in his
hand, and so persuade him to the building of some Chapel or Monastery, and
to appoint a Trentall of soul Masses, and to remember Vigils and annual or
yerelie prayers, and such like. And if Christ be (by chance) spoken of, that
does commonly happen, to the intent the better to set forth and prefer the
said Masses, Vigils, and annuals, and the rest of the baggage: for Christ of
him self is not set by nor esteemed at all. In sum, Christ is only
necessary and fit to serve the holy Church of Rome, her purpose in this
point, and that is to coin good money of bad and naughty metal. For if Christ
had not died, God would without doubt, that all men should have fulfilled his
Law fully in all points: he would have judged all things according to his
word and Law, without having any respect at all to our devotions and
meritorious works, or to Saint Frauncis, or to Saint Dominikes order. And
besides that, he would in the end have punished all breakers of his law,
with eternal maledi^^ion, death, and damnation, without having any regard at
all to our merits or satisfaction.

But now, seeing that Christ died, the holy Church of Rome may now fill him
a hood with hay, they may boldly cast his commandments in a corner, and
thrust in, in stead of them, their own ordinances, good intentes, and
devotions, and with spittle, water, ashes and dust, salt and tallowe, oil and
wax, fire and smoke, shelles and belles, leaping and running, springing and
daunsing, satisfy and pay him: he must take all in good part. Provided, that
men continually make this the foot of their prayers, namely: Per Christum
Dominum nostrum: for that is the butter that does better all things. And
herewithall he is by and by satisfied and pleased? Have not the Catholics then
a good and a gentle God, which is content that they pay hi^ with mussell
shelles? But that is not to be marvelled at, seeing that when they have played
with him a good while, he suffers them even to eat him up, and deal with him
as the cat with the mouse.

Yet notwithstanding, for that he should not be herewith offended, as though
men did mock with him, because they do make so small account of the breaking
of his laws, they have to eschew that inconvenience, ^^elt his lesson to him
before hand, and very substantially and cunningly have determined and judged,
That all sins are not deadly, Deadly sins.
but that there are but sene^ dead^ lie sins only, which (together with
their branches and fruits) have deserved death: The rest are altogether small,
simple and venial sins, which he may not punish by death, Venial sins.
but with a small rod, such as does serve to beat children withal. And
hereupon she has valued all her deseruings and satisfactions, every one
according to his price, to the uttermost penie: and so has committed the
balance to S. Michael, S. Michael (...) the (...).
with open commission and charge that he do justly weye all the sins and
offenses of the Catholics against the troubles which God has sent them, and
likewise against their good deeds and merits, upon this condition, ^hen as
the (...) are too light.
that if the said troubles, good deeds* and merits, be but an ounce or
twain, or some small weight lighter than the other, then Christ shall make
that good by his death and passion. But if the difference in weight should be
great, so as it were to be considered upon, then must he, to conterueil and
make the weight even, put into that scale some good deeds, etc. as building of
Abbeys, Masses, Pilgrimages, Pate^ nosters, and Aue Mary's, wax candels, holy
ashes, holy water, Popes (...), pardons, gray friars cowles, girdles, S. James
shells, and other like stuff: till both the balances wey alike. But now
Econtra* When the merits are the heavier.
if the good deeds, meri^es, etc. be the heavier then shall the surplusage be
kept against another time, to help a good friend withal, or to (...) some
(...) soul one of Purgatory. And our mother the holy church has had much a
do ^ this matter, to bring the balance to a just ^^ight and value, to make all
things even, betwixt the offenses of men, and the punishments of God, and to
approve that to be the right way which notwithstanding she has strongly
fortified with plain scriptures. And in especially where S. John Baptist
says, Facite fructus dignos poenitentia, that is to say, Bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance. The (...) the. 4 (...) 16 (...) the (...) chap.
For out of this has she concluded, That the effect and nature of the
punishment and scourge of God must be equal with the effect and nature of the
crime. Well considered, that the operation of good works is not needful to be
so great, or so many in one that has done ^esse sins, as in him that has
committed a great deal more sin, etc. And therefore, when as God does visit
any man in this world with poverty, sickness, hunger, trouble, or any other
cross, he must likewise have those valued against his sins and offenses. And
if it be found, that the cross and punishment which God has laid upon him, be
of greater importance than his sins have deserved, as our mother the holy
Church of Rome will suppose that often times it is, then must the surplusage of
that be by some honest mean recompensed: or if it be such as cannot well be
recompensed by God then it shall be shut up and kept in the chest of
indulgencies and pardon^, to serve the turn of such as shall have need of it:
for that shall at some convenient time be sealed together with a Bull, and then
some profit will come of it: as our dear mother the holy Church has
concluded: alleging for that purpose a plain and evident text of Job, saying:
O that my troubles and sorrows might be weyed, Job. 6.2. which is to this
purpose br^ught in by ^ilm^nus in En^h^ir ^^ck in titu^o de ^ndulgenu^^.
and my pains delivered up in a pair of balance! They should be found heavier
than the sand of the seas, therein is it that my words have ouerslipped me.
Consider now, out of this has our dear mother the holy Church gathered, that
Job was contented to come to a reckoning with God, and have his cross and
punishment weyed against his offenses: and if his cross and punishment be
greater than his sins, (as she supposes,) then will she that the surplus of
the weight shall be shut up in the Popes chest, to ^elpe some other good
fellow withal for a little money, and so bring him out of danger. And to the
end that hereafter no brabbling, or process, should happ^n in di^^inguishing
which are light and ven^all sins, and which are heavy and deadly sins:
Venial and deadly sins.
and how every sin is to be esteemed: for that purpose has she fetched
out of her cofer, with her keye, called Allegorica expositio, a trim
scripture, Look upon the first ch^pt^r of the secon^ (...).
thereby to declare those things sufficiently, beginning thus:

That like as in the beginning the serpent did first intise the woman often to
sin, The master of the Sentences in the 2. (...). 24. did. 9. c^p.
and then the woman brought the man to the same: so have we now likewise the
wittiness within us, which is the serpent: and then more, the wisdom or the
principal understanding, which is the man: and last of all the knowledge or
the simplest part of understanding, which is the woman: and this man is the
same, which by witnessing of the Apostle is called, The image and honor of
God: and the woman is the same which by the Apostle is called, The honor or
beauty of the man.

Is not this well and profoundly philosophied of our mother the holy Church of
Rome? I can not think, but that the Master of the Sentences, was somewhere in
the bottom of a deep seller, when he found out this profounde speculation.
For otherwise it were not possible, that he should have conceived these
profounde secrets of his own head. But now let us hear further of the
matter.

Now there is (says he) a spiritual marriage and a natural conjunction
between the man and the woman: and out of that is to be considered, which is a
deadly sin, and which is a venial sin. For even as the serpent did by
persuasion abuse the woman, and the woman the man, even so it falls out with
us. For as the inward consent is the serpent, which accepts the
accomplishment of sin, and so persuadeth the woman, that is the knowledge or
least branch of accomplishing: and then, when as by such reasons they are
brought to consent to the accomplishing, then it comes to pass, that the
woman does eat the forbidden fruit, and then presents or offers of the
same to the man: and so, when she has entised the understanding, or principal
desire, that it does give consent to the same, then has the man eaten of the
forbidden fruit likewise. But now, if the full accomplishing remain sticking
in the mind and cogitation, and takes not full effect, then it is but a very
small venial sin: but when only the simple pretense is willing thereto, to
wit, the lust and desire of the mind, or thought, without any further full
pretense and travel, to bring the same effectually to pass, then has the
woman only eaten of the apple, and not the man: who has by his own strength
subdued his will, that it proceeds not to the performing and finishing of the
work: and yet in that case it is sometime a deadly sin, and sometime a
venial sin, according to the continuance of the time* But if in the mean
space there follow a perfect and resolute desire to accomplish the same, then
has the man likewise eaten: principally in co^senting resolut^lie with
pretense of accomplishment: and in that case it is a damnable and an heavy
sin, etc.

Surely this will try Saint M^chaels wits, and put him to his trumpe, A
great trouble to S. Michael for to weigh the merits.
how to observe this rule in weying and judging these sins, unless he come
first for a while into the University of Louen, or to the Sorbonistes of
Paris, there to loiter, read over, and learn to understand the glosses and
expositions of the Master of the Sentences: I know no other mean for him
how to deal, unless he can find out in one place or other, some subtle
Doctor of divinity, and make him so much his friend, that he will help him
through with the matter: and yet notwithstanding, the principal knowledge and
speculation may well be brought to pass and considered, as, That we are not
(of duty) bound to love God with all our hearts, with all our mind, and with
all our might: in such sort, as he by his law has commanded: seeing that the
soul can separate her self from him, and so give over her self to sin, and
yet not plunge so deep therein, as to fall thoroughly into Gods wrath* yea,
there is great reco^pense deserved at Gods hand, when as a man is provoked to
sin, and to fall from God, and that by his wisdom he does withstand the
same: so as the serpent only does eat of the forbidden fruit: In the 7.
chap. of ye same did. upon the last Can.
as the Master of the Sentences has in another place written.

Therefore it is that our mother the holy Church of Rome has expounded that
which our Savior Christ set forth in the fifth Chapter of S. Matthewe, (As to
love our enemies, not to do evil for evil, not to desire another man's wife,
and such other like sayings more:) after the Pharisaicall manner: As, that it
is no special commandment, but only a counsel and advise: and that
therefore no man is bound to observe and keep the same, but such as have
professed and vowed chastity, as Monks, Ankers, and other such like. Whereby
does evidently appear, either that GOD has wholly created and shapen the
soul, and heart of man, or at the least, that his Law is not altogeth^r
spiritual, considering that he has not the full gouern^ment of the spirit,
only through this occasion, that reason did not consent and agree wholly to
sin. For in conclusion, you may not esteem sin thus, as though all that is
done against Gods law and commandment, were a deadly sin, and could not
be recompensed by dese^uing or satisfaction: but all sins and offenses must be
weighed in the balance of our mother the holy church of Rome, who says thus:
That for all ordinary and light sins and offenses, a man may sufficiently
satisfy with saying a Pater noster, and an Aue Maria, In the 4. (...) of the
Sent. in the 4. can. the 16. did*
with knocking upon the breast, and saying, Peccaui, with holy water, and
especially with hearing of a Mass: as for deadly sins, the like must be
done, but yet with much more force, efficacy, and devotion. And to say all in
all, satisfaction is necessary and requisite for all sins, according to the
quality and quantity of the same. And although a man should wholly return
to God, yet can not that help, unless he make full satisfaction. For whereas
these Heretics do say, That when soever a sinner does convert and repent him
of his sins, God does pardon and forgive him: Ezech. 18.21. 1. Iere. 33.34.
Heb. 8.12.10.17. Psalm. 103.12. Miche. 7.19. Esaie. 44.22. Iere. 50.20. Eze.
18.24.
yea, in such sort, as he does wholly forgette the sins committed, and
casts them as far from him, as the East is from the West: yea, and sinketh
them down even into the bottom of the sea: yea, makes them consume to naught,
even as smoke, or as a cloud, in so much as they are not once more thought
upon, even like as he does also utterly forget all the good deeds that a man
has done, which in the end does give him self to mischief.

Take heed of that saying, for it smells of a faggot. For our mother the
holy Church of Rome has specially concluded, That GOD does not forgive any
sins, unless a man do first make full satisfaction and payment for the same
to the uttermost and last farthing: she can allow that he forgiueth the
sin, but not the punishment: and for that cause must he likewise be well
recompensed, doing after this manner: Christ should pardon the offense, but
not the punishment.
As if a man should pardon his debtor all whatsoever he did owe him, and give
him to understand, that he cancelled his obligation, and in the mean space
caused him to be arrested and cast into prison, there to remain and lie till
the whole debte were paid, even to the uttermost mite. Were not that great
mercy used, and a liberal pardoning of debtors? After that manner will our
dear mother the holy Church of Rome have that remission of sins
understood, which we have obtained through the blood and passion of Jesus
Christ. For the blood of Jesus Christ (says she) has washed away the
sins: but holy water, the Mass, and such other like satisfactions, do
deliver us from the pain and punishment. Or rather, the blood of JESUS Christ
has trodden the path, by the which Masses, Pilgrimages, Holy water, and other
satisfactions may run post after our Lord God, to put him in remembrance, to
pardon us of the punishment which we by our sins have deserved. And if they
perhaps should come to late, then are the merits of Saints in a readiness,
to shut up and make even the rest of the reckoning and account. For our dear
mother the holy church of Rome says plainly, by special textes of the
Scripture, That God does never clearelie forgive and pardon the punishment for
sins, through the merits of the blood and passion of Christ, without a
former satisfaction. For all the Scriptures and examples, which the Lutherans*
and Huguenotes; allege and bring in, to prove, That God does chasten his
children with plagues and punishments, to the end, to bring them to perfect
knowledge and understanding of their misery and calamity, and to prove their
faith, or that he will (thereby) bring them from the diuelishe dissimulations
of this world: all this does our dear mother the holy Church of Rome
allege, to prove; that God has only forgiven them the offense, but not the
punishment: as appears by the example of Adam, who although, after his fall,
he received comfort again at Gods hand, yet was he well punished, even by
bodily death, and with many calamities, sorrows, and troubles, by the which
he made satisfaction.

And likewise, take example of the Prophet David, who having grieuouslie
offended God, and afterward returned by repentance, obtained forgiveness of
his sins: and was yet afterward, notwithstanding this, sharply punished,
and so forth of many other examples. For our mother the holy church will in no
wise allow, That God did so punish them, only to the end they should so
feel his mighty hand, as they should ever after walk in fear and
obedience: and acknowledging their own weakness, should learn with more
expedition to call on him for help: as the very words of the scripture do set
forth: for that is altogether Caluinistrie: but she will have it plain, That
those punishementes were as a ransom and payement made, wherewith they did
pay or satisfy God: and make full recompense for their faults and offenses:
yea, and that they thereby deserved, that such as now call upon them, should
be released from their punishment. So that it helps not now, what soever
these Heretics allege out of the Scripture, to prove, that if God should
enter into judgment with men, by their deeds, Psalm. 143.2. Psalm. 130.3. Job.
9.3. Psalm. 19.13. Ioh. 15.10.14.4. Psalm. 40.1^.38.5. 1. Cor. 8.46.
no flesh should be saved: nor that one man amongst a thousand were able to
answer him: for that man does daily: yea, continually and every minute,
fall into so many sins, over and besides those whereof his own conscience
does incessantly accuse him, if God should once begin to punish according to
the greatness or multitude of sins, Esaie. 64.6.
there should be neither end nor measure in punishment: yea, that all the
righteousness of the holiest men, is nothing else but as a stained cloth: in
so much that their good works can not in them selves stand in any stead
before the judgment seat of GOD: Psalm. 143.2. Romans 3.20. Galat. 2.16.
how much less are they sufficient to make full satisfaction for sins and
transgressions? Also, where they say, that God does not punish us according
to the desert of our sins, Psa. 103.10.
thereby to make full satisfaction for the same, but as a good father does
chastise his child, Psalm. 103.10. Heb. 12.6.7. Job. 5.17.
to the intent he may be warned and amend: and many such like places they bring
in, to long to be rehearsed: for they are all but litterall sentences, and
therefore can not serve the purpose of our dear mother the holy Church of
Rome.

And likewise, whereas these Heretics do allege the thief hanging upon the
Cross, to whom Christ did not once make an^ mention of satisfaction and
recompense: and also of Paul, and of a multitude of such other, which have
obtained only by Gods mere mercy forgiveness of their sins, through Christ,
and for his sake, being pardoned as well of the punishment, as from
satisfaction for the same: for that Christ had not only taken upon him our
sins, but likewise the punishment for the same: We pass not a point for all
that: for they are all nothing else, but particular and special examples and
privileges, whereof we will make no account, nor esteem them for any perfect
rule. For this rule established at the Council of Trent, must needs remain
steadfast for ever, to wit, that God does not pardon any sin entirely,
unless a man have first made full satisfaction, and suffered condign and
deserved punishment for the same. And this will we prove wonderfully by an
invincible argument. Hear now a little and mark well, for here the ewe lambs.
These Hexetikes must needs (whether they will or no) grant this, That no man's
sins are forgiven him without penance. And now you must consider, That
penance is nothing else but a punishment for sin. For look, thus the Master
of the Sentences does write: Poenitentia dicitur a puniendo, In the.14. book
of Sent. in the first cap. did.
qua quis punit illicita quae commisit: that is, Penance comes of punishment,
or pyning, whereby a man does punish the evil which he has committed. Ergo,
this matter is clear, and the Heretics catched in a snare. For whereas they
will (perhaps) say, to wind themselves out of the net, That this is a stark
lie, and an asseheadly dullness, considering that this word, Poenitentiae.
Poenitentia is nothing else in good Latin, but Penitentnesse or repentance:
and is derived, not of the word Punire, To punish, but of the word Poenitere,
that is to say, Penitent, or sorry: all this can not help them. For to that we
answer, That our dear mother the holy Church has nothing to do with their new
heretic Latin, she has Latin of herself, which is called Monkish Latin, or
Scullarie Latin. In such latin a Spanish chaplein of the Emperor Charles 5.
did speak to a Germain at Ausburge, and said: Latinu^ nostru^ non est sicut
vostru^, Our Latin and yours is not all one. And therefore it is sufficient for
us, that Poenitentia is so to be taken in our Latin, and so it must be, though
the Crow should be no bird. And therefore is this certain, and without all doubt,
as was concluded at the council of Trent, that whosoever will say, In the.4.
sessio^ can. 12. de sacramento poenitentiae.
that as well the punishment as the offenses are forgiven, and that full
satisfaction is nothing else but a perfect faith, whereby we faithfully believe
that Christ has fully satisfied for us, he is acursed and excommunicated: so
that in conclusion no sin is forgiven without full satisfaction. And now
considering that so long as we live, we are never assured, whether our
satisfaction is of our God fully accepted and allowed, because it may happen
that the Receivers have kept the same in their hands, or else that our paiments
be not current in heaven: or some other such thing, by reason whereof our tallie
should not be allowed by Gods auditors: therefore has our holy mother, upon
this point concluded, That no man can assuredly know, or say, that his sins
are forgiven him, or that he shall be justified before God without any doubt,
or to be assured of his mercy. For this was the determination and conclusion
of the holy fathers at Trent, as follows:

Whosoever says* that to the remission of sins, The council of Trent.
it is needful for all men steadfastly to believe, that all his sins are
clearly forgiven him, not having any doubt of his own weakness and
insufficiency, let him be accursed.

Iere. 31.34. Heb. 8, etc. as before.
For, notwithstanding that our Lord has promised this unto us, without any
doubt, and confirmed the same by his promise, that he will (for Christ's sake)
be our merciful God and father, and that he will no more think upon our
sins, but will clearly forgive and wash away the same, for his own names
sake, and not for any of our deserts: yet may not we credit him fully so
far. For, although he say plainly, That he will not think upon our sins to
judge us according to the same: yet will the holy Church of Rome have us take
good heed to the matter, least it should happen and chance otherwise: and
therefore will have us to consider well before hand, and make good provision of
our merits, and supererogatorie or superfluous good works, to fill his hand
with those, and so to content and please him, as men please children with
puppets and counters. Notwithstanding, all that Paul says, Romans 8.14.15
That all they that are the children of God, have the spirit of God, and are
led by him, and he bears witness of them, that they are the children of God,
and thereby they cry, Abba, Father: and says, That those which have not this
spirit, are not of Christ, considering that all those which are in Christ, and
do faithfully believe in him, and have their recourse to him, with perfect and
steadfast hope through their belief in him: Ephesians. 3.22. Ephesians. 2.4.4.6 8.
and That God who abounds in mercy, has (through his inestimable love
wherewith he has loved us) when we were dead in sin, made us alive again in
Christ, through whose mercy we are beecome holy: yea, and has raised us up
again, and placed us in the heavens by Christ Jesus, justifying us of his
mere mercy through faith: not through our selves, but through the gift of
God: not by works, least any man should boast himself: so that from
henceforth none can charge or blame the elect of God: Romans 8.33.34 39.
for it is he only which does justify them, who therefore can condemn them,
seeing that Christ has suffered for them? So that they are assured, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angel, nor rule, neither might, nor power, neither
any thing present, nor to come, neither hight, nor depth, nor any other
creature, can separate them from the love of God, showed in Christ Jesus our
Lord: With many such other like things which Paul speaks of. But all that
cannot help. For our mother the holy Church will have that understood only
of such, The Council of Trent, 6. session.9. cap de^^et. de iustificati^ne. in
the Interim of the Emperor Charles in the 8. Chap.
as have and are assured of the same by some special revelation, and of such
as trust simply upon Gods word and promise. For she has resolutely
concluded, that such a manner of belief should be nothing else, but a flat and
vainglorious presumption. But when a man does trust to his own merits, good
works, and satisfactions, then he is assured to come out with his just
reckoning: or at the least, if there have not been enough done here in this
world, that shall be after in another world accomplished and paid to the
uttermost farthing: insomuch that he shall not remain one mite in Gods debt.
For to that end and purpose, has our dear mother the holy Church of Rome
ordained the blessed Purgatory: whereof we will now make further
declaration, and prove it to be as well grounded on the Scripture, as the
merits and satisfactions, whereof we have now already spoken.

The viii. Chapter. Wherein Purgatory is established, as well bp Scripture as
by inheritance. And herein are likewise entreated the remedies and helps
whereby the silly souls are released out of Purgatory.
HEre is to be considered, Purgatory, and how souls are redeemed out of it.
that Purgatory is founded and has his ground out of the holy Scripture. For
if Masses are founded upon the Scripture, as we have already certi^ied, then
surely we may not make a bastard of the Mass of Requiem. And now, if it be so,
that the Mass of Requiem is founded upon the Scripture, then no doubt there
must needs be a Purgatory. But now let us bring forth (for the proof
hereof) special textes of scripture. First note, how there is written by
Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.11.12.13.
That no man may lay any other foundation but only upon Jesus Christ. This
te^t is by all Cat^olike writers alleged, and specially in the.4. book of
Sentences. cap. 10. did. 21.
And so whosoever does build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
timber, hay, or stubble, every man's work shall appear: for the day shall
declare it, and it shall be showed in fire, and the fire shall declare every
man's work what it is, etc. This has our dear mother the holy Church
understood, meant, and set forth of Purgatory: And although out of this it
should follow, That all manner of persons (without exception) as well he Saints
as she Saints which our holy father the Pope has canonized: yea, and the very
Popes themselves should daunse in Purgatory, as well as Jack and Tom, with
the rest. But considering how that does not agree in one with the belief of
the holy Church of Rome, in respect of the superfluous good works, which
those Saints have done for themselves, Deruse the ^ooke called Compendium
theologicum. lib. 7. cap. 1. ^a^nardi^u^ de Bustis. in ^osario in the 2.
sermon. in the first part.
and for their good friends, more than they were of duty bound to do,
therefore she properly and wisely concludes thereupon, That those souls only
which depart out of this world without any deadly sin, and before they have
sufficiently satisfied by penance, for their venial and quotidian sins,
shall remain a certain space in Purgatory, and be there broiled and sodden,
til such time as they shall (with soul Masses, pardons, or indulgencies) be
hailed out of the pan or chaldron, as with a flesh hook. The which is worthy
to be noted, considering that which is thereout concluded: as first, that (as
heretofore is declared) al sins are not deadly, In the.7. ca. of the.2* part.
neither deserve everlasting damnation: and then again, by this you may
perceive that which of late we did speak of: namely, Original and daily
sins.
That the death and passion of Jesus Christ, In the council of Trent in the.7.
session canon.10. and 14. ses cap. 8.
has purged but only our original sin, and not our daily sins, for which
we must make full satisfaction our selves. And whereas the Heretics say, that
Paul does not (in the foresaid text) mean any thing at all of Purgatory,
Epiphanius in his book named Ancir^mus, speaking of the doctrine of Trent,
says yt it is the only foundation, and bringes in this text of Paul for his
purpose.
but means only to speak according as the text imports, and as many
ancient fathers have expounded and understood the same of the fire of the holy
ghost, which does in time try and cause to appear plain all doctrines: namely
those which take their foundation of Jesus Christ. And they say that good
doctrine and godly learning shall in this proof remain steadfast: but babblers
and false teachers shall consume like hay, or stubble, before the fire. With
all this we have nothing to do: for that is but an exposition after the letter,
and not after the spirit or allegory. It is sufficient for us, that our holy
mother the Church of Rome, has understood Paul otherwise, Read Eckius and
other writers upon this. Math. 9.23. Luke. 8.52.
and applied his text unto Purgatory: like as she has applied the words of
the Evangelist, where he says, That it was a custom amongst the Jews, to
weep over the dead. For thereby she has concluded, That the Jews did believe,
that there is a Purgatory, because (as she thinks) it had been a great folly
of them, to weep for the dead, unless they did believe there was a
Purgatory: so that it is a thing very credible, that those which wept so sore
over Steeuen (as in the Acts of the Apostles is declared) did think none
other, Act. 8.8.
but that he was gone into Purgatory, notwithstanding that he had seen Jesus
Christ sitting on the right hand of God the father, and sealed the testimony
and witness of him with his blood. Thirdely, Purgatory is clearly proved ^ut
of the plain textes of Paul, who says, That in the name of Jesus al knees do
bow, Phil. 2.20.
those that are in heaven, those upon the earth, and those under the earth.
Surely we will not have this understood of devils: Ergo then it must needs
follow, that it is spoken of the souls which lay burning in Purgatory. For thus
says S. John in the Apocalypse touching the same matter: Apo. 5.13.
And all creatures which are in heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth,
and in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, honor, and
power, be to him that sits upon the seat, and unto the lamb for evermore.
Where undoubtedly he does understand and mean Purgatory, according to the
exposition of our dear mother, the holy Church of Rome. And by this you may
perceive, that Pythagoras was not far different or disagreing in belief from
the holy Church of Romes belief, when as he said, That men's souls departing
from their bodies, did enter into beasts. Considering now that John here, and
David in other places, do witness, that the creatures under the water: yea, the
fishes themselves do laud and praise God, and that the same is understood by
our holy mother the Church of Rome, of the souls that be in Purgatory, she
has not without great appearaunce of truth concluded, Read Eckius in his
Encheiridion.
That there is likewise a Purgatory, in the bottom of the Sea: by which
reasons it appears, that the souls of drowned men, place themselves in the
bowels of fishes. And it is possible that this was the occasion which moved
Pythagoras to forbid his scholars the eating of fish: considering specially
withal, That S. Patriks purgatory in Ireland, lies fast by the sea side, S.
Patrikes Purgatory.
near unto a mountain called Hecla, where our mother the holy Church of Rome
does believe, that the silly souls are as ill punished in yse, as in fire.
So that by good reason, there might have been added unto the same sentence of
Paul, That the trying and showing openly of the works of such as build upon
the foundation of Jesus Christ, is not only by fire, Psalm. 66.12. Read Eck^us
and other Catholic writers and specialy the book of Sen.
but likewise by water and by yse. For so the holy Church understands that
place, where it is written. We have passed thorough fire and water. And Virgil
the wise Poet, which had so good understanding of the sacrifice of the Mass,
as is declared before, has likewise placed Purgatory by a Sea, In the.6.
book of A^neidos.
or by a great water called Lacus Auernus, which lies not very far from
Rome, in the Kingdom of Naples, where he describes to be the entry and
forefront of Hell, and then sets forth Purgatory, with all the pains and
torments, which the souls do suffer, so perfectly and well, that a man would
think that our dear mother the holy Church of Rome, has kindeled her
Purgatory with his fire, tongs, and bellows. Insomuch that our Catholic
Doctors did not amiss when they proved their Purgatory, Dantes in his. book
called purgatory and Margarita Philca.
by the authority and testimony of Virgil. Now, if it were so, that there
were no Scripture to prove Purgatory by, Virgils purgatory.
yet would the inheritance and possession of it, teach us sufficiently, that
there is a Purgatory. And therefore we need not to trouble our selves much,
with bringing out the book of the Machabies for a witness, and thereby cause
the Heretics to mock and jest at us. For they say, that that book is so
far off from being allowed for an authentike book of holy Scripture,
Machab. 15.29.40.
that the writer and Author of the same, did desire to be pardoned and borne
withal, if he had not written so sufficiently as he ought. And men may
further consider, what account is to be made of his writings, seeing he did
so greatly praise one Razis, who ripped out his own vowelles and live him
self, 2. Machab. 14 43.46.
because he would not fall into the hands of his enemies: which vnvndoubtedly
was a detestable deed, and directly against Gods commandment. They declare
likewise, Read what Eusebius of Meliton writes in the 4. book of his
histories. capit. 26, And read Augustine in his 2. book against Gandenuum. ca.
23. and Hierom in his prologue upon the Machabies.
that neither by Christ, and his Apostles, nor by the whole congregation, in
three or four hundred years space, that was never esteemed nor taken but for
Apocrypha, to wit, for the writing and setting sorth of a man, and not for
the undoubted word of God. And yet they say beeside this, that if they should
accept that Book, yet is there nothing written therein touching Purgatory,
but only a praying for the dead, in respect of the resurrection, and not in
any respect of satisfaction by Purgatory. And therefore we will not break
our heads greatly about this matter, but will establishe our Purgatory
strongly, by inheritance and possession.

Besides that, I leave the Priests purses unspoken of, which is a sovereign,
soking, and a drawing Purgatory, as every man may both say and feel. And yet
besides this, The Iegenda aurea and the Vi^ae patrum are full of such s^^ffe.
we find by certain and undoubted testimonies of our auncesters, that many
souls have appeared, and have plainly said, that they were extremely punished
in Purgatory, and therefore have heartily desired that men would help them
out of it, with Masses, alms, pardon letters, and bulls: as it is written of
Pope Benedict 8. himself: Fassiculus to^^porum and other histories*
and as the Legend and other Catholic books testify, which are full of such
worthy matters and notable examples: so that there is no occasion to put any
manner of doubt concerning Purgatory.

And further, we do find diverse evident and very true histories of Odilions
Purgatory, in the kingdom of Sicilia, Odilions Pur^gatorie.
in the mount Aetna, which flames continually, where the silly souls are
burnt, and broyled like dried herring, or like Westphaling hammes, or gammons
of Bakon, which have houng seven years long in the smoke. And this was the
occasion that moved Pope John 8. through the great pity that he had upon the
silly souls: and by the good and ripe advise and counsel of the foresaid
Odilion, which was a holy Father, and Monk of an Abbie called Clunie, to
command and ordeine, An Soule^ day.
that always the next day after Al-hallowes day, a solemn day of devotion
should be kept for all christen souls: which order is very precisely followed
and observed by our dear mother the holy Church of Rome, and many years of
pardon given and granted to all those which upon that day do devoutly visit
the Chantrie priests and Masses of Scala Coeli, using their purses liberally
for that purpose, and to have a trentall of Masses, a sackfull of seven
Psalms, and three or four pokes packt with Pater nosters, and Ane Mary's, all
well measured and filled, whereof to make a present to the silly souls in
Purgatory, for that is even fit meat for their mouths: and they are as well
refreshed with those dainties, as though they were wrapped about the head with
a wet clout in a cold morning. And yet beside all this, the holy Church of
Rome has sought all manner of means and ways to refresh, cool, and ease the
pain of the silly poor souls, which lie in the great heat of Purgatory
gaping for air, as a Carpe does for water: All these. 15. helps and remedies
you shall find even as they are here written in the book called Sermones
discipuli de tempore and de sanctis, cum Promptuario ex* ^mplorum.
all which means she has dug out of the holy Scriptures.

For, to begin, she has appointed burning Candles, which must be set up
to light the poor souls in the dark places of Purgatory: because it is
written, Christ is the true light, and whosoever does follow him, walks not
in darkness. And therefore has our holy mother practiced, that at every
corner of the hearse, a candle shall be set burning for that the dead should be
forgiven and pardoned of four sundry manner of sins: which he has
committed, to wit, in thinking, in speaking, in doing, and in suffering.

Secondarilie, she does succor the poor silly souls with censing: for
thereby they are released of the horrible stink which is in Purgatory.

Thirdly, she does relieve them with holy water, which must be devoutly
sprinkled upon their graves, with a sprinkle, that thereby they may be cooled
and refreshed of the great and extreme heat of the fire: for it is written:
Asperges me Domine Hysopo: Thou shall sprinkle me (O Lord) with Hysope: which
is to be understood, that the Parson or Curate, shall all to water my grave
with a holy water sprinkle. For you may well consider, th6at David was dead and
buried, when he spoke these words, and his soul was in Purgatory: otherwise,
our dear mother would not sing this daily in the name of the souls departed.

Therefore must this holy water needs as much profit them, as a couple of
Egg shelles: which is apparent by the holy Scripture. For it is written in
the Gospel of S. Luke, That the rich man, when he lay burning in Hell, did
require only a drop of water, to cool his tongue. Then consider now, if a
drop of water can succor and help the souls that lie in Hell, how much
more shall the sweet holy water cool the souls that lie in Purgatory, when
it is so swashed and dashed over all the grave with a swinging holy water
sprinkle?

Fourthlie, they are greatly relieved by the offering of bread and wine: for
through the might of such an acceptable offering, the souls are fed and
refreshed of God.

Fiftlie, with Vigils, of three, six, and nine lessons, with De profundis,
with Requiescant in pace: and with such other like pleasant songs, as Job and
David soung, when they lay in Purgatory. For our dear mother the holy Church
of Rome has applied all such matters unto Purgatory.

Sixtlie, they are relieved by fat offerings: for that the souls are
marvelous glad, when the Priests get many offerings. And in deed, it is a
most sweet morsel for their mouths.

Seuenthlie, with praying to he Saints and she Saints, and with singing of
Letanies, D^riges, and Ryrieleesons: for there are many and great indulgencies
granted unto them.

Eightlie, with fasting and kneeling. For there is a plain text in the
decrees, which says, That the fasting of the living, is the hope of the dead.

Ninthely, when men do pay for them such debtes as they left unpaid.

Tenthly, when men do for them works of mercy, and especially when they are
done by Priests, Monks, or Friars.

The xi. when their executours accomplish and fulfill their last wills, and
testamentes, especially if they have vequeathed any thing, either money or
lands, to any Abbie or Cloister.

The xii. when any man shall do for them such penance as they have left
undone when it was enjoined them by their ghostly fathers.

The xiii. when any man perfourmeth for them such vows of pilgrimages, and
other like devotions, as they made in their life time, and yet have not kept
them.

The xiiii. when men do pardon and forgive them such offenses, as they have
committed against any person or persons, he or she, in their life time.

The last relief, and the best of all, is, when men cause Masses to be soung
or said for them: for that is far above all remedies, because it is a goodly
drawing plaster, which has not power only to draw souls out of
Purgatory, but also to pick money out of men's purses. And that same Requiem
aeternam being three times soung in the Mass, is such a pleasant medicine,
that (in a moment) it does clean take away all the pain and grief which the
souls suffer, and brings them fast asleep like dormice, in so much that
they feel no more smart, neither at the stomache, nor in the back: yea, and
though that their bladder were puffed up like a Cowes vdder, so that they had
not the power to piss a plumb stone, yet with that medcine they should in the
twinkling of an eye, be as sound as a rotten apple.

And yet now, besides all these good and wholesome means before specified,
the good and holy Nonnes of Leyde^ in Holland, Nonnes of Leyden in Holland.
and all other Couentes of that profession, found out an other help of great
importance: for every day, between Michaelmasse and All Saints, after that
the Vigils of ix. lessons be song, then goes the Mother or Prioresse of the
Cloister into a dark chamber, with a great rod in her hand, and then come
the Nonnes in thither one after another stark naked, every one alone, and
turn up their bare buttockes: yea, some of them as naked as my nail, and so
lie down before the Prioresse, and there receive holy discipline for the
souls in Purgatory: for, for every ten girkes that one of them does so
receive, there is a soul delivered out of Purgatory, and flies up into heaven
without any stay. Is not this now a goodly matter? I believe verily, that
all the rest of the Nonnes of other professions will do the like, though it
were but even for good manner sake, and that the Father or Patron of the
Cloister does use to execute the office many times, when the Prioresse is
sick, or otherwise earnestly occupied.

And now (besides all this) Durandus writes, That every Sunday and holy
day, the souls do play. For seeing that God has commanded, that on the
Sabbath day al people should rest from their labor: Souls do rest and play
on Sundays and Holidayes.
it is great reason, that the silly souls should be relieved of their pains
on those days. In consideration whereof, it appears a marvelous charitable
deed of our dear mother the holy church of Rome, to have instituted so many
holy days (beside Sundays) and commanded them to be solemnly kept, because
the souls may upon those days rest themselves, and go a playing: for that it
is to be thought, that they observe as well the precepts of the holy Church,
as Gods commandments: otherwise they were no better than Lutherans. And now we
know very well, that there comes no Lutheran into Purgatory: for Purgatory
is only for the good Catholics which hold fast on the church of Rome. So that
it is verelie to be thought, that the poor souls are as well help up with so
many idle holy days, as with the Nonnes discipline on their bare arsses: yet
it is to be considered, that albeit this, they must be prayed for on Sundaies
and other Holy days, as well as on the work days, when they lie scortching
and scalding in Purgatory: for that has our mother the holy church
specially commanded, being thereunto moved by the example of a good fat Abbat,
In the.7. book in tit. de officio mortuorum. nu. 2.
who (as Dura^dus says) because he had forbidden his Monks, to pray for the
souls in Purgatory, upon Sundaies and Holy days, but only upon work days,
he was upon a time (by the poor souls) catched, and very sore beaten and
wounded, and by that means forced to revoke and break his former order and
commandment. And surely, that was but reason: for although the silly souls
have some playing days, yet I assure you they pay full dearly for it at
other times. This is copied in a manner word for word out of the book
called Sermones discipuli de tempore, and de sanctis, cum promptuario
exemplorum in the.160. Sermon of the souls.
For the pains which they suffer there, are so extreme, that our Doctors
write for a truth, That there was a soul which had lien 30. years in
Purgatory, and at last, there came an Angel, who did bid the soul choose,
whether it would tarry yet one short Winters day in Purgatory, or that it
would return into the world again, and there do a marvelous hard penance,
to wit, for one long hundred years space, should go barefoote, and tread
still upon sharp iron nails, eat nothing else but brown bread, and drink
bitter gall mingled with vinegre, and wear a cloth made of Camels hair next
the skin, and a stone under the head in place of a pillowe. This soul did
choose much rather to do all that same hard penance in earth, than to tarry
one day longer in Purgatory. Consider now what a sharp biting sauce mustard
is: for as it is written in the Decrees: There is no earthly pain, or
martyrdom, to be compared to the pains of Purgatory: yea, that holy man
Thomas de Aquino says, Capit. qui in aliud did 25.
That the pain of the fire of hell, and the fire of Purgatory, is all one,
and that they differ nothing at all, but that the one is but temporal, and the
other is eternal. So that it was not without just occasion, that Virgil set a
partition of iron, Aeneid. libro. 6.
and other metal between those two fires: although some men be of opinion,
that the partition was but a pale made of wainscote, which (because it was of
wood) was long ago burnt away: Hell and Purgatory both but one kitchen.
so that now Hell and Purgatory enter in both at one hole, and are both but
one fire. Which is the occasion that some take upon them to say, that The fire
of Purgatory is pist out: although there be other learned men, which bring in
another occasion, whereby it is happened, that there is now no partition
between Hell and Purgatory, but that they are joined together. For it is
written in a certain history: This is written in the Apology of Barnard. O^li.
That there was a good holy Pope, which was very desirous to know of his
Secretary, being a good witty and learned man, whether (as he thought) he
might give a general pardon at once, The Pope and his Secretary commen of
indulgencies and pardons.
for all such souls as were then in Purgatory, and jointly withal pardon
alike all such as should hereafter be condemned thither: so that after, there
should be no more need of Purgatory. Whereupon his Secretary did demand of
him this question again: Whether he did not verily think, that if it were
so, that he had such power, if he did not the^ verily believe, that all his
Pope predecessors have had the like authority in their time? Whereunto the
Pope answered, Yes surely, considering that all his power and authority came
from them. Then the Secretary did demand of him again: Whether that of so
many Popes, and holy Fathers, which had possessed that place before him,
there were not one of them so merciful and loving toward the poor souls,
that had taken upon him to do that charitable deed, if his power did so far
extend? Unto this the Pope answered, As touching that, he knew not. Whereupon
the Secretary gave him a full resolution, saying, I can tell then certeinlie:
Once our Lord Jesus Christ, chief Bishop of all Bishops, and Pope above all
Popes, had full power and authority to do the same, for that he was
almighty: and he had also the will to do it, for that he was most merciful:
and did likewise bear an infinite affection and love unto all mankind, in so
much that he did effectually and fully accomplish that matter. So that it is
not needful for any man to trouble him self any more about that matter,
seeing he has (by offering up of his body) obtained a pardon of God the
Father, and sealed the same for evermore, with his own precious blood for the
redemption of all faithful souls, Christ's indulgence and pardon for all
christen souls.
past, present, or to come. So that now there falls no more condemnation or
judgment upon them, neither shall they need to fear Death, Hell, nor
Purgatory, but depart out of this life directly into everlasting life, as he
him self does plainly testify by John the Evangelist in his Gospel. John.
3.18. John. 5.24.


Now see, Purgatory condemned.
out of this will some men maintain, That Purgatory is clean taken away,
ever since this great and general pardon came: in so much that diuelles are
come to dwell there, and have now brought Hell and Purgatory all into one
kitchen, where they broile their souls, and turmoile them at their pleasure.
And for that likewise, that good Catholic Doctor Barnardus de Bustis does
defend this case with the testimony and witness of Gregory: That the fire
of Hell and Purgatory are kindled together, saying, Nam (vt inquit Gregorius)
sub eodem igne electus purgatur, and damnatus crematur: that is to say, For (as
Gregory says) with one fire are the elect purged, In his book called
Rosarium, in the 3. part the 2. sermon.
and the damned burned. And therefore it is, that our dear mother the holy
Church, in the prayer called, Offertorium, which she sings commonly upon All
Souls day, and in the Anniuersarie, does put no difference betwixt Hell and
Purgatory: for these are the words which she does use:

Domine Jesus Christ, Rex gloriae, libera animas omnium fidelium defunctorum de
manu inferni, Offertorium on all Souls day
and de profundo lacu, libera eas de ore leonis, ne absorbeat eas tartarus, sed
signifer S. Michael repraesentet eas in lucem sanctam, etc. That is to say:

O Lord Jesus Christ, King of glory, deliver thou all faithful souls out of
the power of hell, and out of that deep lake: deliver them out of the mouth of
the lion, that they sink not down into hell, but that thy standard bearer
Saint Michael may bring them into that holy light, etc.

Wherein they now plainly call Purgatory, Hell. And in an other Collect,
which they do sing upon the same day, they call it, Regiones tenebrarum, that
is to say, The region, or place of darkness, praying unto God, that S. Michael
will or may do so much, as to deliver them from thence. In sum, they make
but one hole, and one lake of those twain. Howsoever it happens, whether the
pale that was between them be burnt, or that Purgatory is pist out, I wot
not, it is to profounde a question for us, and therefore we will commit the
disputation of that matter to the Doctors of Louen: They may (perhaps) tipple
out a flaggon of wine or twain, in the matter, before they agree upon it. It
is enough for us, that we have proved Purgatory sufficiently, not only by
plain textes of holy Scripture, but also by inheritance and possession, and
so established it, as there is nothing to be said against it.

The ix. Chapter. Entreating of indulgencies and pardons, proving and
establishing the same by the Scripture.
Now it does follow, that we entreat of pardons and indulgencies,
Indulgencies and pardons.
which of necessity must proceed out of the foundation of Purgatory,
especially if you do minister unto it a glister of parchement, wax, and lead:
for that has a wonderful operation in it, sithence it does refresh again,
our dear mother the holy church of Rome, and makes her lusty, though she
be something troubled with a laske: although in deed she is now waxen so
old and unwieldy, as glisters can not help her greatly, especially so long
as these H^retikes are still gaping after Scriptures, and will believe nothing,
unless i^ be set down or confirmed by the Bible. Now therefore I will send
them the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians, Colos. 1.24.
where they shall find, that Paul says thus, Now joy I in my sufferings, which
I suffer for you, and fulfill that which is behind of the passions of Christ
in my flesh: for his bodies sake which is the congregation. Always provided,
that they shall not understand nor interpret this text after their minds, nor
after the letter: to wit, as though Paul did mean nothing else, but that he (as
a member of Christ's body) does follow Christ his head, in suffering for the
love of the congregation, and strengthening of the same: for this
interpretation is heretical, and does not well agree with the interpretation
and belief of our dear mother the church of Rome. But they must know and
confess, that Paul's meaning in that place is, that the passion of Christ is
not sufficient to satisfy for all our sins, which we have committed since: for
those must every man make satisfaction for by good works and pardons, and with
bulls and indulgencies: for to that end serve the merits of such Saints, as
have bin canonized by Popes, and the blood of their martyrs, which suffered in
defense of the holy church of Rome, and furthermore, all the meritorious works,
which S. Francis, S. Benedict, S. Dominick, and other holy fathers have laid
up for a help, which were superfluous and more than they were bound to do. For
all these merits and good works, Petrus Asotes in Catholica assertione de
lege.
laid together upon a heap with our merits and superfluous good works, which we
have in store, Look for this in the Ex^rauag. of Pope Clement 6. Rubric. de
poenitent. and remis. cap. vnige. Dei filius. Item in the writing up of the
treasure of Churches t^ke^ out of the Compilation of master John de Fabrica
super relax. Item the gloss cap. anti. ext. de poenit. and remis.
over and besides those which must first answer for our sins: All these (I
say) are shut up in a chest together, whereof our holy father the Pope has the
keys to keep: and does distribute them to every person according to his
discretion: which is commonly according as every man does annoint his hand
with golden oil: For this same golden oil is of such strength and virtue,
that there is no offense, knauerie, sin, nor abomination so great, but it
will be heled and made clean with the same, as is plainly to be seen in the
Taxa poenitentiaria apostolica, that is, In the book of reckoning, or tax
register, where the pardon and price of al sins is set upon certain sums of
money, which are set and taxed in the popish or apostolic penance chamber: but
now among the rest, the Pope deals most liberally with such as come to Rome,
in the year of Jubilee, and do there devoutly visit the graves or tumbes of
Peter and Paul: for those have full remission of all their sins, a poena and
culpa: This is plainly set out in the gloss in capit. antiq. de poen. and
r^mis.
and therewith are the two Apostles maruellouslie recreated: for out of that
may S. Peter note, that the prayer of Christ for him, when he said: I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail: does there receive full
effect, when he sees the people so devoutly disposed to go visit his tumbe
and grave. And by this now is that likewise (which we alleged out of S. Paul)
fulfilled: in so much (doubtless) that they have great pleasure, when they see
such devotion used, and surely do laugh wi^hall, as though they had the tooth
ache. The holy Church of Rome does yet bring forth other textes of importance,
for the establishing of indulgencies, as specially, where Christ said unto
Peter: I shall give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: Math. 16.19.
which are to be understood, the keys of the chest before mentioned, This
stands likewise plainly set forth in the said gloss, and is confirmed by
all those Catholic doctors.
wherein that rich tresure is shut up, which can never be emptied nor
diminished: for if it were possible, that all the people of the world did go
to Rome in one year of Jubilee, that every man might receive full indulgence
and pardon, yet should the same chest be no more emptied thereby, than the
Ocean sea should be, with taking out of it one spoonefull of water: or Saint
Goddards mountain be diminished, by taking from it one handful of sand: as is
plainly set forth by a very trim and fine verse, as follows: Mill licet
sumant, deperit inde nihil.

That is to say: Though thousands take and none said nay:
Yet nothing wastes or wears away.


And now, how necessary and profitable this is, to our holy mother the Church
of Rome, it does appear plainly out of this, That only the indulgencies, with
the letters of pardon, In the book called defensio Parisien. Curiae pro
liberate ecc. Gal. Ludouico. 11. oblato aruc. 77.
and the Reseruationes pectorales, mentales, regressus generales, and speciales
accessus, with such other like trifles mo, are worth to the Pope of Rome in
France only, above two hundred thousand Crowns a year: so that through all
Christendom, it does amount to above ten millions of Crowns, which is a
pretty sum.

But what should I talk much of the Pope? It is not long ago, that a simple
gray friar called Samson of Millan, being by Pope Leo, 10. appointed (amongst
other) for one of the gatherers or receivers of the money for Bulls and
Indulgencies, had within a little space, gotten so much money for himself,
that he did offer to give a hundred and twenty thousand Ducats in ready money,
120000. Ducates offered to be made Pope.
to be chosen Pope. In sum, all indulgencies, pardons, iubilies, and bulls,
with the rest of the Popes authority, are lightly to be proved and declared by
scripture, if men will understand them rightly, and according to the exposition
of our dear mother the holy Church.

The x. Chapter. Which does treat of the Supremasie of the Pope, and proves
and establishes the same by scriptures and examples.
The Popes power.
NOw as touching that which is to be said for the supremasie, and authority of
the Pope, that is to be proved by so many clear and strong testimonies and
witnesses of scripture, that I can scarce tell where it is best to begin. But I
may take first the best known and plainest text, where Christ said: Math.
16.18.
I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Petra, (which is to say a
stone, or a rock) will I build my congregation, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against them, etc. For by these few words, to begin withal, Cap.
ita dominus did. 29. capit-omnes. did. 2^. capit. non t^rba^^. 24. Quae*
(...) and in the I. decree. in the beginning of Clemen^s Epist.
it is witnessed (after the spiritual exposition of the holy church) that Peter
is the firm and seedfast foundation of the Church (for she has nothing to do
with Christ in this matter:) as Clemens has very worthily set forth in his
Epistle written to James the brother of our Lord. And again, here is not to
be understood by Peter, the person of Peter the Apostle: but in the name of
Peter, are our holy Fathers (the Popes) pointed unto, as with a wette finger.
For whereas the heretics will say, that Peter was never at Rome, it is a stark
lie. See I pray you their folly: well, his head and bones lie there yet at
this present in a golden chest. And yet besides that, S Peter's history of Rome
not only his Legend, but likewise that holy man Lippomanus, and the book
called Speculu^ historiale, that is, The Mirror of histories made by Vincentius
Lirinensis, do perfectly set forth, Capit. Quamuis. 21. did. capit.
sacrosanct. d^st. 22. cap. beati. 2. Quae. 7. capit. Fundamenta de electione
and electi potestate.
That Jesus Christ met him with out the town gates of Rome. And being demanded
by Peter whether he was going? He answered, I am going to Rome to be there
crucified again: and a while after was Peter crucified, and that upon the same
day, and place, and under the same tyrant that Paul, just a year before, was
put to death: yea, after that he himself had been Pope, and governed that sea
25. years, by the same token that his seat which was hewed out of a Purphyre
stone, and the Albe wherein he song his first Mass, do both remain yet for a
memorial. And although Saint Luke do testify, Read the Acts of the Apostles
where is treated of Cornelius the captain of the council at Jerusalem, of
Peter's imprisonment, and in many other places.
that he continued very long at Jerusalem: yea, and that in the very same
time that he should have been in Rome, by the reckoning and calculation of
our dear mother the holy Church of Rome: and that Paul does seem to agree
with the same, where he writes, that the time that he lay in prison in Rome,
there was not one of the faithful that did visit or assist him: I leave to
say, that Peter should then have been Pope: but all this cannot persuade us.
For that is to be answered, that Saint Luke might be ouerseene in his writing,
and I think he was no good Arithmetician: or else we may say (as diverse
Lutherans them selves confess,) that one body may be in two, or three, or mo
sundry places, at one time. And touching that, he had perhaps forgotten that
Peter was Pope of Rome: as is apparent by that he writes to the Galathians,
where he says, Gal. 10.2.7.8.
That Peter was appointed for an apostle to the Jews, and he himself to the
Gentiles. Or else it may well be answered, that it was not decent for Peter,
being a Prince and Duke over all the Apostles, to go seek or visit such a
simple fellow as Paul was, lying in prison: Gregory. 7.
Considering how that Pope Gregory the 7. successor, about the year one
thousand and seventy, The Emperor Henry the.4. This does Platina write, Ben^o
Cardinalis, and other Historiographers.
did suffer the noble Emperor Henry 4. who came in the cold winter, simply
clad, bare headed, and barefoote, most humbly desiring to have access to his
holiness, being then in the town of Camisen, his holiness did (as is before
said) suffer him to tarry before the gates of the town, three days, without
once looking upon him, or sending to him. I let alone that he would once step a
foot to go meet him, This do all the Catholic doctors write, and many old
histories, which yet notwithstanding do not agree among them selves, so that
there may be false heads amongst them as it seems.
being in the mean space passing his time and dallying with his Curtesans, and
with the Duchess Matildis, who yet at last did make intercession for the
Emperor. Wherefore, is it not to be thought then, that Peter did likewise
stand upon his gravity and reputation, without much going to the prison, to
seek Paul, or visit him? Especially considering, how busy he was to
appoint and set new Prelates in every place. For it might perhaps be, that
Peter was not very well at ease, or diverse other occasions might cause it.
But this is always to be believed, and holden for a very truth, That Peter was
five and twenty years complete, resident at Rome, and distributed the lands
to every one, according as he thought good: and likewise ordained and
instituted Prelates, This is set forth in the.2. decretall Epistle of Anacletus
written touching the ordeining of bishops and Archbishops.

In the first book of the council capit. Province* dis. 39 This witnessing of
David in the 98. Psalm. is brought in in the.3. Epistle of Anaclet. treating of
the Patriarchs, and in the decrees. capit. sacrosancta did. 21. Mat. 12.1.
Mark. 9.53. Luke 9.46.


Bishops, and Archbishops, over all the world, and deposed the heathen
governors, which at that time bare rule, out of their places, and placed other
in their rooms, which he did name Primates, for that every man came to
rece^ue judgment at their hands as is very finely and at large set out in the
epistle of Anacletus, and in the book of decrees. And that this is well founded
upon scripture, it is apparent by the words of the said Anacletus, who does
bring in (for verefying of his saying) plain textes out of the Psalms, to
wit, Moses and Aaron with their Priests. For out of that is forcibly
concluded (as he says) that the Pope of Rome is the head of the Church. Is
not that well shot, God save the mark. Also the holy Apostles (says he)
did debate and determine amongst themselves (as I think at that time, when
they did strive who should be chief amongst them) that the Bishop of every
Country should know, who should be next under him: for notwithstanding,
that they were all Apostles alike, yet did Christ give that vauntage to Peter,
that he should be chief of the Apostles, and so named him Cephas, How Christ
will led his apostles to use themselves in bearing rule one over another: You
shall find in Luke 22 25.26. Mat. 20.25.26. Mar. 10.42.45. John. 1.42.
that is to say, The chief head or Prince of the Apostles. See now, this is
the exposition of our dear mother the holy Church of Rome, upon these words
of Christ: Thou art Cephas. And yet it is true, that Cephas is a word of the
Chaldee tongue, and does not signify A head, but A stone: as Petra does in
the Greek, or Latin: for so S. John the Evangelist him self does expound
it. But notwithstanding that, seeing it has pleased our dear mother the holy
Church of Rome, to understand it so, considering that this word Cephas, or
Cepha, does signify in the Chaldee tongue, A stone, and the like word in
manner, in the Greek, and in the French tongue, does signify A head, as to
wit, Cephali, or Cheff, therefore it is good reason that we take the exposition
of John as literal, and repose our selves upon the exposition of our dear
mother the holy Church: who only in deed, has the power and authority, to
interpret the Scripture spiritually, and allegorically. Gloss. in capite
antiquorum. ext. de poenitentia and remissionibus.
So that this word Cephas, must needs signify A head, and not A stone: as is
plain to be seen in the gloss of the Decretals.

And out of this we have to note two principal points. The first is, that the
holy Church has such power and authority, that she can (not only) change
the bread into flesh, but is able to make of a stone a head, and as well
transubstantiate the words as the bread. The second is, that a man may make a
good similitude or parable, upon the neerenesse of names in speech, which in
pronuntiation do sound one like another, as the holy Church has concluded
hereupon, S. Clara. S. Quintine. S. Valentine. S. Etro^ius.
That Saint Clare can make dim eyes look clear: S. Quintine, can heal the
quensie in the head: and S. Valentine, the falling sickness: and S. Etropius,
the dropsy: because these names in pronuntiation do sound one like another.
And yet this can not always fall out so: for then might the Heretics conclude
out of the same, that Curats, are curres: the Spirituality, spite faulty:
Bishops, very bitesheepes: Cardinals, carnals: and that master Gentianus
after the French, is un genti asne, that is, a proper ass: and Blindasinus, a
blind ass. Which thing now can not be so, considering that asses are not
accustomed to write books, as these men have done. Therefore we must remitte
the judgment of these matters (in like cases and nerenesse of names) to the
holy Church, when they shall be so understood, and when they shall ^ot be so
taken. Now does our dear mother the holy Church, enjoy d^uerse other goodly
and plain Scriptures, wherewith ^o prop up, and make fast the seat of our
hol^e father the Pope: as specially, where it is written: Job. 4.34.5.30
Esaias. 10.15. Which testimony was alleged by Pope Nicholas, verba^^m, unto
this purpose, in an Ep^stle by him written that was s^nt to the bish. of
Constan. and (...) is likewise in the decree^ cap. Infer^or seeds. did. 1.21.
That Christ came to fulfill the will of his father. For of that must needs
follow, That all good Christen men are bound to fulfill the will of their holy
mother the Church of Rome, of which church the Pope (without all doubt) is the
supreme head. And again, God speaks by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias:
But does the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Or does the
saw make any bragging against him that rules it? Signifying thereby, that
the king of the Assyrians had no power against the almighty God, who would
use him as an axe, or a saw, to punish and correct his people by him. Out of
this has our mother the holy Church of Rome concluded, and (as she says) made
it appear clearer than the Sun, that there is no power nor authority in
this world, but in the power of the holy sea and pope of Rome, to correct or
punish the same. And this she does establish yet more strongly, by the words
of Paul, who says: That the natural man cannot conceive nor understand Gods
doings: but the spiritual man does understand and rule all things, but may not
be ruled of any man. For this does the holy Church understand by the pope of
Rome, Boniface. 18. in the Extrauagantes, trac^. de maioritate and obedientia
ff. quod etiam Genesis 2.1.1.
that he is of himself so spiritual and ghostly, that no man may nor can judge
nor punish him. Now further, his power is established in the first book of
Moses called Genesis, where it is written, That God in the beginning did shape
both heaven and earth. For now, that is as much to say (after the exposition of
the holy Church of Rome) that the Pope is the beginning of all things.
Considering there is no mention made but of one beginning. It is not said: In
the beginning, This does the Pope Boniface the.8. write in his Extrauag,
Tractat. de maiorita^e and obedientia. ff. in hac eiusdem.
as of mo or many beginnings: and therefore whosoever should compare the
Emperor to be as good as the Pope, he is a rank heretic and of the sect of
the Manichees, who said, There was mo beginnings of all things than one. What
think you now of this? Is not this a good bagpipe to play a galiard upon? But
now, tarry yet a little, it is likewise written, Two great lights.
That God did shape two great lights, a greater and a lesser: which do
signify (after the interpretation of the holy Church) that the pope of Rome is
above all other Potentates, and above the Emperor: for he is the Sun, and
the Emperor is the Moon. Whereby now is clearly to be seen, that Moses had
a foreknowlege of the pope and his authority. And Job must needs have had
some feeling of his coming. For thus God said unto Job: Job. 38.33. This
interpretation with the other two following are worthily written in the gloss
of the decretals in the Cap antiquorum ext. de poenitentia and r^mi^sionibus.
Know thou (I pray thee) how the heavens are governed? Or can thou rule
him upon earth? That is (after the interpretation of the holy Church) That even
as in the heaven one eternal God does govern all things, and as the holy
Trinity is brought to one only unity: The like consequence must fall out
here upon earth. So that here the Pope only must have dominion over all
estates, dukedomes, The Pope above all kings.
kingdoms, and other whatsoever, in consideration that he is the only line,
level, and compass, whereby all other people are and ought to be directed.
And in consideration hereof is the prophecy of Paul thus understood, saying:
Until the fulness of the Gentiles be come, To. 11.25.26.
and then shall all Israel be saved: ioining this, with that which Christ said:
So that there shall be but one flock, John. 10.16.
and one shepherd: as to understand, When all the nations upon earth, shall
be subject to the Pope. Like as now in our days we have seen a good
beginning, and do daily see with our eyes very great appera^ce of more. And
that the Pope ought not only to have a spiritual government as a Bishop: but
must likewise maintein a worldly government, as a king, is by clear testimony
of Scripture of our dear mother the holy Church approved. The Pope is a king.
For there is without doubt, a plain text, This you shall find in the text
before alleged of the decretals. ff. in hac ext. de maioritate and obedientia.
that the Apostles did say: Behold here are two swords. Whereunto Christ
answered not, saying: That it was too many, but that, that was enough. Now out
of this does our dear mother conclude, That the Pope of Rome must use two
swords, to wit, a spiritual, and a temporal sword. Ho ball, ho how will this
sound in the ears of the Heretics?

But now must they understand for a special matter, that a good while ago
there was in Spain an honest man, who could not understand it so, saying that
this scripture did serve nothing at al to that purpose. And by and by, the holy
inquisition (which is the dearest and chiefest nourse and fosterfather of the
Church of Rome) did take him, and burn him at a stake, as one which had highly
blasphemed: because that upon his opinion should follow, that the holy church
has not full power to interpret the scripture as she will: which I assure you
is a terrible slander.

Therefore have these heretics need to look well to the matter, and keep
their tongues, and give ear to other testimonies and witnesses. For yet
besides this, Christ said to Peter: Put up thy sword into the sheth. In the
extrauagants de maiori. and obedi. and is likewise so concluded in the council
of Reins.
Out of those words does plainly appear (as our holy father Bonifacius the 8.
says) That both the swords, as well the temporal, as the spiritual, are
under the power and jurisdiction of the Church, Yea, and it is very
necessary, that the one sword be subject to the other: which is to be
understood, That the temporal jurisdiction and authority must be subject to
the spiritual and ecclesiastical power and authority. For (according to the
saying of S. Paul) There is no power or authority, but that which is
appointed by God. Truly (says he) there would be no good regiment, if the one
sword were not subject to the other: and that the lower and inferior were (by
some good means) brought in subjection and obedience to the higher and
superior. Consider, this is the only natural and grounded interpretation of
the before alleged text of the holy Scripture, as our dear mother the holy
Church has interpreted the same, word by word. Is not this Popingaie then
trimly shot down? Lee these Huguenots, and Lutherans come out now, who cry
always that we cannot establish the power and authority of the Pope by any
scriptures: now they may see, that we have scriptures ^now to hit the mark
withal.

But now will we teach out of the scriptures, That the Pope only has power to
consecrate and halow Churches, and to bless altars. For blessing and hallowing
of Churches and altars. Psalm. 127.5. Durandus in the book called ^ationale
diui. offici* lib. 1. rubr. 7. de dedicatione Ecclesiae. John. 15.1.
Mark well the words plainly set out in the Psalms, where it is written,
Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it. For
this is the very text, that the holy fathers assembled at the counsel of
Carthage, were chiefly persuaded by to give special commandment, That no
common or simple Priest should take upon him to do any such thing. Was not
that (I pray you) a matter of importance to consult upon? And yet besides this,
it is there written: I am the vine, you are the branches* he that remains in me
and I in him, shall bring forth much fruit, which the holy Church understanding
of the pope, has resolutely concluded, That no man may consecrate or hallow
any Church, but he alone. Think you not that they had great reason so to do?
And therefore no doubt, they are herein very well founded, and upon great
reason persuaded out of this, and all the other texts before alleged* to
conclude, teach, and determine thus, Gloss in the Extrauagantes de verbor.
signifi. ad apostol. ff. nos li. 6. de sent. and (...) iudicata. Item read
hereupon the plain texts in the decretals cap. Quando personam de transl.
episcop. and the gloss in the decretal. lib 1. de electione, and electi
potestate. and allege upon that cap. quos deus. 3.9.2.
That the Pope is not only a man, but Gods Lieftenant: yea, a God himself
upon earth: by which occasion he does likewise Gloss upon the Preface of the
decretals, only in the 6. book.
change his name, at such time as he is promoted to the Popes seat,
specially, for that he does likewise after his nature, and from the degree of
a man, is become half a God.

And upon this consideration Cap. Sic omn^s did. 19.
must his mandates be observed, as Gods commandments. Yea, it is not cap* si
qu^s sua den^e. 17.13.4
lawful for any man to doubt, or to reason upon his title and authority. For
he may (if it so come in his head) Cap. Praeceptis did 12.
set up and establish a new serving of God, or religion: and all men must (of
necessity) Cap* in memoriam. did. 19.
follow his commandments, how heavy or incomportable so ever they be. For he
can (of an Cap. Fuit semper. 9.9.3. and cap. Euphemium 23.9.3.
arrant knave) make an honest man: Cap. si Papa and ibi glossa did. 40 cap
paret. cap. nemo iudicabit. cap. aliorum. cap. ^acta. cap. cuius and per mundu^
with the other chapters following 9. causa quaest. 1.
neither may he by any man be judged or punished: no not although he run
headlong to bell, and carry a great company with him, seeing it is he that
judges all men by his absolute power. Yea, th^re is given to him, Cap. omnes.
did. 22. cap. non no^. did. 40. and the gloss in Extrauagants. cap. 1 de
rel. ordin. Papa S^machus, and Arnold^s Ba^barus. glos. in. Extrau. ad aposto^.
de Pa. did 3. (...) persona.
a full power and authority, as well in heaven as in earth: and he must be of
all men esteemed holy: yea, although he were known to be an arrant knave,
and vile varlet: neither may any man say unto him, Wherefore do ye so, or so?

And therefore the holy Church does Extra de maioritate and obedientia paragrap.
porto. Read likewise upon all these matters ^ostensis a noble Canonist in summa
titu. de off^cio legati ff. quod pertinet ad officium. nu. 3. and is likewise
spoken by Nicholas Go^tiu^ in his treatise de potestate legati a la^^re Nu. 23.
and 24.
say, declare, and pronounce, That it is most nedfull that all Christen men (for
their salvation sake) submit them selves wholly under the Pope of Rome, as it
is written in the John 1.18.
first of John: And of his fullness have we all received eue^ grace for grace.
Which being understood, according to the letter, may well be applied to Christ:
but after the spiritual understanding, which is according to the interpretation
of the Extr. de vsu pallii, ad h^norem. Esa^e. 10.14.
holy Church, and of the Catholic Doctors, it is (without doubt) to be
understood of the Pope of Rome. And therefore does Cap aliorum hominum, Can.
9 quaest. 3.
Esaias say: What will ye do in the day of the visitation and destruction,
which shall come from far? To whom will ye run for help? Troilus Maluit^u^
in his treaty de Canoni ^atione Sanctorum, in 3. dubio.
Or to whom will ye give your honor, that he may keep it? This is now to be
understood (after the interpretation of the holy Church) This stands
written in a manner verbatim in the book called Ceremoniale S. Roman. eccle. in
the 2. Chap. of the 1. book.
That the Pope of Rome is all our honor and wealth. For how can it be
otherwise understood? Considering that he has the power to choose any man
or woman who^ he likes of, and him or her, in the name of God, or in his own
name: yea, and that without the will or consent of his Cardinals, declare,
pronounce and judge for a Saint, canonize them, put them in the Calendar, place
them in the register of Saints: and so appoint them a room in the Romish
Hierarchy, either amongst Angels and Archangels, or else amongst Martyrs and
Confessors, Hierarchy is to say, an holy regiment, and was called
Dionysicall: by one called Dionysius, who said that the Rom^she Church was
Areopagi^: where of Luke does speak in the Act of the Apostles: other say that
it was S.D^onyse of Paris, other take it but for a feined name, and a false
book which is put out in his name, where he does set forth the heavenly
He^archie, or regiment, with all the Chores of Angels, with all the stools and
banks, so perfectly as though he had dwelt there ten years. Or men may
understand by this Dionyso Hierarchy, the holi^ regiment that Dionysius
companions, that is Bacchus companions do keep upon the Saints holidaies,
which the Pope has canonized, as on twelfth eeuen, S. Martins eeuen, and such
like.
as he shall think good: willing and commanding, That in every Church, one
holy day shall be kept for them, and devout service said and done that day, as
to an holy Saint is proper and apperteining: yea, and further, give and grant
to all such as shall once a year (being shriuen and doing penance) go on
pilgrimage, and visit the tumbe of such a new Saint, pardon of all their
sins, for one whole year and forty days. Yea, moreover, he may (if it be
his pleasure) depose, deface, and blotte out of the Calendar, and register,
such as have been a long time canonized and worshipped: as did appear by Pope
Boniface the 8. who caused Saint Herman of Ferrare, to be dug out of his
grave and burnt, after he had been taken and esteemed for a Saint more than
twenty years. And that which is more, we find written, That Pope Clement
the fifth (about the year of our Lord, 1309.) did charge and command the
Angels, through his Popish authority and power, that they should take the
souls of all such, as coming in pilgrimage toward Rome, did die by the way,
and forthwith carry them into heaven without any delay or tarrying, or without
letting them once smell the fire of Purgatory: as appears by his Bulls
hereupon granted and made: whereof diverse copies do (at this day) lie at
Vienne, at Limoges, and at Poytiers, towns in France, in the chestes where the
privileges of the same Towns are kept. Wherefore then I pray you) should not
we willingly accept him for all our wealth and honor, seeing he can
canonize, make, and unmake he Saints and she Saints: and has likewise
power over the Angels of heaven? I do not speak of this, that he, as a King
and Priest, can make God: yea, and create him, who only creates all things,
Read the 1. chap. of the 2. part.
as it is written in the book called, Stella Clericorum, which is to say, The
star of the Clerks, That is to say the creator of the creator of all
things. 2. These. 2.4. Daniel. 11.36 These prophesies of Daniel Paul E^erardus
Archbishop of Saliburch has interpreted upon the Pope of Rome, like as is too
be seen in the book called Annals Au^ntini Lib. 7. And so likewise the
Emperor Frederike 2. has done the like, and set it forth so, even in the
same place.

And Arnoldus, Bishop of O^lians did the like in the council of Rein^.

Read Cap. lect. with the gloss did. 34. and 17. And the same is fortified by
Sigismund, Neap.


or Priests: wherein all Priests are named, Creatores Creatoris. And now, he
makes all Priests: so that he may justly be called, Creator creatorum
creatoris: that is to say, The Creator of those which have shapen and created
the very Creator of all things. So that the writing of Paul to the
Thessalonians, where he speaks of the Pope of Rome is not amiss: where he
says, That he shall extol and advance him self above all things that is named
God, or Gods service, and shall sit in the temple of God, as though he were God
him self, and proclaim: him self for God. Which thing also was before spoken
by the Prophet Daniel, That he should lift and set up him self above all
Godhead, and should speak marvelous things against God, and do every thing
after his own lust: placing him self above all things in the world:
distributing lands and kingdoms, even as he best list and will. Now,
according to this prophecy, has our dear mother the holy Church ordained
and concluded, That he has full power and authority to do what soever his
will and pleasure is, and that he may dispense both with the old and new
Testament: with any oath, Read the gloss upon the first book of the decretals
Gregorii tit. de translatio. Episcopi, Cap. quanto pe^so^^^ there you shall
find the place set forth and established by witnesses of the decrees. Item the
gloss of the decrees cause. 15. que 1 And in the extrauag. Joan. 23. tit. 14.
cum inte. And Panormitan. writing upon the same place. Fo^^^nius Ga^^ia in lib.
1. in P^in. 4. Col. de Pactis.

Cu^tius senior ex Baldo, in Council. 20. in sine. Joan. de (...). crema^a:
Ca^ald^tius in tr^ctatu de potestate Papae. August. Berotus in Rubri. de off.
de leg. number. 10. Bero. in cap. cum tu, in ^um. 1. de Vsuris. Decius and
Ludonicus Gomesius upon many places.


vow, or promise.

In sum, he is over and above all judgments, of God or man, to make of
nothing something, of straight crooked, and of crooked straight, to
transubstantiate and change the form and substance of things, even as it
shall come in his head: For unto him are all laws and judgments subject, and
neither any law nor judgment has power or jurisdiction over him: for that
he is the lively f^unteine of law and judgment, who (as touching matters of
our faith) can not (in any point) fail or miss: and therefore he may order
and determine upon all matters touching our belief and faith, and so
interpret the Scripture, as he thinks good: he only may take and leave,
do and undo. In so much that (though all the world were against him) yet
must we take his part. To be brief, there is no man to be compared unto him,
but God alone: and therefore can he do all things that God does. For look what
soever God does in heaven, the like does the Pope here in earth. Zodericus
Zamorensis in speculo humanae vitae, lib. 2 cap. s. Barto. Chassan. in catalogo
gloriae mundi in 4. part. in 7. consideratio. Antonius Florentinus in his
Summa.
What should a man say more? His authority and power is so great, that no
tongue can express it, neither is it possible for the capacity of man to
conceive it: as Zodoricus Zamorensis and Bartholus Chassaneus, yea the whole
Catholic church of Rome has determined and concluded. For as Antonius
Florentinus does testify, he is above al creatures, and his might and power
does extend even to matters in heaven, Th^s does Felinus witness in many
places.
earth, and hell: for that he is the cause of causes, and the Lord of Lords,
the Head and Bridegroom of the whole church: yea, the high and principal
Governor of the world universal: In cap. quoniam de vnitate ecclesia^um. 6.
Johannes de turre cre^m^t^ in many places.

Antonius de Ro^ellis, Corsecus. Sicalus in tracta de regia poteliat^.


he is the light, the brightness, and the very foundation of faith, and the
very sum and touchstone of the truth: he is the hiest step of the stairs,
and all in all, whatsoever can be thought or said. For as touching the giving
and distributing of Kingdoms, Dukedomes, lands and countries, to whom, and
when he shall think good: that office he has fast and sure in possession, and
does daily practice and put the same in exercise: as is right to be
understood by this pretty verse following: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema
Rodulpho.

That is to say: The Rock gave Peter, and his race,
a princely and imperial crown:
And Ralfe received from Peter's Grace,
a royal diadem of renown.
Which trim verse was (by the before named Pope Gregory 7.) (after that he
had excommunicated the said Emperor Henry 4. and cursed all his adherents)
sent unto Ralphe the Duke of Swaben with am Imperial crown: Read Benno the
Cardinal, Johannes Marius, Ma^e histo^iarum, C^r^ni^a Sigeberti,

Platina and other more writers of Histories.


aduertising him plainly therewithal, that it lay wholly in his hands, to
give to whem soever it pleased him, as well the Empire, as the crown: wherein
he did finely prophecy in such order, as Caiphas the Jewish Pope had
prophesied, saying: That he would never be esteemed as Pope, if there did not
die the same year before Whitsuntide a false or unjust King: For it came even
so to pass: Not that the Emperor Henry (by whom he spoke) did die that
year: but that the lotte fell upon Ralphe, to whom the Pope had given the
Imperial crown, who was the same year pitifully slain, his hands first cut
of, and he lamenting sore before the Bishops, That through informing of the
Pope and their prouokings he had made him and his accursed, and rebelled
against his own lord and supreme head. Now a little after this did succeed
Pope Paschalis 2. who again excommunicated afreshe the Emperor, Paschalis
Pope.
and commanded the Earl of Flaunders, called Robert, The Popes letter to
Robert the Earl of ^landers, written in the 2 book of councels folio 810.
to destroy with fire and sword, the territories of Luek and Camericke, because
that they would remain true unto their natural lord and Sovereign the
Emperor Henry. Yea, he did give the Imperial crown with all the jewels of
the Empire to Henry the 5. son unto the said Henry the 4. Emperor: and
herein prevailed so much, that he did provoke the son to rebel and persecute
his own Lord and natural father: yea, with such horrible and unnatural
malice, that he let him (most pitifully) starve in the prison at Luek: which
happened in the year of our Lord 1108. Neither would he receive the Lukeners
to grace, til such time, as they had taken up the dead carcass of his father
(which was by the^ there buried) and cast the same out into the fields, Read
the Chron^^l^ of Robert ^^rnes, Eus^^* and Nau^^erus.
like the carrion of a dog. And by that means the Lukeners were likewise
discharged of the excommunication which Pope Paschalis had laid upon them.

Men may likewise very well conceive the same by the example of the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, Fredericus Barbarossa.
who after a great many of excommunications and curses, was in the end within
the town of Venice upon the great market called Saint Marks place, Read John
Charion in his Chronicle, and other writers of Chronicles.
at the top of the stairs of the great church or palace, trodden upon the
neck by Pope Alexander 3. even with his feet: who, for the establishing of
his authority and power, did usurp and openly pronounce before all the people
this saying in the Psalm: Psalm. 91.
Super Aspidem and Basiliscum equitabis, and co^culcabis Leonem and Draconem:
that is to say, Thou shall ride upon the Lion and the Adder: the young Lion and
the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet, etc.

And thus likewise was Franciscus Dandalius Duke of Venice, Franciscus
Dandalius.
excommunicated and banished by Pope Clement 5. and enjoined unto certei^e
penance: which was, That he should go creeping alongest the Popes palace, upon
his hands and knees, with a collar about his neck like a dog. So that it is
apparent, that the Pope of Rome has full and absolute power over al Kings,
Quaest. 45. and 46. whole through.
Dukes, and Princes: and therefore may command them, as his subjects and
tenantes: and may extol or advance, and disgrade or depose them, even as he
shall think good. Which authority of his does extend and reach so far,
that he has likewise full power, commandment and jurisdiction over the
Kings and Emperors of Turkey, and other Heathen countries. In so much that a
man may lawfully appeal unto him, (in any matter) from before any earthly
Prince or Potentate. Augustinus de Ancona in summa De Ecclesiastica potestat.
quaest. 1 articulo 7. And more other canonists. Iacobus de Te^ano, chamberleine
to Pope Vrbane 6. writes this, In tractatu (...), qui incipit: Reddi^e quae
sunt Caesaris Caesari, etc. Matthew. 22 21 Marc. 12.17. Luke. 20 25.
In sum, he has under him the rule and government of all Imperial,
Princely, and Spiritual iuris^iction: for he is consecrated as a Priest, and
crowned as a King: and is therefore the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

For, as touching that which these Heretics do allege against this, That
Christ should have said: Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God
that which to God belongs, that (says our mother the holy church) was not
a perpetual rule, but stood in effect only for a short time, to wit, till
such time as Christ had suffered, and was ascended up into heaven. For now, to
answer that, where he says: After that I shall be lifted up from the earth, I
will draw all things up after me: that is thus to be understood, (says the
holy church of Rome) That Christ after his ascension into heaven, should take
al Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and such like out of the possession of Kings, Dukes,
etc. and that by means of his soldiers, especially by his Romish Apostles.
And whereas in other places he does forbid his Disciples to seek after,
Matthew. 10.^. Mark. 6.8. Luke 9 3.12.33.
or to receive gold or silver, that must likewise be understood, but till such
time only, as they have brought in subjection and under them all Kingdoms,
and so to leave the same by will and testament unto the Popes of Rome (their
successors: This does Platina witness in the book of the Popes where he
does set ^orth the life of Alexander the 3.
) for then ends that determination. And that was the cause why the Popes
began to travel with a deliberate intention, to make a division of the
Imperial crown of Rome, who then had the East and West country of Greece,
and almost the whole world in subjection: as Pope Alexander 3. did plainly
acknowledge unto the Ambassadors of Emanuel Emperor of Graecia, declaring
plainly, That he in no wise would have the Empire of Graecia and the Empire
of Rome united or joined together again in one: which was done especially to
the intent that he might be the better able to ouerrule them both.

Frederick the 2. deposed by Gregory the 9. in anno. 4.
And out of that it does likewise grow, that Gregory the ninth, and
Innocentius the fourth, Popes of Rome, did depose the Emperor Frederick the
second, and absolved his subjects of their oath which they had taken and made
unto him: and above that, did excommunicate and banishe all such his subjects,
as did remain faithful and true unto him. And furthermore, granted great
indulgence and pardon to such as would rebelliouslie rise up to destroy and
confound them. And yet besides all this, after that he (with the sum of an
hundred and twenty thousand marks of gold in weight) had redeemed and set
free him self out of the excommunication of the said Pope Gregory, yet was
he (notwithstanding that) once again accursed and banished. Nauclerus.
In so much that Henry Lantgraue of Thuringe was chosen Emperor: and after
his death, (which was very sudein) the Imperial crown was given to one
William then Earl of Hollande: Emperor William county of Holland slain by
the Freeses.
who very shortly after that, was by the Freeses slain. After whose death
the Empire did remain seuentene years complete without head or Emperor.

And yet I pray you, consider: Do we not find by all perfect histories, that
Pope Vrbane the fourth, Vrbane. 4.
did about the year of our Lord 1264. violently dispossess Conradinus son
to Conrade, Conradinus king of Sicilia.
then Emperor of the kingdom of Sicilia, notwithstanding the same, did by
just title of inheritance apperteine unto him, and gave the same to Charles
Earl of Angiou de Province, and brother to Lodo^ike King of France, and his
successor Clement the fourth, did set the Crown upon his head, with
condition, that he should yeerelie pay to the Sea of Rome, Read the
Chronicles of France.
forty thousand crowns of gold.

Now to deface that deed and intent, Pope Nicholas the third about the year
of our Lord 1268. caused Peter the King of Aragon, Pope Nicholas. 3
who had married the cousine germane of the said Conradinus to come out of
Italy, to deprive the said Charles of the same, and brought the matter so
far, that he took perforce the said kingdom of Sicilia, having first by a
crafty practice (in one night) caused most cruelly to be murdered (by the
Sicilians) all the French, Frenchmen murdered in the vespertina Siciliana.
both men, women, and children, young and old, that were within the whole
Island of Sicilia: by reason whereof, they use yet at this day for a common by
word, to call it, The Sicilian Euensong. And then after, to the contrary of
this, Martinus did curse and banish Peter King of Sicilia.
his successor Pope Martin the fourth, did both banishe and curse the said
Peter: and so not only committed the defense and custody of the said
kingdom of Sicilia unto Robert Earl of Artois, for and to the use of the
son of the said Charles, who was kept prisoner in the hands of his enemies:
but did likewise take from him the kingdom of Arragon, which he possessed and
enjoyed by patrimony, and did give the same kingdom of Arragon unto Charles,
Earl of Valois, and son to Philippe the French King.

And did not Pope Bonifacius the eight in like manner curse Philippe the French
King, and gave his kingdom to the Emperor Albertus, by authority and gift of
the holy and catholic Church of Rome: and that, Philip king of France.
because the said Philippe would not acknowledge, accept, and receive the Pope
of Rome, for his superior: In so much that the foresaid king of France was
forced (of necessity) to send out secretly under the government of Sarra
Colomna, Read the Cronicles of France and Carrion.
three or four hundred horsemen, who in the night, took the Pope prisoner at
Anagnia, where he was at that time resident, and so brought him to Rome as
prisoner: where (within four and twenty days after) he died like a beast,
as by a common proverb (which hereafter shall be more expreslie set forth) does
appear. Alexander. 7. These are the words specified in the Bull of Pope
Alexand. grant^d for the same in anno 1943. the 4. of May: which Bull is set
forth by Francis. Lope^ de Gomora, in his hist. of Ind^


We have likewise seen not long ago, that Pope Alexander the seventh, did
give unto Ferdinando king of Castile, and grand father unto the Emperor
Charles the fifth, all the countries of the new Indians, which lie Westwarde
from Spain, in the Ocean Seas: and that in such order and manner as by the Bull
is specified, Motu proprio, that is to say, Of his own mere motion, and
being not thereunto required: but much rather, De mera liberalitate, and ex
certa scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, that is to say, Of
mere liberality, and an assured knowledge, and by full power Apostolical.

In so much that the King of Peru, called Atabaliba, This history you shall
find written by the said Francisco Lopes de Gomora in the histories of the
Indians, in the 113. chapi^.
who being overcome by the Spaniardes in a battle, said (very unwisely)
That he did not esteem the Pope, saying that he would give away to another
that which was none of his own. For Friar Vincent Valuerda, had let him
plainly understand, out of his Breuiarie or Portesse, That Christ the Son
of GOD did at his departing out of this world, appoint and leave the Pope of
Rome for his Liefetenant, with power and authority, to give and distribute all
kingdoms, at his will and pleasure. And that the Pope of Rome had given all
his country of Peru, and the new Indians to the King of Spain.

And likewise, in the year of our Lord, 1515. Leo 10. would have given Frances
the French king (who was then at Bolonia in Italy, and that to make
confederacy and league with him) the whole Empire of Constantinople. Leo. 10.
does give away an Empire.
But the king giving him worthy thanks, would not accept the gift, unless
he would put him in possession of it, which our holy father the Pope had no
mind to do, because it would have cost him a great deal more money than the
sealing of his Bulls. And not long before this, about the year of our Lord.
1466. Pope Paul 2. had deposed by sentence George the natural king of Boemia,
from his said kingdom, Pope Paul. 2. frankely did give away the kingdom of
Boemia, but upon mad conditions.
and given the same to the Dukes of Germany: marie with this condition, that
they should go and take it perforce, at their own cost and charges: in which
attempt they lost above an hundred thousand men, both horsemen and footmen,
and yet did prevail very little. For such presents and gifts, are of the
nature of his Bishoprikes of Jerusalem, and other towns in Turkey, which he
gives to this man and that man, whereof the Bishops never enjoy any more, but
the bare title, which they have well wrapped up in a Bull of a sheep skin
surely sealed. And if they be not therewithal content, they may go seek
further at their own co^t and peril. And yet will our holy father have
homage and reward for it, The Pope chief Lord of Naples.
although it have cost him never a penie. Of the like to this, we see daily
examples, as the kings of Sicilia, and Naples, must every year (upon S.
Peter's day,) do homage unto him, and acknowledge him for their chief Lord: and
for testimony of the same, they present him with a white hackney, The Pope
chief Lord of England.
well trapped with rich furniture, with thousands of ducates besides: yea, the
kingdom of England was a great while in subjection, Platina in the life of
Alexander 3.
and at the disposition of the Pope. For the before written Pope Alexander 3.
did bring one king to that point, about the year of our Lord 1181. And that
under pretense that Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canturburie, was by the kings
consent slain. And further, long before that, in the year 740. a certain king
of England called Inas, did make the whole Island tributarie to the Pope of
Rome: insomuch that the Popes had always their Collectors and Receivers in
Englan^, to gather up and receive the Peter peace, till such time as it was
forbidden by king Henry 8.

But to what purpose should I so particularly name the kings of England,
Naples, and Sicilia, seeing that all Kings and Emperors, throughout the whole
world, are bound to kiss with great reverence the Popes holy feet? Is not
that a sufficient proof, that he has full power and jurisdiction over them
all? And good reason it should so be. For by him Kings do reign, and by him
Judges execute the law: as it is written by Solomon in his Proverbs. Chap. 8.
For that which he writes there, of the eternal wisdom of God, that is by our
mother the holy Catholic Church, understood and set forth concerning the
Pope of Rome. Glos and Panormitanus, upon the Clementines, lib. 5. tit. ad
nostram. This is plainly set forth and at large in the book called Ceremoniae
Ecclesiae Romanae, in the 2. tit. of the first book ff. ordo process. and
further in the 3. ff. de prima lotion^ manuum.
As plainly does appear by the gloss upon the Clementines, and by
Panormitanus likewise.

And therefore, whenever the Popes holiness is disposed to ride on
horseback, then must the Emperor or King which is present, hold his stirrup,
and after for a while lead the horse by the bridle in his hand. And always
when the Pope will be carried in a chair, then is the Emperor or King whosoever
it be, bound of duty, to bow down his neck, and to take the chair up upon
his shoulders. And likewise when the Pope goes to dinner, the duty of the
Emperor or King, is to serve him with water wherewith to wash his holy hands,
and he must be sure to attend at the table, till the first course be served.

Clem. vnica de iureiuran^o* ve^s. postqu^m ^bi. and in. ff. Cer^um. and the
same is set forth likewise by Restaurus Casta^dus in tract. de imperatore.
quaest. 36. and the form of the truth is set forth in cap. Tib^ domine.
did. 63. This you shall find in the book called Ceremoniale eccl. in the
first tit. of the.3. book.
For a final end, he must serve the Pope even as a servant does serve his
master: yea, and I pray you wherefore should he not, see^ng he has taken and
made his oath solemnly of obedience and fidelity to the Pope, as is plainly
set forth in the Popes laws? And yet is not the Pope bound in any point or
jot to him, nor to any other earthly creature, unless he will sometime of
special grace, rise out of his seat to let the Emperor kiss him kindly.
Otherwise, all men living are bound of duty, as soon as they come within
his presence, to fall three times down upon their knees, and then to kiss his
feet. And wheresoever he passes by, there they must all fall down upon their
knees, and worship him: otherwise they are like to eat stock^ish, which his
Guard will give them largely: yea, and that without Butter. And therefore do
they cry, Abasso, Abasso, This does Barbazia a Catholic Doctor set forth
thus, and is so understood of the Canonistes.
which is as much to say as, Down upon your knees. Which thing I assure you is
most duetifull, and established by plain Scripture: for that it is written
Psalm 8. Thou have put all things under his feet, sheep and oxen: yea, and
the beasts of the field: which is to be understood, Ca. Cuncta per mu^ d^m. 9.
qua^s^* 3 and the gloss in the chap. ad apostolicae de sententia and ^e Indie.
in 6 and so thorough. in quaest. 23.32.45.46.
Christen men, Jews, Turks, and Moors. And the fowls of the air, that is,
The Saints departed. And the fishes in the sea, that is, The souls which lie
in Purgatory. Insomuch that there is nothing, but it is made subject unto him.
For he only is Lord over all the world, and the world is properly his, so
proved by the plain text. Psalm. 23. The earth with all her plentiousnesse, is
the Lords, as our mother the holy Church has interpreted it, and so
concluded. For which cause, he may (as Antonius de Rosellis does testify) take
from one whatsoever he will, Antonius de Rosellis in. tincta. de conciliis.
and give to another what he list. And this is that which Cardinali Poole
(being the Popes lieftenant at the council of Trent) did likewise defend and
establish by Scriptures, Regi^aldus Polu^ in the book which he wrote upon the
councelles of Trent.
even by the very words of Christ saying, That he would make of Peter a
fisher of men. Which is in this sense to be understood, according to the
interpretation of the holy Church of Rome, That he would drive al Emperors
and Kings: yea, all people of the world, into the Popes net, so that he might
sees them, broyle them, or fry them in a pan, even as his holiness should
think best to use and order them.

2. Cor. 4.4. John 12.31.14.30.26.11.
And although Paul did speak of an other, which should be the God of this
world: and that Christ does like^ise name the same, The Duke, or Lord of
this world, Ephe. 2.2.
meaning the Tempter which showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of the same, saying unto him, All these will I give thee, Matthew. 4.9.
Luke. 4.6.
if thou will fall down, and worship me: for they are mine, and I may bestow
them upon whom soever I will. Yet does not all that make any thing against
our purpose: for they twain, to wit, the Pope and he, are both as one, and
agree like two heads in one hoode: so that there can no gealousie grow
thereby. For as the Scripture says, and bears witness: The dragon has
rendered up and given to the beast with seven heads all his power, Apocal.
13.2.
his seat, and authority. Now what conditions are made bet(...)ene them, I
wot not, but let them alone with that matter, they will agree well enough.
Thus much then in effect touching all that which Daniel and Paul did say and
prophecy in the Scriptures before specified, is thoroughly fulfilled in the
Pope of Rome: and therewithal likewise, that thing whereo^ John speaks in
the Apocalypse, that The city which is builded upon seven mountains or hills,
Apocal. 17.^. And this is by (...) of the city of Rome* in h^s book against
the Jews, and in the (...) ^oke against Man on Lacta^t* (...). in the (...).
Read l^kewise the epistle of ^eo ^liensis. aduersus Paschalem, and in the 2.
book of Councels. fo. 809.
(which out of doubt is the City of Rome, as Tertullianus, Lactantius,
Hieronymus, and all the old fathers have testified, and as the situation and
state of the city it self does make apparent) shall receive a marvelous
power and authority (specially of the same whom Paul calls, The God of
this world, and whom Christ calls, The duke or Prince of this world, and whom
John calls, The dragon:) insomuch that all kings and princes of the earth
shall pray unto him, and he shall be trimmed and decked with gold, silver,
pearls, and all rich and precious jewels, as you may plainly see in our holy
father the Pope of Rome, with all his Cardinals, who are deftly decked up
with all costly jewels like Puppets, And he shall receive a mouth speaking
great and wonderful things, so that all the world shall say, Who is like unto
him? Even after the same sort, as you see the Pope give forth strange things
touching his own person, and does attribute to himself a certain power and
authority above all kings, princes, and angels in heaven: yea, even above the
son of God, and (which more is) above God himself. Insomuch that, upon this
consideration, our dear mother the holy Church has concluded, that he
should be called Papa, as though men should say Pape, Papa. pape.
which is as much to say in our language, as a wonderful shreeke or hem in
derision. For it is a word which does signify a monstrous wondering, for
because that he is a wonderful monstrous and strange beast. The gloss upon
the preface of the Clementines upon the chapter Quoniam. upon the word pape
and here he does allege a Poet, who^ he names Angelicus, which is to say an
Angel or an Angelical Poet.
Insomuch that one of his own Poets does call him Papa stupor mundi, that is
to say, The wonder or mocking stock of the world. Even as if a man should
say, Tushe, who is to be compared to him? So that it is most apparauntly to be
seen, that Saint John in his Apocalypse does as it were, even point to him,
with his finger, and that Daniel and Paul do in many places of the Scripture,
paint him plainly out in all his feathers. In so much then that these
Heretics are far ouerseen^, when as they will say, That the Scripture does
not make any mention of the Pope of Rome, considering that we have proved all
his authority to be grounded upon the Scripture, in such order, as there is
nothing to be said against it.

The xi. Chapter. Wherein is set forth, how that no Prieste^ nor spiritual
persons are subject or under the jurisdiction, or power of the temporal
Magistrates or Officers.
Now, let us come to speak of the other Priests and spiritual persons, who
are thoroughly furnished in all points with their Officials, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Vicars, Inquisitours, Sumners, The spirituality not ^n any
subjection to any temporal Magistrate nor Officer.
Prisons, Places and Instruments for punishment: so as they are not in any
point subject to any temporal Officer or Magistrate. Neither may any of them
have any their causes or questions debated or determined, before any
temporal Judge or Officer, so far as they have shaven crowns, For the mark
or priestly character, read Thomas de Aquino* Scotus, and other scholemen and
then join therew^th all that which John writes in his R^uelation, touching the
same character.
which is the right mark and character of the city with seven mountains,
whereof Saint John makes mention in the Apocalypse. And the same is likewise to
be proved by plain textes of the holy scripture.

And for the first, it is written, That when as Lot went about to dissuade the
wilful Sodomites from their abominable acts, they said unto him: Thou art
come hither among us, and art but a stranger here: What have thou to do, for
to take upon thee to correct and judge us? Out of this Text, has our mother
the holy Church of Rome finally concluded, C^p. nullus clericus. 11. quaest. 1.
that the Priests may not be judged nor punished by temporal Magistrates and
Rulers: understanding the matter thus, That the Priests are undoubtedly right
Sodomites, Priests right Sodomites.
Burgesses borne, and masters of this world by inheritance: considering that
they are made by the Pope, to whom the world does absol^tely apperteine: and
that the temporal Magistrates and Officers, are but as strangers: who have
but (as it were) the government of the world by lease, at the hands of the
Pope, and his Priests. And therefore it does not become them for to rule or
punish the native Burgesses of Sodom, and Gomorra, that is to say, the Priests
and Spirituality. Anacletus in his Epistle of the sorowfulnesse of the Bishops'
and their innocence or complaint, in the book^ of the decrees, ^ap* lege^
ecclesiarum, causa. 3. quaest. 6.
For so has the Pope Anacletus determined and set forth in his Deccetals,
which interpretation of his, is (by our dear mother the holy Church) allowed
for good, and registered in the book of their decrees for an article of our
faith.

Secondarily, the same is proved by a special text out of the Gospel, where
it is written, That Christ did drive or chase the buiers and sellers out of the
Temple with a whippe, or scourge. For thereby it is apparent, This you shall
find in the 2. epistle of Anacletus, of the admission of Bishops and
Archbishops. It is likewise in the Decades cap. accusatio quoque causa. 2.
quaest. 7. and in the decrees Iuonis in the 4. book^
that the Priests or Spirituality, may not by any means be punished by any
temporal Officer, as is concluded by the forename^ Anacletus, and the holy
Church of Rome: understanding the matter thus, That the Priests are to be
esteemed as the very changers and sellers in the Church, who do utter their
merchandise so dear, that the sight of them (many times) will stand a man
dearer, than the best ware that the Habardashers of Paris and Lions have in
their shoppes. And although other chaungers of money, and usurers, did enjoy
the benefits of the like privilege, as well as the Priests, to wit, that
they were with the same whipping driven out of the temple: yea, and although
dogs be sometime used after the same manner: yet, considering that the Priests
are my white sons, and must have somewhat the more preeminence and
advantage, specially for that their merchaundize are of more estimation than
the rest, and their incense of better smell than the incense that the dogs
smother abroad in the Church. Insomuch that the holy Church of Rome does
understand this by the priests only, to wit, that temporal Magistrates or
Officers, shall have no jurisdiction over them, considering well, that Christ
had them in such estimation as he himself only would whippe them out of the
Church. And yet has she more strongly established the same, by the plain
Text of the Prophet David, where it is written, Psalm. 81.1.6. This proceeds
forth after, in the said epistle of Anacletus.
God stood in the midst of the Gods, that is to say, of Priests and Prelates.
Again, I have said, All you are Gods. Now truth it is, that the whole Psalm
does (after the letter) speak of Kings and Governors of this world: yet
notwithstanding, our dear mother the holy Church, has understood the same
wholly of the Priests and Spirituality, according to the spirit, and that
specially by reason of six weighty causes: to wit:

First, because the whole text does conclude, as well, or rather much better,
upon the Priests, than upon any other: for it is written, That will not
understand, but will walk in darkness, and set the whole world in a rore. In
the 5. verse of the said Psalm.
Which words seem to conclude so well upon Priests and Bishops, as though
they had been spoken only to them.

Now secondly, the Priests are of much more estimation, and better, than any
Kings, This is set out with plain words in the cap. Duo sunt. did. 69. and
in the cap. Sacerdo^ did. 95. and cap. Quis dubitat. did. 96.
or Princes: yea, they do excel them as far as Lead does Gold: and therefore
must Emperors bow down their heads under the knees of the Popes: as is
plainly set forth by the holy father Pope Gelasius, writing unto the Emperor
Anastasius, and registered in the decrees. Yea, they are the light of the world,
Fathers and Masters to all men: so that they deserve much better to be called
Gods, than either Kings or other Rulers do or can deserve.

Thirdly, the Priests are of more worthiness and estimation than Angels.
Guido de monte Rocher in his Ench^i^idion Sacerdotum. Rubr. de sacramento
eucha. cap. 2.
For (as our dear mother the holy Church of Rome has very well concluded)
an Angel may not sing nor say Mass: for that he has not the priestly
character, which is to be understood, because he has not the mark and
token. And it is plainly written: That no man may buie or sell, Apoc. 13.17.
unless he have the character or the mark, or else the name of the beast.

Now, as touching the fourth cause, you must understand, that all Priests are
fellow partners (in some case) with our holy Father the Pope, who is not only
a man, but a God on earth. Which considered, they must needs by kindred be
partakers of his Godhead: as it is written, That commonly a man grows like
him, with whom he is conversant. And again, He that medleth with pitch, some
part of it will cleave to him. And therefore such as be conu^rsant with God on
earth, must needs be godly.

Fifthly, it is great reason they should be called Gods, seeing that they
themselves can make God: and are (as we have taught before) creatours of the
Creator. And now there is a perpetual and infallible rule amongst the
Doctors of Louen, which can not fail, for that it is fetched out of their
master Aristotle, Stella clerico^^^ read the 10. cap. of the 2. part.
and it is this: Propter quod vnumquodque tal^ est, illud ipsum magis est tale*
that is to say, Whenever any thing does get any virtue or estimation out
of the power, or by the gift of an other: the same by whom he does receive
that worthiness or virtue, must needs have very much more like virtue in
himself.

Seeing then, that by the power and knowledge of the Priest, a piece of bread
may be made God, how much rather then are the Priests themselves Gods? For it
is written in the holy scripture, Iere. 16.20*
That no man in this world can make any Gods: Ergo, then must the Priests of
necessity be more than men, seeing they do daily make God himself.

Now sixthly, the common Latin text, which is received in the holy Church of
Rome, and by the Council of Trent allowed for good and credible, does say
thus, That God did stand in the Synagogue of the Gods. Which may very well be
applied to the Priests, considering that they also have their Synagogues, like
as the Jews have had heretofore. And furthermore, it is most certain, that
Christ stood in the midst of the Priests and Prelates, at such time as
Annas and Caiphas di^ accuse him, and sought witnesses against him, to put him
to death. Which manner of doing, our Priests of the holy Church of Rome, do
very lively counterfeite. Whereby it is plain to be understood, that they
are the Gods in the Synagogue, amongst whom the Lord stood, and does yet
(by his elect) daily stand to be condemned to death. So that our dear mother
the holy Church of Rome, has very aptly applied this Text unto them, and so
concluded, That they being Gods, can in no wise be subject unto the judgment
or correction of any earthly man.

Besides this, she does bring forth many witnesses, even by heaps, all which
are fetched out of holy Scripture: as specially, where Saint Luke says, That
God shall aduenge his elect. Luke. 18*
It is likewise written in the Psalms: Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs,
Psalm. 194.2.
God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self, etc. Also, the Apostle Paul
says, What art thou that iudgest an other man's servant? And in the same
place, Romans 14.14. Romans 14.13.
Let us not therefore judge one an other any more, but judge this rather, that
no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. And
the Lord says by his Prophet Zachary: For, Zachar. 2.8.
who so touches you, shall touch the apple of his own eye.

Are not these honest, goodly, and very strong witnesses, such as can not be
disproued? And do they not plainly set forth that the Priests can not be
under subjection to any temporal jurisdiction? At least, so far as men will
allow and stick unto the exposition of the holy Church of Rome: without having
any respect to that which these Heretics bring in: for they would allege all
these witnesses, directly against the Priests and Spirituality, and to their
reproach and detriment. But now is there one special text to be brought in
and alleged, against the which arises no objection, to wit, where Christ
says, Math. 8.20. Luke. 9.5.8.
Foxes have their dens, and the Fowls of the air have their nestes, but the
Son of man has not whereon to lay his head. These Heretics may well enough
sloppe their ears at th^s: for out of this does our dear mother conclude
very strongly, That those which will blame or find any fault with the
Priests, are they whom Christ here calls Foxes. And to the corroboration and
strengthening of the same, she brings forth the text of Solomon, where he
says: He that has dug the pit, shall fall into it him self. Again,
The stone is heavy, and the sand is weighty, but the wrath of a fool does
pass both. Consider, do not these agree in one marvelous well? It seems
they are both painted with one pencill. In sum, all her decrees and
ordinances are full of such apt textes and sentences of scripture, which she
can wrest and wring marvelous finely for her purpose: so that there is not
one stitche amiss. For, when as the Scripture speaks of Bruggesse, she
applies that to Ghent: and if the Scripture speak of a Catte, she will bring
in a Ducke.

For a final end and conclusion, she can make of a Cow a Windmill: and of a
Windmill a Cow. And therefore she can not lack, but does always find
witnesses enough out of holy Scripture, to prove all her matters substantial
and good.

The xii. Chapter. Which proves by Scripture, that Priests, and all
Spiritual men, ought to be rich.
Now, that the Priests and all Spirituality, Spiritual persons ought to be
rich.
together with our holy father the Pope, ought to be rich and wealthy, that
is to be found set forth by the Scripture likewise. For the noble and
excellent Cardinal Poole, of late the Popes Liefetenant in the Council of
Trent, In the book that he made of the council of Trent.
did cause the text of Luke (before alleged) to serve for that purpose, where
Christ says: You do now catch fish, but you shall from hence forth catch
men. Luke. 15.10.
For that (said he) was a prophecy which was not yet accomplished in the time
of the Apostles, when as Paul said: That there were but a few rich men in the
Congregation of Christ: but the same (said he) was first fulfilled and
accomplished about three hundred years after, to wit, at such time (men say)
as the Emperor Constantine did courteously give unto Pope Syluester, Ca.
Constantin.
a great portion of the Empire of Rome, or rather (as he terms it) did give
again and restore: as is apparent by the copy of the writing, which stands
entered in the book of Decrees verbatim.

True it is, that Laurentius Valla, and many other learned men, did mock and
jest at this writing, and likewise do plainly prove, as well by diverse
histories, as by the same writing it self, that it is but a counterfeited
writing, and that so grossly done, that a Calfe with one eye may perceive it.
But I will leave that to the Doctors of Louen, to dispute upon, when they are
set under the roof, with a Gallon of good Rennish wine, for they can not away
with Pittaw: as for us, whether it be a lie or a true tale, it is all one: but
thus much there is of the matter, that our holy father the Pope is in
possession, and does enjoy the lands which S. Peter left unto him by
testament: by the same token it is called, Patrimonium S. Petri, that is, Saint
Peter's patrimony* He is likewise in possession of the rich jewels and bags
of the holy Sea of Rome, and of the precious triple crown, and other rich and
costly pieces: for all the Bishops must swear, In the oath which they take
before they be admitted Bishops.
that they shall (to the uttermost of their power) help to keep and augment
the said iewelles, and that Patrimony. But what needs all this? Paul him
self says, That Bishops must keep hospitality, and be harborous. And then
is it great reason* that their purses should be well filled, for to enterteine
Kings and Princes, and to make them great cheer. This is the argument of
Eckius in his Enchei^id.
For how should they else bake good cakes, if they have neither fire nor fat?
I assure you, if they had not that preeminence and advantage, they would not
buy Bishoprikes so dear, neither would they pay thirty thousand Ducates for a
Pallium, if they must afterward say with Peter, Aurum and argentum non est
mihi: I have neither silver nor gold. But that is now all clean turned, and
the chance is changed: therefore must the Priests and Prelates now a days
be rich, and possess the goods of the world, considering that their father
and master the Pope, is Lord of the whole world: as we have sufficiently
proved in the 11. and 12. Chapters before.

The xiii. Chapter. Wherein is set forth by the Scripture, the praying to
images.
Now will we treat a while of the praying to images, To pray to images.
and see with what Scriptures it is defended. For that second holy Council of
Nice, Read the first chap. of the 4. part. fol. 4.
is (without doubt) marvelous well furnished of excellent scriptures, which
serve as fit for that purpose, as Roses for a swine stie. But we will only
choose out and set forth the principal and most meet to serve our turn, to
the intent that every man may judge by those, what all the rest are. Among
other they have fetched out of the old testament, That GOD did shape man to
his own likeness: In the Epistle of Pope Adrian, read and accepted in the
counsel of Nice, act 2. read the 2. book of the counsel. fol. 482. a. b.
act. 2. page 486.
and thereupon concluded, That men may very well have images. Item, that God
has divided the light from the darkness, and therefore (says Agapius, that
most holy Bishop of Caesarea) I accept images gladly, and cursed be all
they, which are of other opinion. Aha, my friends! How like you this gear?
And after that is the writing of Adrian, the Pope of Rome read: wherein he
says, That James did pray to Joseph's staff, or else to Joseph him self. Act.
2. Synod Nicaenae page 480.
Then (I pray you) wherefore should not we pray to images? For although that
Heretics do herein so cry out with the Hebrewe text, which says, That he
prayed to God, leaning upon his bed, or upon a staff, (for it may be taken
both ways) yet notwithstanding it is sufficient for us, that our dear mother
the holy Church has understood it otherwise: Council. Nicen. of Irene.
and that all the forked Bishops which were assembled at Nice, have otherwise
interpreted it.

For they (you must understand) could not miss, nor err, seeing they were
assembled, inspired, and governed by the holy ghost of the Empress Irene:
whose spirit was so zealouslie addicted unto the worshipping of images, that
she did put out her sons eyes, who was the right and natural Emperor, and
so kept him shut up in prison, to the end that she might have the rule and
government, reign as Queen all alone, and set up and extol images,
according to her own mind.

Wherefore should not we then believe this holy Ghost? Whereas he has declared
by the mouths of the Bishops, that there was a little proper fellow carved out
upon the end of Joseph's staff, as you see upon the staves that children and
fools do ride upon: yea, and that the same pretty fellow was by Jacob
worshipped?

^^tione 5. synod. Nicaena, and page 498.
Then do they further allege this ^ext: The souls of the just, are in the
hands of the Lord. Again, God is marvelous in his Saints. For by these
Saints do they understand nothing else, but dumb Saints or images, which
stand in the church: for that it is written in an other place: The Saints
which are upon the earth. Item, Noah did set up one altar unto God: and Abraham
likewise, with many other mo. And it is good to be thought, that they would
not set up any altars without goodly images of our Lady, of Saint
Christopher, and of S. Anthonies swine, and such like, to stand upon the
altars. For an altar without Saints, is like a Cow without a tail, or a Turd
without Sugar.

^ctio. 4. page 504. ^.
Again, Moses did make the Propitiatorium, which is the round chest of pure
gold, and did by Gods commandment, se^ two Cherubims upon it. And wherefore
then should we not set images upon our altars, according to the commandment
of the holy Church? For, whereas the Heretics will say, that these two
Cherubims, and the golden chest, were covered and hid, so that no man could
see them, much less pray unto them: to that our dear mother the holy Church
of Rome does answer, that they can do so likewise. For the whole Lent
through, they do cause their images, Images covered with blewe cloth.
to look through a blewe cloth, and play bo peep: and so they continue till
Easter: then come the Priests and play their pa^tes, and so bid Coppin out
of a corner, and show his face like a man. So then, these Heretics have no
cause to pra^e and say, That our images are never hid or covered.

Again, our holy fathers say, A^^io 3. synod. Nicaen. pa. 498.
that notwithstanding the Cherubims were kept close, so that no man might see
them, for that no man might enter into that holy place, but only the hi^
Priest: and he but once a year: yet did not the Jews forbear to pray
continually to the same. For so have the fathers at the same Council
concluded out of their own heads.

Now thirdly, the holy fathers say, That seeing images may be had secretly,
wherefore should we not (much rather) have them openly to pray to them? For
notwithstanding that God has forbidden it, yet he must be given otherwise to
understand the matter: for he was not yet informed, that images are the books
of the Lay people, till such time as Pope Gregory came, and ^aught it for a
perfect doctrine. But now, every man does know, that books must be laid
upon a deske, that every man may read on them, and are not to be cast
behind a bank, or in a corner. For it is plainly written, that a candle is
not to be set under a bushel, but in a candlestick, that every man may be
lighted thereby: In the epistle of Adrian to the synod. act. 2. fol. 481.
which the holy fathers do likewise understand by the images, to wit, that
they must stand on high pranking upon the altars, and so be devoutly prayed
unto by the common sort.

Besides all this, they bring forth, that Moses did set up a brazen Serpent
in the wilderness, The brazen serpent.
by Gods commandment, to the intent that all such as should look thereupon,
might be healed of the biting of the venomous serpents. For upon that text
of scripture they say thus: What folly and madness should it then be of us,
that we should yet doubt, whether all such as look upon the image of Christ,
the image of our Lady, and of all other holy Saints, shall become holy, and
shall likewise be healed of all diseases?

Which thing is likewise by the holy father Pope Adrian, most faithfully
assured with Bull and Seal: In the foresaid epis^le sent to the fathers of the
Council.
so as there is no further doubt to be made in that matter: the rather, for
that this is to be seen evidently at Halle, a town in Brabant, where so
many ^rutches of lame men, and so many painted tables are hanging, of such as
have been so well and perfectly healed of their diseases, that the most part
of those which hang there, never feel any pain or grief, neither in the
head, nor in the bladder. I speak not of so many wives, as have been
conceived with child, after that they had once had our holy and blessed
Ladies girdle tied about their middles.

And now of late it chanced in Holland, That a poor woman with a very great
belly came very devoutly, to seek our blessed Lady of Heukelem, and when
she had given her offering, she returned home again, A miracle.
and left her great belly behind her. Yea, there was a blind Gentleman came
out of France, to Saint Job of Wesemale in pilgrimage, to recover his sight
again, which he had lost by Saint Jobs disease: and after he had well ended
his business, he cried to his servant in French, Ie voy, which the Doctors
of Louen did understand, not to be, that he would be gone, but that he did
see. In so much that the same is written, In the table of S. Georges miracles.
and hanged up upon a table in the Church for a great miracle. And it is to
be credibly believed, that he did see as well without spectacles, as with a
candle.

I forbear to speak of the great miracles which the holy and mighty blessed
Ladies at Laureto in Italy, and Montferrato in Spain do: and of Saint James
of Compostella, and Saint Catharina of Scena, and such other like holy he
Saints, and she Saints: for that is not meat for every man's mouth: we
must content our selves with courser meats, and keep our mouths close from
such dainty dishes. Yet notwithstanding, if there were a plompe Hollander, or
a Malle Brabander, or a Botte Flemming that had a stomache or appetite to such
lordly fare, and would go take upon him a pilgrimage for a wager, to come
again within a certain time, he may do so well enough, and so go and
straw his lust abroad amongst the holy and blessed Ladies of Spain and
Italy, and see what great miracles they can do more, than our Ladies can do
here.

He might perhaps speed as well as a good honest man of Paris, who could
have no children by his wife, and in hope of help, did vow diverse
pilgrimages: And first he went to seek Saint James at Compostella, and from
thence he went to Rome to visit the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul: and then
on forward to our holy and blessed Lady of Laureto, and from thence to
Jerusalem: and last of all, to Saint Catharine of Scena: in fine so as he was
about a three years from home: And then when he came home again, he found
his wife merry, and had in the mean space gotten three pretty children, with
help of the good Saints, which he so devoutly had sought.

Was not this now a great miracle? Therefore, who soever has a desire to go
from home, and seek Saints, he may set forward, when soeuex he will, the
wagon stands ready.

And now will we proceed to our matter again, and camp with these
Heretics, who mock and jest with these our holy fathers of the foresaid
Council, because they bring in and allege an example of the brazen serpent,
to establishe their images, by saying, That the same was a figure in the old
Testament, pointing to Christ, and was set up by GOD his special
commandment: but unto this we will answer them, That they have eaten
stockfish, and know not what does belong to a pregnant and ripe wit: for
otherwise, can they not perceive, that our images are figures likewise, as well
of Christ, as of his dear mother, grandmother, and other holy he Saints and
she Saints: yea, and that are by special commandment of our holy father
the Pope, and the holy Church set forth. But yet for all this, these dull
Heretics go on forward with their folly, saying, That the good King Ezechias
did break down and burn to powder, Brazen serpent burnt. 2. Reg. 18.4.
the same brazen serpent, as soon as ever he saw and did perceive, that the
people began to cense and honor it, in like manner as the holy Church of
Rome does now honor and worship her Saints. And those mad brained fellows
do thereupon conclude, that we ought likewise even so to burn our images.
But we deny that flatly: for that was an other matter, considering that our
images are no serpents, as that was.

It is very true, that we do as well cense to Saint Margaret, Saint Georges
dragon, and Saint Anthonies hogs, as to the Saints themselves, and pray to the
one as well as to the other, although those are not much better than serpents:
but that now is otherwise to be considered, for it is not done in honor of the
dragons, but of the Saint which they stand by: as is well proved by a certain
Doctor of Louen, who going out of the porche of the graie Friars, at Louen did
put off his bonnet before the image of Pilate, which stands there, and
suddenly turning back again, cried with a loud voice: Non tibi Pilate, sed
Christo, as though he would have said: As for thee Pilate, thou art but a
varlot: what do thou think? I did not put off my bonnet to thee, but to that
Christ, with whom thou art dealing.

Now consider, even so stands the matter with our Dragons, and with S.
Anthonies hogs. They get many times offerings and wax candles, and are often
times kissed for neighborhood, for the good Saint sake by whom they stand: but
they do not take it upon them selves, no more then a dumb stock or block.
Therefore remains this determination of the holy fathers of the said Council,
always fast and ratified, to wit, That the holy Church must have images:
seeing that the Jews had a brazen serpent. This is likewise maintained with
many other goodly testimonies, as specially with that which the prophet David
says in the 96. psalm, There is praise and honor before his face. Psalm. 96.
Item, I love the cituatio^ of thine house. Psalm. 28.8.
For by these follows, that the Churches must be trimmed up with goodly
images. Item, O Lord, I seek thy countenance, Psalm. 27.8.
Item, O Lord, the rich shall pray before thy face. Item, Psalm. 4.7.
Let the light of thy countenance shine upon us. For out of these textes do
they conclude, that men ought to have our Lords visage goodly painted, and to
pray to it. And for that cause it is, that every year at Rome upon good
Friday, the holy Veronica, which is an old over worn cloute, whereon they say
our Lords face is painted, which they pray unto with great devotion. And the
common people cry alowde, Misericordia, misericordia, that is, Mercy, mercy.
The like is done also at Besanson in Burgonia, and in many other places. For
this same holy fisnomie of the Veronica, was set upon good ground, and is
therefore so well sp^^ung up, and in such plenty, that there are to be found
a number of them, all which do work great miracles.

And besides this, they bring forth these testimonies, to wit, that the
belief comes not only by hearing, but likewise by sight: for that John
says, Like as we have heard, 2. John. 1.1. Number. 15.38. Deuteronomy. 6.8. Matthew. 23.4.
so have we likewise seen. Item, That the Jews did wear broad borders upon
their clothes: Ergo, so must we likewise have images in the church: with many
such other like proofs, which close up together as fit as a spindle upon a
flesh pot. So now, when any man has a desire to see these goodly testimonies,
let him read over the whole proceeding of the said Council of Nice, as it is
set forth in the second book of Councels, or else he may read another
little book, which was set forth about the same time, in the name of the
Emperor Carolus magnus, touching the same Council: he shall therein rejoice
his spirits, with reading of all those goodly, copious, and fine allegations,
brought out and alleged by those holy fathers, to that end and purpose: Read
the council of Nice. act. 4. fol. 521. There does the Monk Theodosius declare
these pleasant histories of the dream of Constantine, and of the waren image
of Cosmus and Damianus.
and with the dreams of Constantine, who (to heal his leprosy) had shed
the blood of young innocent children, and was for the same comforted by Peter
and Paul, in his dreams. And there you shall find also, a great many of
goodly and notable miracles done by images, taken out of the book of Cosmus,
and Damianus, and out of the book of Sophronius, of the miracles of Saints,
and other such like books, which those holy fathers caused there to be read
and heard, and by their judgments established them, and allowed them for
good. So as there is no more doubts to be put in them, than upon the golden
Legende, which stands authentike in the Mass book. And to the end that men
shall have the more desire to read them, I will bring forth here one example
out of them, serving greatly for our purpose: to the end you may perceive by
the nest, what birds are within it.

There was a lively holy Monk, This pretty jest was read in the council of
Nicaen by the Monk Stephanus, out of the book of Sophronius: read of the 2.
book of the councels in the 2. council of Nicaen. act. 4. fo. 520. ad
which was continually tempted and troubled with a devil, even till his old
days: and when in the end he began to wax weary of it, he then did pray
the devil very friendly, that he would let him alone in quiet: whereupon
the devil did answer him, that so far as he would promise to do, and swear
to keep secret, a thing that he would command him, then he would leave
off to trouble him any more. The Monk did promise him, and took thereupon a
deep oath. Then said the devil: If thou will that I shall trouble thee no
more, then thou must not pray any more to that image: and it was an image of
our Lady, holding her child in her arms. But the Monk was more crafty than
the devil: for he went and confessed him of it the next day to the Abbot, and
the Abbot did dispense with him for his oath, upon condition, that he should
continue his praying to the image.

Is not that a fine and worthy testimony, borrowed of the devil, whereby the
holy Fathers in the foresaid Council, have wonderful strongly established
the praying unto images? Truly it is worthy to be written upon balkes and
beams, because calves shall not lick it off. And our Champion, master
Gentianus, is worthy to carry the standard, and to be crowned with a three
footed stool, seeing he dare so boldly adventure, to lay the worthiness of
that Council in the balance, against the second commandment of God, which
does sharply forbid all worshipping and praying to images: and likewise
brings in the said Council, against the Council of Eliberum, which was kept
in Spain, in the year of our Lord 1200, and was consonant and agreeable unto
the word of God.

The xiiii. Chapter. Which treats of some particular images, and painted
tables, which the Church of Rome does use, and for the establishing of the same
by the Scripture.
Now, because these Heretics are most busy with some special images,
Diverse particular images and painted tables of the holy Church.
which the holy Church of Rome do use with great devotion, and with them do
these Heretics mock and jest most of all: it is very necessary that we
prove and establish the same out of the holy scripture. Then, to begin withal,
it is not to be mocked, nor wondered at, that they in their Churches, and Mass
books, do paint the Trinity with three faces: for our mother the holy
Church, did learn that at Rome, where they were wont to paint or carue Ianus
with two faces. And then further, there is written in John, The trinity with
three faces.
That there are three in heaven which bear witness, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy ghost: and these three are one, etc. Then of necessity they must
be painted or made with three heads, or three faces, upon one neck. For
whereas these heretics say, that it is plain forbidden, to make the likeness
of God any manner of way, seeing God himself says: Thou did hear a voice
out of the bush, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
but thou saw no likeness: Therefore be well wary, This did the fathers of
the Council off Nice cut of thus: the like ^ckius, saying, that the Jews were
addicted to idolatry.
that thou make not any image after my likeness: That was spoken to the Jews
only, and is now altered through the worthy custom and usage of our dear
mother the holy Church of Rome.

And whereas the holy Church has also chosen to make the similitude of the
father, an old man, with a long gray beard: and for the son, a man hanging
on the cross: and for knowledge of the holy Ghost, a dove: that is done of
her own invention and free will. For she might as well have made a bushe, or a
flame of fire, or a cloud, to counterfeite the father: for that he did show
himself in all these likenesses, as well as in the likeness of a man, or they
might as well have made for Christ, a child in a cradle, or a man teaching and
instructing the people. And likewise for the holy Ghost, a tongue, or a flame
of fire, as well as they do a man crucified, or a dove. But therein she does
use her liberty: for that has always his course by the common rule, which
is: Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas:
Our pleasure is as we command,


Our lust for law perforce shall stand. Or according to that which the Poet
Horace says in a verse: Pictoribus atque Poetis,
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas:
Painters and Poets,
have license to measure
Their colors and verses,
even at there own pleasure.


Secondarily, Angels with wings.
whereas angels are cou^terfeited with wings, that is taken out of Esaie and
Ezekiel, who say, That the Cherubims were showed unto them in a vision with
wings. S. Micael with his balance. Read also in fol. 107.
And whereas S. Michael is made with a pair of balance in his hand, that is,
because he must wey the souls, to see whether their good works and deserts
be not heuier in weight, Romans 3.4. Galat. 4. Ephe. 2.
than their sins and of fences. For (as before we have written) the holy
church has appointed him that office, because she esteems it a sure article,
that none can be saved by the merits, blood and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ only, Antonine part. 3. tit. ^4. cap. 20 and par 4. tit. 9. cap. 7.
Bonauentura in ^ent. lib. 4 d^st. 15. Barnard. Rosetus in sermo. ^0.

Petrus Sotus in assertione Ca^l^o. de bonis ^peribu^* and all other Catholic
writers. 2. Cor. 3.7. Exodus 34.30.35.

Moses with horns.


yet Paul does so teach: but every man must (by his own good works and
deserts) be weyed out and saved, making full satisfaction thereby, of his
sins and offenses.

After this now, where Moses is painted with horns, is upon this occasion. For
that it is written, to wit, that the face of Moses did shine (as Paul
himself does set it forth) that has the common translation of the holy
Church expounded thus, That Moses had horns, for that he should be as it were
a figure of our Bishops, which now likewise we are two horns.

And whereas they make of the three wise men, The three Kings.
that came out of the East, three Kings, and one of those as black as pitch,
like a Morian, that is fetched out of the words of David, Psalm. 72.10.
or Solomon, saying: Kings shall come out of the Moors land, to worship
Christ. For this has the holy Church interpreted, to be spoken by the three
wise men. And although the Morians land, lay much more to the West of Jury,
than to the East, from whence the wise men came, that is of no importance: for
the holy Church can alter the lying and situation of the lands, and make of
the West the East.

Again, The Ox and the Ass by the cribbe.
whereas they have likewise set an Ox and an Ass by the cribbe of their little
Jesus, which do warm him with their breath: that is grounded upon the plain
Text of Esaie, who says, The Ox does know his masters will, Esaie 1.3.
and an Ass the cribbe of his master: but the people of Israel will
understand nothing at all, etc. Yea, and it may be a very good allusion, that
by the Ox, the Bishops, Abbattes, and Prelates, are understood, because they
wear horns also, like an Ox, and can roar out excellently well against
these heretics, better than they can preach the word of God. And by the Ass
may very well be understood the graie Friars, which are likewise as graie as
asses, and therewithal, all the residue of Monks, Friars, and poor Priests,
who are not much better learned than Asses, and do esteem Christ still as a
young child that lies yet in the cribbe, and therefore go about to please him
and make him contented with goodly images, and puppets, with belles and
rattelles, with piping, and daunsing, and with such other like fond toys and
ceremonies.

Saint Lungies with a Lance.
Again, where they paint S. Lungies, who pricking Christ in the side with a
spear, received his sight, by virtue of the blood which sprinkled in his
eyes, that is likewise proved by good scriptures. For Saint John says, John.
19.34.
That a soldier with a spear did pearce Christ's side. And this spear in the
Greek was called Longi, whereof the holy Church has made a Saint, and named
the same S. Longinus. And because the said John said: That it came so to
pass, John. 19.37.
because the Scripture should be fulfilled, saying: They shall look upon him
whom they have pierced: Zach. 12.18.
Out of that have they fetched the lies or Legend of S. Lungies, as to say that
he was blind, and thinking to have thrust his spear into a Crow, did thrust
it into the side of Jesus Christ, and so the blood did spring out into his
eyes, whereby he received his sight: and was long afterward canonized by the
Pope, and put into the Calendar for a Saint.

In sum, all their paintings, and all those dumb images, which are set up in
Churches: as the Apostles with round trenchers behind their heads, and
every one of them with his weapon in his hand, our Lady with her fris^ed
hair, and goodly golden garments, with her perukes, fine kerchiefs, and
goodly set forth with all her conceits like a Princess of this world, and
Saint Katharine, and S. Barbara, bare breasted, with their embrodered and
stitched works, as trimly deck^ and painted, as the Courtesans of Rome, and
Venice. And all this can our dear mother fetch finely out of the scriptures:
yea, and she can find you a threede for every needle. So that these
Heretics have nothing to say to this: for whatsoever is done of a good intent
and purpose, and to the profit of our dear mother the holy Church of Rome,
that must be by God accepted without any doubt, and he must of necessity
pass it in his reckoning book, or else muscels were no fish, neither should
you have any oysters at Billingsgate.

For a fla^ conclusion, we must have goodly images, and brave painted tables,
in the Church: yea, and though it did not serve for any other purpose, but
that young men and maidens, will therefore the rather come to Church: for
thereby it happens often, that when they come only to see the images and
goodly paintinges, and fisnomies: yet in the mean space some devotion commes
in their minds, to have a snatch at a Mass, or to hear a Salve Regina:
whereby they often obtain pardon of their sins, even half against their
wills. And therefore we care not a bean, for all that these Heretics can say
to this, but will manteine and uphold our old devotion without any iotte
lacking

The xv. Chapter. Which is touching the difference of meats.
Forbidding of meats.
Now, as touching the forbidding to eat some kind of meats, in some certain
times, that is likewise founded upon plain textes of the scripturs. In the
decrees. Cap. Sexto did. ^5.
And first whereas God said to Adam, Thou shall not eat of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge, etc. Out of that has holy Church concluded, That men may
eat no flesh upon the fasting days. Item, after that Adam had sinned, then
did God curse the earth. And now we do know very well, that all flesh which
is to be eaten, comes of the earth. Therefore has our dear mother the holy
Church streightlie defended and forbidden all men, which on the most
principal and holie-fasting days, must do penance for their sins, that in
no wise, they do eat any flesh, on those days, Flesh forbidden to be
eaten, and wherefore.
least they should be partakers of the cursing of the earth, like as the holy
Bishop Durandus has very well set it forth. Whereby it is apparent, Durandus
in the book called Rationale Divine. officiorum. li. 6. Rubr. de aliis i^iuniis
Nu. 22.
that the Cor^e whereof bread is made, and the grapes whereof the wine is made,
are no fruits of the earth, but of the Sea, as the fish is: for otherwise
they were likewise accursed, and so must ^e forbidden on the fasting days. Or
else it may be alleged, that the holy Church has dispensed with them,
because the fish would not have had any good last without bread and wine. And
for this cause has our mother the holy Ch^r^h forbidden the eating of flesh,
as a thing unclean and accursed: in somuche that those which do eat flesh,
or ^gges, upon a fish day, are to be banished and rooted out as shameless
Heretics, and to be burnt^ at a stake, because (notwithstanding whatsoever may
be alleged out of Paul, or out of the holy scriptures, that flesh and eggs
are unclean, unholy, yea, and accursed: and that is apparent by the great
miracle that happened in Italy, upon the mountain called Il monte de la
virgin, that is, Our Ladies mountain. For whosoever does bring unto that
mountain, This is to be found in the book of a Monk called ^eander Albertus
of B^lloigne, named the discourse of Italy, in fol. 242.
flesh or eggs, yea, or milk, by and by it will be full of worms, because
our Lady will not suffer, that any man shall eat (upon her mountain) flesh
nor any unclean meats, but only fish, or herbs and fruits.

But what needs all this? And though the flesh were not cursed, nor unclean:
yet notwithstanding our dear mother the holy Church has great reason to
forbid the eating of it: for that she (at the least) may have a difference in
the eating of meats, and in that point show her self something like unto the
figures and shadows of the old Testament, wherein the children of Israel*
were forbidden certain kinds of flesh, as a thing unclean. Although that our
dear mother is of such discretion and understanding, that she does not esteem
flesh to be altogether unclean in it self. For otherwise our holy Father the
Pope, with his Bishops, and Cardinals, would not so well digest it, that they
would as well in the Lent, as on good Friday it self, lick their fingers
after it. But she does not mean to use her Prelates straitely in that matter:
^^kius in his pamphlet. Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
but to prove lightly the obedience of her subjects, like as GOD (in the old
Testament) did forbid his people certain meats, rather for the keeping of
them in subjection, than that the meats of them selves were unclean: for
whatsoever GOD has created, is from the beginning of it self good and clean,
but the holy Church of Rome, Gene. 1.25. 1. Tim. 4.4.
has had another respect in this matter: as that she did esteem the flesh
for unclean, but not in it self, but unto such as have not bought Bulls of
license of the Pope, to the end they might digest the same with a clear
conscience. For like as in the time of Paul, 1. Tim. ^ ^.
all meats were made holy by prayer and by thanksgiving: so is the meat
now made holy with the Popes Bulls: for whosoever has those, may boldly
eat of all meats without any scruple, and say with a good conscience, Omnia
munda mundis: that is to say, To a man that is clean, all things are clean.
But he that has no Bull, although he had ten times prayed, and given God
thanks for his good gifts, yet that can not help him at all: he must be
cursed, excommunicated, and clean rooted out of the number of the good
Catholics and faithful subjects of our dear mother the holy Church of
Rome: yea, and be burnt at a stake, like an arrant and graceless Heretic.

And therefore it is that the holy Prelates, Cardinals, Bishops, and all other
loyal subjects of the sea of Rome, do so often forget to say grace and
prayers at their meat: and when as sometime (by ill hap) they do say grace
(which happens very seldom) they say it commonly in a tongue or language,
which neither they themselves, nor but a very few of those which sit at the
table with them, do understand: not es^eming that, that can much profit to the
clensing of the meat, nor much hinder nor further the matter, so that they have
good dainty fare. But they in place of this will eat flesh on a fasting day,
and for that purpose, in stead of grace, they must have their Bulls well
sealed, and hanging down with silken tassels: yea, and such as they themselves
can well both read and understand, otherwise it were all not worth a straw.

So now then, flesh (on fish days) is unclean, to them that have no Bulls:
which you may conceive by this, That in Spain, where the holy inquisition
does bear the swinge: yet he, whosoever that can get a Bull for a royal of
plate, may eat (all the Lent through) puddings, tripes, and all the entrails,
with head, neck, and purtenaunce, without any danger or scruple of
conscience. And therefore it is, that the worthy Doctor Eckius, In his
En^h^^ridion.
taking upon him to defend this forbidding of meats by scripture, does bring in
this text out of the Acts of the Apostles: Take heed that you refrain your
selves from meats offered unto idols, For as Paul says, That which was offered
unto idols, was offered to the devil: and therefore he did curse all such as
should eat of it with such a conscience* So likewise (says he) it falls out
always with flesh on fasting days, when as the uncleanness and malediction
thereof is not taken away, and made clean by the Popes Bulls: but otherwise, it
is all well enough, as here before is sufficiently proved.

The xvi. Chapter. Wherein Lent is proved by the Scripture: And further, that
the Romish church must counterfeite Christ in all points: and lastly,
touching festival days, and the ordeining of the same.
Touching Lent seek the decres Statuimus with the.2. following did. 76. and
cap. Solen. de consecra. did. 1. and chefely cap. Quadra. de consecra. did 5.
where this argument is rehearsed.

In the foresaid chap. here follows the very words of the Gloss upon the
decrees, Can. Quadra. de consecra. did. 5.


ANd now, as touching the time of Lent, that is very strongly proved by our
dear mother the holy Church out of the scripture. For it is written, That we
are bound to offer up unto GOD the tenth part of our goods. And now (says the
holy Church) Lent is the tenth part of the year: and therefore must we
necessarily observe the whole Lent, not presuming to eat any flesh at all:
Considering that (as is before said) flesh proceeds of the earth which is
accursed: for now for the tenthes of three hundredth three score and five days
we must fast six and thirty days: and yet there remains five days and
six hours: and of these five days we do fast four, not for payment of
tenthes, but for an other occasion, to wit, That the talies of good works and
merits might be full. So there remains yet one day and six hours, Occasion
of the fasting days.
which makes just thirty hours, whereof the tenth is not paid: but for
recompense of that, we must go late to supper.

So now, is not this past very just? Now let God come and take a reckoning
when soever he will, and he shall find, that the holy Church of Rome is not
one penny in his debt: nay, she has rather paid him more than his duty.
For this reckoning you shall find passed and set down in the reckoning book
of the Decrees, if God will accept and allow of that book (as no doubt he
must) considering that his liefetenants the holy Popes are the makers of it,
and then all is cock sure on our side: and the Catholics must into heaven,
though they should go barefoote and bare leg. It helps to prate and pratle,
the heaven is theirs, if they can get into it, by means of observing their
Lent well.

Now further, for fasting, In the book of decrees. cap significa. de
electione. ca. Deus omni. 2. q. 1. and the Gloss upon the argument of the.6.
book of decrees.
we find written also: That Christ did fast forty days in the wilderness,
Ergo, then we must do the like, following the common rule: Omnis Christi
actio, nostra est instructio, that is, after the meaning of our mother the
holy Church,) all, whatsoever Christ has done, we must counterfeite and do
the like after him. For, notwithstanding that this was a miracle done for the
establishing of his doctrine, as Moses and Elias had done before, which in
deed we can not do after him: yet we must do what we can, and so resemble
Apes and Munkies, which, though they can not do as men do, in speaking, and
understanding with reason: yet they will counterfeite men in any thing that
possibly they can compass. For so has our dear mother the holy Church
concluded, not only in this matter, but in all whatsoever Christ has done.

For, as he did take spicle, and rub the blind man's eyes withal, and said
in the Syrian tongue, Epphatah, that is to say, Be open: even so do the
Priests rub the young childrens nos^ ^^ares with spicle, and say Epphatah
likewise: although the ears and nostrels be open already before.

And as he came riding into Jerusalem upon an Ass, so must the Cardinals
likewise ride upon Mules with their foot-clothes of red scarlet, even down to
the grounde^ and so must men likewise, upon Palm Sunday, A wooden Ass
drawn about.
draw a wooden Ass round about, with the Pharisees and Priests following.

And as Christ did wash the feet of his Apostles, Washing of feet.
so does the Pope upon maunday Thursday wash the feet of certain poor
men, and Abbattes wash their Monks feet with great ceremonies and pronkings.

And as Christ did wear a crown of thorn, The Popes crown.
so likewise does the Pope wear upon his head, a three double crown of
gold, bravely set with pearls and precious stones: over and besides other
two f^ll of Rubies and Diamonds, which are always carried before him, when as
he is borne about in his Pontificalibus upon men's shoulders, like a wooden
image or Saint.

Item, as Christ was laden with carriage of his cross, The Popes cross.
so must the Pope likewise wear upon his coape or mantle, a cross of pure
gold, set full of pearls and precious stones.

And as Christ did shed his blood, so now in figure thereof, Bloody mantles
and hattes of the Cardinals.
must the Cardinals wear blood read scarlet mantles, or cloakes and hattes.
For, whereas these Heretics will say, that their garments look so blood
red, by reason of the blood of the Martyrs, which they have shed: or else, that
their clothes are red, for shame of the shameful deeds which their masters
do: all this can not be true, seeing that Durandus, Innocentius, and all
other Catholic men do otherwise interpret it.

Item, like as Christ was betrayed and sold for certain round pieces of
silver, so must the Os^e or cake, wherewith they say Mass, Durandus ration.
divine. offic. lib. 4. r^b. de terr. number.
be round like a penny, as Durandus does set it forth: and the rather, for
that they do there likewise sell him for ready money: as is written in the
book called, Stella Clericorum, That those Priests which say Mass for money,
do even as much, as though they should say with Judas: What will you give me,
to deliver you the man?

Item, because that Herod did clothe Christ in a white garment, therefore must
the Priests wear a long white garment like a shirt upon their coats or gowns
at such time as they must play their parts in the Mass. A white garment.
And then, because the Jews did afterward cloth him with purple, therefore
they put on the cope aloft upon that white cloth. Cope and stole in the Mass.


And because he was bound, Peruse over the exposition of Durand. Innocentius de
offic. Miss. and Guidon de monte. Roch* the which have expounded all this very
neatly.
therefore do they wear the stoale about their necks, and maniples about
their arms, and girde their surplesse to them with a girdle.

And further, because he was nailed upon the cross, with his arms stretched
abroad: therefore do they likewise stretch out their arms abroad in the
Mass, as though they would be crucified.

And because he was wound in a fine white cloth, when he was buried,
therefore do they lay their little god upon a white cloth, fast by the chalice.

And because the soldiers did cut Christ his garments in pieces, and so dealt
them amongst them for a prey, therefore it is that the Priests do (upon good
Friday) cover their altar with one single cloth, and then lay two other small
clothes or napkins, at the ends of the altar: and as soon as they begin to
sing these words: Partiti sunt vestimenta mea, They divided my garments
amongst them: so must likewise those two clothes or napkins by and by be
stolen and plucked away from the altar.

And because Christ after his resurrection did breath upon his Disciples, and
gave unto them the holy Ghost. Therefore it is that the Bishops and
Suffraganes, at such time as they do create any Priest, do blow upon them:
for with that same wind are the Priests filled as full of the holy Ghost, as
a Cow turde is stuffed full of musk and ambers grease.

In sum, Christ has not done any thing in his death and passion, but they
do play and counterfeite the same after him, so trimly and lively, that no
plaier nor iuggler is able to do it better.

Yea, do we not see likewise, that upon good Friday they have a Crucifixe,
either of wood, or of stone, which they lay down softly upon the ground,
that every body may come creeping to it, upon hands and knees, and so kiss
the feet of it, as men are accustomed to do to the Pope of Rome? And then
they put him in a grave, Creeping to the Crucifixe and burying it.
t^ll Easter: at which time they take him up again, and sing, Resurrexit,
non est hic, Alleluia: He is risen, he is not here: God be thanked. Yea and in
some places, they make the grave in a hie place in the church where men must
go up many steps, which are decked with black cloth from above to beneath,
and upon every step stands a silver candlestick with a wax candle
burning in it, and there do walk soldiers in harness, as bright as Saint
George, which keep the grave, till the Priests come and take him up: and then
comes sodenlie a flash of fire, wherewith they are all afraid and fall down:
and then vpstartes the man, and they begin to sing Alleluia, on all hands, and
then the clock strikes eleven.

Then again upon Whitsunday they begin to play a new Interlude, The holy ghost
on Whitsunday.
for then they send down a Dove out of an Owls nest, devised in the roof of
the church: but first they cast out rosin and gunpouder, with wild fire, to make
the children afraid, and that must needs be the holy ghost, which comes
with thunder and lightening.

Likewise, upon Ascension day, they pull Christ up on hie with ropes above the
clouds, The Crucifix ascends to heaven.
by a vice devised in the roof of the church, and they hale him up, as if they
would pull him up to the gallows: and there stand the poor Priests, and
look so pitifully after their God, as a dog for his dinner.

In sum, a man does often spend a penny or two, to see a play of Robin
hood, or a Morisse daunse, which were a great deal better bestowed upon these
apishe toies of these good Priests, which counterfeite all these matters so
handsomely, that it will do a man as much good to see them, as in frostie
weather to go naked.

I speak not of their perambulations, processions, and going about the town,
cariing their crucifixes along the streets, and there play and counterfeite
the whole passion, so trimly with all the seven sorrows of our Lady, as
though it had been nothing else, but a simple and plain Interlude, to make
boys laugh at, and a little to recreat heavy or sorrowful hearts: for these
matters fall out only upon church holy days or solemnities, when the
Catholics are determined to be merry, and drink themselves so droncke, that
they tumble from their seat: as you shall see our Masters of Louen do every
year in their solemnity, and especially at the seventh years procession, which
is, of the seven sorrows of our Lady. All what soever Christ has done, must
be set abroch to be counterfeite.

And after the same manner, we play by the Lent. For, because Christ did fast
forty days long, therefore shall our dear mother the holy church be content
to fill her belly all sorts of fish only, not once touching one morsel of
flesh, according to the special words of Paul, who says, Eat it not: Taste
it not: Handle it not. Col. 2.21.
And so likewise Moses did fast forty days, for the establishing of the
laws of God, which he presented unto the people. And now, seeing the Bishops
and Prelates do wear horns, as Moses did, wherefore should they not as well
fast forty days as he did? And if the Bishops do fast, then are the Leye
people much more bound to fast, which have no such power nor mean to obtain
dispensations, bulls, or tollerations of our holy father the Pope, as these
holy Prelates have.

Therefore we do now conclude, without exception or contradiction, That the
holy time of Lent is as firmly founded upon the scripture, as all the rest
of the articles of the faith invented and founded by our dear mother the holy
church of Rome: and therefore it is good reason, that our mother the holy
church of Rome do maintein her Lent and fish days in great reputation, and not
only to hold it for a good and holy work in it self, but for a meritorious
work, whereby we may merit and deserve heaven, and the mercy of God, appease
his wrath, and do and make sufficient satisfaction and recompense for all our
sins. In so much that our dear mother does esteem her fasting: yea in a
manner better, than the merits of the blessed blood and passion of Jesus
Christ, whereupon these Heretics do altogether boast themselves. In the Mass
book.
For consider, this the holy church says in one of her secrets, upon the
Wednesday in the Ember week in the Aduent, and on Friday in the Ember days
after Whitsunday, and upon the Tuesday in Easter week:

O Lord, we beseech thee, that thou will accept this our fasting, and that by
it we may be made clean and purified, and worthy of thy mercy, and that it
may bring us unto everlasting salvation, etc.

What can a man wish or desire more? S. John the Apostle will seem to set
forth a special matter, when he says: That the blood of Christ Jesus does
cleanse us of our sins, and makes us acceptable before God the father: but
this other now does grow all upon our own ground: for with our fasting we
can obtain that well enough, which he does attribute only to the blood of
Jesus Christ.

What shall I need to make much a do for the festiual days, and observing of
them? Festiual days.
Of which our dear mother the holy church makes so great account, This is sung
in the.1. collect in the ^mber week of the Aduent.
that she does yerelie pray unto God, that her festival days, may obtain
for her means sufficient to live wealthily in this world: and after assurance
of eternal salvation, and that she may by the perfect observing of the said
days, merit to enjoy perpetual salvation and bliss. And of the hallowing of
Easter eeuen, she does say plainly as follows:

Huius igitur sanctificatio noctis, This is sung the Saturday following next
after.
fugat scelera, culpas lauat, and reddit innocentiam lapsis, moestis laetitiam,
fugat odia, concordiam parit, and curuat imperia:

That is to say:

The halowing of this night, does drive away sins, does purge faults, does
restore such as are fallen to their innocence again, and to the sorrowful
gives gladness, and expels all hatred, procures concord, and does bow
Empires or Kingdoms, etc.

Consider now, what a power the observing of these festiual days has. What a
mischief ails these Heretics, that they so rail upon us, because we make a
difference and diversity of days? They make a do with us, saying, That Jesus
Christ with his precious blood, Col. 2.14.16.
has clearlie adnichilated and taken away the instrument which was against us,
which consisted wholly in such ceremonies and commandments of the law, and
has made fast the same unto his cross: so that no man else can hereafter
judge us, for our meats or drinks, nor for the observing of any holy days,
of new Moons, or Sabbaoths: and still they are troubling of us with that,
which Paul writes to the Galathians, saying:

Gal. 4.9.10.
Seeing that you have now known God, or rather that you are known of GOD,
how does it happen, that you return your selves again to observing and
worshipping of weak elements, which you begin and go about to serve
again? You observe days, months, times, and years, I am afraied on your
behalfes, that all my travel amongst you, will be spent in vain* etc.

But what have we to do with this* seeing our mother the holy Church does
attribute as much power to the observing of our festival days, as to the
blood of Christ it self: and therefore have our Catholic Doctors reason, in
teaching, That the observation of certain days and feasts, heretofore used
by the Jews, are not in any point taken away, by the death and blood of Jesus
Christ, as Paul goes about to persuade, so always as the days be something
altered: In his Enchiridion.
as Eckius has very finely set forth. For in place of their Passover of
the law, we have our Easter: and in place of their Pentecost, we have a
Whitsuntide of our own devising: and in stead of the feast of the new Moon,
we have our Ladies days: and in place of their Trumpet feasts, we have the
Apostles days: and in place of their feast of Tabernacles, we have our Church
holidays or solemnities: and so forth, as is plainly to be seen in the book
of the said Eckius* So that there is no other difference, but as though the
devil (to disguise him self) should put on a Friars cowle. And wheresoever in
the old Testament any mention is made of feast days, our dear mother the
holy Church of Rome, applies it to the establishing of her festival, or
holy days and solemnities: so that the Heretics can not justly complain of
us in this case, and say, that we can not bring in any Scriptures for proof of
the matter: seeing that the old Testament is full of such Scripture, as they
them selves know well enough.

The xvii Chapter. Which treats of the forbidding of Priests to marry, and
how wom^n ought to be common, by special commandment of the church of Rome,
which is diligently by them observed.
A forbidding of matrimony for Priests.
Now as touching the forbidding of Priests, Monks, Friars, and all other
Spiritual persons, to marry, that matter we can not defend by the old
Testament, seeing that in the old Testament all Priests were married.
Therefore, in this matter we will have nothing to do with the old Testament,
because it does make against us: but we say, that it is changed by the new,
as heretofore we have proved by special textes, as to write, where it is
written: None of those that live after the flesh, Romans 8.8.
can please God. Again: Leuit. 10.18.11.25.
Be you holy, like as I am holy, and more such like, which hertofore we have
alleged, and by the book of decrees established for ever. Yea, and it was
specially prophesied by Paul, 1. Tim. 4.3.
That in the latter days there should come such as should forbid marriage,
and the eating of meats, which God has created and ordained to be eaten with
thanksgiving. So that it is no marvel, that it was not forbidden in the old
Testament, nor yet in the beginning of the new testament: for these last days,
whereof Paul speaks, were not yet come: and as a good wise Doctor, and
holy Priest of Groining said: The Pope did not then govern. But now that
those last days are past, and the Pope has taken the whole regiment of the
Church into his hands, the Church has now declared, openly set forth, and
established without retractation, That no man being married can be holy, nor
please God, for that is plain uncleanness and fleshly defiling, Here above
in the 1. and 2. lease.
as we have heretofore declared by plain and special texts of the decrees.

And therefore has our dear mother the holy Church of Rome concluded and set
forth, That it is much better, and less offense, for a Priest to use another
man's wife, than to marry one of his own, after that he has once accepted and
married our dear mother the holy Church for his wife during his life: as
Phigius, Eckius, Ioachimus Perionius, and other like pillars of the holy church
of Rome, have very finely set out in their writing.

Yea, we do find by daily experience, that the holy Catholic church of Rome
will a great deal rather suffer, that these holy sheet Nonnes of Cloisters,
and such like should (being with child) destroy it in their bodies with drinks
and other medicines, Nonnes murder their own children.
yea or kill it after it is borne, than that they should (according to the
counsel of Saint Paul) marry a husband.

This visitation and that which was found there is written by John Ball an
English writer in the argument of his book of the life and conversation of
Popes. John Pontan in his book de immanitat^. Cap. 6.
Which thing was apparent at the visitation of the Cloisters in England, which
King Henry.8. caused to be done throughout all England, where many priuies in
Cloisters were found full of the bones of young children, with many other
abominable matters, which are not meet to be rehearsed.

And Iouianus Pontanus, a good Catholic, and a well learned man, does likewise
witness, that it is a common practice of these holy Religious women, to do
such things.

It is likewise found in ancient credible histories, This is written by
Huldrick bishop of Augsbridg in a letter which he sent unto Pope Nicholas 1.
about the year 265. treating of this matter.
That Saint Gregory Bishop of Rome, after he had first set forth a very
strait commandment against the marriage of Priests, did afterward repeal
and call back again the same very earnestly, lamenting and repenting very
sore his former doing: because, that sending upon a time to his pondes to have
some fish taken, there was drawn out of the same with the nets, and brought
to him, above six thousand heads of young children, which he straight ways
did with sighs and lamentations acknowledge to have been so murdered, by
reason of his said commandment.

But our dear mother the holy Church, who has not lightly any respect to
such small matters, as that, although she hears of enough such: yea, and does
daily see them before her eyes, and is often times put in remembrance of them:
yet she had much rather ouersee and suffer such things to be done, then to
consent that those holy Nonnes, which have professed chastity, should marry.
I do not speak of it, that she will rather look through the fingers, Peruse
the 11. chap. of the second part.
or wink at the abominable and filthy Sodomitrie of Monks and Friars, than
she will revoke and call back again her holy commandment for chastity:
notwithstanding that Pope Pius the second himself, has oftentimes
acknowledged, that although the forbidding of Priests to marry, was done upon
great consideration: yet it must now upon other consideration of greater
importance, be set at liberty again. But this is their first rule, and ABC,
that they learn as soon as ever they are admitted Priests, or professed
Monks or Friars, and that they continually harp upon this string, Si non
cast, tamen caute: which is thus meant, That if they cannot live chastely, yet
they shall use it so secretly, as that it be not much talked of, nor known.

And now after this, to provide so for the matter, that these holy Fathers
should not go to grossly to work, therefore has our dear mother the holy
Church, laid an ordinance before her spouses, the Priests and Spirituality,
that they might freely use other men's wives, and that all women ought to be
common for them. Whereby men may well consider, that she is none of these
gealous wives, which cannot be content, that their husbands should once make
a good countenance to another woman: for she is well contented that her sweet
husbands, to wit, Priests and Monks, should use all women at their
pleasure. Yea moreover, she will maintain, that it ought to be so: and so
goes about to establishe it, with plain textes of the holy Scripture,
besides the worthy witness which she does borrow out of the heathen
Philosophers. For consider, these be the proper words of the holy father Pope
Clement, whom the Church does esteem to have been a successor of Peter: and
therefore has she caused these his words (which are worthy of perpetual
memory, to be written upon the doors of all Cloisters, and Spiritual houses)
to be set in her book of decrees, as a wooden diamond might be set in a
laten ring, where he says:

Dear brethren, to live in common is very necessary for all men, This is
even thus set down word for word in the decrees Cap. D^lectissimi^ Causa 12.
quae. 1 and in the 4. letter of Clement in the 1 part of the Councels.
but most specially for those which will stoutely, and warily fight under Gods
banner, and counterfeit or follow the example of the Apostles and their
disciples. For the same by nature ought so to be, and all things in the world
ought to be common: but the wickedness of man has been the occasion, that
the one has begone to say: This is mine, the other said, And this belongs
to me: And by that means, dealing or participating of all things crept in. To
be brief, a very wise man amongst the Greeks has spoken marvelous well,
Pythagoras who^ Plato did imitate in the goue^nement of his city.
saying: All things are common amongst good friends. Now it is then without
doubt, that under the name of all things, the wives are likewise contained: For
like as the light and the shining of the Sun can not be separated nor parted,
Married women common.
even so there cannot likewise any separation or dealing be made of that which
is to be used in common: but it ought to be generally at the commandment of
every one of the company. And for that cause it is, that God says (gentle
Reader note well here special textes of the Scriptvre) by his Prophet, Psalm.
133.1.
saying: O what a goodly and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell
together. And this custom being observed by the Apostles, so must they have
all together lived with one an other in common: Act. 4.32.
like as it is written: The multitude of the believing was one heart, and one
soul, etc.

Note here the determination and conclusion of our dear mother the holy church
word by word. whereby she does absolutely conclude out of the holy
Scriptures, that these Heretics, which are always in hand with the scriptures,
have now no more cause to complain, though the Priests and Friars will
sometime (even for love) borrow some of their wives, for the mainteining and
knitting together of this holy Clements commontie. And although the gloss
thereupon say, That this having of women in common is not to be understood,
after the use of the flesh, but simply for the good willingness and
charitable love toward the congregation: yet notwithstanding, the text is
plain enough, which says, That men must be conversant with them, as the light
is with the sun shine, which do continually enjoy one another. And the same
is established, by the doctrine of Plato and Pythagoras, who specially were of
opinion, that all women should be common. And that is apparent enough, by the
daily exercise thereof: for you see that the Priests may have no wives of
their own, but do use all women in general, when, or wheresoever they can
get them. But yet they will not look so narrowly to have things common as
touching their goods, because every one of them will look to enjoy his own
goods, but not his own wife: so that it is rather done for the wives, than
for any thing else.

And this may likewise very well be the occasion, wherefore the Romish
Church (which in deed can be but one particular Church, because that Rome is
but one particular town) is yet called The Catholic church, For what cause
the Church of Rome is called Catholic.
that is, The common and general Church over all, which specially proceeds
by reason of that goodly common sort of women, and boys, which she mainteines,
and does increase and multiply her generation over all the world: yea, and
filles the whole face of the earth with her young Priests and Monks, whereof
she has made such a number, as there are flies in the Summer: in so much that
she may justly be called Ecclesia oeccomenica: that is to say, The Church
that does flow over the whole earth, like a spring tide.

The xviii. Chapter. Wherein the seven orders of Priesthood are set forth as
well by Scriptures, as by the examples of Christ.
SEeing that we are now in hand with the holiness of Priests, Seek for this
in the.2. chap. of the second part.
we will proceed directly to the establishing of all the seven orders of
Priesthood by the Scripture. And first you shall understand, that our dear
mother the holy Church does teach very plainly, That our Lord Jesus Christ
him self was forced to pass thorough all those seven orders, before he could
be admitted to be a Masseprieste. Mark now what a matter must this be, All
these goodly exposi^ions are written by the reverend Bishop Durand. in his
book called Rationale diuinorum officiorum in the.1. book Rub. de ministerio
and ordine Ecclesiae. And in the.4 book of Sentences. Psalm. 24.7.9.
and yet for all this, these Heretics make no account of the blessed Mass,
whereas Christ had enough to do, for to come to the use of it.

For first, he must exercise the office of a Porter, like as he did, when he
drove the changers of money, and the sellers and bu^ers out of the Temple, and
snake out of the mouth of David: You Princes lift up your gates, and be you
lift up you everlasting doors. Item, when he said, I am the door of the
sheepfolde. John. 10. In the.4. book of Sentences the.3. chap.


After that, he was Reader, when he did read the Prophet Esaias in the Temple.

In the 4. book of Sentences the 4. chap.
Then after he became an exorcist or Coniurer, when he drove seven devils out of
Marie Magdalene: and when he did rub the mouth and ears of the dumb and deaf
man with clay and spitle, saying, Epphatah, Be open.

Acoluthus in Greek is with us as much as Page, or one which follows us.

John 8. ca. and is repeated in the 4. book of Senten. cha. 5.4. D^st. cap.
6.4. Did. cap. 7.


And after that he came to be Acoluthus, that is, a Page, and Ceroferarius, that
is, a Candlebearer: when he said, I am the light of the world: he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness.

And then was he a Subdeacon, when he did wash his disciples feet.

After that a Deacon, when he did minister the Sacrament of his body to his
Apostles, and (being in the mount Oliuet) willed and persuaded them to watch
and pray.

4. Did. cap. 8. and peruse the same allegatio^ by Durand.
And lastly, he became a Priest, when he did consecrate the bread and the wine,
and so said Mass at the table.

This done, straightway he became a Bishop, when he laid his hands upon his
disciples heads, saying, Go abroad and preach the gospel in all places.

All this you may see set out at large in the foresaid book of Durandus, In
the 23. and 77. Did.
and in the book of Sentences, and in the fourth councels of Tolledo and
Carthago, and likewise in the Decrees. So that it is apparent, that all these
holy orders are fished out of the bottom and ground of the scriptures, and
are founded upon the examples of Christ: notwithstanding now, that the
Priests have somewhat the more prerogative then Christ had, so that they can
pushe through all these seven orders at one time, or else skippe over four or
five of the^ at once. For they that can once get the shaven crown on their
heads, (which is the character, mark, and token of the worthy order of
Priesthood) may not then only proceed to be Priests, but also to be
Bishops and Cardinals, and to get sackes full of benefices: for our most
holy father the Pope may freely dispense with all such matters, as it
pleases him. But that carries his authority in the Popes foundation, which
we have here before set forth and declared to be so strong, as the devils of
hell are not able to withstand it. Peruse the 11. chap. of the 2. part.
For this time we do only teach, that when soever it shall please the holy
church to use the seven orders orderly, she is able to establish the whole
heap of them trimly and finely out of the scripture.

The xix. Chapter. Wherein is concluded, that all the ceremonies of the holy
Church of Rome, are founded upon the Scripture, if they be well understood,
and according to their interpretation which only is to be esteemed so good:
and what advantage they have, that stand fast to this interpretation. And
herein is likewise mention made of the mass, and of master Durandus book.
Ceremonies of the holy Churches in general.
YEa, she does nothing in the world, either of great or small importance, but
it is all so finely founded upon the Scripture, as can be devised. And that
may appear by this: That she has fetched the golden slippers, and the
precious breeches of our most holy Father the Pope out of the Scriptures. For
it is written: O how fair and pleasant are the feet of those, which bring
tidinges of peace, Esaie. 52.7. Romans 10.18. This exposition is set down by
Durandus in his book called. Rationale diuinorum officiorum chap. 7. Number 8.
Slippers and breeches of the Popes.
which bring good tidings: which after their interpretation is as much to say,
as, That the feet and legs of the Pope of Rome, must be decked with goodly
golden slippers, and with marvelous rich and costly breeches: as it is well
set forth by the holy Doctor and Bishop Durandus. And thereupon it proceeds
likewise, that the Pope does suffer Kings and Emperors to kiss his feet:
yea, to tread upon the Emperor Frederiks neck, as is before declared. Seek
the 10. chap. of the 2. part.
And the rather his feet are to be kissed, because they are so fair and
pleasant, and smell so sweet, especially two or three days after he is dead:
for then come all the devout catholic people, and kiss them bare, whereby
they obtain a very great indulgence and pardon.

But now, if any man be desier^us to understand how finely all this is
grounded upon Scripture, and further, to know particularly the reasons, and
causes of all the other ceremonies of the holy Church of Rome, and to see how
they are fished even out of the very deepest ground and bottom of the holy
Scriptures, let him read the book of Durandus, which (upon this occasion) he
has named, Durandus touching ye Mas^^.
Rationale diuinorum officiorum Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, that is to say; The
reckoning, and reason, or cause of the ceremonies and divine services of the
Church of Rome. He shall therein find marvelous secrets, and very trim
jewels: yea, if the whole Bible were clean lost, there might quickly a new
Bible be devised and made out of this book, which would agree a great deal
better with the ordinances of the holy Church, then the Epistles of Paul do,
which these Heretics and Huguenotes have in such great reputation. He has the
textes of the Bible as fast, as a handful of flies: and there is not one iotte
contained or used in the blessed Mass, but he has a good reason, and a
trim text to bring in for it. There is not one hole but he has a pegge to
stop it: he does there set you forth marvelous trimly, all the reasons,
why the Priest does so trim him self in such mumming garments, when he
goes about to play his part: why he does first put a biggin upon his head,
and then a long garment like a woman's smock aloft upon his gown? Search the
15. and 16. chap. of this 2. part.
and then above that, a Cassocke without sleeves, looking out at a little hol^
above, even like as a Snaile looks out of her shell, or like as a magget a pie
out of her cayge: Why he is bound with a cord about the middle, like a thief
that were going to hanging: why he does turn sometime his tail to the
people, and sometime his face: why he trippes sometime to the one end of the
Altar, and sometime to the other side of the Altar, as though he were daunsing
the Maids Morice: Why he heaues or liftes up his voice sometime like a
chimnie sweeper, and by and by he is as still and quiet again, as it were a
mouse in a trappe: why sometime he foldeth his hands together, like
sorrowful Marie Magdalene, and sometime he stretches them out on every side,
as though he would shoot in Robin Hoodes bow: and then sodenlie he pluckes
them in again, and tosseth them from the one side to the other, as though he
were catching of flies, or would fraye and scarre away crows.

After this he does set forth very perfectly, and in particular, all the
occasions and reasons, wherefore Sir John's Table is so early covered, and the
Cup, the little Cannes, and the sauser so mannerly set therevppon: and
wherefore Sir John does sometime sleep at his table, and sometime starteth
up sodenlie out of his dream. Item, what it means, that he does run
and whisper his secrets to the bread and wine in their ears with a low and
soft voice, and that his companions sometime cry out so yealling with open
throats, like wolves in a cave, or like swine when the butcher kills them:
and wherefore some go to work with Organes, other with ringing of bells, as
though there were an vplandish bellie-feast toward, or some such triumph. And
wherefore men do in the mean space light torches, as though they were bringing
the Bride to bed: and wherefore they lift up the Priests tail behind him, as
though they would look into his arse, to minister a glister to him.

And if you peruse that book well, you shall likewise find there, wherefore
Sir Domine with his long smock does so lustily lift up on hie a wafer, and a
cup of wine, and that then every body falls down upon their knees, and
knocks upon their breasts with their fistes: and wherefore the Priest
begins then to look so ^^^^fully* like a ca^^e laid on the butchers stall,
and then begins ^o lament the wafer or s^nging bread pitifully* and to
weep with s^^nes tears* and then at the last, when he has tossed it too and
fro, long enough, away it goes with a (...) into his throat, and so
swalloweth it down without chewing: and then he has his cup filled again,
and so he sends that after the rest. And yet you shall understand further,
wherefore he does lick the chalice so sweetly, as an Ape licketh her young ones.

And you shall (besides all this) bear wonders, of all the rest of the holy
ceremonies of the Romish Church, which they do use at their Matte^s, at noone,
at euensong, at complen, and many other times, with great devotion, with all
the gestures and fashions which they do therein use: and who have devised them
all: and what every one of them does signify. He can tell you more, all the
feast days, and double feasts, all Vigils, Ember days, and fasting days,
all days of fish and eggs, all processions, goings about with the cross,
gange days, and all the whole brabling used through the year: all this has
he even at his fingers ends, and can bring in for every one of them, textes
very finely founded out of the Scripture. So that I assure you, it is a
pleasure for those that can hear it. Besides all this, you have there set
forth all the estate, pomp, and pranckings of our holy Bishops and Prelates,
especially, of our most holy father the Pope of Rome: whereof there is not
one iotte forgotten nor left unconsidered: yea surely, I believe that his
holiness, sitting upon his stool of easement (sir reverence of his holiness)
should not make one sour or skornefull countenance, but this wise and
profounde learned Doctor and Bishop, can straightwayes bring in for it some
mystery and weighty matter: And to bring a text of Scripture for it, which
shall serve as fit for that purpose, as a sadle for a sow. What needs many
words? he is a passing Apoticarie, he can make a good medicine of a Cabadge
stalk.

And therefore it is, that our dear mother the holy Church does so greatly
esteem this his book, Durandus his book.
so that she would not forgo it for any good: and she has reason for it
because in deed it is her chief jewel or treasure, wherein all her holiness
is locked up. Where will all these Heretics now hide them selves, these
Lutheranes, Huguenotes, Zwinglians, and Caluinistes, the one heap with the
other, which do brag so much of the word of God? Let the^ but once take this
book of Dura^dus into their hands, and they shall find there, that all the
ceremonies of the holy church of Rome, all their prankings, and strange
devises, are finely founded upon the Scripture, so that there is not one
lacking: yea, and that the Scripture is wholly on our side, if it be right
understood, according to the meaning and interpretation of our dear mother the
holy Church: to wit, that you pass over and let slip the dead letter, and
the plain text, and depend wholly upon the spirit of speculation of our
Doctors of Louen, and those of Paris, which is only the spirit, That
quickens and makes alive, as is heretofore rehearsed.

Therefore, let all such as will be good and Catholic subjects of the holy
Church and Sea of Rome, hold fast and stick to this interpretation, and in
any wise shrink not from it: but believe all whatsoever the holy church
believes, not once going about to know, or to ask any question what it is:
because it is enough for them to know, that the church of Rome cannot err, so
long as she remains fast grounded upon the foundation of the Pope. Let them
keep in mind the saying of Solomon, You shall not remove the pales and marks
which your fathers have planted: that is to say: Pro. 22, 28.
You shall not once move, Thus does Eckius and all other Catholics expound it.
touch, or alter any thing of all that, which our dear mother the holy Church
of Rome has established and ordained. And doing thus, they shall be her white
sons, and have the world at will, they shall enjoy the goods of this
world: some shall become Bishops, and some Cardinals, riding bravely to the
Courts of Popes and Kings upon brave horses and Mules, and shall have the
fairest Courtisanes of Rome at their commandments.

In sum, they shall say to them selves, What can thou desire? Where
contrariwise, these fellows will be so nosewise, that they will know all
things, and will believe nothing, but just that which they find in Scripture,
and in their Bible plainly set out: yea, they do mock our dear mother, and
the interpretations which she brings forth upon the Scriptures But those
surely are Heretics to the fourth generation: as Doctors and Physicions say,
Even to the hiest step of the stairs. For like as Master Gentian has here
finely concluded, They do not believe the holy Church, They believe not the
twelve articles of our faith: yea, they do not believe the holy scripture,
seeing they will not accept the interpretation of the scripture, which the
holy Church has allowed for good: And therefore, they must be banished,
accursed, and excommunicated: yea, they must be burnt to ashes and powder, if
they will not recante. For that is the sure sentence and resolute determination
of our holy mother the Church of Rome, wherein does not fall any stay or
appellation, for that now from henceforth they will not, nor shall not bear
with them any longer. And herewith we will make an end of the second part,
having emptied this distaffe: and now (by master Gentianus leave) we will in
hand and proceed with another part.

Here follows the exposition upon the third part of Gentianus Haruets
Epistle: wherein is treated of Auricular confession, of the Sacraments, of
Matrimony, of Confirmation, and of the holy Anointment.
The first Chapter. Of Auricular confession, and how necessary it is, and of
establishing the same by the Scriptures.
Auriculer confession.
HEre now does follow the third part of the Epistle of Gentianus, wherein he
does declare himself greatly to wonder, that these new Preachers of the
gospel will go about to abolish auricular confession. Cocks populorum! But
how would they go to work? Where our holy mother has so straightly
commanded upon pain of damnation, These are the very words of Pope Innocent
the 1. in a general council concluded, and is set down in the decrees, Chap.
Omnis vtriusque sext^s de penietentis and remissionibus.
That al such as are of both kinds, to wit, male and female, shall as soon as
he or she is come to years of discretion, confess them selves to their own
Curate of all their sins, at lest once a year: understanding the same always of
deadly sins only, as is set forth by the gloss upon the text: because daily
and perdonable sins are with a Pater noster, or with a sprinckle full of holy
water, clean washed away.

I marvel, how these Heretics can speak against this. For were it not even
as much as though they would put out both the eyes of our mother the holy
church? For undoubtedly, this auricular confession is worth two pair of eyes
to her. For by the one, she can see, perceive and learn all the secret
determinations, counsels, and pretenses of all Kings, Princes and Potentates of
Christendom: by reason whereof she is come to a peaceable possession and
enjoying of her authority and government over all Countries and Kingdoms:
And by the other she can see and creep even into the very bottom of the
bosoms of young maids, simple and sorrowful wives, and widows, and so grope
out and understand all their secrets: and then enjoin them such friendly
penance, that their troubled consciences are thereby comforted, and their
sorrowful hearts made joyful. O good Lord! How often have these holy Priests
and Friars given (under confession) good wholesome counsel to the sorrowful
barren wives, whereby they have afterward become blyth mothers, and have ever
after borne an inward love toward their holy ghostly fathers, even as
though it were to their own husbands.

Yea, there is at this present a good holy graie Friar at Brudgesse, called
Brother Cornelius the Whipper, who (by means of this holy auriculer
confession) did teach a great many of simple women, to tame and mortify their
flesh, in this manner: That they for the fulfilling of penance to them
enjoined, and to receive of him full absolution of their sins, have very
willingly gone creeping upon hands and feet, stark naked before that holy
ghostly father: and when he did mark any that the flesh was not
sufficiently mortified, them did he follow with a rod in his hand, and
whipped the^ upon the bare buttockes, till they had thereby done sufficient
penance.

By the same token, that he is yet at this hour called, Brother Cornelis the
whipper, and is very well beloved in the town of Brudgesse, where the women
are very devout to do such penance.

Consider now, if that auricular confession had been pulled down, how could
he have brought those good women to such a devout mortification and penance?
How should our dear mother the holy Church bring into the right path, that
goodly and friendly congregation of women, which Pope Clement did command,
if it were not by that holy auriculer confession? So that truly, Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople was much to blame, Nectarius.
for disanulling auriculer confession, only because there was a Deacon or a
Priest, which had shreeuen a woman under her smock. In the year 395.
Was not that a strange matter of the Bishop? This is set out in the story
tripar^ite in the.9. book. Chap. 28.
Surely he must needs have been either a Lutherian or a Huguenote, seeing he
had no more regard too the ordinances of his dear mother the holy Church.
But I assure you, it goes now to work after an other manner, what would that
Bishop have done, if he had seen brother Cornelis the whipper, and such
other good fellows, Surely he would have driven auriculer confession with all
that baggadge to the gallows. Chrysostom upon the.51. Psalm. and in the 3.
Homely upon the.12. chap. to the Hebr. And in the Homely of penance. etc.
Seeing he was so earnestly moved for such a smell matter. But we will let him
alone with a morren. And although Chrysostom was of the same opinion, and did
directly withstand auriculer confession, yet notwithstanding we have nothing
to do therwithal, we will stick to and keep fast our auricular confession:
yea, and though all the Doctors of the Church, should run mad. For when
all is said, it were almost as good that the Mass should be put down and
buried for ever, as that there should be no auricular confession. Our dear
mother the holy Church will take heed to that, she will not put down nor
suffer to be overthrown, such a trim and necessary thing as that is, to
please these Heretics: especially seeing she can defend it by holy Scripture,
as well as any article before specified, as you may clearly see out of the
doctrine of Master Gentianus Haruet.

John. 20.28.
Is it not written, (says he,) Whose sins soever you do forgive, the same
shall be forgeuen. Now they cannot forgive without having knowledge first of
the matter: and the matter cannot come to any knowledge, but by confession,
made either openly or in secret. And therefore without doubt (says he)
auricular or secret confession is much more comely and honest, than open
confession. Consider well of this matter (gentle Reader,) here the matter is so
clear, that a blind man may see it as well in the dark as without a candle.
For notwithstanding that Christ speaks there of ministering and preaching the
gospel, Whose sins you remit, etc.
whereby the forgiveness of sins is pronounced unto all those that believe: as
he himself does expound it, saying: That Paul shall open the eyes of the
blind, Act. 26.18.
to the end they may turn from the darkness, to the light, and from the
power of the devil, unto God, so that they may obtain forgiveness of their
sins, and so be partakers with them, which are by belief in Jesus Christ,
made holy. Whereupon Paul plainly says, That he has followed this
commandment, not by confessing of women secretly in their ears, but by
preaching and setting forth of the Gospel, and the forgiveness of sins.
And whereas Chrysostom and all the old Fathers have so understood and set it
forth: yet notwithstanding, Chrysostom upon the.23. of Mathewe the.44.
homily.
since that the holy Church has unburdened all Bishops, Priests,
Ministers, and Officers of the Church, of their charge of preaching, and have
given the same to images and Saints made of stocks and stones, to be books
and preachers to the Lay people. The time and matter is much altered: And the
priests begin to find a good taste in this auriculer confession. They have
blown this forgeuing of sins in at the ears. They give thee absolution with
a Cross, alleging and setting forth the words of Christ, for proof
thereof. So that it is not to be merueiled at, that our Master Gentian does
so glory of this Text, and will with that plainly prove auriculer confession:
Notwithstanding that the holy Church has many other clear Textes of the
Scripture, whereby to prove and establish the same.

As for example: whereas Christ said to the Lepre, after that he had made him
whole: Matthew. 8.4. Mark. 1.44. Luke. 5.14. This witness is by Eckius and all
other Catholic writers interpreted to this sense.
Go and show thy self to the Priest, and offer thine offering according as
Moises has commanded. For that is only thus to be understood: Go hence and
shriue thy self unto thine own Ghostly Father, and do such penance, as he
shall enjoin you. And the like, James. 5.26.
where Saint James says, Confess your sins one to an other, By that did
James mean nothing else, but only seek you out a Priest or a Friar, to whom
you may open your mind, and declare unto him perticulerly al your evil deeds,
and he will quickly give you absolution, especially, if you let him see a piece
of gold. For (by interpretation of our dear mother the holy Church) One to
an other, is as much to say, as the Priests and Friars only. And therefore,
where Saint James following right in the same place says, And pray one for an
other, we may very well understand that thus, as though he would say: Pray
only for Friars and Priests, that the world may be clean cleansed of them,
and Purgatory filled with them.

The.2. Chapter. Treating of the Sacrament of seven orders, and of matrimony,
and of the holy oil or ointment, and of the number of the.vii* Sacraments.
AFter this commes Master Gentianus to the rest of the Sacraments, The
Sacrament of seven orders
and says thus: As touching the seven orders, is there not a plain Text in
Saint Paul where he says: 1. Tim. 4.14
Do not neglect that which is in thee, which is given thee by prophecy, and
laying on of hands of the Priesthood, Look the.18. Chap. of the.2. part.
for that is as much to say, as Take good heed and see that you do not take
upon you to be mass Priests, Look the 19. Chap. of the.1. part.
before you have been Porter, Candle bearer, Chorister, or Acoluthus, Subdeacon
and Deacon, for all these must go before, if you will have the other to
follow, as we have heretofore declared by scriptures. The Sacrament of
matrimony.


Then he does further declare, that matrimony is a sacrament, Ephesians. 5.32.
because there is written: This is a great mystery, I say in Christ Jesus,
and the congregation. But I could be very well content, that gentle Gentianus,
had held his tongue there, and never have written so. It is very true, that
our dear mother the holy church has been accustomed heretofore, to bring in
the same for a testimony or witness, before that the common sort had read or
were acquainted with the scriptures: but now the time does not serve any longer
to give men brickbattes for turfes, or to make them believe that the Moon is
made of green Cheese: for every one will pretend now to know how the world
walks. Therefore he had better have held his tongue touching this matter. For,
to begin withal, an Ass might have seen and perceived, that Paul does not
there mean any thing at all of matrimony: but of the unity between Christ
and his congregation: which he does name to be A great or deep mystery far
above the understanding of all men. And besides this, these scornful
Heretics, will sow a pair of Ass ears on master Gentianus head: seeing he
did not consider, That herein he does speak both against himself, and against
our dear mother the holy Church, who has plainly concluded that matrimony
is fleshly, unclean, and unholy: and has for that cause forbidden, that
Priests shall marry, insomuch, Look the 17. Chap. of the ^ part.
that it cannot be a holy Sacrament: or else it must follow, that Priests
are not worthy to enjoy so holy a Sacrament. And besides that, these
Heretics will set a pair of spectacles on master Gentianus nose, to the end
he may see and perceive, that if it be so, that Matrimony be a Sacrament,
then must virginity or maidenhoode much rather be a holy sacrament, because
that by our dear mother the holy Church it is much more esteemed tha^
matrimony, and so there must be eight sacraments. Yea, widows will come in for
their parts, and challendge viduitie or widowehoode to be a sacrament. So that
men shall at the last be forced to regester for sacraments, all states and
calling of men. Whereupon must needs follow, that our dear mother the holy
church has erred in setting forth and teaching, that there were only seven
sacraments, unless that she (peradventure) will have it understood, that by
the number of seven she does mean an innumerable number, as by Gentianus
reasons appears she does, so that by his argument it must follow, That in
all places of the scripture, where this word Misterium, that is to say a
mystery is used, that must straight way be esteemed for a sacrament: and by
that order, also must the kingdom of Antichrist and the beast with seven
heads be accounted for sacraments: So that in the end, we should have so many
sacraments, that we should not know what to do with them: but we must go set
them out in the Sun to dry, or lade a great Hulke with them, and send them
into Norway: which out of doubt were a great disorder, and such as might make
open to all the world the impudency and shamefulnesse of our dear mother the
holy church of Rome: seeing she has resolutely set forth, that there may be
no more but seven sacraments. Which thing she has likewise fetched out of the
coffer of the scriptures with her Allegorical or Anagogicall key (says she)
Seven deadly sins. Look the.1. chap. of the.2. part.
Ergo must there be of necessity seven Sacraments, which must drive away and
overcome the same seven deadly sins. Item there is mention made of seven
Seals, wherewith the book of the old Testament was sealed up. Also there
were seven pillars, wherewith the church was underset: how like are they to be
the seven principal of the new Bishops of the base country to wit, Seven
bishops in the low countries Vigilius.
The Cardinal Grandwell, the President Viglius, Franciscus, Sonnius, Petrus
Cursius, Ioannes Lindanus de castro and Friar Kniefe, Who (I assure you) stick
to their tackling and hold up the Romish Church like fast and sure pyllers
and proppes for fear she should fall into the mire. After this likewise is
mention made of Seven washings whereby Naaman was healed of his leprosy, and
likewise of seven Basens, Henricus de Vr^^ ma^ia upon the fourth book of Sent.
did. 1.
which the Son of Man held in his right hand, and of Seven loaves, wherewith
Christ fed the multitude of people: and of seven times going about whereby the
town of Jericho was ouerthrown* of seven eyes in one stone: and lastely, of
seven candles set upon the tabernacle. For now (says our mother the holy
church) by all these are signified and set forth the seven doctors of the
Romish church, to wit, the four principal of the scholasticall theology or
divinity, as Thomas de Aquino, Ioa^nes Scotus, Albertus Magnus, and Occam,
together with the two profound interpreters of the mass, namely Rabanus and
Durandus, and the Master of the Sentences called Petrus Lombardus: all which
make just seven, who should likewise set forth and establish in the church of
Rome seven sacraments.

There may yet be alleged many other examples for the establishing of the
number of seven Sacraments, to wit, the seven Psalms, which serve the souls
in Purgatory for seven sacraments. Matthew. 12. Luke. 11.
Item the seven devils which came to inhabit the house when they found it clean
and empty: then the seven sciences: and also the seven or five wits of our
Doctors of Louen, wherewith they far excel all the profounde wit and
understanding of the Apostles and Prophets, with many other things more, which
might be brought in: but our mother the holy church of Rome is satisfied with
these examples and figures before specified. Although yet me thinks (under
correction of my masters of Louen be it spoken, to whose judgments I submit
my self) that the number of the seven Sacraments may best be applied (for
that which is written in the Apocalypse, of the beast with seven heads: or (as
heretofore is set forth) Irenaeus himself has applied this beast to the
Romish church. And the number of six hundredth sixty six, which is the
number of the beast, Apoc. 13 18. For each letter in greek makes one number.
5.20.20.30.2 EKKLH 200.10.1.10 S. IAI 30.1.30.10. TALI 20.1. KA Th^s makes
together. 666. Apoc. 13.17.
do agree very well in one with this Greek word EKKLHSIA ITALIKA, Ecclesia
Italica, which is to say, The Italian or Romish Church. And there is likewise
specially spoken of the Character, or mark of the beast: And now our mother
the holy church says that there is likewise a Charecter or mark in the
sacraments. And last of al it is credibly affirmed that it is a mystery: to
wit, Babylon: And now will our dear mother conclude, as is apparent, that
matrimony is a Sacrament because that this word misterium is plainly set
forth: and then it must of necessity follow, that here also somewhat is
spoken of Sacraments, seeing that this word is likewise spoken of here. And
so must the beast with seven heads, undoubtedly betoken and signify the Romish
church with her seven Sacraments, and with her character or mark. So that
master Gentianus is herein to be blamed, That he has (to maintain his
argument) used this word misterium for the purpose of matrimony to be a
sacrament: considering that our dear mother the holy Church has always used
the same for her stro^gest bulwark, alleging the same continually,

But hereupon yet might fall out a great question, to wit, how does it happen,
that men account upon no more, but seven sacraments, seeing that yet our dear
mother the holy Church has ordained at the least seven and seventy
Sacraments, whereof none is contained under any of these seven? For on Easter
eeuen, when they do bless the Easter candels, then does the holy Church offer
unto God the Father Fire, for a great reward and a holy Sacrament, Fire a
Sacrament.
saying thus:

Te in tuis operibus inuocantes in hac sacratissima noctis vigilia, de donis
tuae suppliciter offerimus Maiestati, non adipe carnis pollutum, non prophana
unction viciatum, non sacrilego igne contactum, sed cera atque stuppa
constructum, in tui nominis honor succenssum ignem, obsequio religiosae
deuotionis offerimus. Magnum igitur Mysterium, and noctis huius mirabile
Sacramentum, dignis necesse est laudibus cumulari.

That is to say:

Calling upon thee in thy works, this holy Eeue of Easter, we offer most
humbly unto thy Majesty, this sacrifice: namely, a fire not defiled with the
fat of flesh, nor polluted with unholy oil or ointment, nor attainted with
any profane fire: but we offer unto thee, with obedience, proceeding from
perfect devotion, a fire of wrought wax and week, kindled and made to burn
in the honor of thy name. This so great a mystery therefore, and the
marvelous sacrament of this holy Eeue, must needs be extolled with due and
deserved praises.

Mark well now, here is the holy fire, or else surely the Eeue it self,
called (not only Mysterium) but also A marvelous Sacrament, and offered up
unto God for a great present, whereby he is (as in the end is concluded) made
very joyful and merry.

The finding of the Cross, a sacrament.
Likewise, the sign of the Cross is also called a Sacrament. For upon the day
called Inuentio sanctae crucis, that is, The finding out of the holy cross,
are song by our dear mother the holy church, in a certain metricall
sequence, these words: Non sunt noua Sacramenta,
Nec recenter est inuenta
Crucis haec Religio.
Ista dulces aquas fecit,
Per hanc Silex aquas iecit,
Mosis officio.
Nulla salus est in domo,
Nisi Cruce munit homo
superliminaria.


That is to say: This is no new made Sacrament,
Nor holy cross does represent
a late vpstart invention:
This cross made bitter water sweet,
And floudes from rock of flint to fleet,
by Moses priestly function.
All health and wealth is turned to loss,
in every house and household,
Except the sign of holy cross
be set upon the threshold.


So that the sign of the Cross must also be a holy sacrament without doubt.

And the like, when they make holy water, they pray thus:

Deus, qui ad salutem humani generis maxima quaeque Sacramenta in aquaru^
substantia condidisti, adesto propitius inuocationibus nostris, and elemento
huic multimodis purificationibus praeparato, virtutem tuae benedictionis
infunde: vt creatura Mysterii tui tibi seruiens, ad abiiciendos daemones,
morbosque pellendos, diuinae gratiae sumat effectum, etc.

That is to say:

O God, who have (for the health of mankind) ordained and made many
sacraments of the substance of water, accept mercifully our prayers, and
send into this water (which is by many means made clear) the virtue of thy
blessing: So that this creature of thy sacrament serving thee, may receive
perfect strength and power, to chase away devils, and to drive away all
diseases and sicknesses, etc.

Water a Sacrament.
Here is the water likewise called Creatura mysterii: so that it must needs be
a sacrament, seeing that A Sacrament is nothing else, but a holy sign of any
holy thing: The Master of sentences in the.1. chap. the did. and.4. book.
or* A visible similitude or likeness of any invisible grace or pardon. So
that it may justly be said, Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fiet
Sacramentu^: that is to say: When the word is joined with the element, it is
made a Sacrament. And now, out of doubt, here is an element, to wit, the water:
And herevppon commes the words of the Priests, by which it does receive a
gracious power, to participate unto men an unvisible gift, even as well as the
holy ointment, or any other sacrament of the holy church, ergo is it
likewise a sacrament. And herevppon it does follow, that the holy ashes also
is no less. Item* the Priests spittle. Item, the Palms. Item, the wax
candels, and all other elements, which our dear mother the holy church does
likewise consecrate, hallowe and bless, to the end they may assist men by
some inward power: all such must likewise be sacraments. Make the reckoning
then, and note whether we shall not have a notable company of sacraments.

And whereas some men will say hereupon, that there is, or must be a difference
between these, and the seven sacraments: Henricus de V^^maria upon the
foresaid text of the sentences
because that the seven sacraments do not only betoken things, but do also
of themselves minister mercy and grace, and that the other can not of them
selves give any grace, neither be the occasion of any: that is plain
blasphemy against the holy church: as is evidently to be seen out of the
lectures, readinges, and exorcismies or coniurations, which she does use over
the said elements, whereby they do receive as great power at the least, as
any of all the seven Sacraments have: as you may plainly see in the Mass
book. Otherwise men might say that all her lectures or readinges and
exorcismies or coniurations, were unnecessary, without power, and of no value:
which is plain blasphemy. And if men would say then, that all these small
Sacraments are contained under the Sacrament of penance, seeing that
satisfaction is included under penance, and that al these do tend to the doing
of satisfaction for our sins, and therefore are contained under satisfaction:
that would not sound well: for this alegation would always be brought in
against it, that baptism and the holy oil or ointment, and Confirmation,
with all the rest of the sacraments, must all likewise be contained under
penance: seeing all they (as is heretofore declared) do justify men Ex opere
operato, or by the merits of good works, and so are reckoned for good payment
and satisfaction. And therefore as touching this matter, we must conclude thus:
That this remains only at the will and discretion of our dear mother the
holy Church of Rome: so that she may ordeine and establishe as many
sacraments as she list, and in the mean space make us believe that there are
no more but seven. And so might it well be said, that the number of seven is
here to be understood for an endless number, as has been written before.

And now, as touching the holy ointment, wherewith they do use to anoint the
sick, when they lie a passing, Gentianus does establish that very finely by
scripture, as specially, where Saint James says: If there be any sick among
you, let him send for the Elders of the congregation, and let them pray over
him, and anoint him with oil, in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of the
faithful shall comfort the sick, and the Lord shall restore him: and if he
have sinned, it shall be forgiven him. Whereby our holy mother does understand,
that whenever any body lies a passing, so that there is no more hope of
life in him, the Priest shall then anoint him with holy oil, bless him with
crosses, and conjure him with certain words, and then he can never come in
hell: for all the devils will run away from before the crosses, like a dog
before a fli^che of bacon. And therefore must he take up his lodging, either
in the suburbs of hell, or in Purgatory, where he shall have his house hire
and firewood free, till such time, as he (with soul Masses and Popes pardons)
have gotten a platte of ground in heaven, to build a house thervppon, of
merits and good works. And this same oil is of such power, that through it
all our sins are forgiven us, according to that which the Priests mumble out
in their Mass: In the Mass book.
Per istam sanctam vnctionem and piissimam suam misericordiam, indulgeat tibi
Deus, quicquid peccasti per visum, per and itum, odoratum, tactum, and gustum,
etc. that is to say, Thorough this holy ointment, and by his meek mercy,
will God forgive thee all thy sins, what soever thou have committed, by
seeing, by hearing, by smelling, by feeling, and by tasting, etc.

Consider now, what can you look for more to enjoy by the precious blood
shedding of Jesus Christ the son of GOD, than that, which the Priests do
bear us in hand to give us, by the power and virtue of their holy oil? These
Heretics may (if they will) hold f^st on the offering up of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ: but the good Catholic subjects of the holy church of
Rome, will in no wise forsake this holy ointment. We will rather bid Christ
him self Adieu, then we will suffer such a precious thing to be wroung out of
our hands. It is very true, that these Heretics do herein again mock with
our dear mother the holy Church, saying, that our Priests are like unto Apes
and Monkies, which will counterfeyte every thing that they see done before
them, though they have neither knowledge nor understanding of the matter: and
this do they allege hereof, because that Mark does witness, Mark. 6.13.
That the Apostles had received the gift of the holy Ghost, whereby they did
make the sick whole with their prayers, and with anointing or laying on of
hands, or by some other apparent token. As it does likewise appear in Paul,
1. Cor. 12.2^.
who amongst other apparent gifts of the holy Ghost, did likewise deal with
this gift of making the sick whole: and he him self did show a notable token
over the dead, Act. 20.10.
falling upon the dead carcass, and embrasing it in his arms: As we read also
of the Prophet Eliseus, who did the like over the dead child, 2. Reg. 4.34*
stretching forth his feet and his hands, and set his mouth directly on the
mouth of the dead, and his eyes on the eyes of the dead: and so he with these
notable tokens, jointly with his devout prayers, did revive that dead
carcass. But now, seeing there are no more such gifts amongst the
Congregation (for that now the preaching of the Gospel has no need of any
new establishing by signs and miracles) therefore will these Heretics say,
that it is but very Apes play, to use outward tokens, where they have no
inward power nor might, which may be showed with the sign or token. For
otherwise the Priests must rub all blind men's eyes with spitle and clay, and
stretche them selves out upon all dead carcases: which were a very
beastliness, seeing they have not the power to make the blind see, nor to
revive the dead: neither can they (with their oil) make any sick man whole.
And therefore they were better to burn the oil in their lamps, or grease
their boots withal, rather than so to dissemble and mock with God and his
word: This talk these Heretics have, when they are gathered together: but we
do not pass for them one hair. For when we shall find any of those, that
would grease his shoes with that holy oil or ointment: yea, if he will not
pray unto it, and worship it upon his knees, as though it were God him self,
him we will burn in stead of oil, and make a good fire of him* For we will
stand unto the words of James, and the example of the Apostles, whether we
have the power to make whole or no: we go forth with our matter, even as we
also grease the childrens eyes with clay and spitle, although we have not the
power to make the blind see: yea, and although the children are not blind, it
is enough for us that our mother the holy Church has so ordained.
Notwithstanding it is here greatly to be noted, that master Gentianus has
gone about to declare his innocence herein, saying, that he did bring this in
only by manner of example, and as children play in jest: For otherwise, if
it were in earnest, he would bring in other manner of stuff: for he could
say so much to the matter, as he would quickly stop the mouths of the
Heretics, as men may easily judge by his goodly utterance, and by his great
learning, which does appear of him on all parts.

Here does follow the declaration upon the fourth part of Master Gentianus
Epistle, treating of the praying to images: How they are holden and ordained
in the Church of Rome: And also of this word or name Idololatria, of the
idolatry of the Heathen, of praying to Saints, and of the Sacrament, with
such other like matters.
The first Chapter. Of the name Idololatria, and that men ought to pray to
Images, with such prayers as do appertain unto those, after whom the images
are made. And of the good felow^hippe and agreeing in one, which is betwixt the
Jews and the Church of Rome, and of the hallowed Agnus Dei.
Of inuocating ^mages look the 4. leaf and 13. chap. of the 2. part.
THe fourth part is a weighty matter, and of great importance, which does
make master Gentianus have an unquiet mind, as he himself does say: to wit,
That these Heretics have no more respect unto these old and devout Catholic
men, but for to esteem them for seruers of false Gods, and worshippers of
images, and do call them Idololatras that is, Idolaters. Alas, is not that
great pity? And are they not marvelous much to blame? In the council
holden at Nicen in the 1. session in the Anathematisme.
whereas our dear mother the holy church can in no wise bear with this
name, nor hear of it: but has finally concluded, commanded, and ordained,
upon pain to be banished, accursed, excommunicated, and anathematized: That no
man shall name her Saints, Idola.
by that same Greek word Idola, which is as much to say, as an image, or
likeness, yea, and has flatly determined, that from henceforth this same
word shall no more be taken properly for images or likenesses made after any
man, or other thing to their worship, like as it has evermore from time to
time been taken and used, as well by the Greeks as Latinistes: but shall now be
taken for nothing else, but only for the false Gods of the Heathen or Jews,
and such images as they heretofore have used in their Temples: Insomuch that
the very natural and proper name and similitude of this word, is wholly
transubstantiated, and turned into an other substance and being.

And therefore these Heretics, are very much to blame that they will come and
plague our most dear mother, yet again anewe, with this word Idola, and say,
that the good Catholic people, and Subjects of the holy church of Rome, are
very Idolaters, because they do greatly esteem, and woorshippe the images of
our Lady and of other holy Saints, and do kiss them and lick them, and
trim them up, with goodly garments and iewelles, (setting candles burning
before them,) because they cannot see without candles, and cense them with
sweet incense, and sing Hymns and other songs of praises devoutly before
them: and because they carry them about upon their shoulders, for that they
cannot go themselves, and fall down upon their knees before them, and say to
them, Our father which art in heaven. They set them upon Altars, they go to
them on Pilgrimage, to get health and good luck in their affairs, and do
even as much worship to them, as the ancient Romans, and Greeks, or as the
Israelites did unto their false Gods.

Now upon this these Heretics say, that it is very ill done of them, and
will prove them to be very idolaters and woorshippers of false Gods: but the
blind heretics do not perceive that our images are no idolles, but holy
Saints, Images are Saints
which do many and great miracles. Neither will they understand, how that
our dear mother the holy church of Rome has commanded us so to do. For
all the holy catholic teachers have very friendly and jointly concluded,
that all images ought to be worshipped with like worship, This history is
written in the golden Legende. Also in the book of Leander Albert of Boloigne,
which he has named the description of Italy in the 164. leaf of this book
printed in the year 1550.

Item it is written by Vincent Lirinensis. And so forth by brother Bernarde of
Lu^enburgh Doctor of folly in the 11. part of the 4. book called Catalogus
Haereticorum. Thomas part.3. Quaest. 25. Article. 3.


as does apperteine unto such, after whom the said images are made, as the
good and holy man Thomas de aquino has plainly written. Yea, because that he
did handle that matter so exactly, there was a crucifixe in the city of Naples
which spoke to him, saying, Gentle Thomas thou have written well and truly of
me, what reward would thou receive? Wherevpo^ he did make answer to the
crucifixe, and said: I will have nothing else but even thy self.

Now whether the same crucifixe was of Gold, or silver, (because he was so
far in love with it above all other things) that I cannot tell, but I know
very well, that he has written wonderfully for the advancement of prayer and
woorship to be done to Images: and is for that cause likewise by Pope John
the.21. canonized for a Saint. For he has concluded (wherein our dear mother
the holy Church does likewise follow him) that while Christ is prayed unto with
Latria, Latria.
which is to say after their interpretation, with the spirit as God: men shall
likewise pray with Latria unto his Image, which is with a cole, or with a
Pencill painted upon a wall, and likewise woorship it as God himself: if it be
so, that it be painted with long hair and with a round Trencher behind his
head, and holding up his two fingers, and having the world with a cross upon
it in his hand: for even such a fellow is the right Saluator mundi.
Bonauentura super senten. lib. 3. did. 9. quaest. 2.


The worshipful Master Bonauentura does likewise establish this matter: yea
all the writers of the sentences have generally so ordained and concluded
hereupon, insomuch that these Heretics ought not now to doubt any more of the
matter. Yet it is very true, that Durandus would not allow of it, but did
rather directly withstand it, saying plainly, that Images ought not to be
prayed unto, with the like honor as those after whom they were made or
painted. But all the rest were offended with him, for that he refused to follow
the authorite of the holy church. And perhaps, if he had not written so as he
did, he had been canonized, as well as Thomas de Aquino. Notwithstanding that
a certain Spaniard called Perezius, did follow him in that point, saying,
That stones and blocks ought not to be prayed unto and worshipped with Latria, as
God, considering they do always remain stones and blocks, this is re^ersed by
brother B^rnard of Luzenburge and Leander Albert and other besides.
how muchsoeuer they be hallowed or co^iured by any body. But he is far out of
the way in this matter: For first we know, that Saint Thomas de Aquino, was
taught by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, so that he could not err, and after
that, has our dear mother accepted his opinion for the best. And wherefore
should she not? For, seeing that a simple priest can with five words, of a little
round cake, make a God: wherefore I pray you, should not a Bishop or a
Suffragane make of a goodly gilded Image a God also? That were to put little
trust in our dear mother the holy church. Therefore we must remain steadfast
upon the common opinion and judgment of our dear mother the holy church of
Rome. For a final end, the Heretics do us great wrong to call us seruers of
false Gods, worshippers of Images and Idolaters, eue^ as the Jews do, who
cannot find in their hearts, to bestow any honester name upon us. And
therefore says Master Gentianus, that some good people, which see deper into
the matter, mistrust that these Heretics should have some secret intelligence
with the Jews: yea, should play booty and be in pension with them, to maintein
friendly conversation with them, yet he adds unto it, that he for his part
does not believe any such thing, whereby it seems, that he would herein a
little flatter and annoynte their mouths with Honey, to please them withal:
but it is not so, for he speaks in this behalf, as does become a good and
stout Catholic subject of the holy church of Rome. And besides that, he
should have done these Heretics a great deal to much worship, if he should
have yoked them in a Wagon, with the nation of the Jews, who (as we have
heretofore plainly set forth) are the very best founders and chiefest
fountains and welsprings of all the ceremonies, and institutions of the holy
Church of Rome.

It is very true, that our dear mother has amended them, and brought them
into a better order, for that her wisdom and understanding does far exceed
the wisdom of Moses and Aaron: And therefore has she in place of one temple
of Solomon, caused to be builded upon mountains and hills, and other hie
places, above a hundred thousand: and in place of three or four altars, which
they had, she has set up so many, that they are not all to be told over in
seventy years. Although in deed (as before is rehearsed) the example and
pattern does proceed from the Jews, and is borrowed of them: which shadows
and figures our dear mother has followed very diligently. Heb. 9.
throughout. Col. 2.17.18. Gal. 4.9.10. and so forth.


Therefore, whereas these Heretics will (with the Apostle to the Hebrews)
defend and say, that all the figures and shadows of the old Testament were
ended, and clean taken away by the coming of Christ, and ought not to be used
any more, is rank heresy. And truly, they do thereby sufficie^tlie
declare, that they have no understanding with the Jews, neither in white nor
black. The faith of the Jews out of Moses law.
For the Jews hold that for the principal article and foundation of their
belief, to wit, that the law of Moses with all her ceremonies, and figures,
shall never be taken away, nor altered, but shall continue in her Esse for
ever, like as it does appear by their teacher Rabbin Moses Henmaymon, who
wrote a book of the thirteen articles of their belief.

Ceremonies of the Lutherans.
This tends likewise as right as a line, against the doctrine of the Lutherans
and Zwinglians, who take upon them to defend stoutly, that men ought not to
use any other ceremonies, than only such as Christ him self and his Apostles
have ordained. And therefore will not they have in their temples any altars,
nor guilte images, 1. Cor. 14.29.
nor any other such like ceremonial things: but will only, when as they are
assembled together, that nothing else shall be done, than, like as Paul has
taught, after that every one has soung a Psalm, 1. Cor. 11.2.25.
or declared some text of Scripture, or some open declaration or exposition,
and all tending to edifying: This is in the decrees chap. vasa. de consecra.
did. 1. And it was the Proverb of Bonifac^ of the marters and Bishops.
or (as he says in an other place:) That which we have received of the Lord,
etc. And now they are so gross, that they do not note, that it was so, In
illo tempore, that is to say: At that time, when there were wodden chalices and
golden Priests* but (as the good martyr Bonifacius, and after him Durandus
have ^aide) the leaf is now turned: because now we have wodden Priests, and
golden Chalices. For now is the authority of the Church, and the serving of
God, waxen a great deal f^tter, than it was in the time of the Apostles. And
therefore can the holy Church now agree a great deal better with the Jews.
And so have commanded very straightly, Look the foresaid Chap. Vasa. In the
Decrees and that which follows. And the council, Tribur. Can. 9.
that there shall no more Mass be ministered with wodden Chalices, for that
God shall not be moved to wrath in such a thing, wherewith he ought to be
pleased, as if they be of gold and silver, as it has been concluded in the
Councelles of Triburensis, and Remensis, and so entered in the decretals. For
she will (according to the manner of the Jews) set forth her serving of God
bravely with gold and silver: yea, the more that the religion, and the Gospel
do take ^o them, the more will she have the Jewish manners and ceremonies
used. So that Master Gentianus should err very fa^^e, Look ye whole first
did. de consecrat in the decrees.
if he should go about to resemble the Huguenotes and Caluinistes to the
Jews, who do agree so well in one with our dear mother the holy Church of
Rome, that they piss both in one quill, and have all studied in one school.
But these Huguenotes will have all things after their own mind reformed
according to the Gospel, as it was in the time of the Apostles, and therefore
we will let them go, with a good year, and hold us fast to the Jews. For
our holy father the Pope himself does bear the Jews very good will, A
synagoge of Jews at Rome.
and does show them all the friendship he can, or may. He does keep a
great many of them, in his city of Rome, and lettes them have one or two of
the best streets that be there.

This task has authority without Italy. But within Italy is a pound
Turnoys changed to a pound Sterling.
Yea, he is fast in their pension: for of every Jew that will have a synagoge
in his house, the Pope has thirty pound Turnoys, which is seven Ducates, and
six sterlinges: and if they will have license to set up one openly, then the
price is set up in the Popes reckoning chamber, at sixty pound Turnoys,
which is fifteen Ducates. Note what fearful blasphemy should it then be,
to say, that the Huguenotes were in pension with the Jews likewise, for that
therevppon it must needs follow, that they should be companions and
brethren with our holy father the Pope: No, The Pope agrees better with Jews,
Turks, and Heathen, than with Huguenotes.
no I warrant you, he can agree much better with the Jews: yea, with the
Turks and Heathen, better than with the Huguenotes, which go about to
refourme his holy Sea, according to the Gospel: he can neither abide the sight
nor smell of them* yea, and the matter is so far gone, that he would allow
them an assembly and meeting together, as he does the Jews, for a small
piece of money, to the end that he might set a (...) upon them, and burn
them all up, where he might catch them, or come handsomely by them.

It is most true, that the Jews do likewise call us Worshippers of false
gods, and idolaters, that is, Prayers to images, and do herein agree with
these Heretics: but they are therein to be ^orne withal. For they have
learned it of old out of their Bible, and also out of their Prophets, who
knew nothing at all yet, of the goodly and Hellishe (I forget my self, I
should have said holy) ordinances of the Popes of Rome: neither did they
understand, that the images must be prayed unto and worshipped, even as the
thing, after which they are made and fashioned.

For Saint Thomas de Aquino, that heavenly English Doctor, was not yet in place
for to teach such things, neither had* they yet heard any tidinges of our
Saints, nor of all the miracles which they do, nor that the mild Empress
Irene had not yet scratcht out her sons eyes, to bring to pass (by the good
assistaunce of the second council of Nice) the woorshipping of images again.
And therefore the Prophets knew not yet the difference that is betwixt
Latria, Look the.13. Chap. of the second part.
Dusia, and Hyperdulia: and therefore did they condemn all such, as did pray
to any images, for woorshippers of false gods, without making any difference
or exception between the Catholics and the Heathen.

And now, when the Jews do read the same, they think that the Prophets did
speak as well of our dear mother the holy Church, as of their forefathers.
And then that which the Prophet Jeremy says: Iere. 7.17.
That they did offer Cakes to the Queen of Heaven, that do they think to be
spoken of by such as call our Lady, The Queen of Heaven, Queen of Heaven.
and do offer to her Cakes, Flawnes, Tartes, and all kind of proper things,
without care. But these heretics do know better* yea, their old shoes do
know, that the Prophets speak to the Jews, and not to us. For we were yet
unborn, and therefore we may not seem to take it upon us: for he that is
not ytchie has no need to scratche, and he that is not scabbed, has no need
to clawe. And yet they pretend so, as though they knew no other, and do not
forbear to blare us out for woorshippers of false gods, and idolaters:
therefore shall not they go free with the Jews. And it is not to be thought,
that they should have any secret conference with the Jews, as Master
Gentianus has very learnedly considered and noted, yet has he dealt very
grossly in one point, where he does so spitefully blame the Jews, for their
golden Calfe, saying, Golden Calfe.
that our dear mother the holy Church of Rome has never been brought unto
so great a folly as that. Truly, if this had not proceeded from him even of a
pure and simple Catholic zeal, it might almost be taken for a blasphemy and
an heresy.

For although it be very true, that the holy Church has no golden Calfe:
yet has she not therefore forgotten to follow herein the trace and
footesteppes of the Jews, her good schoolemaisters. For in place of that that
Aaron the high Priest once hallowed the golden Calfe, our dear mother has
ordained and set forth, that the Pope of Rome (who undoubtedly is established
in Aarons place) shall yearly hallow and bless a certain number of lambs of
wax, which he does call Agnus Dei, Agnus Dei.
that is to say, The lamb of God: or, The son of God, which has taken away
the sins of the world: and being slain as a lamb for us, has released us
from the bondage of the devil, even as Aaron and the Jews did name their
Calfe: The God which had delivered them out of the slavery of the land of
Egypt.

And now, although that a Calfe is better than a lamb, and gold of much
greater value than wax: yet our holy father the Pope of Rome has such a
notable devise of Alcamistrie, that he will for these lambs bring good fat
Oxen into his kitchen, and lumpes of gold which will not be much less
woorthe than the golden Calfe of the Jews: for the power of these lambs is so
great, that it is unspeakable. And that may be perceived out of the Latin
verses which Pope Urban did once send with five such Agnus Dei, to the
Emperor of Graecia, In the book called Ceremoniale Roman. Eccle.
for a great and solemn present, which verses are these that follow:
Balsamus, and munda
cera, cum Chrismatis vnda,
Conficiunt Agnum,
quod munus do tibi magnum:
Font velut natum,
per mystica sanctificatum:
Fulgura de sursum
depellit, and omne malignum.
Peccatum frangit,
vt Christi sanguis, and angit.
Praegnans seruatur,
simul and partus liberatur.
Dona defert dignis,
virtutem destruit ignis.
Portatus munde,
de fluctibus eripit vndae*


That is to say: Balm, virgin wax, and holy water,
an Agnus Dei make:
A gift than which none can be greater,
I send for thee to take.
From founteine clear the same has issue,
in secret sanctifide:
All these virtues are ascribed to the Agnus Dei, or lamb of God.
Aynst lightening it has sovereign virtue,
and thunder crackes beside.
Each heinous sin it wears and wastes,
even as Christ's precious blood:
And women whiles their travel lasts,
it saues, it is so good.
It does bestow great gifts and graces,
on such as well deserve:
And borne about in noisome places,
from peril does preserve.
The force of fire, whose heat destroys,
it breaks and brings down:
And he or she that this enjoys,
no water shall them drown.


Now my masters, how like you this sauce? Let us now see, if the golden calfe
of the Jews had such might and power. No, that was far from home. Neither do
the Jews ascribe any such thing to their calfe: but did even simply think*
seeing Moses was away, that they would have some apparent thing before their
eyes, which should put them in remembrance of their deliverance by God: and
therefore they did call it, The God which had delivered them out of the land of
Egypt, as our mother the holy church does likewise co^monlie say, by an old
rotten block* Behold, there is your God, which was hanged upon the cross for
you: or, There is our Lady which has done great miracles. So that their Calfe
is not to be compared with our Agnus Dei. But now, seeing the Jews do know
nothing of all this, neither do understand of what power this is: therefore
may they justly think, that their golden Calfe and our Agnus Dei, are both
children of one mother. So that Master Gentianus had done much better
(speaking under correction) that he had not so quickly and spitefully blamed
them for that matter: least now they should say, that the pot does blame
the kettell for being so black with smoke.

The ii. Chapter. That the sacrament of the Altar must be prayed unto,
otherwise Christ were no God..
Look also the 4.5. and 6 cap. of the 2. part.
ANd now, proceeding to the conclusions which Master Gentianus does add
hereunto, which (I assure you) are very fine and spiteful witty, and is a
very learned piece, which the schoolemasters of Louen call Argumentum cornutum,
that is to say, A cornet or horned Argument, because he does herewith thrust
all the Huguenotes as far backwards, as a lusty young ox would crushe Paul's
steeple in pieces with his horns. Mark now, this is his argument: If the
sacrament of the Altar were not prayed unto, then were Christ no God: and now
Christ without all dout is God: Ergo these Huguenots must needs be damnable
Samosatenes, which deny the Godhead of Christ.

That hitteth as iumpe as six fingers in a glove: For the holy church has
once for all resolutelie concluded, That the bread of the sacrament, is the
very body of Christ, as long and as broad as it did hang upon the cross.
Then it must needs follow, that whosoever does not believe that, does
therewith also not believe, that Christ is God: or else must men needs say,
that the Church of Rome has erred, which were so dangerous a matter, as would
make the brisles of a wild Bore to stand on end. It is very true, that Christ
did not command us to pray to it, but said simply, Take, eat, etc. And
neither Saint Paul* nor any of the Apostles did ever know of any praying to
it. But what is that to the purpose? Seeing men are sufficiently informed,
that they had not yet that power to make goodly pixes, or sacrament houses, to
lay him in, and to carry him sometime about in procession under a Canopie of
silk: The followers were then to many: they had not the leisure nor time:
neither was the dearly beloved and eldest daughter of our dear mother the
holy church of Rome as yet borne, to wit, Peruse the 4. chap. of the 2. part.
Transubstantiation. But as soon as that blessed babe was brought into the
world, by the mean and faithful help of that good middewife called,
Theologia Sophistica, and was nourished up with the sweet milk of her dear
mamme and nourse Concomitantiae, then came first in sight jointly withal, The
praying to the sacrament: and then they lodged their God in the half moon,
and shut him in a goodly golden cofer or pixe, till the time that he should
go abroad with the Giant in the procession to quicken his spirits a little,
and then they will daunse before the Bride with a fife and a drumbe. And thus
does this witty conclusion and argument of Master Gentianus proponing remain
so fast and firm, as a reed, which is shaken to and fro with all winds.

The iii. Chapter. Of praying to images, and especially to the cross, and of
the great power and advantage of the cross.
Touching this turn also to the 1. chap. of the 4. part.
Now, after the praying unto shapen gods, he does begin again with praying
to images, and to the cross, which is from the Ox to the Ass: and surely,
he has conceived that very wisely, where he says, That we may not pray to
the cross, as to a creature, or to a similitude or likeness: For there was
never any man so frantike or mad, which would pray to any thing in stead
of God, as a bare and simple creature: yea, the Jews themselves (as we have
seen) when they did pray unto their golden calfe, did it not in worship of the
golden creature, as a creature: but in remembrance of him which had brought them
out of the land of Egypt: as they well witnessed them selves, in naming it by
the name of him, after whom they had made it. The like have the Heathen always
done: and in consideration thereof, they did call their images, idols, or
simulachra, that is to say, Likenesses or images, because they did (in making
them) attribute unto them the power of God. And therefore did the Egyptians
pray unto those creatures, wherein they perceived best Gods goodness to be
declared toward us, as Oxen and Kine, the Sun and the Moon, and other
creatures, wherein they found any special help or comfort: as is to be seen
by Justinius, Athenagoras, Arnob. August. Lactan. Eusebius, Orosius, and other
such like, which have written against them: and very notoriously out of
Esaie, who speaking against the Jews, said, That God by his eternal and
unspeakable power did make heaven and earth. And then he does demand of them:
Like unto whom then will you make God? Or wherewith will you make his image?
Giving them thereby plainly to understand, that they did not pray to their
blocks and stocks only as simple creatures, but that they did (through such
resemblances and likenesses) think to have an image, and so a remembrance of
God: even as Master Gentianus does here likewise allege. And it was also
thus concluded in the second Council of Nice. For sure, Look the 13. chap. of
the 2. p^^t.
a calfe may conceive and see, that our dear mother the holy church has this
discretion, as well as the idolatrous Jews and Heathen. It may well happen,
that some simple people, and old devout wives do esteem that block or
stock it self (where it stands) for a very God: especially, when he
begins to laugh upon them, or else to weep bitter tears for great pity.
But what then? That is satisfied by their good intents and devout meanings,
which the holy church does apply to the best. Yet notwithstanding, her own
ground and foundation is no other, but even the same ground of the Jews and
Heathen. Always excepted and to be considered, The Image of the cross prayed
unto.
that the image of the Cross has a special prerogative before all other
images and likenesses: for it is like to the Sextons Cow, and therefore may
grase in the churchyard: and she is by our dear mother prayed unto with a
three fold devotion more than other.

But now, that I do not forget the cross of pardons, which is commonly set up
in the church, when any bulls or letters of pardon are come down from Rome:
which cross has even such power (unless men will make the Popes Legates
rank liers) as the offering up of the body and blood of Jesus Christ upon the
cross for our sins. And yet we must besides all this, pray unto and worship
all small or ordinary crosses with Latria, that is to say, with such worship,
as does apperteine unto God only: acording to the order and common rule of
their school here before rehearsed and spoken of. After this now, the very
wood of the cross which came from Jerusalem, John Tekel the Popes Legate, and
after that Bishop of Mentz, did preach this at Franckfort, anno 1517. Latria.
Read the writers of Sent. which have altogether concluded this after this manner.
and which Christ was crucified upon, must be by us worshipped as a creature
for it own proper worthiness, and prayed unto with Hyperdulia, that is, with such
worship, as is ascribes unto the virgin Marie* especially considering the
great miracle that is thereupon to be seen: which is, that it is so waxen and
increased, that the pieces thereof would lade a good Hulke. And lastly, in
reverence of the most holy cross, we must worship al other tokens and
similitudes of the same* Wherein our loving mother does attribute great
pre-eminence to the holy cross in respect of that which she does show
toward all the relics and holy things. True it is, that (most devoutly)
she does worship a heap of spears, wherwithal Christ his side was pierced,
and two or three dosen of the very same nails, which our Savior was nailed
with on the cross: yea, she has also ordained a holy day in ^^uerence of
the same, and has appointed a special Mass for it: namely, In festo Lanceae
and Clauorum Domini. And then greetes the same most friendly with a Sonnet,
The feast of the Spear and Nails of Christ's passion.
wherein she sings thus: Aue ferrum triumphale,
Intrans pectus tu vitale,
Coeli pandis ostia,
Fecundata in cruore,
Foelix Hasta nos amore,


Per te fixi saucia, etc. with the rest that follows, which in our tongue
might thus be englished: All hayle, O Spear triumphant,
which pearcing Christ his side,
Commaundedst as thy servant,
heaven gates to open wide:
O happy Spear and blessed,
did Crimson red in blood,
Of love save us distressed,
vouchsafe to be so good, etc.
Thereafter has she yet four or five of the right sponges, wherewithal
Christ was refreshed with vinegar, Sponges.
which she devoutly does lick and kiss, and reserues for a singular
relic. Moreover, she has the very natural tail of the Ass whereon he
rode, The Ass tail. The Manger.
and the same Manger wherein he lay, whereof she makes great store. But what
is all this to be compared by the reverence which she does show to the holy
Cross? For admit she does worship five or six Spears, and some Nails, yet
will she not worship all the spears, which are used in the wars, nor all the
nails which are made in the smithes forges, nor all the sponges which grow in
the sea, nor yet all the tails wherewith the asses are covered behind, nor all
the mangers wherein horses have their prouender, (like as she does permit to
worship all the crosses which can be made) for then you should counterfeite the
Ape to nigh: yet may it seem strange to some, whether all other relics or
holy things have pist against the moon because they cannot atteine to the like
preferment. For all the rods of right might challenge the same privilege, in
worship of the rod wherewith Christ was scourged, and al ropes in worship of
that with which he was bound, and all haithornes in worship of the thorns
wherewith he was crowned. But it behoues them to be content with their portion,
for they are sufficiently provided for: and if sobeit the holy church does
please to attribute more to the cross, it proceeds of her mere liberality,
and of the special love which she does bear to the same, which for the same
cause she reuerenceth more than the very body of Christ, which did hang on
the cross, or than his blood which he has spilt on the cross. For we can
not perceive, that in reverence of the body of Christ, all bodies, and much
less, all similitudes or likenesses of the body are had in reverence or
worship: like as not only all crosses, but all figures and likenesses of the
cross are worshipped, reverenced, kissed, and lickt in reverence of that only
cross whereon his body did hang. But it has thus pleased our loving mother
the holy church: and not without most great and weighty occasions: for
without doubt, the likeness of the holy cross is of of such great power and
singular virtue, that the devil does take it for a bulbegger, and flies from
it, as a dog does from a piece of bacon. Like as evidently appears in the
golden Legend of Saint Christopher: and in a number of other legendes, where
almost for fear he beraied his breech, so soon as a cross was made. And it
is also the cudgel wherewith he was once beaten, like as we may plainly see
on all altars, and in processions, where our Savior is counterfeited knocking
with a cross upon the gates of hell, at which all the devils run away as
though they were possessed. Moreover, it is the token with the which God has
created heaven and earth: and that is it which Esai would say (according to the
exposition of our holy mother the church) saying thus: Who has holden the
waters in his fist? Who has measured heaven with his spanne, and has
comprehended all the world in their measures? Who has wayed the mountains
and hills in a balance? Which is to say, that God did (with three fingers)
make a cross, when he created heaven and earth. Item, our holy mother the
church says besides, That Moses did with the figure of the cross change the
bitterness of the waters in the wilderness, and caused the water to flow out
of the stony rock. And although the scripture does not make mention of any
cross, but only of a rod wherwithall Moses did strike: yet our mother the
holy church has thus expounded the same, supposing that Moses did the like to
the Bishops now, who with their staff do make a cross and so bless the
people. She has also fained, that those which do sprinkle their thresholdes
with the blood of the Paschal lamb, and thereon set the figure of a cross,
that the striking Angel by means of the cross does pass by it, like as we
have out of their sequences, (which they upon the cross days, named Inuentio
S. crucis, sign) here above rehearsed. Besides that, the same which Ezechiel
does mention of Tau, Ezech. 9.4. Tau is an Hebrew word, signifying with us a
token. For that which Ezech. does call Tau, that does John expound for a
seal, Apo. 7.3.
that is to say, of the token or seal, which is set upon the foreheads of the
elect, thereof has she also made a cross: albeit that the letter Tau does
resemble the figure of the cross no more then an aple does an oyster: for the
one is written thus, and the other thus,: notwithstanding she does not take the
matter so near: we must (for clownes) sift meal through a lattice, and set
them packing after the homeliest sort, then may they bake their bread as they
list. This once is the issue, that all cursing and coniuring, all hallowing and
blessing, al mysteries and co^secrations must be made with crosses.

The holy Mass is likewise full of crosses from one end to another: sometimes
with two at once to save both body and soul, or to change both bread and
wine: sometime with three together, in worship of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: sometime with five at once, in reverence of the five wounds of
Christ Jesus. The blessed holy water is made with crosses, the wax candles,
the salt, the holy oil, the palms, Thom. de Aquin. in the e^positio^ of the
Mass. Gu^do de monte Roch. in Encheir. sacerd or the Pamphlet of Priests, in
the title De Sac. Euc. Seek al^o Durandus and Innocent, for they do expound
these crosses also in like manner.
the Agnus Dei, the holy ashes, and all the implementes pertaining to the
Priests, are created with crosses: yea the Priests themselves without crosses
cannot be made Priests. In all processions the cross must go before. Upon all
bables, toys and sacrament boxes must stand a cross, least the devil should
put in his nose: yea, upon all wafers and trinkets, upon churches and upon
steeples, and also upon coin, and upon Ma^mona iniquitatis, a cross must
simper.

To conclude, the cross has an oar in every boat, and has a place in all
the ceremonies perteining to the holy Church of Rome. There can not a Pageant
be played, but she must have a part: yea, a Nun durst scarce let a fyste,
but she must bless her self with a cross. And the Priests are never worse
at ease, than when they have never a cross in their purse. Therefore, it is not
without great and urgent occasion, that our holy mother does hold the cross
in such honor: in so much as she has for her sake, ordained and instituted
three or four holy or festiual days, as namely, Inuentio crucis, Rogationum,
Exaltatio crucis, and other such like. Look the 16. chap. of the 2.
She has also a special Mass in honor of the holy cross, which she
names, Missa de sancta cruce: and a service called, Officium de sancta cruce.
And besides she has more ordained and charged, Look the 16.^2.
that we should upon the good Friday after Maunday thursday, devoutly and
sadly creeping along the ground upon our bare knees, worship the cross, and
there bestow a good fat offering, and liberal alms to the benefit and
maintenance of the poor Priests, so that they with crosses in their purses,
might be preserved against the devil. Whereunto she has frankly given a
great heap of pardons to those which with great devotion do the same. For she
does esteem and believe, that the cross has no less force than the blood
of Jesus Christ the son of God. For behold, these are the words with the
which she causes the cross to be consecrated or hallowed.

Oramus te Domine sancte pater, etc. vt digneris benedicere hoc lignu^ crucis
tuae, vt sit remedium salutare generi humano, sit soliditas fidei, bonoru^
operum profectus, and redemptio animarum: sit solamen and protectio, ac tutela
contra saeua iacula inimicorum, etc. That is: We beseech thee, O Lord heavenly
father, that thou will so bless this wood of the cross, that it may be a
healthful help to mankind, a co^firming or strengthening to faith, a
furtherance to good works, and a redemption of souls: that it may be our
comfort, our safeguard and defender against the noisome darts of the enemies,
etc.

What can we ascribe more to Christ Jesus the son of God for the help and
consolation of man, than our mother the holy church does ascribe here unto
the cross? yea all that Christ has ever done, and all the good which can be
thought, that has she in like manner attributed to the figure of the cross.
For these be her words: Ista suos fortiores
Semper facit, and victores,
Morbos sanat and languores,
Reprimit daemonia.
Dat captiuis libertatem,
Vitae confert nouitatem,
Ad antiquam dignitatem,
Crux reduxit omnia.
O Crux lignum triumphale,
Mundi vera salus vale,
Inter ligna nullum tale,
Fronde* flore, germine:
Medicina Christiana,
Salua sanos, aegros sana,
Quod non valet vis humana,
Fit in tuo nomine, etc.


That is to say: It makes her soldiers excellent,
and crowns them with victory,
Restores the lame and impotent,
and heals every malady,
The devils of hell it conquereth,
releaseth from imprisonment,
Newness of life it offers,
it has all at commandment.
O Cross of wodde incomparable,
to all the world most wholesome:
No wodde is half so honorable,
in branche, in bud, or blossom,
O medicine which Christ did ordain,
the sound save every hour,
The sick and sore make whole again,
by virtue of thy pour.
And that which man's unableness,
has never comprehended,
Grant by thy name of holiness,
it may be fully ended, etc.


Behold, here may you see that Christ Jesus is deprived of his right, and the
same is given to a wodden Cross, so that it is not without just cause, that
the Catholic children of our holy mother the Church do name themselves
servants and slaves of the Cross, singing thus: Serui crucis crucem laudent,
qui per crucem sibi gaudent,
Vitae dari munera,
dicant omnes, dicant singli:
Aue salus totius soecli,
arbor salutifera:


That is to say: The servants of the holy Cross,
her praise to heaven let them toss.
And they which in the Cross rejoice,
and of the gifts of life have choice,
Let this of all, both old and young,
in solemn sort be said and soung,
O holy Cross which can prevail,
O tree of life, All hail, All hail.


Therefore neither is it any marvel, that she does call upon it so devoutly,
and prays that it may defend us from all adversity, crying with a shrill
voice: Ecce lignum crucis, venite, adoremus, That is to say: Behold, here is
the wood of the cross, come let us worship it. And also, O crux spes vnica,
auge pijs iustitiam, dona reis veniam, That is to say: O holy Cross our only
hope, increase righteousness to the godly, and pardon the offenses of the
wicked. It is no wonder neither, that she does so friendly flatter and coll it
even like as the she Ape does her young ones, with all manner of pleasure
she can devise. For she does speak unto it, and does commend it as though
it had great understanding. For this is it which they say:

Dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulcia ferens pondera: quod solum fuisti dignum
sustinere Regem coelorum and Dominum. That is to say:

O sweet wood, which did bear a sweet burden, fastened unto thee with
sweet nails, which wast reputed worthy, thou alone above all other, to bear
the King of Heaven the Lord Jesus.

With other sonnets, sounding all upon the same tune, which she sings
devoutly in Gang week. And to the end that none should marvel hereat, Master
Gentianus does here show, that all this is founded upon the Scripture, the
which he does confirm by these words of Paul, God forbid that I should
rejoice, Gala. 6.14.
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: for by this Cross does not he
understand the satisfaction and salvation which it brought unto us by the
Passion and death of our Savior Jesus Christ (for that understanding is
heretical) but only the figure and bare likeness of the Cross, like as our
dear mother the holy Church has expounded it, ordeining and commanding
that these foresaid words of Paul, be song upon the day called Inuentio
sanctae Crucis, with open voice over the figure and likeness of the Cross.
And in deed it is to be thought, that this is the just meaning of Paul: for
otherwise if he had taken it so, like as these Heretics will interpret it,
what else might ensue thereof, then all manner of anguish and sorrow,
persecution and trouble? Gala. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 21.23.
Which is all together understood by the Cross of Jesus Christ, which was a
kind of shameful and detestable death, as the gallows is with us. Verily
Master Gentianus nor the Prelates of the holy Church conceive no great pride
in such a manner of Cross: but they gladly post it over to the Heretics and
Huguenotes, against whom commonly they cry, Crucifige, crucifige, Hang them
up, hang them up. But the figure and holy token of the cross formed of gold or
silver, is the only hope, trust, and stay of the holy Church of Rome, and
of all her subjects. For it brings her in good rentes, and makes
continually a warm kitchen and a plentiful table. Therefore must we
(doubtless) understand Paul so, to the end his text may agree with the
foresaid sonnet of the holy Church.

But touching Master Gentianus, in that he is here angry, and rores against
the Heretics, saying: It is a diuelishe mockery, that the Heretics regard
not to ask, whether we will fraie away fli^s, when we make a sign of the
Cross with three fingers. Therein has he not (in my judgment) any great
reason, so to disturb himself. For seeing that with a token of the cross we
fraie away devils: what marvel is it then with the same to drive away flies,
which in comparison are nothing so wicked as devils? Howbeit they do
oftentimes shamefully beshite the Sacrament box, yea the God himself, which
dwelles therein, and oftentimes do disturb the devotion of Priests in their
Memento, and when they stand dreaming in their secrets. Verily that is not to
be compared by the diuelles. But Zele and fervent affection has caused our
Gentianus thus to speak. And from the flies does he retire again to the
images, for those in no sauce can he forget, but will defend them by virtue of
the second council of Nicen. But because we have hereof spoken sufficiently
before, we will not trouble the reader therewith any further.

The.iiii. Chapter. Of the worshipping of Saints, and how their charges and
offices are bestowed to each a part, and specially of our holy Lady of
Loretto, and further of the agreement and disagreement which is between the
^atholikes and the Heathen.
Forwards he does proceed from the images, Saints.
and falls to the worshipping of Saints, which are those holy ones which
are departed this world into heaven, and says, That they are not worshipped
of our loving mother the holy Church as gods, but they are prayed unto only
that they will make intercession for us. For albeit that Saint Paul says,
There is but one God, 1. Tim. 2.5.
and one intercessour, betwixt God and man, namely Jesus Christ: yet that must
be understood of those days, when the holy father the Pope of Rome had not
yet canonized any Saints, neither commanded, that we should erect any altars
or Churches for them, In the council of Nice, in the council of Tren^ Peter
Lombarde in the* 4 book of Senten.. did. 45. B^nauent. did. eadem arti. 2.
read Masses, or offer gifts, and by their merits to crave pardon for our
sins. For since that time has the holy Church concluded in sundry her
Councils, that they should also be our Atturnies, Intercessours, or Mediators:
and that we should cry to them at all times of our need. Yea she has
prescribed to each his charge, like as upon Twelfe Eeue, every one is
appointed his office by drawing of lottes: Our Lady has gotten the bean out
of the Cake, and the Queen of Heaven is their hope, their stay, the gate of
heaven, the Queen and mother of mercies, Mother of compassion, their life,
their pleasure, and their only Mediator and Advocate.

In sum, there is no other refuge or present stay, than she alone, like as
they with express words do daily sing in their prayers and thankesgeuing in
their Christi virgo dilectissima, their Aue Maria stella: O intemerata: Stabat
matter, and many other pretty pageantes, which our holy fathers the Popes of
Rome them selves have made, and with many pardons have trimly adorned and set
out: but in especial in their Salve Regina. Yea, they beseech her in one of
her prayers, which they call Prosas, that she will, by her motherly authority,
command Christ Jesus the true and everlasting God, and show by the date,
that she is the mother. Moreover they beseech her also that she will accept
and receive them in the last hour of death, Look ye church songue beginning
Aue praeclara maris stella. Also look the Mass books and the service of our
Lady Marie, her Rosarium, Hortulus animae: the.7. tides, and other Popish
books, which are replenished with such pranckes.
and to defend them from their foes in the prayer called Maria matter gratiae,
etc. After that, all whatsoever is spoken in the worthy song of Solomon, named
Cantica canticorum, of Christ the son of God and of his loving spouse,
namely, the commonaltie of the faithful: Also, all whatsoever Esaias has
prophesied of the sprigge, which should spring out of the root of Iesse: and
of the same which should crush the old crooked snake, that do they all expound
and declare of her: Yea also the self same first promise, which God made to
our forefather Adam, saying: That the seed of the woman, should grind in
pieces the head of the Serpent, That has our holy mother the Church of Rome
advisedly expounded of Marie. And therefore in place where there stood, He
shall grind, has she set, She shall grind, as being spoken, not of Christ
Jesus the son of God, but of Marie herself, which should be the promised
seed. In sum, all the worship which in the scripture is attributed to
Christ Jesus the everlasting son of God, the same has she bequeathed unto our
Lady. And therefore will she (besides so many holy days as are instituted
and ordained for worshipping of her, that we shall notwithstanding celebrate
and keep holy the Saturdayes for her, to the end she may at least have as
much preferment as her son Jesus Christ to who^ the Sundays are attributed.
Howbeit, for all that upon the Sundays, Officium beatae Mariae, that is, The
service which is done for her worship must not be forgotten.

And hereof is it, This does B^^nardinus Ochinus rehearse in his Apologio.
Graie friars.
that once at Venice was great heuinesse toward. For when the Graie friars had
preached upon S. Francis day, the unspeakable great pardons and merits, which
might be gotten every year, if so be that the people would celebrate that
day in their Church by hearing Masses, and offering large gifts, whereby they
gathered great sums of money: The Black friars envying the same did take
upon them to preach, Black friars.
that it was not needful to tarry a whole year for S. Francis day, to
merit pardons, seeing they might have them every Saturday better cheap, if
they would resort to their Patroness: namely, our Lady every week, and in
honor of her, bestow^ their devotion in their Cloister, whereby they prevailed
so much, that the people did wholly forsake Saint Francis, and bequeathed
themselves to our Lady, and the Black friars began by this means to be
very rich, and to make good fat brues. Croutched Friars.
But when the Croutched friars envying this, would also preach, that the
general pardon might (not only from week to week, but also from day to day)
be merited, in most abundant manner, if so be it that the people would come to
celebrate and reverence the cross of Christ daily in their Cloister, for as
much as Christ by his cross and passion had purchased such a large remission
and pardon of all men's sins, that they needed not to tarry for the Saturday,
and much less for S. Francis day, neither yet to run after any other
Saints, when as they might draw water out of the fountain it self: whereat
all the friars together waxed so wroth* that they procured by the Signo^ie of
Venice, that these Croutched-friers should be musseled, and forbidden to
preach so any more, as being a matter most hurtful to all Saints, and
especially to our well-beloved mother of God, which by the Catholics is
worshipped, and who was very woeful to be so forsaken, by means of following
her son. So as it is not without occasion, that our well-beloved mother the
holy Church, has foresene this matter so discretely, ordeining that she
should at least deserve as much devotion and reverence, as Christ Jesus
himself.

For this their Lady is desirous of glory, and very fond of such devotion:
This story is set forth in the Church of Loreta, and affirmed in the
history of ^eander Albert of Bullin, called The description of Ital^, where he
is writing of Recanati.
which evidently appears by her closet, wherein she was borne and bred. For
when the Jews did first cleave to the faith of Mahomet (guess when this was)
then did she ordeine, that the Angels should remove her closet from the
foundation, standing in Nazareth, and bear it through the air into the
country of Slauonie: But when she perceived that she was not sufficiently
honored there, as she did look for, then did she most speedily cause the
Angels to remove the same closet to a hill in the country of Recanati, in a
wood, which apperteined to a good woman named Loretta: whereby she is yet called
at this day, Our Lady of Loretta, howbeit, she could not abide to stay there
long, for that (by reason of the great access of people) many murders and
robberies chanced: for which cause she removed again, and caused her closet to
be borne unto an other mounteine or hill, which apperteined unto two brethren,
which for the lucre or gain which they received by her, fell at variance, and
agreed like dogs and cattes together, so that she would afreshe remove again:
and seemed in a manner to have a fly in her tail, being unable to remain in
one place. In sum, the Angels did remove this closet again from thence, and did
bring it upon a common highway, where it does yet remain to this hour,
without any ground hold or foundations, by reason that the foundations were
left at Nazareth. And now it is compast in and preserved with bulworkes and
strong walls, which notwithstanding dare not touch the holy closet, through
fear and reverence which they bear to the same.

And for proof that this is true, does first appear hereby, That our Lady
did appear to a devout man in a dream, This demonstration is also written in
the Church of Loret, and is repea^^d by Leander Albert.
and has manifested all these things unto him, and he has declared all the
same to the commons of Recanati, the which (thereupon) did forthwith send.xvi.
chosen men to Jerusalem, to inquire for the certeintie hereof. To be brief,
they have found the foundations yet standing there of the same closet, so that
there remains no more doubt to be had in this matter.

Secondly, a certain holy Heremite (about two hours before day) did see a
great light descending from heaven, (in likeness to fire) which lighted upon
this Church, and it was twelve foot high, and six foot broad: so that
undoubtedly it must needs be our Lady, which came to take view of her feast,
and solemnization: for this happened upon the day of her birth, the eight day
in September, in those days, when dumb beasts spoke, and houses did ^lie.
And then did the cock crow, and it waxed day.

Lastly, we may easily discern this same, by so many, yea many godly miracles
which she even there has showed upon those which (in their need) did call
unto her, out of so many fair pictures and costly monumentes, which were
left there in her holy Church, by sundry Emperors, Kings, Dukes, and all
other sorts of people to an everlasting memory. This is no mocking matter:
For the Pope of Rome was wo^nt yearly to receive hereby about a hundredth
thousand Ducates, (howbeit, that now the rent is greatly abated.) And
therefore is it, that he does cause it to be so diligently kept, and so
strongly environed with walls, appointing always a Cardinal for safe keeping
of it, and about four or five dozen Cannons and Chaplines, which usually
observe to do her divine service, and keeps her from Thieves* and Robbers,
from Spiders, from flies, Mothes, and other her enemies. The which is so true,
that who so dare but once doubt of it, the same is reputed and presented for
an Heretic: like as is manifested by the example of Petri Pauli Vergerij,
which for the same cause, was once in the hands and examination of the
Inquisitours. Whereby we may sufficiently gather, that this Lady is greatly
desirous of glory and honor, and coueteth to be accepted and worshipped for
the Queen of Heaven, and also to have the preeminence before all the Saints
of Paradise: For she is of an other disposition than the holy Virgin Marie
(the mother of Jesus Christ) was, Luke. 1.48.
who did acknowledge her self to be a poor handmaide of God, and did direct
those which needed any thing unto her son Jesus Christ. But this stands
bedeckt and garnished with Gold and Silver like a Queen, John. 2.5.
and wills that we should reverence and adore her clothes and jewels, her
Churches and Chapels, her gilded cofers and other her furniture, vtensiles,
and implementes, like unto the everlasting and living God. To conclude, the
holy Church has made her Queen.

After this, Offices of Saints.
has she also mustred all other Saints, and has assigned and appointed to
each his sundry charge and several office a part. Each has his holy day, his
sundry Collect, holy Hymns and devout prayers: every one does know over what
handicraft or science, over which disease, over what town or Church he is
appointed to be patron, defender, and Baal* The Dutche are under the defense
of Saint George. The Burgonians hold Saint Andrewe for their Patron. The
Frenchmen Saint Michael. The Spaniardes Saint James. And further, Saint Peter
and Saint Paul are trodden in the place of Romulus and Remus, and defend the
City of Rome with a key and a sword. Saint Marks Lion is Patron over the
town of Venice, Saint George on cockehorse over Genua, Saint Ambrose with his
staff and whippe in hand over Millain, the three Kings over Cullin, Saint
Dionis keeps the town of Paris, Saint Goele does keep scoute watch at
Brussels, Saint Baue and S. Louell do love the town of Gaunt, Saint Romboute
does keep the garrison at Machelin, Saint Lambert at Luike, and so forth.
After this has Saint Hugh and Saint Eustace, gotten the hunters in guard, Saint
Martin and Saint Urban the Aleknightes, Tauernhunters, and dronkardes, Saint
Crispin and Crispinian are Patrones of the Shooemakers, Saint Arnold is Baal
over the Millers, Saint Steeuen over the Weauers, S. Luke is alloted the
Painters. And the Physicians (which might have grudged and complained hereat)
have gotten Cosmus and Damian to their chosen. The Carpenters do vaunt of their
Patron S. Euloge. The Tailers (which love good fellowship) do cleave to S.
Goodman. The potmakers have elected S. Goare, who carries a black devil
upon his shoulders, with gloing eyes, and a pot in his hand. The whores and
light women were not content with one Patroness, but have Saint Aphra (which
may be set in Venus place) which in times past was also called Aphrodite: and
besides her S. Magdalin, and so forth, as appears in Processions and stately
shows in Brabant and else where, where each company does bear his Patron or
Baal in stremers displayed with great state. Moreover and above this, S.
Anthony must keep the hogs, S. Loy the horses and kine, S. Hugh the
dogs, least they run mad, S. Gallus gardes the geese, Saint Wendelin the
sheep, S. Gertrude reigns over rats and mice.

Yea, which is more, each disease has his sundry Apothecarie and special
Doctor. S. John and S. Valentin do heal the falling sickness, howbeit that S.
John with S. Benedict is also appointed over all infections of poison. S.
Anthony can heal the burning, S. Roche the pestilence. Notwithstanding Saint
Sebastian has some skill in it also. S. Roman does restore the possessed and
mad people again to their former health, S. Mark does preserve the people
from souden death. S. Cosmus and Damian are good for all byles and swelling
diseases. S. Job for the pockes, S. Appolin for the touth ache. S. Clare does
clear and heal the fiery and red eyes. S. Agatha has skill how to deal
with swelling breasts. S. Margaret is middewife for those which are in travel
with child. But because that she remained always a chaste virgin, and
therefore not thoroughly expert in her faculty, S. Norpurg was joined with
her, as a trusty mate in such a match. S. Petronella can drive away all
manner of agues. S. Vincent and Saint Vinden cause all things that are lost to
be restored again. Saint Seruatius does cause all things to be well kept.
Saint Vitus does direct all daunsers, and such as will leap or vaute.

Hereafter yet has each his chosen joint or special place in government of a
man's body, like as in times past the twelve signs of the Sun. Saint Otillia
does govern the head, in place of the first sign named Aries: howebeit she
has bequeathed the tongue to Saint Katharine, and to Saint Appolin the teeth.
Saint Blasius is appointed over the neck, like as the sign Taurus. Saint
Laurence keeps the back, together with the shoulders, in steed of Gemini,
Cancer, and Leo. Saint Erasmus rules the whole belly with the entrals, in
place of Libra and Scorpius: Notwithstanding that Saint Appollinar has also
taken charge over Scorpius: for he is president of the secret members. And
forwards, in steed of Sagittarius, Capricornus Aquarius, and Pisces, has the
holy Church of Rome elected Saint Burgard, Saint Rochus, S. Quirinus, S. John,
and other more, which govern the thighs, the knees, the shinnes, and the
feet.

To conclude, each has his service, and who so is the deuoutest in honoring
these Saints, with burning tapers, with rose garlands, with gaie coats, and
with good fat liberal offerings, the same is the most acceptable and beloved of
our mother the holy Church. It is verelie great provision with small cost,
that the poor people (what need or disease so ever they have) know
presently where to find a good Apothecarie or Cheirurgian to cure their
diseases. For touching the Heretics which vpbraide us hereupon, that we
imitate the unbelieving Heathen, and worshippers of idols (as has bin said) and
are none, like as Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Vulcan, Juno, and Diana, and other
such like have been: but are holy saints and Gods friends. And therefore ought
we (at least) to show them as great reverence, as the Heathen did to their
idols. We ought in time of need to call upon them: to put our trust in them:
observing their rules as a commandment of God: to bequeath Cities and
Countries to their custodies: to erect Temples and Altars in their names: to
build Cloisters and Abbeys for their sakes: to consecrate and hallowe
Priests, Monks, Cannons and Nonnes for their worship. And like as the Heathen
had their Flamines, that is, Priests of Jupiter, Mars, Ceres, Bacchus, Venus,
and Diana: and also their Nonnes of Vesta, Flora, Bona Dea, Sibyl, or Magna
matter, and other such like. Even so must now the Church of Rome also have
Cannons of S. Peter, S. Bauen, and S. Lambert: And Nonnes of S. Clara, and S.
Brigit. Also as they were accustomed to offer sacrifices in honor of Apollo,
Diana, Ceres, and Proserpina: even so she observes to do her Masses and
Trentals, in honor of S. Anthony, S. Hugh, S. Sebastian, S. Rochus, S.
Barbara, and of all Saints. To conclude, they did not any worship or
reverence to their idols: but the holy church does ten times more to her
Saints: for she does attribute such things as they durst not to do the like.
For (as Homer makes mention) when Juno, Pallas, or Apollo, or any other of
that company would assist any of their friends, Homer in his 1. book Iliad^^*
they were feign to descend from heaven down to them, and could not hear
their prayers so far off, because they knew not their thoughts, although they
were mediators and intercessors for them to the great idol Jupiter. Yea, Juno
her self, which was his sister and spouse, knew not what Thetis had held him
in hand with. But our Saints remaining sitting in heaven, can erewhilest
help the people here on earth with their images, which can laugh and weep,
and do all manner of miracles: and they hear from above every man's
invocation, as well as God him self. For, admit that the Scripture witnesses,
1. Reg. 8.39.
That none does see or can conceive the thought or inward cogitation of man,
except God alone: yet the holy Church has found a trim remedy for that, by
a preatie devise of The looking glass of the Trinity, saying, That the holy
Trinity is a looking glass, wherein the Saints can see all things whatsoever
happen here on earth: yea, can sound the depth of men's thoughts, and perceive
the secrets of their hearts. It is very true* that we do not call our
Saints by this name God, like as the Heathen were wont to do their canonized
Saints: But what skilles it for the name, when we understand the matter
aright? Howebeit notwithstanding, we name them Diuos: which is even as much as
Gods, or, Men created Gods: like as they also were wont to call their men
canonized Gods, as Hercules, Dionysius, Augustus, Vespasianus, etc. And here
besides we do attribute to them this name Saints, or holy men, after the
same sense, as GOD names him self the holy one of Israel, that is, Esai.
43.3.14 and in many places.
The Defender and Safegarde which does sanctify Israel. So that our Saints
are (at least) so highly honored of us, as in times past any idols have
been by the Heathen, and as God him self can be by us.

The v. Chapter. Of the interpretation of the words Latria, Dulia, and
Hyperdulia, and how they are distributed to each.
FOr seeing it is requisite, as well through the objections which the Heretics
do here allege, as also that God has commanded, Psalm. 50.15.
that we shall alone call to him in our need, and that he esteems it more
than all sacrifices and burnt offerings which we can make to him: yea, that it
is he alone which can help us, Esa. 63.6.43.11. Esa. 63.16. and 64.10.
and that Abraham does not know us, nor Israel can say nothing of us, but that
God alone through his might can relieve us, that is to small effect: for that
knot can our holy mother so netelie lose, that it is a marvel which the
distinction that Master Gentian does here bring forth: and is by all
Catholic Doctors, and especially by the worshipful Sir Sonnio, reputed for
a mighty bulworke, namely, betwixt Latria, Dulia, and Hyperdulia. For the
holy church has hereby made a division or cavil betwixt GOD and the Saints,
wherewithal each must be content, as namely:

That God alone with his images and the holy cross, shall be honored with
Latria: the Saints and their images with Dulia: and our Lady with all the
images which apperteine to her, and all the relics of the right and holy
cross in deed, with Hyperdulia.

In very deed, God has the worst chance: for if so be we do expound it
naturally, and according to the literal sense of the word, then is Latria
nothing else but A hirelings payment. For Latron is a Greek word, Latria, look
the 3. chap. of the 4 part.
which betokens A reward or pay which is made to a hired servant: and thereby
are the hired men servants called Latres: and the maid servants Latris. And
even so is God served of the holy Church of Rome only for reward, like a
master of a hired servant. Again this Dulia, which is the Saints lot and
portion, signifies A bound service: Dulia.
for Dulos in Greek is A slave, and proper to any. And touching our Lady, to
her is alloted the best chance: for Hyperdulia is to say, Hyperdulia, lok^ the
1. chap. of the 4. part.
More than proper bound service. So that the good Catholics are but simply
hirelinges, or Gods hired servants and slaves to the Saints, but bound to
our Lady above all. But, be it, as be may, Quod scripsi, scripsi, said Pilate:
The holy Church will not revoke her cauils, the lot is east: that which is
written, remains written. Yet notwithstanding, because God shall not be
displeased, she has ordained, that the Saints shall give him a share of their
Dulia: but he shall keep Latria wholly to him self: so that Latria shall
simply signify nothing else, then the service which pertains to God alone.

In this respect has Master Gentian and all other Catholic writers great
reason, (as they allege) that the holy Church does not worship the Saints
like God with Latria, but simply as Saints with Dulia and Hyperdulia: for
that has his plain dispatche and ground on the clear text of the Scripture,
where Christ says to the Saints, Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. For in
these last words does he use the word Latreum, the which does agree with
Latria: and says, that to God alone we shall attribute the same. But in the
first words he does not once mention, that we must worship God alone with
Proskynesi, that is, With falling feet, or kneeling: Therefore will the holy
church, that this shall also be attributed to the Saints, like as it is
apparently manifest by the 2. Council of Nice, and by all Catholic writers.
And although it is true, that Christ does declare these words by the witness
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.20.
which does ascribe the first as well as the last to GOD alone: yet the holy
Church is not to reason with Moses in this point: for so much as Moses wrote
that to the Jews which were inclined to the serving of idols, and not to the
Church of Rome: which do not woorshippe idols, but only Saints.

Item, there is an other plain text in Paul, which says to the Galathians,
That when they did not know GOD, Galat. 4.^*
then did they serve them which were no Gods: even where he does use this
word Dulium, which is derived of Dulia. Whereby it does manifestly and
plainly appear, that these Heathen have also known this Catholic
distinction, and therefore would not worship their Saints, as Apollo,
Bacchus, Hercules, Castor and Pollux, with more other such like, with Latria,
but baselie with Dulia: Even like as now the holy Church of Rome does serve
her Saints. Touching all other Prophets, which so often cry, that in time of
need, we should only turn to GOD, and that he will be honored by our
calling to him: yea, and say, that all Patrones, Defendours, The Scripture is
full of such.
and Baals which may be thought on (to declare our grieves unto them) are
plain idols, all that is to small purpose, for they did not (in those days)
know any thing at al to say, touching this our distinction, and therefore
have they gone roundly to work, using plain speech, without favoring the
matter, or lapping it about with soft rags: but have served all such as
invoke idols, pray to Patrones, seek unto Saints or any deceased dead men,
with one sauce, and without excepting any, has given them to drink of one
cup. But if the Jews and other idolaters had been so wise, to have objected
to the Prophets this worthy distinction in stead of a bucklar, I trow they
would as easily have stopped their mouths, as now ye new gospellers and
preachers are put to silence.

The vi. Chapter. Wherein the worshipping of Saints is affirmed by Scripture.
NOtwithstanding our loving and dear mother the holy Church of Rome, Look
the 4. chap. of this part.
can also fish somewhat out of the Prophets writings, wherewith she does
approve the service of her holy Saints: Provided always, that she has the
keie to unfold the same for her most advantage. For in the first book of
Moses (called Genesis) is plainly and expreslie set down, That Jacob does
pray over Ephraim and Manasses, after this sort, saying: Ge. 48.15.16. This
witness is brought forth by Eckius, ^^^^derius, and all other Catholic writers,
treating upon the same.
God before who^ my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk: God, which had fed me
all my life long unto this day, and the Angel, which has delivered me from
all evil, bless the laddes, and let my name be named in them, and the name
of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. This has the holy Church of Rome construed
after this sort, That Ephraim and Manasses must invoke or call upon the
name of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for so much as the old Romish exposition
(which she does accept as most firm and irreuocable) has in place of,
named, or called, set inuocated. And although the Heretics do understand
this after the most usual manner of speech, (accustomed amongst the Hebrews)
that Jacobs name called upon, or named by Ephraim and Manasses, is as much to
say, As that they should be accounted of Jacobs generation, and accepted for
children of Israel, like as Jacob him self does expound it, saying: Ephraim
and Manasses shall be my children, and shall be called after the names of their
brethren, in their inheritance. And, like as is said in Esaie, the fourth
chapter, That seven women shall wish by one man's name to be named, Psalm. 4.1.
or called upon by them, which is, That they may be called the wives of one
man: Notwithstanding, for so much as this exposition is according to the plain
literal sense: therefore has the holy Church of Rome abiected the same, and
accepted the other former meaning: thereby concluding, that Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob are to be inuocated or called upon: Howbeit, the Prophets and Fathers
in the old Testament have never done the same, but have protested the
contrary, saying, O Lord, Esai. 63.16.
thou art our father: for Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted
with us: but thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, and thy name is
everlasting. and. But that happened, because the foresaid Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, were yet in the lodge of hell, and must pray for them selves, and could
not then see in the looking glass of the Trinity, what was done here on
earth. Wherefore likewise the Romish Church has not set down their names in
the Calendar, according to the custom of Rome. Besides, they are to old, and
were never canonized of any Pope. Nevertheless, they serve our turn, to show
after what order we must deal with our Saints.

Moreover, we have yet an evident text in Jeremy, which is, The^ said the Lord
unto me: Iere. 15.1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet have I no heart to this people.
Whereunto does agree the text of Ezechiel, saying thus: When the land sins
against me, Ezech. 14.14.
and goes forth in wickedness, I will stretch out my hand upon it, and destroy
all the provision of their bread, and send dearth upon them, to destroy man
and beast in the land. And though Noe, Daniel, and Job, these three men were
among them, yet shall they in their righteousness deliver but their own
souls, says the Lord. etc.

Now, like as (by these words of Ezechiel) it is concluded, that Noe, Daniel,
and Job, were in the town of Jerusalem, when GOD destroyed the same: so may
we also (in the like manner) conclude and affirm, that Moses and the Prophet
Samuel did pray for the children of Israel. And notwithstanding that the Lord
says, That he would not give ear to their prayers, yet the holy Church
does not regard it, for so much as (like as it has been said) they lie yet
in the dungeon of hell, and could not pray so earnestly nor with such zeal,
as the Saints do which now are in heaven. Yet nevertheless, If they (being
yet in the dungeon of hell) prayed so heartily for the people: These are the
arguments of Eckius in his En. or Pamphlet in the chap. De venerat. Sanctor.
What may we suppose that the Saints do now, which stand in the Calendar,
and are Canonized by the Pope? Verelie, they pray so zealouslie, that (often
times) their images here on earth, through anguishe do sweat and weep. The
holy church does bring forth many more places of scripture for confirmation of
these articles: Psalm. 139.17.
namely, that which David says: O God, I have honored thy friends, which is,
That we should call upon Saints, which are Gods friends. Also that Job says:
Cry (I pray thee) if happily there be any that will answer thee, Job. 5.1.
and look thou upon the holy men, etc. And albeit he speaks there of the
holy men which are in this world, like as the very text does plainly show
it self, yet why may we not understand the same of our Saints and holy men
deceased? For so much as our mother the holy Church will so have it to be
understood. This argument is brought forth by Eckius, and other writers also.
Over and above this, Christ will say at the last judgment day, unto those
which have been helpefull to the poor and needy: Whatsoever you have done to
the least of these, the same have you done unto me. Ergo, Who soever does pray
to the Saints, and in place of God does worship them, that does God accept,
as if it had been done to himself. There are yet many more and sundry of
such like proofs of scripture, which would be to tedious to rehearse: But
because the Heretics do deride them, and will understand them according to
the literal sense, and after the Greek and Hebrewe text: I know no better
mean to dispute with them, then with a good faggot.

Yet will I add thus much more, That when they have a suit to a King or
mighty Prince, they know very well, This is an argument of Eckius and all
other Catholic writers.
that first they must speak and sue for help of some of the Lords, who may
broach their cause, and by their entreaty, be a mean for them and so to
further their suit, which considered, they ought not so rudely to encroche upon
the king of all kings, without first to have spoken with one of his court. In
very deed it is most true, that a poor woman at Louen sometime did thwart
the Doctors and set them non plus: by saying. That if so be it that the King
or Prince himself had called and charged her, that she should come to him,
like as Christ expressly charged us to come to him, saying: Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you: Then would
she not have gone to seek any other for her Mediator. But this woman was a
great Heretic, and therefore was also burnt. Wherefore this article does
remain in force and vnsoluble: to wit, that we must have and allow these
Saints for our Mediators, Advocates and Atturnies, being else unable of our
selves to obtain favor of Christ Jesus: yea though he should once again die
the death for us, to prepare us the way to have free access to the merciful
throne of his heavenly father. For all this ca^ not serve, but we must have a
great sort of Solicitors, Patrones, Mediators and Baals which must move the
matter for us to whom we must use all the worship and reverence which we are
able to show unto God himself, saving that they must be content with Dulia,
and must permit God to enjoy Latria to himself, wherewith this matter is
fixte. And so will we proceed to an other.

Now follows the declaration upon the.5. part of Master Gentian Heruet his
letter, wherein is showed, that the heretics seek nothing but liberty of the
flesh, hating all prayer, fasting and abstinence.
The first Chapter. Which declares that it is a lawful thing, to lie and
falsely to accuse an heretic, being to a good intent. Also of the fables of
Cocles of Laurence Surius and of Aloysius Lippomanus, and to what purpose they
serve a^ things most needful and necessary.
IN this fifth part does M. Gentianus show, Wherefore we may lie.
that these Heretics seek nothing else but fleshely liberty, and to get
loose the bridle of their own wills and appetites: and therefore (says he) is
it, that to the death they hate all prayers, fasting and abstinence. But here
draws great heaviness toward: For a man might even at the first sight
imagine, that he speaks not indifferent, but of affection. For So Much as it is
most manifest and well known, Fasting and prayers of the Lutherians and
Huguenotes.
that they highly esteem of prayer, and also fast very often: refraining not
only from flesh, but also from all kind of meats, until the very night,
and remain durable in prayer and in hearing of sermons.

Hereby then a man might suppose, that Master Gentianus has deserved a
whetstone, and wagged the thumb, to make his case good. Wherefore we will
more deeply consider this point, and warily weigh the reasons which have moved
him hereunto. So that we have then here to consider upon two points: Namely,
the first is that which David says, Psalm. 69.10.
That the zeal of the house of the Lord has even eaten him, Which is even
here affected in Gentianus. For he is so hottely inflamed with the zeal of the
holy Romish Church, that he is in a manner astonished and amassed, so as he
does not see what he says. In the mean while notwithstanding does he
record and call to mind that which our holy mother the Church of Rome has
concluded in the council of Constance, and the same time did put in practice,
when the holy fathers there congregated did permit John Hus and Hierom of
Prage to be burnt, contrary to the letters of safeconduite, which were
granted and given them by the Emperor and the said council, ordeining most
firmly, that it should be no offense to break promise with Heretics. Yet
perhaps our Gentianus has read in Cicero, That a man's faith or promise is
steadfastness or vowed truth, of that which he pretendes to do or speak.
Therefore he fears (as we may judge) that if he should say nothing but a
truth, he might be reputed and taken for a transgressour of the ordinances of
the foresaid council, as though he had undertaken the faith of the Heretics.

Moreover, Lies to a good intent.
the holy Church has consented and ordained, that sometimes a lie may be
invented against Heretics, for a good intent, as to fraie simple people from
desire to read their books, least thereby they should fall into their
heresies. And that this be true, appears first by strong prouebable reasons:
and further by credible examples. The reasons are these: That the holy Church
has ordained and concluded (like as yet by the daily exercise appears) that
it is not ill done, to make the people believe many fables and Cau^terburie
tales: Fables.
as of holy relics, Saint Gabriels feathers, and Saint George his spear with
which he did pearce the Dragon. Also of Saints as S. Christopher, S. Barbara,
S. Katherin, of S. Francis vine and others such like, whereof Gesta Romanorum,
Vitas Patrum, Speculum historiale, the book Lippomani, the book Abdiae and
Sophronij and the golden Legend, are full, and replenished with a number of
such fables, which our holy mother the holy Church of Rome does term
Piae frauds, Pi^ frauds.
that is to say, holy deceiptes, or golden Legendes: And says that it is
the milk, which Paul did give the Corinthians to drink when they were yet
unable to disiest strong meats: like as a good gray friar was wont to say at
Ghaunte. In so much then, that it is allowable to feign such fine fables, to
provoke people to devotion, much more then is it tolerable to rehearse some
odd and strange iestes of Heretics, as to wit, that they are black and foul
favored, and work matters with the devil, with such like things, to
affright people from the study of their doctrine. Now the examples are also
very sure and weighty. For upon such like lies, which the holy supposses or
subjects of the Romish Church, has persuaded Emperors and Kings to believe,
were they permitted to make their placards and privileges against the
Lutherians and Huguenotes, whereby such controversies and tumultes are grown
and sprung up in the world, that it is to be doubted, great bloodshed will be
made before they will be apppeased again. This may sufficiently appear by the
words of the Placard in the reign of the Emperor Charles of noble memory,
Placardes of Charles the.5.
set forth in the year.1521. at the city of Worms, declaring expressly, That
Luther was a Pelagian, and did disdainefullie contemn the Saints. Also he
taught, that there ought to be neither government nor superiority, nor yet
obedience, and did gainesaie reprove and disalowe all good civil policy and
spiritual reformations, to the end the commonaltie should be moved and
provoked to raise arms and rebel against their rulers as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, and to frame themselves to contend, murder and steal, wasting and
consuming all things with fire and sword, to the great indammaging of the
whole common wealth of Christendom* And, which is more detestable, he ordained
and allowed a certain kind of life, whereby each should do that which he
would in manner of brute beasts: and as a lawless man did abject and detest
all Ecclesiastical and temporal laws.

Behold, these be the very words of the Emperors act, and this is the
very first and original welspring of all the bloodshed, which has happened
throughout all Christendom for the space of seven and forty years, until
this present time, the which all men may both see with their eyes, and in a
manner feel with their fingers to be most gross, blockishe, and palpable
lies, which Petrusa Sotto (the Emperors good ghostly father) and other
Catholic Priests did blow in at his ears: not for that they did suppose it
to be so, for they had not a hair on their heads but it knew the contrary.
But fearing the reformation of the Gospel, did move the Emperors Majesty
(which otherwise of himself was not by nature given to wrath or any desire of
bloodshed) to a bloody abolishing and wrathful extirpation of all these
Lutherans and Caluinistes, which were not (in any respect) for their tooth:
for so much as they sought to reform papistrie by the authority of the Gospel:
Notwithstanding, upon their words only did the Emperor proceed in his
purpose, and would not at any time give ear to the Heretics. Like as now the
King of Spain, of a good zeal (supposing to do God high and acceptable
service) does also proceed to the utter ruin and manifest destruction of his
own inheritance and natural country, and his most loyal, loving, and
obedient subjects: knowing no other, Placardes of king Philip.
but that all is true, which his ghostly fathers and other Spanish Priests and
foster fathers of the holy Inquisition do put in his head: yea upon the same
has not spared his natural and only son, but has delivered him over into
the hands of the hellishe Inquisitours permitting them to throw him into
prison, where most miserably he ended his lamentable life. Verelie this was a
sly and fine fetch, which our holy mother did wisely weigh, that to a good
intent men might make a lie. For otherwise, if they might have manifested
naught but a troth, then should the Heretics have found audience by Kings
and Princes: the play had been made, and all things would have gone a wrie
with Priests and Popery, Masses and such tromperie of the Romish Church:
yea, the whole Spirituality would not have been worth a bean, like as we
may perceive in all places where these Heretics have had hearing, and where
they have been permitted to plead their cause openly.

But worship be unto our Lady of the seven Oaks, and Saint Job of Wesemall
with all the glorious Saints, which are at Antwerp on the high altar. For
there (in good time) did happen some foresight, by the cunning of unfolding the
book of lies, and causing Kings to believe that the Moon was made of green
cheese: And good reason: for who so faines himself to be a sheep, may happen
to be devoured of the Woolfe, according to the vulgar saying.

But yet have ye another commodity which grows by this kind of sacred
dealing. For if Priests and Monks were bound always to preach the truth,
there would ensue a great disgrace unto them, for that they would oftentimes
in their pulpettes become as dumb as fishes, being unable to bring forth any
thing, because they are all unfortunate in declaring the truth, and therefore
should miss the mean to utter their excellent gifts of filed eloquence. But
when they have no more arrows left in their quiuers, then do they fall upon
the Heretics, and have store of matter to talk of, yea wonderful things to
declare against them: they rage, they rore, they thu^der, they lighten, and
make them so black and deformed like devils in hell. Sometime they catch a
Calvin by the throat, sometime Beza, sometime their quarrel is against Marottes
Psalms: sometime with the Greek and Hebrewe text, which in no sauce they
can abide: sometime they martyr the Catechism so pitifully, as though they had
it on a rack.

To be brief, they regard neither door nor post, but shoot their shaftes up
to the feathers in it. They prattle like Pies, and seem in a manner as they
had soulde all their pot herbs, and yet reserve of the best to themselves,
that is truly a sport and pretty pastime: specially to the devout women,
which are not greatly acquainted with the Bible, or Gods word, but rather
listen to the Popes lies, and to daunse after his pipe, or to hear some
Gospel of a distaffe, and tale of a tubbe. In fine, a man would verily judge,
that such Catholic preachers had been all their days Pedlers or pelting
Apothecaries of Dutchlande, or that they had farmed the prattle court wholly
to themselves. Like as daily may be perceived at all their Sermons, and
specially at the worthy Sermon, which a goodly grayfrier does usually make
in French at Antwerpe in S. Jacobs Church. It seems he is one of those
foresaid pelting Apothecaries which has trudged these seven and thirty
years to all markets and faires, about the country, to sell his triacles and
rattes bane.

It does also appear by the preaching of the foresaid brother Cornelis the
whipper, Seek the first Chapter of the second part.
who does with such a zeal roar against Heretics, that he will have them
rooted out quite, and to be burnte to ashes. Yea, he has not long ago
preached, That child bearing women ought to have their wombes rent and torn,
to take out their babes, and burn them, before they should be borne or
brought forth into the world, which he does affirm with a plain text,
which he has read in the kitchen bible, or else has learned of his Cook:
namely, that of Eggs fride in a frying pan, come no ill chickens. I omit
the goodly Sermons of dronken Nicholas, Dronken Nicholas.
the Bishop of Harlem, and many famous sermons more of sundry worthy
champions, which do ring their larum belles with such vehemency against
Heretics, that when they are in their pulpites, their hearse and rustie
throtes will scarce be refreshed and cleared again with four or five pottles
of wine.

Yet can I not forget, nor let slip out of memory, that precious Sermon of
the reverend Bishop of Vtrecht, which he made when the Provincial council was
holden there, which is about three years past. For in the same he declared
and pronounced it out at large, of the Dutche Bear Luther, and that his mother
was a whore, and had slepte by the Devil, with many such like Caunterburie
tales and forged fables which he had rakte together out of Cochles or brother
Laurence Surius who were godly Catholic pedlers.

And verelie such trusty spears as Laurence Surius and Cochleus have well
deserved a good piece of roasted beef hot from the spitte, considering that
with their notable and excellent brief histories, they have furnished and well
armed the Bishops, Monks, and priests, with such stuff as will serve
their turns to occupy their Pulpittes with all. So as their stories may well
and aptly be called Dormi secure, that is to say, Sleep without care: So that
the Monks and Parish Priests need not study in their Bibles for to make a
sermon, so long as they are provided of such books. For therein they find
made ready to their hands, matter enoughe to prate upon: yea if it were
naught else but the pretty pageant which the foresaid Laurence Surius does
rehearse of Calvin. This pretty tale is to be read in the history of Laurence
Surius, which he has called, Comentarius breuis rerum in ^rbe gestarum, and is
printed at Cullen.
To wit, That Calvin should seek to confirm his doctrine with miracles, and
therefore should persuade a man to suffer himself to be borne in a coffin to
Church: And when Calvin called to him, before the multitude) that if his
doctrine were true, he should arise, the man being smothered in the cheste was
found stark dead: his wife beginning pitifully to lament, Calvin did (with
fair speech and promises of recompense) persuade her to be still: and
presently got him into the Pulpitte, declaring to the people that it was long
of their unbelief that this miracle would not fadge. It is a common saying,
that, To him which tells a lie or a fable, it behoues him to have a good
memory. But this was out of this good Historiographers head, for so much as
he did not call to mind, that they are not accustomed at Geneua, to bring
dead* corses into the Churches* and much less in time of any Sermons:
besides, he had forgotten, that Calvin did always teach it to be an ungodly
and a diuelishe act, to go about to confirm the doctrine of the Gospel a
new with miracles, which has already in times past been sufficiently
confirmed with most notable and wonderful miracles of God. But the good
Catholic is to be pardoned, for that (with eating too much fish) his
brains are weakened, and his memory thereby decayed. Yet he declares more,
which sound a great deal better.

As touching the miracles of Luther: of the blood which issued out of the
Sacrament from the altar in the country of Brandenburge, which (it may be)
he has learned of Aloysius Lippomano, who has likewise written a great book
full of such iestes. And many more such lies and toys with a witness, which
serve greatly for the use of Priests and Monks in time of their sermons and
preachmentes. And chiefly these new base Country Bishops, which (for the
most part) have spent their time in study, betwixt the butterie and the
kitchen, and can say but little except they be pricked forwards with some
helps: like as may appear by the worthy sermon of the reverend Bishop
Franciscus Sonnius, (the father of all the new Bishops) which he made at his
first entry to a city called Hertoghenbosch, saying, That the citizens might
rejoice, for so much as they had gotten him to be their Bishop, The sermon of
Sonnius.
for that henceforwards (quoth he) you shall have great resort of many
strangers, which (before times) were wont to have their trade to Luyke and
Vtrecht, and the one should eat a herring, the other should drink a pot of
bear, which would be a great help to their impost, etc. Was not this a good
help to sing Gaudeamus?

In like manner also Curtius at Bridges, which notwithstanding had been Pastor
or Curate of the great and chief church at Louen, expounding that part of the
Gospel: Ego sum, nolite timere: I am he, be not afraid, said, That he was the
man, The sermon of Curtius.
of whom so much had been spoken, and that they should not stand in fear of
ought, considering he was a towns man borne, and christened in the same font.
In fine, it was: which way to London? A pooke full of plummes. The good Curate
had but little to say, for he knew no tales of Robin Hoode, nor yet of Calvin,
nor the Dutch Bear his miracles. He had not red over the pleasant histories
of Laurence Surius, Cochles, nor Lippomanus. Therefore are they highly to be
commended, which can furnish out their matter with such pleasant rehearsals,
to keep the audientes waking: as for the Bible or Gospel, they have not
forgotten much, because they fear to read it, least (thereby) they should
become Heretics. To conclude, so far forth as lies and fables do serve to
the advancement of the holy Church of Rome, they are not only to be borne
withal, but also greatly extolled. And therefore it is no marvel, that
Master Gentianus durst thus boldly affirm by writing, That the Huguenotes
and Lutherans did hate and detest all prayers, fasting and abstinence. This is
than the first point, which is to be considered hereof, for his discharge, to
wit, That he has (in this behalf) behaved him self as a good and faithful
Catholic.

The ii. Chapter. Wherein is declared, How it is to be understood, that the
Huguenotes and the Lutherans do hate all prayers, fasting, abstinence, and
penance or mortification: and herein is comprehended of the abstinence and
mortification of Monks, Bishops, Prelates, and other: and of the mortification
which is used amongst the Huguenotes and Lutherans.
THe other part is, The manner of fasting and prayers amongst the Huguenotes
and Lutherans.
that he has great reason to say, the Heretics are mortal foes to prayer,
fasting and mortification. For there is a rule in law, That, to plead a case
ill, and otherwise then it ought to be, or to neglect the same wholly, does
fall out to one effect. Well then, albeit the Heretics do often pray and
fast, for so much as they do it not as they ought, it serves them to no
purpose. It is true, they pray morning and evening: and would be loath to go to
their meals or to arise without praying and serving God: which notwithstanding
is oftentimes neglected by the most chiefest of the catholics: like as may be
seen in the Popes sacred Court, and at the tables of the Cardinals and
Bishops: yea, amongst the most faithful subjects of the Romish church.
Pardons to drink after grace is said.
In so much as it has bin found necessary for a Pope to grant pardons to
such after their meals should once drink, to the end that (thereby) he
should remember the good ale knights to say their graces, for to have one good
draught more when they have done. I admit then that the Heretics do pray apase:
Iam. 1.5.6.7. Mat. 7.7. Mar. 11.24. Mat. 14.31. Mar. 9.23. John 16.23. Psalm.
27.1.2.3 Romans 8.1.16. Romans 4.20.8.33.34.34. etc. Galat. 4.6. Ephe. 1.13. 1.
Cor. 13.5. Augu. upon the 1. epist. to Timot. in the 8. sermon, and upon the
Galat. in the 5. Antoni. part 4. Tit. 6. cap. 2. ff 7. Stanislaus Hosius in
the book of Heresies. And in the Council of Trent, it is thus concluded.
9.12.13. and cap. 13.14, etc. Sess. 6.
But to what end is it? They pray not as they ought to do. For, in primis,
they will approve, that whenever we desire ought in the name of Christ Jesus,
that we are assured to obtain the same. And therefore (say they) All faithful
people are assuredly persuaded of their salvation, and stand in no doubt at
all of Gods gracious good will and fatherly love toward them: for so much as
God can not lie, who has (for Jesus Christ's sake) undoubtedly promised them
the same: and with his holy Ghost has sealed and affirmed it in their
hearts. This does the holy Church of Rome hold for great heresy, teaching
to the contrary, That none in this present world can certainly know, whether
his prayer be heard, much less, whether he be in Gods favor or no, except by
great preeminence, or some special miracle, it be revealed and made known
unto him. Therefore does she hold it for great arrogancy and presumption, to
say (according to Saint Paul) That the holy Spirit of God is in us, and
prays in us, Romans 8.27.
and that without it, we can not pray at all: For so much as none does know
whether he has the spirit of God or not: and therefore must always stand in
doubt betwixt hope and fear, like to a ship without helm and compass, betwixt
the gulffes and waves of the sea, like as S. James does say. James 1.6.


Secondarilie, the Heretics will not declare and complain their need, but to
God only, nor call upon any but him alone, as though none but he could
help them, or that he were at leisure, and had naught else to do, but just to
hear what they would say unto him. To the contrary of this, does the holy
Church command, In the 4. chap. of the 4. part.
That we shall likewise call upon Saints, and put our trust in them, like as
has been declared before. Moreover, they will not have any Mediator or
Advocate to God, but only Christ Jesus. And so set all Saints aside, as
serving for sifers, and standing to none effect: even as though Christ alone
were a sufficient Mediator, and that the silly Saints had not one voice in a
court.

After this, they will not pray any thing, for (forsouth) it must first be
found prescribed in the Scripture, forasmuch as To pray without faith (say
they) is sin: Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6. Romans 10.17.
And faith can not be allowed, without the promise and word of God. Hereby
(la)does it come to pass, that the poor souls do remain still frying in
Purgatory, for default of a Pater Noster, and an Aue Marie. In so much as now
the high way (through which the souls were wont to pass) is become such a
thicket, over grown with thorns and thistles, that it is not possible to
pass that way any more.

Moreover, they will not pray otherwise than in their own mother tongue, or in
such a language as them selves do understand, as though our God did not
understand Latin: or at least, that they them selves ought to understand that
which they say. They build upon Paul, 1. Cor. 14. throughout the whole chapter.
who forbids to pray in an unknown tongue. But they do not consider that
the holy Church of Rome has altered the case, commanding, that Masses,
Eeuensongs and Vigilles, Mattens, and Meridians, with all other such
tromperies, should be red in the Latin tongue, even like an unlearned thief
reads his neck verse: Latin tongue.
for that is more meritorious, than if we our selves understood what we did
say. Like as Cardinal Hosius, and Doctor dolt Eckius have finely affirmed out
of that part of Scripture, where it is written, That Pilate did set down the
title or superscription, in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin. And in deed, it is
good reason, that they which (after the example of Pilate) do crucify Christ,
ought likewise to use and imitate his language.

Further, these Heretics will not say their Aue Mary's, nor Pater Nosters,
with little pretty wooden bullets or beaderowes made of stone or yuorie, as
though they should score them upon a poast: they suppose perhaps, that GOD
may number or tell them him self, thinking he has nothing else to do. They
will never kneel unto Images or dumb Saints, (by prayer) to crave their
help or aid, but imagine GOD to be present every where, Mat. 6.6.
and that their prayers be as forcible in their bed chambers, as to our
blessed Lady, the Lady of Hayle, or to Saint James of Compostella in Spaine^
And therefore do deride all the pilgrimages of our loving mother the holy
church. And when they desire to receive Gods holy spirit, they know not that
they ought to say an Aue Marie, like as the good Catholics use to do at their
sermons, for so much as Aue Marie is as much to say with them, as, O Lord
grant us thy holy spirit. And, which is worst of all, they will not pray,
neither through the merits of Saints, nor through the virtue of holy water,
of the holy oil, of sanctified bread, of Palms, Agnus Dei, holy Relics,
nor through the merits of holy days which they have observed, neither
through the merits of their fasting, or any worldly thing else, but only
through the merits of the only sacrifice or oblation of Jesus Christ, being
offered upon the cross to God the Father: yea, they make a jest of all such
matters, and condemn them for mere superstition and idolatry. To conclude,
they will not pray as the holy Romish Church does. Ergo, they pray not as
they ought to do: and therefore must we account of them as though they did not
pray at all.

Even in like sort does it fall out with their fasting: for they fast after
their own orders, and will not observe the ordinance of the holy Romish
Church. But like as they pray without keeping any set taylie, or Ceremony, so
due they fast without a score, and without exception of days: Fasting without
a score.
so that God cannot well remember, when they have fasted or prayed. And further
when they fast, they will not eat any thing at all, and make it as great a
matter to eat fish, as flesh, and Eggs: which is a great heresy, like as
is showed before. Where again (notwithstanding) they will (with an obstinate
he^d) defend, That, Mat. 15.11. Titus 1.15. 1. Tim. 4.3.
that which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man: And, To them which are
clean, all things are clean, which God has created, to use them with
thankesgeuing. After this, they will not fast in reverence of the Saints, to
observe their Vigilles with devotion, like unto our holy mother: And when they
have brought all about, to what end (I pray you) serves their fasting? They
acknowledge themselves, that of it self, it is neither good nor bad: And, Romans
14.17. 1. Cor. 8.8.
That the kingdom of God does not consist neither in meat nor drink. Yea,
they uphold, That meat or drink does not make us acceptable to God: And,
That we are not the better for eating, nor the worse for not eating. And that
all their fasting only serves to make them more apt and fit to serve God,
and to submit themselves to his omnipotent power: chiefly whenever his
wrath is kindled against them. To what end fasting is used.
Then do they use fasting, not for the deed it self, but for the occasion of
prayer, and to humble themselves, but further benefit do they not seek by it,
unless that any of his own accord or free will, do accustom him self
thereunto, thereby to subdue his flesh, and the sinful affections of his
mind. A true kind of fasting.
Else (say they) the right fasting is, to refrain from all ungodly and
sinful deeds, and to frame him self to use a perpetual sobriety and
temperancie all the days of his life. Esai. 58.6. Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13.
Whereas notwithstanding our dear mother expreslie does teach, That fasting
is a meritorious work of it self, whereby a man may merit heaven, the favor
of God, and life everlasting, as has been declared before.

Seeing then that the Heretics make no account hereof, but rather esteem it
for vile, and an open blasphemy toward GOD, so does it appear, that they do
hate and abhor the right fasting of the holy Church.

Concerning Penance, mortification, Abstinence.
and brideling of the flesh, therein they do not likewise conceive any great
pride: for otherwise they would go to shrift, whereas now they mock with it,
and with all the penaunces which the ghostly father does but then the
penitent souls: withal. Further, they will have Priests to marry wives* That
each one shall have his married wife, 1. Cor. 7.2.
and every woman her espoused husband, to the end, aduoutrie and fornication
may be avoided. And will not lend out their wives to the parish Priests nor
Monks, like as the good Catholic fellows (especially in Spain) do, for to
pleasure the holy Clementish community, as is before rehearsed. They pass
not for any Ember weeks: They observe neither Lent, nor Shrouetide, Saint
Martins, nor Twelfth day at night: they will not daunse, neither will they
drink any more, than to satisfy their thirst: once they will be right
Huguenots* they do not imitate their forefathers: they will have a new law
after their manner: they esteem it not worth a rotten medler, to remove into
a Cloister or religious house, and to beg from door to door: they skoffe
with the holy Monks coat: they do not greatly glory to be buried in a
Monks greasy hoode: they count the rope wherewith the Friars are girt, of no
worth: but (say rather) It would fit better about his throat, than about his
loins: they would not give a bean, for the hearn garment of Heremites: they
will not be chastised, and receive the Miserere, till unto vitulos: they will
not whip them selves, like as the Spaniardes do at Bruxelles, and the company
of those which are called Flagellantes: they make no account of pilgrimages,
and will not go barefoot and bare head in processions, after the holy
sacrament of Miracles, with a torche in their hand: they esteem all the
festival and loytering days never a whit: and when the good Catholics do
sit in Tauernes drinking and swilling, devoutly observing the festival days,
then sit these in their shoppes at work, or else go to hear some sermon, or
walk abroad: in so much, that at Antwerpe (when public preaching of the
Gospel was permitted) it has been firmly found by the impost and taxes of
drink, that these holy days have been neglected: where through the Almoners
found them selves likewise much grieved, because they did not receive such
sums of money, as they were wont to do by brokes of those which in their
drunkenesse were wont to wound and slaie each other: for so much as the
Heretics did not celebrate these festival days after the old order of the
Romish Church. In sum, they will not do any thing at all to mortify their
flesh, otherwise than the Apostles have charged them to do, or then they did
them selves, as though in deed they were Apostles them selves. So that we may
plainly perceive, they do not regard at all the fasting, abstine^ce,
mortification, or penance of the holy Church worth an oatten cake.

And therefore can they not in like case merit heaven, I omit that they
should make others partakers of their merits, like as our Catholic Monks and
Priests, and especially the greie Friars do: The penance of greie Friars.
which are so lean, as though they had lien diseased seven years in a coal
house, and do such penance, that we may perceive by their bleared eyes, they
have not droncke so much wine, as they desired to have done: They lay their
heads at one side on their shoulders: Esai. 58.5.
They wreith their necks like a rush, they have always their Dirige book in
their hands: Esai. 59.5.
They punish their own flesh: they wrinkle their foreheads like a Bucke: they
make their eyes as dim as an Owl: they watch by night, to sleep in the day:
they forsake their own riches and substance, to live on the sweat of other
men's brows: they labor never a whit, to the end they may enter into more
deep contemplations: they vow chastity, and will not have wives them selves,
to the end and purpose, they may the more bouldlier shriue, and the better
comfort other men's wives and daughters: they vow obedience unto their chief
ruler, for to be released and wholly freed from all obedience toward other
Magistrates and rulers: they take upon them poverty, to enriche their
Monkerie: they wander like pilgrims, to fill their baight bags with lumpes
of bread and roast meat: they visit the sick, to cause them to put on S.
Francis cope, and go to tend those which are ready to leave this life, to help
the^ make their wills: they wear a hearie garment and a graie coat, to show
that they are like to wild beasts and wolves in doing their penance: they
wear a fools hood, to declare that the world is replenished with idiotes: to
be short, we may perceive by their noses, that they love mortification, as a
dog does a cudgel.

But what shall I say concerning the holy Prelates and Bishops, Penance of the
Bishops.
who in all their clothing and uttermost habits do show their inward penance
and mortification? Do they not wear a Miter on their head with two horns, to
signify that they do know (by heart) both the testaments a like? and are
always pressed to butte with their horns against al heretics? As also to
show that they have bin crowned with thorns, as well as our Lord was? And
sometime they wear them snow white, to declare their undefiled pureness. Do
they not wear a pair of gloves, that their left hand knows not what the
right hand does? And, their gold ring, what does it else signify, Gold ring.
but that they be upright and without dissimulation? Their staff, that they
are strong against heretics? And their handkercher (which is always at hand)
that they be ever ready to abandon all earthly filthiness, and wholly do
rub of their fleshly affections? After this, all Priests in general, have
they not a shaven crown on their heads, to show, that like as a round crown
has no corners, so have they not any filthiness, which they can spare, or be
without. But if I should rehearse all these matters piece by piece, it would
verily seem to be a Babylon, which is, A foul confusion, or meruellous
medlie. Therefore, it is suffient to gather hereby, what great mortification
does lurk and lie hidden in the skins of these holy subjects of the
Romish Church, which by their outward apparel and seeming, do show such
exceeding great holiness. I refer now al men to consider what is to be
thought of their inward parts, which are so holy, as though they were possessed
with seven spirits. To the contrary whereof, these new Preachers, have
neither stick nor staff, myter nor ring, neither yet any shaven crowns or
other, whereby they may declare their mortification: yea, they go arraied like
other plain people, and say, that Penance and mortification does not consist
in such and such like outward ceremonies, Joel. 2.13. Iere. 4.1.2.4.
but in the conversion of the mind and soul to Godwardes, and in an inward
feeling of miseries, a true feling of Gods wrath against sin, and in a firm
faith and trusty stay upon Gods goodness and mercy through the merits of
Jesus Christ. Moreover, 1. Tim. 6.8.
That bodily exercise is little vailable, but Godliness in all things is
profitable and helpefull. Wherein they sufficiently show, that they know
little concerning the mortification which the holy Church does teach, and
they contemn holy Confession, Contrition, Absolution, and Satisfaction, and
other such like things, and love the first day of Lent as well as the last.
Behold, for this cause is it, that Master Gentianus has so cunningly
concluded in this Article, That they hate and wholly condemn fasting, praying,
abstinence, and mortification of the flesh.

The iii. Chapter. Which does show, how it is to be understood, that we can
not make satisfaction for the least offense: and hree is concluded, that the
penance of Heretics is not acceptable with God.
But for so much as they do here acknowledge, that we can never make satisfaction
for the least offense of the world, that might seem to be a great heresy:
for if it were so, the Heretics should have great reason to say, that our
satisfaction were vain and frivolous. And therefore they would say, In the 7.
chap. of the 2. part.
as has bin showed before, That we ought to lay aside and tread under foot
all hope of satisfaction, and wholly to cleave and trust to the mere goodness
and undeserved mercy of God, Romans 3.21.24 25.4.6.16.5. Galat. 2.16 3.13. Ephe.
2.8.9. 2. Tim. 1.9. 1. Pet. 1.19. Esai. 53.5.
which in respect of our parts, is without desert bestowed upon us, but in
respect of Gods righteousness, is given us for an exceeding dear price, to
wit, the blood of Christ Jesus the unspotted lamb, which (as Esaie says)
has borne our infirmities, and was laden with our punishments: which was
wounded for our sins, and for our sakes did suffer death: and upon him is laid
the punishment whereby we are at peace. And hereout they conclude with Paul,
That we have (through Christ) all satisfaction, Colos. 2.3.4.5 1. Cor. 1.30.
and that he is wholly our salvation, justification, and deliverance* And with
Peter, Act. 4.12.
That by none other in the world, salvation is to be gotten, for so much as
there is not any other name given to mankind, whereby they may be saved:
insomuch that all our boasts, Romans 3.27. 1. Cor. 1.29.
whether it be of good works, merits, or satisfaction, is wholly excluded and
brought to nothing: in so much as before God it does not prevail, and that no
flesh can be justified in his presence by the works of the law, Psalm. 143.2.
Job. 9.3 Romans in the 3. and 4 chap. and Gal. in the 2. throughout. Esaie 64.6.
and that all our righteousness is naught else but a stained cloth. But all this
is heresy, as it has been sufficiently showed before, and they which learn
such, are hanged and burned like Heretics. In the 2. part in the chap. of
Satisfaction.
For else (as has bin said) what should become of satisfaction, and meritorious
deeds, which (according to the doctrine of the holy Church) do amend faults
escaped, These are the proper words of Anthonius upon the Sent. par. 3. in
tit. 14 cap. 20.
and by good foresight defend and set us free from those to come? What should
become of al our good works whereby we can deserve three sundry things,
namely, Eternal life, Increase and augmentation of mercy, These are the
words of Barnardine Roset sermon 20.
and Forgiveness of sins? What should become of the merits of Saints,
through the which the holy church does pray unto God, that he will pardon all
their offenses, through the Saints, whose relics and bones do lie on the
altar where the Mass is said? This is in a prayer which the Priests say in
their Mass presently after Consiteor, and herewith does agree Pet. Lom. in
the 4. book of Sent. dis. 45 Alto Bonauen. in the 2. article, and al other
catholics writers
In so much, as (often) she does pray through the merits of ashes, horses
and dogs, whose bones for the most part remains also (as relics) on their
altars. What (moreover) should become of our exceeding good works, which are
called Opera supererogationis, wherewith we do not only make satisfaction
for our selves, but also for others, and especially for the souls in
Purgatory? Yea, what should become of Purgatory it self, if there were not
satisfaction? What would become of Pardons and Bulls, which are allowed and
sent from the Pope? Verelie they would serve for no purpose better, than to be
brought to the house of office, to be sealed with portingale wax, if so be it
were true, which Master Gentianus does here set down, as that we are unable
to make recompense for the least offense. It were in deed a lamentable case:
therefore we must understand him here aright. For his meaning was to speak
thus obscurelie, because he would tole and entise the heretics into the field.
For otherwise, this is not his meaning: but does simply understand, that we
can not satisfy, Nisi concurrente gratia, that is to say, Except mercy does
assist, and help our merits (as is said before) sometimes thorough the pikes.
For we have apparantlie concluded, that we must make a bargain betwixt God and
us. He does give us his mercy in our baptism: but after that, we must shift
for our selves, and by our good deeds bind God unto us, so that of duty he
must receive us into heaven: especially if we be assisted with the means and by
helps of holy church: namely, by the virtue of the Mass, holy water,
tapers, etc. and with the Popes Bulls: for thereby will our infirmities
amend, like corn shaken with a shower of hail, or like fish left on the
sands, and as sower Ale in Summer. And if so be that (besides this) we will
submit our selves, and take unto us the habit of a Monk or Friar, and so frame
our selves after the full shapen order of S. Francis, and S. Dominicks rule, Of
supererogatorie works, read Peter de Asolo in the book called, Asser. Cath^.
sidei, where he speaks of the Law. And E^k. in his Pamph.
and so compass more then God has commanded us, then we excel all the rest
of our friends in riches, and may bestow some of our overplus upon them,
which we like best. Like as our loving mother the holy Church has neatelie
concluded. Therefore is Master Gentianus to be understood after this manner:
For So Much as he does very Doctorlike conclude, saying, We may not repose or
trust hereto to much, to wit, All Paul's Epistles are full of these
doctrines, and the pla^e^ are noted before.
that Christ should have made full satisfaction for us: For albeit that S.
Paul (every where) does teach otherwise, and (in any case) will have, that
we shall repose all our confidence (without any surmising or doubting) upon
the merits and satisfaction of Christ, yet this is not to be understood
literallie* as the Heretics do take it, but spirituallie, that is to say,
after the gloss and interpretation of the spiritual Council of Trent, like as
we have sufficiently declared above. And therefore is that likewise true which
Gentian does gather hereof, to wit, That God does not accept or allow the
conversion and repentance of Heretics, for so much as it is not done, as it
ought to be. And it is not an easy matter (as he says) to make God a flexen
beard. For that can none do, but our dear mother the holy Church of Rome, God
with a flaxen beard.
which has four white feet, and can not err. Therefore has she (in token
that she will make God a flexen beard) a religious custom, to make her God with
a graie beard like to flexe: And in their procession, when they carry Corpus
Domini about, they do likewise make a god with a flaxen bearde, and so bear
him triumphantly about with a Tabber and pype, in manner as though they were
going to the Theater, or to the playing of a Fensers price. And how be it,
that Gentian says, God will not be derided, or mocked, that is understood by
the living God which is in heaven, and not by the same God which our dear
mother does keep as prisoner in the Sacrament box, against her festival
solenmizations. For that is a patient God, and is never angry, but always
pleased alike, and at one stay: provided always, that he be saflie kept and
well guarded from myse, mothes and worms, which are his deadly foes.

Now follows the exposition upon the sixth and last part of Master Gentian
Heruet his Epistle, treating of the ignorance and wicked life of the Huguenote
preachers, and of the Holiness of the Pope, and other Prelates.
The first Chapter. Declaring the lothing of Gentian Heruet, and what we^ must
do, when a Priest does loathe so much, that he does cast the Sacrament out of
his stomache, after he has said Mass.
IN the sixth and last part says Master Gentian, that he does maruellouslie
loathe, when he considers the quality, that is, the custom and life of the
new Huguenot Preachers. But it were not good that he should consider that to
much, after he has song Mass: for otherwise he might make a mad stir, and
give the holy Church both her hands full. He might by ouerlothing, cast a
calfe, and so cause the loving God to void his stomach. Were not that a
goodly loathing? It is true in deed, that the Romish church is provided in
this respect, that who so does cast the calfe, shall again suppe up the same
without salt. Yet hereby might grow a grievous matter: for the calfe might
cause him to loathe more, then he did before: insomuch as the good God would
lodge no longer in his stomach, and then should we be driven to burn him, and
to keep the holy ashes for a relic under some altar. This were (in very
deed) most blasphemous, and worst of all for our dear mother the holy
Church, that she should handle the matter with her blessed God, as she does
with Heretics and Huguenotes.

True it is, that upon a time, when the Doctors were assembled together at
Paris, and with this matter being greatly encombred, there was one of the
ancient which did esteem and pass it very lightly, saying: Seeing he did
permit himself to be crucified of the Jews, why should he not suffer him self
to be burnt of us? And thereupon was it concluded, that which (yet in these
days) is to be seen in the Cantils of Masses, and all Mass books, This is
in the Mass book, and (...) thus judged in the Council of Orlians, in the 5.
Chap.
to wit, that both he, and the cast Calfe, shall together be burnt without
redemption, and thereof to be made holy ashes, for to seal, on the first day
in Lent, or on Ashewednesday, all good, godly, or devout people therewithal
on their forehead.

Yet were it not meet in these days, to follow that Council in burning him,
seeing the Heretics do on all sides so ouercharge him: for if he perceive
now, that the Catholics will also burn him, his heart might fall into his
heels, and cause him to loose his courage quite, and than our game were quite
lost. Therefore I would wish Master Gentian to be friendly in treated, not
to loath so sore, especially after he has said Mass: or else, if in case his
stomach be so tender, that he cannot abide any filthiness, he ought to beware
from looking to much on the Huguenote preachers for so much as they bring such
lothsomnes to his stomach.

The ii. Chapter. Of the great knowledge and holiness of Priests and Monks.
But I pray you let us hear, whereat he does so much loath. He says first,
that they are the most ignorant and the most unlearned, which are to be
found in the world: and after that, that they are likewise of a wicked life.
But before he does come so far, he does above al, protest, That there is in
some Priests and Monks, and other religious persons, a certain excessive and
beastly ignorance. yea, that some do lead a very lewd life. Which he does
handle very wisely and circumspectly, to the end we should the sooner believe
him to desire a reformation, as well as others do. Like as we may lightly gather
hereof (according as himself does witness) that he has expounded the sixth
article of the counsel of Calcedonie, and permitted the same to be extant in
print. Is not this a great matter, and an infallible token, that he means the
reformation of the mind? He has assuredly deserved hereby a fatt benefice, or
a Bishops myter. Yet do I not regard so much the first point, that there are
such ignorant Priests, which cannot read their Mass nor Dirige books. And if
they can do that, what need they any further? Therefore is Gentian to blame, to
esteem them unlearned: howbeit, I surmise he has done thus, to show that he
has learned Rhetorica, or The art of eloquence and utterance. For thereby is
learned, That if we seek greatly to rebuke any man, it cannot be done more
aptly, than by dilating and amplifying his default, in comparing him to some
one, who has been tainted with the like. For, as touching the Monks, it is no
marvel, though they are unlearned, seeing their profession does require the
same: and the more ignorant they be, the welcomer and more acceptable are they
to their Covent. For those which are very well learned, have commonly to much
tongue, and therefore are often punished: and if then they do not mend, they
are thrown into a dungeon, or are closed somewhere betwixt two walls in a
seller, and there permit them to live so long as they can. Like as might have
been seen a year ago at Antwerpe, Ghaunt, and other places more, which have
remained there, some eight or ten years, some twenty, and thirty years.
Therefore it is no marvel, though Monks be unlearned: insomuch as in the
Latin tongue is used a common proverb: Monacho indoctior, that is to say, A
great Ass or dolt, and more unlearned than a Monk. Yea, they have a special
Latin tongue for their own use, which the learned sort them selves can not
understand, and is called, Friars latin.
Friars latin, or, Kitchen latin. But touching Priests, they need no great
learning: for, if they can but only repeat the five secret words of the
Mass without giving Priscian or Despauter a bobbe on the face (that is to say,
Priscian or Despauterie were men, which wrote the latin Grammar, or the rules
for the latin tongue. And therefore it is usually said, that those which
speak false latin, do strike Pris. and Despau. on the face.
without intermingling of Friars latin) than is the matter cock sure: They are
more learned then the Angels in heaven: for they can make God, which thing the
Angels can not do. And if besides that, they know but how to brewe of the
smallest sort of latin withal, then has their sow pigd, they may be bold to
inuit their neighbors to the feast, and serve out messes with the great Laten
ladell: for then they may not only be parish Priests, but also Bishops,
Prelates, Cardinals, yea Popes them selves. And what more can they crave? For,
touching their life, we must always conjecture the best, like as is commanded
in the Decrees, and not to think that those which daily do handle God, This
is openly commanded in the Decrees cap. in scriptis, did. 96.
would commit any thing, that is not to be allowed. Therefore, if a Priest do
kiss a maid, or grope her about the pappes, we must suppose, that he is about
to shrieue her, or does give her absolution for her sins. And if sobe any
man does take them ope^lie with the manner, he must cover, or lap them about
with his own cloak, lest he make them ashamed. For they are even by nature
very shamefast, and change color, like a pewter platter: otherwise may not
any correct or punish the^ (as is showed before) with the expressed words of
the Sodomites, which would not be corrected of Loath: yea although they were the
veriest smelsmocks which might live. For they are of that number which plead,
Noli me ta^gere, Touch me not.

The iii. Chapter. Which treats, whether the spirituality do likewise
practice knauerie: and here is repeated the high and noble stock of the
Clergy, their forefathers* progeny, brought into 32. degrees, and each set out
and beautifi^d with his arms, crestes, banners, and knightly acts.
IN recording or calling to mind the su^me hereof, Knauerie of the Clergy.
a devout and well disposed catholic mind might suppose, whether it were
possible for the most reverend spiritual professors (whose daily exercise is to
make god, and who are created and descended from the stock of the most holy
father the Pope of Rome) might use, or were able to exercise any kind of
knauerie or wicked deeds? God forbid, that any such matters should pass in
our thoughts. For how were that possible? Seeing they are all sprung forth of
so noble a stock, and descended of so worthy, so righteous and holy
forefathers (whose footsteps they follow so fervently) that a man's heart must
melt away, to hear the same rehearsed. But to the end it may seem no jest, I
will (as briefly as I may) define their noble and worthy progeny, and set it
forth to each man's sight, to the end these birds may be known by their kind,
and these coltes by their dammes. And for that each thing may appear
substantial, I will (after the sagest and ancientest manner of these noble Dom
Cannons of Colen and Ludick) bring their stock into 32. degrees, to wit, eight
from the fathers father, 32. degr^es of the Clerg^^.
and eight from the fathers mother: also eight from the mothers father, and
eight from the mothers mother. For whosoever can describe these degrees in their
proper and deserved arms and banners, without doubt, there is nothing to be
gainsaied, but that he may not only be a dom Ca^non, but also freely possess
all the privileges of a Gentleman, and account himself to descend of the
worthiest race. Like as each (who herein has any knowledge) will easily
condescend. Therefore, if case I can declare any such thing of the old descent
of the holy forefathers of the spirituality, then is the case six, and (spite
their teeth) they must be famous. For the blood will not lie, and a Goose can
lay no Owls eggs. It must be most true and certain, or Mussels are no fish.

The first 8. quarters.
Concerning then the first eight quarters, they proceed only of noble, most
famous, and renoumed Heretics, notorious blasphemers of God, and shameless
deriders, which have played mock holy day with all religious and godly
setuice. For in place of the first, they have the holy father and Pope
Liberius, Liberius
upon whom they build their stock: who, after he had first steadfastly
professed the truth (and for the same had been banished by the Emperor
Constantius, Search for t^is Pope Liberius, Athanasius in the Epistle to those
which live in unity. Also the histories of Platina, of John Maiero, and the
history tripartite, and Abbas Vispergensis.
did afterward revoke, and, to please the Emperor, did turn his coat: and
reputed him self amongst the Arrians, (which denied the eternal Deity or
godhead of Christ.) And being for that cause banished, was (through the
entreaty of the Noble Roman women) which were also of the Arrians
disposition, called home again from his banishment, and restored anewe unto
his seat, from whence he had been driven before: Insomuch as there was great
dissension and brabling betwixt him and Pope Foelix, who had in his absence
occupied his place: which Foelix, John de Maier^ in the book of Counsels.
Hierome and Eusebius also do witness to have been an Heretic, and for that
cause obtained the Seat of Rome, howbeit other Historiographers write the
contrary. After that, they count their descent from Anastasius the second, who
in the days of Anastasius the Emperor, Anastatius the second.
about the year of our Lord 500. did likewise decline from the truth, and
consented to the Nestorians, Hereof peruse Platina and ^ascicul temporum, and
the decrees cap. Anast. did. 19. with the gloss upon the same, and Nauel.
who denied the humanity or manhood of Christ: yea, he sought by all means
possible, to call the Heretic Acatius from his banishment home again, and
used likewise free access and company with Photinus the heretic: in so much
that he was forsaken of al true believing Bishops: and at last (being stricken
by the hand of God) did (in easing him self) void all his intrailes, and
departed this life as Arrius did before him.

Thirdly, they boast them selves upon Boniface the eight, Boniface the 8
who reigned in the times of the Emperors Adolphus and Albertus: this proverb
(in those days) passing of him: Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, mortuus
est vt Canis: that is to say, Touching this, read Cornelius Abbatus, John
Maierus. Volaterranus in his 22. book. Platina, Chronicon Charionis, Baleus
and other Historiographers.
He entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and died like a dog. For when
Coelestin the fifth (a good simple companion) did possess the Sea of Rome, and
for his honesty (and specially for that he commanded the Cardinals to ride no
more on horses nor Mules, but upon asses) was by them hated and had in
contempt. This crafty fox did ordeine a man, to feine him self an Angel of
God, who speaking through a gutter or pype which was bored through a wall, did
warn Coelestine by night (as in a vision) to give up his charge, he being
unfit for the place, and therefore to resign it unto some other, more able for
that function. Insomuch as this Boniface (by this subtle device) obtained the
Popedom, mocking with God and his own profession. And immediately after this,
fearing least Coelestine might yet give out him self for the right Pope, did
throw him into prison, and caused him there (most miserably) to end his
life. Further, he play^ many injurious and ungodly parts more: for he
dispossessed (by mere force) two Cardinals (being of the stock of the
Columneses) not only from their Cardinalships, but also from their own
proper inheritances, because they had reported, that he was not the right and
lawful Pope. Also, he did banish and curse Sara Columna, with all the
Columneses. He refused to crown the Emperor Albertus: and setting the crown
upon his own head, and girding the sword to his side, said, I am Emperor my
self. Yet notwithstanding after that, the King of France did in his own
person crown him, to spite the Pope: which king of France (named Philip) he
did likewise excommunicate, and adjudged him to be dispossessed and deposed
from his kingdom (the same apperteining to the Emperor Albertus) because he
denied the Pope for his Sovereign. Yet besides this, in token of his
godliness, and to the end each one might know, that he deririded his own
religion, It fortuned on a time in the City of Genes, that he had in handling
the Archdeane, named Prochetum, upon the first day of Lent, commonly called
Ashwednesday: And in place that he should print the sign of the cross on his
forehead with hallowed ashes, after the accustomed manner of the Romish Church,
and say, Memento homo, quia cinis es, and in cinerem reuerteris, Seek Nauel.
and Chronic. Ca^ion.
that is to say, Remember (O man) that thou art ashes, and to ashes thou shall
return: he took a handful of ashes, and threw them into the good man's
eyes, and said in a great rage, Memento homo, quia Gibellinus es, and cum
Gibellinis in cinerem reuerteris, that is to say, Remember (O man) that thou
art a Gibelline (for they were called Gibellines, which took part with the
Emperor) and shall be consumed with the Gibellines, to dust: and therewithal
did he bereave him of his benefice. But what shall I say further? It does
manifestly appear, that he has deserved a good place amongst the first
quarters, seeing he was (at a general Counsel holden in Paris) accused and
found guilty of three special faults, Seek for this Council, and ^f his
death the Chronicle of France, called, Les Annals de France.
namely, of Murder, Heresy, and Simonie or briberie* and for those causes,
dispossessed of his Popedom: and shortly after was taken as prisoner in the
town of Anagnia, where he was resident, and from thence conveyed to Rome in a
prison called castra de. S. Angel* where (through very spite and malice) he
became raging mad, in so much as he did gnawe and devour his own hands,
and so most miserably (like to a dog) ended his life: howbeit, it seemed
that the Devils did marvelously mourn for him: for the same whole day was
heard in the prison, where he died, such great and horrible thunderclappes,
and terrible stir, that it seemed, all the belles, Priests, and Monks in
hell did sing his Requiem: for he had been unspeakable holy, for so much as he
was the first which did set forth the shop of Indulgencies and pardons, and
first brought to light the year of Iubile. Therefore it is most meet, Ag^ippa
de van^tate scientia^^^.
that he furnishe this third place of these eight first quarters.

The fourth place we may (of duty) attribute to John the 23. for so much as he
was a manifest and professed Heretic: defending not only by words, but
also openly, that the souls die together with the bodies, till the lat^er day
of the resurrection. And verelie at his election, the holy spirit of the
Cardinals was so zealously inflamed, that two of the most principal were
murdered: Read of this Pope in Ma^o historiarum, Supplementum Chronicorum,
Chron. Eusebii, Chron. Carionis, and the extra^a. of John the.22. begin* thus.
Cum inter n^nnullos. Ex* de verborum significatio.
yea, he him self was inflamed with a burning zeal toward our dear mother
the holy Church: and therefore did condemn the Emperor Lodowick of Beyren
for an Heretic, because he would not take the Imperial crown at the hands of
the holy Pope of Rome: yet was he him self afterward in a general Council
found an heretic, and by Nicholas the fifth (who possessed his place) was
figuratiuelie burnt like an heretic. And further, after his death, were his
opinions by his successor Benedict the 12. condemned for heresies. He was
also before by the General of the Gray friars (named Michael of Saesena)
complained upon, and accused of an other heresy, to wit, that he would by
force maintain, against all sufficient and true proofs of the Scripture, That
Christ and his Apostles had in this world borne temporal rule: yet
notwithstanding, howesoeuer he used the matter, Supplementu^^ Chron. Chron
Eusebii Polidor. Virgil. in the book de inuen. rerum.
he reigned and remained Pope. For he made two Saints, namely, Thomas of
Erford, and Thomas of Aquin: and ordained, that at night should be song Aue
Maria: therefore is he also worthily nu^bred among the noble ringleaders of the
spirituality in this first quarter.

For the sift in this quarter, Grego. the 11.
we may place Gregory the 11. who reigned about the year 1371. Seeing he lying
at the point of death, did make a most true confession, declaring him self
thereby not much better than an heretic: for after he (like an honest man) had
of mere malice banished and cursed all the Florentines, Nauclerus.
and with a mighty army, had sought their confusion: and had raised the tenth
penny throughout al Germany, The t^nth penny in Germany
whereby he had caused a great schism to grow among the people: At last
(death approaching) he sent for his Cardinals, and other Prelates, to come to
him, and holding the Sacrament in his hand, coniured every one which were
there present, that they should beware from doing those, or other such like
things as he had done: for so much as he (in place of Gods word, and
following of good counsel) had inclined to those, which sought to prefer
their own false imaginations and feigned dreams, and thereby had brought the
Church to a perfect likelihoode of confusion and ruin, by great debate and
schism: like as i^ did sufficiently appear after his death. For immediately
did arrise the horrible schism, which the Historiographers do term, The
twenty and two Schism, which continued above forty years.

After this follows in the sixth place of the first quarter, a worthy and an
Ancient bearer up of all ungodly Heretics and Epicures, John the 24.
called John the 24. who at the first brought to pass, that Alexander the fifth
and Pope next before him, by an approved and faithful service of his Physicion
(named Daniel de Sancta Sophia) was, B^ptista Panact. in the 56. sermon.

Peruse the Council of Con^tance, in the 2 book of Councels. Stella.


with a Romish fig picked over the perch, to make place for this honest man.
After that, having assembled and gathered together the Cardinals at Bullin, (by
force of arms) compelled thereunto, to the end they should choose a Pope
according to his liking: when they had nominated three or four which did not
please his mind, at last he demanded for him self Saint Peter's cloak and
habit, frankly to bestow it where it pleased him best. But he put it on him
self, and said, Egomet ipse nunc Papa sum, that is to say, I am now Pope my
self. Was not this an excellent, orderly, and lawful election of the holy
Ghost.

After this, These are in a manner the proper words of the Council of
Constance, like as it is set down in the 2. book of Cou^c. in the 1050.
leaf. And are touched by all Historiograph*
He was convicted and proved in the Council of Co^stance, an apparent
Heretic, ungodly knave, an oppressor of the poor, a persecutour of the
righteous, a stay to the wicked, a pillar to barterers of benefices, a glass
of dishonestie, a vessel full of all vice* yea a Devil incarnat, and
therefore deposed from his holy Apostolical Romish Seat: being convict with
witnesses, that he had not only unlawfully kept company with his brothers
sister, many holy Nonnes, young maids, and married wives: but also like a
Captain and worthy champio^ of all Heretics, did make sale of all manner of
Prebendes, Benefices, Churches and Bishoprikes for his most profit, and
bestowed them on young babes, and miss begotten bastardes. Yea moreover, did
him self oftentimes sell one benefice to sundry persons at one time, and made
a mock at all religions, for that he did not only contemn Masses,
Eeuensong, the Seven tides, the Fasting days, and Abstinence: but had likewise
sold Saint John's head (which lay in Saint Syluesters cloister) to the
Florentines for fifty thousand Duccats, if so be he had not been hindered from
the same by the Citizens of Rome: And had said openly in the presence of many
Prelates and other honest and credible hearers, That after this life, no other
was to be looked for: yea, remained immovable in the same: that the soul
together with the body, did quite die, and that there is no resurrection at
all.

Aha Sirs, is not this good stuff? And yet notwithstanding, this holy father
being accused of more than four and fifty such like articles, which were
orderly read to his face, he answered to each of them, sighing very
heavily: Alas, I have committed yet a more heinous offense than this is:
namely, for that I have descended and come down from the mountains of Italy,
and have submitted my self in Germany under the subjection of this Council.
Now mark well, if our holy fathers and Popes, by this example, are not well
instructed, to suffer no Council to be holden out of Italy, in a country
where they have neither power nor jurisdiction. In conclusion, this holy father
was deposed from his Popedom, notwithstanding he was him self exceeding holy,
considering he had canonized Saints, and had entered S. Brigit in the register
of saints. And he was the same which so^g the high Mass on Christmasse day in
the council of Constance, where the Emperor Sigismund (in manner of his Deacon)
did sing the gospel. Therefore it is great reason, that this place be
bequeathed unto him.

And further, seeing Leo the 7. did freshlie follow him in his holy Romish
belief, Leo the 7.
he shall also furnish the place following with his arms i^ this quarter. For
besides his great gluttony and inco^tine^cie for the which he is set forth for
a horrel in histories: also besides that, he deposed the Duke of Vrbin from his
Dukedom, and joined the same to the Sea of Rome: that he likewise did bereave
the Duke of Ferrara of two towns, Mantua and Regiu^ Lepidi: and besides, the
bloody wars which he kindled and maintained betwixt the Emperor Charles 5.
and Francis king of France* yet has he, This is rehearsed in the book which
the Nobles of Germany set out, for to be freed from the Council of Trent. Also
in Baleus and other Historiograp.
to an everlasting memory, left this brag of him self, namely, That he
esteemed no more of the life to com, the^ the foresaid John: and whatsouer is
written of Christ in the gospel, he accounted for iestes and fables. In
consideration whereof, when Peter Bembus, a learned man, which afterward
likewise became a Cardinal, did allege unto him a certain and true place and
reason ^ut of the Gospel, he answered laughing: I pray you what come you now
forth with your fables of Christ? Insomuch as he in deed has earned an honest
room amongst this sacred company.

Clemens the 7 Read the Pasquilles of the Popes. Also ye Epitaphes of Clement,
and the book called, Resistance of the works of Christ and the Pope* e^ta^t
in French.
At last we will conclude these eight first quarters with Clement the 7. who has
also bin a holy father of the Spirituality, most famous and renoumed, by
reason of his diuelishnes, poisoning, treason, and coniuring. For he dispatched
many Cardinals with the Italian trick, to the end he might possess their
goods, and so gather money, wherewithal he might buie the Popelie seat,
which was resigned unto him for thirty thousand Duc^ates. Yet especially it
is reported of him, that he (lying on his death bed) said, That now at last
he should be resolved of that great doubt, whether souls were mortal, or not
So as it may ea^^lie be coniectured hereby, what opinion he held t^uching
Christian belief, the whole Scripture, and of his own religion, which he
manifested directly yet an other way. For being destitute of money, he set
certain Apostles of gold to pawn, to get some money by that mean, and after
that did raise an Impost upon the expedition of Bulls, which he named, Pro
redemptione Apostolorum, that is to say, For the redeeming of the Apostles. In
respect whereof, we may worthily place him, to stop up the neathermost hole
in the bottom of these eight first noble quarters, serving properly for
Heretics and public blasphemers of GOD: which for arms bear in their
shieldes Foxes, Wild Swine, Dragons, Sea horses, Arms of the first quarter of
holy Popes.
called in Latin Hippopotami, Adders, Basiliskes, Snakes, and Spyders* and in
their ba^ners the cities whence they are descended, namely, Rome, Samaria, Dan
and Bethel* And for their squiers* Epicurus, Lucian, Arrius, Sabellius, Julian,
the co^ductours of reprobates, and other such like.

The second eight quarters of this noble and renoumed stock of spirituality,
The second eight quarters.
depend most upon unchastity, whorehu^ters, breakers of Wedlock, or
adulterers, and Sodomiticall knaves.

Of which, Pope Joan the ninth, or Iuth is the right mother and most meet
ancient bearer. For, Pope Iuth.
as a litter of pigges are farrowed of a fruitful Sow, so are the Priests
and Monks, and all the Spirituality sprung from her. And in very deed, she was
inflamed with such a zealous love toward this holy generation, Platina,
Chronicon Charionis, and other Historiographers.
that she suffered her self be gotten with child by one of the Cardinals, and
was delivered of a child in the midst of the streate, at the midway betwixt
the Colosseu^ and S. Clements chapel, even as she was devoutly and stately
treading in procession: By the same token, that yet at this day there does
remain an image of stone hewn out of the earth, and that the Popes in their
processions do never pass that way: fearing lest the like might happen to
them also. Nevertheless, for the avoiding of such a chance, the holy Romish
Church did ordeine two chaires to be heawen of Porphyr stone, where they used
to feel from under, whether the new chosen Pope was furnished of al his ware.
Howbeit that custom is now left, for that they make the matter manifest by
act, and by the number of their bastards which before hand they do get.

Lando.
Afterward, they are descended of Lando, who begotte John the eleventh in
adultery, and further passed the most part of his life with whores: Petrus
Po^monst.
wherefore he is to occupy the second degree of these quarters.

And his son John the eleventh may follow his father, John the 11.
in the third degree of this quarter: who, by the shameless whore Theodora,
Regent and Gouernesse of the city of Rome, This does Luitpr^ndus of Paui^ in a
manner write from word to word in his 2. book the 12 and 13. chap.
was first forced to use fornication with her, and after that, when he had
showed him self willing in the same, was first created Bishop of Bullen,
after, of Rauenna, and lastly, made Pope of Rome. Which fell out a sower sauce
unto him: for Marozia, daughter to the foresaid Theodora, being also a subtle
strumpet, brought to pass by the help of her husband Guido Governor of
Thuscane, that some of his soldiers did apprehende him at S. John's, in the
Palace of Lateran, in the year 928. and there with a cushen twhartning his
mouth, did pitifully smother him. And this happened, to the end that this
Morozia might further her son John the 12. (whom Pope Sergio the 3. had
begotten on her in adultery) to the holy Seat of Rome. Howbeit, that joy did
not continue, for so much as he (that same year) was by a great commocio^ of the
citizens of Rome, deposed, and Leo the 6. set in his place. But this Leo was
within seven months after, in the year 930. poisoned by Marozia: and further
(as men suppose) Stephanus the 6. who did succeed him, was served with the like
sau^e, and sent to the kingdom of Mooles: Insomuch as the foresaid John her
son did (at last) achieue the holy seat again. Now, this said Marozia had
a son named Albericus, who perceiving that he was mighty and feared in the
city of Rome, did compel the nobility and Magistrates of the same by oath,
that they, (after the decease of Pope Agapitus who then reigned) should elect
and make his son Octauian Pope, as in deed they did, John the 13.
and he was called John the 13. who (for so much as he was descended of whores
and knaves) showed him self no changeling, but declared of what stock he
came. For he was so excedingly given to unchastity, and filthy living, that
he maintained an open stews: and being for the same blamed by the Cardinals,
from the one he cut of his nose, from the other his hand, and from the third
his legs and privy members. So that of duty he is to be placed in the
fourth quarter amongst the noble forefathers of the spirituality. This is the
very same, who did vow homage to the Emperor Otto, according to the oath
which is registered in the Decrees. And he likewise crowned the said Emperor.
But when Otto had turned his back, he took part against him with his foe,
the son of Albertus Berengarius. The which when the Emperor understood, he
returned again toward Rome: And then my lord the Pope betook him self to
his heels, flying into the wild wooddes, and would not by any means come in
presence of the Emperor, notwithstanding the promises and assurances which
were made unto him. Wherefore the Emperor caused a Council to be gathered,
wherein the Pope was complained upon, This whole history with the articles
here set down, are rehearsed by the Historiographers. Luitprandus almost
throughout his book.
and accused with these faults following, to wit, That he did not read his
drudgerie, that in saying Mass, he did not receive the Sacrament of the Altar,
that he had made a Deane in a stable, that he had committed whoredom with
two sisters, that he had made Bishops of children, that he had defiled many
young virgins and widows, that of S. John's Pallaice at Laterane, he had made
an open stews: that he had lain by and had at will, his fathers Concubine,
named Stephana, also a widdowe named Rauera, and yet an other called Anna, with
a Niece of hers. Besides, that he had bin the occasion of fires, which su^drie
times had happened, that he had broken up windows and gates in the night time,
that he had offered up wine to the devil, and in gaming with dice, had
inuocated and besought aid of the devil, with many such Popelie parts, which
were to tedious to repeat. For which causes, he was in that Council deposed by
the Emperor (with consent of the Prelates) and in his stead was placed Leo
the 8. Yet notwithstanding, This is repeated by Ioh. Marius, Nauclerus, Chron.
Sigis. Robert. Barus.
after the Emperors departure, the whores of Rome (whom he had his friends)
wrought so much with the Nobility of Rome, and played their parts so
gallantly with great sums of money, and by promising the substance and coin
of the Church, that he was yet once again called to the Seat, and the
aforesaid Leo put of. But this soon ripe fruit was soon rotten: for he was
shortelie after, by a man that dwelt without Rome, in the night time, thrust
thorough with a dagger, being taken a sleep in bed with his wife.

And this was he, who first taught his successors to christen belles, and
caused the great bell of S. John's at Lateran, to be called by his own name.
After whom, we may place Paul the 2. in the fourth degree of this quarter,
Paul the 2. in this degree.
who first boasted to have al Gods and man's laws shut up in his breast. So
as it was no marvel, that he did so carefully pamper the same with ioyllie
good cheer, and for the most part, past and spent his time with viewing of
old gold, and antique coins. And further, to study by all the means he
could devise, to make and set out him self proper and neat, with all manner of
pearls and precious stones: wherein he past all his predecessors. Yea, when
he should show him self, he did painte and color his face with a certain
kind of vernishe, and other like trumperie, like to his countriewomen the
Courtisanes and Strumpettes of Venize, amongst whom he had a long time gonne
to school. He was the first likewise, which ordained, That the Cardinals should
have their close stools, and pispottes covered over with Crimson velvet* which
they (even at this day) do yet most duly observe, as did sufficiently
appear at the Council of Trent, whither they caused such goodly stuff to be
conveyed on their Mules amongst other of their most costly and precious jewels.

At last (notwithstanding that he was reported to be most cunning and famous
in the art of witchcraft and coniuring) he could not avoid nor save him
self, but the devil his good master brake his neck, whilst he was
practicing his intolerable Sodomiticall filthiness, wherein he often (after
the Venetian manner) did accustom him self. In consideration whereof, he must
of right be reckoned in the register of this gentle generation.

After whom (not only in the Popedom but also in good life* Sixtus the 4.
) did follow Sixtus the 4. who was not him self alone addicted to this
loathsome Sodomitical sin, and to all manner of fleshly desire besides,
(whereon he consumed within the space of two years, Johannes Rauisius Textor,
in his book called Officina.
the sum of three hundredth thousand Duccates) but further gave license to all
the generation and kindred of the Cardinal of Saint Lucie (who was his
huntsman) that they might use this Sodomiticall filthiness in the three whotest
months of the year, namely, June, Iulie, and August. And this is the holy
man, who has ordained so many festival days, as Saint Francis etc. and of
the Presentation of our Lady. And further has made that devout prayer,
which begins, Aue sanctissima Maria matter Dei, Regina coeli, etc. giving a
thousand years remission out of Purgatory, to whom soever does say the same
before her Image. Yea he has also made a Saint of S. Bonauentura: wherefore it
is good reason that he should likewise furnish a place amongst the company of
our Saints.

Immediately after this, Innocent the 8
followed Innocent the 8. who had but eight bastard sons, and as many
daughters: which he fostered and brought up all very highly, according to his
offspring. Yet for so much as he was of no great descent, and that it is but of
small estimation with Popes, to have bastardes, we will let him step for
such as he is.

And place Julius the third in the seventh Julius the 3.
degree of this quarter, who did not only abuse him self with strumpets, The
memory of the^se two Popes is yet so fresh, that the pranckes which be here
rehearse^, are known to each.
but also kept manifestly a young knave called Innocent, to his filthy,
unnatural and unchaste Sodomiticall use: yea and did often boast himself
thereof. And when he was chosen Pope, he did give unto the said boy, as a
reward for his beastlines, his Cardinals hatte, with his syrname and arms: So
that he afterward was always named by the Popes syrname, and yet is so
called, namely, Cardinalin de Monte, that is to say, The little Cardinal of
Monte.

Lastly, we will place Pope Pius the 4. (now last ouerpassed) in the eight
degree of this quarter: Pius the 4.
of whom our Priests, Bishops, and Prelates are (for the most part) sprung up
and proceeded. This good holy father, when he iourneied thorough Bullin
toward Rome, at what time the the Seat was void, he fained him self very
weak and sickly, hoping thereby to win the Cardinals unto him, and that
they would chose him, upon hope, he would not tarry long by it. And when this
fetch would not serve his turn, he sought another way: for being in the
Conclaui, which is, the Closet of Cardinals, he did gloss with the Cardinal of
Trent, as though he would permit in Religion many things to the Germans, as
namely, The whole exercise of the Sacrament, and the liberty of wedlock for
Priests. But when he perceived that the Cardinals were greatly offended
hereat, and that all this did not further, but rather hinder his intent, he
proceeded further, and did by gifts and fair promises, buie their voices. And
at the same time got for a proverb of the Pasquill: Impius es tu, Pater tuus
latro est, Matter tua Meretrix, quomodo huc intrasti? that is to say, Thou art
an infidel, thy father is a murderer, and thy mother a whore, how came
thou hither?

For which occasion, to fetch out this shameful stain of infidel, he would
be called Pius, that is to say, Godly. But to fall to our purpose, he loved
not only the stru^pettes and Courtesanes of Rome exceedingly, but also the
married wives. Insomuch as in the latter and uttermost time of his age, besides
an open and manifest Courtesane or whore, he kept and maintained also, the
wife of a certain Gentleman of Rome, named Papyrio Capizucchi, and most
commonly did eat Oysters and Snayles, and did drink unto them a very strong
wine called Mangeguerra, to revive and provoke his fleshly lust.

And when all would not help, insomuch as his Courtesane did ope^lie deride
him, as an impotent sewter, and that she esteemed more of the foresaid little
Cardinal de Monte, he caused her to be thrown in a stinking dungeon: yet
afterward, of meare pity and love did set her free again, and having tired
him self on her, in his unnatural lust, and further being desirous to
solace him self in bed with the foresaid Gentlewoman, did one night eat so
many Snailes, and drank so much of the foresaid wine called Mangeguerra,
thereby having recovered a fresh youth, that he got to bed with her: from
whence he never rose, but was borne with his heels forwards under the green
coueringes. Whereupon an Epitaph was graven on his grave, as follows: Le
Done, Lumagi, and Mangaiguerra,
M'ha^no l^uato dalla Sedia, and posto in terra


That is to say: Women, Snayles, and Mangaiguerra brave,
From stately seat, have brought me in grave.


He shall then (as of duty to him apperteyning) shut up the second eight
degree, for so much as he had ^duentured his life in the danger of whorish and
most filthy incontinencie, and thereby has purchased an everlasting name,
amongst the noble predecessors of the Clergy: who (most triumpha^tlie) bear
in their arms, Buckes, Bulls, Bears, Leoppards, Arms of the second quarter
of holy Popes.
Harpies, Sowes, Mares, and salt Bitches: And in their banners, the cities of
Rome, of Sodom and Gomorra: of whence their noble race is proceeded: and for
their squiers they have Ammon, Absolon, Sardanapalus, and Heliogabalus.

Now follows the third eight degrees, The third eight degrees.
from whence the sacred stock of the spirituality is sprung up: and these
proceed most of greedy covetous persons, and ravening blood hounds, which
have purchased the Seat with money and bribes: and further have stirred up
great commotions and troubles, and shed much blood. Therefore they wear in
their arms, Lions, Wolves, Crocodiles, Tygres, Eagles, Griffones, Hawks, and
Ravens. And have for their squiers, Cain, Nemrod, Esau, Nero, and other such
like. Marie in their banners, they bear the cities of Rome and Edom.

The first of these Noble personages, may be Pope Formofus (who reigned about
the year 893.) together with his adversaries, who have brought such
dissentions and discords in Christendom, that in many years after could not
be appeased. For the envy which the one bare to the other, was so monstrous
and unnatural, that Stephanus the 6. caused the dead body of Formosus to be
taken out of his grave, Stephanus the sixth.
and congregating a Council for the same, did first command him to be
clothed with a Popely habit, and after stripped him of that, clothing him with
lay apparel: and after cutting two of his fingers from his right hand, caused
them to be thrown into the river of Tiber, and then buried him as one of the
vulgar and unlearned sort: and caused all his ordinances to be void and of no
effect. To the contrary whereof Romanus the successor of Stephanus, Nauclerus.
did establish and allow again all his acts and ordinances, and made those
which Stephanus had enacted, to be frustrate and of no force.

Whom also in this case Pope Theodore the second did follow, Mare historiat.
and Nauclerus.
establishing al those which Formosus had ordained to bear charge. The same
also did (though not without great stir and commotion) John the tenth, who
did succeed him, and did not only disanull all the acts and statutes of
Stephanus, but further caused them in a common and vulgar Council to be burnt.
After w^om did presently follow, Mare historia^. Robert. Barnes. Chron.
Sigisb.
Benedict the 4. and after Benedict, Leo the 5. After the which Leo followed
Pope Christopher, who^ we may of right place in the second degree of this third
quarter, for so much as he did imprison those, which had received any
preferrement of the foresaid Benedict the fourth, and obtained the Seat
perforce: so as poor Leo through sorrow died.

But this great vngratfulnes of the foresaid Christopher was worthily repaide:
Christopher*
For Sergius the third, a notorious whorehunter (as was signified before) did
apprehend him there also, Sergius 3.
and first kept him in a cloister, afterward in a common g^ole, where pitifully
he ended his miserable days. In the 3. deg^e of the 2. quarter. Supp. Chron*


And this is the same Sergius, who yet once again commanded the foresaid
body of Pope Formosus to be dug out of his grave, Pope Formosus beheadded.
and most inhumanlie to be beheadded, and his other three fingers to be cut
off, and so did throw the body into the river of Tyber: yet notwithstanding
was it (in the time of Anastasius the third) fisht out again: and being in S.
Peter's church honestly buried, was by the Images and wooden idols (through a
special miracle) nodded unto, and bid welcome: if histories do not lie. But
that is a small fault: Once we will make this good man Sergius Quarter master
in this third degree, considering that of so worthy a fellow, all other
Popes, and the whole Clergy are grown like maggots of a rotten cheese.

Boniface the 7
For the fourth in this quarter, we may chose Pope Boniface the seventh, who
having achieved the Seat by unlawful means, began to perceive that he was
not well thought of, nor assured at Rome. And therefore, he got him packing to
Constantinople: but forgot not privily to steal and take with him, This
history is rehearsed by Nauclerus, Rob. Barus, and Corn. Abbas.
all the costly jewels and treasures of Churches. Whereof (within eight
months after he was abandoned) he had made a great mass of money,
wherewithal he wrought so wily, and blinded the eyes of all the Romans, in
such sort, as they perceiving no more his wickedness and naughty dealings, did
receive him again, and permitted themselves with the shine and brightness of
the gold to be blinded: so as he found means to apprehend as prisoner Pope
John the 15. who was placed in his room, Pope John his eyes put out
and having put out both his eyes, did famishe him (in prison) to death, and so
got the government unto him again: Howbeit, he enjoyed not long, for being
shortly after overtaken with a soudein death, was by the common people trayled
along the streets, Boniface the 8 his death.
being thrust through with spears and bodkinnes, and at last, buried like unto
a lay and common man.

Here may now follow Benedict the eight, Benedict the 8 upon a black horse.
who may set out this quarter with his arms: of whom the Histories do agree
in one, that after his death he appeared to a Bishop in a fearful shape,
sitting upon a black horse: and when the Bishop had demanded of him: Art not
thou Pope Benedict, who is departed this world? Fasci^ tempor. and other
Historiographers
He answered: I am verelie the subtle and miserable Benedict* But how then
stands the case with you, good holy father (quoth the Bishop:) Whereunto he
answered: I am most pitifully tormented and martyred: notwithstanding the
mercy of God is not quite shut from me, if so be I may be helped with
prayers, Masses, and Almesdeedes: and therefore shall thou go to John my
successor, and tell him, that in such a coffer or chest, he shall find a
great sum of money, which he must distribute to the poor: for whatsoever was
given for me before, will not help, because it was stolen and evil gotten
goods. Whereupon the Bishop, having done his message, did forsake his
Bishoprike, and placed him self in a Cloister. But whether this be true, or
whether it be a lie, or that the devil or some ^^end appeared in likeness of
the Pope, I refer it to the Doctors of Louen to judge. Once (for so much as all
Historiographers do witness alike, it is manifest, that he, as well as his
predecessors, and successors, did gather the most part of their substance
with rouing and stealing, and heaped the same by ungodly means: wherefore it
is reason, that he be also allowed a room in this third quarter.

The sixth place in this quarter we may bequeath to Clement the 4. who could
find out most notable means to fetch in money and goods. For being crowned
Pope, Clement the 4.
he sent for Charles, the French kings brother, and made him chief Counselor
and General over the city of Rome: and further, caused him to be crowned, by
his Cardinals, king of Jerusalem and Sicil: yet upon condition, that he
should, by vow, plight him self to pay yeerelie to the Church of Rome,
forty thousand crowns of gold, and should not at any time accept the
Dominion of Rome at the hands of the Almains, although it were proffered unto
him. Naucler. Ca^ion.
And after that, in the year 1267. when Conradinus the right and natural king
of Sicil, being fled out of the field and from the discomfiture which he had
received of Charles, was delivered into his hands, the Pope wrought so much by
his practices, that he was at Naples, together with Frederike Duke of the East
Country, and others more, against al right and reason, most lame^tably
beheadded. Beside this, he was the cause of the x. penny* Tenth penny.
levied throughout all Germany, and banished John Teutonicus, because he had
bent himself against it.

In sum, seeing he could find such means to catch coin, it is meet,
that he help to furnish this third part with his arms and valiant acts.

Eugen. the 4.
Further, in the seventh degree of this quarter, may we place Eugenius the 4.
of whom all Popes and Cardinals, all Bishops and Prelates, and the whole
Spirituality, are as of a fruitful stock sprung forth: Notwithstanding, that
he was at first driven out of Rome by the Citizens, as one who set all things
in debate, and was with stones and darts driven through Tyber, and so hunted
out of the town. And after that, was lawfully and often summoned by the
Council of Basil, to appear, being complained on for a mutiner and a stirrer
of sedition, for a bloudthirstie and wicked man, Search the Council of Basil.
and for a persecutour of the Spirituality. And when he would not appear, for
fear least it might have happened to him, as it did not long before in the
Council of Constance, unto John the 23. he was (at last) lawfully and justly
deposed, and bannished. Yet this notwithstanding, at the last, by force of
arms, with the aid of the Dolphin of France, (who afterward was called
Lodowick the eleventh) he recovered his Seat again, after that he had
disturbed the Council at Basil, and had raised a great tumult and schism, the
which continued more than fourteen or fifteen years after.

Lastly, for the lock of this quarter, can not be found any more fit than
Julius the second, of whom is written, Julius the 8.
That he threw Saint Peter's key into the river of Tyber, protesting, that
(thenceforth) he would use, and help him self with S. Paul's sword. And in
very deed, he passed his whole time of Popedom with wars and effusion of
blood: For albeit that he was maruellouslie addicted to dronkennes, and to
other fleshly filthiness, and especially to that Sodomiticall incontinencie,
like as appeared by two noble children which the Queen of France had sent to
Rome by the Cardinal of Nantes, which did further this good holy father in
his beastly appetites: yet besides this, he had no greater pleasure in the
world, than in wars. For proof whereof, it is to be read in all Chronicles,
that he (within the space of seven years) had brought above two hundredth
thousand persons to their end. And therefore it is good right and reason, that
he with his arms shut up this quarter.

We might over and above have brought in this quarter, many other Popes and
holy fathers of the Clergy, who maintained the contrary part against the
Emperors, with great commotions, wars, and bloodshed. Like as have been
Gregory the 7. Victor the third, Urban the third, and Paschal the second,
against Henry the fourth: Gelasius the second, and Calixtus the second,
against Henry the fifth: Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third, against
Frederike Barbarossa, which was also trod upon with feet by Alexander.
Honorius the third, Gregory the ninth, and Innocent the fourth against
Philippe the brother of Frederike, and against Frederike the second the first
Frederiks son, and against Conrade the son of Frederike the second: And
Clemens the fourth against Conradine King of Naples, and son of Co^rade.
Insomuch as they handled the matter so roughly, that after William Duke of
Holland, the Dominion of Rome was for the space of xvii. years without an
Emperor, until that Rodolphus of Hasburg was elected for Emperor: who for
that cause would not come there, taking example (as he said) by the Fox,
whereof Aesope makes mention in his Fables: who being sent for by the diseased
Lion, to visit him in his sickness, like as other beasts had done, made
answer, That the footesteppes did fraie him, which were all bent toward him,
but there were none which returned again.

We might then (say I) rehearse all such worthy champions and holy fathers,
and inserte them in this quarter, which have so wilfully breathed against
Emperors and Gods anointed. But for so much as our intent is not to repete every
Popes history, but only to manifest the noble progeny of the holy and
reverend Clergy: And that each may very well know, that in the registre of
kindred we cannot number further than 32. degrees, to show a noble descent, the
rather for that we have briefly touched such Popes, and their feats, where
any mention has bin made of them. Therefore do we refer the reader in this
behalf, to the Historiographers, and prosecute our last 8. quarters of the
Papistical descent, with their skutchions, banners, and quarter masters, in due
and decent order.

So then, do these eight last quarters depend upon Coniurers, Necromaneers,
Poysoners, The fourth and last 8. quarters
and other such like, which work with the Devil and his craft: and wear for
their arms Owls, Howlets, Battes, Kites, Arms of the 4. quart^rs of the holy
Popes.
Crows, Black dogs, and Devils claws. For their squiers do I know none
more meet than the devil him self, whom in their coniuration they invoke,
and call upon, except they would have Simon and Elymas the coniurers: In like
manner, and for their banners, can they not find more fitter cities, than
Rome, Babylon, and Egypt, from whence their Gentilitie has taken root:
for so much as they have always been replenished with such diuelishnes: except
they will have hell it self, where their first father the Devil long since
has farried and prepared their places.

Now then, in the first comes our Syluester the second forth as foreman, who
was Pope about the year 998. Syluester the 2. the coniurer.
This was first a Monk, at Flueria (under the dominion of Orleans named
Gerbertus,) and after that, being removed to Civil in Spain, to study and
apply his book, got a Master who was skillful and of great experience in
this art, and by the aid of his masters daughter, with whom he was very
familiar, did steal one of his especial and chiefest books in that art, and
got him packing therewithal, without saying farewell. And to the end he should
not be trapt in his theeuerie, he did bequeath the Devil his soul, with a
solemn oath: always provided, that he might return into France, and be
prosperous in his attempts. After that, he became a Schoolmaster, and further,
master to Otthonis the third, Platina and all other histories.
and to Robert Hugon Capets son, and to Lotharius, by whose aid he was made
Archbishop of Rhenes: howbeit, Benedict the 7. deposed him as an Heretic and
Coniurer. Yet after that, by the help of Otthonis the 3. whom he had taught
his art, he became Bishop of Raue^na, and at last, to be short, Pope of Rome:
and made with his master the devil a compact, that he should live so long,
till he said Mass at Jerusalem, supposing that the same would never have
happened. But the master deceived the scholar: For in the city of Rome was a
Chapel, which was called Jerusalem, in the Church of the holy Cross, and
saying Mass there, he waxed sick, and perceived the Devils coming for him
to their feast. And hereupon the Historiographers declare, that he became
penitent, and confessed openly his offenses, commanding that his dead carcass
should be thrown upon a carre, and the oxen permitted to draw it* whither
they would: so the oxen drew the carre before Saint John's church at Lateran,
where he lies buried: and it is said that he wroght many miracles there. Yea,
this is to be seen before the same church pictured very bravely in a table.
And therefore this holy Syluester shall occupy the first place in this last
quarter, for so much as of him are proceeded all other hellish fathers, which
with their plaguie spirituality have possessed and replenished the world.

After this may follow John the 19. who likewise had friendly and familiar
conference with Robin goodfellow, John the 19. This is written by Benno the
Cardinal, and Blondus the Historiographers.
like as had been taught him in the schole of the foresaid Syluester, and with
the aid of his master the Devil, got the Popelie triple crown on his head,
about the year 1005. but possessed it but 5. months. And after, went to catch
Moles, proceeding forwards to view his masters Maygame in Purgatory, or
thereabout. Yet in that short time, he did great good: For he confirmed All
souls day, which then was newly inverted and first registered in Clunie Abbie
by Odilius. I suppose he knew before, Robert. Barus, and Supple. Chron.
that he should shortly after go visit the souls in Purgatory, and help
them there to celebrate their feast.

The third place we cannot by right attribute to any sooner, Benedict the 9
then to Benedict the ninth, who before being called Theophilactus, had lien at
study together with one Laurentius, Archpriest in the schole of the foresaid
Gisbertus (who after was called Syluester the second) and was faithfully
instructed in his worthy science, whereby he achieved the Popelie Seat, and
far surpassed his Uncle Benedict the 8. (who had reigned not long before him)
in all subtlety and crafty dealings, like as histories make mention: He
reigned in the days of Conrad 2. and Henry 3. And after being departed this
life, appeared to an Heremit, in the likeness of an horrible and unnatural
beast, This history is rehearsed in Supplem. Chron. Ma^e historiarum
Fasciculus Tempor. and others
having head and tail like an Ass, and the rest of his body like a Bear.
And being known of the Heremite, and demanded what the same signified, made
ananswer, that he ought not to marvel thereat, considering that by Gods just
judgment he was perpetually condemned to the same, as one who after a beastly
manner had lived without faith, and belief, without reason and Law in this
world. Like as by all credible histories is uniformly declared: and
therefore was in his life time complained upon for many shameful acts which he
had committed. And in the thirteenth year of his Popedom was banished
Syluester the third being chosen in his room, Johannes Marius, Fasciculus
Temporum.
who also was deposed within nine and forty days after, as an unmeet and
unlearned man. And the foresaid Benedict put in again, who within a while
after was put forth again, and Gregory the sixth taken in his steed. Johannes
Marius, and Mare historiarum.
Howbeit some Historiographers will say, that he was not deposed the second
time, but did of mere covetousness for ready money sell his title unto the
said Gregory. Robertus Barnes, and Nauclerus.
In fine, this is the effect, That there were the same time three Popes at
Rome: namely, Benedict, Syluester, and Gregory, who did all at once draw for
the longest cut, and drew so long, till the fourth named Gratian did arise,
Gratianus.
who had likewise gone to school with Syluester the second, and played his
part so neately, that he bought all their three parts, and became Pope him
self. Howbeit, that he, like a Simoniake, that is, one which was crept in with
coin, was first by the Spirituality of Rome, and after by the Emperor Henry
in a general Council deposed, and one promoted to his place, called
Sindegerus, who (after that) would be called Clemens the second. But he
likewise made the matter short: Supplem. Chron. Robertus Barnes.
for nine months after stepped Damasus the second in place, having poisoned
the other: and scaled the Romish Seat him self without a ladder, that is,
without election of the Commonaltie, or help of the Clergy. Damasus the 2
Wherefore we may allow him the fourth degree of this last quarter:
considering that in those days the most part of Popes and other Prelates were
addicted to sorcerie and poisoning, with other devilish devises: whereof
histories do sufficiently witness, and make mention at large.

The fifth place (by all reason) does belong to Gregory the seventh, Gregory
the ^
which before was named Hildebrand, who (as histories declare) did temper his
Triacle so well, that as good as five or six Popes were by the Italian Dram
brought to their baine, to the end he might find a ready beaten and trodden
pathe to their place: Fascic. tempor.
yea he was also a scholar of the forenamed Syluester. For So Much as Syluester
(as has been showed) did instruct Laurence the Archpriest, and Theophilactus
(who after was called Benedict the 9.) and Laurence did teach this Hildebrand,
who thereby atteined to the holy Seat. And notwithstanding that first in a
Council holden at Worms, he was for a coniurer and crafty villain, who by
policy had obtained the Popedom, and also after that, in a council holden in
the city of Brixne by many Nobles and Bishops, and lastly in a council at
Mentz, as a Simoniake, or a merchant of Benefices, and a seditious mutiner,
deposed from his Seat* being accused and lawfully charged, that he ^^lie, and
with briberie crept into the same, and had brought all Christendom into a
commotion, sown discord on all sides, did maintain and receive under his
tuition, al Periurers, Murderers, Church spoylers, Villains, Thieves, and such
as by fire consumed true men's substau^ces: like as afterward him self (lying
on his death bed) did confess. Yet, all this notwithstanding, he wrought so
much with help of his master whom he served, that he again (like to a cat)
did clamber on his seat, and did work all the spite and hurt which he could
devise unto the Emperor Henry the 4. suborning certain persons, some with
treason, some with poison, and some with other treachery and subtle devises,
to procure his end. And the better to atchieue his intent, did co^monlie bear
in his bosom a book of Necromancie. Yea his Secretary John the Bishop of
Portua, did testify in a public sermon, that he had committed such factes,
This declaret^ the Cardinal Benn^, who lived in those days.
whereby he deserved to be burnt quick: for so much as he had thrown the holy
sacrament into the fire, in his coniurie, to the end he might have knowledge
from the devil, of his good fortune and succession against the Emperor
Henry. And this is the holy man which did forbid Priests, Marian. Scotu^.
and the rest of the Clergy, to marry wives: yea that none should be received
in any office pertaining to the Church, except first he were sworn to live
chaste and undefiled, that is, Cap. quae. 1. di^^ Sabb. de consecr. did. 5. Ca.
Carnium, de cons^cr* did. 5.
without a married wife. He also did forbid all Chisten people, on the
Saturdaies, and all Monks for ever to eat flesh. Likewise, he did separat Azo
the Governor of Esten from his wife the Duchess of Matildo, Platina, Naucler.
Abb. Vrs.
under pretense that they were a kin within the fourth degree: but in very
deed, it was because he would have the woman at his pleasure: like as all
Histories do witness, that she had great familiarity, friendly conference,
and continual conversation with him.

What say you then, was not this fellow holy enough, to occupy the fifth place
in this noble quarter?

Go to then, after him may follow in this quarter John the 21, (who reigned in
the year 1276. John the 21.
) for that he did give such credit to his knowledge of Geometry, and to the
Geometricians or star Prophets, that he spared not to say, That by the same
he was assured to live a long time. But he deceived none more than him self.
For he continued but eight months in his Popedom, being soudeinlie slain in
the city of Viterben, by the falling of a chamber, which he had caused there
to be built: so as it is manifest, that this was one of the devils prankes, who
had assured him so finely of a long life.

Now for to furnish the seventh part of this last quarter, we can find none
more fit than Alexander the sixth, Alexander the 6.
who before was named Rodorike Borgia: and being Cardinal sought by all means
possible, to wax Pope: finding in the end no way more commodious to atchieue
the same, than by framing him self to the study and exercise of Necromancie
or black science: which art he most diligently did apply, and thereby
examined the devils, whether they would willingly and without grudging, prefer
him to the Popelie crown. Whereunto they presently consented, with condition,
that he should be sworn to be subject and serviceable in all matters unto
them: whereunto with right good will he also did condescend: desiring only,
that when this compact should be confirmed, the devil should not appear in
any fearful likeness, to demand the accomplishment of his oath, but should
show him self in the habit and semblance of a Protonotarie. The devil (who
could not have wished a better vizard) was soon entreated to show him that
pleasure. So it fortuned on a time, that the Cardinal did walk in the
ancient city of Rome, to the mount called Monte cauallo, and drew him self
aside in a summer parler, or place of pleasure, where byding alone, his lord
the Protonotarie came also treading in, in the similitude of a comely
middleaged man, seemly apparelled with the habit of a priest. And having taken
the oath of the Cardinal according to his wish and prescribing, did assure him
to become Pope: and that agreed very friendly upon the time wherein Borgia
should reign as Pope, to wit, 1108. In fine Borgia was made Pope, and gave
himself thoroughly to al manner of pleasure and desire of his flesh. He lay
with his own daughter named Lucretia, which nevertheless was used in like case
the same time by his son her own brother, called Valentin Borgia: insomuch
as of his daughter he did not only make his bride, but also his daughter in
law, like as her Epitaph (extant on her grave) does expreslie declare. He
caused likewise the good man Hieronymus Sauonarola to be burnt at Florence,
because he did boldly preach against his wicked life and doctrine. Besides
this, he did covenant and agree with the Marranes, which is, with the revoked
Christians. Yet further, after he had committed many murders, as well with
his own hands, as also thorough the mean of his aforesaid son Valentin,
who had raised a commotion through all Italy, and had brought Iacobus
Caietanus, the Cardinal Vrsin, and the Abbatte Aluiane, with many other more,
to their end. He would at last at a banquet (which very liberally he had
prepared) have poisoned a Cardinal: So it chanced, that through mistaking the
one bottell for the other, he which filled the drink, did serve the poison to
the Pope him self: insomuch as he therewith did swell, and became exceeding
sick. The while now, that good counsel with him was dear and far to
seek, he sent one of his most trusty servants called Modena, into a study
joining next to a chamber where he lay in bed, to fetch a pretty golden
book of Necromancie, which he had always most carefully kept amongst his
costly and chiefest jewels. And as the aforesaid servant mas entering into the
study, he saw the aforenamed Protonotarie sitting in the Popelie habit, who
did so well resemble his master in all respects, as if it had been him self.
Whereat being greatly frighted, and in a manner half dead through fear, did
retire back, until his master the Pope had revived him again, and then
aduenturing the second time to enter the study, was asked of the Devil, what
he had there to do, who answered, that the Pope had sent him for a book. Then
roared the devil with a terrible noise, and cried out: I am Pope my self:
wherewith he vanished away. After the which time, the Pope began to hasten
toward his end. Yet a little before his death, did his master appear once more
in likeness of a Post or Purseuant, and having had long conference and a
longer discourse with him, did teach him his Arithmetic, or his table of
numbering, effectually giving to understand, that eleven and eight did signify
eleven years and eight days, and not nineteen years, so as the Pope had
reckoned without his host. And then with a filthy stinck he departed from my
lord the Pope, who immediately after followed, and with his faithful masters
departed this world into the Popes heaven. Now, seeing his Requiem is a
singing, we will affoarde him this seventh place in the last quarter.

The last and best, which may not only conclude the fourth quarter, but also
shut and seal up the whole registre of kinreds with his noble arms and
Popelie acts, is Paul the third, whose high renoumed and noble feats do
show them selves, Paul the 3.
partly in all the four quarters: for he is at first, a kin to the fathers
of the first quarter, insomuch as he was, all his life time, a notable Epicure:
openly skoffing at Christ the son of God, and esteeming the word of God for
a vain fable. Like as they do sufficiently know, which in his time have
frequented and been at Rome.

After that, he is a kin likewise to those of the second eight quarters,
for so much as he was not simply a whoremonger, but besides the women which he
defiled, being the Popes Legate, was by his kinsman Nicholas Querceo, taken
with the manner, whereas he being a bed with his own cousine germane Laura
Fernesia, Laura Fernesia.
wife to the said Nicholas, was for the said cause, by him thrust with a dagger
into his body, whereof he bore the scarre to his grave. Yea he did lie with
his own daughter Constantia: Constancia.
and to the end he might the more safely do the same, did poison her husband
named Bosa Sforza. He had also a son called Peter Aloysius, Peter Aloisius.
who knew very well how to follow his fathers footsteppes. For besides
innumerable shameless and most detestable crimes, which would be to tedious
to repeat: he did perforce ravish the Bishop of Fanes, and misvsed him, with
help of his servants, to the satisfying of his most horrible Sodomiticall
lechery, whereof the good Bishop (through sorrow and anguish of heart)
died: which notwithstanding, the good son got of the holy father for a reward
of his good deed an Earldome of forty thousand Duccates a year. But what
marvel is it, that he forbore and maintained his son in such a dishonest and
detestable life, seeing him self through the whoredom of his sister Iulia
Fernesia, Iulia Fernesia.
which she had committed with Pope Alexander the sixth, was called to be one of
the college and fellowship of Cardinals? For So Much as she did threaten to
forsake the Pope, unless he would bestow on her brother a Cardinals hatte.
After this he does claim kindred of the third 8. quarters: considering he kept
open shop or market of all manner of benefices, and mercha^dise. For being by
Pope Clement (who lay at Rome as prisoner in the Palace called Castra de Sancto
Angelo) sent of an Embassage to the Emperor Charles, would not take it upon
him, but that the Pope must first prefer his young Nephewe to the Bishoprike
of Parma, who was but a child of x. years old: and afterward being Pope, did
give all, or most part of this treasure perteyning unto the Churches, unto his
friends and kinsfolks, as well women as men: yea sold from the Duke of
Ferrara two towns called Modena and Rhegium. He alienated also Parma and
Plasancia, and gave them to his friends. He was not abashed to raise all manner
of strange impostes and taxes, and to demand of his subjects 3000 Duccates a
year, and besides that sometimes the tenths, sometimes the one half of their
fruits, to gnaw the common people to the very bones, and gather money from al
quarters and corners. And further touching bludthirstines and murder, therein
he was doctor long before he got the Cardinals hat on his head: for in the
days of Pope Innocent, he was throwe^ into Bocardo for two murders by him
committed, and for poisoning his own mother and nephew: Murders committed by
Pope Iulie.
insomuch as he has also deserved a place in this fourth and last quarter:
considering he was so skillful in tempering an Italian fig, that he did not
spare his own natural mother. Yea after that did bring his own sister to her
baine, who otherwise was none of the holiest. Besides this, he was a necessary
and toward companion in Necromancie and devilish arts: as appeared by his
endeavor and diligence in preferring (so much as in him lay) all those of the
same science, to wit, Cecius, Marcellus, Gauricius the Portugal, and other
more his approved friends and fellow students. To conclude, he is the very
same, with whom we need to fill up this beaderowle, and to bring these two and
thirty noble degrees unto one notable stock or graft, from which all our
holy Clergy, all our triple crowned Popes, all bloody Cardinals, all mytred
Bishops, all lazy Abbattes, fat Curates, houdded Monks, idle Channons,
Massepriestes, shaven Clerks, fysting Nonnes: In fine, all the shaven sort
are proceeded and sprung up, and further, have filled the earth, as with a
heap of grassehoppers.

The iiii. Chapter. Declaring that the lewd and wicked life of Priests can
not be a let to the administration of their Sacrament. And herein is treated,
the briberie, and chopping of benefices used in the holy Church of Rome.
SEeing then that our Clergy is descended of so high, holy, renoumed, noble,
and right honorable stock, of all sides, that they can show and declare all
the arms and banners of their predecessors, so exactly and perfectly:
wherefore then should they not (as of right to them apperteineth) possess
their fathers rentes and revenues, and enjoy all the privileges which of old
are bequeathed and given unto them: and which (many hundredth years ago) they
have always used? Good reason then, that they should after the ancient
accustomed manner of their old mother the holy Romish Apostolical and
Catholic Church, invoke and call for help of their old fathers, whenever
any heaviness or trouble does seem any way to come upon them. And
especially in this, that our master Gentian does here diligently treat upon,
to wit, that the wicked and lewd life of Priests cannot stain or disgrace
the commendable and worthy order of their admission to be Priest. And it is in
deed true, for else the matter would cotton but ilfauouredlie with our loving
mother the holy church: for to the end I need not rehearse every several
part, Look before in the 5. chapter of the first part.
we have heard above, that the decrees do mention: If any Pope or other
religious person do with Simonie, that is to say, with gifts or briberie, with
affection or friendship, or with any other indecent mean, obtain a benefice,
living, or other spiritual stipend, the same shall not only be banished and
accursed, but beside al whatsoever he does, or ordein, shall be accounted without
force, void, and of none effect. And al Priests and those of the Clergy
placed and appointed by him, shall likewise be banished and excommunicated with
him. Now help good Lady of Walsingham: for is it possible to find one
amongst ten thousand, which can get his benefice otherwise, than by such
pretty practices and cunning sleights? I refer that to the right worshipful
Abbat of S. Bauen at Gaunt, and to the Secretary Arge^terus, and to Morillio^
the Cardinal of Grandveile his brokers, Vigilius. A Argenterus. B Morilion. C
which were wont to be called the A.B.C. of benefices (because he had so many
benefices, as there are letters in the crisse cross row) I refer it (I say)
to their consciences, if perhaps there is any conscience at all left in them.
They know how indulge^ces and aduousons of benefices were wont to be dealt
withal. They know also, what subtle practices that the good Cardinal
Grandville has brought us in the low countries, to scumme the best fat from
our pots, with the scummer of indulgences, and sheare the sheep, where others
sheare the hogs. I refer me also to the Notaries, Bull writers, Registres,
and Secretaries of the Romish court: they know what notable gain they yerelie
put up by their boxes for all the pardons, dispensiues, expectatiues,
privileges, Bulls, new prouisos, Vocatories, Commendaticus, Absolutions,
Dispe^sations, for to compass three, four, or ten benefices at once, for
Protonotariships, Promotions of Chaplains, Conseruatories, Reuocatories,
Reductions, Exemptions, and other such like paultrie more, which we have
rehearsed before.

But I pray you, was there ever any Pope, which obtained his place otherwise,
than by gifts or bribes, or with open force and armed hand?

That appears sufficiently by the horrible schisms, Peruse John Marius, and
other Historiographers.
contentions, murder, and wars, wherewith histories are so thoroughly
replenished, that it is wonderful. Mentioning at last of 22. manifest
schisms, wherein were sometimes two, sometimes three: yea four Popes at once,
each contending most stiflie against the other to win the bell: and that
continued sometimes three or four, sometimes ten or twenty: yea sometimes
thirty and forty years.

But I omit all the rest, only calling to mind the late passed Pope Pius the
4. Has not he openly on a time with ready money, Pius the 4.
an other time by fair promises, bought the voice of Cardinal Caraffa, and his
adherents (which always held the contrary part against the Ferneses, and
Mantuans?) Did not he promise the said Cardinal a pension of many thousand
Ducates a year, to receive them out of the revenues of the Bishopric of
Toledo in Spain, which he by means of the Duke of Florence (who was surety
for the same) would cause him to obtain, and also certain Fortes and Castles
situate in the land of Naples, which he should deliver into the hands of the
Duke of Paliano? And at last, when the time of payment was come, he caused the
Cardinal to be throtled with a napkin about his neck, and his brother the Duke
of Paliano to be beheadded, and further payment they might seek where they
could. But what need I (by sundry examples) declare, that which a calfe with
one eye might lightly perceive? The Lawier Marsilius Patauin him self could
well discern this, and by writing testify with these words following: In
defension^ pacis, cap. 24. part 2.
Quid aliud Romae, quam Simoniacorum vndique concursus? That is to say: What
else is at Rome, but a gathering and flocking from all places of bribing
Heretics, and brokers of benefices?

The same did the Monk Baptista Mantuan lament, writing thus: Vaenalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes,
Altaria, Sacra, Coronae:
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum
Est venale, Deusque.


Which might be thus Englished: Wares of all sorts,
are here to be sold:
Buy what you will,
for money down told:
Churches, Priests, Altars,
Offerings, and Crowns:
We pass, for quick sale,
all cities and towns:
Fire, Franckincense, Dirges,
and pardons from pain,
Hell, Heaven, God, the Devil,
we give all for gain.


Wherewith a good Abbat does finely agree, who being asked, Papa cuius partis
orationis? That is to say: What part of speech is this word, Pope?

Answered, that it was Participii partis, Quia partem capit a Clero, partema
Seculari, partem ab vtroque, cum totius orbis doloris significatione, sine
modis and temporibus. That is to say:

This word Pope is a participle, or of the quality of those which put forth
their hands on both sides of the dishe: for he receives of the Spirituality,
he receives of the Temporaltie, and does part stakes on both sides, without
measure or end, to the great anguish and sorrow of all the world.

And for proof of this, may be sufficiently perceived by the taxes, or
valuing of Benefices, wherout the Pope must alwais have his share. For to let
sky a many of scrappes, First fruits. This calculation and reckoning is to
be read in the hoke called Desensio pro liberate Gallie. Eccl. aduers. Romans
aulam, made by the parliament of Paris, and delivered up to king ^od^wick^ the
11. in the 72.73.74. and 75. article. Peruse also here of Charles Molinae^s. in
the book de Annatis, and search the tare of Bishoprikes and Archbishopriks and
Franciscus Duarenus de sac^is Eccle. ministris ac benefi^iis in the end of the
book.
which he so carefully does gather from under the table of the Beneficed,
like a dog: only the first yearly fruits, which the Bishops, Abbats,
Prelates, and other bene^ice buiers must allow the Pope, do amount only in
France, year by year, but to ten times an hundredth thousand Crowns. Yea in
the time of Pope Pius the 2. were void in France above twenty, so of
Archbishoprikes as Bishoprikes, which brought to his coffers, a hundredth and
twenty thousand Crowns. After that, he received not much less of xl. Abbeys
which were likewise void in his time. And further of Priories, Deanties, and
Parsonages, he got in no less than an hundredth thousand Crowns. And above all
these were there about an hundredth thousand parish Churches and Pastorships,
which the one with the other did each allow to the Pope xxv. Crowns. Behold, and
consider, if this does not in the whole amount unto xxviii. times an hundredth
thousand, and more, xl. thousand Crowns? Reckon then, and ouercast all the
other profits, besides the first fruits. And then ponder what a monstrous
sum of money, al other countries (throughout all Christendom) do bring
together, which in a manner are served with the like sauce. I omit the
revenues which he receives, and is paid every year by the strumpets of Rome,
amounting (for each paid a Ducate) above forty thousand Ducates: besides that
which he dueth likewise get of the Jews: and further, that which is brought
him in the chamber of penance, where the remission of all sins are rated and
taxed at a certain price: like as we have touched before, and granted
dispensations, for to marry with their nearest kindred, which is not allowed
to any, but such as be rich. For thus sounds the text:

In the book named, Tax^, and Cellar. Apost. cu^ notabilibus, iuxt. stylum
hodiernu^ Romans Cu^iae, in Rubri. de Matrimonial.
Et nota diligenter, quod huiusmodi gratiae, and dispensationes non co^ceduntur
pauperibus, quia non sunt, ideo non possunt consolari.

That is to say:

And note diligently, that such favor and dispensations are not allowed to the
poor, for they are not, and therefore can not be comforted.

Behold, this is a text of the Bible, which speaking of the people of Israel,
under the name of Rachel, says, that she is mournful, and does bewail her
children, and can not be comforted, because they are not present. This does
the holy Romish Church understand of the poor fellows, which have no Ducates
or Crowns of gold, and therefore can not be relieved in the chamber of
penance: where none find ease, but such as will come off, and deal
liberally. But who were able to declare all the sundry merchandises, fines,
trumperies, and simonie of the most holy fathers and Pope of Rome? It is even
a very bottomless poole, which does surpass man's capacity. Insomuch as we
need not marvel, that Pope John the 22. after his discease, did leave unto
his successors, xxv. Millians, This writes Francisc. ^et^ar. and Ma^sil.
Pa^a. in defen. pacis.
or xxv. times thousand thousand Crowns in ready money, which after our
reckoning, is five hundredth tonnes of gold. Besides all that, which he
(whilst he was Pope) did wastfullie spend and consume with whores and knaves,
with sumptuous and dainty fare, with riot and banqueting, and other such like
Popelie holiness, the which undoubtedly was an infinite mass of money.

In his book called, Sylua locorum commun.
Therefore it is, that the Archbishop of Maydenburg, noting this sum, and
having cast and reckoned, that in the time of Pope Martin the fifth, were
brought into Rome, as good as nine millians of gold, which is, nine times
thousand thousand Crowns only out of France, with great admiration used
these words, Iudicet timoratus, quae vorago haec: That is to say, Each one
which fears God, record and judge hereby, what an insatiable and bottomless
poole this is.

But what needs further repetition hereof? Every one does know well enough,
that al things with the Popes of Rome, are set at sale. And this appears
sufficiently by the worthy acts of the holy fathers Alexander the 6. and Leo
the tenth. For of the first did John Picus Prince of Mirandula write thus:
Vendit Alexander,
Cruces, Altaria, Christum:
Emerat ipse prius,
Vendere iure potest.


That is to say: Vpstart Pope Alexander,
and out with his male,
And made up his market:
What set he to sale?
Christ (by Saint Maerie)
Altars, and Crosses,
He bought them, to sell them:
Men live not by losses.


And of the other did the learned Poet Accius Sannaharius indite as follows:
Sacra sub extrema
Si forte requiritis hora,
Cur Leo non potuit
Sumere? vendiderat.


That is to say: If this to know be your intent,
Why Leo, at his dying day,
Could not receive the Sacrament:
What other cause did let, (I pray?)
But that, for greedy gain of gold,
Out of his hands the same he sold.


But if promotions and benefices were only to be sold for money and bribes,
then were our dear mother the holy church to be borne with, and not greatly to
be blamed. But what helps it? It is apparantlie perceived, that they are to
be gotten by Ruffianlike living, whorehunting, perjury, and abominable
Sodomiticall filthiness.

For to the end I let slip, that Pope Paulus the third, after that he was put
by the third time, did at last obtain a Cardinals hatte, by the importunate
instigation of his sister Iulia Fernesia, Pope Alexanders strumpet, who
threatened to forsake him, unless he would admit her brother into the honest
and worthy fellowshippe of Cardinals. To the end I also let slip the forenamed
little Cardinal of Monte, who by his filthy Sodomitical mildemeanour, possessed
the Cardinals hat of Pope Julius de Monte. Those which have but a while
frequented Rome, can testify, that it is a common order and usual course:
yea, it is not of to day nor yesterday, but it is one of the old traditions or
customs of the holy Romish Church, which she without setting down in
writing, has received from the father to the child, or from heir to heir,
and does still follow the same. For Pope Benedict the twelfth, who him self
made a decree, forbidding, That to the undeserved, or such as were unworthy,
should not any benefice be given, did notwithstanding in the year 1336.
offer the learned man Francis Petrarcha a Cardinals hat, upon condition, that
he should deliver him his sister for a Concubine. This is rehearsed in the life
of Petrarch. of that which is written of Vergerio and Squarciasico, which
within ^^le did live upon the said time.
Whereunto Petrarcha answered, That he had no need of so foul or filthy a
hatte. Yet his brother Gerard Petrarcha consented thereto, and delivered his
sister to the holy father for a Cardinals hat. But when the Pope had satisfied
his desire with her, and did not pay the hat, the good man did despair, and
got him self away into a Catholic cloister or religious house.

Such merchandise is a daily thrift to the Romish Pilates and holy fathers.
And therefore might Peter's bark suffer shipwreck, if upon their holiness and
honesty you would build the worthy state of Prelatshippe and spiritual
callings, and the Mass with the seven Sacraments. For admit they had obtained
all their livings, benefices, and shaven crowns, by their worthiness and holy
acts, yet might we not hear their Masses, so long as they haunt and use the
company of their pretty Minions, by virtue of the council of Mantua, wherein
is expreslie forbidden, That we shall not hear the Mass of any Priest, whom
we know to exercise the company of any women.

And now I refer the matter to the consciences of Priests, Monks, and
Cannons, whether the holiest amongst them al, do always refrain and keep
themselves from the haunt of harlottes. For So Much as it is known and manifest,
that the common sort are not content with one proper bedfellow, as we may
sufficiently perceive by the Popes and other Prelates their bastardes, with
which they have replenished the world, and have distributed their lands and
livings amongst them. And therefore must we always be mindful of this rule:
that whensoever we hear ought of Priests or Monks, which sounds not well,
yet the same cannot be prejudicial or hurtful to their state or calling, or
hinder the virtue of holy Mass: yea it is sanctified and made holy through
the worthiness of the person him self, how wicked and sinful soever the fact
can be. Fel^ius in cap. ex part. 1. De officio delegati. and Iacobatiu* in
tract. de Conciliis. Tit. 4. Chap. 4.
For this has our mother the holy church after this sort concluded: That in
case the Pope should for ready money sell all the Spiritual goods, all
benefices and prebendes, and all the trumperie, one with the other, yet may not
that be reckoned for Simonie, so long as the holiness of his person can wash
and cleanse away all stained spots and filthiness. Yea, of a sin can he
make a good and godly work, as is showed before. And the Pope with the holy
Church of Rome can no further be tainted with this crime of Simonie or
briberie, than that the Court of Rome may be called Monarcha Simoniae, This
is repeated by Restau. Castaldus, in tractat. de Imperat.
that is to say, A Monarche or Duchess of Spiritual theeuerie. And therefore
Bribeberie or Simonie can not be found at Rome.

And as concerning other factes, the Pope can wholly dispense with them:
insomuch as the holy Church is out of danger, yea although she were as full
of villains and reprobates, as an egg is full of meat.

The v. Chapter. Which treats of the ignorance of Hugnenote preachers, and
the great and singular learning, capacity, weighty and deep grounded
questions of Catholic Doctors.
Now let us proceed with our Huguenote Ministers and Preachers, and paint
them forth in their colors. Go to then, master Gentian says: They are
unlearned, and of a wicked life. Touching the first point, their ignorance is
easily perceived by this, in that they will not say and sing their Pater
Nosters, Benedictions, or thanksgiving, Psalms, and other prayers in Latin,
but always use their own mother tongue. Truly if they had their latin
tongue so prompt and ready, as the Priests have it in their Masses and
Diriges, they would not be so charie and dainty of it. In deed, it is very
true, that some of them have not only the latin tongue, but also the Greek
and Hebrewe more perfect and ready, than the Priests and Monks have their
Kirieleyson and Per omnia. But in primis, it is Heretical Latin, and of this
new sort, which is unknown, (much less used) amongst the Doctors of Louen,
Colen, and Paris, and such as the holy Romish Church can not skill of. On the
other part, there are some amongst them, which know no more latin then our
Monks and Parish priests: yea they will not boast or crake to know any
thing, save only Jesus Christ, and the same crucified: 1. Cor. 2.2.
and persuade them selves, that that alone, (at least) is worth as much, as all
the Doctors copes, Aristotle's breeches and lyripypes, which our Magistri nostri
and Supermagistri at Louen have won with great and painful industry. But
when all is said, are their learned sort such jolly fellows? Are they of the^
selves able to dissolve one of those questions, which our masters of Louen
with great heaps do daily deliver? and break their brains about them, in
such sort, that when they come abroad in the air, their heads are lapt and
wrapped about with cloutes and rags, as though they were in danger to break
and fall asunder? Ywys sir no. He had need to be a wily Woodcocke, which
should be able to dissolve such indissoluble questions. For behold, these are
they, whereby they permit their students to proceed Bachelors, Masters of
art, and Doctors: Namely, to know, Whether God be able to sin? Questions
of Catholic Doctors.
If he were able to hate his Son? If it were in his power to command any
thing, that is evil? If he might have created the world in better condition
than he has done? If he could have created a father without a child? Or a
child without a father? Or a hill without a valley? If he were able of a
whore to make a virgin again? Also, whether the son of God could have taken
a woman's shape upon him? Yea, if he could turn him self into the likeness of a
Devil? Or take upon him the nature of an Ass? Whether he could not have been
a peeble stone? A Pompin? or Colewort? And if he had become a Pompin, how
then would he have preached? Also, whether our Lady was borne pure and without
sin? Further, how many companies of Angels there be? Who sits on the
highest end and who on the lowest: who goes before, and who folowes after?
Moreover, what is done in hell? With what sort of tongs and bellows the fire
is kindled? How hot Purgatory is? Wherewith all it was separated from hell?
How long the souls must fry in it, before they be enough? Besides them which
we have rehearsed, concerning Mise which were cerpt into the Sacrament box,
what they find there to gnaw upon, considering it is changed from bread? How
long the man in the Moon will tarry there, and when he takes his flight?
Whether the host be poisoned when there is any poison mixed with the bread? And
whether flies dare presume to beshite it? With other more weighty questions
without mesure or end, wherein the Heretics are nothing seen, nor can tell no
more of, than of the wind which last blew of my hat: and therefore it must of
necessity follow, that they are most ignorant and unlearned. They suppose it
is now, as it was in the days of Paul and the other Apostles, when there was
no talk of Bachelors nor Masters of Art: when as Quotlibets, horned or forked
Sillogismes, Quidditates, Identitates, Realitates, and other such like rattes
nestes, were not yet found out, when Fishermen were preachers, and Tanners
Apostles. And therefore are they all busy with their Paul, and their
Prophets, Doctor subtilis, is to say, a profound and deep witted doctor, and
so do they co^monlie call Ioh. Scotus. Doctor An^e^^^us is an Angelical or
Angellike doctor, and this is the Surname which they give Thomas de Aquino.
and scoff at all that our Doctor subtilis Johannes Scotus, Doctor Angelicus
Thomas de Aquino, That our Albertus Magnus, Petrus Lombardus, Occa, and all
other such like famous and learned Doctors, have written in great books and
large volumes, and which they have after deep and special speculation,
concluded and set forth for chief and principal articles of our belief.

But we pratle in vain, they must (at the least) go yet these ten years to
school, if they will be reputed and taken for learned. What tattle I of ten
years? A wise Doctor of Divinity said to Erasmus, That in nine years could
not be understood, what only Scotus, in his argument upon Petrus Lombardus,
had written. And another said, That it was impossible to conceive one sentence
or place in Scotus, except he had Aristotle's Metaphysickes at his fingers
ends. Metaphysica is to say, those things which surpass nature as Spirits,
Angels, etc. And it is the name of a book which Aristot. has written of
supernatural things.
What a good year mean these Heretics then, that they are learned, because
they have read the Bible, or S. Paul, or Augustine and Hierome? Or because
they understand Hebrew, the Chaldean, and Greek tongues? They must to it a
little better, and must yet these twenty or thirty years go beat their
brains in their common schools, and draw Aristotle's breeches over their
ears: or else they shall remain but unlearned doltes all their life time, and
can never proceed Masters of Art, or Bachelors, I say not Doctors: Yea,
although they had eaten seven Bibles, and know as much as ever did Paul.
Therefore it is no marvel, that master Gentian does cast in their teeth, and
vpbraideth them with their ignorance: forsomuche as they did never taste the
knowledge and doctrine of our mother the holy Church, nor yet the wisdom of
the deep grounded and surpassing learned Louanistes.

The.vi. Chapter: Declaring the life and reformation of Huguenote Preachers,
and the city of Geneua and to the contrary, of the great virtues and valor
of the city of Rome: and of the love and kindness of the church of Rome. And
of the taxations or rate book of the penance Parloure.
COncerning their lives, Master Gentian does put in ure his art, which he
learned of the Oratoures and masters of eloquence and filed speaking:
Forsomuche as he does first burden his contrary party, with such crimes, as
his own conscience does prick him for, and finds himself guilty in:
Notwithstanding he does handle the matter very circumspectly: For he says
but that, he heard say, That in the City of Potiers in France, was executed
a Huguenote Preacher, who had (all his life time) been a thief, and murderer:
and had with his own hands murdered as good as a hundred persons. And if so
be that this be true, it seems strange unto him, that such preachers will
accuse and rebuke the Pope of Rome, for a thief, and raueni^g bloudhounde, and
the Cardinals and Bishops for villains and reprobates. In deed it were
strange. For it is vnsitte, that one Woolfe should bite an other. They ought
rather to be faithful friends together, and say according to the common
proverb: Te ti, Te mi, Clawe me and I will clawe thee: or, Keep my counsel,
and I will keep thine.

Howebeit, Master Gentian will not say, or assure much thereof. For he says
that he knows none such: wherein, as an honest man, he does acknowledge his
fault in time, least he might be taken for a brother of that company.
Therefore, although he says that the common brute goes, that there are some
Huguenote Preachers which are little better than those which stand by the
high way side, Fellons, and rauishers of virgins: yet he soon lets slip
his purpose, and does leave them for such as they are. He fears perhaps,
that he might come to nigh the holy sea^e of Rome, and rub the holy fathers
to near the gall. Of the city of Rome.
For it is not only a common report, but the very truth, which every one
may see and feel, That whenever such fellows are wanting, which might
fittely serve to furnish a Gallie, they are not to be found in any place more
ready, than at Rome. For, according to the gloss which is written upon the
decrees, Rome was first founded and built by Rouers and Fellones, Gloss in cap.
Fundamenta. N^ autem. De electi^ and elect. potestat. in 6.
and does yet observe her ancient customs. Wherefore it is called in Latin
Roma, as though one should say* Rodens manus, that is gnawing the hands. Like
as the said gloss does testify in the decrees, with this following verse:
Roma manus rodit,
Quos rodere non valet, odit.


That is to say: Rome gnawes the flesh,
from th'andes of every one:
And hates all those,
of whom she can have none.


Which being considered by the good and worthy king Alphonsus, he was wont to
say: That the greedy, ravening, birds, (called by the Poets) Harpies, did
not nestle or dwell any longer in the Islandes* but were removed to Rome, and
did possess the Romish Court. And too this purpose, in like manner, did Pope
Adrian the 4. lament and complain upon, to John. of Sarisburie, Bishop of
Chartres, saying, that the Pope of Rome was rightly named, Seruus seruorum,
that is, A slave of slaves, for so much as he was a servant and slave of the
Romans, which are the very slaves and servants of covetousness. This
writes John of Salisburie himself in his book, called Speculum or the
Mirror. In cap. quotiens. 1.4.7.
Like as the Gloss does also testify, in this common verse: Seruierant tibi,
Roma,
prius Domini Dominorum:
Seruorum serui
nunc tibi sunt Domini.


That is to say: O Rome in time past,
Lords of Lords were thy vassals:
But now at the last,
Slaves of slaves and rank rascals
Are Lords over thee,
As all people see.


Yea, he said further, That the Pope of Rome was no more a follower of Peter,
but of Romulus: which Romulus, in the time, when the city walls were a
building, did murder his own natural brother called Remus: And within a small
while after, did perforce ravish the wives and young virgins of his neighbors
the Sabines, under pretense of keeping a special day of solemnization.
Insomuch as the city of Rome is meerlie founded, sanctified, and hallowed,
with murder riot; and rauishing of women. And therefore, it is no marvel,
though such birds keep their feasts there, and are so welcome into it.

Yea, not only Murderers, Spoylers by the high way side, and Rauishers of
women, but also, all whatsoever (without terror) a man can not call to mind,
to wit, All Buggerers, all such as lie with their mother and sister, all
Sodomites and Gomorites, all seducers of children, all ungodly Epicures, which
openly do scoff at God and Christ, all blasphemers and cursers, all
periurers, all whoores and knaves, all proud and salt bitches, all Bawdes,
Ruffians, and slewes haunters, all villains and thieves, all falsifiers of
Scriptures and Gods testament, all traitors and ministers of poison, all dice
coggers, false counterfeiters and clippers of coin, C^awbackes, Parasites,
Hanggebyes, Shi^^ers and Couseners, all Sorcerers, and Coniurers, all new
fangled and inuenting practisers, all braggers and boasters, all enhaunsers of
coin, lease mongers, and usurers. In sum, all rascals, knaves, roges,
gallowclappers and castawayes, keep in the Court of Rome open household, and
there be enterteined and friendly welcomed. There do they obtain Benefices
by heaps, Bishops miters, Cardinals hats, and Popelie crowns. There do they
write books of Johannes de la Casa, Archbisshop of Beneuenta, has written a
book in commendation of Sodomitrie calling it, A godly work, and saying,
That he took great delight in the same, and used no other bed^ellow* He was
Deacon of the Apostolical chamber, and the Popes Ambassador through^ut the
whole country of Ve^ice: and he is the same which first permitted the
registre of the forbidden booke^ to be extant, in the year 1549 the 7. of May.
And the book whereof we mention, was printed at Venice, by the printer called
No^us. Petrus A^etinus has bin likewise a great friend to Popes, and has
published many books, (...) he treates of many matters touching b^wderie, and
caused many filthy and vnseemel^e pictures to be made at Venice, and sundry
sorts of by sleeping to be printed, and made a book and exposition upon the
same. In the year 1558. in the days of Paul the 4. was one at Bullin, who did
openly in the public schools argue upon Shrou^ tuesday, against Matrimony, in
comendatio^ of Sodomitrie. Of this disputation the Italian books be full.
Sodomitrie, and all manner incontinencie, and esteem them for a godly matter:
like as have done, the Bishop Monseur de (...) Casa, and Petro Aretino. There
do they keep common schools, and dispute, whether Matrimony is better than
Sodomitrie.

Also whether the soul be mortal, and whether Christ has ever been, like as
Pope Leo the tenth did. There is kept the staple of all villainie which may be
thought on. There do men fetch dispensations for all sins and incontinent
living: like as may expressly be seen in the Taxa Poenitentiaria. There do
they buy and sell holy and unholy women and men, sons and daughters, soul
and body, Bulls and Pardons, Benefices and Venefices: yea God and the Devil,
S. Peter and Saint Paul, and all things whatsoever, are there to sell. Yea
the town it self would be sold, so far forth as a merchant might be found,
who had money enough: like as sixteen or seventeen hundredth years ago, was
prophesied by one named Iugurtha. This does Sal^st declare in his history
named, Bellum Iugurthinum.
To conclude, there is not any thing so wicked nor irksome in all the world,
which is not frankly and freely allowed and permitted to be done in Rome:
only is excepted and forbidden, to live godly. Like as the aforenamed Monk
Baptista Mantuanus him self has testified, writing thus: Viuere qui sancte
cupitis,
Discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant,
Non licet esse pium.


That is to say: All you, which desire
to live in holiness,
From Rome must retire,
the sink of sinfulness:
Where all things are free,
for every man to use:
Save godly to be,
which all men must refuse.


Behold, for this cause was master Gentian well and wisely advised, and would
not reason to far in these matters, fearing least he might have touched the
City of Rome to nigh* for so much as each does sufficiently know, that the
thrift and staple (of those things which he did burden the Heretics withal)
is in the city of Rome, yea in the Court and Palace of the holy father the
Pope. For Rome (as the Italian Poet Franciscus Petrarcha has finely soung) is
a right, Fontana di dolor, Albergo d'ira,
Scola d'errori, ^ T^mpio d'heresia:
Gia Roma, hor Babylonia falsa and ria,
Per cui tanto si piagne and si sospira.
O fucina d'inganni, O priglon d'ira,
Oue'l ben muore, e'l may si nutre and cria
Di viui Inferno, un gran miracol sia,
Se Christo teco al fine non s'adira.


Item: Nido di tradimenti, in cui se coua
Qua^to mal par lo mo^do hoggi si spa^de,
Di vin serua, di letti and di viuande,
In cui Lussuria fa l'vltima proua, etc.


That is to say: A gulf of great grief,
a rock of furious rage,
And (take it in brief)
a school or common cage
Of errors most strange:
Far Rome to look upon,
But (mark well the change)
now beastly Babylon.
O dungeon most deep,
of fraud, deceipte, and guile:
O cage, fit to keep
hot hate and vengeance vile:
Where vices prevail,
where* virtue lies stark dead,
Where sin with full sail
all states has long misselead,
O whirlepoole of hell,
O foul and stinking lakes,
Such as in thee dwell,
all goodness quite forsakes.
A rare and strange worlds wonder,
thou will of all be thought,
If Satan keep thee under,
and Christ set thee at naught.


Item: O neast of devilish treason,
from whence all vices issue:
O enemy to reason,
O fatal foe to virtue:
O drudge to drowzie dronknesse,
and surfeiting excess:
O shrowde of shifters shameless,
as whoores, and such like guess, etc.


To the contrary hereof, these Heretical and Huguenote Preachers, like as
they are sworn enemies to the holy Romish religion, so in like manner do they
hate and persecute the ancient Romish orders and worthy traditions:
especially in that thrice accursed city of Geneua, they are such terrible
enemies to our Romish practices and worthy feats, that if any dare once
presume there with women, to practice the Romish, Gomorrian, or Clementine
manner, he should first be made a Cardinal with a red hatte upon his head:
or a Bishop at Tyborne, where he might give his benediction with his heels:
and his Mantle or Bishops cloak would not stand him in thirty thousand
Ducates, like as the Mantles do at Rome.

Therefore, if master Gentian his case be not clear, as it is to be doubted
of one so faithful a subject of the holy Romish Church, but that he is
somewhat tainted with the Romish holiness: I would by any means advise him
to visit these new found Preachers, or to taste of the Huguenotes reformation
or mortification. Although it seem by his writing, that he would gladly
know how the matter is wrought amongst them: but if he be wise, he will
keep him thence, and bear aloof from them, for it might breed a scab, and
cause all the veins in his body to repent his enterprise. For their
mortification is to the Romish believing Christians, such a bitter receipte and
loathsome pill, that it would go near to make them burst. If master Gentianus
be well in his wits, he will pack thence, and rather trudge to Rome to his
father the Pope, to hold with the mortification of the holy Church of Rome.

For our dear mother is so kind, that she gladly receives all comers into
her lap, according to the express text of the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 16.25.
to wit, The daughter of Israel has laid open her legs, for every one which
passes by her: and receives every one, Lutheranes and Huguenotes only
excepted. And further provided* that the taxations and rates of the Apostolical
Penance parlour, be allowed, in token of an upright penance. As namely:
Whosoever has layen with his mother or sister, the said shall for four pound
Turnois, be remitted.

But whosoever, besides this, have committed aduoutrie with her, to wit, she
having a husband, then must he pay six pound.

Whosoever is accused and found guilty of Simonie, shall be forced to pay,
five and thirty pounds Turnoys.

But whosoever has slain father or mother, sister or brother* the said shall
escape scotfree with four pounds, one Ducate, and six Carlines: and so of all
other. Understood always, that this valuation is meant and takes hold, so
long as the Romish Court is resident on this side the mountains, namely in
France: For if she have her habitation, on the other side the hills, as in
Italy, then for pounds and pence Turnois, shall be reckoned pounds and pence
stearling: like as the Iurist or Lawier Ludouicus Gornesius has written, and
mentioned. In Reg. Cancella. In regula de ^alore exprime^^o Col. 4.


In sum, they can not commit any so great a fault, but they may at Rome for
a piece of money, have dispensation for it, and so escape free without blame or
punishment, insomuch as they shall never come in Purgatory, if they can keep
themselves from hell mouth: Whereas master Gentian shall be more welcome a great
deal, than at Geneua, or elsewhere amongst the Huguenote Preachers. And this
worthy Book or Epistle which he has made, may serve him very well at Rome,
for a special recommendation to the holy Father the Pope, for to obtain him
a Bisshops Myter, or a Cardinals hat.

The vii. Chapter: Wherein is given to Master Gentian and all other holy
Catholics, good and wholesome counsel: And thus the book concluded.
But above all things in the world, I would wish master Gentian, to be
persuaded to remain steadfastly, and stick close to the old customs and
traditions of his predecessors, like durte to a carte wheel, and he can not
speed amiss: For although he be then a good fellow with the rest, or an
Aleknight, or one which loves the company of pretty wenches: yet so long as he
is not an heretic, it makes no matter: he needs but once in a year to go
to shrifte, and observe a high feast day, and then shall he be taken for a
good and faithful subject of the holy Catholic Church. And admit that
after his death he should pass to Purgatory: yet shall so many Masses (which
now are fallen in price and become good cheap) be said for his soul, that he
with hose and shoes, shall fly to heaven, as straight as a sickle.

Therefore must I greatly marvel and rejoice at his wise, deliberate, and
wellpremised conclusion, which hereto he has annexed, to wit: That he will
remain permanent in the lap of his dearly beloved mother the holy Church
of Rome, without meddling or having ought to do with the Heretics.

For seeing they cannot (as he says) he faithful, for so much as they will not
believe all whatsoever the holy Church does believe: and in especial will not
believe the holy Sacrament of the Altar. Seeing also it is a lie, that we
ought not to believe any thing, but whatsoever God comprehends in the
Scriptures, and that we may not add or diminishe any part thereof: and that
in like case the Scripture does hold on our side, being rightly taken and
understood, after the exposition of the holy Church. Seeing they do also
call us worshippers of idols, like as also the Jews do: seeing their lives be
no better then good christians lives, and that they detest and deride al
prayers, fastings, and mortification. Seeing their Preachers and Ministers may
worthily be reputed for ignorant and unlearned: yea also reproched for lewd
and wicked livers: and that they can bring us no better demonstracions, nor
allege other reasons, than is in the Scripture: and that master Gentian even
until this very time has heard say, that there is no salvation without the
Church: so will he then live and die with his dear and holy mother the
Church: and will not at any time forsake her, but immovable remain with her
for ever. For although he with great have did offer an answer, and makes a
show, as though he would run in po^t haste to the Huguenotes sermons, yet
he is not in earnest. I esteem him to be so steadfast and obstinat, that he
will not easily alter his hide, nor his spots, Iere. 13.23.
like as Jeremy does say of the black Moore and the Libarde. In the mean
while notwithstanding, when I consider the merueilous burning zeal, wherewith
he is driven, then am I of mere necessity forced, in the name of the holy
Church, to beseech God, that the Huguenotes do not answer him, but may find
so much to do with other hardy and weighty matters, that they do not think
on Master Gentian, for fear least it might so fall out (which I hope not) that
he might be changed, for so much as it seems, that he is driven with such seal
to his salvation, that he regardes neither Hedge nor ditch, but runs so
directly thitherwards, as a young headelesse Ducke. Therefore had I rather
request the Pope, to cast a morsel in his mouth, and give him a good fat
benefice, to the end he depart not from us in such haste: for it were to
great a loss, if the holy Church should miss such a strong pillar. They
might go nigh to fall both in the ashes, which Gods good mother, and all the
Saints which are at Bruxelles on the high altar of S. Goele, deliver us from,
S. Goele is the chief Church in Bruxe's, a city so called.
Per omnia secula seculorum, that is to say, For ever, Amen.

Further, I am friendly to request the good man, which did translate the
Epistle of Gentian into the Dutch tongue, that he will take thus much pains
more, for the commodity of our dear mother the holy church, and to the
rejoicing of the foresaid good man master Gentian, to translate this our
exposition of his Epistle into the French tongue: to the end that the Wallons
may in like manner use this our Be hiue, and gather the honey and honiecombe
thereout, to the renoume, glory, and honor of our mother the holy Church,
against all her foes.

The conclusion of this book, to the Christian Reader.
HEre have thou (well-beloved Reader) a short exposition and declaration upon the
Epistle or letter of the most learned Doctor master Gentian Haruet: which
serves not only thereto, but to all other books and writings of the
Catholic writers, and defenders of the Romish Seat. For we have herein (as
briefly and expresselie as may be) rehearsed the two chiefest foundations,
whereon all their Scriptures, reasons, conclusions, and Syllogismes, are founded
and built, namely:

The first, The holy Catholic Church what she is, whereon she depends,
and how far her authority and power does streatche.

And the second, namely: The expositions of the Scripture: wherein each may
see with eyes, that howbeit the Huguenotes and Lutheranes do always refer
them to the text of the holy Scripture, yet our dear and loving mother the
holy church can so aptly handle the said text, that she makes it so fit
and pliable, as it does wholly bend and stretche to her advantage.

Then read the same, and accept our pains in good worth: and considering the
grounded reasons of all commotions and insurrections, which from forty years
hitherwarde have been in Christendom, for causes of Religion and Gods service,
pray unto God, that he, for his Son Jesus Christ his sake, will shortly
appear, and with the breath of his mouth, and force of his holy Spirit,
consume and destroy the wicked wasters, and falsifiers of his holy word and
doctrine, to the glory of his most holy name, and the edifying of his Church
and Congregation.

But seeing that here above in this our Be hiue of the Romish Church, we
have often and in sundry places repeated, that with many rags and patches
it is botcht and sowed together, and selected from diverse and sundry sorts
of flowers and herbs, to make the honnie sweet, we will for thy delight and
for the further declaration and confirmation of that which is said, dilate and
more amply declare the condition and property, or rather commodity of our
Be hiue, the original, disposition, nature, cunning, and capeable capacity of
our Bees, in their honey and honey combs, their rule and regimentes, with all
things appertaining: to the end it may be known wherein they do agree with
our common sort of Honey Bees, and in what respect they disagree and decline
from them. In which treaty, we will presently follow with the description of
Bees, which Aristotle in Greek, Varro, Columella, Virgil and Pliny in Latin,
have wittily written, and for our learning left behind them. But because none
shall think, that we will in any respect be injurious to the holy Romish
Church, for so much as we compare her holiness and immovable foundation, to
Bees, and a Be hiue, I will first and before all other matters, rehearse the
high praise and commendation which she her self does attribute unto them.
For behold, these are the words which she does use upon Easter eeuen, in
the hallowing or sanctifying of her Easter Tapers.

Cum igitur huius substantiae miramur exordium, In the Mass book.
Apum necesse est laudemus originem: Apes vero sunt frugales in sumptibus, in
procreatione castissimae, aedifica^t cellulas cereo liquore fundatas, quib.
humanae peritiae ars magistra non coaequatur: Legunt pedibus flores, and nullum
damnum floribus inuenitur: partus non edunt, sed ore legentes concepti foetus
reddunt examina, sicut exemplo mirabili Christus ore paterno processit.
Foecunda est in his sine partu virginitas, quam vtique Dominus sequi dignatus,
carnalem se matre^ habere, virginitatis amore constituit. Talia igitur Domine
digna sacris Altaribus tuis munera offeruntur, quibus te laetari Religio
Christiana non ambigit, Per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Which in our English tongue is to say:

For So Much as we do maruellouslie wonder, Commendation or praise of Bees.
in considering the first beginning of this substance, to wit, wax tapers,
then must we of necessity greatly commend the original of Bees: for they are
sober in diet, and exceeding chaste in engendring. They make closettes, and
found them on the souple wax, whereunto man's* invention and knowledge is not to
be compared: they gather of the flowers with their feet, and yet the flowers
are not endamaged by it: they bring forth no young ones, but deliver their young
swarms through their mouths, like as Christ (for a wonderful example) is
proceeded from his Fathers mouth: they have a fertile chastity without
bearing, which example Christ has thought good to follow, and ordained to
have a carnal mother, for love of chastity. Therefore, O Lord, are such
worthy gifts offered and presented upon thine Altar, wherein Christian
Religion is assured that thou delightest exceedingly: through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Behold, here we perceive, what a precious jewel these Bees are. Wherefore
our dear and loving mother the holy Church of Rome, ought not to scorn or
disdain, that we do compare her customs and orders to a Be hiue,
considering that she her self does compare the incomprehensible generation of
the son of GOD from his Father, together with his birth, out of the pure and
undefiled Virgin Marie unto the Bees: which were in very deed a great
blasphemy, if the Bees were not of so great valor and virtue, that by them
we might liken and compare the holy Church of Rome. And seeing she says,
That GOD is delighted with the gifts and presents of the Bees, why should not
she her self exceedingly rejoice with our Be hiue? Therefore can none blame
us herein, unless also they blame and accuse the holy Church of Rome for
blasphemy. Which considered, we will without fear or dread, proceed with this
our Be hiue.

Now follows further the exposition and declaration of the Be hiue, and the
description of the Bees, the Honey and Honicombe, with all things belonging
thereunto.
The first Chapter. Whereof the Be hiue is made.
THE Be hiue then, wherein our Bees dwell, swarm, and make their honey, is
made with tough and strong wicker, or oziers of Louen and Paris, plaighted and
wrought together. They commonly call them at Louen, Sophismata, or Quotlibeta,
and are found for the most part by the Basketmakers of the Romish Church:
namely, by Johannes Scotus, Thomas de Aquino, Albertus Magnus, and other such
like, which have been very expert and c^^ning in this art. These rods thus
wouen or plighted together must for the more security be bound also with
gross Jewish or Thalmodician cables, and then over that draw a clammi^ or
cleaving mortar plaster, made of old rubbish or chaskie dust (wherewithal the
ancient old decayed Councels were wont to be morteied and dawbed) being good
and small beaten to poulder, and wrought very thin, with a little chopped
straw, which the Apothecaries call, Palea Decretorum, we^^ing and often
moystening the same with scomme of the ancient Doctors: and also mingled among
the same some new chalk of Trent, and so wrought together with sand, which
is dug out of the decayed wells of men's superstitions: or of that old
sand which the Heretics were wont to bind their arguments withal. Here
under you may also mingle some Jews lime, or Bitumen, which is a very tough
and cleaving substance, wherewithal the city and Tower of Babylon was wont to
be bound and it is drawn out of the poole and dead sink of Sodom and Gomorre:
For herewithall thou shall make such an excellent mortar, that neither the
heat of the Sun, nor showers of rain, will be of force to moisten it, or
make it to splitte. The masters of this Be hiue, who love to have it somewhat
garishe to the eye, use besides all the rest to make snow white Gypsus, or a
kind of plaster of white biblish Marble stone very finely ground in a
Louauist or Parisian mill, being wrought with excellent strong durtie
decrees, and so stroke over with a whiting brushe or pincell, and then painted
with all manner of gallant pictures and brave images: for that makes a gaie
show, and causes the Bees the rather to enter into it.

The ii. Chapter. Declaring the first original of these Bees.
COncerning the first original of Bees, are sundry opinions amongst the
learned. Some amongst the Poets, as Higinius, and others say, that there was
a woman, Melissa.
named Melissa, whom Jupiter did transform into a Be. And it seems
partly, that our bees be of a feminate disposition. The other, as Euhemerus
says, that they are proceeded of hornettes and horseflies, which did norishe
and feed Jupiter, being in a cave, in the land of Creta, and that he (for
that cause) did endue them with honnie. Which fable therein does agree with
the truth, for so much as the idol Jupiter, and all other idols are nourished
and maintained with the honey of our bees, and by them brought acquainted in the
world. Some suppose, they were first found in Thessalia, which is a very
fertile soil of all manner poisones, and sorcerers necessaries: the other say,
in an Is^and named Quea: other some, upon a mounteine Himettus. In su^me, what
so ever it be, thus much is of it, that our Bees are exceeding old: for Moses
mentions, that in Egypt were such a sort of Bees, Psalm. 118.12. Esaie.
7.18.
David declares also of a swarm of such Bees, which had environed him
about. And Esaie speaks of the Bees in in Assyria and Chaldea. Yet
notwithstanding our Bees do somewhat differ from those. For these were first
bredde at Rome, in the days of Numa Pompilius, and continued many hundred
years after, and are maruellous^ie increased: yet after that, the first kind
being all most worn out, they are grown to an other kind, in the days of
Phocas the Emperor of Rome. But we will permit this to the judgments of
Historiographers, and prosecute our matter.

The iii. Chapter. Of the quality and sundry sorts of Bees.
Those Bees Ergo, are of sundry qualities, but are in a manner all brought
into two sorts or species, Natural. hist. lib. 11. Cap. 18. Domestical Bees.
according to the description of Pliny. For the one are domestical or house
Bees, and be conversant among people. The other are strange and odd, terrible
to see to, more teaslie or angry, and with a sharper sting, but withal more
diligent in their Beehiue. And albeit they are conversant also amongst people,
and frankly bestow their honey, yet be they more solitary and stranger than
the other, and therefore are called with the Greek word Monachi, that is to
say, dwelling solitary or by them selves and are known from other, by a hoode
which they wear on their heads. We will term the first tame Bees: and these
wild Bees. Tame Bees. Wild Bees.


Furthermore, they are both divided into four manner of sorts or kinds, 4.
sorts of Bees
after the description of Aristotle and Columella. Of which, the very best are
thick and round: they make the most honey, Thick and sanguine colored.
and keep company next to their king, amongst which the most excellent are
of a sanguine color, as though they had read scarlet wings. These tend the
king, and are commonly by his side, being of both kinds, wild and tame: the
other are of manifold and sundry sorts, with more variety: but how much
the nearer they approach to the king, so much the thicker and rounder they
commonly grow.

The second kind or sort resemble and are like to Waspes, Horseflies, and
Hornets: Like waspes.
they make not so much honey as the first, because they come not of so good a
kind. Notwithstanding, they labor earnestly, and bring also much honey into
the Hiue. They are in a manner of the condition and nature of Horseflies and
Hornets, saving that they love not so well to fly and seize on horses and
kine, as they do on sheep. Wherein they digress clean from the nature of the
ordinary Honiebees, which do carefully shun the sheep, for fear, lest
they should entangle them selves, and stick in their fleeces. But these have a
good remedy for that, for they first bite away their wool after that their
skin, and lastely do suck their blood, to which they are wonderfully
addicted: and therefore (of many) are called bitesheepe, or for breuities sake,
Bishops. There are also amongst these, which are as profitable in the
Beehiue, as any other, by reason of their fearcenesse, for they have very
fearce and murdering stinges, insomuch as those being stoung by them, can
hardely escape death. For the wound can not be remedied with any thing, but
with golden salve: they are of the generation of Wasps, which Aristotle and
Pliny do name in Greek Ichneumones, which may be interpreted Inquisitors, or
after the Latin phrase Inquisitores, and after the saying of Pliny are so
called, because with great industry and diligence, they know to seek and
catch the flies, and bite off their heads, permitting them to live of that
which remains: howebeit, these our Ichneumones do most covet the woll and
blood of sheep, and are marvelous bloudethirstie. They are like wise of both
kinds, some tame, some wild: But the wild are always more fearce and
deadly. They are bredde or engendered, after the same order, which Aristotle
does declare of his Ichneumones: namely, they take very venomous spiders,
named Phalangiae, (which are found ple^tifullie in Spain at the old
Inquisitors walls and posts) and carry those to their holes: and after they
have greased them a good with filthe and durte (whereunto ours use commonly
Popes grease) then do they set or brood over them, and after that sort
increase their kind.

The third sort is by Arlem named Pheres, Pheres.
which signifies as much as thieves and rouers, because they are of an exceeding
theeuish disposition, and have a great large and broad belly commonly black
to see to. These devour great store of honnie, and love exceedingly well the
smacke of Prebends and fat beneficed honey, which the Be Apothecaries do
term in Latin Veneficia: And therefore are called Veneficiati, or veneficed.
They are for the most part tame, yet there are found not a few, which are of
the wild and strange disposition. And they are separated amongst themselves,
each over a several office and charge, according as the king has appointed
them. For some have nothing else to do, but with an irksome buzing by day and
night do swarm in their hiue. But they know their rule, how and when they
shall swarm, and are for that cause called Regulares, or by a Greek word
Canonici. Some are appointed each over his honicombe apart, which they call
Parishes, by reason whereof they are called Parish Priests. The other are as
Presidents in the convocation house, and have each about ten Bees under their
jurisdiction, whereof they are called in Greek Decani: which in our tongue
does signify the tenth men, or Capteines over ten.

Touching the wild sort of Bees, some are called fathers, or with a Chaldean
word Abbas, because they bear rule over the other Bees, like a father over his
children. Some keepers, or after the Italian and French phrase, Gardians. Some
are called the first, or in Latin Priores. Some Controllers, or in Latin
Prouinciales: each after his state and calling, and according to the rule and
dominion which he bears over the other common Bees, which common Bees make
the fourth and last heap or kind of Bees, according to Aristotle's
declaration, and are named in Greek Cephenes, and in Latin Fungi, that is
after our language, Buzzardes or Drones. These are the most unprofitable Bees,
and yet the most in number: they have no sting, and will not work, but live on
the labor of the other, and chiefly the wild Bees, amongst the which some
fly swarming from door to door, to find out baightes to fill their bags:
and therefore are called Mendicantes, that is to say, Beggars, or begging bees:
because they are of the begging order of Bees. But the tame Drones do not fly
so from house to house, but tarry in their Be hiue, and there get their
commons with swarming, without laboring, or doing any good. For when they
would do any good, then do they commonly miss, and are also for that cause
called Missebees, or Massebees.

And these are the four chiefest sorts and kinds of our Bees, agreeing very
fitly with the descriptions of Aristotle and Pliny. For touching certain
worms (whereof they mention) the which do grow in the Be hiue, and are termed
by them with a Greek word named Cleros* and has no other name in Latin then
Clerus, that is no several or special sort of Bees, but is a general name of
all the Bees, when they first come forth: like as Pliny in the 16. chap. of
the 11. book has written. For he says, that whenever the Bees come not to
perfection, but remain still worms, then are they called Clerus, which falls
out in like order with our Bees: for amongst them are none called Clerici, but
those which begin to fledge, and have a white spot on their heads, which
seems to be a white worm, as Pliny says. And if so be it, they remain
still in that state, without coming to further order or degree of Bees* then
are they esteemed and accounted as of an imperfect creation, and have no other
name but Clerici, and the white spot which they bear on their heads, Tonsura
Clericalis.

The iiii. Chapter. Of the nature of Bees: of their ingendring, and procreation.
FVrther, concerning the nature of these Bees, there is a difference betwixt
male and female, especially amongst the wild. And they love to go together,
yet do they not engender the one of the other, but be most altogether engendered
and made of their king, like as Aristotle and Pliny do plainly show: for
without this king, they can not bring forth their like, notwithstanding they
can brood up these foresaid worms, named Clerus, after they have been first
engendered by the king: if Pliny be credible, in the sixteenth Chapter of the
forenamed book of his History.

The V. Chapter. What the rule and being of these Bees are, touching their
King.
IN their rule they resemble the common sort of Honey bees, for they have all
one king: yea can not abide without a king, whom they call Papa, as if one
should say, Papa pate^ Apum.
Pater Apum, that is to say, The father of Bees, whereof it comes, that we
call al these Bees in the Dutch tongue Papen, and with us, Papisticall
Priests. For the Bees are called in Latin Apes.

This king has a sting in like manner, but he does not occupy him self
abroad, because al other Bees are pressed to do him service, in whatsoever it
pleases him to command. And like as this king of Honiebees has a spot on his
head: so likewise does he carry a token or mark on his head, like a triple
crown: howbeit, all the other Bees (as has been said) do bear in like manner
a round white spot in the middle of their heads, in manner of a crownet. They
fly all at once about this king, and show themselves very meek and obedient
toward him. He goes seldom abroad, but when he does determine to go forth
any whither, it may be perceived long before, by the swarming and humming of
the forerunners. For whenever he goes out, the whole swarm follows round
about him, and oftentimes they carry him on their shoulders, like as the honey
Bees do carry their king.

He has likewise certain loiterers by him, and Seruitours which guard him,
and some other of the very best, which be of a ruddie or sanguine color, and
remain always next to his side, and are for that cause named Laterales, or a
Latere. In sum, each one would feign be next: for that is reputed for great
honor: where he settles, there is the host of the whole swarm and staple of
the honnie and honnie comb: and such as dwell many hundredth miles thence, bend
notwithstanding their flght thitherwards: who so ever has him to friend, shall
in like manner find friendship of all the whole swarm: when they lose him,
then is all their porridge spilte, and sport at an end: For they creep
pensiuelie to their selles and closets, and there buzze or swarm so long and
so much, till they have gotten an other. And if by mishappe it chances, that
there be twoe or three kings, (like as has often has bin seen,) then falls
out great schisms and troubles among them, and they be at mortal wars
together: yea, cease not, till the one or the other be dispatched and made
away: like as Virgil has finely set forth.

The Vi. Chapter. Of their Burialles.
THey observe their burialles very carefully, like as also the common honnie
bees do, and make a great hu^ming, whenever they carry any of the Bees
forth. With the sound of hallowed beiles and pannes, they are greatly to be
comforted: for with such tinging they are well help up and amended, and then
they gather toge-in their be hiue with a great buzzing. But especially they are
to be comforted when they are pe^siue and ill at ease, Argentina and Nummularia
are phrases alluded to coin or gold and silver.
with a burnt incense of good herbs, to wit, Argentina and Nummularia: for
that sent they love a life, according to Virgils writing, who says, The
common honiebees are well pleased with burnt incense of Casia, Thymus, and other
sweet smelling herbs. They observe their Vigiles like to other Bees: for
there are some which rise in the night with a great humming, and swarm the one
to the other, like as if they were singing Mattines or De profundis.

The vii. Ch^pter. How these Bees work, and how they be maintained.
THese Bees in their labor resemble much the common sort of honiebees, for
they cease also from work in the winter time, and when it is foul weather.
They intend not to labor, onles first the Beans do bud, and having once begun,
they cease not so long as fair weather continues, just as Pliny does write
of the other bees. But herein they differ from the other, in that they cannot
make any fresh or new honiecombes: but it must be made to their hands, by
certain other Apothecaries, which are skillful in the same, and make the
honiecombe after this sort: They take two or three ounces of honiedeawe, which
falls from heaven upon the Prophetical and Apostolical beans, and is
commonly called, Manna coeleste, or Drosomeli. It was wont to be found
plentifully in Calabria, but now it is also in Germany, England, and
France: yea also very rife in the Base countries. But this may they not by
name put raw in the hiue: for it would cause the Bees to have a laske, and
would all die of it. Therefore do they hate this excedinglie: insomuch that
where they are conversant, this heavenly deawe is scarce and hard to be
found. Therefore the Apothecaries must first temper this honnie deawe in this
order: They let it be molten first by a whote fire of Sophistical seacoales,
and after that they do let it seethe more than the one half away, in a thick
and troubled muddie water, which they have drawn out of the Tiber at Rome,
Tiber, Seen, and Dilie, are rivers so called
the Seen at Paris, or the Dilie at Louen: and being thus sodden, do still it
in a clock bell, or Doctors hood, so long and sufficient, till the natural
substance is clean gonne, and that the Quinta essentia by them be drawn from
it.

This Quinta essentia, they mingle with a plaster cake, which they make thus:
Recipe half a pound of blewe counsel, which let soke three days and three
nights in strong Romney or Bastard: or if you can not get Romney nor Bastard,
then take of the best Vinum Theologicum, which is to be got, or of that wine
which the whore of Babylon was wont to give kings and Princes to drink.
These councels thus soakte, and the stalks and carnels picked clean away, you
shall bruise or beat very small in a Parisian mortar, and ofter moysten them
with strong Romish durtie decres, straining it through a Spanish cloute, or an
Inquisition bowlter, and mixed with a little driuell of the old Teachers, and
sturde together, you shall with wax, wherewith the Bulls of Rome be sealed
(so much as need requires) make it in a Plaster cake: which Plaster cake is
by the Apothecaries, named Pastillus, or Bolus fidei Romanae, and this cake a
little besprinkeld and powered over with the forenamed Quinta essentia confected
of the honnidewe, you shall set in the Beehiue. For this is the honnicombe, and
the foundation whereon the Bees labor. If so be it, you can not make the same,
you shall find it to be soulde at Trent, for there have these bees
Apothecaries for the space of two or three years ben gathered a long time
together, to make so much of this ho^ni comb, that it may suffice all the Bees
in Europa, and is sold very good chepe. You may cause it to be brought thence
by the Pardoners, which commonly drive their Mules amongst the mountains in
Italy.

The viii. Chapter. Which shows on what flowers and herbs these Bees labor
and gather honnie.
THese Bees do labor almost on all sorts of flowers and herbs: but Pliny
says that they cannot work of one herb, which is called in Latin Rumex,
and in dutche Patience, which with us is Patience, nether yet of an other,
which he calls Chenopodium, and with the Germans, is called Swines death.
To these two herbs, our Bees in like case have no lust or desire: but above
all, they hate two other herbs, of which the one is called amongst the
Apothecaries, Gratia Dei, or the Mercy of God: the other, Palma Christi. For
whosoever dare presume to set these herbs by their hiue, they would all at
once set upon him, and kill him with their stinges. Therefore if any will
keep this Be hiue, he must fence his garden from such herbs: but he shall
sow and set these herbs following, wherein they have a singular delight, as
namely, Broad way, Cokoe flowers, Assecucombers, or wild Cucombers, Dogs
tongue, and Dogs ribbe, Calves snow^, Cats tail, Wolves clawe, Goose grass,
Goats beard, Buckbeanes, Hogs grass, Toades f^owres, Lybards claws, Mad
herb, Toggeworth, Penny male and female, or Man and wife. And next to the
Be hiue, he shall set Popes herb, Popes wodde, Dragons blood, Seven tyded
herb, Monks hoods, Foolish mathes, Romish morsels, or Devils bit, Romish
royles or rigges, (as it please you to term them) Wolves berries, Belflowres,
and Caunterburie tales. Also a little further from the Be hiue, whither
commonly they go to solace the^ selves, shall be Virgins marks, Maiden hair,
Capillus Veneris: For therewithal they are wonderfully pleased. Also,
Pothearbe, and Cuppeberries: for these they oftentimes like better then
Seuentyded herb or Popes herbs, which grows next their hiue. And if it
fall out, that you have the commodity of a running water by it, or a fair
ditche, that will be patte and fit their turns marvelous well. And you shall set
in it, the herbs called Vmbelicus Veneris, and Restum Merionis, which in the
Germane tongue is called Narren Kolben: and shall not forget to have near
about the Be hiue, some beans growing with their flowers. And further, if
thou can so bring it to pass, thou shall place a Mill not far from the
same: for they fly willing about the Milles, because they resemble them in
lightness and vnstabilitie.

The ix. Chapter. Declaring the diseases of these Bees, and the remedies to the
same.
THese Bees in like manner are not without diseases, like unto other common
Honey bees, and are especially troubled with the laske of the purse, and with
the money dropsy: and then are they quite out of heart: therefore must their
Hiue be often perfumed and smoakt with the forenamed herbs, to wit, with
Argentina Nummularia, Goldemaries, or Mariegoldes, gold flower, and other such
like. The Apothecaries know also to make a syrrope, which is very good
against all their diseases, which is this: Recipe, A handful of roots of
Seven tide herb, of Rattleflowers, Coggeworth, and Peniemale, and beat them
with Devils milk, and sprinkle or mingle the same with the Quinta essentia of
foolish mathes. And further, a bole of fine white wheat meal, with dogs
grease made trim and round, and that sodde together with cross thorns, and
cross herb, and with nine leaves of Alleluya, and that being done, steep it,
and let it soake in Vine syrrope, and then hallowed with five fingred herb:
put to the same so much honey, until it wax a thick syrrope. This syrrope is
called of the Be Apothecaries, Syrrupus Missaticus, which is very good and
costly to be laid in the Be hiue. For if the Bees eat of the same in the
morning fasting, they shall not die the same day, until their breath be gone
from them. And if so be they happen to die, then shall they immediately pass to
the Be heaven. It might also by great mishappe fall out, that the whole
generation of Bees might perish, like as in some Countries has been seen, as
England and Scotland: for the avoiding of which inconvenience, Virgil gives
you good counsel, whom in any case follow. Provided always, that you, in
stead of a Calfe, may also take a Hog or an Ass, and stop his mouth or
nostrelles, like as Virgil does write: howbeit, you need not to kill him, but
only straw certain herbs under him of the most principal, which we have named
in the Be hiue, to wit, Popes herbs, and Seuentide herb, and let him lie a
while on these foresaid herbs, in hogs dongue, you shall perceive a wonder:
for of this Ass or this Hog will rise a swarm of Bees. And thus doing, you
may maintain the kind.

The x. Chapter. Of the wax and honnie of these Bees.
THe wax which these Bees make, is called Bull wax, being of great estimation
and sold very dear: yea, a great deal dearer, then his weight in gold: but
it is exceeding forcible, for who so has of this wax, doubtless has great
pre-eminence: for in Lent he may eat flesh without let or danger of law, he
may marry and lie with whom he will: yea, although she weee his own sister,
without being reputed an Heretic for doing the same. He is also defended
from Purgatory, as one which eats mustard is free from the danger of
thunder. For it is said, That if any with this wax, did come before Lucifers
gate, he should be forced to deliver three or four souls out of Purgatory,
spite of his teeth: yet well understood* so far forth the wax do not melt
through the heat of the fire: for there must stand upon it, the perfect seal
impressed with a ring called Annulus piscatoris. Concerning the honnie, there
are some countries in which no other is used then of these bees, and whereas it
is greatly esteemed, to wit, above all, in Spain. It was wont also to be
much used in Germany and France, but is grown now out of request, and with
many nothing regarded, like as it is also fallen out in the base countries: but
the Spaniards have of late brought whole ship lodings out of Spain, whereby it
is become more usual again: yet by experience it is found, to be unnatural
and unwholesome, yea very hurtful and poysonable to be eaten. For it is of the
same operation, In the 21. book of the natural history, in the 13. Chap.
which Pliny does mention, speaking of the poysonable honnie, and declaring
that the same may be known, by that it is not fast nor thick, but of a
ruddie color and strange sent, which strikes soon into the head, and
provoke neesing: such as have eaten it, do cast them selves down to the
ground, and seek to cool them selves, etc.

This is the description wherewithal the nature and operation of our bees
honnie, does fittely agree. For it is in like manner bloody colored, and
waxes never thike nor fast, but remains still nature and operation of our
Bees honnie, does fittlie agree. For it is in like manner bloody colored,
and waxes never thick nor fast, but remains still vnstedfastlie floting. It
has also a marvelous strange sent, for it sauors very strongly after the
honnie comb, which is chefelie made of stinking Romish Decrees and decretals,
and perboild or sodden with foul stinking water. It strikes in like manner
quickly into the head, and prouokes not only neesing, but also beereaues one
of his senses and understanding. It is also exceeding heavy in weight, and
burdensome, and therefore such as use it, have for the most part a heavy
stomach, as though a mill stone lay on their heart. It incenseth all the limbs
and parts of the body with heat, and makes one as it were puffed up, and
further makes one choleric and angry: yet remain they still creeping and
cralling on the ground, very loathe to look up toward heaven. They seek
still to cool them selves, and run like mad men from one place to an
other, and fling them selves upon their knees, before wooden stocks and
stones* or brazen images, to find some refreshing. But how much more they
trouble them selves herein, so much the more sick and diseased they become
both in head and stomache. They rave sore, and are very greedy after the
foresaid syroppe, call Syrupus Missaticus: but the more they use of it, the
more they swel with self-holines, so that they are like to burst: sometimes they
wax faint hearted, and loose their courage, their eyes are darkened, their
ears stopped up, all their parts numme and astonished: and yet they are persuaded
to be most strong and lusty, and to have their senses at liberty, to use
their limbs, feeling, and understanding. We find some, which have even the
like accidents or Symptomata, as though they were bitten of a mad dog,
having their bodies wholly bloody and sanguine colored. They are loathsome,
and shun the light: they have an everlasting pain, like a gnawing worm at
their heart: they foame at the mouth: yea, they bark and blow, and also bite
those whom they meet, although it be their own father and mother, sister or
brother, those only excepted, which are troubled with the same disease: for
to such they do no hurt or damage. Some of them run a pilgrimage to Saint
Heughe, or Saint Gole, or in like case to our Lady at Halle: yea, they stick
not to run to Italy, to our Lady of Loretta, or to Spaigne to Montserrato,
and to Compostille, and to Jerusalem, and to other places more, hoping to
said some refreshing of the Saints, but all will not help them.

The xi. Chapter. Which ^heweth a remedy for all those, which are diseased
with the honnie of these Bees.
THe only remedy is, to make them cast all, whatsoever they have received
and taken in (but that will they hardly do:) And after that* shall be
ministered unto them every morning a Syroppe of the heavenly honnie deawe,
whereof we have spoken before, wholly raw and vnsedde. And after they have
used this a while, and that there boddie is well prepared and cleansed with the
same, Then shall they receive a drink of the sapp of Gratia Dei, And of Palma
Christi: And so (with Gods help) shall, by that mean come, to good health and
perfection.

The xii. Chapter. Declaring how it is to be taken, that which Aristotle
writes, that the Bees dye, whenever they are anointed with Oil.
TOuching the rest of that which might be said of the nature and property of
Bees, I refer you to Aristotle, to Pliny or to Collumella. For our Bees do
in a manner agree wholly with theirs. Only you are to note, that where as
Aristotle and Pliny do write of the other common honny Bees, that they dye,
whenever they are anointed with oil, that is to be understood, of a special
kind of oil or grease, which is called holy or hallowed oil. For when our
Bees are anointed with the same, then are they queasie, and without doubt, do
seldom recover or rise again: but touching the other oil, they have a
singular joy in it: for they can not work aright, or as they should do in the
Beehiue, unless they be first greased with oil. And whenever you will raise
the generation of an Ass, Calfe, or Hog (as was said a little before,) then
must you grease the same a good with oil, or else it will take no effect.
There is also made a certain confect of Oil, Salt, White Virgins wax and
spittle, wherewithal their heads be smeared, before they come or are bredde
to any full perfection. And if they will not yet cotton, then are they greased
again with oil: for therewithal are they formed and brought to a fashion,
and when they come to be full grown Bees, then must they the third time be
salued again with oil, and therewithal they come to a full natural and most
perfect kind.

The lock of this Book.
HErein I thought good to instruct thee, good reader, to the end thou might
discern the nature and property of these Bees, from the other common honnie
Bees: and not to think, that in all respects they agree, but differ in many.
But whosoever has any understanding, will perfectly perceive it of him self.
Therefore will we not trouble thee any longer, but make an end of this our Be
hiue: Each read and consider, and specially ponder all the witnesses and
allegations which are alleged herein, as well out of the Scripture, as other
Books, I trust he shall reap commodity by it. God the Lord lighten all our
hearts with his holy spirit, and keep us from all errors, through his
everlasting truth, wisdom, and Son Jesus Christ, to whom belongs all
praise, honor and glory, with the Father, in the unity of the holy Ghost.
Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson,
for John Stell. 1579.


