ANTONIOS Revenge.

The second part.

As it has been sundry times acted, by the children of Paul's.

Written by I. M.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Fisher, and are to be soulde in Saint Dunstans
Church-yarde. 1602.

Antonios Revenge. The second part of the History of Antonio and Mellida.
The Prologue.
THE rawish danke of clumzie winter ramps
The fluent summers vain: and drizling sleete
Chilleth the wan bleak cheek of the numd earth,
Whilst snarling gusts nibble the iuyceles leaves,
From the nak't shuddring branch; and pills the skin
From off the soft and delicate aspectes.
O, now, me thinks, a sullen tragic Scene
Would suite the time, with pleasing congruence.
May we be happy in our weak deuoyer,
And all part pleased in most wished content:
But swear of Hercules can nere beget
So blessed an issue. Therefore we proclaim,
If any spirit breathes within this round,
Incapable of weighty passion
(As from his birth, being hugged in the arms,
And nuzzled twixt the breasts of happiness)
Who winkes, and shuts his apprehension up
From common sense of what men were, and are,
Who would not know what men must be; let such
Hurrie amain from our black visag'd shows:
We shall affright their eyes. But if a breast,
Nailed to the earth with grief: if any heart
Pierced through with anguish, pant within this ring:
If there be any blood, whose heat is choakt
And stifled with true sense of misery:
If ought of these strains fill this consort up,
Th'arriue most welcome. O that our power
Could lackie, or keep wing with our desires;
That with unused paize of style and sense,
We might weigh massy in judicious scale.
Yet here is the prop that does support our hopes;
When our Scenes falter, or invention halts*
Your favor will give crutches to our faults. Exit.
ACT. I.
SCEN* I*
Enter Piero, vnbrac't, his arms bare, smeer'd in blood, a poniard in one hand
bloody, and a torch in the other, Strotzo following him with a cord. Pie. HO,
Gasper Strotzo, bind Feliches trunk
Unto the panting side of Mellida. Exit Str.
It Is yet dead night, yet all the earth is cloucht
In the dull leaden hand of snoring sleep:
No breath disturbs the quiet of the air.
No spirit moves upon the breast of earth,
Save howling dogs, nightcrowes, and screeching owls,
Save meager ghosts, Piero, and black thoughts.
One, two* Lord, in two hours what a toplesse mount
Of vnpeer'd mischief, have these hands cast up!
Enter Strotzo. I can scarce coope triumphing vengeance up,
From bursting forth in bragart passion.

Str. My Lord, it is firmly said that

Pie. Andrugio sleeps in peace: this brain has choakt
The organ of his breast. Feliche hangs,
But as a bait upon the line of death,
To tice on mischief. I am great in blood,
Vnequald in revenge. You horrid scouts,
That centinell swart night, give loud applause
From your large palms. First know, my heart was raised
Unto Andrugios life, upon this ground:

Str. Duke, it is reported

Pie. We both were riuals in our May of blood,
Unto Maria, (...) Ferraras heir.
He wan the Lady, to my honors death:
And from her sweetes, cropped this Antonio:
For which, I burnt in inward sweltring hate,
And festred rankling malice in my breast,
Till I might belke revenge upon his eyes:
And now (o blessed now) it is done. Hell, night,
Give loud applause to my hypocrisy.
When his bright valor even dazzled sense,
In offering his own head, public reproach
Had blurd my name. Speak Strotzo, had it not?
If then I had

Str. It had, so please

Pier. What had so please? Unseasoned Sycophant,
Piero Sforza is no nummed Lord,
Senseless of all true touch; stroke not the head
Of infant speech, till it be fully borne*
Go to.

Strot. How now? Fut, I Will not smother your speech.


Pie. Nay, right thine eyes: it was but a little spleen:
(Huge plunge!
Sinn's grown a slave, and must observe slight evils.
Huge villains are enforced to clawe all devils.)
Pish, sweet thy thoughts, and give me

Str. Stroke not the head of infant speech? Go to?


Pie. Nay, calm this storm. I ever held thy breast
More secret, and more firm in league of blood,
Then to be struck in heat with each-slight puff.
Give me thy ears; Huge infamy
Press down my honor; if even then, when
His fresh act of prowess bloomed out full,
I had taken vengeance on his hated head

Str. Why it had

Pier. Could I avoid to give a seeming grant
Unto fruition of Antonios love?

Str. No.


Pie. And did thou ever see, a Judas kiss,
With a more covert touch of fleering hate?

Stro. No.


Pie. And having clipped them with pretense of love,
Have I not crushed them with a cruel wring?

Strot. Yes.


Piero. Say, faith, did thou ere hear, or read, or see
Such happy vengeance, unsuspected death?
That I should drop strong poison in the boawle,
Which I my self carous't unto his health,
And future fortune of our unity,
That it should work even in the hushed of night,
And strangle him on sudden; that fair show
Of death, for the excessive joy of his fate,
Might choke the murder? Ha Strotzo, is it not rare?
Nay, but weigh it. Then Feliche stabd
(Whose sinking thought frighted my conscious heart)
And laid by Mellida, to stop the match,
And hale on mischief. This all in one night?
Is It to be equaled think thou? O, I could eat
Thy fumbling throat, for thy lagd censure. Fut,
Is It not rare?

Str. Yes.


Pie. No? yes? nothing but no, and yes, dull lump?
Can thou not honey me with fluent speech,
And even adore my toplesse villainy?
Will I not blast my own blood for revenge?
Must not thou straight be perjured for revenge*
And yet no creature dream it is my revenge.
Will I not turn a glorious bridal morn
Unto a Stygian night? Yet naught but no, and yes?

Str. I would have told you, if the incubus,
That rides your bosom, would have patience:
It is reported, that in private state,
Maria, Genous Duchess, makes to Court,
Longing to see him, whom she nere shall see,
Her Lord Andrugio. Belike she has received
The news of reconciliation:
Reconciliation with a death?
Poor Lady shall but find poor comfort in it.

Pie. O, let me swoone for joy. By heaven, I think
I ha said my prayers, within this month at least;
I am so boundless happy. Does she come?
By this warm reeking goare, I Will marry her.
Look I not now like an inamorate?
Poison the father, butcher the son, and marry the mother; ha!
Strotzo, to bed: snort in securest sleep:
For see, the dapple gray coursers of the morn
Beat up the light with their bright silver hooues,
And chase it through the sky. To bed, to bed.
This morn my vengeance shall be amply fed. Exit.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Luceo, Maria, and Nutriche. Mar. STAY gentle Luceo, and vouchsafe thy
hand.


Lu. O, Madam

Ma. Nay, pree thee give me leave to say, vouchsafe,
Submisse entreats beseem my humble fate.
Here let us sit. O Luceo, fortunes gilt
Is rubd quite off from my slight tin-foild state,
And poor Maria must appear vngrac't
Of the bright fulgor of gloss'd majesty.

Luc. Cheer up your spirits Madam; fairer chance
Then that which courts your presence instantly,
Can not be formd by the quick mould of thought.

Mari. Art thou assured the dukes are reconciled*
Shall my wombes honor wed fair Mellida?
Will heaven at length grant harbor to my head?
Shall I once more clip my Andrugio?
And wreath my arms about Antonio's neck?
Or is glib rumor grown a parasite,
Holding a false glass to my sorrows eyes,
Making the wrinkl'd front of grief seem fair,
Though it is much riueld with abortiue care.

Lu. Most virtuous Princess, banish straggling fear;
Keep league with comfort. For these eyes beheld
Tke Dukes united; you faint glimmering light
Nere peeped through the crannies of the east,
Since I beheld them drink a sound carouse,
In sparkling Bacchus,
Unto each others health;
Your son assured to beauteous Mellida:
And all clouds cleared of threatening discontent.

Ma. What age is morning of?


Lu. I think 'bout five.


Ma. Nutriche, Nutriche.


Nu. Beshrow your fingers marry, you have disturbed the pleasure of the finest
dream. O God, I was even coming to it law* O Jesus, it was coming of the
swetest. I Will tell you now, me thought I was married, and me thought I spent (O
Lord why did you wake me) and me thought I spent three spur Roials on the
Fiddlers for striking up a fresh hornepipe. Saint Vrsula, I was even going to
bed, and you, me thought, my husband was even putting out the tapers, when
you, Lord I shall never have such a dream come upon me, as long as


Ma. Peace idle creature, peace.
When will the Court rise?

Lu. Madam, twere best you took some lodging up,
And lay in private till the soil of grief
Were cleard your cheek, and new burnisht luster
Clothed your presence, before you saw the Dukes,
And enterd, among the proud Venetian States.

Mar. No Lucio, my dear Lord's wise, and knows
That tinsill glitter, or rich purfled robes,
Curled hairs, hung full of sparkling Carcanets,
Are not the true adornements of a wife.
So long as wives are faithful, modest, chaste,
Wise Lords affect them. Virtue does not waste,
With each slight flame of crackling vanity.
A modest eye forces affection,
Whilst outward gainesse light looks but entice.
Fairer then Natures fair is fowlest vice.
She that loves Art, to get her cheek more lovers,
Much outward gaudes slight inward grace discouers.
I care not to seem fair, but to my Lord.
Those that strive most to please most strangers sight,
Folly may judge most fair, wisdom most light.
Music sounds a short strain. But hark, soft music gently mooues the air:
I think the bridegroom's up. Lucio, stand close.
O, now Marya, challenge grief to stay
Thy joys encounter. Look Lucio, it is clear day.

SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Antonio, Galeatzo, Matzagente, Balurdo, Pandulpho Feliche, Alberto,
Forobosco, Castilio, and a Page. Ant. DARKNESS is fled: look, infant morn
has drawn
Bright silver curtains, 'bout the couch of night:
And now Auroras horse trots azure rings,
Breathing fair light about the firmament,
Stand, what is that?

Mat. And if a horned devil should burst forth,
I would pass on him with a mortal stock.

Alb. Oh, a horned devil would prove ominous,
Unto a bridegroomes eyes,

Mat. A horned devil? good, good: ha ha ha, very good.


Al. Good tand prince laugh not. By the joys of love,
When thou do girne, thy rusty face does look
Like the head of a roasted rabbit: fie vpont.

Bal. By my troth, me thinks his nose is just color de Roy

Mat. I tell thee fool, my nose will abide no jest.


Bal. No in truth, I do not jest, I speak truth. Truth is the touchstone of
all things: and if your nose will not abide the truth, your nose will not abide
the touch: and if your nose will not abide the touch, your nose is a copper
nose, and must be nailed up for a slip.


Mat. I scorn to retort the obtuse jest of a fool.


Balurdo draws out his writing tables, and writes. Bal. Retort and obtuse,
good words, very good words.


Gal. Young Prince, look sprightly; fie, a bridegroom sad!


Bal. In truth, if he were retort, and obtuse, no question, he would be
merry: but and please my Genius, I will be most retort and obtuse ere night.
I Will tell you, what I Will bear soon at night in my shield, for my device.


Gal. What, good Balurdo?


Bal. O, do me right: sir Gefferey Balurdo: sir, sir, as long as ye live, sir.


Gal. What, good sir Gefferey Balurdo?


Ba. Marry forsooth, I Will carry for my device, my grand fathers great
stone-hors, flinging up his head, and ierking out his left leg. The word;
Wighy Purt. As I am a true knight, will it not be most retort and obtuse, ha?


Ant. Blow hence these faplesse iestes. I tell you bloods
My spirit's heavy, and the juice of life
Creepes slowly through my stifned arteries.
Last sleep, my sense was steep't in horrid dreams:
Three parrs of night were swallowed in the gulf
Of ravenous time, when to my slumbring powers,
Two meager ghosts made apparition.
The on's breast seemed fresh pauncht with bleeding wounds:
Whose bubling gore sprang in frighted eyes.
The other ghost assumed my fathers shape:
Both cride Revenge. At which my trembling joints
(Iced quite over with a froz'd cold sweat)
Leap't forth the sheets. Three times I gasp't at shades:
And thrice, deluded by erroneous sense,
I forced my thoughts make stand; when lo, I op't
A large bay window, through which the night
Struck terror to my soul. The verge of heaven
Was ringd with flames, and all the upper vault
Thick lac't with flakes of fire; in midst whereof
A blazing Comet shot his threatening train
Just on my face. Viewing these prodigies,
I bowed my naked knee, and pierced the star,
With an outfacing eye; pronouncing thus;
Deus imperat astris. At which, my nose straight bled:
Then doubled I my word, so slunke to bed.

Ba. Verily, sir Gefferey had a monstrous strange dream the last night. For me
thought I dreamt I was asleep, and me thought the ground yaun'd and belkt up
the abominable ghost of a misshapen Simile, with two ugly Pages; the one
called master, even as going before; and the other Mounser, even so following
after; whilst Signior Simile stalked most prodigiously in the midst. At which
I bewrayed the fearfulness of my nature: and being ready to forsake the
fortress of my wit, start up, called for a clean shirt, eat a mess of
broth, and with that I awakt.


Ant. I pree thee peace. I tell you gentlemen,
The frightfull shades of night yet shake my brain:
My gellied blood's not thawed: the sulphur damps,
That flow in winged lightning 'bout my couch,
Yet stick within my sense, my soul is great,
In expectation of dire prodigies.

Pan. Tut, my young Prince, let not thy fortunes see
Their Lord a coward. He, that's nobly borne,
Abhorres to fear. Base feare's the brand of slaves.
He that observes, pursues, slinks back for fright,
Was never cast in mould of noble spright.

Ga. Tush, there is a fun will straight exhale these damps
Of chilling fear. Come, shal's salute the bride?

Ant, Castilio, I pree the mix thy breath with his:
Sing one of Signior Renaldo's airs,
To rouse the slumbring bride from gluttoning,
In surfeit of superfluous sleep. Good Signior, sing.
CANTANT. What means this silence and unmoved calm!
Boy, wind thy Cornet: force the leaden gates
Of lasie sleep fly open, with thy breath,
My Mellida not up? not stirring yet? vmh.

Ma. That voice, should be my sons Antonio's. Antonio?


Ant. Here, who calls? here stands Antonio.


Mari. Sweet son.


Ant. Dear mother.


Ma. Fair honor of a chaste and loyal bed,
Thy fathers beauty, thy sad mothers love,
Were I as powrefull as the voice of fate,
Felicity complete should sweet thy state:
But all the blessings, that a poor banished wretch,
Can power upon thy head, take gentle son:
Live, gracious youth, to close thy mothers eyes,
Loved of thy parents, till their latest hour:
How cheares my Lord, thy father? O sweet boy,
Part of him thus I clip, my dear, dear joy.

Ant. Madam, last night I kissed his princely hand,
And took a treasured blessing from his lips:
O mother, you arrive in Iubile,
And firm atonement of all boystrous rage:
Pleasure, united love, protested faith,
Guard my loved father, as sworn Pensioners:
The Dukes are leagued in firmest bond of love,
And you arrive even in the Solsticie,
And highest point of sunshine happiness.
One winds a Cornet within. Hark Madam, how you Cornet ierketh up
His straind shrill accents, in the capering air;
As proud to summon up my bright cheek't love.
Now, mother, open wide expectation:
Let loose your amplest sense, to entertain
The Impression of an object of such worth,
That life's too poor to*

Gal. Nay leave Hyperboles.


Ant. I tell thee prince, that presence straight appears,
Of which thou can not form Hyperboles,
The trophy of tryumphing excellence:
The heart of beauty, Mellida appears.
See, look, the curtain stirs, shine natures pride,
Loves vital spirit, dear Antonio's bride.
The Curtain's drawn, and the body of Feliche, stabd thick with wounds,
appears hung up. What villain bloods the window of my love?
What slave has hung you gorie ensign up,
In flat defiance of humanity?
Awake thou fair unspotted purity.
Death's at thy window, awake bright Mellida:
Antonio calls.

SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Piero as at first, with Forobosco. Pie. WHO gives these il-befitting
attributes
Of chaste, unspotted, bright, to Mellida,
He lies as loud as thunder, she is unchaste,
Tainted, impure, black as the soul of hell.

He draws his rapier, offers to run at Piero: but Maria holds his arm and
stays him. Ant. Dog, I will make the eat thy vomit up,
Which thou have belk't against taintlesse Mellida.
Ramm't quickly down, that it may not rise up
To imbraid my thoughts. Behold my stomack's:
Strike me quite through with the relentlesse edge
Of raging fury. Boy, I Will kill thy love
Pandulfe Feliche, I have stabd thy son:
Look, yet his lifeblood reekes upon this steel.
Albert, you hangs thy friend* Have none of you
Courage of vengeance? Forget I am your Duke.
Think Mellida is not Pieros blood.
Imagine on slight ground, I Will blast his honor.
Suppose I saw not that incestuous slave,
Clipping the strumpet, with luxurious twines:
O, numme my sense of anguish, cast my life
In a dead sleep, whilst law cuts off yon maine,
Yon putred ulcer of my royal blood.

Foro. Keep league with reason, gracious Sovereign.


Pie. There glowe no sparks of reason in the world;
All are raked up in ashie beastliness.
The bulk of man's as dark as Erebus,
No branch of Reasons light hangs in his trunk:
There lives no reason to keep league withal.
I ha no reason to be reasonable.
Her wedding eve, linkt to the noble blood
Of my most firmly reconciled friend,
And found even clingd in sensuality!
O heaven! O heaven! Were she as near my heart
As is my liver, I would rend her off.

SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Strozzo. Str. VVHITHER, O whither shall I hurl vast grief?


Pier. Here, into my breast: it is a place built wide
By fate, to give receipt to boundless woes.

Str. O no; here throb those hearts, which I must cleave
With my keen pearcing news. Andrugio's dead.

Pier. Dead?


Ma. O me most miserable.


Pie. Dead, alas, how dead? Give seeming passion.
Fut weep, act, feign. Dead, alas, how dead?

Str. The vast delights of his large sudden joys
Opned his powers so wide, that is native heat
So prodigally flowed, t'exterior parts,
That thinner Citadell was left vnmand,
And so surpised onsodaine by cold death.

Mari* O fatal, disastrous, cursed, dismal!
Choke breath and life* I breath, I live too long.
Andrugio my Lord, I come, I come.

Pie. Be cheerful Princess, help Castilio,
The Lady's swouned, help to bear her in.
Slow comfort to huge cares, is swiftest sin.

Bal. Courage, courage sweet Lady, it is sir Gefferey Balurdo bids you courage.
Truly I am as nimble as an Elephant about a Lady.


Pan. Dead?


Ant. Dead.


Alb. Dead?


An. Why now the womb of mischief is delivered,
Of the prodigious issue of the night.

Pan. Ha, ha, ha.


Ant. My father dead, my love attaint of lust:
That's a large lie, as vast as spacious hell:
Poor guiltless Lady. O accursed lie.
What, whom, whether, which shall I first lament?
A dead father, a dishonored wife. Stand.
Me thinks I feel the frame of nature shake.
Cracks not the joints of earth to bear my woes?

Alb. Sweet Prince, be patient.


Ant. S'lid sir, I will not in despite of thee.
Patience is slave to fools: a chain that is fixed
Only to posts, and senseless log-like dolts.

Alb. It Is reasons glory to command affects.


An. Lies thy cold father dead, his glossed eyes
New closed up by thy sad mothers hands?
Have thou a love as spotless as the browe
Of clearest heaven, blurd with false defames?
Are thy moist entrals crumpled up with grief
Of parching mischiefs? Tell me, does thy heart
With punching anguish spur thy galled ribs?
Then come and let us sit and weep and wreath our arms:
I Will hear thy counsel.

Alb. Take comfort

Ant. Confusion to all comfort: I defy it.
Comfort's a Parasite, a flattring Jack:
And melts resolved despair. O boundless woe,
If there be any black yet unknown grief:
If there be any horror yet unfelt,
Unthought of mischief in thy fiendlike power,
Dash it upon my miserable head.
Make me more wretch, more cursed if thou can.
O, now my fate is more than I could fear:
My woes more weighty than my soul can bear. Exit

Pan. Ha, ha, ha,

Al. Why laugh you uncle? That's my cuz, your son,
Whose breast hangs cased in his cluttered gore.

Pa. True man, true: why, wherefore should I weep?
Come sit, kind Nephew: come on: thou and I
Will talk as Chorus to this tragedy*
Entreat the music strain their instruments,
With a slight touch whilst we. Say on fair cuz.

Alb. He was the very hope of Italy, Music sounds softly.
The blooming honor of your drooping age.

P. True cuz, true. They say that men of hope are crushed:
Good are suppressed by base desertlesse clods,
That stifle gasping virtue. Look sweet youth,
How provident our quick Venetians are,
Least houes of iades should trample on my boy:
Look how they lift him up to eminence,
Heave him, boue reach of flesh. Ha, ha, ha.

Alb. Uncle, this laughter ill becomes your grief.


Pan. Would have me cry, run rauing up and down,
For my sons loss? would have me turn rank mad,
Or wring my face with mimick action;
Stamp, curse, weep, rage, and then my bosom strike?
Away it is apish action, player-like.
If he is guiltless, why should tears be spent?
Thrice blessed soul that dies innocent.
If he is leapred with so foul a guilt,
Why should a sigh be lent, a tear be spilt?
The gripe of chance is weak, to wring a tear,
From him that knows what fortitude should bear.
Listen young blood. It Is not true valors pride,
To swagger, quarrel, swear, stamp, rave, and chide,
To stab in fume of blood, to keep loud coil,
To bandie factions in domestic broils,
To dare the act of Sins, whose filth excels.
The blackest customs of blind Infidels.
No, my loved youth: he may of valor vaunt;
Whom fortunes lowdest thunder can not daunt,
Whom fretful gauls of chance, stern fortunes siege;
Makes not his reason slinke, the souls fair liege,
Whose well pais'd action ever rests upon
Not giddie humors, but discretion.
This heart in valor even Jove out-goes:
Jove is without, but this above sense of woes:
And such a one eternity: Behold,
Good morrow son: thou bidst a fig for cold.
Sound louder music: let my breath exact,
You strike sad Tones unto this dismal act.

ACT. II.
SCEN. I.
The Cornets sound a cynet. Enter two mourners with torches, two with
streamers: Castilio and Forobosco, with torches: a Heralde bearing Andrugio's
helm and sword, the coffin: Maria supported by Lucio and Alberto, Antonio by
himself: Piero, and Strozzo talking: Galeatzo and Matzagente, Balurdo and
Pandulfo: the coffin set down: helm, sword, and streamers hung up, placed by
the Herald: whilst Antonio and Maria wet their handkerchers with their tears,
kiss them, and lay them on the hearse, kneeling: all go out but Piero.
Cornets cease, and he speaks. Pie. ROT there thou cearcloth that infolds the
flesh
Of my loathed foe; moulder to cru^bling dust:
Oblivion choke the passage of thy fame.
Trophies of honored birth drop quickly down:
Let naught of him, but what was vicious, live.
Though thou art dead, think not my hate is dead:
I have but newly twone my arm in the curld locks
Of snakie vengeance. Pale beetle-brow'd hate
But newly bustles up. Sweet wrong, I clap thy thoughts.
O let me hug my bosom, rub my breast,
In hope of what may hap. Andrugio rots:
Antonio lives: vmh: how long? ha, ha; how long?
Antonio packt hence, I Will his mother wed,
Then clear my daughter of supposed lust,
Wed her to Florence heir. O excellent.
Venice, Genoa, Florence, at my beck,
At Piero's nod, Balurdo, o ho.
O, twill be rare, all unsuspected done.
I have bin nursed in blood, and still have sucked
The steeme of reeking gore. Balurdo, ho?

Enter Balurdo with a beard, half of, half on. Ba. When my beard is on, most
noble prince, when my beard is on.


Pier. Why, what do thou with a beard?


Ba. In truth, one told me that my wit was balde, and that a Meremaide was
half fish, and half fish: and therefore to speak wisely, like one of your
counsel, as indeed it has pleased you to make me, not only being a fool,
of your counsel, but also to make me of your counsel, being a fool; If my
wit be bald, and a Mermaid be half fish and half cunger, then I must be
forced to conclude the tyring man has not glewd on my beard half fast,
enough. Gods bores, it will not stick to fall off.


Pie. Do thou know what thou have spoken all this while?


Ba. O Lord Duke, I would be sorry of that. Many men can utter that which, no
man, but themselves can conceive: but I thank a good wit, I have the gift to
speak that which neither any man else, nor my self understands.


Pi. Thou art wise. He that speaks he knows not what, shall never sin against
his own conscience: go to, thou art wise.


Ba. Wise? O no. I have a little natural discretion, or so: but for wise, I am
somewhat prudent: but for wise, o Lord*


Pie* Hold, take those keys, open the Castle vault, and put in Mellida.


Bal. And put in Mellida? well, let me alone,

Pi. Bid Forobosco, and Castilio guard,
Indeere thy self Piero's intimate.

Bal. Indeere, and intimate: good, I assure you. I will indeere and intimate
Mellida into the du^geon presently.


Pie. Will Pandulfo Feliche wait on me?


Ba. I will make him come, most retort and obtuse, to you presently. I think,
sir Ieffrey talks like a counselor. Go to, gods neaks, I think I tickle it.


Pie. I Will seem to wind you fool with kindest arm.
He that is ambitious minded, and but man,
Must have his followers beasts, dubd slavish sots:
Whose service is obedience, and whose wit
Reaches no further then to admire their Lord,
And stare in adoration of his worth.
I love, a slave raked out of common mud
Should seem to sit in counsel with my heart.
High honored blood's too squemish to assent,
And lend a hand to an ignoble act*
Poison from roses who could ere abstract?
How now Pandulfo, weeping for thy son?

SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Pandulfo. Pan. NO no, Piero, weeping for my sins:
Had I bin a good father, he had bin a gracious son.

Pie. Pollution must be purged.


Pan. Why taintst thou then the air with stench of flesh,
And humane putrifactions noisome sent?
I pray his body. Who less boon can crave,
Than to bestow upon the dead, his grave?

Pie. Grave? why? think thou he deserves a grave,
That has defiled the temple of

Pan. Peace, peace:
Me thinks I hear a humming murmur creep
From out his gelli'd wounds. Look on those lips,
Those now lawne pillowes, on whose tender softness,
Chaste modest speech, stealing from out his breast,
Had wont to rest it self, as loath to poast
From out so fair an Inn: look, look, they seem to stir,
And breath defyance to black obloquie.

Pie. Think thou thy son could suffer wrongfully?


Pan. A wise man wrongfully, but never wrong
Can take: his breast's of such well tempered proof,
It may be rac'd, not pearc't by savage tooth
Of foaming malice: showers of darts may dark
Heavens ample browe: but not strike out a spark;
Much less pearce the Suns cheek. Such songs as these,
I often dittied till my boy did sleep:
But now I turn plain fool (alas) I weep.

Pie. Fore heaven he makes me shrug: would a were dead:
He is a virtuous man. What has our court to do
With virtue, in the devils name! Pandulpho, hark.
My lustful daughter dies: start not, she dies.
I pursue justice, I love sanctity,
And an undefiled temple of pure thoughts.
Shall I speak freely? Good Andrugio's dead:
And I do fear a fetch; but (vmh) would I durst speak.
I do mistrust; but (vmh) death: is he all, all man:
Has he no part of mother in him, ha?
No licorish womanish inquisitiveness?

Pan. Andrugio's dead!


Pie. I, and I fear, his own unnatural blood,
To whom he gave life, has given death for life.
How could he come on, I see false suspect
Is vicde; wrung hardly in a virtuous heart.
Well, I could give you reason for my doubts.
You are of honored birth, my very friend.
You know how god-like it is to root out sin.
Antonio is a villain. Will you join
In oath with me, against the traitors life,
And swear, you knew, he sought his fathers death?
I loved him well, yet I love justice more:
Our friends we should affect, justice adore.

Pan. My Lord, the clapper of my mouth's not glibd
With court oil, twill not strike on both sides yet.

Pie. It Is just that subjects act commands of kings.


Pan. Command then just and honorable things.


Pie. Even so my self then will traduce his guilt.


Pan. Beware, take heed least guiltless blood be spilt.


Pie. Where only honest deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a beggary.

Pan. Where more than noble deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a tyranny.

Pie. Tush iuicelesse graybeard, it is immunity,
Proper to princes, that our state exactes,
Our subjects not alone to bear, but praise our acts.

Pan. O, but that prince that worthfull praise aspires,
From hearts, and not from lips, applause desires.

Pie. Pish, true praise, the brow of common men does ring,
False, only girts the temple of a king,
He that has strength, and's ignorant of power,
He was not made to rule, but to be ruled.

Pan. It Is praise to do, not what we can, but should.


Pie. Hence doting Stoic: by my hope of bliss,
I Will make thee wretched.

Pan. Defyance to thy power, thou rifted Iawne.
Now, by the loved heaven, sooner thou shall
Rince thy soul ribs from the black filth of sin,
That soots thy heart, then make me wretched. Pish,
Thou can not coupe me up. Had thou a Iaile
With trebble walls, like antic Babylon,
Pandulpho can get out. I tell thee Duke,
I have old Fortunatus wishing cappe:
And can be where I list, even in a trice.
I Will skippe from earth into the arms of heaven:
And from tryumphall arch of blessedness,
Spit on thy froathy breast. Thou can not slave
Or banish me; I will be free at home,
Maugre the bearde of greatness. The port holes
Of sheathed spirit are nere corb'd up:
But still stand open ready to discharge
Their precious shot into the shrowds of heaven*

Pie. O torture! slave, I banish thee the town,
Thy native seat of birth.

Pa. How proud thou speak! I tell thee Duke, the blasts
Of the swollen cheekt winds, nor all the breath of kings
Can puff me out my native seat of birth.
The earth's my bodies, and the heauen's my souls
Most native place of birth, which they will keep:
Despite the menace of mortality.
Why Duke:
That Is not my native place, where I was rockt.
A wise man's home is wheresoere he is wise.
Now that, from man, not from the place does rise.

Pie. Would I were deaf (o plague) hence dotard wretch:
Tread not in court. All that thou have, I seize.
His quiet's firmer then I can disease.

Pan. Go, boast unto thy flattring Sycophants;
Pandulpho's slave, Piero has orethrowne.
Loose Fortunes rags are lost; my owne's my own.
Piero's going out, looks back, Exeunt at several doors. It Is true Piero,
thy vexed heart shall see,
Thou have but tript my slave, not conquered me.

SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Antonio with a book, Lucio, Alberto, Antonio in black. Alb. NAY sweet
be comforted, take counsel and

Ant. Alberto, peace: that grief is wanton sick,
Whose stomach can digest and brook the diet
Of stale ill relisht counsel. Pigmie cares
Can shelter under patience shield: but giant griefs
Will burst all covert.

Lu. My Lord, it is supper time.


Ant. Drink deep Alberto: eat, good Lucio:
But my pined heart shall eat on naught but woe.

Alb. My Lord, we dare not leave you thus alone.


Ant. You cannot leave Antonio alone.
The chamber of my breast is even throngd,
With firm attendance, that forsweares to flinch.
I have a thing sits here; it is not grief,
It Is not despair, nor the most plague
That the most wretched are infected with:
But the most greefull, despairing, wretched,
Accursed, miserable. O, for heavens sake
Forsake me now; you see how light I am,
And yet you force me to defame my patience.

Lu. Fair gentle prince

Ant. Away, thy voice is hateful: thou do buzze,
And beat my ears with intimations
That Mellida, that Mellida is light,
And stained with adulterous luxury:
I cannot brook't. I tell the Lucio,
Sooner will I give faith, that virtue's scant
In princes courts, will be adorned with wreath
Of choice respect, and indeerd intimate.
Sooner will I believe that friendships rain.
Will curb ambition from utility,
Then Mellida is light. Alas poor soul,
Did ere see her (good heart) have heard her speak?
Kind, kind soul* Incredulity it self
Would not be so brass hearted, as suspect so modest cheeks

Lu. My Lord

Ant. Away, a selfe-one guilt does only hatch distrust:
But a chaste thought's as far from doubt, as lust.
I entreat you leave me,

Alb. Will you endeavor to forget your grief?


Ant. I faith I will, good friend, I faith I will.
I Will come and eat with you. Alberto, see,
I am taking Physic, here is Philosophy.
Good honest leave me, I Will drink wine anon.

Alb. Since you enforce us, fair prince, we are gone.


Exeunt Alberto and Lucio. Antonio reads. A. Ferte fortiter: hoc est quo deum
antecedatis. Ille enim extra patientiam malorum; vos supra. Contemnite dolorem:
aut soluetur, aut soluet. Contemnite fortuna^: nullu^ telu^, quo feriret animum
habet.




Pish, thy mother was not lately widdowed,
Thy dear affied love, lately defamed,
With blemish of foul lust, when thou wrot'st thus.
Thou wrapped in furs, beaking thy lymbs before fires,
Forbidst the froze^ Zone to shudder. Ha, ha: it is naught,
But fomie bubling of a fleamie brain,
Naught else but smoke. O what danke marrish spirit,
But would be fyred with impatience,
At my No more, no more: he that was never blessed,
With height of birth, fair expectation
Of mounted fortunes, knows not what it is
To be the pitied object of the world.
O, poor Antonio, thou may sigh.

Mell. Aye me.


Ant* And curse.


Pan. Black powers.


Ant. And cry.


Ma. O heaven.


Ant. And close laments with


Alb. O me most miserable.


Pan. Woe for my dear dear son.


Mar. Woe for my dear, dear husband.


Mel. Woe for my dear dear love.


Ant. Woe for me all, close all your woes in me:
In me Antonio, ha? Where live these sounds?
I can see nothing; griefe's invisible,
And lurkes in secret angles of the heart*
Come sigh again, Antonio bears his part.

Mell. O here, here is a vent to pass my sighs.
I have surcharged the dungeon with my plaints.
Prison, and heart will burst, if void of vent*
I, that is Phoebe, empress of the night,
That gins to mount; o chastest deity:
If I be false to my Antonio,
If the least soil of lust smeers my pure love,
Make me more wretched, make me more accursed
Then infamy, torture, death, hell and heaven
Can bound with amplest power of thought: if not,
Purge my poor heart, with defamations blot.

Ant. Purge my poor heart from defamations blot!
Poor heart, how like her virtuous self* she speaks.
Mellida, dear Mellida, it is Antonio:
Slinke not away, it is thy Antonio.

Mel. How found you out, my Lord (alas) I know
It Is easy in this age, to find out woe.
I have a suit to you.

Ant. What is it, dear soul?


Mell. Kill me, I faith I Will wink, not stir a jot.
For God sake kill me: insooth, loved youth,
I am much injured; look, see how I creep.
I cannot wreake my wrong, but sigh and weep.

An. May I be cursed, but I credit thee.


Mell. To morrow I must die*


An. Alas, for what?


Mell. For loving thee; it is true my sweetest breast*
I must die falsely: so must thou, dear heart.
Nets are a knitting to intrappe thy life.
Thy fathers death must make a Paradise
To my (I shame to call him) father. Tell me sweet,
Shall I die thine? do love me still, and still?

Ant. I do.


Mell. Then welcome heavens will.


Ant. Madam, I will not swell like a Tragedian, in forced passion of affected
strains.

If I had present power of ought but pitying you, I would be as ready to
redress your wrongs, as to pursue your love. Throngs of thoughts crowde for
their passage, somewhat I will do.

Reach me thy hand: think this is honors bent,
To live vnslau'd, to die innocent.

Mel. Let me entreat a favor, gracious love.
Be patient, see me die, good do not weep:
Go sup, sweet chuck, drink, and securely sleep.

Ant. I faith I cannot, but I Will force my face
To palliate my sickness.

Mell. Give me thy hand. Peace on thy bosom dwell:
That's all my woe can breath: kiss. Thus farewell.

Ant. Farewell: my heart is great of thoughts,
Stay dove:
And therefore I must speak: but what? o Love!
By this white hand: eno more: read in these tears,
What crushing anguish thy Antonio bears.

Antonio kisseth Mellida's hand: then Mellida goes from the grate. Mel. God
night good heart,

Ant. Thus heat from blood, thus souls from bodies part.


Enter Piero and Strozzo. Pie* He greeues, laughe Strozzo: laugh, he weeps.
Has he tears? o pleasure! has he tears?
Now do I scourge Andrugio with steel whips
Of knottie vengeance. Strozzo, cause me straight
Some plaining dittie to augment despair.
Triumph Piero: hark, he groans, o rare!

Ant. Behold a prostrate wretch laid on his toumbe.
His Epitaph, thus; Ne plus vltra. Ho.
Let none out* woe me: mine is Herculean woe.

CANTANT. Exit Piero at the end of the song. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Maria. Ant. MAY I be more cursed then heaven can make me;
If I am not more wretched
Then man can conceive me. Sore forlorn
Orphant, what omnipotence can make thee happy?

Mar. How now sweet son? good youth, what do thou?


Ant. Weep, weep.


Mar. Do naught but weep, weep?


Ant. Yes mother, I do sigh, and wring my hands,
Beat my poor breast, and wreath my tender arms.
Hark ye; I Will tell you wondrous strange, strange news.

Ma. What my good boy, stark mad?


Ant. I am not.


Ma. Alas, is that strange news?


Ant. Strange news? why mother, is it not wondrous strange
I am not mad? I run not frantic, ha?
Knowing my fathers trunk scarce cold, your love
Is sought by him that does pursue my life?
Seeing the beauty of creation,
Antonio's bride, pure heart, defamed, and stoad
Under the hatches of obscuring earth.
Heu quo labor, quo vota ceciderunt mea!

Enter Piero. Pie. Good evening to the fair Antonio,
Most happy fortune, sweet succeeding time,
Rich hope: think not thy fate a bankrout though

Ant. Vmh, the devil in his good time and tide forsake thee.


Pie. How now? hark ye Prince.


An. God be with you.


Pie. Nay, noble blood, I hope ye not suspect


An. Suspect, I scorn't. Here Is cap and leg; good night:
Thou that wants power, with dissemblance fight.

Exit Antonio. Pier. Madam, O that you could remember to forget


Ma. I had a husband and a happy son.


Pi. Most powreful beauty, that enchanting grace


Ma. Talk not of beauty, nor enchanting grace.
My husband's dead, my son's distraught, accursed.
Come, I must vent my griefs, or heart will burst.

Exit Maria. Pie. She Is gone (and yet she is here) she has left a print
Of her sweet graces fixed within my heart,
As fresh as is her face. I Will marry her.
She Is most fair, true, most chaste, most false: because
Most fair, it is firm I Will marry her.

SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Strotzo. Str. MY Lord,

Piero. Ha, Strotzo, my other soul; my life,
Dear, have thou steeled the point of thy resolve?
Wilt not turn edge in execution?

Str. No.


Pie. Do it with rare passion, and present thy guilt,
As if twere wrung out with thy conscience gripe.
Swear that my daughter's innocent of lust,
And that Antonio bribed thee to defame
Her maiden honor, on inueterate hate
Unto my blood; and that thy hand was feed
By his large bounty, for his fathers death.
Swear plainly that thou chok'tst Andrugio,
By his sons only egging. Rush me in
Whilst Mellida prepares her self to die:
Halter about thy neck, and with such sighs,
Laments and acclamations lyfen it,
As if impulsive power of remorse

Str. I Will weep.


Pie. I, I, fall on thy face and cry; why suffer you
So lewd a slave as Strotzo is to breath?

Str. I Will beg a strangling, grow importunate

Pie. As if thy life were loathsome to thee: then I
Catch straight the cords end; and, as much incensed
With thy damned mischiefs, offer a rude hand,
As ready to girde in thy pipe of breath:
But on the sudden straight I Will stand amazed,
And fall in exclamations of thy virtues.

Str. Applaud my agonies, and penitence.


Pie. Thy honest stomach, that could not digest
The crudities of murder: but surcharged,
Vomited'st them up in Christian piety.

Str. Then clip me in your arms.


Pie. And call thee brother, mount thee straight to state,
Make thee of counsel; tut, tut, what not, what not?
Think ont, be confident, pursue the plot.

Str. Look here is a troop, a true rogues lips are mute*
I do not use to speak, but execute.

He lays finger on his mouth, and draws his dagger. Pie. So, so; run headlong
to confusion:
Thou slight brained mischief, thou art made as dirt,
To plaster up the bracks of my defects.
I Will wring what may be squeas'd from out his use:
And good night Strozzo. Swell plump bold heart.
For now thy tide of vengeance rowleth in:
O now Tragoedia Cothurnata mounts*
Piero's thoughts are fixed on dire exploites.
Pell mell: confusion, and black murder guides
The organs of my spirit: shrink not heart.
Capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est.

FINIS ACTVS SECVNDI.
ACT. III.
SCEN. I.
A dumb show. The cornets sounding for the Act. Enter Castilio and
Forobosco, Alberto and Balurdo, with polaxes: Strozzo talking with Piero,
seems to send out Strotzo. Exit Strotzo. Enter Strotzo, Maria, Nutriche, and
Luceo. Piero passes through his guard, and talks with her with seeming
amorousnesse: she seems to reject his suite, flies to the toumbe, kneeles,
and kisseth it. Piero bribes Nutriche and Lucio: they go to her, seeming to
solicit his suite. She rises, offers to go out, Piero stays her, tears
open his breast, imbraceth and kisseth her, and so they go all out in State.
Enter two pages, the one with two tapers, the other with a chafing dish: a
perfume in it. Antonio, in his night gown, and a night cap, vnbrac't,
following after. An. THE black iades of swart night trot foggy rings Bout
heavens browe. (12) It Is now stark dead night.

Is this Saint Marks Church?

1. Pa. It is, my Lord.


Ant. Where stands my fathers hearse?


2. Pa. Those streamers bear his arms. I, that is it.


Ant. Set tapers to the toumbe, and lamp the Church.
Give me the fire, Now depart and sleep. Exeunt pages.
I purify the air with odorous fume.
Graves, valts, and toumbes, groan not to bear my weight,
Cold flesh, bleake trunkes, wrapped in your half-rot shrowdes,
I press you softly, with a tender foot.
Most honored sepulcher, vouchsafe a wretch,
Leave to weep ore thee, Toumb, I Will not be long
Ere I creep in thee, and with bloodlesse lips
Kiss my cold fathers cheek. I pree thee, grave,
Provide soft mould to wrap my carcass in.
Thou royal spirit of Andrugio, where ere thou houerst
(Ayrie intellectt) I heave up tapers to thee (view thy son)
In celebration of dew obsequies.
Once every night, I Will dew thy funeral hearse
With my religious tears,
O blessed father of a cursed son,
Thou diedst most happy, since thou liuedst not
To see thy son most wretched, and thy wife
Pursued by him that seeks my guiltless blood.
O, in what orb thy mighty spirit soars,
Stoop and beat down this rising fog of shame,
That strives to blur thy blood, and girt defame
About my innocent and spotless brows.
Non est mori miserum, sed misere mori.

And. Thy pangs of anguish rip my cerecloth up:
And lo the ghoast of old Andrugio
Forsakes his coffin. Antonio, revenge.
I was impoyson'd by Piero's hand:
Revenge my blood; take spirit gentle boy:
Revenge my blood. Thy Mellida, is chaste:
Only to frustrate thy pursuit in love,
Is blazed unchaste. Thy mother yields consent
To be his wife, and give his blood a son,
That made her husbandlesse, and does complot
To make her sonlesse: but before I touch
The banks of rest, my ghost shall visit her.
Thou vigor of my youth, juice of my love,
Seize on revenge, graspe the stern bended front
Of frowning vengeance, with vnpaized clutch.
Alarm Nemesis, rouse up thy blood,
Invent some stratageme of vengeance:
Which but to think on, may like lightning glide,
With horor through thy breast; remember this.
Scelera non vlcisceris, nisi vincis. Exit Andrugio's ghost.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Maria, her hair about her ears: Nutriche, and Lucio, with Pages, and
torches. Ma. WHERE left you him? show me good boys, away.


Nut. Gods me, your hair.


Ma. Nurse, it is not yet proud day:
The neat gay mistes of the light's not up,
Her cheeks not yet flurd over with the paint
Of borrowed crimsone; the vnpranked world
Wears yet the night-cloathes: let flare my loosed hair.
I scorn the presence of the night.
Where Is my boy? Run: I Will range about the Church,
Like frantic Bachanell, or Iasons wife,
Inuoking all the spirits of the graves,
To tell me where. Hah? O my poor wretched blood,
What do thou up at midnight, my kind boy?
Dear soul, to bed: o thou have struck a fright
Unto thy mothers panting
O quisquis noua
Supplicia functis dirus vmbrarum arbiter
Disponis, quisquis exeso iaces
Pauidus sub antri, quisquis venturi times
Montis ruinam, quisquis auidorum feres,
Rictus leonum, and dira furiarum agmina
Implicitus horres, Antonii vocem excipe
Properantis ad vos Vlciscar.

Ma. Alas my son's distraught. Sweet boy appease*
Thy mutining affections.

Ant. By the astonning terror of swart night,
By the infectious damps of clammie graves,
And by the mould that presses down
My dead fathers sculle: I Will be revenged.

Ma. Wherefore? on whom? for what? go, go to bed
Good dutious son. Ho, but thy idle

An. So I may sleep toumb'd in an honored hearse,
So may my bones rest in that Sepulcher,

Ma. Forget not duty son: to bed, to bed.


An. May I be cursed by my fathers ghost,
And blasted with incensed breath of heaven,
If my heart beat on ought but vengeance,
May I be numd with horror, and my veins
Pucker with sing'ing torture, if my brain
Digest a thought, but of dire vengeance:
May I be fettered slave to coward Chance,
If blood, heart, brain, plot ought save vengeance.

Ma. Will thou to bed* I wonder when thou sleepst*
In Faith thou look sunk-ey'd* go couch thy head:
Now faith it is idle: sweet, sweet son to bed.

Ant. I have a prayer or two, to offer up,
For the good, good Prince, my most dear, dear Lord,
The Duke Piero, and your virtuous self:
And then when those prayers have obtained success,
In sooth I Will come (believe it now) and couch
My head in downie moulde: but first I Will see
You safely laid. I Will bring ye all to bed.
Piero, Maria, Strotzo, Lucio,
I Will see you all laid: I Will bring you all to bed,
And then, in faith, I Will come and couch my head,
And sleep in peace.

Ma. Look then, we go before.


Exeunt all but Antonio. Ant. I, so you must, before we touch the shore
Of wished revenge. O you departed souls,
That lodge in coffined (...), which my feet press
(If Pythagorian Axioms be true,
Of spirits transmigration) floote no more
To humane bodies, rather live in swine,
Inhabit wolves flesh, scorpions, dogs, and toads,
Rather then man, The curse of heaven raines
In plagues unlimited through all his days,
His mature age grows only mature vice,
And ripens only to corrupt and rot
The budding hopes of infant modesty.
Still striving to be more then man, he proves
More then a devil, devilish suspect, devilish cruelty:
All hell-straid juice is powered to his veins,
Making him drunk with fuming surquedries,
Contempt of heaven, untamed arrogance,
Lust, state, pride, murder.

And. Murder. From above and beneath.


Fell. Murder. From above and beneath.


Pa. Murder. From above and beneath.


Ant. I, I will murder: graves and ghosts
Fright me no more, I Will suck red vengeance
Out of Pieros wounds Piero's wounds.

Enter two boys, with Piero in his night gown and night cap. Pie. Maria, love
Maria: she took this I Will.
Left you her here? On lights away:
I think we shall not warm our beds to day.

Enter Iulio, Forobosco, and Castilio* Iul. Ho, father? father?


Pie. How now Iulio, my little pretty son?
Why suffer you the child to walk so late.

Foro. He will not sleep, but calls to follow you,
Crying that bug-beares and spirits haunted him.

Antonio offers to come, nere and stab, Piero presently withdrawes. Ant. No,
not so.
This shall be sought for; I Will force him feed on life
Till he shall loath it. This shall be the close.
Of vengeance strain.

Pie. Away there: Pages, lead on fast with light.
The Church is full of damps: it is yet dead night.

Exit all, saving Iulio. SCENA TERTIA.
Iul. BROTHER Antonio, are you here in faith?
Why do you frown? Indeed my sister said,
That I should call you brother, that she did,
When you were married to her. Busse me; good
Truth, I love you better then my father, deed.

Ant. Thy father? Gracious, o bounteous heaven!
I do adore thy Justice; Venit in nostras manus
Tandem vindicta, venit and tota quidem.

Iul. Truth, since my mother dyed, I loved you best.
Something has angered you; pray you look merrily.

Ant. I will laugh, and dimple my thin cheek,
With capring joy; chuck, my heart does leap
To graspe thy bosom. Time, place, and blood,
How fit you close together! Heavens tones
Strike not such music to immortal souls,
As your accordance sweetes my breast withal.
Me thinks I pase upon the front of Jove,
And kick corruption with a scornful heel,
Griping this flesh, disdain mortality.
O that I knew which joint, which side, which lim
Were father all, and had no mother in it:
That I might rip it vain by vain; and carue revenge
In bleeding races: but since it is mixed together,
Have at adventure, pel mell, no reuerse.
Come hither boy. This is Andrugio's hearse.

Iul. O God, you will hurt me. For my sisters sake,
Pray you do not hurt me. And you kill me, deed,
I Will tell my father

An. O, for thy sisters sake, I flagge revenge.


Andr. Revenge.


Ant. Stay, stay, dear father, fright mine eyes no more.
Revenge as swift as lightning bursteth forth,
And cleares his heart. Come, pretty tender child,
It is not thee I hate, not thee I kill.
Thy fathers blood that flows within thy veins,
Is it I loath; is that, Revenge must suck.
I love thy soul: and were thy heart lapt up
In any flesh, but in Piero's blood,
I would thus kiss it: but being his: thus, thus,
And thus I Will punch it. Abandon fears.
Whilst thy wounds bleed, my brows shall gush out tears.

Iuli. So you will love me, do even what you will.


Ant. Now barks the Wolf against the full cheekt Moon.
Now Lions halfe-clamd entrals roar for food.
Now croakes the toad, and night-crowes screech aloud,
Fluttering 'bout casements of departing souls.
Now gapes the graves, and through their yawnes let loose
Imprisoned spirits to reuisit earth:
And now swarte night, to swell thy hour out,
Behold I spurt warm blood in thy black eyes.

From under the stage a groan. Ant. Howl not thou pury mould, groan not ye
graves.
Be dumb all breath. Here stands Andrugio's son,
Worthy his father. So: I feel no breath.
His jaws are fallen, his dislodged soul is fled:
And now there is nothing, but Piero, left.
He is all Piero, father all. This blood,
This breast, this heart, Piero all:
Whom thus I mangle. Spright of Iulyo,
Forget this was thy trunk. I live thy friend.
May thou be twined with the sofest embrace
Of clear eternity: but thy fathers blood,
I thus make incense of, to vengeance.
Ghost of my poisoned Sire, suck this fume:
To sweet revenge perfume thy circling air,
With smoke of blood. I sprinkle round his goare,
And dew thy hearse, with these fresh reeking drops.
Lo thus I heave my blood-died hands to heaven:
Even like insatiate hell, still crying; More.
My heart has thirsting Dropsies after goare.
Sound peace, and rest, to Church, night ghosts, and graves.
Blood cries for blood; and murder murder craves.

SCENA QVARTA.
Enter two Pages with torches. Marya, her hair loose, and Nutriche. Nut. FIE,
fie; to morrow your wedding day, and weep! Gods my comfort. Andrugio could do
well: Piero may do better. I have had four husbands my self. The first I
called, Sweet Duck; the second, Dear Heart; the third, Pretty Pugge: But the
fourth most sweet, dear, pretty, all in all: he was the very cockeall of a
husband. What, Lady? your skin is smooth, your blood warm, your cheek
fresh, your eye quick: change of pasture makes fat calves: choice of linen,
clean bodies; and (no question) variety of husbands perfect wives* I would you
should know it, as few teeth as I have in my head, I have red Aristotle's
Problemes, which says; that woman receives perfection by the man. What then
be the men? Go to, to bed, lie on your back, dream not on Piero. I say no
more: to morrow is your wedding: do, dream not of Piero.


Enter Balurdo with abase Vyole. Ma. What an idle prate thou keep'st? good
nurse go sleep.
I have a mighty task of tears to weep.

Bal. Lady, with a most retort and obtuse leg I kiss the curled locks of
your loose hair. The Duke has sent you the most musical sir Gefferey, with
his not base, but most innobled Viole, to rock your baby thoughts in the Cradle
of sleep.


Ma. I give the noble Duke respective thanks.


Bal. Respective; truly a very pretty word. Indeed Madam, I have the most
respective fiddle* Did you ever smell a more sweet sound. My dittie must go
thus; very witty, I assure you: I my self in an humorous passion made it, to
the tune of my mistress Nutriches beauty. Indeed, very pretty, very
retort, and obtuse; I Will assure you it is thus.

My mistress eye does oil my joints,
And makes my fingers nimble:
O love, come on, untruss your points,
My fiddlestick wants Rozzen.
My Ladies dugges are all so smooth,
That no flesh must them handle*
Her eyes do shine, for to say sooth,
Like a new snuffed candle.

Mar. Truly, very patheticall, and vnuulgar.


Ba. Patheticall, and vnuulgar; words of worth, excellent words. In sooth,
Madam, I have taken a murre, which makes my nose run most patheticallie, and
vnvulgarlie. Have you any Tobacco?


Ma. Good Signior, your song.


Ba. Instantly, most vnvulgarlie, at your service.
Truly, here is the most patheticall rozzen. Vmh.

CANTANT. Ma. In sooth, most knightly sung, and like sir Gefferey.


Ba. Why, look you Lady, I was wade a knight only for my voice; and a
counselor, only for my wit.


Ma. I believe it. God night, gentle sir, god night.


Bal. You will give me leave to take my leave of my mistress, and I will do it
most famously in rhyme.

Farewell, adieu: Says thy love true,
As to part loath.
Time bids us part, Mine own sweet heart,
God bless us both. Exit Balurdo.

Ma. God night Nutriche. Pages, leave the room.
The life of night grows short, it is almost dead.
Exeunt Pages and Nutriche. O thou cold widdowe bed, sometime thrice blessed,
By the warm pressure of my sleeping Lord:
Open thy leaves, and whilst on thee I tread,
Groan out. Alas, my dear Andrugio's dead.
Maria draws the courtaine: and the ghost of Andrugio is displayed, sitting
on the bed. Amazing terror, what portent is this?

SCENA QVINTA.
And. DISLOYAL to our Hymniall rites,
What raging heat rains in thy stru^pet blood?
Have thou so soon forgot Andrugio?
Are our loue-bands so quickly cancelled?
Where lives thy plighted faith unto this breast?
O weak Marya! Go to, calm thy fears.
I pardon thee, poor soul. O shed no tears.
Thy sex is weak. That black incarnate fiende
May trippe thy faith, that has orethrowne my life:
I was impoyson'd by Piero's hand.
Join with my son, to bend up straind revenge.
Maintain a seeming favor to his suite,
Till time may form our vengeance absolute.

Enter Antonio, his arms bloody: a torch and a poniard. An. See, vnamaz'd, I
will behold thy face,
Outstare the terror of thy grimme aspect,
Daring the horred'st object of the night.
Look how I smoke in blood, reeking the steame*
Of foming vengeance. O my soul's inthroan'd
In the tryumphant chariot of revenge.
Me thinks I am all air, and feel no weight
Of humane dirt clogge. This is Iulios blood.
Rich music, father; this is Iulio's blood.
Why lives that mother?

And. Pardon ignorance. Fly dear Antonio:
Once more assume disguise, and dog the Court
In fained habit, till Piero's blood
May even ore-flowe the brimme of full revenge.
Exit Antonio. Peace, and all blessed fortunes to you both.
Fly thou from Court, be pearelesse in revenge:
Sleep thou in rest, lo here I close thy couch.
Exit Maria to her bed, Andrugio drawing the Curtains. And now ye sootie
coursers of the night,
Hurrie your chariot into hels black womb.
Darkness, make flight; Graves, eat your dead again:
Let Us repossesse our shrowdes. Why lags delay?
Mount sparkling brightness, give the world his day.

Exit Andrugio. Explicit Actus tertius.
ACT. IIII.
SCEN. I.
Enter Antonio in a fools habit, with a little toy of a walnut shell, and
soap, to make bubbles: Maria, and Alberto. Ma. AWAY with this disguise in any
hand.


Alb. Fie, it is vnsuting to your elate spirit:
Rather put on some transshap't caualier,
Some habit of a spitting Critic, whose mouth
Voids nothing but gentile and vnuulgar
Rheum of censure: rather assume*

Ant. Why then should I put on the very flesh
Of solid folly. No, this cockscombe is a crown
Which I affect, even with unbounded zeal.

Al. It Will twhart your plot, disgrace your high resolve.


An. By wisdoms heart there is no essence mortal,
That I can envy, but a plumpe cheekt fool:
O, he has a patent of immunities
Confirmed by custom, sealed by policy,
As large as spacious thought.

Alb. You can not press among the courtiers,
And have access to

An. What? not a fool? Why friend, a golden ass,
A babl'd fool are sole canonical,
Whilst pale cheekt wisdom, and lean ribd art
Are kept in distance at the halberts point:
All held Apocrypha, not worth survey.
Why, by the Genius of that Florentine,
Deep, deep observing, sound brained Macheueil,
He is is not wise that strives not to seem fool.
When will the Duke hold feed Intelligence,
Keep wary observation in large pay,
To dog a fools act?

Mar. I, but such faining, known, disgraceth much.


An. Pish, most things that morally adhere to souls,
Wholy exist in drunk opinion:
Whose reeling censure, if I value not,
It valewes naught.

Ma. You are transported with too slight a thought,
If you but meditate of what is past,
And what you plot to pass.

Ant. Even in that, note a fools beatitude:
He is not capeable of passion,
VVanting the power of distinction,
He bears an vnturnd sail with every wind:
Blow East, blow West, he stirs his course alike.
I never saw a fool lean: the chub-fac'tfop
Shines sleeke with full crammed fat of happiness,
Whilst studious contemplation sucks the juice
From wisards cheeks: who making curious search
For Natures secrets, the first innating cause
Laughes them to scorn, as man does busy Apes
When they will zanie men. Had heaven bin kind,
Creating me an honest senseless dolt,
A good poor fool, I should want sense to feel
The stings of anguish shoot through every vain,
I should not know what twere to loose a father:
I should be dead of sense, to view defame
Blur my bright love; I could not thus run mad,
As one confounded in a maze of mischief,
Staggerd, stark feld with brusing stroke of chance.
I should not shoot mine eyes into the earth,
Poring for mischief, that might counterpoise Enter Luceo. mischief, murder
and How now Lucio?

Lu. My Lord, the Duke, with the Venetian States,
Approach the great hall to judge Mellida.

Ant. Asked he for Iulio yet?


Lu. No motion of him: dare you trust this habit?


An. Alberto, see you straight rumor me dead:
Leave me, good mother, leave me Luceo,
Forsake me all. Now patience hoope my sides,
Exeunt omnes, saving Antonio. With steeled ribs, least I do burst my breast
With struggling passions. Now disguise stand bold.
Poor scorned habits, often choice souls infould.

The Cornets sound a Cynet. SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Castilio, Forobosco, Balurdo and Alberto, with polaxes: Luceo bare.
Piero and Maria talking together: two Senators, Galeatzo, and Matzagente,
Nutriche. Pie. ENTREAT me not: there is not a beauty lives,
Has that imperial predominance
Ore my affectes, as your enchanting graces:
Yet give me leave to be my self.

Ant. A villain.


Pier. Just.


Ant. Most just.


Pie. Most just and upright in our judgment seat.
Were Mellida mine eye, with such a blemish
Of most loathed looseness, I would scratch it out.
Produce the strumpet in her bridal robes,
That she may blush t'appeare so white in show,
And black in inward substance. Bring her in.
Exeunt Forobosco and Castilio. I hold Antonio, for his fathers sake,
So very dearly, so entirely choice,
That knew I but a thought of prejudice,
Imaigin'd against his high innobled blood,
I would maintain a mortal feude, vndying hate
Against the conceiuers life. And shall Justice sleep
In fleshly Lethargy, for mine own bloods favor,
When the sweet prince has so apparent scorn
By my (I will not call her) daughter. Go,
Conduct in the loved youth Antonio:
Exit Alberto to fetch Antonio. He shall behold me spurn my private good.
Piero loves his honor more then is blood.

Ant. The devil he does more then both.


Ba. Stand back there, fool; I do hate a fool most most pathetically. O
these that have no sap of of retort and obtuse wit in them: faugh.


Ant. Puff; hold world: puff, hold bubble; Puff, hold world: puff, break
not behind: puff, thou art full of wind; puff, keep up by wind: puff,
it is broake: and now I laugh like a good fool at the breath of mine own lips,
he, he, he, he, he.


Bal. You fool.


Ant. You fool, puff.


Ba. I cannot digest thee, the vnuulgar fool. Go fool.


Pier. Forbear, Balurdo, let the fool alone,
Come hither ( ficto) Is he your fool?

Ma. Yes, my loved Lord.


Pi. Would all the States in Venice were like thee.
O then I were secured.
He that is a villain, or but meanly sowl'd,
Must still converse, and cling to routes of fools,
That can not search the leakes of his defectes.
O, your unsalted fresh fool is your only man:
These vinegar tart spirits are too pearcing,
Too searching in the vnglewd joints of shaken wits.
Find they a chinke, they will wriggle in and in,
And eat like salt sea in his siddowe ribs,
Till they have opened all his rotten parts,
Unto the vaunting surge of base contempt,
And sunk the tossed galleasse in depth
Of whirlepoole Scorn. Give me an honest fopp:
Dud a dud a? why lo sir, this takes he
As grateful now, as a Monopoly.

SCENA TERTIA.
The still flutes sound softly. Enter Forobosco, and Castilio: Mellida
supported by two waiting women. Mell. ALL honor to this royal confluence.


Pie. Forbear (impure) to blot bright honors name,
With thy defiled lips. The flux of sin
Flows from thy tainted body: thou so foul,
So all dishonored, can no honor give,
No wish of good, that can have good effect
To this grave senate, and illustrate bloodes.
Why stays the doom of death?

1. Sen. Who rises up to manifest her guilt?


2. Sen. You must produce apparent proof, my Lord.


Pie. Why, where is Strotzo? he that swore he saw
The very act: and vowed that Feliche fled
Upon his sight: on which, I brake the breast
Of the adulterous letcher, with five stabbes.
Go fetch in Strotzo. Now thou impudent,
If thou have any drop of modest blood
Shrouded within thy cheeks; blush, blush for shame,
That rumor yet may say, thou felt'st defame.

Mell. Produce the devil,; let your Strotzo come:
I can defeat his strongest argument,
Which

Pie. With what?


Mell. With tears, with blushes, sighs, and clasped hands,
With innocent vpreared arms to heaven:
With my vnnookt simplicity. These, these
Must, will, can only quit my heart of guilt.
Heaven permits not taintlesse blood be spilt.
If no remorse live in your savage breast

Piero. Then thou must die

Mell. Yet dying, I Will be blessed.


Piero. Accursed by me.


Mell. Yet blessed, in that I strove
To live, and die

Pie. My hate.


Mell. Antonyo's love.


Ant. Antonio's love!


Enter Strotzo, a cord about his neck. Stro. O what vast ocean of repentant
tears
Can cleanse my breast from the polluting filth
Of vlcerous sin! Supreme Efficient,
Why cleau'st thou not my breast with thunderbolts
Of wingd revenge?

Pie. What means this passion?


An. What villainy are they decocting now? Vmh.


Str. In me conuertite ferrum, O proceres.
Nihil iste, nec ista.

Pie. Lay hold on him. What strange portent is this?


Str. I will not flinch. Death, hell more grimly stare
Within my heart, then in your threatening brows.
Record, thou threefolde guard of dreadest power,
What I here speak, is forced from my lips,
By the pulsiue strain of conscience,
I have a mount of mischief clogs my soul,
As weighty as the high-nol'd Appenine:
Which I must straight disgorge, or breast will burst.
I have defamed this Lady wrongfully,
By instigation of Antonio:
Whose reeling love, tossed on each fancies surge,
Began to loath before it fully ioyed.

Exit Forobosco. Pie. Go, seize Antonio, guard him strongly in.


Str. By his ambition, being only bribed,
Feed by his impious hand, I poisoned
His aged father: that his thirsty hope
Might quench their dropsy of aspiring drought,
With full unbounded quaffe.

Pie. Seize me Antonio.


Str. O why permit you now such scum of filth
As Strotzo is, to live, and taint the air,
With his infectious breath!

Pie. My self will be thy strangler, unmatched slave.


Piero comes from his chair, snatcheth the cords end, and Castilio aydeth him;
both strangle Strotzo. Str. Now change your

Pie. I, pluck Castilio: I change my humor? pluck Castilio.
Dye, with thy deaths entreats even in thy jaws.
Now, now, now, now, now, my plot begins to work.
Why, thus should Statesmen do,
That cleave through knots of craggie policies,
Use men like wedges, one strike out another;
Till by degrees the tough and knurly trunk
Be riu'd in sunder. Where Is Antonio?

Enter Alberto, running. Alb. O black accursed fate. Antonyo's drowned.


Pie. Speak, on thy faith, on thy allegiance, speak.


Alb. As I do love Piero, he is drownde.


Ant. In an inundation of amazement.


Mell. I, is this the clofe of all my strains in love?
O me most wretched maid.

Pie. Antonio drownde? how? how? Antonio drowned?


Alb. Distraught and rauing, from a turrets top
He threw his body in the high swollen sea,
And as he headlong topsie turuie dingd down,
He still cried Mellida.


Ant. My loves bright crown.


Mell. He still cried Mellida?


Pier. Daughter, me thinks your eyes should sparkle joy,
Your bosom rise on tiptoe at this news.

Mell. Aye me.


Pie. How now? Ay me? why, art not great of thanks
To gracious heaven, for the just revenge
Upon the author of thy obloquies!

Ma. Sweet beauty, I could sigh as fast as you,
But that I know that, which I weep to know,
His fortunes should be such he dare not show
His open presence.

Mell. I know he loved me dearly, dearly, I:
And since I cannot live with him, I dye.

Pie. Fore heaven, her speech falters, look she swouns.
Convey her up into her private bed.
Maria, Nutriche, and the Ladies bear out Mellida, as being swouned. I hope
she will live. If not

An. Antonio's dead, the fool will follow too, he, he, he,
Now works the scene; quick observation scud
To coat the plot, or else the path is lost:
My very self am gone, my way is fled:
I, all is lost, if Mellida is dead. Exit Antonio.

Pie. Alberto, I am kind, Alberto, kind.
I am sorry for thy couz, in faith I am.
Go, take him down, and bear him to his father:
Let him be buried, look ye, I Will pay the priest.

Alb. Please you to admit his father to the Court?


Piero. No.


Al. Please you to restore his lands and goods again?


Piero. No.


Alb. Please you vouchsafe him lodging in the city?


Pie. Gods fut, no, thou odd uncivil fellow:
I think you do forget sir, where you are.

Alb. I know you do forget sir, where you must be.


Foro. You are too malepert, in faith you are.
Your honor might do well to

Alb. Peace Parasite, thou bur, that only sticks
Unto the nappe of greatness.

Pie. Away with that same yelping cur, away.


Alb. I, I am gone: but mark, Piero, this.
There is a thing called scourging Nemesis. Exit Alb.

Bal. Gods neakes he has wrong, that he has: and
S'fut, and I were as he, I would bear no coals, law I,
I begin to swell, puff.

Pie. How now fool, fop, fool?

Fool, fop, fool? Marry muffe. I pray you, how many fools have you seen
go in a suite of Satin? I hope yet, I do not look a fool in faith: a fool?
Gods bores, I scorn't with my heel. S'neaks, and I were worth but three
hundred pound a year more, I could swear richly: nay, but as poor as I am, I
will swear the fellow has wrong.


Piero. Young Galeatzo? I, a proper man.
Florence, a goodly city: it shall be so.
I Will marry her to him instantly.
Then Genoa mine, by my Mariaes match,
Which I Will solemnize ere next setting Sun.
Thus Venice, Florence, Genoa, strongly leagued.
Excellent, excellent. I Will conquer Rome,
Pop out the light of bright religion:
And then, helter skelter, all cock sure.

Ba. Go to, it is just, the man has wrong: go to.


Pie. Go to, thou shall have right. Go to Castilio,
Clap him into the Palace dungeon:
Lap him in rags, and let him feed on slime
That smeares the dungeon cheek. Away with him.

Bal. In very good truth now, I Will nere do so more; this one time and


Pie. Away with him, observe it strictly, go.


Ba. Why then, o wight, alas poor knight.
O, welladay, sir Gefferey. Let Poets roar,
And all deplore: for now I bid you god night.

Exit Balurdo with Castilio. Ma. O pittious end of love: o too too rude hand
Of vnrespectiue death! Alas, sweet maid.

Pi. Forbear me heaven. What intend these plaints?


Mar. The beauty of admired creation,
The life of modest unmixed purity,
Our sexes glory, Mellida is

Pie. What? o heaven, what?


Ma. Dead.


Pie. May it not sad your thoughts, how?


Ma. Being laid upon her bed, she graspt my hand,
And kissing it, spoke thus; Thou very pore,
Why do not weep? The Jewel of thy browe,
The rich adornement, that inchac't thy breast,
Is lost: thy son, my love is lost, is dead.
And do I live to say Antonio's dead?
And have I lived to see his virtues blurd,
With guiltless blots! O world thou art too subtle,
For honest natures to converse withal.
Therefore I Will leave thee; farewell mart of woe,
I fly to clip my love, Antonio.
With that her head sunk down upon her breast:
Her cheek changed earth, her senses slept in rest:
Until my fool, that pressed unto the bed,
Screch't out so loud, that he brought back her soul,
Calde her again, that her bright eyes began open,
And starde upon him: he audatious fool,
Dared kiss her hand, wished her soft rest, loved bride;
She fumbled out, thanks good, and so she did.

Piero. And so she did: I do not use to weep:
But by thy love (out of whose fertile sweet,
I hope for as fair fruit) I am deep sad:
I will not stay my marriage for all this.
Castilio Forobosco, all
Strain all your wits, wind up invention
Unto his highest bent: to sweet this night,
Make us drink Lethe by your queint conceits;
That for two days, oblivion smother grief:
But when my daughters exequies approach,
Let Us all turn sighers. Come, despite of fate,
Sound lowdest music, lets pase out in state.

The Cornets sound. Exeunt. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Antonio solus, in fools habit. Ant. I Heaven, thou may, thou may
omnipotence.
What vermin bred of putrifacted slime,
Shall dare to expostulate with thy decrees!
O heaven, thou may indeed: she was all thine,
All heavenly, I did but humbly beg
To borrowe her of thee a little time.
Thou gave her me, as some weak breasted dame
Gives her infant, puts it out to nurse;
And when it once goes high-lone, takes it back.
She was my vital blood, and yet, and yet,
I Will not blaspheame. Look here, behold,
Antonio puts off his cap, and lies just upon his back. I turn my prostrate
breast upon thy face,
And vent a heauing sigh. O hear but this;
I am a poor poor Orphant; a weak, weak child,
The wrack of splitted fortune, the very Ouze,
The quick sand that deuours all misery.
Behold the valiant'st creature that does breath.
For all this, I dare live, and I will live,
Only to numme some others cursed blood,
With the dead palsy of like misery.
Then death, like to a stifling Incubus,
Lie on my bosom. Lo sir, I am sped.
My breast is Golgotha, grave for the dead.

SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Pandulpho, Alberto, and a Page, carrying Feliches trunk in a winding
sheet, and lay it twhart Antonios breast. Pan. ANTONIO, kiss my foot: I
honor thee,
In laying thwart my blood upon thy breast.
I tell thee boy, he was Pandulphos son:
And I do grace thee with supporting him,
Young man.
The dominering Monarch of the earth,
He who has naught that fortunes gripe can seize,
He who is all impregnably his own,
He whose great heart heaven can not force with force,
Vouchsafes his love. Non seruio Deo, sed assentio.

Ant. I ha lost a good wife.


Pan. Did find her good, or did thou make her good?
If found, thou may refinde, because thou had her.
If made, the work is lost: but thou that made her
Live yet as cunning. Have lost a good wife?
Thrice blessed man that lost her whilst she was good,
Fair, young, unblemished, constant, loving, chaste.
I tell thee youth, age knows, young loves seem graced,
Which with gray cares, rude iarres, are often defaced.

An. But she was full of hope.


Pan. May be, may be: but that, which may be, stood,
Stands now without all may; she died good,
And do thou grieve?

Alberto. I ha lost a true friend.


Pan. I live incompast with two blessed souls.
Thou lost a good wife, thou lost a true friend, ha?
Two of the rarest lendings of the heavens:
But lendings: which at the fixed day of pay
Set down by fate, thou must restore again.
O what unconscionable souls are here?
Are you all like the spoke-shaues of the Church?
Have you no mawe to restitution?
Have lost a true friend, cuz? then thou had one.
I tell thee youth, it is all as difficult
To find true friend in this apostate age
(That balkes all right affiance twixt two hearts)
As it is to find a fixed modest heart,
Under a painted breast. Lost a true friend?
O happy soul that lost him whilst he was true.
Believe it cuz, I to my tears have found,
Often durts respect makes firmer friends unsound.

Alb. You have lost a good son.


Pan. Why there is the comfort ont, that he was good:
Alas, poor innocent.

Alb. Why weeps mine uncle?


Pan. Ha, do ask me why? ha? ha?
Good cuz, look here.
He shows him his sons breast. Man will break out, despite Philosophy.
Why, all this while I ha but played a part,
Like to some boy, that acts a Tragedy,
Speaks burly words, and raues out passion:
But, when he thinks upon his infant weakness,
He droopes his eye. I spoke more then a god;
Yet am less then a man.
I am the miserablest soul that breathes.

Antonio starts up. Ant. S'lid, sir ye lie: by the heart of grief, thou lie.
I scorn't that any wretched should survive,
Outmounting me in that Superlatiue,
Most miserable, most unmatched in woe:
Who dare assume that, but Antonio?

Pan. Wilt still be so? and shall you blood-hound live?


An. Have I an arm, a heart, a sword, a soul?


Alb. Were you but private unto what we know


Pan. I Will know it all; first let us interre the dead:
Let Us dig his grave, with that shall dig the heart,
Liver, and intrals of the murderer.

They strike the stage with their daggers, and the grave opens. Ant. Wilt
sing a Dirge boy?


Pan. No, no song: twill be vile out of tune.


Alb. Indeed he is hoarce: the poor boys voice is cracked.


Pa. Why cuz? why should it not be hoarce and cracked,
When all the strings of natures symphony
Are cracked, and iar? why should his voice keep tune,
When there is no music in the breast of man?
I Will say an honest antic rhyme I have;
(Help me good sorrow-mates to give him grave.)
They all help to carry Feliche to his grave. Death, exile, plaints, and woe,
Are but man's lackies, not his foe.
No mortal scapes from fortunes war,
Without a wound, at least a scarre.
Many have led these to the grave:
But all shall follow, none shall save.
Blood of my youth, rot and consume,
Virtue, in dirt, does life assume:
With this old saw, close up this dust;
Thrice blessed man that dies just.

An. The gloomie wing of night begins to stretch
His lasie pinion over all the air:
We must be stiff and steddie in resolve.
Let Us thus our hands, our hearts, our arms inuolue.

They wreath their arms. Pan. Now swear we by this Gordian knot of love,
By the fresh turned up mould that wraps my son;
By the dead browe of triple Hecate:
Ere night shall close the lids of you bright stars,
We Will sit as heavy on Pieros heart,
As Aetna does on groaning Pelorus.

Ant. Thanks good old man.
We Will cast at royal chance.
Let Us think a plot; then pell mell vengeance.

Exeunt, their arms wreathed. The Cornets sound for the Act. The dumb
show. ACT. V.
SCEN. I.
Enter at one door, Castilio and Forobosco, with halberts: four Pages with
torches: Luceo bare: Piero, Maria and Alberto, talking: Alberto draws out his
dagger, Maria her knife, aiming to menace the Duke. Then Galeatzo betwixt two
Senators, reading a paper to them: at which, they all make semblance of
loathing Piero, and knit their fists at him; two Ladies and Nutriche: all these
go softly over the Stage, whilst at the other door enters the ghost of
Andrugio, who passes by them, tossing his torch about his head in triumph.
All forsake the Stage, saving Andrugio, who speaking, begins the Act. And.
Venit dies, tempusque, quo reddat suis
Animam squallentem sceleribus.
The fist of strenuous vengeance is clutcht,
And stern Vindicta towreth up aloft,
That she may fall with a more weighty paise,
And crush lives sap from out Pieros veins.
Now gins the leprous cores of vlcered sins
Wheale to a head: now is his fate grown mellow,
Instant to fall into the rotten jaws
Of chap-falne death. Now down looks providence,
To Attend the last act of my sons revenge.
Be gracious, Observation, to our scene:
For now the plot unites his scattred limbs
Close in contracted bands. The Florence Prince
(Drawn by firm notice of the Dukes black deeds)
Is made a partner in conspiracy.
The States of Venice are so swollen in hate
Against the Duke, for his accursed deeds
(Of which they are confirmed by some odd letters
Found in dead Strotzos study, which had past
Betwixt Piero and the murdring slave)
That they can scarce retain from bursting forth
In plain revolt. O, now tryumphes my ghost;
Exclaiming, heauen's just; for I shall see,
The scourge of murder and impiety. Exit

SCENA SECVNDA.
Balurdo from under the Stage. Bal. HOE, who is above there, hoe? A murren on
all Proverbs. They say, hunger breaks thorough stone walls; but I am as
gant, as lean ribd famine: yet I can burst through no stone walls. O, now sir
Gefferey, show thy valor, break prison, and be hanged. Nor shall the darkest
nooke of hell contain the discontented sir Balurdos ghost. Well, I am out
well, I have put off the prison to put on the rope. O poor shotten herring,
what a pickle art thou in! O hunger, how thou dominer'st in my guts! O, for a
fat leg of Ewe mutton in stewde broth; or drunken song to feed on. I could
belch rarely, for I am all wind. O cold, cold, cold, cold, cold. O poor
knight, o poor sir Gefferey; sing like an Unicorn, before thou do dip thy
horn in the water of death; o cold, o sing, o cold, o poor sir Geffrey,
sing, sing.


CANTAT. SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Antonio and Alberto, at several doors, their rapiers drawn, in their
masking attire. Ant. VINDICTA.


Alb. Mellida.


Ant. Alberto.


Alb. Antonio.


Ant. Has the Duke supt?


Alb. Yes, and tryumphant revels mount aloft.
The Duke drinks deep to ouerdowe his grief.
The court is rackt to pleasure, each man strains
To feign a iocund eye. The Florentine

Ant. Young Galeatzo?


Alb. Even he is mighty on our part. The States of Venice


Enter Pandulpho running, in masking attire. Pan. Like high-swoln floods, drive
down the muddie dammes
Of pent allegiance. O, my lusty bloods,
Heaven sits clapping of our enterprise.
I have been laboring general favor firm,
And I do find the citizens grown sick
With swallowing the bloody crudities
Of black Pieros acts; they feign would cast
And vomit him from off their government.
Now is the plot of mischief ripped wide open:
Letters are found twixt Strotzo and the Duke,
So clear apparent: yet more firmly strong
By suiting circumstance; that as I walked
Muffled, to eues-drop speech, I might observe
The grauer Statesmen whispering fearfully.
Here one gives nods and hums, what he would speak:
The rumour's got among troop of citizens,
Making loud murmur, with confused dinne:
One shakes his head, and sighs; O ill used power:
Another frets, and sets his grinding teeth,
Foaming with rage; and swears this must not be.
Here one complots, and on a sudden starts,
And cries; o monstrous, o deep villainy!
All knit there nerves, and from beneath swollen brows
Appears a gloting eye of much mislike:
Whilst swart Pieros lips reake steame of wine,
Swallows lust-thoughts, deuours all pleasing hopes,
With strong imagination of, what not?
O, now Vindicta; that is the word we have:
A royal vengeance, or a royal grave.

Ant. Vindicta.


Bal. I am acolde.


Pan. Who Is there? sir Geffrey?


Ba. A poor knight, god wot: the nose of thy knighthoode is bitten off with
cold. O poor sir Geffrey, cold, cold.


Pan. What chance of fortune has tript up his heels,
And laid him in the kennell? ha?

Alb. I will discourse it all. Poor honest soul,
Had thou a beuer to clasp up thy face,
Thou should associate us in masquery,
And see revenge.

Ba. Nay, and you talk of revenge, my stomack's up,
For I am most tyrannically hungry. A beuer? I have a headpeece, a skull, a
brain of proof, I warrant ye.


Alb. Slinke to my chamber then, and tire thee.


Bal. Is there a fire?


Alb. Yes.


Bal. Is there a fat leg of Ewe mutton?


Alb. Yes.


Bal. And a clean shirt?


Alb. Yes.


Bal. Then am I for you, most pathetically, and vnvulgarly, law. Exit


Ant. Resolved hearts, time curtals night, opportunity shakes us his foretop.
Steel your thoughts, sharp your resolve, imbolde^ your spirit, grasp your
swords; alarm mischief, and with an vnda^ted brow, out scout the grim
opposition Of most menacing peril.

Hark here, proud pomp shoots mounting triumph up,
Borne in loud accents to the front of Jove.

Pan. O now, he that wants soul to kill a slave,
Let him die slave, and rot in pesants grave.

Ant. Give me thy hand, and thine, most noble heart,
Thus will we live, and, but thus, never part.

Exeunt twined together. Cornets sound a Cynet. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Castilio and Forobosco, two Pages with torches, Lucio bare, Piero and
Maria, Galeatzo, two Senators and Nutriche. Piero to Maria. Pie. SIt close unto
my breast, heart of my love,
Advance thy drooping eyes,
Thy son is drownde,
Rich happiness that such a son is drownde.
Thy husband's dead, life of my joys most blessed,
In that the saplesse logge, that pressed thy bed
With an unpleasing weight, being lifted hence,
Even I Piero, live to warm his place.
I tell you, Lady, had you viewed us both,
With an vnprtiall eye, when first we wooed
Your maiden beauties, I had borne the prize,
It Is firm I had: for, fair, I ha done that

Ma. Murder.


Pie. Which he would quake to have aduentur'd;
Thou know I have.

Mari. Murdered my husband.


Pier. Borne out the shock of war, and done, what not,
That valor durst. Do love me fairest? say.

Ma. As I do hate my son, I love thy soul.


Pie. Why then Io to Hymen, mount a lofty note:
Fill red cheekt Bacchus, let Lyeus flote
In burnisht gobblets. Force the plump lipt god,
Skip light lauoltaes in your full sapt veins.
It Is well brim full. Even I have glut of blood:
Let quaffe carouse; I drink this Bordeaux wine
Unto the health of dead Andrugio,
Feliche, Strotzo* and Antonios ghosts.
Would I had some poison to infuse it with;
That having done this honor to the dead,
I might send one to give them notice ont.
I would indeere my favor to the full.
Boy, sing alowd, make heavens vault to ring
With thy breaths strength. I drink. Now lowdly sing.

CANTAT. The song ended, the Cornets sound a Cynet. SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Antonio, Pandulfo, and Alberto, in maskery, Balurdo, and a torchbearer.
Pie. CALL Iulio hither; where is the little foul?
I saw him not to day. Here Is sport alone
For him, in faith; for babes and fools, I know,
Relish not substance, but applaud the show.

To the conspirators as they stand in rank for the measure. To Antonio. Gal.
All blessed fortune crown your brave attempt.
To Pandulpho. I have a troop to second your attempt.
To Alberto. The Venice States join hearts unto your hands.

Pie. By the delights in contemplation
Of coming joys, it is magnificent.
You grace my marriage eve with sumptuous pomp.
Sound still, loud music. O, your breath gives grace
To curious feet, that in proud measure pase.

Ant. Mother, is Iulios body

Ma. Speak not, doubt not; all is above all hope.

Ant. Then will I dance and whirle about the air.
Me thinks I am all soul, all heart, all spirit.
Now murder shall receive his ample merit.

The measure. While the measure is dancing, Andrugios ghost is placed betwixt
the music houses. Pie. Bring hither suckets, canded delicates.
We Will taste some sweet meats, gallants, ere we sleep.

Ant. We Will cook your sweet meats, gallants, with tart sower sauce.

And. Here will I sit, spectator of revenge,
And glad my ghost in anguish of my foe.

The maskers whisper with Piero. Piero. Marry and shall; in faith I were too rude,
If I gainesaide so civil fashion.
The maskers pray you to forbear the room,
Till they have banqueted. Let it be so:
No man presume to visit them, on death.
The maskers whisper again. Only my self? O, why with all my heart*
I Will fill your consort; here Piero sits:
Come on, unmask, lets fall to

The conspirators bind Piero, pluck out his tongue, and triumph over him. Ant.
Murder and torture: no prayers, no entreats.


Pan. We Will spoil your oratory. Out with his tongue.


Ant. I haue't Pandulpho: the veins panting bleed,
Trickling fresh goare about my fist. Bind fast; so, so.

And. Blessed be thy hand. I taste the joys of heaven,
Viewing my son triumph in his black blood.

Bal. Down to the dungeon with him, I Will dungeon with him; I Will fool you: sir
Gefferey will be sir Geffrey. I Will tickle you.


Ant. Behold, black dog.


Pan. Grinst thou, thou snurling curre?


Alb. Eat thy black liver.


Ant. To thine anguish see
A fool tryumphant in thy misery.
Vex him Balurdo.

Pan. He weeps: now do I glorify my hands,
I had no vengeance, if I had no tears.

Ant. Fall to, good Duke. o these are worthless cares,
You have no stomach to them; look, look here:
Here lies a dish to feast thy fathers gorge.
Here Is flesh and blood, which I am sure thou love.

Piero seems to condole his son Pan. Was he thy flesh, thy son, thy dearest
son?


Ant. So was Andrugio my dearest father.


Pan. So was Feliche my dearest son.


Enter Maria. Ma. So was Andrugio my dearest husband.


Ant. My father found no pity in thy blood.


Pan. Remorse was banished, when thou slew'st my son.


Ma. When thou impoysoned'st my loving Lord,
Exilde was piety.

An. Now, therefore, pity, piety, remorse,
Be aliens to our thoughts: grim fier-ey'd rage
Possess us wholly.

Pan. Thy son? true: and which is my most joy,
I hope no bastard, but thy very blood
Thy true begotten, most legitimate
And loved issue: there is the comfort ont.

Ant. Scum of the mud of hell.


Alb. Slime of all filth.


Mar. Thou most detested road.


Bal. Thou most retort and obtuse rascal.


Ant. Thus charge we death at thee: remember hell,
And let the howling murmurs of black spirits,
The horrid torments of the damned Ghosts
Affright thy soul, as it descends down
Into the intrals of the ugly deep.

Pan. Sa, sa; no, let him die, and die, and still be dying,
They offer to run all at Piero, and on a sudden stop. And yet not die, till
he has di'd and di'd
Ten thousand deaths in agony of heart.

An. Now pel mell; thus the hand of heaven chokes
The throat of murder. This for my fathers blood.

He stabs Piero. Pan. This for my son.


Alb. This for them all.
And this, and this; sink to the heart of hell.

They run all at Piero with their Rapiers. Pan. Murder for murder, blood for
blood does yell.


Andr. It Is done, and now my soul shall sleep in rest.
Sons that revenge their fathers blood, are blessed.

The curtains being drawn, Exit Andrugio. SCENA SEXTA.
Enter Galeatzo, two Senators, Luceo, Forobosco, Castilio, and Ladies. 1. Sen.
WHOSE hand presents this gory spectacle?


Anto. Mine.


Pan. No: mine.


Alb. No: mine.


Ant. I will not loose the glory of the deed,
Were all the tortures of the deepest hell
Fixed to my limbs. I pearc't the monsters heart,
With an undaunted hand.

Pan. By yon bright spangled front of heaven it was I:
It Was I sluc't out his life blood.

Alb. Tush, to say truth, it was all.


2. Sen. Blessed be you all, and may your honors live
Religiously held sacred, even for ever and ever.

Gal. To Antonio. Thou art another Hercules to us,
In ridding huge pollution from our State.

1. Sen. Antonio, belief is fortified,
With most invincible approueme^ts of much wrong,
By this Piero to thee. We have found
Beadroles of mischief, plots of villainy,
Laid twixt the Duke and Strotzo: which we found
Too firmly acted.

2. Sen. Alas poor Orphant.


An. Poor? standing tryumphant over Beelzebub?
Having large interest for blood; and yet deemed poor?

1. Sen. What satisfaction outward pomp can yield,
Or cheifest fortunes of the Venice state,
Claim freely. You are well seasond props,
And will not warpe, or lean to either part*
Calamity gives man a steady heart.

Ant. We are amazed at your benignity:
But other vows constrain another course.

Pan. We know the world, and did we know no more,
We would not live to know: but since constraint
Of holy bands forces us keep this lodge
Of durts corruption, till dread power calls
Our souls appearance, we will live enclosed
In holy verge of some religious order,
Most constant votaries.

The curtains are drawn, Piero departs. Ant. First let us cleanse our hands,
Purge hearts of hatred, and intoumbe my love:
Over whose hearse, I Will weep away my brain
In true affections tears,
For her sake, here I vow a virgin bed.
She lives in me, with her my love is dead.

2. Sen. We will attend her mournful exequies,
Conduct you to your calm sequestered life,
And then

Maria. Leave us, to meditate on misery;
To sad our thought with contemplation
Of past calamities. If any ask
Where lives the widdowe of the poisoned Lord?
Where lies the Orphant of a murdered father?
Where lies the father of a butchered son?
Where lives all woe? conduct him to us three;
The downe-cast ruins of calamity.

And. Sound doleful tunes, a solemn hymn advance,
To close the last act of my vengeance:
And when the subject of your passion's spent,
Sing Mellida is dead, all hearts will relent,
In sad condolement, at that heavy sound,
Never more woe in lesser plot was found.
And, o, if ever time create a Muse,
That to the immortal fame of virgin faith,
Dares once engage his pen to write her death,
Presenting it in some black Tragedy.
May it prove gracious, may his style be decked
With freshest bloomes of purest elegance;
May it have gentle presence, and the Sceans sucked up
By calm attention of choice audience:
And when the closing Epilogue appears,
In stead of claps, may it obtain but tears.

CANTANT. Exeunt omnes. Antonij vindictae. FINIS.

