The copy of a letter written by one in London to his friend concerning the
credit of the late published detection of the doings of the Lady Marie of
Scotland*

MAny are the practices of Papists and other false and hollow hearted
subjects, and wonder it is what they dare do and say, as if they had the
Majesty of our Prince in contempt or did still bear them selves bold upon the
success of some mighty treason, the bottom whereof has not yet been
thoroughly searched. Of late has been published out of Scotland, a treatise
detectyng the foul doings of some that have been dangerous to our noble
Queen, by which detection is induced a very excellent comparison for all
Englishmen to judge whether it be good to change Queens or no, and therewith a
necessary enforcement to every honest man to pray heartily for the long
continuance of our good mother to rule over us, that our posterity may not
see her place left empty for a perilous stepedame. Some carried with Popish
affection that regards neither natural Prince nor country, and puffed with
the dropsey of a traiterous humor, labor what they can to discredit the same
detectio^ as untrue. Some of them, while they like good sincere men forsooth,
would feign seem very indifferent judges, say they will credit nothing till
they hear both parties, not remembryng that in the same one book are both
parties to be heard the one in the former part, both in the declaration and
oration of evidence: the other in the latter part, in the parties own
contractes, songs, letters, judicial procedynges protestations, examinations
and confessions. Some other more open fellows, say flatly that all is false,
the book has no credit, the author is unknown, obscure, the matter
counterfaite, and all is nothing. If any such rumors come to your ear, first I
think verily in truth you may be bold to say to the party Et tu ex illis es,
thou art also one of them. And for the matter I have thought good to inform
you of so much as I know for proof of the same treatise to be of credit,
wherewith you may answer and stop the mouths of such rumor spreaders.

The book if self, with the oration of evidence, is written in Latin by a
learned man of Scotland M. George Buchanan, one privy to the procedynges of
the Lords of the Kings secret Counsel there, well able to understand and
disclose the truth, having easy access also to all the records of that
country that might help him. Besides that the book was written by him, not as
of him self, nor in his own name, but according to the instructions to him
given by common conference of the Lords of the privy Counsel of Scotland, by
him only for his learning penned, but by them the matter ministered, the book
ouerseen and allowed, and exhibited by them as matter that they have offered and
do continue in offering to stand to and justify before our sovereign Lady or
her highnesses Commissioners in that behalf appointed. And what proof they have
made of it already, when they were here for that purpose, and the said author
of the said book one among them, when both parties or their sufficient
procurators were here present indifferently to be heard, and so were heard in
deed, all good subjects may easily gather by our said sovereign Ladies
procedyng sins the said hearing of the cause: who no dout would never have so
stayed her request, but rather would have added enforcement by ministering of
aid to the Lady Marie of Scotland, for her restitution, (the president and
honor of Princes, and her Majesty's own former example of sincerity used in
defense of the Scottish Queen her self in Scotland against France, and her
maintenance of the French Kings honor and liberty against the hye attemptes
of some his Popish subjects, considered) nor would have lived in such good
amity with the young king of Scotland, the Regentes, and the true Lords
mainteiners of that side, if these heinous offenses alleged on that part had
not ben prouable, or if the young King had been an usurper, or his Regentes and
other Lords of that faction traitors, as they must have been if all be false
that is objected against the said Lady Marie. I recite not what subscriptions
and assentes have been to confirm the book and the matters in it contained,
Byside that I do you to wit that one written copy thereof in Latin was now
upon his late apprehension found in one of the Duke of Norfolkes men's houses,
and thither sent by his commandment a little before his apprehension to be
secretly kept there, with diverse other pamphelets and writings. Which thing
not only adds credit to this book that it was not counterfeit, but also
gives shrewed suspicions that the Duke could not so well like the woman being
such a woman, as for her persons sake to venture the overthrow of such a
florishyng state wherein he stood before, but that some other greater thing it
might be that he lyked, the gredynesse whereof might temper his abhorryng of so
foul conditions and of so great a danger to him self to be sent after his
predecessors. The Bishop of Rosse likewise does both know that the Duke had
this book, and can tell how the Duke came by it.

The other matter of the contractes, letters, songs etc. have, among other,
these proves. Lively witnesses of great honor and credit can tell that the very
casket there described was here in England showed, the letters and other
monumentes opened and exhibited, and so much as is there said to have been
written or subscribed by the said Lady Marie, the Earl Bothwell, or other,
has been by testimonies and oaths of men of honor and credit of that country,
testified and auowed in presence of persons of most honorable state and
authority to have been written and subscribed as is there alleged, and so
delivered without rasure, diminution, addition, falsifieng or alteration in any
point. And a number there be in England, of very good and worshypfull calling
byside the Commissioners thereto appointed, that have seen the originals them
selves of the same hands whoes this book does say them to be. Which things
have been heard and understood by these that can tell, and those whoes truth
in reportyng is above all exception.

Wherefore sith the Scottishemen have, for satisfaction of us their good
neighbors, among whom the said Lady Marie remains to the peril of both
Princes as the Scottishmen say, published these matters, to the intent that the
impudency of the said Lady Mary's fautors in denyeng those truths may not
seduce English subjects to the vnderminyng of the estate, honor, and noble
procedyng of our most gracious sovereign, and diuertyng of affections to undue
places, and to the great peril of both Realms, which the adversaries call
beneficial vnityng, but is in deed most maleficiall confoundyng, intended to
join the Realms in other persons, excluding the person of our said
sovereign Lady: Let us receive this admonishment thankefully, and gather the
fruit thereof to the stablishment of our loyalty to our own Queen, against
whom the favorers of the other side have banded them selves in hostility and
treason.

This I have thought good to write to you for your satisfaction in knowledge of
the case, whom I know already sufficiently satisfied in good and dutiful
affection. God disclose these hollow hearts, or rather God grant her Majesty,
and those that be in authority under her, an earnest will to see them, for
they will disclose them selves fast enough. And God send her Majesty so to
remove the grounds of her peril, that not only we which by open thrustyng
our selves against her enemies have set up our rest upon our Queen Elizabeth,
and shall never be admitted to favor on the other side, but also all wise and
honest me^ may know that it shall be safe to be true, and dangerous to be false.
Otherwise the mischief is evident. For men in nature and in policy will seek
for their own safeties, which if they may not find in truth, it is a great
auauncement of falsehode. God long preserve our good and gracious Queen
Elizabeth, and make her enemies know that there is sure peril in treason, and
her true subjects bold to stick to her without dread of any revenge or
displeasure* So fare ye well.

FOr further proof that the said letters written by the said Lady Marie and
mentioned in the said book are not counterfeit but her own, I have herewith
also sent you the most autentike testimony of the three estates of Scotland
assembled in parliament. The copy of which act you shall receive word for
word as it was enacted in Scotland in Dece^ber 1567. and remains publicly
in print, saving that I have for your more easy understanding changed ye
Scottish orthography, which I would to God had been done for Englishme^s better
satisfaction in Master George Buchnans book. Howbeit the same is not so hard
but that after ye readyng of two leaves a man may easily enough grow acquainted
with it, and doutlesse the knowledge and mounume^tes therein contained are well
worth so small a travel to understand them.

The Scottishe act of Parliament.
Touching the retention of our sovereign Lords mothers person.
ITem touching the article propounded by the Earls, Lords, and other Noble
men, who took arms at Carbarie hill, upon the xv. day of June last bypast,
and touching their conuenynges of before, and of the cause of the apprehension
of the Queen mother to our sovereign Lord: And whether the said Noble men,
and others which took arms of before her said apprehension, and which joined
with them, and assisted them at that time, or any ways sense, have done the
duty of Noble men, good, and true subjects of this realm, and no ways
offended, nor transgressed the laws in that effect, or any thing dependyng
thereupon, either preceding, or following the same.

Our sovereign Lord, with advise of my Lord Rege^t, and three estates, and
whole body of this present Parliament, has found, declared, and concluded, and
by this present Act finds, declares, and concludes, that the cause and
occasion of the conue^tions, and messages of the said Earls, Lords, Noble
men, Barons, and others faithful and true subjects, and consequently, their
taking of arms, and coming to the fields with open and displayed baners, and
the cause and occasion of the taking of the said Queens person, upon the said
xv. day of June last bypast, and holdyng, and deteinyng of the same within the
houses and Fortalice of Lochleum, continually, sense presently, and in all time
coming, and generally all other things inverted, spoken, written, or done by
them, or any of them to that effect, sense the x. day of Febr. last bypast,
upon the which day, ye late Henry King, then the said Queens lawful husband,
and our sovereign Lord the Kings dearest father, was treasonablie,
shamefully, and horribly murdered, unto the day and date of this present Act,
and in all times to come, touching the said Queen, and deteinyng of her
person: That the cause and all things dependyng thereon, or that any ways may
perteine thereto, ye intermissio^, or disponyng upon her property, casualities,
or whatsoever thing perteyning, or that any ways might perteyne to her, was in
the said Queens own default, in so far as by diverse her privy letters written
wholly with her own hand, and sent by her to James sometime Earl of Bothwell,
chief executor of the said horrible murder, as well before the committing
thereof, as thereafter, and by her ungodly, and dishonorable procedyng to a
pretended marriage with him, suddenly, and vnprouisedly thereafter, it is most
certain, yt she was privy, airt, and part, of the actual devise, and deed of
the foresaid murder, of the king her lawful husband, and father to our
sovereign Lord, committed by the said James, sometime Earl of Bothwell, his
accomplices, and partakers. And therefore justly deserves what soever has been
done to her in any time bygone, or that shall be used toward her, for the said
cause in time coming, which shall be used by advise of the Nobility, in
respect, that our said Sovereign Lords mother, with the said James, sometime
Earl of Bothwell, yeid about by indirect and colored means, to color, and
hold back the knowledge of the truth of the committers of the said crime. Yet
all men in their hearts were fully persuaded, of the authors and deuisers of
that mischievous, and unworthy fact, awaityng while God should move the hearts
of some to enter in the quarrel, for reuengyng of the same. And in the mean
time, a great part of the Nobility, upon just fear to be handled, and
demeaned in semblable manner, as ye King had been of before: perceiuyng also ye
Queen so thrall, and so blindly affectionate to the private appetite of that
tyra^ne, and that both he, and she had co^spired together such horrible
cruelty, being therwt all garnished with a company of ungodly, and vicious
persons, ready to accomplish all their unlawful commandments, of who^ he had
a sufficient number, continually a waytyng upon him, for the same effect, all
noble and virtuous men abhorryng their tyranny, and company, but chiefly
suspecting, that they, who had so treasonablie put down, and distroyed the
Father, should make the innocent Prince, his only son, and the principal,
and almost only comfort, sent by God to this afflicted nation, to taste of the
same cup (as the many inverted purposes to pass where he was, and also where
the noble men were in) by their open confession gave sufficient warnyng and
declaration, where through the said Earls, Lords, Barons, and others
faithful, and true subjects taking arms, or other ways whatsoever ioynyng,
and assisting in the said action, and in ye said conue^tions, displaying
baners, and coming to the fields, taking and reteinyng of ye Queens person,
as well in times bypast, as hereafter, and all others that have thereafter, or
shall in any time coming adioyne to them, and all things done by them or any
of them, touching that cause, and all other things depending thereon, or that
any ways may appertain thereto, the intromission, or disponing upon her
property, or casualties, or whatsoever other things perteining, or any ways
might apperteine to her, was in default of her self, and the said James
sometime Earl of Bothwell, and by the horrible and cruel murder of our said
sovereign Lords late dearest Father, conspired, devised, committed,
counseled, and colored by them, and not co^dignely punished according to the
Laws. etc.

This Act with the rest is thus subscribed in the Scottish book. Extractu^ de
libro actoru^ Parlamenti per me lacobum Makgill de Rankelour nether Clericum
rotulorum Registri ac consilij S. D. N. Regis sub meis signo and subscriptione
manualibus. Iacobus Make gill. And is imprinted at Edinburgh by Robert Lekpreuik
Printer to the kings majesty the vi. day of April, in the year of God. 1568.


