A TREATISE OF CHRI^^^AN PEREGRINATION, W^^^ten by M. Gregory Martin
Licentiate, ^ and late reader of divinity in the English Coleadge at Remes.

Whereunto is adioined certain Epistles written by him to sundry his friends:
the copies whereof were since his decease found among his vvrytinges.

Now especially puplished for the banifite, of those, that either err in
religion of simplicity, or follow the world of frayl^i^.

ANNO DOMINI 1583.

The contents of this book.
A brief preface.

2. A treatise of Pilgrimage and Relics.

3. A letter sent to M. N. a married priest.

4. A letter sent to his Sisters, married to protestants, and them selves
trained up in heresy, where he shows and proves the Catholic Church to
be the true Church.

5. A letter sent to M. D. White then warden of new colleadge in Oxford,
touching his folow^ng the world and diss^mbling in religion against his
conscience and knowledge.

The Printers Preface unto the Christian Reader.
THE aunciente Author of heresy by innumerable means enduceth his
instruments (the professed enemies of Catholic truth) ^eruersly to opugne by
flat denial, impudent^^ to wrest by absurd cauills, or Ievvishly (...)
reiecte with blasphemous tauntes, those ^inges which either they list not to
believe, (...) desire not to learn: In all which, though ^eir facility were
ever n^torious, yet their ^^pudencie was never more manifest then in ^^is age.
But seeing truth is eterall, heresy ^ariable, and incredulity atbisme: The
mem^rs of Christ his Catholic Church on the over side being guided by the
holy Ghost, have ^e seized sufficiently to circumuent and dis^uer the final
driftes of those deluders in ma^y most excellent and learned discourses late^^
written, among the which this brief ^reatyse of Christian Peregrynation^^me
unto my hands; the which by lycense of my Superiors, I have here published,
and annexed there-unto certain Epistles of the same Authors, a man of rare
virtue and excellent learning. Leaving thee (good Christian Reader) with
attention to consider thereof: trusting the same will sufficiently give
testimony unto thee, that there is no part or poy^^ of the Catholic Faith
unable inuincibly to be defended. Further assuring thee, that whatsoever
incredulous heretic gayn-sayeth the same, he not only resists here in
earth the Church millitant and the members thereof, but violently stryueth
against the Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, Doctors and blessed Saints in
heaven, whose very words and vvrytings here alleged he wickedly oppugneth,
the which action of his and comparison of him with those, may be a
sufficient motive to confirm thy faith. Vale.

R. V.

A SHORT DISCOVRSE OF Pilgrimage and Relycks.
PILGRYMAGE coming of the latyne word perigrinatio, is nothing else in this
present case which now I mean to write of, The name of pilgrimage and pilgrim.
but going of de^^tion to visit some holy monument ^f Christ or his Saints, as
to Jerusalem, (...) Rome, to Compostella. To the which ^aces because there
has been always ^eat resort of strangers (in latin pere^ini) out of all
Christian countries, ^erof is it that we say, Pilgrims of Hie^salem, of Rome,
of Compostella, that is, ^raungers and religious trauelers to ^ose places. For
example, whereas the ^ree wise and honorable persons na^ed Magi came from the
East to wor^ip Christ in Bethlehem, Mat. 2.
we may very ^uely say of them, that they came in Pilgrimage to Christ. When
the Cha^berlayne to the Queen of Aethiopr^ whom Philippe baptized, went out of
hi^ country to worship God in the temple at Jerusalem, he went also in
Pilgrimage. S. Paul him self goinge to Jerusalem of purpose to see Peter,
and (as Theophylactus notes) not to see him only, In. 1. Galat.
but with all to honor him as his be^ter, even as we go to holy virtuous
men, made a certain Pilgrimage. The difference is, here was Pilgrimage to the
persons them selves, as to Christ and to Peter, we having now their momuments
only and of other Saints, make Pilgrimage unto them. Ho. 5. ad po. Antioch.
And according to this sense S. Chrysostom in one of his Sermons most
properly speaks thus. If I were void of Ecclesiastical cares and had a
strong body, I would not refuse to make so long a journey, (as from Antioch
to Rome) to see the cheynes at the least and the prison, where Paul was
bound. In the latin we read it thus, peregrinationem tantam facere non
recusarem. I would not ^cke to make so long a Pilgrimage. and this much for
the names of Pil^ime and Pilgrimage, which heretics ^ue made sore
bugges-wordes, as ^ough a man would say, Idolatour ^d Idolattie.

Which terms to the end thou ^yest understand (Christian Reader) ^w falsely
and foolishly they are ob^cted to us: The principal cause of pilgrimage, Gods
honor.
Mark in all that I shall (...) hereafter, the fervent devotion of ^grymes,
and the princypall cause ^reof, to wit the glory of God and (...) honor of his
Son Jesus Christ: ^ich are the very grounds of Catho^ke Pilgrimage, Ho. 5. ad
Po. Antioch.
Devotion or affecti^^, as when the forsayed holy Doctor ^^ulpet vehemently
brake out into ^se words: Vellem nunc in illis locis ver^^ etc. I would vvish
now to be for a ^e in the places where these chains re^yne, and see the
fetters, which devils fear, (...) Angels reverence. The cause of this (...)
affection, because they were Paul's ^ynes, his cheynes that was Vas electionis,
God chefely is honored, when saints or their reliks are honoted
Gods chosen vessel: his cheyn^^ that carried the name of Christ before Kings
and countries, that turned a great part of the world to the faith, that wrote
so many excellent Epistles for our edifying, that for Christ suffered infinite
miseries, finally his cheynes that under Nero shed his blood for the Gospel.
These considerations and the like made this learned Father so in love with the
Apostle, that he could not conteyne him self, but would needs signify, how
he honored the very fetters, cords, and linckes, wherewith this Champion was
tied for the name of Christ. This religious zeal toward Christ and his
Saints caused him in an other place to say in this heavenly manner. I remember
thee Peter, and am amassed. I think upon thee Paul, and being in manner past my
self, can not refrain weeping, for what I may say or what I may speak
beholding your afflictions, I know not. How many prisons have you sanctified?
How many cheynes have you (...) eautified? How many torments have you
^^usteyned? You have followed Christ in all things. Well may thou rejoice
Peter, that ^adst the gift to suffer upon the Cross as Christ ^^id. Blessed
are the nails that persed those ^oly limbs of thine. Thou also (O blessed
^aule) haste great cause to be glad, whose ^ead was cut of with the svvord.
What a ^recious svvord is that which perced thy sa^red throat, the instrument
of our Lord, which ^eauen does admire, and the earth does reue^ence. That
svvord I vvish to be my garland, and thoso nails of Peter in steed of precious
^^nes to stand in my golden crown. This ^euotion proceeding of that cause and
^eferred to that end, which is the wor^hip and glory of Christ, is the very
^round of honoring Relics, and con^equentlye the cause of Pilgrimage: The
glory of Christ I say. 1. cor. 3.
For what is Paul, what Apollo, what Peter, but his ^inisters and servants
in whom we be^eeue? Our Savior says, he that geneth a cup of could water
to one of his little ones, tantum in nomine discipuli, only in the name of a
disciple, and (...) S. Mark expresses it, Cap. 9.
quia Christi sun^, because they belong to Christ, he shall not loose his
reward. And he that receaueth a Prophet in nomine Propheta, because he is a
Prophet, not for an^ other worldly consideration, he shall have a reward
answerable to the dignity of a Prophet. Li. 4. cap. 4.
We read in the books of Kings, that the welthy woman of Suna having
entertained Eli^eus, at length said to her husband I perceive this is a holy
man of God which passes by our house so often: let us therefore provide a
little chamber for him, and set a head in it, a table, a stool, and a
candlestick, that he may rest with us, when be comes. Therefore (says
she) let us do it, because he is a holy man of God. A goodly reason and godly
consideration. But what reward had she? Being barren before, now she had a
son: the son dyed, and was restored to life again, that after sorrow her
joy might be greater. In the great dearth that then happened, she was well
provided for in an other country, and after seven years receaueth all her
possessions again, and the rents for the time that she was absent, by the
Kings commaundment, and all this by the means of that Prophet whom she so
entertained. Leonides father to Origin that learned Doctor, him self a great
clerk and afterward a Martyr, was wont to kiss his sons breast, being then
a little boy, when he lay sleeping. ^useb. li. 6, cap. 2.
If therefore because he was his pretty boy, it had been (...) little fondnes,
but the storye says: Osculabatur tanquam Spiritus sancti habi^aculum: Hiero.
in. ^pitaphio.
He kissed it as the dwelling or temple of the holy Ghost. Paula an honotable
widow and religious marrone of Rome coming in Pilgrimage to Bethlehem, after
many godly meditatio^s, at length concludes thus. Here is my resting place,
because it is the country of my Lord: here vvil I dvvell, because our Sauioer
has chosen it. S. Hierome speking of Origens commentaries upon the twelve
Prophets, In (...)
says that he esteemed them as much worth as Craesus wealth. Why? because they
were written with Pamphilus the martyrs own hand. Si enim laetitia est etc.
For if it be great joy to have one epistle of a Martyr, how much more, to
have so many thousand verses, which I imagine as though they were drawn
with the printes of his blood.

This devotion toward God and his son Jesus Christ, makes holy persons to
honor all things that belong to them. The true end and purpose of godly
pilgrims.
Prophets, because they are Gods Prophets. Mattyrs, because they are the
matyrs of Christ. All monuments of them, for their sake. Concerning places:
Bethlehem, because our Savior was borne there. Mount Caluarye, because he
suffered there. Rome, because Peter and Paul are buried there, there they dyed
for Christ, there are their bodies, their shrynes, their chains, other their
glorious memories. In this respect to go to Jerusalem, to travail to Rome,
is a very fruitful Pilgrimage. Otherwise to go to see strange countries, gaye
buildinges, profane antiquities, to learn tongues, yea and as ^ome traitors
do, to espy faults, ^ometyme it is sinful, and never to be ^alled
Pilgrimage. Socrat. ^. 4. ca. 18.
It is told much for ^he praise of Ammonius an auncionte monk, that going to
Rome with Atha^atius, he was so far from all vain ^uriositie, that he
desired to see nothing at all of the stately buildinges ^here, but only Peter
and Paul's Church: ^arre contrary to a certain countryeman of ours, who making
large re^orts of courtysa^ts, what goodly howes and how many they had, wherein
by ^he authority of a traueler he thought ^e might bouldly feyne at his
pleasure: ^eing demanded of a wise man, how ^any Churches were there, how
bew^ifull, how devoutly frequented, could make no answer. Such a wonderful
difference there is between a good godly Pilgrim, and a worldly wicked
traueler. In Ep. ad. Romans
S. Chrysostom declaring his singular affection toward Rome, has after his
manner these excellent words. I therefore love Rome (albeit I might praise it
for other causes, for largenes, for antiquity, for beauty, for number of
people, for the Empire, for riches, for mighty things atcheiued in warfare,
but letting pass all these, therefore I account it a blessed Cyttie,) because
Paul did so love them, when he lived, and preached before them, and at length
ended his life among them: whose holy body they have, and therefore that City
thereby is made more glorious, then by all other things. And as it were a
great mighty body that had two gliftering eyes, so it has the bodies of
those Saints (Peter and Paul): The heavens I tell you do not so shine, when
the sun casts his beams, as does the Cyttie of Rome with these lamps,
that lighten the whole world. Consider me I pray you, and be amassed to
think, what a fight Rome shall see when Paul shall rise suddenly out of that
Coffin of his, with Peter, to meet our Lord. O that I might be so haeppie as
to embrace and grype that body of Paul round about, to be tied in his grave a
while, to see but the duste of that body which carried the marks of Christ.
Tell me (gentle Reader) when thou hear this, art thou not moved with
devotion toward the very carcasses of those Apostles, and co^seque^tly toward
the City where they are to be seen? I confess unto thee my folish kind
heart in this case: As often as I read it I am ready to melte for joy. But
mark as I began to say the cause of his affection toward Rome: to wit the
bodies of the Apostles lying there, and why the bodies? because they carried the
marks of Christ. This is it that causes Pilgrimage. This consideration, The
eruen^ devotion o^ pilgrims whence it proceeds.
for the love of Christ and the honor of him, inflamed this godly Father and
all the best Christians in the Primitive Church, to love sacred momuments, to
be desirous to see them, to go far and near unto them, to touch, to kiss,
to lick them, to weep in the place, to conceive such a lively imagination of
things done there by Christ or his Saints, and withal such a sensible feeling
of heavenly devotion, that it was a pain to remove from thence, a death to
dwell far of: A joy and comfort to say with the Spouse of Christ, Inueni quem
quaesiuit anima mea: tenebo eum and non dimittam. I have found him whom my
soul sought for. I will hold him fast, and never let him go. One example may
suffice in steed of a number, being of most excellent importance, and
therefore I will tell it at large and never crave pardon for the matter,
because I know it can not but much delight al such as are not sworn ennemies
to the honor of Christ and his sacred monuments.

I named a little before one Paula a very honorable gentlewoman of Rome: who
after the death of her husband entered into religion with her daughter
Eustochium, traueled both together to the holy land, dwelt there above twenty
years, until her death. Whose virtues vere such that S. Hierome does protest,
if all his joints and limbs were turned into tongues, he could not
sufficiently praise her: and calls JESUS to witness, that whatsoever he
writes of her, is a plain historical truth, and no retoricall amplification.
In Epitaphio.
The order of her Pilgrimage for the chief points was this as S. Hierome
tells it. The pilgrimage of paula.
After she had passed Rhodes and Lycia, she came at length to Cypres, where she
fell at the feet of the holy and reverent Bishop Epiphanius, and was content
to be stayed there ten days, not to rest her in steed of a bayt, but to do
works of charity: For in that space she visited all the religious howses of
that country, Cypres fu^ of religion men.
and as she was able, gave them alms: From thence she made a little cut over
the water to Selencia and so to Antioch, where the holy Confessor Paulinus
could stay her but a very little time: but even in the mids of winter (so
fervent she was in faith) a woman of honorable calling, took her journey upon a
little ass: Arryueth at Sarepta, where she entered into a little turret of Elias,
and making her prayers to our Savior, passes by the sands at the shore of
Tire where Paul kneeled: From thence to Caesaria: In it she saw Cornelius
house, whose household was the little Church of Christ: and Phillips chambers
with the four closettes of his daughters that were Virgins and Prophets: Then
to Nicopolis, which before was called Emaus, where our Savior was known in
the breaking of bread. To make short, Hermynd was only to sacred momuments.
she forsook the princely monumente of Queen Helena (who had succored the
people with corn in a time of famine) and went on straight to Jerusalem. The
Lieutenante of Palestine knowing her house and family very well, commanded the
Palace to be prepared for her, but she chose rather a little base cottage, and
with such feruente devotion visited every holy place, that but for hastening to
the rest she might hardly have been plucked from the former. In Jerusalem
kneeling before the Cross, Her manner of reverence in holy places.
even as though she had seen our Lord present, so devoutly she adored and did
humble reverence. Entering into the Sepulcher, she kissed the
Resurrection-stone, which the Angel had removed from the door: and the very
place where our Lords body did lie, she licked with a faithful mouth, as one
that thirsted after water much longed for. All Jerusalem bears witness, what
tears, what sobbinge, what sorrow she powered out there: Our Lord him self is
witness to whom she prayed. Coming forth from thence, she went to Sion, which
is (to interpret) a peer or watchtower: there was showed unto her a pillar
that bare up part of the cloister, embrued with our Lords blood, to the which
they say he was tied and whipte. The place was showed where the holy Ghost
came down upon a hundred and twenty persons that believed, to the fulfilling
of Ioels Prophecy. This done, she divided the little substance she had to the
poor Pilgrims there her felow-seruants, and went forward to Bethlehem. In the
way at the right hand she pawsed at Rachels sepulcher, where she was delivered
of Benjamin: From thence being entered into Bethlehem, after she saw once the
Inn of the blessed Virgin, and that stall where the ox did acknowledge his
lord and the ass his masters stable, Wonderful devotion by occasion of the
plrce.
she swear in my hearing (says S. Hierome) that she saw with the eyes of
faith, the Infant wrapped in his clowtes, our Lord crying in his cradle, the
wise men adoring, the star shining over the house, the Virgin Mother, the
careful Tutour, the she pheards coming in the night to see what the matter
was, the young Innocents slain: Herod raging, Joseph and Mary flying into
Egipte: whereat between tears and joy she brake forth into these words, So the
hebrew words do signifye.
saying: All bail Bethlehem the very house of bread in deed, wherein was
borne that bread which came down from heaven. All hayle Ephrata, vvorthely
called a most plentiful and fruitful country, whose fruteful flower is God
him self. Of thee Micheas prophicyed long ago. And thou Bethlehem the house
of Ephrata, art not the least among a thousand other in Judah: out of thee shall
come surth to me even he that shall be prince in Israel, whose proceeding is
from the beginning and from the days of eternity. And I wretched and sinful
woman that I am, how is it that I am thought worthy to kiss the manger where
my Lord first cried, being a little pretye one, and to pray in that cabin,
where the Virgin Child-wife brought forth our Lord a young babe? Here is my
resting place, because it is my Lords country: here will I dwell, because our
Savior has chosen it. Thus far S. Hierome, and much more which I omit.
Tell me Reader who so ever thou art, I appeal to thy conscience: what do
thou think of this noble woman's Pilgrimage? Have thou not read here her
wonderful desire and longing to these holy places? her exceeding devotion in
them? her words? her tears? her manner of worship, in all points so fervently
and discretely applied to the honor of our Lord and Savior, that to dream of
her superstition in this case, were cold Christianity: to imagine Idolatry,
were plain infidelity? Most happy is he that can feel in him self these
heavenly motions toward the least things that concern Christ, for his sake:
And most unhappy is he that does not at the least desire it: for to dispyse
and condemn it altogether, I know right well is no small point of heresy,
but in deed that name is to common and therefore to good for it.

This this I say, and often I must repete it, is the true cause, and manner,
and fruit of Catholic Pilgrimage, exemplified by me in the foresaid Paula,
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem from al countries in all ages.
but so universally used of all the most holy and best learned men in the
Primitive Church, that S. Hierome in an other place writes thus. Ad marcellam
in the name of Paula and Eustockium.
It were long for me to run through every age from the Ascension of our Lord
unto this day, and to show, what Bishops, what Martyrs, what excellent Divines
have come in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, thinking that their devotion and
knowledge was so much the less, and that they wanted something to the
perfection of virtue, if they had not worshipped Christ in the same places,
from whence the Gospel began first to shine down from of the Cross. Surely
the company of religious persons both men and women (that have resorted
thither) is a certain flower and most precious jewel among the ornaments of
the Church. pilgrims of our own country in S. Hieromes time.
In France who soever is the chief, he comes hither in all have. The
Britayne whom the seas divide from this main part of the world that we are in,
if he grow once to be any thing religious and well disposed, he forsakes the
west parts, and seeks after this place which he knows by common brute only
and by report of the scriptures. What need I reckon here the Armenians, the
Persians, Indians, Aethiopians, and Egypt, adjoining to it full of Religious
folk, Pontus, and Capadocia, Coele-syria and Mesopotamea with whole swarms of
the East, and so forth. Gentle Reder, be wise and sober in esteeming of holy
things, mark those few examples, and be not wise in thine own skoffing
conceyte to condemn the authority of the whole world, and of that ancient
world, which by our adversaries confession was without corruption. Thou have
here the custom of all states and degrees, out of all contryes, since CHRIST
ascended, by S. Hieromes account. Unless perhaps thou desire also to hear of
Kings and Emperors: which demand is not unreasonable, for that some Princes
now a days are partly so proud, and partly so far from all devotion, that it
may seem incredible that the mighty Emperors of the world, above a thousand
years ago, would not only reuere^tly kneel in the place, Vbi steterunt pedes
eius, where he stood, walked, died, rose again and ascended, that is Lord of
lords, The Pilgrimage of Princes, and their honor of Relikes.
but stoop to the dust and ashes of poor fyshers his Apostles, and of meaner
men his beloved servants. And yet how easy it were to be copious in this
point, they ca^ not be ignorant, that have read the ecclesiastical histories
of Consta^tyne the great, and his mother Helena, of Arcadius, of Theodosius his
son and Eudocia the Emperesse his wife, of others. My purpose to be short
does not suffer me to tell of all perticularlye, Generally of al I will bring
two testimonies very sufficient. Ep. 42.
S. Austen writing to Madaure^ces that were Idolators: you see (says he) that
the potestates and Peers of this world them selves, that have been won by
the Christians not resisting but willingly dyeng, have turned their force and
laws aganst these Idols, for the which before they put Christians to death. Et
Imperii nobilissimi culmen eminentissimum ad sepulchrum Petri piscatoris
submisso diademate supplicare: haec omnia scripturae diuinae ante longissima
tempora futura esse testata sunt. And the most lofty top of the noble Empire
humbling the stately crown, makes supplication at Peter the fishers tomb:
all these things the divine scriptures witnessed long before should come to
pass. Chrysostom also writes thus. Homeli. quoth. Christus sit Deus.
Romae quae vrbs est regalissima etc. At Rome, which is the most royal city,
Kings, Lieutenantes, Captains, all other things set apart run to the tombs
of the Fisher and the Tent-maker. And in Constantinople our Emperors think it
a great benefit to have their bodies buried not hard by the Apostles, but at
the least without their chapel door a little, and notvvithstanding they were
Princes of the world, are content to be dore-keepers to poor fishers. Is not
here going, running, kneeling, praying, burieng at the Apostles memories? And
is not that plain Pilgrimage? Is it not the very honoring of sacred R^likes
after the present Catholic manner? Were they all fools, all asses, all
superstitious, all Idolatours? Yea I will say with S. Hierome: Cont. Vigil.
scripto. 2.
Did Constantyne the Emperor commit sacrilege, when he translated the holy
Relikes of Andrew, Luke, and Timothy to Constantinople: Great sole^nitie in
traslating or removing of Relikes.
before the which Reliks the devils rore, and confess they feel the presence
of these Saints? Shall we say that Arcadius (Emperor at this present) is
guilty of sacrilege for translatinge Samuels bones so long time after his
death from Ievvry into Thracia? Are all those Bishops not only sacrilegious but
also fools and asses, who carried in silk and in a golden coffin that which
Vigilantius calls a most vile theng and nothing else but vvynd-blovved
ashes? Are the people of all parishes doltes and dysards, who came to meet
the boly Reliks, and received them so joyfully, as if they had seen the
Prophet present and alive among them? in so much that from Palestine to
Calcedo^ svvarmes of people were clustered together, singing with one voice
to the praise of Christ. Here are many goodly points to be noted: the universal
practice of the Primative Church, the principal cause and final end thereof,
the praise of Christ, Reliks honored because they were the Reliks of Samuel,
Samuel honored because he was the Prophet of Christ, so devoutly and in such
swarms because they now saw them, and by occasion thereof entered into a
higher consideration what a marvelous man he was, how far in God his favor:
borne by miracle of a barren woman, dedicated or vowed to God before he was
borne, famylier with him being but a child, nerer then of his counsel the^
Hely the high priest, able to co^mau^d rain and to stay it, to make Kings and
to depose them, at one word a most excellent Prophet. These meditations I
say by occasion of the eye trickling into the mind (as S. Cap. 18. Banist.
Chrysostom and S. Austen speak in the like cases) made them so affected
toward the Reliks as if they had seen the Prophet present. Cap. 5. de cura
pro mort.


Now then to go one step further, If to see the place only or some blessed
monument, does so much stir up devotion (as by these former examples
appears) that it justly moved al good folk to trauail unto them: Miracles
wrought by Reliks caused Pilgrimage.
which is properly Pilgrimage. When it pleased God moreover to show not only
qua^ pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctorum eius: How presious in his
sight the death of his saints is, but also quam mirabilis Deus in sanstis
suis: HOW marvelous a God he is in his saynctes, when it pleased him I say to
work stra^g miracles, to bestow his gracious gifts upon the poor, the lame,
the sick, and such like, and that at the tombs, by the very virtue of his
saints Relikes: That, by all reason did much more increase this desire, inflame
this devotion, multiplye Pilgrims and Pilgrimages. This was it that made the
Princes of the earth bow their crowns to the shrynes of the Apostles and
Martyrs: When they saw the deuels rore there, wicked spirits cast out, the
blind to see the lame to go, the dead to rise again, Ipsi videntes sic, psalm.
47.
abmirati sunt, conturbati sunt, commoti sunt, tremor apprehendit eos. They
seeing such wonderful works, were amassed, astonyshed, apawled, trembled to
consider it, sayng that that goes before in the same psalm. Magnus Dominus
and laudabilis nimis: The lord is great and exceeding praise worthy. And
again: For the credit of miracles.
Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus: Thy friends O God are become very
honorable.

But doubtest thou Reader, whether ever any such thing has been done or no?
No maruayle in this our faythlesse age wherein is veryfied the saying of our
Savior: Luc. 18.
Putas cum venerit filius hominis, inueniet fidem in terra? Shall the son of
man think thou find any faith upon the earth, when he comes? But thou art
a reasonable man, thou will believe those that in thine own judgment are
worthy of credit, if they tell it thee. To omit S. Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Hierome, and others, whose testymonyes are very plain and very many: let S. S
Austens. testimony of sundry miracles.
Austen suffice in this my brevity for all the rest: a man so far from all
superstition as he is from fayning or forginge: from both so far, as the
grauest, wisest, best learned Doctor of the Church must needs be: Read at thy
leisure the eight chapter of his twentye two book de Ciuitate Dei through out.
In the maene time I chose out these his words for thee to way indifferently.
Miraculum quod Mediolani factum est cum illic essemus. The miracle that was
vvroughte at Millan when we were there, Amb. ser. 91 names the man and his
occupation
were found by a revelation that Ambrose the Bishop had in his sleep: At
the which very place the same blind man was delivered from his old darkness,
He tells moreover of a young man so horribly possessed of an evil spirit,
that he lay for dead, from the which he was delivered, and restored also to his
eye, that by force of the spirit departing from him, hanged down upon his
cheek. And this was done at the memory only, that is to say some little Relike
of the forsayed Martyrs, far from Millan where the bodies lie: in Afric, at
a town called Victoriana, less then thirty miles from S. Austens
bishoppricke. Note by the way that of one Martyr there were diverse memories,
S. Steuens relikes in sundry places.
that is, some Relike or other of him in sundry places: S. Steven he reconeth
up seven or eight, at all great miracles wrought: per memoriam supradicti
Martyris: by the Relike of the forsayed Martyr. Again a man of worship that
was a very Infidel, made an earnest Christian by the fervent prayer of his
son in law ad memoriam Martyris, Quid faciam? What shall I do? My promise
to end this book forces me that I can not rehearse all which I know. And
without doubt most part of our country men when they shall read these,
will be sorry that I have omitted so many things which they know as well
as I: of whom I crave pardon. Miracles in many places by S. Steue^s Relikes,
For to let pass other, if I would write the myraculous cures only that
have been done by this Martyr, to wit, Steven that most glorious saint, at
Calamnes and with us, I might make many books. In the end he tells at
large a wonderful cure done upon one Paul and his sister Palladia in his
own Church at S. Steuens Reliks, Tam clarum atque illustre miraculum, vt
nullum arbitrer esse Hipponensium, qui boc non vel viderit vel didicerit:
nullum qui obliuisci vlla ratione potuerit. So evident and famous a miracle
(says he) that I think there is none in all Hippo but he saw it or has heard
of it, none that can possibly forget it. His conclusion to shut up the matter
is that which I make the principal ground of all these Pilgrimages, the honor
of Christ in his saints. Exultabant in Dei laudem voces etc. There was such a
sound of their voices that could not speak for joy, in the praise of God,
that our ears might hardly abide it. Quid erat in cordibus exultantium nisi
fides Christi, pro qua Stephani sanguis effusus est? What was there in their
hearts that so reioysed, but the faith of Christ, for the which Steven shed
his blood?

And are there yet Christian men in the world that do discredit the mighty
power and glorious works of Christ in his saints? Against faythles heretics
that discredit miracles.
Yea (God wot) there are yet Eunomians and Porphirians that say these were but
delusions of noughty spirits, Hiero. aduc. Vigil.
and that they did not rore in very deed, but fained as though they suffered
intolerable torments. Yet there are stubburne Arians that is to say
heretics, who (as Ambrose tells) would in no wise confess that the martyrs
Geruasius and Protasius did vex the devils, or make the blind man see: Sermo.
91.
whereas the spirits them selves confessed it, and of the man named Seu^rus it
was a thing famously known: yet there are Iewishe Scrybes that say of Christ
and his saints: In nomine Beelzebub eiiciunt daemonia: In the name of Beelzebub
they cast out devils. Yet there are hypocritical Pharisees that pretend as
though they gave all the honor to God, which they detracte from his saints and
their Reliks, like to the Jews that said to the blind man whom Christ had
cured. Da gloriam Deo: Give God the praise good fellow: yea a lamentable case to
consider, yet there are among Christian men as far from believing the
miracles done by Saints, To discredit miracles is plain paganism.
as were sometime the Paynims: in so much that the learned books of
Chrysostom, Austen, and others made in this case to prove against them, are
not sufficient to persuade our own faythlesse false brotherhood: wherein I
marvel they are not ashamed, pretending the name and profession of
Christians, against the authorytye of the wholle Prymytiue Church, to plead the
Paynims cause^ who to discredit the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, 22.
eiuit. c. 8.
objected thus, as S. Austen writes. Cur nunc illa miracula quae praedicatis
facta esse, non fiunt? Why are not the like miracles done now a days to
them which you say were wrought sometime (by the Apostles?) To answer them
fully (although to allege later miracles was not necessary, because at the
beginning they were requisite til faith was planted, afterward they were not
to be looked for) yet to answer them fully, whereas it pleased God always from
time to time to nourishe faith and devotion by them, these holy Fathers
allege miracles wrought at saints tombs, by their Relikes. The paynims were
at a point to believe neither the one nor the other. what does Luther? what
Calvin? The former they are content to admit, least they should be otherwise no
christians. The later they will not grant least they should be good Catholics.
But, S. Austen says of both sorts thus. Non credu^t hoc, qui etiam dominu^
Iesum per integra virginalia matris enixum, and ad diss^pulos suos ostiis
clausis ingressum fuisse non credunt. They do not believe these later, which
also do not believe that our Lord Jesus was borne of his mother without
empayring of her virginity, and that he entered in to his disciples, the doors
being shut: The ancient Doctors did easely-beleue miracles.
Again he says to philosophers concerning the former, that which may very
well be said to our adversaries touching the later. Vlt. ciuitdei.
Si rem credibilem crediderunt etc. If christian people did believe such
things as were not incredible, let them consider what fools they are that
do not also believe it. Again if it were incredible, how is it that all the
world has so long believed it? S. Hierome in another case of certain marvelous
fasters, but in the same case concerning faythles heretics, says very
fynely. Hoc illis incredibile videbitur, qui non credunt omnia possibilia esse
credentibus. ^n vita Pau^i Eremitae.
This will seem incredible to such as do not believe that al things are
possible to them that believe. Nafianzene also that famous doctor writes thus.
Et illud est narratu dignum. Corin. devita sua.
That also is worthy to be toulde, which to many seems incredible, as other
things do, such men as think nothing that they see done plainly and without
delusion. My self dare not discredit them, whom strange things do move as much
as any man: for in deed it is worse to stand styfly against all things
universally, then contrarievvyse to be content to believe any thing easily:
this proceeds of simplicitye and lightness, that of presumptuous bouldnes.
Finally the Apostle says, Charitas omnia credit. Charity believes al things.
which is true in this sense, that a charitable man is not conte^tious and
selfwilled to stand against the likely report of an honest man, much less
against al senses, al reason, al authority al custom and practice. and
therefore to such, S. Austen shows also the reason why it is very credible
that saints do work these miracles at their tombs and Reliks. Haec a domino
impetrare possunt propter cuius nomen occisi sunt. 22. ciuit ca. 8, 9. 10.
They can easily obtain these things of our Lord, for whose names sake they
were put to death. Praecessit little mira patie^tia, vt in by: miraculis tanta
ista potentia sequeretur. Their vvo^derful patience went before, that in these
miracles this so great power might follow after. Credamus ergo eis and vera
dicentibus and mira facientibus. Dicendo enim vera passi sunt, vt possint
facere mira. Let us therefore believe them both when they say truly and when
they do wonderfully: for by saying trewly they suffered death, that they might
be able to do wonderfully, So far S. Austen. To conclude this point against al
stubbourne negatiues and Ethnyshe reasoning, the same holy Father him self was
so easy to believe, and so careful to publysh them, because he knew God was
much glorified in them, that he took orderin his own Church where S. Steuens
Relikes were, to have all the miracles from tme to time written. Id namque fieri
voluimus, cum videremus antiquis similia diuinarum signa virtutum, etiam
nostris temporibus frequentari, and ea non debere multorum noticiae deperire.
For we would have it so, for as much as we saw that, the like signs of God his
power to them of old time were often showed in our age also, to the end they
might not dye but be known of many.

To say the very truth, there are two evident causes why the heretics of our
time abhor from this article and others: The causes of heretical incredulity
and hatred of Relikes.
Lack of faith, and want of devotion: such as S. Jude discribeth in his
epistle. Animales, spiritum non habentes. Brutish men that have no feelinge of
the spirit at all. Arbores autumnales, like dead trees, when their leaf is
s^llen. They little consider the power that Christ so assuredly promised to his
saints. Amen Amen dico vobis. Verily Verily I say unto you, he that believes
me, the works that I do, shall he also do, and greater then they are shall he
be able to do. They can be as stout as S. Thomas to auouche and to swear it,
that they will not believe, unless they put their fingers in the very print of
the nails. But when the thing is so evident and palpable, Heretics have no
spritual film of feruen^ devotion.
that in deed they may see, touch, and handle the glorious miracles wrought at
holy places, as it were the marks of martyrs blood, and certain prints of
Christ's nails left to us by the virtue of his passion, they are far from
the heavenly affection that Thomas felt, when he brake out with heart and voise
into this goodly confession, Dominus meus and Deus meus. My Lord and my God. O
if they did know what it were to touch the memory only of Christ's wounds and
his ayntes, what it were to adore but in the place where his feet stood, to
sit at his feet a while with Mary and wash them with weepinge tears: to
touch the hemme only of his garment and feel the virtue that proceadeth from
thence, to see but a glimse of his glory and his saints with the three
Apostles, and in all this to hear as it were this voice of S. John unto Peter,
Dominus est, It is our Lord, it is he that makes the diuils rore, he heals
the sick, he rayseth the dead, because his saints do it by him, his presence
and power is in all these things: then undoubtedly they would take Peter's
faith and nothing doubt safely to tread upon the seas and waves of infidelity:
they would conceive his inestimable joy, saying: Bonum est nobis hic esse. O
this is a sweet place, well were we if we might tarry here: The wonderful
devotion of chatholiks.
let us make here tabernacles, to thee O Lord first, and next to thy glorious
saints. This faith and affection had Paula, when she came to the place in
Bethlehem where Christ was borne, saying: here is my restinge place, because it
is my Lords country: here will I dwell, because our Savior has chosen it: and
again when in her letters to Marcella which S. Hierome penned. Shall it ever
be our good hap to see the day, when we may go together into the little
vaulte, where our Savior was borne? To weep a little in our Lords
sepulcher, to lick the vvood of the holy Cross, and in Mount-oliuet with
will and vvish to ascend after a sort with our Lord, as if he were very
now ascending? To see Lazarus come forth tied in his vvynding sheet? Amos the
prophet even yet playing on his bag-pype upon some little hillocke? afterward
in Samaria to honor the ashes of John Baptist, Heliseus and Abdias, all three
together? This devotion had Chrysostom to Paul's cheynes, the people of the
East parts to Samuels Reliks: the best men out of all places to the holy
land, as before I have mentioned. This made blessed Anthony to go a dangerous
journey to Paul the wonderful Eremite of whom he reported to his scholars
thus: I have seen (I tell you) Elias, ^^er. in vi^a pauli.
I have seen John in the wilderness, and to say truly, I have seen Paul in
Paradyse. This devotion was it that made Hilarion to do the like toward S.
^iero. in vi^a Hilario^is.
Antony after his death: in whose little cabin he laid him down, and as
though he had felt it warm as yet of the holy man departed, so he culled and
kissed it: This was it that caused the godly contention between the
Palestines and them of Cypres about the self same wonderful man Hilarion,
who after his death in both places wrought great miracles, but especially in
Cypres, belyke (says S. Hierome) because he loved that place best. (...) 2.
Ciuit. 3.
This devotion and this faith was it that worked in those Africanes, ^ouch of
relikes.
which S. Austen writes of, when they touched three dead persons with the
garments, and anointed the body of an other with the oil that had touched
only S. Steuens Reliks, and immediately all four were reuyued.

Where mark for your comfort and joy al you good religious and well disposed
persons that carry Cross or beads, The laudable devotion of Catholics toward
(...) esser things then relike
having touched glorious Relikes, the better to put you in mind of such saints
and to pray the more devoutly (for to that purpose I would have it employed.)
Mark I say how exceedinglye such devotion pleases God, whereas he confirmed it
so long ago by miracles. And no marvel, for he is the same good Lord still,
that straight perceived the feruente faith of the pore woman, that thought it
sufficient, with great fear and reverence to touch but the hemme of his
garment. He that by Peter's shadow and Paul's clothes healed the sick and
cured the lame, must now also needs accept all devotion done toward him and
his saints for his sake: he can not chose, because he is always like him
self: Fidelis est, seipsum negare non potest. You also that delight to have
Agnos-Dei, M^dalias, Graynes or the like honorable memories of heavenly things
and inslamers of devotion, such I say as the holy hand of Christ's high Vicar
has blessed for that intent, give God hearty thanks for your religious mind,
if you feel in deed that it proceed of devotion. It is not given to every
man although he would, to have toward small things no small devotion. Small
things in comparison, otherwise not small that have great commodities. Little
hallowed tokens sent from^ Bishops as appears in their epistles.
The learned Fathers and holy men of ancient time, Austen, Paulinus, Leo,
Gregory, here also have given you example: who although by their excellent
knowledge of scriptures they understood all divine mysteries and thereby were
inflamed to love Christ exceedingly, yet they gladly used to practyse their
devotion by these lesser means also, Leo. ep. 72.
sending one to the other panes benedictos, imagunculas, particulas terrae
sanctae, particulam Dominicae Crucis cum culogiis, hallowed bread, little images
of Christ, our Lady, and the Apostles: some portion of the holy land, and as
Leo speaks a little piece of our Lords Cross with blessings adjoined. S. Li.
8^. ^y. 60.
Gregory in an epistle to Edelbertus King of our country has these words.
Parua autem xenia transinisi, quae vobis non crunt parua, cum a vobis ex beati
Petri Apostoli benedictione fuerint suscepta. I have sent you certain small
tokens, which shall not be of small value to you, when you have received them
as having the blessing of S. Peter the Apostle. Whereby he means that the
gracious blessing of Peter the first Bishop of Rome remains still in all his
Successors to bless and sanctify sacred tokens: So that the Bishop of Rome
his blessing is the very blessing of S. Peter him self, even as in other cases
also the whole Council of Chalcedon protested: Petrus per Leonem locutus est:
Peter him self has spoken by the mouth of Leo. It is a very common phrase or
speech in S. Gregory that he sends S. Peter's blessinge when he sends little
golden keys or crosses that had touched his body, to noble men, to Princes,
to the Emperesse, to Bishops in all countries, wherein sometime to make the
gift more precious he put a little of the holy Cross, of S. Peter's cheyne, of
S. John Baptists hear, of S. Laurence gridyron: which the forsayed parties did
wear about their necks for most holy and sacred rewels, Li. 2. cp. 72. 86.
li. 3. cp. 30, li. 5. cp. 6. li. 7. epist. 126. ind. 2.
full of spiritual grace and heavenly blessinge.

Men of common sense and colder feeling in religion (if they be catholics) are
moved with the reverence of sacraments, sacrifise, and great solemnities, but
the morefe ruent a man is and as it were the more famylier With Christ, the
sooner he espyeth him if he do see but his shadow, and says with S. John,
Dominus est, it is our Lord: which other think to be pbantasma, an
imagination only and dark appearance of some tryfling thing. S, Antbony, a
man of so deep contemplation that he desired no other book to know the
infinite wisdom and mercy of God, but only the sight of his goodly
creatures, saw so far in the very cote of Paul the Eremite aboue-named,
Hiero. in vita Pauli.
which that good man himself had made of palm leaves, that he kept it for a
Relike of that faint, and ware it only upon high feasts in honor of the day.
S. Hierome also in the end of Paul's life which he writes, is wonderfully
moved to conclude with these words. I humbly request every one that reads
this story to remember Hierome the sinner, who if he might have his wish of
God, would much more desire Paul's cote with all his good merits, then Princes
purple with their painful punishments. And because we talk of holy men's
garments, Socea^. ^i. 7. ca. 22.
Theodosius the younger a Prince of noble virtues and very religious was wont
to wear the facke cloth of a certain holy Bishop that died at Constantinople
quantu^uis sordidatu^ although it were not very clean, persuasus se aliquid ex
mortui sanctimonia inde percepturum. Being fullye persuaded that he should
receive thereof somewhat of the dead man's holiness. But to return back a little
to such men as Christen. dome esteems for renowned Saints: Blessed Hillarion
going in Pilgrimage to S. Authonies eremitage, Hicro. invita Hilarionis.
reioysed in his spirit at every little memory of that holy man, when it was
told him, here he was wont to sing, here to pray, in this place he did work,
and there he rested him self, these vynes and little stocks were of his
planting, that alley he made with his own hands, this poole cost him much
labor and pains to water the garden, this mattocke he had many years to
dig and delue withal. If this good man be therefore thought a superstitious
fool, because he was a monk forsooth almost twelve hundred years ago, and a
miracle of that age. Chrysostom an Archbishop and honorable in the world, was
no fool undoubtedly, how so ever he may seem superstitious because he is a
Catholic: He expresses the very like affection to the least monumentes of
the Apostles that you can deuyse. Praefat. in cp. Pauli ad. philemonem.
Vtinam (says he) non defuissent etc. I would there had been some one that
could have given us the whole story of the Apostles, not only what they
vvrote, but what and when they did eat, where they sat, vvhither they
went, and so forth. For if we see but the places only where they sat,
thither we direct our mind oftentimes, and begin to a wake, and feel our
selves better disposed. And that you may know he was always the same man,
tender hearted toward all sacred monuments were they never so little, See. quoth
vtriusque testamenti sit vnus legislator.
he writes of him self that having a picture in wax, wherein the Angel
destroyed so many thousand Assyrians in one night, as in the book of Kings is
mentioned, he was wonderfully delighted to behold the mighty power of God in
that small image of sorry wax. All the which examples do declare this one point
what grace they had and how virtuous men they were that of small things could
reap great devotion, Profane affection toward see uler monumentes.
devotion I say toward God and his saints, not as profane heretics that more
gladly look upon Tullies face because he was eloquente, or Caluins round
cappe because he was a minister, or some noble man's arms, that is Patron of
their bishopric. No no, but the sweet picture of some heavenly thing, the
blessing of a virtuous hand or of Gods anointed, the view of holy place, and
touch of sacred Relike, these work wonderfully the praise of God in the hearts
of sad and sober Christians. 22. ciuit. 8.
S. Austen notes very diligently in him that prayed instantly at S. Steuens
memory for his father in law that was a Panyme and lay very sick, how he took
away with him of the flowers that were upon the Altar, such as came first to
hand, which in the night he put under the sick man's head, and before day he
cries out in all haste to send for the Bishop, and so was baptized and not
long after made a godly end. Of another he writes that had the palsye, who
requested to be brought to a new chapel that was built a little before by S
Austens consent over a portion of that holy land where Christ rose again, for
the more reverent reserving thereof, thither he was brought and imediatly
recovered. Again, I know (says he) a maid of Hippo this city, who anointing
her self with oil embrewed with the tears of a priest that prayed for her,
was delivered from an evil spirit. S. Hierome writes of the aboue-named
Hilarion that Bishops, priests, judges, men of great calling, grave and
welthy matrones, besides the common people out of country and town, tanne to
him in heaps only to take hallowed bread and oil at his hands: Hallowed bread
and oil.
which had the virtue to preserve from death, namely the daughter of one
Constance and her husband. All these things being practiced by men of such
virtue and reported to us by doctors of so Against scoffing heretics.
great authority, skoffyng heretics will jest at: and no marvel. The
prophecy of Inde the Apostle can not be false. In nouissimo tempore venient
illusores, secundum desideria sua ambulantes in impietatibus. In the later time
there shall come mockers, walkyng at their pleasure in all ungodliness. Such were
the young laddes, irrifores as, S. Austen calls them that laughed the poor
old man Flore^tius to skorne for prayeng at the Reliks of the twenty martyrs,
22 ciuit. 8.
that he might by some means have wherewith to cloth him, which he obtened as
there is told very myraculosly. Such were they that iested at Macarius the
Bishop of Jerusalem, Sozom. li. 2. Cap. 1.
when they saw him put two of the crosses to the sick woman and that she Was
nothing the better, and thought it a very foolyshe mockery: who were
controwled by and by with the third cross, that healed her, because it was the
same cross that our Savior suffered on, as appeared by the miracle. Mauritius
the Emperor although he was sometime in these cases very incredulous, Niceph.
li. 18. ca. 31.
yet such a skoffer he was not: who thought at the first that the miracles done
at Euphonia the Martyrs shryne were delusions wroughte by men, but he tried the
contrary by such infallible means that ever after he honored them exceedingly.
Hiero.
But Vigilantius was an old captain of such scoffing mates, who called the
Catholics, ashmongers: Reliks, folish duste wrapped in a clowte: wax candles
burning before them, vile taper light. Such were Eunomius and Porphyrius that
said the devils made as though they had been formented greeuouslye by martyrs
Relikes, whereas they felt no such thing. Marc. 5.
Such were they that laughed at Christ him self: Irridebant eum (says the
Evangelist) when he said of Iairus daughter, Puella non estmortuae, sed
dormit. The mayed ie not dead but sleeps. And undoubtedly these iesters of
our time, if very shame of the world rather then fear of hell did not stay
them, would laugh merely at Peter's shadow, Act. 5. Iac. 5. Io. 9 Tob. 9. Dan.
14 Iud. 1^^. 4. Reg. 2
James oil, Christ's spittle, R^phaels fish, Daniel dragon, Samsons law-bone,
and Elias cloak. Do thou wonder why I will say so, and tell me that I ought
not to judge? Because it is euidente they can neither abide ceremonies, nor
believe miracle, it is their profession. For example, Peter Martyr in the
disputations at Oxford being urged in the question of the blessed Sacrament
with this axample, Peter martir^ judgment of Christ's miracle entering when the
doors was shutt.
that Christ entered into the place where his disciples were, the doors being
shut, said that he first opened the door forsooth, and so entered: A
wonderful miracle that Christ did go in when the door stood open. As well he
might say that he could not have risen again unless the Angel had first
removed the stone from the sepulcher, nor be borne of his mother without
breach of her virginity, which infidelity S. Austen obiecteth to the Paynims
as I have before mentioned. But especially in the fact of Eliseus, 4. Reg. 6.
when he cast a pyce of wood into the water to make the iron swim that
before did sink appears what they would do if they durst: which when a witty
catholic to confound a scoffing heretic propounded to him barely without
circumstance of Eliseus or of scripture, A skoffing heretic finely confuted.
as though some monk had written it, asking his judgment, if it were not like
to the foolish fables of Papists concerning miracles at martyrs tombs: This
good fellow by his wisdom made gay sport with it, till he understood it was
plain scripture, and the^ in what plight he was you may easily guess, in his
own play to be so flatly foiled. So little they understand the wisdom and
power of God, Miracles as truly wrought by relikes, as sometime by the Apostles.
who of purpose has chosen by small and folish things (as they may seem) to
confound and controwle the hawty wits of worldly resoners.

If they will tell me that whatsoever scripture reports, the authority thereof
forces them to believe it, although reason reclayme: but for all other
testimonies, it is at their pleasure to believe them or not: S. Austen
answers, 22. ciuit. 8.
that for the truth of things: Etiam nunc fiunt miracula in eius nomine, sieve
per sacramenta eius, sieve per orationes vel memorias sanctorum. Now also at
this present miracles are wroughte in his name what by his sacacraments, what
by the prayers or memories of saints. But the difference is: Non eadem
claritate illustrantur, vt quanta illa gloria diffamentur. They are not so
famously known not bruted abroad so gloriously as the other: the reason
whereof is there also to be seen most reasonable. If they had rather cavil
thus, that signae sunt infidelibus, the miracles that Christ and his Apostles
did, were for unbelievers to bring them to the says: now since all the world
believes, they are to no purpose, Aduers. vigilantium.
and therefore they think there is no such thing. First S. Hierome shall
answer them and Vigilantius all at once, that the question is not between us,
for whom they are wrought, but by what power, and therefore tell me not (says
he) that wonders are for such as will not believe, but answer me bovv in
dust and ashes there is such a forcible presence of vvonderfull operations.
Secondly I add moreover, that because there are always in the world infidels
or unbelieving heretics, miracles are always to good purpose against both
sorts, to maintain true faith in the hearts of Catholic Christians, eodem
Deo (as S. Austen says) nunc faciente per quos vult and quemadmodum vult, 22.
ciuit. 8.
qui and illa quae legimus fecit. The self same God working now by whom he
will and as he will, that wrought those former which we read of in scriptures.
Of abuses.


If they will tell me sadly and rou^dly that their be many abuses herein,
delusions esteemed for miracles, false reliks, much superstition. First it is
great rashness to think so without evident causes as in the notable example of
Meuritius the Emperor before is declared. Again, the like abuses have been in
all ages even of the Primitive Church, without any prejudice to the Catholic
customs, but to the better trial of constante Christians, which will not
stumble at every straw, and refuse the corn because of the chafe: Adue. vigil.
Paucorum culpa (says S. Hierome) non praeiudicat religioni. The fault of a
few is no prejudice against religion. Judas treason did not destroy the
Apostles faith. Ep. ad Rustic^ monacum.
And again: In omni condition and gradu optimis mixta sunt pessima. In all
stats and degrees the worst things are mingled with the best: which
consideration of former times (which by all reason should be most pure the
nearer to Christ) and that our Savior said. Necesse est vt veniant scandala.
It is necessary that offenses do come, seems to me a very goodly instruction
for weakelings that quickly condemn a good thing, when they see it abused, of
one superstitious woman judge all Idolatours, for one false relike think none
true, S. Gregory in this case put true Relikes in Place of the false,
mainteyning the catholtke use redressing the abuse, in his answer to the tenth
interrogatorie of S. Auste^ our Apostle.
for one feigned miracle will give credit to none. Where of the learned and holy
Martyr of our country S. Thomas Moore has most wisely and pithely (as his
manner is) disputed in his english volumes, sufficient to satisfy any
reasonable and grave wit. S. Austen writes of certain idle monks or rather
false monks in that weed, that went gadding abroad out of their cloister
showing martyrs reliks ( si tamen martyrum, De. op. mona. ca. 28.
if happily they were so in deed) for to gain by it or to seem the more
holy: And yet I trow no man will say that he condemns monks or reliks, that
shall read the self same book de opere monachorum, how monks ought to be
occupied, and my former testimonies out of him for miracles. S. Hierome tells
of some superstitious women that carried crosses about them: whereupon some
hasty heretic will take me short, and by and by conclude, ergo S. Hierome
does mislyke of wearing Crosses: Let him stay his wisdom, for he adds also,
and parua euangelia, and she carried also the Gospel in a little volume: did
that also mislyke S. Hierome trow you? No soothly, neither the one nor the
other well used, and as well the one as the other abused, Hiero. Culantiae
matrouae.
if they bear them to seem the more holy, as the Pharisees did their ten
commandments in the broad hemme of their garments, and therefore are checked
of our Savior. It would require a just volume to reckon the enormities crepte
in among religious tytes and customs, in all ages since the ascensio^ of
Christ, and as the number of Christians multiplied, so (as it happens in a
multitude) the more abuses: whereof the aunciente Fathers make often mention
and lament it. Ad. Rustmona.
As when S. Hierome says: Vidimus nuper and planximus: we hane seen of late
and it grieved us not a little. And agyne, piget dicere: Ad Eustochium.
I am loath to tell how many virgins daily fall from their porpose and
profession: And again, Ad Sauin^ Diaco^um.
prorumpunt lacrimae antequam verba. O villainy, I can more easelye weep in
this case then speak. Of all the which things, as also the unprofitable
ceremonies and superfluous devotion, which are the private fancies of
unskillful persons, not the public ordinances and decrees of the Church, the
first Council of Nice and after it S. Ep. 11^.
Austen gives this general rule, which at all time takes place and is our
warrantyse: what so ever is against faith or good life that the Church of God
nec approbat, nec tacet, nec facit: does neither allow, nor dissemble, nor put
in practyse. And this much might well be answered if happily there be any
sinful abuses at this day. First that we can not be happyer the^ the Primative
Church, which in all points had the like, as I will show if it be needful.
Secondly all good Catholics that see any such faults, much more lamente them
then the heretic does blame them, the more it greeueth them that by such
offenses the truth is ill spoken of among our enemies, and suspected of them
that are indifferent to both. Thirdly, the words of our Savior must needs be
fulfilled, Necesse est vt veniant scandala. Offenses must necessarely come,
there is no remedy, such is the sinful frayletie of man's nature. Psalm. 118.
But Pax multa diligentions eum, and non est illis scandalum: They are at
great peace which love him, and nothing can offend them or make them to fall
from the truth. Love Christ and his Catholic Church as thou should do,
and no abuse be it never so great shall be able to move thee one iotte from
the pure profession of all laudable customs.

Howbeit to say truly, Of supersti(...) so called.
I think heresy has partly so extinguished and partly so cooled the fervent
devotion of right good earnest Catholics, that if there be any religious zeal
left in some few more then in others (which therefore seems superstition
because it is rare and singular) the same is so far from heinous crime or
grievous fault, Adue, vigil.
that I may compare it rather with their devotion which in S. Hieroms time
lyghted tapers at the Gospel time, and burned wax candels before Martyrs
tombs, of whom he gives sentence that each one had reward according as they
were devoutly disposed: or with their persuasion that at the same time also
were wont to show Pilgrims coming to Jerusalem, Com^in matthew
the pauement of the Church as yet imbrewed with Zacharias blood as it was
thought, and therefore visited not without reverence: which their godly
affection (albeit they were possibly deceived) S. Hierome did not mislyke,
toward that glorious Martyr, whose death was so precious in Gods sight, that it
was one cause of the Jews extreme desolation, as our Savior himself
witnesses. So likewise it may fortune that in some Churches or Chapels there
is proposed some false relike, Of doubtful relikes.
and so honored as the relike of that saint whose it is not: which thing if it
were done rashly upon light credit, and if it might easily be discerned, were a
fault in no wise to be suffered: but be cause it has from time to time been
esteemed so, nothing known to the contrary, not disalowed of the Bishop (whose
diligence in examining such things is to be wished, and in Fisher Bishop and
Martyr of Rochester is greatly commended) and especially because the honor
rests not in the Relike, but is wholly referred to that saint whose Relike it
is esteemed: For these causes I say their is no more fear of superstition or
Idolatry in this case, Mare. 10.
then if Bartimens the blind man (in the Gospel) had said to any other man
in steed of Christ, Misertre mei fili David, Son of David have mercy upon
me: as he might quickly have done being blind, if they had mocked him and
showed an other for Christ. Or if a Catholic should adore that host which a
priest at the time of elevation lifts up not consecrated, or worship one of
the thieves crosses for the Cross of our redemption, if one suddenly were
changed for the other: In all these cases and the like, ignorance does excuse,
being neither rash nor wilful: and sincere meaning has reward before him
that knows the heart of the worshipper, that he honoreth undoubtedly the
pri^cipall it self in heaven, howsoever he be deceived against his will in
mistaking some earthly monumente or remembrance thereof. For example, thou
meanest to honor the Kings Lieutenant as if he were the King him self: among
a number thou do not know him: it is told thee sadly that it is he that
wears the gay cote, perhaps he is of his meanest gentlemen, yet no doubt thou
have done thy dutiful obeisance to thy Lord and Prince, howsoever thou be
deceived in this person or that, which is said to represent him. How be it in
sacred things more heed is to be taken and greater discretion to be used.
Psalm. 89.
Honor Regis iudicium diligit: In honoring the King of Kings and his servants
there is much judgment required. Psalm. 46.
We are commanded to sing to our Lord, but sapienter, wisely: 150.
and in an other psalm, in cimbalis been sonantibus, upon well sounding
cymbals: They sound well when every string is in tune without discord, neither
to high nor to low, but in a golden mean, which all good Catholics in all
points of religion most heartily wish and pray for, Tit. 2.
vt is qui ex aduerso est, vereatur, nihil habens malum dicere de nobis: That
the adversary may be afraid to open his mouth against us, when he is able to
say no evil of us.

Thus I have briefly touched certain points concerning Relikes and pilgrimage:
the name, the cause and the ground, the fruit, the miracles, the use and
abuse, which may be an interim to thee Christian Reder against the odious
terms of Idolatrye and superstition, devised by heretics as buggishe baubles
to fear babyes. A full discourse of this matter I reserve as not necessary,
if after these few the adversary be quiet: if not, then I mean God willing
to open the whole pa^cke. And to show such a glorious sight of universal
practice and infallible testimonies, so clear as none days. that the best of
our adversaries shall be no more able to look aganst it although he take
Caluins spectacles, the^ the owl or the bastard-egle against the sun beams:
not because I can do much or any thing at all of my self, the meanest stud^ent
of catholic divines, but because it is very much to have learned of them that
can do exceading much if they were in place, how much the catholic Church is
able to aledge as for all the rest, so for this article also. That church,
whereof the psalm says: Gyoriosa dicta sunt dete ciuitas dei. Psalm. 86.
Glorious things are reported of thee O city of God: against that synagoge, of
the which is said: ^salm. 136.
Filia Babilonis misera, the daghter of Babylon is a wreched one. Blessed is he
that takes her ungracious chil, dren (al heretics and scismatikes) and
squiseth them aganst the Rock. which is the present faith of the Church of
Rome, by that commission which Christ gave to Peter, whom he made a rock and
foundation, upon whom he built his Church, to whom he promised it should not
fail, Man. 16.
and has performed his promise until this day. To whom for his excellent
gift and our assured safetye, as many as stand upon this Rock, be all honor
and glory for ever.

Amen.
A LETTER SENT BY M. LICENTIATE MARTIN TO A MARRIED priest his friend.
GENTLE M. N. being always myndful of your courtesy toward me, I have often
thought how I might best requite it; and because I neither have temporal
ability, nor you (God be thanked) have need thereof, I have purposed many
times to communicate with you some spiritual benifite that might be to the
health of your soul. And having differred hitherto, this I trust is that
good hour which God has appointed me to tell you, and you patiently and
willinglye to hear that, which, if you well consider, is the most necessary
thing for you of all other, if you be such a one (as I hope you are) that look
to be saved.

To be short and to come to the point: you have been a priest many years,
your self for many years together never imagined that you might marry, no
more then any other priest made in the like sort as you were. Afterward the
liberty of the time and the sensuality of the flesh and only worldly
considerations pricking you forward, and no good or godly reason (as your own
conscience can tell you) your fancy fell upon a woman, and to accomplish your
desire, you remember how gladly you would have had some authority of
scripture or doctor to have soothed you in your fleshlye purpose; and when it
was told you that there was nothing for it, but all against it, you thought or
rather you said so (for you could not think it) that you never vowed, and so
you began to flatter your self: and when that also was showed unto you and
proved clean contrary, because all that present them selves to a catholic
bishop for orders of subdeacon and so forth, by their very presentation and
taking of the orders (although no more were said) do make their vow before
God, because the Church always presupposes that, and admits none but with
vow, this I say standing so, you went farther, and hoped the Counsel of Tre^t
would release the vow, or that by your friends you at the least might obtain a
dispensation: whereby you declared that your self thought it not lawful
without dispensation, and how you could once think of a dispensation, I do
marvel much, whereas there is no example thereof in any private man's case, such
as yours is.

But when all these means failed, yet the devil blew the coals of concupiscence
still, spite of the Church, of your vow, of holy and chaste priesthod, to match
your self with a woman, not in matrimony (for you wot well it can be none) but
in damnable sacrilege worse then any adultery, as S. Austen tells you, if it
would please you to read it, saing of such as have vowed, Talibus non solum
nubere, De bono vid. ca. 9. tom. 4.
sed velle nubere damnabile est. To such it is damnable, not only to mary, but
to have the vvil to mary. And this he says upon S. Paul's authority, who
writing of widows that had vowed and would afterward marry, says: 8. Tim. 5
Cum luxuriatae fuerint in Christo, nubere volunt: habentes damnationem, quia
primam fidem irritam fecerunt. For when they shall be vvanton in Christ, they
will marie: having damnation, because they have made void their first says.
They are damned, because they have broken their first promis, and they brake
their first promis, because they would marie: so that their first promis was
as yours also was, not to marry.

And therefore S. Austen says boldly in an other place, Eodem ^. ca. ^^.
that such marriages are not only adulteryes, but worse then any adultery. And
believe me M. N. as your very friend that do rather tender your soul toward
Christ the^ feed your carnal humor toward the world, believe me I say, that
if S. Ambrose, S. Austen, S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S.
Ierom, S. Gregory the great, S. Bernard, or any other ancient and learned
Doctor were alive to tell you, they would plainly say as now their books do
say, that your state is damnable. And what if you did but ask your old
master and Lord the last true bishopp of Lichefilde, would you not believe
him, and so many other learned and virtuous prelates of these our days? Shall
flesh and blood ouerrule you to do against your conscience, and to your
exceeding shame before all your friends and all the good christians of the world?
Shall not time at the least reclaim you, and make you consider of your
dangerous state? At the first perhaps fantasy and pleasure might overcome
you, but has not time and experience taught you to be weary thereof? Will you
sell heaven for the company of a woman, or gain eternal pains for so short a
pleasure? because you are fallen, will you never rise again? or will you
defer til God sodenlie take you away in the mids of your filthy sins? or
do you think that both stand well together, God his favor, and abominable
lechery?

O M.N. you should rather be there where those hands should handle the blessed
body of Christ, for which they were anointed and consecrated: where those
lips should say ordinary Mattins, Mass, and Euensong, as you are bound also
by precepte, then to employ your whole body upon the daily doing of such
things, which good preests dare not think once upon (but against their will)
for fear of sin. Or if you can not be in place to do as you should, yet
you may always be in place to refrain from that which you should not do.

Good M. N. consider at length the case deeply as it deserves. As it is
odious before God and man that you have thus fallen, so it shall be always
honorable for you to rise again: we have known married priests, afterward
holy men, and by their repentance no less esteemed then if it had never been.
The Church of God (as also God him self) is always glad of a penitent sinner,
and the Angels in heaven reioise thereat: let it suffice you that you have taken
your pleasure all this time, and give God thanks that he has spared you and
reserved you all this time to repentance, whereas you might have died in your
sins and so have been damned everlastingly: despise not his calling of you
unto him self and to his CATHOLIC CHVRCH. You have where-withall to live
although you did forsake all. And so you must, and make away with all at once,
to follow him that being God of gods and Lord of lords came into this world
and went out of this world in all poverty and misery, for your sake, and for
my sake, and for every sinners sake, to redeem us unto him self. Be not tied
any longer to woman, or benifice, or bishop, or this or that. Play the man once
in your time for God his sake, who have been stout and stroung to abide the
very cutting of your body for your own healthes sake.

O it is an honor to be compted a good mau of good men, rather then rich of
the rich, and happy of the unhappy: and a little misery, or want, or
disgrace in the world and before worldlings, is in deed the greatest glory
and renown before God and good men that can be wished. God be thanked for it,
for it is his grace and nor our desert. But I think I may say of us all which
are here no small number, if we should die in banishment, if we were driven
to beg among strangers, if any misery should befall us, yet if we
continevve catholic and in the fear of God, al is our joy, our crown, our
triumph. But to say truly, we have all sufficientlye, and my self was
never in so good state in Ingland, as here I am in all respects. And yet we
in comparison of that which you might provide, are of mean state: you might
be as great a man beyond the seas as you are there, and be so well accepted
of the best as you would desire, and it would be a singular joy to all your
friends, and a great honor to your self, besides the joy and peace of your
conscience, which now either does much torment you, or you are so much the
worse if you have no feeling thereof.

You see what might be said if a man were disposed to set your self before
your own eyes as in a glass: but I hope you are wise enough to gather much
of this little: and I would to God I had now as good oportunitye to talk
with you face to face as I have had heretofore: I doubt not, by the grace of
God, but I should reclayme you: for I persuade my self that you would do
well, but the world and the flesh ouercometh you: and yet (alas) flesh and
blood shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. Think then of the loss of
heaven, nay think on the pains of hell, which shall begin perhaps to
morovv, perhaps one year hence, and shall continue for ever, for ever, for
ever, (this is a long day,) and in more terrible torment then can be imagined
in this life. And yet the very goodness and love and benifites of God and of
our Savior Christ, should make us to do well and to please him, more then the
fear of hell pains. Slaves and servants will not work without stripes:
but children ought to do well of very love and conscience.

Your unlawful woman (M. N.) is but one thing (albeit a great and horrible
thing) but your living in schism, out of the Catholic Church, in all
communicating with heretics, these are also of great importance. If your good
L. and master had also kept his bishopric and followed the world, his
example perhaps might have diminished your fault. Now what excuse have you,
after the virtuous example of such a prelate, of so many like unto him either
dead in prison, or yet prisoners, or beyond the seas, in loss of goods and
country and friends; of so many young men and children which contemn all the
world and vvorldie friends to follow CHRIST and the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, and shall
condemn such as you are that ought to be lanterns and lights to them? What
excuse (I say) have you in this case, especially having so many examples of
your near friends and acquaintance, whom you may remember, namely that grave
and learned priest, which committed that woman and her children to you as to
a spiritual patron and not a fleshful father, who if he were alive, how
would you look him in the face? An other example you have your felovve
chaplen sometime, now many years a most blessed prisoner. Whose happy state
and your own miserye if you consider well, you may iustlye fear that saying
in the Gospel: Two in the filde, two in a bed, two at the mill, the one
taken and the other forsaken: You may fear it I say, and thereby take occasion
to reclayme your self before that terrible day of seperating the evil from the
good, the reprobate from the elect and chosen: When to the elect it shall be
said, come ye blessed, you have done this and this for me: And to the rest,
Go ye cursed, you have done nether this nor that.

And here I pray you think well upon it and examine your self what you have
done for Christ and for his Church in this time when Catholic men are proved
as gold by the fire. You have broken your vow, taken a woman, lived in
pleasure of the flesh, kept all livings and perhaps increased them, said or
caused to be said heretical service, interteined blasphemous and lying
preachers, flattered and desired the favor of your false bishopp, you have
generally loved the world in all respects more then God, and that against your
conscience which must needs condemn you. And are these (trowye) the means
to come to heaven? No, no. Act. 14.
Per multas tribulationes oportet intrare in regnum co^lorum. By many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. And, Mat. 10.
Qui me negauerit coram hominibus, negabo and ego eum coram patremeo. But he
that shall deny me before men, I also will deny him before my father which is
in heaven. For Gods love (M.N.) think upon it betimes, and dispatche at once,
and bear with my boldness and plainnes, which is necessary for your souls
health, as your self will confess if it may please God to send you his grace
and his spirit abundantly to make you a new man.

Then shall I love you and honor you more then ever I did, and all good men
with me, who do not marvel that you or any man should fall, whereas we are all
sinners and have all sallen one way or an other but if after admonition you
will not rise again, that will make us to marvel, and to pity your ease as
altogether desperate, which God forbid, who convert you and save you and
bless you both soul and body, even as I wish to mine own self: For a
farewell, remember the later end of man, the account to be made, the
consequent there of, hell or heaven, and before all other respects do well for
his sake that made you, redeemed you, sanctified you, and has hitherto
preserved and enriched you, and will hereafter in heaven fully reward you, if
you will come even now at the ninth and eleventh hour. Our Lord keep you.

Paris. 15. Fe. 1580 Your loving friend undoubtedly G. M.

TO MY LOVINGE AND BESTBELOVED SISTERS.
DEAR Sisters, my care, my love, and of al worldly things (next to my good
mother) my greatest comfort and joy. Unless you did think, that I do most
heartily love you, you could nor always heretofore have declared your
exceeding love so plentifully toward me, for the which almighty God reward
you. This my love because it is not a natural affection only, but sincere and
true charity, forces me to wish unto you, my loving Sisters, not only many
worldly commodities, which (God be thanked) you lack not: but much more, all
spiritual treasure and heavenly riches, whereof you can not have great store,
because you dwell not where it grows.

I know good Sisters, that you mean well, and most willing are you to do
that which might please God: but in good sooth you are out of the way, and
therefore the further you hold on, the further you are from your iornies end,
the further from heaven. The wise man says: There is a way which seems to
a man right, Proverb. 14.
but the end thereof leads to destruction. Bear with me if I write bold. lie,
and tell you the truth plainly. I am your brother, I love you (as nature
binds me) not only in worldly respect, but much more toward God. Your
souls are dear unto me: my heart always mourns to think upon your
dangerous state wherein you stand. O good Sisters, the pain of hell exceeds
all torments, and that fire shall burn for ever. Happy are they that keep
them selves by God his great goodness within the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, for out
of it, there is no hope of salvation: And most happy are they that having been
out of this Church by the wicked perswasio^s of false preachers, when it
pleases God to send them true teachers, will not remain obstinate, but follow
good exhortations and wholesome doctrine, and so return again as obedient
children to Christ their father, and to the Church their mother, who are
always ready to receive them: remembering that which a most ancient and learned
Father writes. S. Auste^ upon the 88. psalm.
He can never account God to be his father, who vvil not have the Churh to be
his mother.

If you ask me what this Church is, that is called CATHOLIC, and how you may
know it, behold the true and certain marks thereof, and your self judge
whether you be within it or no. This Church is a congregation of all true
christians which began in Christ and his disciples at Hierus lem, and from
thence grew and multiplied throughout the whole world, according as it is said
in the psalm: Their sound (speaking of the Apostles) is gone out into the
whole world, psalm. 18. v. 5.
and their words into the ends of the earth. The first mark of the Church is
to be visible.
So that the first mark of the true church is, that it must grow and multiply,
be seen and appear always as a light in the world: and therefore Christ
calls it A City builded upon a hill, Mat. 5.
which can not be hid. And the blessed Martyr S. Ciprian says: The Church
being lightened with the brightness of our Lord, does reach forth her beams
through-out the whole world. And S. Austen besides many other places to this
purpose, compares Christ and his Church to that stone which was cut out of
a hill without men's hands, Daniel. ca. 2.
and after grevv to be a mighty mountain, so that it filled the whole
earth. For undoubtedly this stone whereof the Prophet speaks is Christ, who
was borne of a virgin without the help of man, and is now grown from a few
Apostles and disciples to an infinite number of christian people in all
countries, confessing one faith and one belief: and this is the Catholic
Church, whereof your Creed tells and teaches you to say. I believe the
CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Let us see now whether this mark does agree to your brethren in England who
call them selves Protestants, or to us whom it pleases them to call Papists.
First they call the^-selues in their books the English church, that is to say,
of that faith which is professed in England: but we are of the CATHOLIC
CHVRCH, that is of such a faith as is professed in France, in Spain, in
Flanders, Brabant, zelant etc. In a great part of Germany, in all Italy, and
beyond, wheresoever there be christians, and is now preached to the Indians,
that never heard of Christ before, and increases wonderfullye. And within
these forty years, in England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, and Germany,
there was no other faith openly professed but ours. And now also in all these
countries, how many are there think you of secret catholics that wish for
the old religion again with all their heart, and follow the new only for
fear? Nay how many are there especially in England that do yet openly
profess the CATHOLIC FAITH?

Ask good Sisters ask, and you shall learn that all the prisons not only of
London, but of England are full of them, because they will not yield to these
new proceedings, nor contaminate their souls with this new service, and leave
the old true and Catholic faith: besides a number of sundry degrees, which
are dead in prison: namely twenty three Bishops all depryued of their living
these twenty three years, and now but two of them alive: I omit Doctors,
Deanes, Archdeacons, Krights, Squires, partly in prison, partly departed the
Realm and forsaking all, rather then they will forsake God; and his most true
and undoubted religion. This is true (good Sisters) as knows God, you seldom
hear of these things, and therefore you think either their is no other
religion but that could service without all comfort and devotion which you see
in your parish church, or you think that must needs be the best, because you
are not taught any other: whereas you see (if you believe me) that all
christendom almost is of an other religion. And therefore this is the CATHOLIC
CHVRCH, and yours is worthily called by your own ministers, the church of
England.

But this shall better appear, The second mark is successiou.
if I give you an other mark of the true and Catholic Church, which is, that
it must continue for ever, and from the first beginning, which was in Christ
and his Apostles, never to fail, but to appear and be seen still as a citrye
upon a hill, or a light in the world. Mat. 28.
For Christ said: I will be with you unto the end of the world: And again:
I will send you an other Comforter, the spirit of truth who shall remain
with you for ever. And unto Peter: Upon this rock will I build my Church,
Mat. 16.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. That is to say, the
devil and all his ministers, shall never so prevail against this church, but
that it shall still appear and profess one, and the same faith. So that there
shall be no time, wherein this faith and this church is not.

Now mark (good Sisters) I pray you heartily, whether your English church, and
your English religion has been always in the world since Christ his time. I
will speak unto you as before God, and as I shall answer before him at the
later day, and therefore I request you to mark well my words and to consider
of them. A whole thowsande and five hundred years after Christ, your English
religion was not heard of in any part of the world, but I told you before,
that the true church must continewe for ever, and appear always, unless you
think Christ is false of his promise. When began your religion then? Forsooth
about fifty veres agone, by one Marten Luther in Germany a friar: who as well
for other ungodly respects, as also because he would needs marie and break
his vow which he had made of chastity, began to preach against the POPE, and
against the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, and because he taught great liberty, as that
Princes ought not to reverence the POPE, that all Priests might mary, that no
man need to fast, and such like: he found many disciples in Germanye, and has
unto this day carnal and fleshly men that love their own pleasure, more then
the will of God, and his holy church.

But will you know what manner of man this was? Forsooth being examined by
learned men concerning his doctrine, he was so pressed and so angered with the
force of truth, that he said in a great rage: This quarrel was never begone
for Gods sake, neither for his sake shall it be ended. Will you know further
that he wrote against the POPE for malice and not for conscience? himself in
his letter to Argentmenses fayeth: I neither can deny, neither will I, that if
Carolstadius or any other man could five years agone have persuaded me that
in the Sacrament is nothing but bread and wine, he might have deserved of me
great thanks: for I labored in that matter very carefully, knovving right
well that by that means, I might much have hindered the Popes authority.
Mark that this man would gladly have found somewhat against the BLESSED
SACRAMENT, but a long time he could not, till at length the devil had taught
him to write against the Mass, De missa angulari.
as him self witnesses in his books, where he tells what talk he and the
devil had together. Much more could I tell you of this man: but of this little
you may judge whether you may adventure to build your faith upon this man, who
lived within these fiftye years, and to forsake the ancient faith of all
Christendom continewed from Christ until this day: for it is most certain
that from this man came your new religion into England, but not immediately at
the first when he began to preach, for King Henrye the e^ight, wrote a learned
book very earnestly against him, The Queen's M. father wrote a learned book a
gaiust Luther for the pope. Afterward he forsook him not upon religion or
conscience but upon displeasure.
which is common to be seen, but long after, partly when the King began to
take displeasure against the POPE, because he might not be married and unmarried
as he list: Partly and especially, when King Edward being in the beginning of
his reign but a very child, was oueruled by wicked cou^sellers to maintain
such a religion as might best agree to their carnal appetite. This was the
beginning of your religion; the beginning I say, for as for King Heury, he
went nothing so far as they are now come: but whereas for his pleasure he
had put away the Popes authority, and for his profit had plucked down
Abbaies, he let all other points in man^r remain as before: and of this also
rep^nted before he died, as it is known, if not? woe be unto him that ever he
was borne: for there in the next world (good Sisters) Kings and Queens come to
their accounts, as well as you and we poor folks.

I could here tell you of many learned and virtuous men that were then put to
death, because they would not yield to the King in his unlawful doings:
knowing right well that it was all contrary to the law of God. Amongst whom
were these two: The Bishop of Rochester the most virtuous and best learned of
all the Clergy, as appears by his books. And Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chauncel
or of England a lay man, who for his virtue, wisdom, and learning passed all
temporal men that ever were in that Realm, as appears by his learned works
written in the English tongue, but now not suffered to be redd, because they
teach the CATHOLIQVE FAITH: Some man will tell you, that they were behedded for
treason; but believe him not, unless it be treason to obey God rather then
Princes, surely other treason they committed none.

One Mark more I will show you to discern the true Church, The thir^e mark
is ^nitie.
and that in few words, but so plain that your self will confess it. To
know the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, this is a certain and an infallible mark, if it be
in unity and concord? if it have an agreement and consent of hearts and
opinions: that is to say, if it have but one faith and one religion. Act. 4.
For of the true Church it is said: The whole multitude of believers had one
heart and one mind. Ephe. 4.
And S. Paul says: One God, one faith, one baptism. And again: 1. Cor. 14.
God is not a God of dissension, but of peace and unity. Look now and
consider the state of your Protestants in England only, are they all of one
religion? Have you not among them, some Lytherans, some Caluinists, some
Puritanes, all agreeing against the POPE, and each disagreeing one from the
other? Do not your Luther^^s preach yea before the Queen, not without great
thanks for their labor, that the body of Christ is really present in the
Sacrament? And do not your Caeluinists preach clean contrary, that there is
only bread and wine? And as for your Puritanes do not they preach and write
so far contrary from the other two, that they are now forbidden to preach and
cast into prison, and put from all livings? Yea the communion book it self
does it not now say clean contrary to that which it said in the later end
of King Henry his time? Then you were expreslye commanded to believe that
under each kind of bread and wine are contained the body and blood of Christ,
now it is petty treason to fay so? I speak not here of Dermarke, of Geneua, of
other cities in Germanve, who are all Protestants, and all differing among them
selves, and from you. I have only declared how great diversity and
disagreeing their is among your Protestants at home within one little Island:
which is so evident, and so far from good christianity, that it may be unto
you a very certain and suer token, that the true faith can not be among them,
which hitherto can not agree in one faith, each condemning the others opinion.

Thus (derely beloved, and my very louinge Sisters) I have given you certain
general Marks to learn the true Church: To write all were infinite, because
all books are full of our religion, I trust hereafter to instruct you in
every point, as you would desire, and I pray God give you grace, that you may
desire it: All at once would be to tedious: In the mean time remember these
two things: When your religion began, and by whom, and how it came at length
into England. This is the year of Christ a thousand five hundred, eyghty and
three. Luther began to preach with-in these fiftye years: If he preached the
truth, and all before him were deceived, where was the Church of Christ in all
the world for a thowsande and five hundred years before? and how is Christ
^^ue of his promis, that said: I will remain with you for ever, and the holy
Ghost shall teach you all truth, and the gates of hell shall not prcu^^ile
against it: But for out Church, that is to say the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, we can
show how it is grown and continued from the Apostles until this day, and never
failed: We can reccon you from time to time, Councels, Bishopps, Doctors,
infinite numbers of good christians of all ages that were all of our faith and
of our Church. Can your Ministers deny but that S. Chrysostom allows
praying to Saints? or that S. Jerome calls the Bishop of Rome Supreme head
of the whole Church under Christ? or that S. Austen prayed for his mother
being dead? or that he honored the Relics of S. Steven? or that S. Gregory
said Mass? or that S. Ambrose says, hefore the words of consecration it is
bread and wine, but after the words are spoken by the priest it is the very
body and blood of Christ or that all christians in S. Austens time, did
worship the blessed Sacrament? or that the second Council of Nice^, did many
hundred years ago, allow the use of Images for the memory and
representation of Christ and his saints? condemning Image breakers: or that S.
Barnerd was an Abbot and had monks under him, as in catholic countries now a
days? can they deny but that all this is true? and dare they deny these
virtuous Fathers, and Doctors of the Church to be now Saints in heaven?

O my good Sisters, that you could understand their books and their writings,
that you might your selves see what they say, and what wonderful men they
were, endued with the spirit of God exceedingly above other even good men, much
more then your licentious leaders, I doubt not but you would suspect your new
doctors, and follow these: you should perceive they had the scriptures at their
fingers eds, they knew right well the meaning and sense thereof, night and day
by fasting and prayer, and chaste life, beseeching God that they might
understand and truly expound his word. O what a difference is there between
them and these new Preachers? Sisters, I appeal to your consciences, whither
will you, or ought you to trust in the expounding of Scripture, your young
unlearned, and fleshly Ministers; or these ancient, most skillful, and most
virtuous Fathers?

When Christ said: Mat. 26.
Take, eat, this is my body: Al these Fathers say and agree that it was his
body in very deed: Your ministers tell you it was but bread and wine. Mat.
16.
When Christ said to Peter, thou art Peter, that is a rock, and upon this
rock will I build my Church. These Fathers say that Peter was made Head of
the Church, and after him all his successors in the Sea of Rome where Peter was
the first Bishopp: Your Ministers tell you that Peter had no more preheminaunce
then the other Apostles, and therefore the Bishop of Rome has no more
authority then an other bishop has. When Christ said to his Apostles:
Receive ye the holy ghost, Io. 20.
what soever ye do loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven, and what soever
ye do bind in earth it shall be bound in heaven: These Fathers say that
Christ gave to his Church authority to remit sin by the ministry of the
priest to all such as do truly repent, and therefore will have the people go
to Confession: Your ministers have taken that comfortable Sacrament of penance
away altogether. When Raphael the Angel says in the twelfth chapter of Tobias:
That he did offer up Tobias prayer to almighty God. And when in the second
book of Macchabees the fifteenth chapter, Onias the priest says of Jeremy
being dead This is he that prays much for his people, and for the holy
city: these fathers say, that the Angels and Saints do pray for us, and
that we may pray to them: your ministers do not stricke to say, that these
books of Tobie, and the Macchabces are scant good scripture.

Many other things like unto these I could reccon, but I should be to long,
fearing least I should werie you, these few are sufficient to give you to
taste of such marks as may show you the CATHOLIC CHVRCH. These and many other
great reasons do keep all good christians within the Church. These things
make so many catholics, partly to have suffered death: partly to have died in
prison: partly to continue in prison so many years: partly to forsake their
pleasant country, their dear friends, and to live to their conscience among
strangers, being thought of many worldly men to be very fools for so doing:
but they know right well that the wisdom of this world is foolishnes before
God. Mat. 10
And Christ says, He that loves father and mother, sister and brother, better
then me, is not vvorthie of me.

Sisters give me leave to tell you somewhat of my self, not for any brag,
but the more to move you and to give God all the praise for his great goodness
toward me. It pleased my parents to bring me up in learning as you know, as
I was not the best, so I was at al times not compted the worst among my fellows
and companions: some small estimation I had in Oxforde above my desert, more
afterward when it pleased the Duke to make me though unworthy, Tutor to the
Earl his son: as long as his grace did prosper, I lived in his house to my
conscience without trouble: when he was in the Tower, and other men ruled his
house, I was willed to receive the Communion, or to depart: if I would have
yielded, I had very large offers which I need not tell. It pleased God to
stay me so with his grace, that I chose rather to forsake all then to do
against my belief, against my knowledge, against my conscience, against the
law of almighty God: For a time I lay secretly in England, afterward I came
beyond the seas into these catholic countries, out of schism and heresy:
for the which I do thank almighty God much more, then for all the estimation
that I had or might have had in England. Whatsoever my estate is here, I do
more esteem it, then all the riches of England as it now stands.

And were I so mad think you to forsake all preferment, all liuinges, all
estimation, to live from my good Mother, from you my louinge Sisters and your
husbands, from other my dear friends and companions, out of mine own most
pleasant country, would I do this think you, but that my learning and my
conscience tells me, that to solow your religion is present danger of body
and soul: and to be in the CATHOLIC CHVRCH is the only way to salvation? Fie
upon all worldy riches when the soul is in danger: nothing is so precious as
the soul: first seek for the kingdom of heaven, and for other things as it
pleases God. O that I might understand once, that you were of my mind, and of
the catholic religion: O my heart would leap for joy, to consider that
although we can not live together upon earth, yet we may hereafter meet in
heaven: which is impossible as long as we disagree in faith. S. Paul says:
There is one God, one faith, one baptism. S. Austen says, speaking of one
Emeritus, He can not be saved but in the Catholic Church.

Do you think it sufficient to believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost? Upon the 88 psalm.
Harken what S. Auste^ says: What does it profit thee, if thou consesse the
Lord? If thou bonour God? If thou preach and praise him? If thou acknovvledge
his Son? If thou confess that he sits at the right hand of his father?
What does this profit thee, if thou blaspheme his Church? S. Athanasius in
his creed says: Whosoever vvil be saved it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith, which faith unless a man believe in all points, and every
article, without doubt (says he) he shall perish everlastingly. One point is
(good Sisters) that Christ gave us at his last supper, his own blessed body
and blood to feed upon in the remembrance of his bitter death: he that says
it is not so, does he believe in Christ? Does he not in effect say that Christ
was not able to do it, and by that reason that he was not omnipotent? For when
the three Evangelists report it so plainly, Mat. 26. Mat. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor.
11.
and S. Paul after them: Take, eat, THIS IS MY BODY, that shall be delivered
for you: THIS IS MY BLOOD that shall be shed for you: What makes a man to
doubt but that it is so in deed? O you will say, I see nothing but bread and
wine. If you should see his body, no god a mercy if you did believe it: But
Christ said to Thomas: Thou Thomas do believe because thou have seen,
10.20.
but happy are they that believe when they see not. Mat. 2.


I pray you when the three wise men came from the East to worship Christ, what
did they see in him? Forsooth a young infant, not able to help himself
suckinge his mother a poor carpenters wife, and that in an ox stawle: yet
they fell down and worshipped him as a God: Is it not as easy to believe the
body of Christ is under the form of bread, as that almighty God himself was
then under the shape of a seely weak infant? O good Sisters, unless you
believe, you shall never understand: believe once Ghrist his words, and that
he is Almighty, and that he is able to do what soever he says, and you will
think that all is easy: return to the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, and be content to
learn that which you know not, of them that will not for all the world deceive
you, and you shall find exceeding comfort.

When Christ shall say at the later day, as it were in this manner. Was it not
of my great kyndnes that I left unto you mine own body and blood? And was it
not of my exceedinge goodness and wisdom to leave it, not in the form of flesh
and blood, least your nature should abhor it, but of bread and wine which can
be loathsome to no man? and you make me this gaye recompense, saying that it was
nothing but bread and wine, because you could taste nothing else in your mouth,
and because your new preachers told you so, whom I sent not? Were not you
christened in an other faith? Did not my church which is my spouse and the
pillar of truth, Apoc. 21
1. Timo. 3.
always teach otherwise? What have you to say for your self, but that you
have most vukindly abused that BLESSED SACRAMENT and heavenly mystery, and
make me a liar, and deny my omnipotency, and therefore deserve eternal
damnation with all such as have deceived you?

When Christ shall say this, will it not be a heavy case? When Cyprian,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Austen, Ierom, Gregory, Bernard, all the old Fathers
now Saints in heaven, shall come and bear witness against you, and say that
they taught otherwise? When your Bishops that are now partly dead, and partly
in prison for the defendinge of this cause, shall condemn you because you did
not follow their good example? When your own doctors and teachers shall not be
able to answer for themselves, will it not be a pitiful case? But I hope
better of you (good Sisters) I can not mistruste your good natures, but that
you will be glad to learn the truth: which almighay God grant unto you for
his dear Sons sake who died for us: and that I may hear some comfortable
news from you.

Do but signify unto me that you are content, if any thing be amiss, to be
better instructed. Prove me what I can say for any thing that trowbleth your
consciences: It shall be far better news unto me, to receive two lines from
you to such a purpose, then to understand that your husbands were made Lords
and you Ladies. He is rich that is in the Catholic Church, and he is honorable
that is in the favor of God. Sisters if I might do you good to God-warde, I
would not stick to adventure this body of mine to save your souls, to come
and talk with you: my body is not more precious unto me then your souls: How
you are disposed, and what you would have me to do for your sakes let me
understand by the next. Deal wisely I pray you and warily both for your own
sake and for our good friend this berer: It is not reason that for his good will
he should incur any danger: God forbid: my trust is in your wisdom that you
will keep this very close til hereafter by reason of the great persecution.
The matter is weighty and concerns both you and this berer very much: be
wise and trusty, and deceive not your brother that loves you as himself, and
therefore wishes by all means to do you good. S. Paul says: He that has
not regard of his own kindred, 1. Timoth. 5.
has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel: S. Chrysostom upon the
same place writes thus: If a man instruct strangers in the faith, and suffer
his own kin to continevve in their error with whom he were lykelly to
prevail most, because they make most account of him, were he not a most
cruel and barberous man? For this cause I write unto you, and wish you al
grace, al goodness, al heavenly comfort: last of all, and least of all, to
prosper in this world, and yet I wish you that with all my heart at the pleasure
of God.

Other good thing I have none to send you but this, I will remain in your
debte for your gentle tokens. Commend me to your selves, your loving husbands,
and your little ones: and when you have learned to believe right your selves,
bring them up accordingly, and teach them to fear God. Make much of this
berer I pray you: and save him harmless by your wise and discreate dealings.
Almighty God preserve you, and by his holy spirit lead you into all truth.

Amen.
THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN TO M. DOCTOVR White Warden of the new College in
Oxforde.
RIGHT Worshipful, although your worldly dignity, and the just opinion of
your great wisdom compared with my contraries might fear me from writing
unto you in this bold manner, yet many things moved me, especially my charity
toward you to whom I am beholding for causes which you may remember, and my
dewtie toward God, whose good motion I hope it was, that I should tell you
rather friendly then finely, plainly the^ curiously, that which your self do
know much better, but have not cause so well to remember: Isa. 28.
Because that vexation does give understanding, Ps. ^8.
and man when he was in honor did not understand. Which difference in estate,
makes that the younger man for years and more simple for wit and knowledge, may
notwithstanding sometime truly say with the prophet: Ps. 118.
Above ancients have I understood. Quare doctoralis ille facessat splendour
cuiuscunque dignitatis recedat ambitio: cum fratre and conseruo meo, filig
matris ecclefiae, discipulo Jesus Christi loquor. Therefore setting a side that
doctor all honor and the respect of what dignity soever, I may be bold to
speak plainly with my brother and fellovv-seruant in Christ, with a child
of our Mother the Church and a scholar of Jesus Christ.

Presupposing then that you are in conscience a catholic, and seeing that in
outward show you profess the contrary, I am bold to reason familiarly with
you, and to demand: whether you think it lawful to believe one thing
inwardly, and to protest the contrary openly? and how you can avoid these
evident scriptures: With the heart we believe to Justice: But when there is
necessary occasion: To. 10.10
With the mouth confession is made to salvation. He that shall deny me before
men, Mat. 10.33.
I also will deny him before my Father which is in heaven. But if you think
it unlawful so to do, (because you wot well it is condemned of old in the
heretics called Helcesaitistes and Priscilianistes) and yet do against your
own persuasion, Buscb. li. 6. ca. 31. Aug. co^t. Mendac. Cap. 2. To. 14.22.
how answer you these places: Blessed is he that judges not himself in that
which he approves. And: whatsoever is not of faith is sin: To. 6.
That is (as S. Augustine and others expound it) reluctante conscientia: Our
conscience striving against it. If neither the one nor the other, but you are
persuaded that a man may lawfully profess both religions as time and Prince
alters: Besides that it was the heresy of Basilides. Lib. 4. ca. 2.
To adiaphore in, as Nicephorus writes: What interpretation have you for these
scriptures: Vsquequo claudicatis in vtramque partem etc. 3. Re. 18.21.
How long haulte you on both sides? I four Lord be God? solovv him: But if
Baal? follow him. Ecclesiast. 3.
And again: Coringrediens duas vias etc. A heart that goes two vvayes shall
not have success, and the perverse of heart shall be scandalized in them. And:
1. Cor. 10.11.
you can not drink the chalice of our Lord, and the chalice of devils: Mat.
6.24. Mat. 12.30.
you can not serve two Masters. He that gathers not with me scatters.
And again: Iac. 3.16.
Does the fountain give forth at one hole svveete and sour water? And yet
again: Apoc. 3.16.
But because thou art lukevvarme, and neither could nor vvhot, I will begin to
vomit thee out of my mouth. I need not urge the terrible threatenings, your
wisdom may carnestly consider of it.

But it is possible that you mislyke of certain things in the Catholic
religion which you would wish to be otherwise, and conceive a mixte religion,
compounded of that which is best in both. But M. Doctor, you are in mine
opinion wyser then they who notwithstanding for this singularity are esteemed
to be wise men, and of grave judgment, but of the vnwyser sort. You know
concerning things to be mislyked, either they pertayne to faith or to manners:
If these later offend, you wot what S. Augustine has long agone answered the
Donatistes: Tollerare ecclesiam, non probare, paleas in tanta copia esse vt
frumentum tegant, donec veniat is qui ventilabrum habet in manu sua vt purget
aream suam. That the Church does tolerate and not approve them, and that their
is so great quantity of chafe that it covers the corn, till he come that
has the fan in his hand to purge his floor.

If any point of doctrine agreed upon by the whole Church (which is always
directed by the holy Ghost) mislyketh you? you may upon deeper consideration,
iustlye fear lest your self, or any other man in this case be not a true
Catholic, nor of that Church, out of which is no salvation: For that which is
the ground of your faith in one point must consequently be the ground of it
in all the rest. So that if you believe (as you do) the presence of Christ in
the blessed Sacrament, because the universal Church out of the scriptures has
so concluded: then if the same Church do define any other Article, for
example, Of Purgatory, of praying to Saints, of Pilgrimage, of Pardons, of
Images, you must in like manner believe the same. If not? What authority do
you follow? What do you make your grownd? but your singular fancy, as in
these, so in all the rest which you seem to believe,

Far from the obedience which the Apostle teaches: Captiuatinge their
understanding to the obedience of faith: 2. Cor. 10.3.
And very wide from S. Austens most learned and humble opinion. Contr^cy.
funda^a. 5.
Non crederem Euangelio nisi authoritas Ecclesiae me moueret: I vvoulde not
believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Church did move me. He that
said so, would he not also upon occasion offered boldly and confidently have
said: I believe their is Purgatory, that their are Pardons in the Church, that
we may pray to Saints, because the Church does teach me to believe so. And if
you ask him what church, he would send you to his long treatises against the
Donatists and show you as in a glass a very lively description of this present
CATHOLIC ROMAN GHVRCH. No dout the authority of the Church is either so
necessary or so sufficient a foundation to build upon, that without the
warrantise of it a man believes nothing, because he believes his own
brains: and with it, a man may and ought even against humane reason believe
any thing, because it is the Oracle of the holy Ghost.

And in good sooth, it is a small reason to credit one article and discredit
an other, both defined by the Church. As to say: this is gold and this is
copper, both being tried gold by the tou^ch stone. As much to say in plain
words, this I will, and this I will not. Prospe^. pru. P. 2.0.27
Si^yolo, si^iubeo, stet proratione voluntas. Unnatural children, and therefore
in deed no true children, that deuideth their mother the Church, lyking this,
misliking that: which is properly deuidere sententiam: Even as Salomom judged
most truly her to be the false mother, that required most impudently: Be it
neither to me, nor to thee: but let it be divided. 3. Reg. 3.26. In. Ps, 88.
conc. 2.
Quid prodest si Dominum confiteris? Deum honoras? if sum predicas? Filium eius
agnoscis, sedentem ad dexteram patris confiteris? and blasphemas ecclesiam
eius? What does it profit thee (says S. Austen) if thou confess our Lord,
if thou honor God, if thou praise him, if thoudost acknovvledge his son, and
confess him to sit at the right hand of the Father, and yet do blaspheme
his Church? And after he had recyted all the heresies before, and in his time,
he says: Omnis christianus catholicus is it a non debet credere: Ad Quodul. in
sine.
sed non omnis qui ista non credit, consequenter debet se christianum
catholicum iam putare vel dicere. Possune enim and haereses aliae quae in hoc
opere nostro commemoratae non sunt, vel esse vel fieri, quarum aliquam quisquis
^enuerit, Christianus Catholicus non erit. Every christian catholic ought not
to believe these things, but it follovveth not that every one that belecueth
not these things ought to think and account him self to be a christian
catholic, for their may be many other heresies which are not reconned up in
this book, any one of the which, whosoever holds, is not a christian
catholic. And therefore Athan ^si is in Symbolo says: Which (Catholic
faith) except every one do keep wholy and inviolable, without doubt he
shall perish euerl estingly. Thus much I have said by the way, rather to you,
then of you: because I have known certain learned and wise men of that
mislyking and distinguishing humor.

But to you I will talk as to one that is in conscience a full Catholic, and
for outward behavior may be esteemed contrary. S. Austen exhorts us: Vbi
supra.
Amemus Dominum Deum nostrum, Amemus Ecclsiam eius, illum siout Patrem, istam
si^ut Matrem Matrimonium hoc magna cum charitate compaginatur: Nemo offendit
vnum and promere^ur alterum. Nemo dicat ad Idola quidem vado: sed tamen Dei
ecclesiam non relinquo, Catholicus sum: tenens Matrem, offendis Patrem etc. Let
us love our lord God, let us love his Church: Him as our Father, her as our
Mother. This matrimonye is knitte together with great charity. No man
offends the one, and deserves thanks of the other. Let no man say, I go to
the Idols, and yet for all that I do not forsake Gods Church: I am a
Catholic, houlding thy Mother (in heart) and offendinge thy Father (in fact
openly) etc. I need not tell you, that to communicate with Idolaters and with
heretics is all one, Passim in propheta^
Quia omnis heresis Idolum est sectatorum eius. Because all heresy (as S.
Hierome says) is the Idol of her followers. And therefore S. Austen
declaring the danger of the one to be more then the other says: Upon the. 54.
Psalm.
Ab illis qui long sunt facilis cautio est: non me tamcito fallit qui dicit:
veni Idolum adorare: multum a me long est. Christianus es? Christianus inquit:
expropinquo aduersatur, prope est, redime in pace animam meam ab iis qui
appropinquant mihi. We may easily bevvare of those that be afar of, for he
does not so soon deceive me, which says: Come adore the Idol, he is very
far from me. Art thou a christian? I am a christian says he: he is near to
me: he is against me even at hand: redeem thy soul in peace from those which
are near unto thee. S. Ambrose: Fraterno nomine non fraterne ecclesiam
persequntur: ^e Incar. Ca. 2.
siquidem sub optione. nominis Christiani and quadam nuncupatiua fidei
germanitate paricidalibus gladiis nos cupiunt vulnerare. They persecute the
Church under the name of a brother, but not brotherly: truly they desire to
wound us with their murdering svvord under the chosen name of a Christian,
and a certain feigned brotherhood of faith.

Now if the pretensed name of a Christian does so easily procure credit to
false doctrine? What does the name of a Catholic to persuade erroneous
opinions? which I beseech you consider deeply. For a Catholic you are
esteemed, and learned and wise: Many good meaning men that gladly would do
well depend upon you, harken what you say, look what you do, and because
they are determined to follow you, by your doing ill and saying worse, you do
pitifully infecte many hearts, either with error or dissimulation, and wound
their souls to everlasting death: and that because they compte you a
Catholic, and therefore are persuaded, that you will not teach them amiss.
Like as the Jews conceived of one Al^mius the high Priest, saying: 1. Mac. 2.
The man being a Priest of Arons stock and coming unto us after this sort,
vndoubtebly will not deceive us. But you can well remember how by that name
and title he abused them.

Surely, if Heresy should choose persons for her commendation, there could be
no greater policy, the^ to hire such as have been wise Catholics and are so
esteemed yet. But in deed to be a slave to heretical aduauncements does not
become a wise man: and so great contempt of Christ and his Church ca^ not
stand with the name of a Catholic: Besides that, the danger thereof is
terrible, and with little consideration may justly make a stony heart to quake
and tremble. For what will you allege at the later day? or under what name
will you plead for your salvation? When he shall render every man according
to his works. Mat. 6.27
Amb. li. 3. ^e sp. san. c. 18.
That you are a Christian? But Christ will answer: Non agnosco nomen meum, vbi
non agnosco doctrinam meam. I do not acknovvleage my name, where I do not
acknovvleage my doctrine. Ps. 49
That you are a Catholic? But if thou savvest a these, To. 2.24
thou rannest after him. And my name through you is blasphemed amongst
heretics. Ps. 16.
And: Their belly is filled with my secrets. 1. Tim. 6.
Of close dissembling catholics, their congregation was increased and
multiplied. When our sweet Savior (who made that notable confession for every
one of us before Pontius Pilate) shall thus say unto you that now dare not
confess him, will you not then wish that you had prayed with the Prophet:
Ps. 118.
Take not away out of my mouth the word of truth utterly: Ps. 38.
And that you had done with the Prophet: I have not hid thy truth from the
great Council. And: Ps. 39.
Lo I will not stay my lips, Lord thou haste known.

Look well upon your person, your calling, your place, what a foul example it
is to others, and when such a man does (I will not say) further, but tolerate
only and dissemble false religion. Woe be to the world for scandals. S. Austen
has a place much worthy of your consideration. Ca. 7. de. pastor.
Si indifferent^r habuero errorem tuum, attendit qui fortis est, put at nihil
esse ire in haeresim. Quando aliquod commodum de seculo illuxerit, vnde mutetur
statim mihi dicit, fortis ille periturus: and hac and hac Deus est: quid
interest? homines inter se litigantes hoc secerunt, vbicunque colendus est
Deus: si forte illi dixerit aliquis Donatista, non tibi do filiam meam, nisi
fueris de part mea: illi opus est vt attendat and dicat: si nihil mali esset
de part eorum, non contra illos dicere^t ta^ta Pastores nos^tri, no^ pro
illorum errore satagerent. Si ergo cessemus and taceamus contrar: o^ loquuturus
est. Vtique si malum esset in part Donati, loquerentur contra, redarguerent
eos, satagerent lucrarieos, si errant, reuocarent illos: si pereunt,
quaererent. If I (being a pastor or guide of others) should make it (in the
weaker sort) a matter indefferent, to be of your error, then the strong in
faith would note it, and think it were no matter of importance to fall
into heresy. Therefore when any commodity that the world might proffer by
changing of his religion, the strong prone to perish would straight say to
me: ^ush, God is on this side, and that s^le, there is no difference, men only
falling at varience about the matter, have made all this ado. God may be
served on each hand. If some Donatist (so was the sect of that time called,
as now Protestant or Caluinist) should happily say unto him, I will not besto
we my daughter upon thee, except thou vvilte be of our sect, such a one bad
need to take good beede and say, if it were no hurt, but an indifferent
matter to be of the Donatistes party, then our Pastors would not speak so
many things against them, they vvoulde not busye them selves so much about
that error. Therefore if we cease and hold our peace, he will say all
contrary: Surely if it were so ill a thing to be of the sect or part of
Donat, our Pastors vvoullde speak against it: would reprove them: would
seek to vvynne them: If they erred, they would revoke them, if they be lost,
they would seek them.

If it be such a block for other men to stumble at, when the learned Doctor
and Pastor does not confute heresy? What is it when he preaches and
prayseth it? Alas you can not deny, but that you do so. 1. cor. 8.
And so through thy knowledge, the week brother shall perish for whom
Christ has dyed. Saint Cyprian brings in children, Ep. de. laps.
whose Parents example made them den^e Christ, Aug. ep. 23.
pleadinge for them selves at the day of Judgment, in this manner. Nos nihil
fe^imus, nec derelicto cibo and poculo Domini ad prophana con^agia sponte
properauimus: Perdidit nos aliena perfidia, parents sensimus parricidas: illi
nobis ecclesiam Matrem, illi Parentem Deum negauerunt, vt dum parui and
improuidi, and tanti facinoris ignari per alios ad consortium criminis
iungimur; aliena fraud caperemur. We our selves did nothing: we forsook not
of our own accord the meat and cupp of our Lord, and hastened to profane
contagions: other men's faythlesnes destroyed us. We felt our parents
murderers of us their own children, they for us denied the Church our
mother, they forsook God our Father that being in our young and unskillful
years, and wholy ignorant of the wickedness, we might be entangled by
others in the fellowship of the sin, and be intrapped by other men's fraud.

If the carnal children may justly thus accuse their natural parents in the
case of Idolatry? May not spiritual children much more impute their damnation
to their spiritual fathers in the cause of heresy? I will not dispute how the
crimes differ to commit Idolatrye and to preach heresy, both against a man's
conscience, but because dissimulation is the least of them, and scandalizare
fratres is an horrible sin: Therefore the authorities which served sometimes
against the one, may now be aptly used against the other. S. Austen: Apparet
illud esse prohibitum, ne in honorem alienorum Deorum aliqua re vtamur, aut vti
existimemur, Ep. 15^.
sic eam accipiendo, vt quamuis animo contaminamus eos tamen qui nostrum animum
ignorant, ad haec honoranda, aedificemus. It is evident that we be forbidden
to use any thing whatsoever for the honor of strange gods, or in such sort
as we may be thought to use it to that end so taking it, that though we in
our heart contemn it, we yet provoke them that see not our minds to honor
the same. And again speaking of Seneca: Eo damnabilius colebat Idola, quo illa
quae mendaciter agebat, De ciui. Dei li. 6. ca. 10.
sic ageret, vt eum populus veraciter agere existimaret. He did so much more
damnablye worship Idols, for that he so did those things which he did in
feigned show only that the people might think he did them truly and
unfeignedly.

For how shall the people judge, but according as they see and hear? If a
good meaning or interpretation would serve: Peter, might have said, (as some
old writers excused him) that dicendo, Theeph. in. ^. 22. Lu.
Nescio bominem, illud voluisset, Nescio purum hominem, sed Dcum bominem
factum: saying: I know not the man, be meant I know him not for a pure
man, but for God, Ep. Cleri. Roms. 31. Apnd. Cyp.
made man. But: Cum totum fidei Sacramentum in confessione Christi nominis
intelligatur, esse digestum, qui fallaces in excusatione peaestigias, quaerit,
negabit. Et qui vult videri propositis aduersus Euangelium vel edictis vel
legibus satisfecisse, hoc if so iam paruit quod videri paruisse se voluit.
Seeing the whole Sacrament of faith is known to consist in the confession of
Christ his name, be shall be deemed to deny him that seeks deceiptfull and
vain shifts for his excuse. And he that would be compted to have satified or
fulfilled Laws or statutes promulgated against the Gospel, in that he must
be adjudged to have obeyed them, that he would have him self seem to have
done it. And there fore constante Eleazarus would not eat, no not lawful
meats, 2. Mac. 6.
lest it should be thought he did eat meats unlawful. I appeal to your
conscience only (for what need I urge euidente places) whether these
authorityes do not concern you? S. Ambrose says: Li. 2. of. c. 24.
Licet ^^bi silere in negotio duntaxat pecuniario, quanquam si^ constantiae
adesse aequitati: in causa autem Dei, vbi communionis periculum est, etiam
dissimulare peccatum est non leave. It is lavvfull for thee in a monye matter
only to hold thy peace, though it vve^e the part of a constant man even
therein also to stand in a matter of equity: but in the cause of God, where
communion or fellowship in ^ayth is in peril, even to dissemble is no small
sin.

O but it is good wisdom to maynteyne credit in every world, and to loose
neither wealth no^ estimation. I wounder that any wise man should think so.
Much like as Cato Vticensis thought it great manhood to kill him self: and the
secular Poet calls it Catonis nobile laetum: Cato his noble death: Whereas S.
Austen proves it to have been dastardly cowardnes, and womanishe
pucillanimitye: Right so that worldly wisdom, is foolishnes with God:
unless a christian man may say with the unchristened and profane Orator:
Seruire temporibus sapientis semper est habitum: 2. Cor. 3.19.
It was alvvayes compted vvisdome to apply him self to the time. And Non idem
semper dicere sed idem semper spec^tare debemus. We ought not to speak the
same thing advvayes, but to approve the same thing still. And: Quem fugiam
scio, ad quem fugiam nescio: I know whom I should fly: but I know not to
whom to fly. O but we are commanded to obey our Prince: I need not tell you
how sarre, and in what degrees: S. Peter and S. John tell you by their example
the case must be limited. I will only put you in mind of other worthy men
sometime Prelates in the Church, and as it were houlde you the book to read
how they have dealt with Princes and potentates Act. 6.19.
upon the like occasion: what vehement persuasions, how manifestly they
resisted for his sake: Who is terrible and takes away the spirit of Princes,
Psalm. 75.
terrible to the Kings of the earth.

Theodoretus writes thus: Ec. histo. lb. 4. ca. 17
Cum Praefectus (Modestus) Caesaream venisset, Basilium Magnum accercitum
honorifice excipit, leui and blanda oratione compellat: hortatur vt cedat
tempori, and ue propter nimis curiosam dogmat^m obseruationem, eamque paruo
estimandam, tot tantasque ecclesias prodat: pollicetur se Imperatoris
(Valentis) amicitiam ei conciliaturum beneficiaque multis aliis inde euentura
praedica^. Cui diuinus ille vir: pueris (inquit) haec quidem oration conuenit,
siquidem illi ac sui similes eiusmodi verba auide arripiunt: at qui sunt in
sacris literis educati, ne vnam quidem sillabam diuinorum dogmatum prodi
siaunt: sed pro istorum defensione, si opus sit, nullum non mortis genus
libenter amplectuntur: quod autem ad Imperatoris amicitiam attinet, eam cum
pietate iunctam magni aestimo, sed si ea careat, perniciosum esse dico. etc.
When the Lieutenante was come to Cesar^a, he called for Basil the great, and
received him honorably, and by a svveete and gentle speech exhorted him to
yield to the time, and not upon to curious observation of some point of no
great vvayght to betray so many and so great churches, promising him vvithall
to reconcile him to the Emperors favor, and affirming that much good might
come thereof to many. To whom this divine man ansvvered, that his tale were
fit to persuade children and such like, which would easily like of such
offers: but that those which are brought up in holy writ, can not suffer
one fillable of heavenly doctrine and laws to be betrayed, but for defense
thereof would embrace, if need require any kind of death. As for the amitye
of the Emperor, if it might be had with pietye, I much would esteem it, but
without that I say it is (...). May it please you to read a little after the
constante confession of the Priests and Deacons of Alexandria, Lib. 4. ca. 20.
being exhorted by Magnus the Count: (...) fidem ^b Apostolis per Patrum
successionem traditam proderent, affirmando Valenten Augustinum Imperatorem
clementissimum hac re veheme ^ter delectatum iri. Postremo cum maxima
contentione vocis haec verba protulit: O mis^ri, obsequimini. Ariani opinioni
assentite. Nam diuinum numen, licet illa quam colitis religio vera sit, si non
vestra sponte, sed necessitate ducti ab ea discedatis, veniam vobis daturum
est: Etenim in his quae necessitate peccantur, relinquitur excusationi locus,
sed cum sua sponte quisquam deliquerit, carere reprehensione, non potest. To
betraye their Ancestors faith received of the Apostlis by succession of the
Fathers, affirming that Valens the most clemente Emperor vvoulde be much
pleased thereby. Lastely with great vehemence of speech and loud voice be
uttered these word: O miserable men, obey, assent to the Arians opinion, for
though your religion were true, the divine Majesty would pardon, seeing you
fall (...) from it willingly, but of necessity compelled: for their is ever
just exc^se to them that offend by necessity, though when a man falls
willingly he can not be without blame. Read the place and mark how little
they esteemed these Worldly persuasions, which I have therefore recyted at
large, because the world is prone now a days, not only to use, but also to
follow the like inchauntements.

But must the Prince needs be soothed? Then Symeones an Archbishop of Persie is
without cause praised in the Ecclesiastical histories. ^ozo. lib. 2. ca. 8.
Qui introductus ad Sap^r^m Regem vt de fide sua responderet, neque veritus est
quiequam, neque Regem adorauit: Rex commotus sciscitatur cur iam neutiquam
^psum adoret, cum ante fecisset. Cui Symcones, non ante (inquit) eram deductus
ad verum Deum prodendum, and propterea non re^us tham debitos honores Regi
praestare: at iam idem ipsum facere fas non est, nam iam pro pietate and nostra
religione decertaturus venio. Who being brought to King Sapor to gene^n
account of his faith, neither was any whit afraid, neither adored the King:
vvhereat the King being offended, demanded why be now did not his duty to
him as at other times before he had done? To whom Symeon, I was not said he
before brought to your presence to renounce the true God, and therefore then I
refused not to do due honor to the King, but now it is not lavvfull to do
the same, for now I come to combat for piety and our religion.

Thus to observe times (M. Doctor) was good wisdom so to honor the Prince at
one time, that God be not dishonored at an other time. Luc. 2^.
This was to render to Caesar the things that are Cesars: and the things that
are Gods, to God. O that all Prelates, in worldly consideration worthy men,
would learn by these examples and the like, to teach Princes, rather then to
be taught by them, to be stout in God his cause: and so happily to win both
the Prince and the people, rather then by the contrary to peruerte them. Will
you have an example of such lamentable consequents: Theod. lib. 4. ca. 32.
Vlphilas Gotthorum Episcopus cuius verba pro ratis legibus habebant, cum ab
Eudoxio pecuniae illecebris persuasus esset, nullam doctrinae esse differentiam
(Catholicorum and Arianorum) idem barbaris suis sua authoritate potius quam
ratione vlla ita persuasit, vt patrem maiorem quidem dicant ^sse, creaturam
tamen esse filium noluit dicere. Vlphilas Bishop of the Goths whose words
the people compted of as of very laws, being corrupted of Eudoxius by money,
so persuaded those his barberous men, not by any reason but by his authority
only, that betvvixte the Catholics and the Arians their was in doctrine no
difference: that they affirm the Father to be greater then the son, but yet
will not say that the son is a creature. Like as if an heretic
Superintendent should ask a dissemlinge Catholic: do thou believe, that
Christ is in the Sacrament? No forsooth: and says no m^re, but means he is
not there visibly and fleshly: were not this to say as the heretic would
have? And if some learned man would teach in this ease that he might say so
verve well, were it not a damnable lesson both to Master and Scholar? Your
learning and your wisdom knows it were so.

But will you give me leave to bring one example more of the peoples dangerous
error through the sca^dalous demeanure of Catholic Prelates? Misinus and
Vitalis sent to Constantinople from the Bishop of Rome to examine the case of
one Peter esteemed an heretic, delte so couldly in the matter, and kept such
familiar compan^e with the heretics: Euang. lib. 3. ca. 21.
Vt ea ratione multi simplices homines ab hereticis in errorem inducerentur qui
affirmare non dubitarunt Petrum ab Episcopo Romano in communionem receptum
esse. That by their meenes, many simple men were brought into error by the
heretics, who sticked not to affirm that Peter was admitted, by the Bishop
of Rome to his Communion. And because I spoke of ye^lding to Princes, the self
same history tells that Acacius the Bishop of Constantinople (otherwise a
worthy man) was judged by the Council of Calced on grauissimo crimine dignus,
worthy of a most greeuou^ fault, because he did not tell Zeno the Emperor
which communicated with Peter, the Counsels sentence upon him. Cume rte istud
simodo amaret Zeaonem, ^. Cap.
prestare deberet: verum Imperatoris desiderio satisfacere quam fideiconsulere
expetebat. When perdy, if he had loved the Emperor Zeno, he should have done
that, but he had a greater desire to satisfy the Emperors mind, then to
advance the faith. He saw that the Emperor had preferred him, and therefore
to gratify his Majesty, dissembled what was done in the Council, and him
self communicated with him. But it was small for the Emperors honor to have
such a friend that would not deal plainlye, as it appears by the story.

Themistius the Philosofer speaking of the A^acians, that applied the^ selves
to the Emperors pleasure (then Iouianus) against their conscience, says:
Assentatores non Deum sed purpuram Coluisse, Socrat. lib. ^. ca. 21.
Euripoque similis esse, qui modo in hanc, modo in illam partem praecipitatur.
That those flatterers did not worship God, but the Emperor: and were like to
Euripus, which runs one while this way, an other while that way.
Undoubtedly besides that, simulation is an horrible offense toward God, besides
the evil examples ministered thereby, to the simple, and the punishment due for
so many souls miscarried: undoubtedly I say a known dissembler is never well
thought of: yea he is always secretly misliked of the same Potentats whom he
thinks by soothing and yielding to gratify. And it is certain that among them
selves they jest at such co^terfaits. As Octauius. Augustus drinking to a fre^d
of his taxed one that sat present, saying: Proditionem amo, Proditores non
l^udo. I love the betraying of treason, but I do not praise the betrayers
thereof.

And here I remember the terrible storye of Constantinus the false Bishop of
Constantinople, Who having yielded to the Emperout against Images, and utterly
abiuring them, and consented to the excommunication of John Chrisoroas
(otherwise) S. Dam^s^n and other holy men for the same matter, notwithstanding,
fell into such displeasure and disgrace, that as it is long, so it is loathsome
and pitiful to tell what dishonotable reproach he sustened before all the
people where he had been Bishop, not one of them all mourning or lamentinge his
case because of his inconstancy and dublenes: for even until his miserable
death the wretched man said, whatsoever they would have him, hoping thereby to win favor, but it full out far otherwise. (...)
N^m ^^ssisimp^^ Imperator p^triciis, significate, dicens: Quid di^^s de ^^de
nostra and Concil^o quod (...) (inqui^) and credis, and hone (...): puta^^s^
abhor (...). ^t conscstim (...) respondentes di^erunt e^: (...) audire nolunius
de Rspan^ pollu^e, exho^ ergo vadi^in terebr^s, and sic (...) sententia,
descendit ad claustra firarum and decollatrus est. ^or the (...) to him certain
of his (...) caused him to be questioned vvithall thus: What say thou of
our (...) and the Council that love held? You believe well Sir says he, and
the Council was good, thincking by these words to please the Emperor: but
they straight ansvvered him, we will not bear these things of thy pollured
mouth: from benceforth therefore go down into darkness, and so bauing that
sentence given upon him, he descended into the places where vvild beasts use
to be kept, and there was behedded. So that in this man (as in all doble
delets) is and shall be verified the prophecy: Sophon. 1
I will destroy those which swear by our Lord, and by Melchom: By their
Lord God in heart, and the Idol, or (as in the hebrew) in their King with tongue
and lips.

Contrarywyse when a grave Prelate will deal plainly and resist the fancy of
his Prince, although he might thereby incur displeasure, that thing has
greater commodities then may easily be esteemed: that is, so glorious in
heaven, and heroical upon earth, as might move a man in many respects
exceedingly. To omit all others, the above named Constantine shall suffice to
declare what wisdom it is, in time and place mildly to mortify the Princes
humor. Who being asked of the Emperor (named also Constantine) Modo quid nos
laederet, si dixerimus Theotokon Christotokon: (...)
At ille hunc complexus, ait: Miserere domine, ne ad contagionem tuam venit
sermo iste. Nonne vides qualiter deuulgetur and anathematizetur Nestorius a
tota ecclesia? Qui respondens, ait: I go discere volens interrogaui, verum
vsque ad te sermo. Well, what burte would it do us, if we should call our
B. Lady the mother of Christ? (For the Catholics called her Gods mother, and
the Nestorians would not so do, but called her Christ's mother only) But the
Bishop Constantine embracing the Emperor said: Oh my Lord have pitye, let not
that term be used to thy defiling: do thou not see, how Nestorius is
published and proclaimed as accursed by the whole Church? Who ansvvered and
said: I asked the question but for my learning only, it was but to thee
spoken. Is it not very plain here, that if the Patriarch had soothed him in
this as he did afterward in other things a great part of the world had been
in danger of Nestorisme? But when he heard the matter gaynesayed, he excused
him self and was ashamed that he had moved the question: Such a virtue it is
to deal discreatly and religiously between God and Princes, that we always
remember: 1. ps. 117.
It is good rather to hope in our Lord, then to hope in Princes.

Thus I have rudely and breifely, but truly and charitably set down before
your eyes diverse examples, if it may please God to give you heavenly
understanding by some one or other of them to see your own fault and to
repent before the dreadful account which you must needs make, so much the
sooner the elder that you are. Do not conceive I beseech you that by these
sundry histories I meante to discrybe your person, good M. Doctor take me not
amiss. If by the universal view of other men's noughtye demeanure you do the
better perceive what soever little or great fault is in your self (as by the
Preachers general Sermon, we do all the better espy our own defects) that
is my meaning, that was my purpose. If my manner of utterance do offend,
pardon lack of skill, or think that I was rather occupied about the matter,
then curious in the art. If you will needs think that I touch you sometime
more then was need: let the chidings of a friend prevail more with your good
nature and wisdom, then the kisses of an enemy.

For learning or wisdom, I am not worthy to counsel you, but of duty and
good will I presume to exhort you, so earnestly as I do sincerely honor and
love you, that you consider your calling: A Priest, a Doctor, a man of worship,
of estimation. What could Christ have done more for you then he has done?
(...) 215.
What then will you render to our Lord, for all that he has rendered to you:
Will you dye for his sake? Mat. 26.
Spiritus promptus, caro infirma: The spirit is prompt, but the flesh is
infirm. Heb. 22.
That is not required at your hand. Non dum vsque ad sanguinem resistimus: we
have not yet resisted unto blood. Mat. 19.2^
Will you forsake all and become a beggar? Si vis perfectuss esse, vade and
vende omnia and sequere me: If thou vvilt be perfect, go sell the things that
thou haste, and follow me. But neither is that necessity. Will you suffer
imprisonment? Act. 16.
And at midnight Paul and Silas praying, did praise God: when their seete were
fast in the stocks in the inner prison. But we see that many earnest Catholics
have also their liberty. Will you go into banishment and live in a Catholic
country? Mat. 10.
When they shall persecute you in this country, fly into an other. And yet a
man with wisdom may live also quietly at home. Will you then for Christ his
sake leave your lyuings only, and live still worshipfully upon your stock? To
^ould your peace unless you be urged ^o confess your faith: to prefer
heresy, and further it neither by word nor deed? What may a man do less
that will do any thing for his sweet Savior and merciful redeemer? ^at.
19.16.
What permutation shall a man give for his soul?

If you had lived in the primitive world when you must either have denied
Christ, or suffer a long death full of exquesite torments, what would you have
done? whereas now so little loss a little before the time of some little
temporalities, makes you not only deny your religion, but to maintain the
contrary? ^uc. 12.48.
and yet you can remember well: much shall be required of him that has much.
^ap. 6
And Potentes Potenter tormenta Patientur. The mighty shall mightily suffer
torments. ^uc. 17.1.
And: VVo to him by whom scandalls come. ^s. 13.
And shall they not all know that work wickedness that devour my people as
they would eat bread? And S. Austen. ^a. ps. 52.
Cum scis malum esse quod facis et tamen facis, nonne viuus descendis ad
inseros? when thou do know that that is ill which thou do and yet for
all that do it, do thou not go down to hell, alive? But I will not
have you fear only: Perfecta charitas, 1.10.4.18.
for as mittit timorem. Perfect charity casts out fear. Good M. Doctor as
you are not without cause esteemed wise, so employ it to his honor who gives
all wisdom. Be content to be a fool to the world, that you may become
heavenly wise. S. Ambrose. S. Bafill. S. Chrysostom were wise men, think what
they have done long a go, and would do in your case. Follow them, and be not
servant to them, that are the servants of noughtines: that say in effect,
Edamus et bibamus, cras moriemur. 1. Co. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye. If that were the way to
heaven, to follow all worlds, all rellgions, all Princes, to be still in
favor, to sleep in a whole skin, to loose nothing which way soever the
wind blows. Suerly many men could wisely do all this, that now are
esteemed for very fools: but of such as in the last Judgment shall howl and
cry out for very anguish and confusion: ^ap. 5.
We senseless esteemed their life madness, and their end without honor:
Behold how they are compted among the children of God, and their lot is
among the Saints.

This that I have said is in truth nothing, in respect of the matter, but in
respect of your wisdom it is much. I beseech God to add more then I can utter
or think, Psa. 26.
of his holy spirit which may lead you, In semitam rectam and ostendat tibi
viam in qua ambules: in the right path, and show you the way in the which you
ought to walk. As for me, I am in this case to you as one that carries the
candle or opening the gate before his master. I seek no thank by this my
service, as knows God: only I quake to think of my friends damnation: and
therefore I cry out unto you and make a noise, such as I can in this my
infancy. 1. Cor. 3.
Nam neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat sed quidat incrementum,
Deus. For nether he that planteth is any thing, nor be that vvatereth, but be
that gives the increase, God. Christ our Savior keep your worshipp in long
and good health.

The 15 of October. 1575.

