A SPEECH DELIVERED, TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY IN THE NAME OF THE
SHERIFFS OF LONDON AND MIDDLESEX.

By Master Richard Martin of the Middle Temple.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Thorppe, and are to be sold by William Aspley.
1603.

A SPEECH DELIVERED, TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, AT HIS NEAR
APPROACH TO LONDON, IN THE NAME OF THE SHERIFFS OF LONDON AND MIDDLE SEX.
THe common fears and difficulties which perplex most confident Orators,
speaking before Princes, would more confound my distrustful spirit speaking to
your high Majesty (most mighty King and our dread sovereign Lord) did I not
know that the message which I bring is to a good King always grateful.
Curiosity of wit and and affected strains of Oratory I leave to those, who
more delight to tickle the Princes ear, then satisfy his deeper judgment.

To me (most gracious Sovereign) your Majesty's meanest subject, vouchsafe
your mild and Princely attention, whiles in the names of these grave
Maiestrates (your Majesty's faithful Sheriffs of London and Middle SeX) I
offer to your benign grace that loyal and hearty welcome, which from that
Honorable and ancient City (the heart of this kingdom) is brought by them,
whose deep and inward grief, conceived for the loss of our Peerless and
renouned Queen Elizabeth, is turned into excessive joy, for the approach of
your excellent Majesty, by whom the long and blessed peace of five and forty
years is made perpetual. Great is thac'knowledgement we owe to the memory of
our late Princes government, whose far spread fame, as it shall live
reco^mended to posterity for ever, so of her flourishing reign no other
testimony need be required, then that of your high Majesty (since none can be
more honorable) that the like has not been read or heard of in our days, or
since the reign of great Augustus: So that, even glorious and victorious Kings
have just cause, to envy the glory and virtue of a woman. But she is gathered
in peace to her fathers, a memorable instance of your Majesty's divine
observation, that Princes differ not in stuff, but in use from common men.

Out of the Ashes of this Phoenix were thou King James borne for our good, the
bright star of the North, to which all true adamantine hearts had long before
turned themselves. Whose fame (like a new Sun rising) dispersed those clouds
of fear, which either our politic friends, or open enemies, or the
unnatural factors for the fifth Monarchy, had given us some cause to apprehend:
yea our nobility, Counselors, and Commons (whose wisdom and fidellity is
therefore renouned as far as this Island is spoken of) with a general zeal
poasted to your Majesty's subjection: not more incited here unto by the right
of your Majesty's descent and royal blood, drawn to this fair inheritance
from the loins of our ancient Kings; then enflamed with the fame of your
Princely and eminent virtues, wherewith (as a rich Cabinet with precious
jewels) your Kingly mind is furnished, if constant fame have delivered us a
true inuentory of your rare qualities. A King whose youth needs no excuse, and
whose affections are subdued to his reason: A King which not only does
justice, (which even Tyrants do some times) but loves justice; which habit
none but virtuous Princes can put on. Who (immitating the free bounty of the
King of Kings) inuites all distressed people to come unto him, not permitting
Gehaezie to take talents of silver, nor change of garments.

In some Princes (my Sovereign Lord) it is enough that they be not evil, but
from your Majesty we look for an admirable goodness, and particular
redress, so strange an expectation (forerunning your Majesty's coming) has
invested the minds, of good men with comfort, of bad with fear.

And see how bounteous heaven has assined four kingdoms, as proper subjects
for your Majesty's four Kingly virtues. Scotland has tried your prudence, in
reducing those things to order in the Church and Commonwealth, which the
tumultuous times of your Majesty's infancy had there put out of square.
Ireland shall require your justice, which the miseries (I dare not say the
policies) of civil wars have there defaced. France shall prove your
fortitude, when necessary reason of state shall bend your Majesty's Counselles
to that enterprise. But let England be the school, wherein your Majesty will
practice your temperance and moderation: for here flattery will essay to
undermine, or force your Majesty's strongest constancy and integrity: base
assentation the bane of virtuous Princes, which (like Lazarus dogs) licks even
the Princes soars, a vice made so familiar to this age by long use, that even
Pulpits are not free from that kind of treason? A treason I may justly call it
most capital, to poison the fountain of wisdom and justice, whereat so many
kingdoms must be refreshed,

Nor can I be justly blamed, to lay open to a most skillful and faithful
Physician our true griefs, nay it shall be the comfort of mine age, to have
spoken the truth to my Lord the King, and with a heart as true to your Majesty
as your own, to make known to an uncorrupted King, the hopes and desires of
his best subjects.

Who (as if your Majesty were sent down from Heaven to reduce the golden age)
have now assured themselves, that this Island (by strange working and revolution
now united to your Majesty's obedience) shall never fear the mischiefs and
misgouernments, which other countries and other times have felt.

Oppression shall not be here the badge of authority, nor insolence the mark
of greatness. The people shall every one sit under his own Olive tree, and
anoint himself with the fat thereof, his face not grinded with extorted suits,
nor his marrow sucked with most odious and unjust Monopolies. Vnconcionable
Lawiers, and greedy officers, shall no longer spinne out the poor man's cause
in length to his undoing, and the delay of justice. No more shall bribes blind
the eyes of the wise, nor gold be reputed the common measure of men's
worthiness: Adulterate gold, which can guild a rotten post, make Balam a
Bishop, and Isachar as worthy of a judicial chair as Solomon, where he may
wickedly sell that justice, which he corruptly bought. The money changers and
sellers of Doves, (I mean those which trafique the livings of simple and
religious pastors) shall your Majesty whip out of the Temple and common
wealth: For no more shall Church livings be pared to the quick, forcing
ambicious Churchmen (pertakers of this Sacrilege) to enter in at the window
by simonie and corruption, which they must afterward repair with usury, and
make up with pluralities.

The Ports and Havens of these kingdoms which have long been barrd, shall now
open the mouths of there rivers, and the arms of there seas, to the gentle
amity and just traffic of all nations, washing away our reproach of
universal pirates, and sea-wolues, and deryuing (by the exchange of homebred
commodities with foreign) into the veins of this land, that wholesome blood
and well got treasure, which shall strengthen the sinnews of your Majesty's
kingdoms. The neglected (and almost worn out) nobility shall now (as bright
Dyamonds and burning Carbunckles) adorn your Kingly Diadem. The too much
contemned Clergy, shall hang as a precious earing at your Princly ear, your
Majesty still lystning to their holy Councels. The wearied Commons shall be
worn as a rich ring on your royal finger, which your Majesty with a watchful
eye will still graciously look upon. For we have now a King that will hear
with his own ears, see with his own eyes, and be ever jealous of any great
trust, which (being afterward become necessary) may be abused to an
vnlymmitted power.

O my gracious Liege, let never any wrye Councels dyuert or puddle the fair
stream of your natural goodness. Let wicked usurpers seek lewd arts, to
mayntaine their lewd purchases: To your Majesty (called to this Empire by the
consent of God and men, and now King of so many faithful hearts) plain and
dyrect virtue is the safest policy, and love to them, who have shown such
loyalty to you, is a wall of brass.

They mean to sell the King to his subjects at their own price, and abuse
the authority of his majesty to their private gain, and greatness, who persuade
him, that to shut himself up from the access of his people, is the means to
augment his state.

Let me not seem tedious to your Majesty (my gracious Sovereign) nor yet
presumptuous, for I counsel not. But whiles your Majesty has bin (perchance)
wearied with the complaints and insinnuations of perticulars, for pryuate
respects; let it be lawful (my liege) for a heart free from fear or hope, to
show your Majesty the agues which keep low this great body, whereof your
Majesty is the sound-head.

Nor are we fed with hopes of redress by immagination (as hungry men with a
painted banquet) but by assurance of certain knowledge, drawn out of the
observation of your Majesty's forepast actions, and some books now fresh in
every man's hands, being (to use your Majesty's own words) the Viue ideas or
representations of the mind. Whose excellent wholesome rules your Majesty will
never transgress, having bound your Princely son by such heavy penalties, to
observe them after you, nor does any wiseman wish, or good man desire, that
your Majesty should follow other Counselles or examples then your own, by
which your Majesty is so neerelye bound.

To conclude therefore, what great cause have we to welcome to the territories
of our City your most excellent Majesty, who (to make us the glorious and
happy head of this Island) have by your first entrance brought us th'addition
of another kingdom, which war could never subdue. So your Majesty's upright
government, shall make us partakers of that felicity, which divine Plato did
only apprehend but never see, (whose king is a Philosopher a Philosopher
being our King) Receive then (most gracious Sovereign) that loyal welcome,
which our City sends out to meet your Majesty; our City which for the
long trial of her loyalty, obedience, and faithful readiness in all
occasions, your majesty's royal progenitors have honored with the title of
their Chamber: whose faithful Citizens, with true and well approved hearts,
humbly lay at your royal feet their goods and lives, which they will
sacrifice for your majesty's service and defense, with longing eyes, desiring
to receive your Majesty within their walls, whom they have long since lodged
in their hearts: praying to heaven that your Majesty's person may be free from
practice, your soul safe from flaterie, your life extended to the possibility
of nature: and that if not your natural life, yet your royal line may have
one period with tbe world, your princely offspring sitting upon the throne of
their fathers for evermore. And we your Majesty's faithful servants, humbly
surrendering into your Majesty's hands that authority, which we hold from you,
wishing from our hearts that all plagues may pursue his posterity, that but
conspires your Maisties danger.


