The true Report of all the success of Famagosta, of the antique writers
called Tamassus, a City in Cyprus.

In the which the whole order of all the skirmishes, batteries, mines, and
assaults given to the said Fortress, may plainly appear.

Moreover the names of the Captains, and number of the people slain, as well
of the Christians as of the Turks: likewise of them who were taken prisoners:
from the beginning of the said seege until the end of the fame.

Englished out of Italian by William Malim.

With certain notes of his and expositions of all the Turkishe words herein
necessary to be known, placed in the margent, with a short description also of
his of the same Island.

Imprinted at London by John Day.

AN. 1572.

To the right honorable and his singular good Lord, and only Patron the
Earl of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter, one of the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel. etc.
William Malim wishes long health with increase of honor.
IT has been a natural instinct (right honorable and mine especial good
Lord) engraffed in noble personages hearts, much approved and confirmed also
by custom, for them to seek from time to time, by some means in their life,
by the which, they after their death, might deliver over their name to their
posterity: least otherwise with their body, their fame also altogether might
perchance be buried. Upon the which consideration we read many notable, and
famous things to have been erected in time past of noble personages (having
had wealth at will) in such sort, that not only certain ruins of the same
sumptuous works builded so many hundred years past, do still remain, but
also the most part of those princes the authors of the^, do continually by them
dwell in our memoryes. As the Pyramides made at Memphis, or near the famous
River of Nilus, by ye great expenses of the Kings of Egypt: the Tower called
Pharia, made in the Island of Pharos by King Ptolomee: the walls of Babylon,
made or at the least reedified by Queen Semiramis: Dianas Church at Ephesus
builded by all the noble persons of Asia: Mausolus Toome or Sepulcher, made by
his wife Queen of Caria: Colossus Solis placed at Rhodes, I remember not by
what Princes charge, but made by the hands of Cares Lindius scholar to
Lysippus: and the Image of Jupiter, made of Yuerye by the hands of the
skillful workman Phydias. The which monumentes made of barbarous and heathen
Princes to redeem them selves from oblivion, deserved both for the
magnificence, and perfect workmanship of the same, to be accompled in those
days as the 7. wonders of the world. Since the which time, an easier, readier,
and lighter way, being also of more continuance then the former, has been found
out, namely, Letters, which were first invented by the Caldies and Egyptians,
as we read, and augmented since by others, to our great benefit, and now last
of all (no long time past) the same to have been committed to Printers Presses,
to the greatest perfection of the same: men being first enforced to write their
acts and monumentes in beasts skins dried, in barks of trees, or otherwise
perchance as vnreadily. By the which benefit of Letters (now reduced into
Print) we see how easy a thing it is, and has been for noble persons, to live
for ever by the help of learned men. For the memory of those two worthy and
valiant Captains Scipio and Hannibal had been long before this present quite
forgotten, except Titus Liuius, or some such learned Historiographer had
written of them in time. And Alexander Magnus him self that great conqueror
had nothing been spoken of, had not Q. Curtius, or some other like by his
learned style revived the remembrance of him, and called back again his
doings to his posterity. For the which cause we see commonly in all ages
learned me^ to be much made of by noble personages, as that rare pattern of
learning Aristotle, to have been greatly honored of that former renowned
Monarche Alexander: who affirmed openly, that he was more bound to his Master
Aristotle, then to King Philip his father, because the one had well framed his
mind, the other only his body. Many other like examples I could allege at
this present, if I knew not unto whom I now wrote, or in what. For your honor
being skillful in histories, and so familiarly acquainted with the matter it
self, that is in still intertaining learned men with all courtesy, I should
seem to light a candle at noone tide, to put you in remembrance of the one, or
to exhort you to do the other, daily being accustomed to perform the same.
Crassus says in Tullies first book, De Oratore: that a Lawyers house is the
Oracle of the whole City. But I can justly witness, that for these 5. years
last past, since my return from my travel beyond the seas, that your
Lordships lodging in the Court (where I through your undeserved goodness to my
great comfort do daily frequent) has been a continual receptacle or harbor
for all learned men coming from both the eyes of this Realm, Cambridge, and
Oxforde (of the which University your Lordship is Chauncellor) to their great
satisfaction of mind, and ready dispatch of their suits. Especially for
Preachers and Ministers of true Religion: of the which you have been from time
to time not only a great favorer, but an earnest furtherer, and protector: so
that these two nurseries of learning (in one of the which I have before this
spent part of my time, that I may speak boldly what I think) should wrong
your honor greatly, and much forget them selves, if by all means possible
they should not hereafter (as at this present to their small powers many well
learned gentlemen of them do) labor and travel in showing of them selves
thankful, to reverence and honor your Lordship, and honest their own names:
whose studies certainly would suddenly decay and fall flat, if they were not
held up by such noble proppes, and had not some sure anckerholdes in their
distress to lean unto. How ready daily your travel is, and has long been
besides to benefit all other persons, in whom any spark of virtue or honesty
remains, I need not labor to express, the world knowing already the same.
But whosoever they be, that in all their life time have an especial care by
all means to profit as many as they be able and hurt none, do not only a
laudable act, but lead a perfect and very godly life. Whereupon Strabo
affirms this most truly to be spoken of them: Mortales tum demum Deos
imitari, cum benifici fuerint. Great commendation undoubtedly it brings to
any noble personage, that as the Moon, that light and brightness which she
receaueth of the Sun, is wont presently to spread abroad upon the face of the
earth, to the refreshing and comforting of all inferior and natural things
bearing life: so for him, to bestow all that favor and credit, which he has
gotten at the Princes hands, to the help and relief of the worthy and needy.
Great is the force (my right honorable Lord) of true Virtue, which causes
them as Tully writes in his book De Amicitia, to be loved and honored often of
those persons, which never saw them. Whereof I never had better proof (I take
God and mine own conscience to witness, the which I declared also to certain
of my friends as soon as I returned) then at my last being at Constantinople,
in the year of our Lord. 1564. whereas I often resorting (as occasion served) to
the right honorable Christian Ambassadors, whilst I made my abode there
(namely unto Monseur Antonio Petrimol, leegger there for the King of France,
Sig. M. Victor Bragadino, for the Segniorye of Venice, Sig. Lorenzo
Giustiniano, for the state of Scio, or Chios, and Sig. Albertacio delli
Alberti, for the Duke of Florence) heard them often report and speak very
honorably of your Lordship, partly for your other good inclinations of nature,
but especially for your liberality, and courteous entreating of diverse of
their friends and countrymen, which upon sundry occasions had been here in
this our Realm. So that to conclude, all men justly favor your honorable
dealinges and deserts: and I for my part have reverenced and honored the same
evermore both here at home, and elsewhere abroad, wishing often to have had some
just occasion to pay part of that in good will, which my slender ability will
never suffer me fully to discharge. For unto who^ should I sooner present any
thing any way, especially concerning matters done abroad, then unto your
Lordship, by whom I was much cherished abroad in my travel, and maintained
since my return here at home? For yt which cause I have enterprised (hoping
greatly of your Lordships favor herein) to clothe and set forth a few Italian
News in our English attire, being first moved thereunto by the right
worshipful Master D. Wilson Master of her Majesty's Requests, your honors
assured trusty friend, a great and painful furtherer of learning, whom I, and
many other for diverse respects ought to reverence: who remembering that I had
been at Cyprus, was willing that my pen should travel about the Christian
and Turkishe affairs, which there lately have happened: persuading him self,
that somewhat thereby I might benefit this our native country. Against whose
reasonable motion I could not greatly wrestle, hazarding rather my slender
skill in attempting and perfourming this his requested task, then he through
my refusal thereof should seem to want any iotte of my good will. In offering
up the which news, although I shall present no new thing to your honor,
because you are so well acquainted with ye Italian copy, as I know: yet I trust
your Lordship will not mislike, that the same which is both pleasant to read,
and so necessary to be known for diverse of our Captains and other our
countrymen, which are ignorant in the Italian tongue, may thus now show it
self abroad, covered under the wing of your Lordships protection. Certainly it
moves me much to remember ye loss of those 3. notable Islands, to the great
discomfort of all Christendom, to those Hellish Turks, Horseleches of
Christian blood: namely Rhodes beseeged on S. John Baptist day, and taken on S.
John's day the Evangelist, being the 27. of December. 1522. Scio or Chios being
lost since my being there, taken of Piali Bassa with 80. Galleys, the 17. of
April. 1566. And now last of all not only Famagosta the chief hold and
fortress in Cyprus to have been lost of the Venetians the 15. of August last
past. 1571. (the chief Governors and Captains of them being hewn in sunder
by the commandment of that tyrant Mustafa Bassa) but all the whole Island
also to be conquered by those cruel Turks, ancient professed enemies to all
Christian Religion. In the which evil success (coming to us as I take it for
our offenses) as I lament the general loss: so I am surely pensive to
understand by this too true a report of ye vile death of 2. particular noble
gentlemen of Venice, Sig. M. Lorenzo Tiepolo, and Sig. M. Giouanni Antonio
Querini: of both ye which I in my travel was very courteously used, the former
of them being then (as now also he was in this overthrow) Governor of Baffo in
Cyprus, the other Captain of one of ye Castles at Corsyra in Greece, now called
Corfu. But things past, are past amendment, and they could never die more
honorably, then in the defense of their country. Besides that the late
blows, which the Turks have received since this their fury, in token of Gods
wrath against the^, much comfort every Christian heart. Moreover this
uniform preparation which is certainly concluded, and forthwith looked for, by
very many Christian Princes (would God by all generally) against these
barborous Mahometistes: whose cruelty and beastly behauour I partly know, and
am able to judge of, having been in Turkye amongst them more then 8. months
together. Whose unfaithfulness also and breach of promise, as the Venetians
manly courage in defense of them selves, and their fortress, your honor may
easily read in this short treatise and small handful of leaves, I having set
down also a short description of the Island of Cyprus, for the better
understanding of the whole matter. The which I not only most humbly beseech
your honor now favorably to accept as an earnest penny of more to come, and
of my present good will: but with your accustomed goodness toward me, to
defend the same against such persons, whose tounges too readily role sometime
against other men's painful trauells, persuading them selves to purchase the
sooner some credit of learning with the ruder sort, by co^troling and
ouerdaintie sifting of other men's labored taskes. For I know in all ages to be
found as well Basiliskes, as Elephantes. Thus nothing doubting of your ready
aid herein, as I assuredly trust of your honors favorable acceptance of
this my poor present, wishing long life with the increase of Gods holy spirit
to your Lordship and to all your most honorable family (unto whom I have
wholly dedicated my self by mine own choice and election for ever) I, craving
pardon for my former boldness, most humbly thus take my leave.

From Lambheth the 23. of March. An. 1572.

Your honors most humble and faithful servant for ever, William Malim.

A brief description of the Island of Cyprus: by the which not only the
Venetians title why they have so long enjoyed it, but also the Turks, whereby
now he claims it, may plainly appear.
THe Island of Cyprus is environed with diverse seas. For Westward it is washed
with the sea called Pamphilium: Southward, with the Sea AEgyptium: on the East
part, with the Sea Syrium: and Northward, with the Sea called Cilicium. The
which Island in time past had diverse names: called once Acamantis, as Sabellicus
witnesses: Philonides makes mention, that it was called sometime Cerasis,
Xenagoras writes, that it was named Aspelia, Amathusa, and Macaria. There were
in time paste 15. Cities or famous Towns in it, but now very few, amongst the
which Famagosta is the cheifest, and strongest, situated by the Sea side. There
is also Nicosia, which was wont, by the traffic of Merchants, to be very
wealthy: besides the City of Baffo, Arnica, Saline, Limisso, Milopotomo, and
Episcopia. Timosthenes affirms, that this Island in compass is 400. and 29.
miles, and Arthemidorus writes ye length of ye same to be 162. miles,
measuring of it from the East to ye West betwixt two promontories named
Dimareta and Acamanta. This Island is thought to be very rich, abundant of
Wine, Oil, Grain, Pitch, Rosin, Alum, Salt, and of diverse precious stones
pleasant, profitable, and necessary for man's use, and much freque^ted of
Marchantes of Syria, unto the which it lies very near. It has been as Pliny
writes, joined sometime with Syria, as Sicilia has been also with Italy. It
was a long time subject unto the Romans, after, to the Persians, and to the
Souldan of Egypt. And last of all the Venetians have enjoyed it of late a long
time, in this order following. In the year of our Lord. 1470. John King of the
said Ila^d son to Ianus of Lusignian had by Hellen his wife, which was of the
Imperial house of Paleologus one daughter only called Charlotta, and a
bastard called James: the which James was afterward consecrated Bishop of
Nicosia. This Charlotta was married first to the King of Portingall, of whom he
had no issue, so that he being dead, Jews Duke of Sauoy (to whom she was the
second time married) son to Jews the second of that name (unto whom the said
Island by the right of this his wife Charlotta did appertain) had the
possession of the same. James the bastard as soon as his father was dead, of a
Bishop became a Soldier, and with an army wanne the Jland, making it his own
by force. This Duke of Sauoy hearing these news, with a number of well
appointed soldiers, arrived shortly after in Cyprus, and recovering again the
Island, compelled ye Bastard to fly forthwith over to the Souldan of Egypt.
Who making him self his subject, in time so wrought and tempered the matter,
that the Souldan in person at his request passed over into Cyprus, beseeged
Duke Jews in the Castle of Nicosia, and at length compelled him to depart,
leaving his kingdom. So that this Bishop became again King of this Island: who
shortly after cleaving to the Venetians having made a league of friendship with
them, married by their consent one Catherina the daughter of Marco Cornaro,
which Catherine the Senate of Venice adopted unto them soon after as their
daughter. This Bishop not long after sickned, and died, leaving this his wife
with child, who lived not long after his fathers death. By ye which means the
Venetians making them selves the next heirs to Catherina by the law of
Adoption, took unto them the possession of this kingdom, and have kept, and
enjoyed the same almost this 100. years. Now this great Turk called Sultan
Selim in the right of the Souldan of Egypt, whom his grandfather (called also
Sultan Selim) conquered, pretends a right title unto it, and now as you may
understand by reading of this short treatise has by conquest obtained the
same. Whom, I pray the everliving God, if it be his holy will, shortly to root
out from thence.

To the Reader.
I Am not ignorant (gentle Reader) how hard a matter it is for any one man to
write that, which should please and satisfy all persons, we being commonly of
so diverse opinions and contrary judgments: again Tully affirming, to be a
very difficult thing, to find out any matter which in his own kind may be in
all respects perfect. Wherefore I trust by your own judgment I ought of
reason to be the sooner pardoned (my translation being precisely tied to mine
authors meaning) if any thieg herein besides be thought to be wanting: I having
learned by the way, how comberous a thing it is, to turn the self same matter
out of the Italian language into our country speech. But who does what he
possibly can, is bound to no more. And I now at the request of others (who put
me in mind, that I was not only borne unto my self) have accomplished that in
the end, which I promised and was required. With what pain and diligence, I
refer me to the^ which are skillful in the Italian tongue, or may the better
judge, if it please them to try the same, casting a side this exampler. I
speak not arrogantly, I take God to witness: but men's painful travels ought
not lightly to be condemned: nor surely at any time are wont to be of the
learned, or discrete. By whose gentle acceptance, if these my present doings
be now supported, I will persuade my self that I have reaped sufficient fruit
of my travel. Unto whom with all my heart I wish prosperous success in all
their affairs.

AN. 1572. W. M.

Jn Turchas precatio.
SVmme Deus succurre tuis, miseresce tuoru^,
Et subeat gentis te noua cura tuae.
Que^ das tantoru^ fine^, Rex magne, laboru^?
In nos vibrabit tela quosque Satan?
Ante Rhodum, mox inde Chium, nunc denique Cyprum
Turcharum cepit sanguinolenta manus.
Mustafa foedifragus parts grassatur in omnes,
Et Veneta Cypriam strage cruentat humum.
Nec finem imponit sceleri, mollitue furorem,
Nec nisi potato sanguine pactus, abit.
Qualis, quae nunquam nisi plena tumensque cruore
Sanguisuga obsessam mittit hirudo cutem.
Torturam sequitur tortura, cruorque cruorem,
Et caedem admissam caedis alius amor.
Saeuit inops animi, nec vel se temperat ipse,
Vel manus indomitum nostra domare potest.
At tu, magne Pater, tumidum disperde Tyrannum,
Nec sine mactari semper ouile tuum.
Exulet hoc monstrum, ne sanguine terra redundet,
Excutiantque nouum Cypria regna iugum.
Et quod Christicolae foedus pepigere Monarchae,
Id faustum nobis omnibus esse velis.
Tu pugna illorum pugnas, and bella secundes,
Captiuosque tibi subde per arma Scythas.
Sic tuo per totum fundetur gloria mundum,
Vnus sic Christus fiet, and vna fides.
Gulielmus Malim.

The true report of all the success of Famagosta made by the noble Earl
Nestor Martinengo, unto the renowned Prince the Duke of Venice.
THe 16. day of February. 1571. the Fleet which had brought the aid unto
Famagosta, departed from thence, whereas were found in all ye army, but 4000.
footeme^, 800. of them chosen soldiers, and 3000. (accompting ye Citizens and
other of ye villages) the rest 200. in number, were soldiers of Albania. After
the arrival of the which succor, the fortification of the City went more
diligently forward of all hands, then it did before, the whole garrison, the
Grecian Citizens inhabiting the town, the gouerners and captains not
withdrawing them selves from any kind of labor, for the better encouragement
and good example of others, both night and day searching the watch, to the
intent with most careful heedetaking they might beware of their enemies,
against whom they made no sallye out of the City to skirmish but very seldom,
especially to understand, when they might learn ye intent of the enemies.
Whilst we made this diligent provision within the City, the Turks without
made no less preparation of all things necessary fit to batter the fortress
with all, as in bringing out of Caramania and Syria with all speed by the sea,
many Wollpackes, a great quantity of wood and timber, diverse pieces of
artilarye, ingens, and other things expedient for their purpose.

This word Bassa, is a most honorable title amongst the Turks, and
signifies as much with us as a privy cou^seller.
At the beginning of April Halli Bassa landed there with 80. Galleys or
thereabout in his company, who brought thither that, which of our enemies was
desired, who soon after departing from thence, and leaving behind him 30.
Galleys, which continually transported soldiers, munition, fresh victuals, and
other necessaries, besides a great number of Caramusalini be vessels like unto
the French Gabards, which sail daily upon the river of Bordeaux, which sail
with a misen or triangle sail.
Caramusalins, or Brigandins, great Hulkes called Maone be vessels like unto
the great Hulkes, which come hither from Denmark, some of the which carry 7. or
8. hundredth tons a piece, flat, and broad, which sail some of them with 7.
misens a piece.
Maones, and large broad vessels termed of them Palandrie be great flat
vessels made like Feribotes to transporte horse.
Palandrie, which continually passed to and fro betwixt Cyprus and Syria, and
other places there about, which they did with great speed, standing in fear of
the Christian army. And about the midst of the same month, the Turks caused
to be brought out of the City of Nicosia, Nicosia, otherwise called Licosia.
which they had won a little before, 15. pieces of artilarye, and raising
their army from whence they were before, making ditches and trenches necessary,
incampt them selves in gardens, and toward the West part of Famagosta near a
place called Precipola. The 25. of the same month they raised up mountes to
plant their artilary upon, and caused trenches to be made for harquebusers one
very nigh an other, approaching still very near the City, in such order, as
was almost impossible to stay the same, 40. thousand of their Pioners
continually laboring there the most part of all the night. The intent of the
enemy being then known, and in what part of the City he minded most to plant
his battery, we took diligent heed on the other part, to repair and fortify
all places necessary within. For ye which cause we placed a great watch in that
way, which was covered with a counterscharfe, and in the sallies of their
privy Posterns, for the defense of the said cou^terscharfe there were new
fla^ckers made, also Trauerses called Butterisses, made upon the Cortaine with
one trench of Turues 2. foot high and broad, the which was made on that side
of the wall of the City, which was already battered with the shot of the
Turks, with certain loope holes for our Harquebusers, by ye which they
defended the counterscharfe. Sig. Bragadino was Proueditore, that is,
Governor, and Sig. Baglione General of the Christian army: both of them were
noble men of Venice.
Two noble personages Bragadino and Baglione, personally took this charge on
the^, by the which means the Christian affairs passed in very good order. All
the bread for our soldiers was made in one storehouse, of the which the noble
gentleman Lorenzo Tiepolo Captain of Baffo, of the ancient writers, named
Paphos, in the which City there was a sumptuous Church dedicated unto Venus.
Baffo had charge, who refused no pain, where he thought his travail might
prevail. In the Castle was placed that famous gentleman Andrea Bragadino, who
with a diligent guard had charge on that part of the Castle principally, next
unto the sea side, trimming and diging out new flanckers for the better defense
of the Arsenall in Constantinople and Venice, is the place for munition and
artilary to lie in.
Arsenall.

A valiant Knight named Foito, was appointed master of the Ordinance, who was
slain in a few days after in a skirmishe, whose garrison the noble Bragadino
Proueditore before named, presently delivered over to me. Three other Captains
were appointed over the wildefire with 20. footmen for every one of them,
chosen out of the army to use, and execute ye same as occasion should serve.
The best pieces of Ordinance were brought forth unto that side of ye town,
where ye battery was looked for to be made: and they made privy fences to cover
the better their Cannon shot withal. There was no want in ye Christians to
annoy their enemies in issuing often out of every side against them, as well to
hinder their determinations, as to hurt them otherwise at diverse times. They
also rendered to us the like. For 300. of the inhabitance of Famagosta one time
issuing out of the City, armed only with their Swords and Targets, with so
many Italian Harquebusers also in their company, received great damage,
because the trenches of the enemies were made about so thick, although at the
same present we compelled them to fly, and slew also many of them: yet they
increased to such number, that they killed presently 30. and hurt there 60. of
our company. For the which cause order was taken, that our men should no more
come forth of their hold, committing them selves to manifest peril to bid
their enemies the base.

The Turks in process of time by little and little with their trenches, came at
length to the top of the counterscharfe, and having finished their fortes the
19. of May, began their batterye with 10. fortes, having 74. pieces of great
artilary within their custody, amongst the which there were 4. Basiliskes
(for so they term them) of an immeasurable greatness, and began to batter from
the gate Limisso unto the Arsenall, and laid 5. batteries against the town,
the one against the great high Turret of the Arsenall, which was battered with
5. pieces of Ordinance mounted upon that forte of ye rock, the other against
the Cortaine it self of the Arsenall, battered by one forte with 11. pieces:
an other against the Keep of Andruzzi with 2. commanders, which were above
with one forte of 11. other pieces: an other battery against the Turret of S.
Nappa, the which was battered with 4. Basiliskes. The gate of Limisso, which
had one high commander alone, and a Brey and Cortaine without was battered by
the fortes with 33. pieces of artilary, whereas Mustafa him self general of
the Turks army took the charge in person. At the first they seemed not to
care much to spoil the walls, but shot still into ye City, and against our
Ordinance, which greatly galled them. Whereupon they, who were within ye City,
as well our soldiers, as the Grecians, as soon as the battery began,
withdrawing them selves, came and dwelt by the walls of the City, whereas
they continued from that time to the end of the siege. The noble Bragadino
lodged in the Keep of Andruzzi, Baglione in that ward of S. Nappa. The
honorable Tiepolo in that which was called Campo Santo. Wherefore they being
present to all that was done, both encouraged, and punished the soldiers
according to their deserts. The right worshipful Luigi Martinengo was
appointed chief over the Ordinance, who answering all men's expectation of him,
with great courage divided the charge thereof unto 6. other inferior Captains,
who took order and care for that company, and for the provision of things
necessary for the gunners: one company of ye Grecians being appointed to every
gate of the City for to attend upon the service of the artilary. The valiant
Captain Francesco Bagone warded at the Keep, and at the great commander of
the Arsenall. Captain Pietro Conte attended upon the Cortaine, at the
Commander of the Volti, and at the Keep of Campo Santo. I for my part
attended upon the Commander of Campo Santo, and upon the Commander of
Andruzzi, and of the Cortaine, unto ye Turret of Santa Nappa. The Earl Hercole
Martinengo attended upon the Commander of Santa Nappa, and to the whole
Cortaine, unto the gate of Limisso. Horatio Captain of Veletri attended upon
the Brey and Cortaine, toward the Bulwark. Upon the high Co^maunder of
Limisso, which was more troubled then all the rest, attended the Captain
Roberto Maluezzi. At the same time, when the battery began (by the commission
of the honorable Bragadino) victuals were appointed, and given to all the
soldiers, as well Grecians, as Italians, and Gunners: Namely Wine, Pottage,
Cheese, and Bakon: all the which things were brought to the walls as need
did require in very good order, so that no soldier there, 2. Venetian Souses or
Soldi amount but to one penny English.
spent any more in bread then 2. souses a day. They were paid at the end of
every 30. days, with the great travel of that right worshipful Venetian
gentleman M. Giouanni Antonio Querini, who besides this his ordinary charge was
found present in all weighty and dangerous affairs to ye great encouragement
of our soldiers. And we made a counterbattery against our enemies for 10. days
space, with so great rage, that we choked and destroyed 15. of their best
pieces, also we killed and dispatched of them about 30. thousand at that
season, so that they were disapointed at that time of their battery in that
place, and were greatly dismayed. But we foreseing that we had no great store
of powder left, there was made a restraint, and such order taken, that 30.
pieces should not shoot of, but 30. shot a piece every day, and that in the
presence of the Captains, who were still present, because the soldiers and
Gunners should not shoot of in vain.

The 29. of May there came toward us from Candia a Fregat or Pinnisse, the
which giving us great hope and lightening of aid, increased maruelously every
man's courage. The Turks with great travel and slaughter of both sides, had
won at the last the Counterscharfe from us, with great resistance and
mortality on both parts. Whereupon they began on the other side of the fifth
battery to fill up the ditch, with the earth that they threw down, which was
taken near the wall of the Counterscharfe. But all that earth and falling
down of the wall made by the shot of their artilary, was carried away of us
within the City, all our company laboring continually as well by night as
day, until our enemies had made certain loope holes in ye wall, through the
which they fla^cking and scouring all the ditch with their Harquebussie,
stopped our former course of carrying, or going that way any more, without
certain and express danger. But M. Giouanni Marmori, a fortifier, had
devised a certain kind of joined boordes, the which being carried of the
soldiers, defended the^ from the shot of ye Harquebusers, so that some other
quantity of earth, but no great store, was carried also away: in the which
place this foresaid fortifier was slain, who had done especial good service
in all our necessary affairs. And our enemies having cast so much earth into
the ditch, as filled it up again, and made it a firm way to the wall of the
Counterscharfe, and casting before the^ the earth by little and little, they
made one Trauerse even unto the wall on two sides in all their batteries, the
which they made thick and strong with Wolpackes, and other Fagots, to assure
them selves the better of our flanckers.

When they had once possessed the ditch, that they could not be hurt of us
but by chance, they began forthwith to cast and dig out undermines to
undermine the Brey, the Turret of S. Nappa, the Commander of Andruzzi, the
Keep of Campo Santo, the Cortain, and the Turrion of the Arsenall: so that we
being able no longer to serve our turn and enjoy those few flanckers, we
threw down wildefire into our enemies camp, the which annoyed them very sore,
because it fired their Wolpackes, and also their Fagots. And for the better
encouragement of the soldiers, the right honorable Bragadino gave to every
soldier one Duckat, the which could gain or recover any of the former
Wollpackes, making cou^termines in all places. To yt which charge Maggio the
fortifier knight was appointed, who in all our business served with such
diligence and courage, as he was able, or was requisite. But the countermines
met not, saving those of the Commander of S. Nappa, of Andruzzi, and that of
Campo Santo, because they were open, and our men sallied out often both by day
and night into the ditch to perceive better the way of the mines, and to fire
the Fagots and Wool. Nor we ceased at any time through the unspeakable
travel of the Lord Baglione (who had the oversight of all these matters) to
trouble our enemies intents, by all manner of wit and policy, dividing the
companies for the batteries, joining and pla^ting in all places a garrison of
the Albanois soldiers, soldiers of Albania, otherwise called Epirus, who
commonly serve the Venetians, both on horseback and foot, very skilful and
painful.
Albanois soldiers, who as well on foot as on horseback, showed always
notable courage and manhood.

The first Assault.
THe 21. of June, they put fire to the mine of the Turret of the Arsenall,
whereas Giambelat Bey took charge, who with great ruin rent in sunder a most
great and thick wall, and so opened the same, that he threw down more then
half thereof, breaking also one part of the baymure, made before to uphold the
assault. And suddenly a great number of the Turks skipping upon the ruins
thereof, displayed their Ensigns, even to the top of the same. Captain
Pietro Conte with his company, was in that ward, the which was much shaken and
terrified by that sudden ruin. I with my company came first thither, so that
they shortly took the repulse, and although they refreshed them selves with
new supplies 5. or 6. times, yet they failed of their purpose. Of this noble
and painful Venetian Gentleman M. Gio. Antonio Querini (who was afterward
hewn in sunder by the commandment of Mustafa) I was entertained very
courteously in my travel at Corsyra, now called Corfu, he being then there
Mag. Castellano or Captain of one of the Castles.
There fought personally the L. Baglione: Bragadino and Querini being armed,
stood not far of to refresh and comfort our soldiers, and the Captain of
the Castle with the Ordinance, that was planted upon the Buttereis, destroyed
many of our enemies, when they gave the assault, the which endured 5. hours
together: so that of Turks were slain very many, and of our side betwixt them
that were slain and hurt a 100: Most part of the which number were cast away
by a mischaunce of our wildefire, the which being unadvisedly and negligently
handled, burnt up many of our own company. There died at that present the
Earl Gio. Francesco Goro, the Captain Barnardino Agubio: and by the throwing
of stones Hercole Malatesta, Captain Pietro Conte, with other Captains and
Standerd-bearers were very sore hurt.

The night following arrived in Cyprus a Pinnisse from Candia, which bringing
news of most certain aid, greatly increased both the mirth and courage of us
all, so that we made soon after, with the help of the Captain Marco
Criuellatore, and Maggio the knight, certain retreates flancked to all the
places beaten down, and where as they suspected that the enemy had dug up
any mines, with Hogsheades, Chestes, Tykes, and Sackes stuffed full of moist
earth (the Grecians with all speed having already brought almost all that
which they had) because they having dispatched their Canueis about necessary
uses, In extremities men have no regard to spare trifles.
they brought their hanginges, cortaines, carpets, even to their very sheets,
to make and stuff up their foresaid sackes, a very good and ready way to make
up again their vaymures, the which were thrown down with the fury of the
artilary, which never stinted, so that we made up again still that in ye
night, the which was thrown down and broken in the day, sleeping very
seldom: Provident and careful gouerners or magistrates seldom sleep all the
night at any time, much less in dangerous seasons.
all the soldiers standing always upon the walls, visited continually of the
Gouerners of the City, which slept at no time, but in the extreme heat of the
day, having no other time to take their rest, because the enemy was at hand,
giving us continually Alarmes, not suffering us long to breath.

The second Assault.
THe 29. of the same month, they set ye mine made toward ye Brey on fire,
the which mine was dug in stone, which brake and cleft all things in
pieces, and caused great ruin, making an easy way for the enemy to assault
us, who with an outrageous fury came to the top, whereas Mustafa their
General was altogether present, A small thing at ye beginning, or in due time
done, helps much.
which assault was received, and stayed at the beginning of the Earl Hercole
Martinengo with his garrison, and so were repulsed by our company, who fought
without any advantage of covert, the vaymure being thrown down by yt mine.
There were slain of our company Captain Meani the Sargent Mayor of our army,
Captain Celio de Fuochi, Captain Erasmo da Fermo: and Captain Soldatello,
Antonio d' Ascoli, Captain Gio. d' Istria, Standerdbearers, with many other
officers, were sore wounded, there dyed also 30. other of our common soldiers.
At the Arsenall they were beaten back with greater damage of our enemies, and
small hurt to us. Five only of our part being slain there, whereas Captain
Giacomo da Fabriano dyed, and I was wounded in my left leg with an Harquebuse
shot. The which assault continued 6. hours, the Bishop of Limisso standing up
there, encouraging the soldiers. That certain women inhabiting this Island be
Viragos, or mankind, I saw sufficient trial at my last being there, in a
City called Saline.
Where also were found present stout women, who came thither with weapons,
stones, and water, to help the soldiers. Our enemies understanding how great
hinderance they had received at these two assaults, changed their minds, and
began again with greater furye then ever they had before accustomed to lay
battery to all places, and into our retreates, so that they laboring more
spedely then ever they did, made 7. other forts more, under the Castle, and
taking away the artilary from them which were farther of, planting of it
somewhat nearer to the number of 80. they battered ye hold with so great rage,
that on the 8. of July, with the same night also, was numbered 5000. Cannon
shot, and after that sort they ouerthrewe to the ground ye vaymures, that
scarcely with great travel and pain we could repair them again, because our
men that labored about them were continually slain by their Ordinance, and by
reason of the endless tempest of the shot of their Harquebusers. And our men
began to decrease. For the Turks caused us to retire from our Breyes, by the
violence of their artilary and mining in such sort, that there being no more
standing left for our soldiers, because we making our vaymures more thick, our
standing began to wax narrower, the which presently we of necessity enlarged
with boordes as a scaffolde to the vaymure, whereby we might have more elbow
room to fight. It is accounted a good warlike shift, to leave that to our
enemies with hindrance, which we can not any longer keep, and use to our own
commodity.
Captain Maggio also made one mine under the said Brey, to the intent, that we
being not able any longer to keep it, the same might be left to our enemies
to their great hinderaunce.

The third Assault.
TO the said Brey the 9. of July, they gave the third assault, to the Turrion
of Santa Nappa, to that of Andruzzi, to the Cortaine, to the Keep of the
Arsenall: the which assault having continued more then 6. hours, they were
beaten back in 4. places, but we left the Brey to their great loss, and ours
also: because we being assaulted, our company being not able to manneage their
Pikes in good order, by reason of the narrownes of the standing where they
were, being willing to retire in that order, as the L. Baglione had prescribed
unto them, and could not, cast them selves at the last into a confuse order,
and retired, they being mingled amongst the Turks: so that fire being given
to our mine, the which (with a terrible sight to behold) slew presently of
our enemies more then a 1000. and above a 100. of us. There dyed Captain
Roberto Maluezzi, and Captain Marchetto da Fermo was grievously wounded. At the
assault of the Arsenall dyed Captain David Noce master of the Camp, and I my
self was hurt by the racing of a Cannon shot. This assault continued five
hours, and the Citizens of Famagosta showed great courage in every place, with
their women also, and young striplinges. The Brey was so defaced by reason of
this mine set on fire, that no body any more attempted to recover the same:
because there was no apt place remaining to stay upon. The left flancker only
remained still, whereas an other mine was made. The gate of Limisso was over
against this foresaid Brey, and somewhat lower, which was always open, having
made to the same a Portall, with a Percollois annexed to it, the which
Percollois by the cutting of a small cord, was a present defense to the gate,
and our soldiers gave their atte^dance by that gate to bring in the battered
earth, which fell in the ditches from the rampayre: and when they saw that
their enemies in 4. days came not thither, they began to entrench above the
Brey, and by the flanckers above they suffered no person to pass out of the
gate, the which thing brought great suspicion unto our enemies, because they
were often times assailed of our company.

The fourth Assault.
WHerefore they came the 14. day of July to assault the gate of Limisso, and
lying their battery to all other places, they came and planted their Auncientes
even before the gate, whereas the L. Baglione, and Sig. Luigi were in
readiness, who had taken upon them to defend that gate of the City. Who as
soon as they had encouraged their soldiers, sallying swiftly forth, killed,
and put to flight the greater part of them, and at the last giving fire to the
mine of the flancker slew 400. The forwardness of ye Captain at dangerous
times not only much comfort the common soldier, but also increases greatly
his credit and commendation with all men.
Turks, and Sig. Baglione at the same time won an Ancient of our enemies,
wrasting it violently out of one of the Auncientbearers hands. The day
following they gave fire to the mine of the Cortaine, the which thing not
falling out greatly to their purpose, they followed not their prepared assault.
Wherefore they began to fortify, and advance hyer their Trauerses in the
ditches, for their better assurance against they should give the assault: and
they had emptied and carried away all the earth near unto the Counterscharfe,
where they lodged in their pauilions, so that we could not descrie them. They
shot 7. pieces of artilary upon the wall of the Counterscharfe so covertly,
that they were not seen: two from the Brey of the Turrion of Santa Nappa, one
from Andruzzi, and two other all a long the battery of the Cortaine. And they
came with certain boordes covered with raw and green hydes, under which they
brought their men to dig in the vaymures, we being nothing behind or
forgetful to cast wildefire amongst them, and sometime to issue forth of our
sallies called Posterns, to offend their Pioners, although to our great
hinderaunce. And we still repaired the vaymures by all means possible, with
Buffe skins, being moist and weet, throwing in also earth, shredes, and
cotton with water, being well bound together with cords: all the women of
Famagosta gathering them selves together in companyes in every street (being
guided of one of their Priests called Caloiero) resorted daily to a certain
place appointed, to labor, Caloiero be secular Greek priests, who by their
laws may be, and commonly are also married.
gathering and providing for the soldiers, stones and water, the which was kept
for all assaults in half butts to quench the fire, which the Turks threw
amongst them.

They having had no great success in taking the gate, they found out a new
way, never heard of before, in gathering together a great quantity of certain
wood called Teglia, Teglia in Latin called Teda, is a certain wood, which
burns easily, and sauoureth unpleasantly, of the which there is great store
in Sicilia: sometime it is used for a Torche.
which easily burned, and smelt very evil, the which they throwing before the
former gate of the City, and Fagots fastened to the same, with certain beams
besmered with Pitch, kindled suddenly so great a fire, as was not possible for
us to quench the same, although we threw upon it whole Buts of water, which
were thrown down from an high Co^maunder, which Buts presently brake in
sunder. This fire continued 4. days, wherefore we were enforced by reason of
the extreme heat and stinche, to withdraw our selves farther inward, and they
descending toward their lower flanckers, began other mines, so that the
gate was shut up, because it could be no longer kept open, No necessary thing
to be done was left unattempted on either part.
and suddenly (a thing marvelous to be spoken) the standing of the Brey being
repaired and made up again, they planted one piece over against the gate, the
which of us with stones, earth, and other things, was suddenly buried up. By
this time we were driven to an exigent, all our provision within the City
stooping very low, saving only hope, Man's courage often abateth, but hope
seldom forsakes.
the noble courage of the Governors and Captains, and the stout readiness of
the soldiers: our wine, and flesh as well poudered as vnpoudered was spent,
nor there was any Cheese to be gotten, but upon an unreasonable price, our
company having eaten up their Horse, Saguntina fames.
Asses, and Cattes, for lack of other victuals: there was nothing left to be
eaten, but a small quantity of bread, and Beans, and we drank water and
Vinegar together, whereof was not much left, when that we perceived that our
enemies had dug and cast up 3. mines in the Commander of the gate, they
laboring in all places more diligently then ever they did before, bringing
into the ditch, over against the battery of the Cortaine, a hill of earth, as
high as the wall: And already they came to the wall above the Counterscharfe
over against the Turrion of the Arsenall, and had made one Commander complete,
fenced with shares, like unto plough shares, in proportion and height
correspondent to ours.

Within the City were remaining but 500. Italian soldiers, who were not hurt,
yet very faint and weary by their long watching and pains in fighting in those
fervent and burning heates, which are in those parts. In July the heat is
commonly so extreme in this Island, that the inhabitauntes thereof, are not wont
to travel, but by night only.
And the greater and better part also of the Grecians were by this time slain,
when as the chief of those Citizens remaining, did fully resolve them selves
(the which was about the 20. of July) to present a supplication in writing to
that noble gentleman Bragadino Proueditore, A letter or supplication exhibited
by ye Cypriottes unto Sig. Bragadino.
desiring and beseeching him, that seeing their City and fortress was thus
battered and brought to extremity, without sufficient aid to defend the same,
without substance or sustenaunce, having no hope of succor, or any new
supply, they having spent and consumed not only their goods, but also their
lives for the defense of them, and in testifying of their dutiful service
toward the noble and royal state of the Segniory of Venice, that it might
now please him, and the rest of the honorable Governors, that were present,
and put in trust, having a careful eye unto some honorable conditions, to
have now at the last a respect to the credit and honor of their long
traueiled wifes, and the safegarde of their poor children, which otherwise
were shortly very like to be a pray to their bloudthirsting and ravening
enemies. The answer of the former letter.
To the which letter or supplication speedy answer was made by the forenamed
honorable Bragadino, comforting them, that they should by no means abate
their courage, and that shortly he looked for succor from the Segniorye,
diminishing as much as he might, the fear which they had conceived in their
hearts, dispatching and sending away suddenly from Cyprus into Candia a
Pinnisse to certify the Duke and Governors there, in what extremity they
were. The Turks by this time had ended their mines, and set them on fire, the
29. of July, in the which space our men according as they were wont to do,
renewed and made up again the vaymures ruined before by ye Ordinance, and
having no other stuff left to advance them with, It stands with reason, in
hope of saving the greater, to let the lesser go.
made sackes of Carsey, unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligently looked. The
3. mines of the Commander did great damage to us, having thrown down the
greater part of the earth, whereas the Governor Randacchi was slain. The mine
of the Arsenall overthrew all the rest of the Turrion, having smouldered and
choked one whole garrison of our soldiers, the 2. flanckers only still
remaining.

The fifth Assault.
THe enemies traveled much to become masters of those foresaid flanckers, and
to sallye forth by the other batteries, and this assault lasted from three of
the clock in the after noone until night, where, and at what time were slain
very many of our enemes. In this assault Sig. Giacomo Strambali amongst the
rest, showed much worthiness, as he had done before in other conflictes.

The 6. and last Assault.
THe next morning following, at the break of the day, they assailed all
places, the which Assault continued more then six hours, with very little
hurt on our side, because our enemies fought more coldly then they were wont to
do, annoying of us continually on the Sea side with their Galleys, shooting in
all their Assaults and batteries continually Cannon shot in all parts of
the City, as near as they might. After we had defended and repulsed this
assault, and perceived things brought to a narrower strait then they were
wont to be at, Necessity often times presses us in the end to that, which our
will continually spurneth against.
we having left in all the whole City, but 7. barrels of powder, the
Governors of the City fully determined to yield up them selves and the City,
with honorable conditions. Wherefore the first of August in the after noone,
they took a truce, one being come for that purpose from Mustafa the General,
with whom they concluded the next morning following to give 2. hostages a
piece, until such time as both armies were agreed. For our hostages (by the
appointment of ye right honorable Bragadino) were sent forth the Earl Hercole
Martinengo, and Sig. Matteo Colsi a Citizen of Famagosta, and from our enemies
came into the City the Liefetenant of Mustafa, Giannezzeri be the Guard of the
great Turk, so that Aga de' Giannizzeri is the Captain of the Turks Guard.
and ye Aga of ye Giannizzers, the which were met, even unto the gate of the
City, of Sig. Baglione with 200. Harquebusers: ours also were met in like
manner with great pomp with horsemen and Harquebusers, with the son also of
Mustafa in person, who made very much of them.

The Lord Baglione imparld with these hostages, which were then come for that
purpose of the articles of peace, requiring by them of their General, their
lives, armor, and goods, 5. pieces of Ordinance, 3. of the best horses, and
safe passage from thence unto Candia accompanied with their Galleys, and last
of all, that the Grecians inhabiting ye Island might dwell there still quietly,
and enjoy peaceably their own goods and possessions, living still Christians
hereafter, as they had done before. All the which requests and articles were
agreed upon, granted, Just Turkishe dealing, to speak and not to mean:
suddenly to promise, and never to perform the same.
and subscribed unto by the hand of Mustafa. Forthwith were sent Galleys, and
other vessels into the haven, so that our soldiers immediately began to
imbarke them selves, of the which the greater part were already gone aboorde,
the nobility and our chief Captains also being likewise very desirous to
depart. The 15. of August in the morning, the worthy Bragadino sent me with a
letter unto Mustafa, by the which he signified, that the same night he would
come unto him to deliver up the keys of the City, and that he would leave in
the hold the honorable gentleman Tiepolo, praying him therefore, that whilst
he should have just cause thus to be abroad, that there might be no harm done
at home, and in the City. The Turks from our truce taking until that time,
practiced with us all familiarly, The Wolf sometime cunningly counterfeiteth
the voice of the Goat, and the deceatfull person pretends plain and upright
dealing, that he may the sooner intrappe the simple.
and without any suspicion of sinister or double dealing, they having showed us
much courtesy both in word and deed. Mustafa him self by word of mouth
presently answered me to this letter, in this sort, that I should return, and
make relation to this noble man Bragadino, who had sent me, that he should come
over to him at his own pleasure, for he was very desirous both to see and know
him, for his great worthiness and prowes, that he had tried to be in him, and in
the other of his Captains and soldiers, of whose manhood and courage he would
honorably report, where soever he came, as occasion should serve thereunto: and
to conclude that he should nothing doubt of any thing: But full evil may the
simple Lambs trust the ravening Wolf.
because in no manner of condition he would suffer any violence to be done to
those, which remained behind within the City. So I speedely returning, made
true report of the same: and toward night about 4. of ye clock, the right
honorable Bragadino accompanied with the L. Baglione, with Sig. Aluigi
Martinengo, with the right worshipful Sig. Gio. Antonio Querini, with the
right worshipful Sig. Andrea Bragadino, with the Knight of Haste, with the
Captain Carlo Ragonasco, with Captain Francesco Straco, with Captain Hector
of Brescia, with Captain Girolomo di Sacile, and with other gentlemen, and 50.
soldiers: the Governors and noble men with their swords, and ye soldiers with
their Harquebusers, came forth of their hold, and went unto the Pauilion of
Mustafa, of whom, all they at the beginning, were courteously received, and
caused to sit down by him, he reasoning and discoursing with them of diverse
things, a certain time: and drawing them from one matter to an other, at the
last upon a sudden picked a quarrel unto the^, An easy thing it is to find a
staff to beat a dog: and better is an ill excuse, then none at all.
especially burthening that noble Bragadino with an untruth, laying to his
charge, that he had caused certain of his slaves in the time that the truce
continued betwixt them, to be put to death. The which thing was most false. So
that he being angry therewith suddenly stepped forth, and commanded them to be
bound. Thus they being unarmed (not suffered at that time to enter into his
Pauilion, with their former weapons) and bound, were lead one by one into the
market place, before his Pauilion, being presently cut and hewn in sunder in
his presence, and last of all from that worthy and noble Bragadino (who being
bound as the rest, and being commanded twice or thrice to stretch forth his
neck, The property of true fortitude is, not to be broken with sudden
terrors.
as though he should have been beheaded, the which most boldly he did without
any spark of fear) his ears were cut of, and causing him to be stretched out
most vilely upon the ground, Mustafa talking with him, and blaspheming the holy
name of our Savior, demanding him, Mustafa, cousin german to the thief,
which honge on the left side of our Savior at his Passion.
where is now thy Christ, that he helps thee not: To all ye which no answer
at all was given of that honorable gentleman. The Earl Hercole Martinengo,
which was sent for one of the hostages, who was also bound, was hidden by one
of Mustafas Eunukes until such time as his fury was past, afterward his life
being granted him, he was made the Eunukes slave. Three Grecians which were
under his Pauilion were left untouched. All the soldiers which were found in
the camp, and all sorts of Christians to the number of 300. were suddenly
slain, they nothing mistrusting any such treason, or tyranny. The Christian
soldiers, which were imbarcked a little before, were lincked and fettered with
iron chains, made slaves, all things being taken from them, and stripped into
their shirtes.

The second day after this murder was committed, which was the 17. of August,
Mustafa entered the first time into the City, and caused the valiant and wise
governor With this noble man of Venice M. Lorenzo Tiepolo, now thus vilely put
to death, in my return from Constantinople into Christendom, I sailed 300.
miles, namely, from Candia or Creta, unto Zacynthos, now called: Zanthe, with
his great favor: he being then, as at this seege also he was Captain and
Governor of Baffo.
Tiepolo to be hanged, who remained behind, waiting the return of Sig.
Bragadino. I being in the city at that present, when other of my cou^treyme^
were thus miserably slain and made slaves, hid my self in certain of the
Grecians houses the space of 5. days, and they not being able to keep me in
covert any longer for fear of the great penalty, which was proclaimed against
such transgressors and concealers, I offered, and gave my self slave to one
Sangaccho del Bir, promising him 500. Zechini, be certain pieces of fine gold
coined in Venice: every one of the which is in value vj. shillinges viij. pence
of our money and somewhat better: and equal altogether to a Turkishe Byraltom.
Zechins for my rau^some, with whom I remained in the camp. The Friday
following (being the Turks sabbath day) this worthy and pacient gentleman
Bragadino was led still in the presence of that unfaithful tyrant Mustafa, to
the batteries made unto the City, whereas he being compelled to carrye two
baskets of earth, the one upon his back, the other in his hand slave like, to
every sundry battery, being enforced also to kiss the ground as often as he
passed by him, was afterward brought unto the Sea side, where he being placed
in a chair to lean and stay upon, was winched up in that chair, and fastened
unto the Maineyarde of a Galley, and hoysted up with a Crane, to show him to
all the Christian soldiers and slaves (which were in the haven already shipped)
he being afterward let down, and brought to the market place, the tormentors
took of his clothes from him, and tacked him unto the Pillary, whereas he was
most cruelly fleyed quick: with so great constancy and faith on his part,
that he never lost or abated any iotte of his steadfast courage, being so far
from any fainting, His death answerable to his former life.
that he at that present with most stout heart reproched them, and spoke much
shame of his most traiterous dealing in breaking of his faithful promise. At
the last without any kind of alteration of his constancye, he recommending his
soul unto almighty God, gave up the ghost. When he had thus ended his life
(thanks be to God) his skin being taken and filled with straw, was
commanded forthwith to be hanged upon ye Bowsprit of a A Foyste is as it were
a Briga^dine, being somewhat larger then half a Galley, much used of the
Turkish Cursaros, or as we call the^ Pirates, or Rouers.
Foyste, and to be carried along the coast of Syria by the sea side, that all
the port towns might see, and understand who he was.

This is now so much as I am able to declare to your highness by that I saw my
self, Things seen are of much more credit, the only heard.
and can remember whilst that I was in the Fortress: that also, which by true
relation of others I could understand, and saw also my self in the Camp,
whilst I was slave, I will likewise breefly utter unto you. The enemies armies
was in number 200. The Turks call all those Segniories which they have in
Asia, commonly by the name of Natolia, as they do likewise term it to be in
Grecia, what soever is in any part of Europe, being under the great Turk.
thousand persons of all sorts and qualities. Of soldiers which took pay
there were 80. thousand, besides the which number, there were 14. thousand of
Giannizzers taken out from all the holds of Syria, Caramania, Natolia, and
part of them also which came from the The Gate of the great Turk, is as much
to say, as Constantinople: the which they call in the Turkishe language,
Stanboll.
Gate of the great Turk. The venturers with the sword were 60. thousand in
number. The reason, why there were so many of this sort, was because Mustafa
had dispersed a rumor, through the Turks dominion, that Famagosta was much
more wealthy and rich, then the City of Nicosia was: so for that cause, and
by the commodious and easy passage from Syria over into Cyprus, Gli Venturieri
da spada, are a kind of venturing soldiers, who commonly are wont to follow
the army in hope of the spoil.
these venturers were easily induced to come thither. In 75. days (all the
which time the battery still continued) 140. thousand iron pellets were shot
of, numbered, Aleppo, a famous City near unto Antiochia, otherwise called in
Greek, (...), the City of the Sun.
and seen. The chief personages which were in their army near unto Mustafa,
were these following: the Bassa of Aleppo, the Bassa of Natolia, Musafer Bassa
of Nicosia, the Bassa of Caramania, the Aga of the Giannizzers, Giambelat Bey
in the Turkishe language, signifies knight with us.
Bey, the Sangiaccho of Tripolis, the Begliarbei signifies L. Admiral.
Begliarbei of Greece, the Bassa of Sciuassi and of Marasco, Ferca Framburaro,
the Sangaccho, is that person with the Turks, that governs a province or
country.
Sangaccho of Antipo, Soliman Bey, three Sangacchos of Arabia, Mustafa Bey
General of the Venturers, Fergat governor of Malathia, the Framburaro of
Diuerie, the Sangaccho of Arabia, and other Sangacchos of lesser credit, with
the number of 80. thousand persons besides, as by the muster made by his
commission might well appear.

The Framburaro which was at Rhodes, was appointed and left governor at
Famagosta, and the report was that there should be left in all the Island of
Cyprus 20. thousand persons, with 2000. horse, many of the which I saw, being
very lean and evil appointed for service. It seems also a thing not
impertinent to the matter, to signify to you, God suffers much to be done to
his servants, but never forsakes them.
how I by the especial grace of God, was delivered out of their cruel hands,
I having paid within 42. days (all the which time I was slave) 500. Zechins
for my ransom to him, whose prisoner I was, by the means of the Consul for
the French Marchantes, a ligger then at Tripolis, who a little before came from
Tripolis in Syria unto Cyprus, into the Turks camp. Yet for all that I had
paid this sum of money to him, he would not so set me at liberty, but
feeding me up still with fair words, and promising me, that he would first
bring me unto his government, which abutted upon a piece of the famous river of
Euphrates, and afterward dimisse me. The which malice and falsehoode of his I
perceauing, determined with my self to give him the slip, and to fly: so I
waiting my time, and repayring often to the City, at length met with a small
Fisher bote, of the which a poor Grecian was honor and master, with whom in
one night with two only Ores and a small sail made of two shirtes, Necessity
often times sharpeneth men's wits, and causes boldness.
passed over from Cyprus unto Tripolis, being in very great danger of
drowning, whereas I remained in covert in the house of certain Christians,
until the 25. of September, at what time I departed from thence in a little
French ship called Santo Vittor, which came into these parts, and as we rode,
we touched at a part of Cyprus westward, called Capo delle Gatte, where as I
came a land, and talking with certain of the inhabitaunce of the villages, who
were then by chance a hauking, demanded of them, how they were entreated of
the Turks, and after what sort the Island was tylled: to the which they
answered, that they could not possibly be in worse pickle, then they were at
that present, not enjoying that quietly, which was their own, being made
villans and flaues, and almost always carrying away the Bastonados, The nature
of every commodity is sooner understood by lacking, then by continual
enjoying of the same.
so that now (they said) they knew by trial too perfectly the plesaunt and
peaceable government of the Christians, wishing and praying God that they might
shortly return. And concerning the tyllage of the Island they made answer
moreover, that no part of it was plowed or labored, saving only that
mountain, which was toward the West, and that because they were little
troubled with the cruelty of the Turks, but as for the plain and East part
of the Island, there was small seed sown therein, but became in a manner
desert, there being left but few inhabitauntes, and less store of cattle
there. Afterward we departing from thence, arrived in Candia, of the old
writers called Creta in latin, (...) in Greek, because it had once a 100.
Cities in it, now there remaining but only 4. thus commonly named, Candia, La
Cania, Retimo, and Sythia.
Candia, I for my part being clothed in Sackcloth, whereas soon after by the
great courtesy of the right honorable Sig. Latino Orsino, I was new
apparelled accordingly, friendly welcomed, and my necessity relieved. From
whence I shortly after sailing in a Cypriottes ship (thanks be to almighty
God) arrived in this City in health, and am safely come It is great pleasure
for any true subject, after long travel, to see the smoke of his native
Country.
home now at the honorable feet of your highness.

The Captains of the Christians dead in Famagosta.
THe Lord Estor Baglione. Thr Lord Aluigi Martinengo. The Lord Federico
Baglione. The Knight of Asta Vicegouernour. The Captain David Noce Master of
the Camp. The Capt. Meani of Perugia Sargent Mayor. The Earl Sigismond of
Casoldo. The Earl Francesco of Lobi of Cremona. The Captain Francesco
Troncauilla. The Capt. Hannibal Adamo of Fermo. The Capt. Scipio of the City
of Castello. The Capt. Charles Ragonasco of Cremona. The Capt. Francesco
Siraco. The Capt. Roberto Maluezzo. The Capt. Caesar of Aduersa. The Cap.
Bernardin of Agubio. The Capt. Francesco Bugon of Verona. The Capt. James of
Fabiano. The Capt. Sebastian del Sole of Florence. The Capt. Hector of Brescia,
the successor to the Captain Caesar of Aduersa. The Captain Flaminio of
Florence, successor unto Sebastian del Sole. The Capt. Erasmus of Fermo,
successor to the Captain of Cernole. The Captain Bartholmewe of Cernole. The
Capt. John Battista of Riuarole. The Capt. John Francesco of Venice.
The names of Christians made Slaves.
THe Earl Hercoles Martinengo, with Julius Caesar Ghelfo a soldier of Bressa.
The Earl Nestor Martinengo, which fled. The Capt. Marco Criuellatore. The Lord
Hercoles Malatesta. The Captain Peter Conte of Montalberto. The Capt. Horatio
of Veletri. The Capt. Aluigi Pezano. The Conte James of Corbara. The Capt. John
of Istria. The Capt. Soldatelli of Agubio. The Capt. John of Ascoli. The Capt.
Antony of the same town. The Capt. Sebastian of the same town. The Capt.
Salgano of the City of Castello. The Capt. Marchese of Fermo. The Capt. John
Antonio of Piacenza. The Capt. Carletto Naldo. The Capt. Lorenzo Fornaretti.
The Capt. Barnardo of Brescia. The Capt. Barnardino Coco. The Captain Simon
Bagnese, successor to the Captain David Noce. The Captain Tiberio Ceruto,
successor unto Conte Sigismond. The Captain Joseph of Lanciano, successor
unto Captain Francesco Troncauilla. The Capt. Morgante, successor to Captain
Hannibal. The Lieftenant, successor unto the Captain Scipio. The
Standerdbearer, successor to Captain Roberto. The Captain Ottauio of Rimini,
successor to the Captain Francesco Bugon. The Capt. Mario da Fabiano,
successor to Cap. Iacomo. The Captain Francesco of Venice, successor unto
Captain Antonio. The Capt. Matteo of Capua. The Captain John Maria of Verona.
The Captain Mancino.
The Fortifiers.
John Marmori. dead. The Knight Maggio. slave.
Turkishe Captains in Famagosta.
MVstafa General. The Bassa of Aleppo. The Bassa of Natolia. slain. Musafer
Bassa of Nicosia. The Bassa of Caramania. The Aga of the Giannizers. Giambelat
Bey. The Sanganccho of Tripolis. slain. The Begliarbei of Greece. The Bassa of
Sciuassi and Marasco. Ferca Framburaro. The Sangaccho of Antipo. slain.
Soliman Bey. slain. Three Sangacchos of Arabia. One slain. Mustafa Bey,
General of the Venturers. slain. Fergat Ruler of Malathia. slain. The
Framburaro of Diuerie. slain.

