A Book of the Art and manner, how to plant and graffe all sorts of trees,
how to set stones, and sow Pepines to make wild trees to graffe on, as also
remedies and mediicnes. With diverse other new practice, by one of the Abbey
of Saint Vincent in France, practiced with his own hands, divided into
seven Chapters, as hereafter more plainly shall appear, With an addition in
the end of this book, of certain Dutch practices, set forth and Englished,
by Leonard Mascall.



In laudem incisionis distichon,
Hesperidum Campi quicquid Romanaque tellus,
Fructificat nobis, incisione datur.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for John Wight.

The book unto the Reader.
Each wight that willing is to know,
The way to graffe and plant:
May here find plenty of that skill,
That erst has been but scant.
To plant or graffe in other times,
As well as in the spring:
I teach by good experience,
To do an easy thing.
The pleasure of this skill is great,
The profit is not small:
To such men as will practice it,
In things mere natural.
The poor man may with pleasure find,
Some thing to help his meede,
So may the rich man reap some fruit,
Where erst he had but weed.
The noble man that needs naught,
May thereby have at will:
Such pleasant fruit to serve his use,
And give each man his fill.
The common weal cannot but win,
Where each man does entende:
By skill to make the good fruits mo,
And ill fruits to amend.
Weigh well my words, and thou shall find,
All true that I do tell:
Mine Author does not write by guess,
Practice made him excel.
If thou will practice as he did,
Thou may find out much more:
He has not sound out all the truth,
That nature has in store.
Farewell.
To the right honorable and my very good Lord, Sir John Pawlet Knight, Lord
S. John, Leonarde Mascall wishes prosperous health, with continual increase
of honor.
RIght honorable, among all sciences that may be lightly obtained, and among
many goodly exercises and experiences for men, there is none (among the reast)
more meet and requisite, or that more does refresh the vital spirits of men,
nor more engender admiration in the effects of nature, or that is cause of
greater recreation to the weary and traueyled spirit of man, or more
profitable to man's life, than is the skill of planting and graffing, the which
not only we may see with our eyes, but also feel with our hands in the secret
works of nature: yea, nothing more discovers unto us the great and
incomprehensible work of god, that of one little Pepin sede, Nut or small
plant, may come the selfsame herb or tree, and to bring forth infinite of the
same fruit, which also does shine and show forth it self unto us, especially
in the spring time, by their diversity of shootes, blossoms and buds, in
diverse kinds of nature, by the goodness and mighty power of the great Lord
and Creator toward his people, in such things as comes forth of the
natural earth, to nourishe, to sustain and maintain our lives. What greater
pleasure can there be, than to smell the sweet odor of herbs, trees, and
fruits, and to behold the goodly color of the same, which in certain times
of the year comes forth of the womb of their mother and nourse, and so to
understand the secret operation in the same. And to be short, of this labor
(in our lives) we do take part thereof with great gains and revenues that come
thereby, where as through idleness there comes none: therefore to augment the
same, it shall be good to appease and mittigate all fond delights and vain
pleasures, with such like vanities, and clean put out and abolish the
delights of all vices. Wherefore the Poet says: let us praise the true
laboring hour of the true labourer. Thereupon many great Lords and noble
personages, have left their theaters, pleasant stages, goodly pastimes,
forsaking and despising their pleasures, not much regarding rich Diademes, and
costly perfumes, but have given themselves to Planting and Graffing, and such
like. In such sort, that if we should diligently search, and recite all the
discourse of ancient Histories, as of late days we should find, that the
most noble personages through their virtue, has showed many goodlye examples,
as in one Theater a supreme degree honorable: nor have had nothing more dear,
more requisite, or more greatly in commendation, than Planting and Graffing of
fruit. Cyrus a great king of the Persians (as witness Xenophon,) did so much
delight in the Art of planting and graffing, (which did show a great praise and
glory unto his personage,) that he had no greater desire or pleasure, than
when he might occupy himself in Planting and Graffing to garnish the earth, to
place and order thereon certain number of trees. The Emperor Dioclesian, (as
does recite, Sextus Aurelius Victor,) of his own good will without any
constraynt, did leave the scepter of his Empire for to remain continually in
the fields. So much pleasure did he take in planting of fruit, in making of
Orchardes and Gardens, which he did make, garnish, and finishe with his own
hands. The Senators, Dictatours, and Consuls of the Romans, among all other
things have commended Planting and Graffing to be one of the most flourishing
labors in this world for the common wealth, the which was celebrated and
counted a great virtue: yea, they did so much esteem it, that they did hang
tables thereof in diverse places, never thinking the time more aptly spent, than
in Pla^ting and Graffing, nothing more contenting themselves, nothing more
delighted in any other affairs for the common wealth, than in setting, sowing
or planting on the earth. How much we may praise of late days and commend our
trauailers from other countries, it is easy to be perceived and known, but of
Lords, Gentlemen, and Merchants, which have had (as it does appear) a great
regard in these latter days, how they might follow the example of others:
Whereby it has replenished this our realm with diverse strange Plants, Herbs,
and Trees, very good and necessary for the common wealth, not heretofore
commonly known. And behold, above all labors (for the common wealth) we
ought to give a sure and certain judgment, that Planting and Graffing is more
highly to be commended and praised, than many other worthy and noble things in
this world: for this Art has not only from time to time, been put in use
and practice of labor through kings and princes: but also it has been put in
writing of many great and worthy personages, in diverse kind of languages, as
in Greek by Philometor, Hieron, Acheleus, Orpheus, Musceus, Homer, Hosiode,
Constantine, Caesar: and in Latin, by Verron, Caton, Columella, Paladius,
Virgill, Amilius Macer, and in the Portingall tongue by king Attalus and Mago,
(the which recites the Historyes) that after their death, the books of
planting and graffing were brought to Rome, soon after the destruction of
Carthage. Likewise how many since have written only of zeal and love for
their country and common wealth, of the fruitful art of planting and
graffing: yea of late days how many worthy men by their learning have
written likewise thereof, should seem that it has come from their
auncesters, as the greatest honor, through the noble invention of the same.
Likewise I dare boldly affirm, not only the learned have written, but also
have been practisers and inuenters of the same, (as witnesses diverse
hystories) in diverse and many secret thing, wherein I dare boldly say, they
have not so learnedly, nor so exactly written, but they have more exactly
taught and left in writing things so certain, that their successors may
easily mark, observe, and keep the same: for every one has written according
to the nature of his country. The Greeks for Greece, the Barbarians for
Barbary, the Italians for Italy, the French men for France* etc. which
writing without the order and practice, does very small profit for this our
Realm of England, the which I can blame nothing more than the negligence of
our nation, which has had small care heretofore in planting and graffing, in
some places of this realm (as I have known) where as good and well disposed
have graffed, the evil and malicious person has sone after destroyed them
again: but if we would endeavor our selves thereunto (as other countries do,)
we might flourish, and have many a strange kind of fruit (which now we have
oftentimes the want thereof) that might greatly pleasure and serve many ways
both for the rich and poor, as well as in Greece, Barbary, Italy, or France,
if our nation were given so well that way as they are.

Right honorable, for so much as I have been long in declaring of our
predecessors, I will now leave, (troubling your honor any further) and rest
from the other things accomplishing my desire, beseching your Lordship to take
this my simple traueile in good part, requesting no other recompense for my
pain herein, but wishing it might be put in a general practice through this
realm, whereby in small time it would grow unto a great profit and commodity
both to the rich and poor, wherein I should think my self not only happy,
but also to have a just tribute for my deserts, and also this Realm might
thereby receive no small benefit, with praise of other countries, in following
our predecessors in this art of planting and graffing: some places of this
Realm are greatly commended and praised among others, as Kent for the
chiefest, which virtue (notwithstanding) can not be clean put out or forgoten,
specially, when such as your honor shall seem to favor the same, and also to
see the forward doyngs thereof, in such grounds and Lordships as ye do
possess, the which at this time has only moved me to attempt unto your
honor this my simple travail, which is not the only duty that I owe unto your
honor, but as a dew desert, not thinking my self half able to recompense
your virtuous liberality, nor showing otherwise how to recompense the same,
has boldned me at this time to commend this my simple and rude work unto
your Lordship, not according unto your estate and honor, the which had been
more mete and requisite to have had the finishing of some better work.
Therefore beseching your honor to wey and accept this mine intent and good will
herein, which thing so doing, I shall think my self not only happy, but it
shall encourage me the more hereafter to take in hand the like or better
work. Thus I beseech the almighty God and creator, to increase your
prosperous honor, with long life in health.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
GEntle reader thou shall understand, I have taken out of diverse Authors this
simple work, into our English tongue, praying thee for to accept it in good
part: in so doing thou shall bolden me to trauail further therein: and thus
showing my good will in declaring of diverse ways of planting and graffing, and
how in the meetest times of the year, with showing of diverse commodities and
secrets herein, how to set or plant with the root, and without the root.
How to sow or set Pepines or curnelles, with the ordering thereof. Also how
to cleanse your graffes and cions, how to help barren and sick trees, how to
kill worms and vermin, and to preserve and keep fruit: how to plant and
proyne your Vines, and to gather and press your grape: how to cleanse and moss
your trees, how to make your Syder and Perry, how to set, choose, order and
keep Hoppes, with many other secret practices, which shall appear in the
table following, that every person may easily perceive in these our days more
largely of the art of planting and graffing than heretofore has been showed.
Which thing is not an exercise only to the mind, but likewise a great profit
many ways, with maintenance of health unto the body. Therefore spare not the
body to show so great goodness thereunto, and also to the common wealth. In
these days (among the rest) ye may see many, which be of the base and abject
sort of the common wealth, as those which will not stick to say. Fie on thee
slave, what thing is now counted more filthy in these days (among fair
personages) than labooring of the earth which we must al live by. Well, these be
dainty persons: yet thereunto, what thing is more beautiful to the eye, more
profitable to the purse, or more healthful unto the body? and herein to put
away all nourishing of vice and idleness, it is easy to recite infinite and
many worthy Lords and Gentlemen, which have had a great care to follow the
example of others. Wherefore gentle Reader, let us now leave of from al wanton
games and idle pastimes, and be no more as children which seek but their own
gain and pleasure, let us therefore seek one of us for another in all good
works for the common wealth, whereby those that do come after us may so
enjoy our works and travel herein, as we have done of our predecessors,
that therein God may be glorified, praised and honored in all our works of
planting and graffing: and we therefore may be thankful, from age to age,
during this mortal life.

Amen.
The Table of all the principal things contained in this book, which ye
shall hereafter find by number and leaf.
Of the seven Chapters following.
The first Chapter treats of the setting of curnelles, of Apple trees, Plum
trees, Pear trees, and Service trees.
1 HOw to choose your Pepins at the first pressing. 1 How to use the earth to
sow your Pepynes on. 2 How to see unto pultrye for marring your beds, and
How to weed or cleanse your beds or quarters. 2 How to pluck up the wild
cyons. 3
The second Chapter treats, how to set your wild trees come of Pepynes,
when they be first plucked up. 3
HOw to dung your wild trees come of Pepines. 3 How to cut the principal
roots in setting again. 3 How to set your trees in rank being yung. 4 How to
make a space from one rank to another. 4 How to water your plants being dry.
4 How in remoouing your trees, to plant them again. 5 The best time for to
remove. 5 Of negligence and forgetfulness. 5 Not so good to graffe the
Service tree, as to set him. 6 Some trees without graffing have good fruit,
and other some being graffed, have but ill fruit. 6 For to augment and
multiply your trees. 6 The manner to change the fruit of the Pepin tree. 7 How
to make good Cider. 7 To make an Orcharde in few years. 7
The third Chapter is, of the setting of trees which come of Nuttes 8
HOw to set trees that do come of Nuttes, and the time to plant or set them. 8
For to set them in the spring time. 8 Of the dung and deep digging thereof. 9
Of Nuttes and stones like the trees they come of. 9 Of planting the said
Nuttes. 9 Why fruit shall not have so good savor. 8 To set the Pine tree. 10.
To set Cherry trees. 10 Trees of Bastard and wild Nuttes. 10 To set Filbardes
and Hasell wandes. 10 To set Damsons and Plum trees. 10 To graffe cyons of
Plums, on the like. 11 To set all sorts of Cherry trees. 11 How to order Plum
trees, and Cherry trees. 11 How to graffe Plum trees, and Cherry trees. 11 How
to proyne or cut trees. 12 How to cleanse and dress the roots of trees. 12 To
help the stock, being greater than the graffes. 13 The Remedy when a bough is
broken. 13 How to enlarge the hole about the roots. 14 To set small staves to
stay your cyons. 14 What trees to proyne. 15 Why the sour Cherrye dureth not
so long as the great healme Cherry. 15 To graffe one great Cherry with a
another. 16 Of deep setting or shallowe. 16
The fourth Chapter shows how to set other trees, of great cyons pricked in
the earth without roots, with the proyning of lesser Cyons.
TRees taking root pricked of branches. 16 How to set them. 16 How to bind
them that be weak. 17 How to dig the earth to set them in. 17 Of Cyons
without roots. 18 To plant the Fig tree. 18 How to set Quinces. 18 The way
to set Mulbery trees. 18. A Nutte thereof. 19. The time to cut cyons. 19 To set
bushe tree, as Gooseberies and small reysons. 19 Of setting Oziars. 19
The fyft Chapter treats of four manner of graffings. 19
OF diverse ways of graffing. 20 The first way of graffing all sorts of trees.
20 To graffe Apple trees. Pear trees, Quince trees, and Medler trees. 20 The
graffing of great Cherries. 20 To graffe Medlers on other Medlers. 20 Of diverse
kind of graffes on one tree. 21 The graffing of the Fig tree. 21 Of graffing
the great Abricotes. 22 Of graffing the Service tree. 22 The setting of the
Service tree. 22 Of trees hard to graffe in the shield. 22 How to see to
trees charged with fruit. 22 Of trees for to choose your graffes on. 23 The
cions on the East part are best. 23 To choose your tree for graffes. 23 To keep
graffes a long time. 23 To keep graffes ere they budde. 23 How ye ought to
begin to graffe. 24 When is good graffing the wild stocks. 24 To mark if
the tree be forward or not. 24 When ye graffe, what to be furnished withal.
24 Of graffes not prospering the first year. 25 For to graffe well and sure.
25. How to trim your graffes. 25 How to cut graffes, for Cherries and Plums. 26
A note of your incision. 26 For to take heed in graffing ye raise not the
bark. 26 How to cut your stock. 27 If your wild stock be great or slender.
27 Trees as great as ones arm. 27 Of great trees as big as ones leg. 27
The graffes being pinched in the stocks. 28 How ye ought to cleave your
stocks. 28 To graffe the branches of great trees. 28 How to cut great old
branches. 28 How to bind your graffes against winds. 28 To set many graffes
in one cleft. 29 To save your stock before ye cleave him. 29 If the stock
cleave to much, or the bark open. 29 How graffes never lightly take. 29 How to
set graffes right in the stock. 30 Of setting in of the graffes. 30. A note of
the same. 30 How to draw forth the wedge. 30 How to cover your cliftes on the
head. 31 How ye ought to see well to the binding of your graffes. 31 How ye
ought to temper your clay. 31 How to bush your graffe heads. 31 The second way
to graffe hye branches. 32 The third manner of graffing, is betwixt the bark
and the tree. 33 How to dress the head, to place your graffes betwixt the
bark and the tree. 33 How to cover the head of your stock. 34 The manner of
graffing in the shield. 34 To graffe in Summer, so long as the trees be
leaued. 34 Of big Cions are best to graffe. 34 How to take of the shield. 35
How to know if your scutchion or shield be good or bad. 35 How to graffe on
young trees. 36 How to set or place your shield. 36 How to raise up the bark,
to set your shield on. 36 How to bind on your shield. 37 On a tree ye may
graffe two or three shieldes. 37 Of the time to unbind your shield. 37 How to
cut the braunckes, graft on the trees. 37
The sixth Chapter is of transplanting, or altering of trees. 38
THe sooner ye tra^spla^t or set them it shall be the better. 38 To plant or set
toward the sowth. 39 How to cut the branches before ye set. 39 Apple trees
commonly must be disbraunched before ye set them again. 39 All wild stocks
must be disbraunched. 40 What trees do love the Sun, and what trees the old
air. 40 Of many sorts and manners of trees. 40 How to plant or set trees at
large. 41 How ye ought to enlarge the holes, when ye plant your trees. 43 Of
dung and good earth for your trees. 43 If worms be in the earth at your roots
of trees. 44 To dig well the earth about the roots. 44 The nature of places.
44 Of good earth. 44 With what ye ought to bind your trees. 45
The.vij. Chapter is of medicening and keeping the trees. when they are planted
and set.
THe first counsel is, when your trees be but plants (in dry weather) they
must be watered. 45 With what dung ye ought to dung your trees. 45 When ye
ought (in Summer) to uncover your trees. 46 When to cut or proyne your trees.
46 How to cut great branches, and when. 46 How to leave your great branches
cut. 47 Of the trees having great branches: 47 Of the barrenness of trees, of
cutting ill branches and uncovering the roots. 47 Of trees which ye must
break, or pluck up the roots. 48 What does make a good Nutte. 48 Trees eaten
and destroyed with cattle, to be graft again. 48 How wild stocks ought not
hastily to be removed. 49 When to cut naughty cions from the head. 49 How
sometime to cut principal members. 49 How to guide and govern the said
trees. 49 A kind of sickness in trees. 50 Trees which have worms in the
bark. 50 Of snayles, antes and worms that mar trees. 50 How to take those
strange creeping worms. 51 A note of ill airs and weathers. 52 To defend
the Caterpiller. 53
Here follows the table of Graffing strange and subtle ways in using of
fruits and trees. 54
TO graffe one vine upon another. 54 To help a tree to long without fruit. 54
To have Peaches two months before others. 55 To have Damsons unto
Alhallowtide. 55 To make Medlers, Cheries and Peaches, in eating, to fast like
spyce. 55 To make a Muscadell taste. 55 To have Apples and Pears to come
without blossoming. 56 To have Apples and Chestnuttes rathe, and long on the
frees to remain. 56 To have good Cheries, unto Alhallowtide. 56 To have rath
Medlers two Months before others. 56 To have Pears timely. 56 To have
Misples and Medlers without stones. 57 To have other Pears betimes. 57 To have
Mulberies ripe very sone, and dure long. 57 To keep Pears a year. 57 To have
fruit taste half an Apple, and half a Pear. 57 Times of graffing. 58 To
destroy Pysmiers or Antes, about the tree. 58 Another way for the same. 58 To
have Nuttes, Plummes, and Almondes, greater and fayrer than others. 59 To make
an Oak (or other tree) as green in Winter, as in Summer. 59 The time of
planting without roots, and with roots. 59 To keep fruit from the frost. 59
The chosen days to plant and graffe. 60 To have green roses all the year. 60
To keep Raysons or Grapes good, a year long. 60 To make fruit laxatiue from
the tree. 60 A note for all plants and graffes. 61
Here follows the Table of certain Dutch practices. 62
To graffe one Vine on an other. 62 To help trees that do not prosper. 72 To
graffe Apples, to last on the tree to Allhalowtide. 74 To make Cherryes and
Peaches smell like spyce. 74 To graffe that an apple shall be half sweet and
half sour. 75 To graffe the Rose on the holly tree. 75 Chosen days to graffe
in, and to choose cyons. 60 How to gather your cyons. 61 Of worms in the trees
or fruit. 64 The setting of stones, and the ordering thereof. 64 How to gather
Gum of any tree. 65 To set a hole Apple. 65. The setting of Almondes. 65 The
watering of Pepines. 66. To plant or set Vines. 66 To set or plant the Cherry
tree. 66 To keep Cherries good, a year. 67 Remedy against Pismaires and
Antes. 67 The setting of Chestnutes. 68 To make all stone fruit taste, as ye
shall devise good. 68 The graffing of the Medler or Misple. 69 The bearing of
fruit of the Fig tree. 69 The planting the Mulbery and Fig tree. 69 The
trees that bear bitter fruit. 70 To help barren trees. 70 Another way for
the same. 70 To keep fruit after they be gathered. 71 The Mulbery tree lyking
his earth. 71 Of Moss on your trees. 71 To keep Nuttes long. 72 To cut or
proyne the Peache tree. 72 To color Peach stones. 73 If Peach trees be
troubled with worms. 73 To have the Peache without stones. 73 Another way for
the same. 74 The keeping of Plums. 75 The altering of Pears. 76 The making of
Cider and Pirry. 76 To help frosen Apples. 76 To make Apples fall from the
tree. 77 To cherrish Apple trees. 77 To make an Apple grow in a glass. 77 To
graffe many sorts of Apples on one tree. 78 To color Apples, what color ye
list. 78 To graffe, to have Apples without core. 79 The ordering of the Wine
and grape. 79 To have Grapes without stones. 83 To make the Vine to bring a
grape to taste like Clarret Wine. 83 The gathering of your grapes. 83 To know if
your Grape be ripe or not. 84 To prove or taste wine. 84 Of the ordering,
setting, and planting of Hops 85 To choose your Hop. 86 How to sow the
seeds. 86 Of the setting of poles. 87 How to proyne the Hoppe. 87 How to
gather your Hoppes. 87 What poles are best for your purpose. 88 How to order
and dress your hills. 88 Of the best ground for your Hoppe. 88 A note of all
the reast above said. 89 And how to pack and keep your Hoppes. 89

Praises be to God on hye,
In all our vvorldly planting:
And let us thank the Romans also,
For the Art of Graffing.
FINIS.
An Exhortation to the Planter and Graffer.
Always before ye do intend to plant or graffe, it shall be meet to have good
experience in things meet for this Art, as in knowing the Natures of all
trees and fruits, and the differences of Clymates, which be contrary in every
land: also to understand the East and West winds, with aspectes and Stars,
to the end ye may begin nothing that the wind or rain may oppress,
that your labor be not lost, and to mark also and consider the disposition of
the elements that present year, for all years be not of like operation, nor
yet after one sort, the Summer and Winter do not bear one face on the earth,
nor the spring time always rayny, or Autumn always moist: of this none have
understanding, without a good and lively marking spirit, few or none (without
learning) may discern of the varieties and qualities of the earth, and what he
does ask or refuse. Therefore it shall be good to have understanding of the
ground where ye do plant, either Orchard or garden with fruit, first it
behooves to make a sure defense, to ye end, that not only rude persons and
children may be kept out, but all kind of hurtful cattle indomaging your
plants or trees, as Oxen, kyne, Calves, Horse, Hogs and sheep, as the
rubbing of Sheep does greatly burn the sap, and often does kill young trees
and plants, and where they are broken or bruised with cattle, it is doubtful to
grow after. It shall be good also, to set, plant or graffe trees all of like
nature and strength together, that the great and hye trees, may not overcome
the low and weak, for when they be not like of heyght, they grow, nor ripe
not your fruit so well at one time but the one before the other: that earth
which is good for Vynes, is good also for other fruit. Ye must dig your
holes a year before ye plant that the earth may be better seasoned, mortifyed
and wax tender, both by rain in Winter, and heat in Summer, that thereby your
plants may take root the sooner, if ye will make your holes, and plant both in
a year, at the least, ye ought to make your holes two months before ye
plant, and as soon as they be made, then it shall be good to burn of straw or
such like therein, to make your ground warm: the further ye make them asunder,
the better your trees shall bear: make your holes like unto a fornayce, that
is, more straight in the mouth than beneath, whereby the roots may have the
more room, and by straightness of the mouth, the less rain or cold shall
enter by in Winter, and also less heat to the root in So^mer. Look also that
the earth ye put to the roots, be neither wet, nor laid in water: they do
commonly leave a good space betwixt every tree, for the hanging bows, for
being nyghe together, ye cannot set roots, nor sow nothing so well under
your trees, nor they will not bear fruit so well: some loweth forty foot,
some thirty between every tree: your plants ought to be greater than the
handle of a shouell, and the lesser the better: see they be straight, without
knottes or knobbes, having a long straight grain or bark, which shall the
sooner be apt to take graffes, and when ye set branches or boughs of old
trees, choose the youngest and straytest branch thereof, and those trees which
have borne yearly good fruit before, take of those which be on the sunny
side, sooner than those that grow in the court or shadow, and when ye take up
or alter your plants, ye shall note to what winds your plant is subject, and so
let them be set again, but those which have grown in dry grounds, let them
be set in moist ground: your plants ought to be cut of three foot long. If ye
will set two or three plants together in a hole, ye must take heed the
root of one touch not one another, for then the one will perish and rot the
other, or dye by worms or other varmen, and when ye have placed your plants
in the earth, it shall be good to strike down to the botto^ of every hole two
short stakes as great as your arm, on either side your hole one, and let the^
appear but a little above the earth that ye may (thereby in Summer) give water
unto the roots if need be. Your young plants, and rooted trees are commonly
set in Autumme, from the first unto the.xv. of October, yet some opinion is,
better after Alhollowtide unto Christmasse, than in the spring, because the
earth will dry to soon after, and also to set plants without root after
Michaelmasse, that they may the better mollify and gather root against the
spring, whereof ye shall find hereafter more at large. Thus much have I thought
meet to declare unto the Planter^ and Graffers, whereby they may the better
avoid the occasion and dangers of planting and graffing, which may come
oftentimes through ignorance.

1572.

Staff with vice above, to set in what instrument ye list, to cleanse your
moss trees. Graffing Chesill Avvinble byt. A Chesill A s^sing knife. A
proyning knife A Vine knyfe A graffing knyfe with each, a ring or butten to
hang at their girdell. Chesill head. A great Knyfe A Hammer with a File and
Percer. A Mallet. A Saw.



The Art of Planting and graffing.
The first Chapter. This chapter treats of the setting of Curnels, young Plum
trees and Pear trees, of Damsons and Service trees.
FOr to make young trees of the Pepins, of Apples, Pears, Plummes and Service.
First ye must prepare and make a great bed or quarter well replenished, blend
or mixed with good fat earth, and placed well in the Sun, and to be well
labored and dug a good time before you do occupy it: and if ye can by any
means, let it be dug very deep the Winter before, in blending or mixing it
well together with good fat earth, or else to be mixed almost the half with
good dong: and so let it rot and ripe together with the earth. And see always
that plot be clean unto the pressyng of Syder, that no wild cions or plants
do spring or grow thereon. Then in the month of September, December, or
thereabouts, take of the pepins or pomes of the said fruit at the first
pressing out of your licour, before the Curnels be marred or bruised: then take
out of them, and rub a few at once in a cloth, and dry them betwixt your
hands, and take so many thereof as you shall think good: then make your bed
square, fair and plain, and sow your seeds thereon, then take and cover
them with a rake lightly, or with earth, not puttyng to much earth upon them.
This done, divide your beds into quadrantes or squares of four foot broad
or thereabout, that when ye list ye may cleanse them from the one side to the
other, without treading thereon. Then shall ye cover your seeds or pepins with
fine earth, so siftying all over them, that then they may take the deeper and
surer root, and will keep them the better in winter following, and if ye list
ye may rake them a little all over: so that ye raise not your Pepins above the
earth.

Another way how one may take the Pepins at the first coming of the licour or
pressing.
WHich is: ye shall chose the greatest and fairest curnels or pepins, and take
them forth at the first brusing of your fruit, the^ dry them with a cloth, and
keep them all the winter until S. Andrews tide: then a little after sow them
in good earth, as thynne as ye do sow Peason, and then rake them over as the
other.

How one ought to use his earth to sow Pepins without dunging.
BUT in this manner of doing (in the spring) it is not so great need for to
raise or dig the earth so deep as that which is dunged in Winter: but to
divide your quarters, in covering your pepins not so much with earth as those
which be sown with good dung, but when ye have sown them, a little rake them
all over.

How ye ought to take heed of pultrie for scraping of your beds or quarters.
AS soon after as your Pepins be sown upon your beds or quarters, let this
be done, one way or other, that is, take good heed that your hens do not
scrape your beds or quarters, therefore stick them all over light and thin
with bows, or thrones, and take good heed also to swine, and other cattle.

How to weed or cleanse your beds and quarters.
ANd when the Winter is past and gone, and that ye see your Pepins rise and
grow: so let them increase the space of one year, but see to cleanse weeds,
or other things which may hurt them, as ye shall see cause. And in the Summer
when it shall wax dry, water them hardely in the euenings.

How one ought to pluck up the wild cions.
AND when these wild cions shall be great, as of the growth of one year, ye
must then pluck them up all in the winter following, before they do begin
to spring again. Then shall ye set them and make of them a wild Orcharde as
follows.

The second Chapter treats how one shall set again the small wild trees,
which come of Pepins, when they be first plucked up.
FOr the bastard or little wild trees incontinent as soon as they be pluckte
up, ye must have of other good earth well trimmed and dunged and to be well in
the Sun, and well prepared and dressed, as it is said in the other part before
of the Pepins.

How to dung your bastard or wild young trees which come of Pepins.
ABout Aduent before Christmas, ye must dig and dung well the place where as
ye will set them, and make your square of earth even and plain, so large as ye
shall think good, then set your wild trees so far one from another as ye
think mete to be graft, so that they may be set in eue^ ranks and in good
order, that when need shall require, ye may remove or renew any of them or
any part thereof.

How ye ought in replanting or setting to cut of in the mids the principal
great roots.
IN what part so ever ye do set any trees, ye must cut of the great master
root, within a foot of the stock, and all other big roots, so that ye
leave a foot long thereof, and so let them be set, and make your ranks cross
wise one from another half a foot, or thereabouts, and ye must also see that
there be of good dung more deep and lower than ye do set your trees, to
comfort the said roots withal.

How ye ought to set your trees in rank.
YE shall set your small young trees in ranks, half a large foot one from
another: and let them be covered as ye do set them, with good fat earth all
over the roots.

How to make the space from one rank to another.
YE shall leave between your ranks, from one rank to another, one foot, or
there aboutes, so that ye may pass between every rank for to cleanse them
if need require, and also for to graffe any part or parcel thereof when time
shall be meet. But ye must note, in making thus your ranks, ye shall make so
many allies as ranks. And if ye think it not good to make so many allies,
then divide those into quarters of five foot broad or thereabouts, and make
or set four ranks (in each quarter of the same) one foot from another, as ye
use to set great Cabbage. And as soon after as ye have set them in ranks and
in good order as is aforesaid, then shall ye cut of all the sets even by the
ground. But in thus doing see that ye do not pluck up or loose the earth which
is about them: or if ye will, ye may cut them before ye do set them in ranks.
If ye do so, see that ye set them in such good order and even with the earth, as
is aforesaid. And it shall suffice also to make your ranks as ye shall see
cause. And look that ye furnish the earth al over with good dung, without
mingling of it in the earth, nor yet to cover the said plants withal, but
strowed betwixt: and ye must also look well to the cleansing of weeds, grass,
or other such things which will be a hurt to the growth of the plants.

How to water plants when they wax dry.
IT shall be good to water them when the time is dry: in the first year. Then
when they have put forth of new cions, leave no more growing but that cion
which is the principal and fairest, upon every stock one: all the other cut
of hard by the stock: and ever as there do grow small twigs about the stock,
ye shall (in the month of March and April) cut them al of hard by the stock.
And if ye then stick by every plant a pretty wand, and so bind them with
Willowe bark, brier, or osiers, it shall profit them much in their growth. Then
after five or six years growth, when they be so big as your finger, or
thereaboutes, ye may then remove any of them whereas ye will have them grow and
remain.

How one ought to remove trees, and to plant them again.
THe manner how ye ought to remove trees, is showed in the sixth Chapter
following: then about two or three years after their removing, ye shall graffe
them, for then they will be the better rooted. As for the others which ye leave
still in ranks, ye may also graffe them where as they stand, as ye shall see
cause good. When ye have plucked up the fairest to plant in other places (as is
aforesaid) also the manner how to graffe them, is showed in the fifth Chapter
following. But after they shall be so graft, in what place so ever it be, ye
shall not remove or set them in other places again, until the graffes be well
closed upon the head of the wild stock.

When the best time is to replant or remove.
WHen the head of the stock shall be all ouerclosed about the graffes, then ye
may when ye will, transplant and remove them (at a due time) where they shall
continue. For with often removing ye shall do them great hurt in their roots,
and be in danger to make them die.

Of negligence and forgetfulness.
IF peradventure ye forget (through negligence) and have let small cions two or
three years grow about the roots of your stocks vnplucked up, then if ye
have so done, ye may well pluck them up and set them in ranks, as the other
of the pepins. But ye must set the ranks more larger, that they may be removed
without hurting of each others roots: and cut of all the small twigs above as
need shall require, though they be set or graffed. Order them also in all
things as those small cions of a years growth.

It is not so convenient to graffe the Service tree, as to set him.
WHere as ye shall see young Service trees, it shall be most profit in setting
them, for if ye do graffe them, I believe ye shall win nothing thereby. The
best is only to pluck up the yung bastard trees when they are as great as a
good walking staff: then proyne or cut of their branches and carry them to set
whereas they may be no more removed: and they shall profit more in setting than
graffing.

Some trees without graffing bring forth good fruit, and some other being
graffed be better to make Syder of.
IT is here to be marked that though the Pepins be sown of the pomes of Pears
and good Apples: yet ye shall find that some of them do love the tree whereof
they came: and those be right, which have also a smooth bark, and as fair as
those which be graffed: the which if ye plant or set them thus growing from the
master root without graffing, they shall bring as good fruit, even like unto
the Pepin whereof he first came. But there be other new sorts commonly good to
eat, which be as good to make Syder of, as those which shall be graffed for that
purpose.

When you list to augment and multiply your trees.
AFter this sort ye may multiply them, being of diverse sorts and diversities,
as of Pears or Apples, or such like. Notwithstanding, whenever shall find a
good tree thus come of the Pepin, as is aforesaid, so shall ye use him. But if
ye will augment trees of themselves, ye must take graffes, and so graffe them.

Of the manor and changing of the fruit of the Pepin tree.
WHen so ever ye do replant or change your Pepin trees from place to place,
in so remoouyng often the stock, the fruit thereof shall also change: but the
fruit which does come of graffing, does always keep the form and nature of
the tree whereof he is taken: for as I have said, as often as the Pepin trees
be removed to a better ground, the fruit thereof shall be so much amended.

How one ought to make good Syder.
HEre is to be noted if ye will make good Syder, of what fruit so ever it be,
being Pears or Apples, but specially of good Apples, and wild fruit, have
always a regard unto the riping thereof, so gathered dry, then put them in
dry places, on bordes, in heaps, covered with dry straw, and whenever ye
will make Syder thereof, choose out all those which are black bruised, and
rotten apples, and throw them away, then take and use the rest for Syder: But
here to give you understanding, do not as they do in the country of Men's,
which do put their fruit gathered, into the mids of their garden, in the
rain and miselings, upon the bare earth, which will make them to leese their
force and virtue, and does make them also withered and tough, and lightly a man
shall never make good Syder that shall come to any purpose or good profit
thereof.

To make an Orchard in few years.
SOme do take yung straight slippes, which do grow from the roots, or of
the sides of the Appletrees, about Michaelmasse, and do so plant or set them
(with Otes) in good ground, where as they shall not be removed, and so graffe
(being well rooted) thereon. Other some do take and set them in the spring
time (after Christmas) in likewise, and do graffe thereon when they be well
rooted: and both ways do spring well.

And this manner of way is counted to have an Orchard the sonest. But these
trees will not endure past twenty or thirty years.

The third Chapter is of setting trees of Nuttes.
How one ought to set trees which come of Nuttes.
FOr to set trees which come of Nuttes: when ye have eaten the fruit, look
that ye keep the stones and curnels thereof, then let them be dried in the
wind, without the vehemency of the sun, so reserve them in a box, and use
them as before.

Of the time when ye ought to plant or set them.
YE shall plant or set them in the beginning of Winter, or before Michaelmasse,
whereby they may the sooner spring out of the earth. But this manner of setting
is dangerous: for the winter then coming in, and they being young and tender
in coming up, the cold will kill them. Therefore it shall be best to stay and
reserve them til after Winter. And then before ye do set them, ye shall soke or
stiepe them in milk, or in milk and water, so long till they do stink
therein: then shall ye dry them and set them in good earth in the change or
increase of the Moon, with the small end upward, four fingers deep, then
put some stick thereby, to mark the place.

For to set them in the Spring time.
IF ye will plant or set your Nuttes in the Spring time, where ye will have them
still to remain and not to be removed, the best and most easy way is, to set
in every such place (as ye think good) three or four Nuts nigh together, and
when they do al spring up, leave none standing but the fairest.

Of the donging and deep digging thereof.
ALso where as ye shall think good, ye may plant or set all your nuttes in
one square or quarter togithers, in good earth and donged in such place and
time, as they use to plant. But see that it be well donged, and also dug
good and deep, and to be well meddled with good dong throughout, then set your
nuttes three fingers deep in the earth, and half a foot one from another: ye
shall water them often in the Summer, when there is dry weather, and see to
weed them, and dig it as ye shall see need.

Of nuttes and stones like to the trees they came of.
IT is here to be noted, that certain kinds of nuttes, and curnelles which
do love the trees, whereof the fruit is like unto the tree they came of, when
they be planted in good ground, and set well in the sun, which be: the
walnutte, chestnuttes, all kind of peches, figs, almondes, and abrycotes,
all these do love the trees they came of.

Of the planting the said nuttes in good earth and in the Sun.
ALL the said trees do bring as good fruit of the said Nuttes, if they be well
planted, and set in good earth, and well in the Sun, as the fruit and trees
they first came of.

Why fruit shall not have so good savor.
FOr if ye plant good nuttes, good peaches, or figs in a garden full of
shadow, the which has before loved the Sun, as the vine does, for lack
thereof, their fruit shall not have so good savor, although it be all of one
fruit: and likewise so it is with all other fruit and trees, for the goodness
of the earth, and the fair Sun, does preserve them much.

To set the pine tree.
FOR to set the Pyne tree, ye must set or plant them of Nuttes, in March, or
about the shewte of the sap, not lightly after, ye must also set them where
they may not be removed after, in holes well dug, and well dunged not to be
transplanted or removed again, for very hardly they will shewte forth cions,
being removed, specially if ye hurt the master root thereof.

For to set Cherry trees.
FOr to set sour Cheries which do grow commonly in Gardens, ye shall
understand they may well grow of stones, but better it shall be to take of
the small cions which do come from the great roots: then plant them, and
sooner shall they grow than the stones, and those cions must be set when they
are small, young and tender: as of two, or three years groth, for when they are
great, they profit not so well: and when ye set them, ye must see to cut of
all the bows.

Trees of bastard and wild Nuttes.
THere be other sorts of Nuttes, although they be well set in good ground,
and also in the sun, yet will they not bring half so good fruit as the
other, nor commonly like unto those nuttes they came of, but to be a bastard
wild sour fruit, which is the Fylbert, small Nuts, of Plums, of Cheries, and
the great Abricots: therefore if ye will have them good fruit, ye must set them
in manner and form following.

How to set Filberdes or Hasell trees.
FOr to set Filberdes or Hasels, and to have them good, take the small wandes
that grow out from the root of the Filbard or hasell tree, (with short beary
twigges) and set them, and they shall bring as good fruit as the tree they
came off: it shall not be needful to proyne, or cut of the branches thereof
when ye set them, if they be not great but those that ye do set, let them be
but of two or three years growth, and if ye shall see those cions which ye have
planted, not to be fair and good, or do grow and prosper not well, then (in
the spring time) cut them of hard by the root, that other small cyons may
grow thereof.

To set Damsons or Plum trees.
IN setting damsons or plum trees, which fruit ye would have like to the trees
they came off: if the said trees be not graft before, ye shall take only the
cyons that grow from the root (of the old stock) which grows with small
twigges, and plant or set them: and their fruit shall be like unto the trees
they were taken off.

To take plum graffes, and to graffe them on other plum trees.
ANd if your Plum trees be graft already, and have the like fruit that you
desire, ye may take your graffes thereof, and graffe them on your Plum trees,
and the fruit that shall come thereof, shall be as good as the fruit of the
cion which is taken from the root, because they are much of like effect.

To set all sorts of Cheries.
TO set all sorts of great Cheries, and others: ye must have the graffes of
the same trees, and graffe them on other Cherrye trees, although they be of a
sower fruit, and when they are so graft, they will be as good as the fruit of
the tree whereof the graffe was taken: for the stones are good, but to set to
make wild cyons, or plants, to graffe on.

The manner how one may order both plum trees, and cherry trees.
FOR so much as these are two kind of trees, that is, to understand, the
Cherry, and the Plum tree, for when they be so grafte, their roots be not so
good, nor so free as the branches above, wherefore the cions that do come fro
the roots, shall not make so good and frank trees of. It is therefore to be
understood, how the manner and sort is to make frank trees, that may put forth
good cions in time to come, which is: when they be great and good, then if ye
will take those cions or young springes from the roots, ye may make good trees
thereof, and then it shall not need to graffe them any more after: but to
augment one by the other, as ye do the cions from the root of the nutte, as is
aforesaid, and ye shall do as follows.

How to graffe Plum trees and Cherry trees.
YE may well graffe Plum trees, and great Cherry trees, in such good order as
ye list to have them, and as hereafter shall be declared in the fifth Chapter
followyng, for these would be graffed while they are young and small, and also
graft in the ground, for thereby one may dress and trim them the better, and
put but one graffe in each stock of the same. Cleave not the heart, but a
little on the one side, nor yet deep, or long open.

How ye must proyne, or cut your trees.
FOr when your graffes be well taken on the stock, and that the graffes do put
forth fair and long, about one years growth, ye must proyne, or cut the
branch of commonly in winter, (when they proyne their vines) a foot lower,
to make them spread the better: then shall ye meddle all through with good fat
earth, the which will draw the better to the place which ye have so proyned or
cut.

The conuenientest way to cleanse and proyne, or dress the roots of trees.
ANd for the better clensing and proyning trees beneth, is thus: ye shall take
away all the weeds, and grass about the roots, then shall ye dig them so
round about, as ye would seem to pluck them up, and shall make them half
bare, then shall ye enlarge the earth about the roots, and where as ye shall
see them grow fair and long, place or couche them in the said hole and earth
again, then shall ye put the cut end of the tree where he is graft: somewhat
more lower than his roots were, whereby his cions so graft, shall spring so
much the better.

When the stock is greater than the graffes.
WHen as the tree waxes or swells greater beneath the graffing, than above:
then shall ye cleue the roots beneath, and wreath them round and so cover them
again. But see ye break no root thereof, so will he come to perfection. But
most men do use this way: if the stock wax greater than the graffes, they do
slyt down the bark of the graffes above, in two or three parts, or as they
shall see cause thereof, and so likewise, if the graffes wax greater above
than the stock, ye shall slitte down the stock accordingly, with the edge of
a sharp knife. This may well be done at any time in March, April and May, in
the cresce of the Moon, and not lightly after.

The remedy when any bough or member of a tree is broken.
IF ye shall chance to have boughs or members of trees broken, the best remedy
shall be, to place those bows or members right sone again, (then shall ye
comfort the roots with good new earth) and bind fast those broken bows or
members, both above and beneath, and so let them remain unto another year,
till they may close and put forth of new cions.

When a member or bough is not broken, how to proyne them.
WHere as ye shall see under or above superfluous Bows: ye may cut or proyne
off, (as ye shall see cause) all such bows hard by the tree, at a due time,
in the winter following: But leave all ye principal branches, and whereas any
are broken, let them be cut off beneath, or else by the grownd, and cast them
away: thus must ye do yearly, or as ye shall see cause, if ye will keep your
trees well and fair.

How one ought to enlarge the hole about the tree roots.
IN proyning your trees if there be many roots, ye must enlarge them in the
hole, and so to wreath them as is aforesaid, and to use them without breaking,
then cover them again with good fat earth, which ye shall mingle in the said
hole, and it shall be best to be dug all over a little before, and see that
no branche or root be left uncovered, and when ye have thus dressed your
trees, if any root shall put forth or spring hereafter out of the said
holes, in growing, ye may so proine them as ye shall see cause, in letting them
so remain two or three years after, unto such time as the said graffes be
sprung up and well branched.

How to set small staves by to strengthen your cyons.
TO avoid danger, ye shall set or prick small staves about your cions, for
fear of breaking, and then after three or four years, when they be (...)
^raunched: ye may then set or plant them in good earth, (at the beginning of
winter) but see that ye cut of all their small branches hard by the stock, then
ye may plant them where ye think good, so as they may remain.

In taking up trees note.
YE may well leave the master root in the hole (when ye dig him up) if the
removed place be good for him cut of the master roots by the stubbe, but
pare not of all the small roots, and so plant him, and he shall profit more
thus, than others with all their master roots. When as trees be great, they
must be disbranched or bows cut of, before they be set again, or else they
will hardly prosper. If the trees be great, having great branches or bows,
when ye shall dig them up ye must disbranch them before ye set them again,
for when trees shall be thus proined they shall bring great Cyons from their
roots, which shall be frank and good to replant, or set in other places, and
shall have also good branches and roots, so that after it shall not need to
graffe them any more, but shall continue one after another to be free and good.

How to couche the roots when they are proyned.
IN setting your trees again, if ye will dress the roots of such as ye have
proyned, or cut of the branches before, ye shall leave all such small roots,
which grow on the great root, and ye shall so place those roots in
replanting again not deep in the earth, so that they may soon grow, and
put forth cions: which being well used, ye may have fruit so good as the other
before mentioned, being of three or four years growth, as before is declared.

What trees to proyne.
THis way of proyning is more harder for the great Cherry (called Healmier)
than for the plum tree. Also it is very requisite and meet for those cyons or
trees which be graft on the wild sour Cherry tree, to be proynned also, for
diverse and sundry causes.

Why the sour cherry dureth not so long as the healmier or great cherry.
THe wild and sour cherry, of his own nature will not so long time endure,
(as the great healme cherry,) neither can have sufficient sap to nourish the
graffes, as the great healme cherry which is graft, therefore when ye have
proyned the branches beneath, and the roots also, so that ye leave roots
sufficient to nourishe the tree, then set him. If ye cut not of the under
roots, the tree will profit more easier, and also lighter to be known when
they put forth cyons, from the root of the same, the which ye may take
hereafter.

To graffe one great Cherie upon another.
YE must have respect unto the healme Cherrie, which is gratf on the wild
goynire (which is another kind of grate Cherrie) and whether you do proyne
them or not it is not material: for they dure a long time. But ye must see to
take away the cions that do grow from the root of the wild goynire, or
wild Plum tree: because they are of nature wild, and do draw the sap from
the said tree.

Of deep setting or shalow,
TO set your stocks or trees somewhat deeper on the hye grounds than in the
valleys, because the sun (in Summer) shall not dry the root: and in the low
ground more shallow, because the water in winter shall not dround or annoy the
roots. Some do mark the stock in taking it up, and so to set him again the
same way, because he will not alter his nature: so likewise the graffes in
graffing.

The fourth Chapter does show how to set other trees which come of wild
cyons prickked in the earth without roots: and also of proyning the meaner
cyons.
Trees taking root pricked of branches.
THere be certain which take root, being pricked of branches proyned of
other trees, which be, the Mulberrie, the Fig tree, the Quince tree, the
Service tree, the Pomegranade tree, the Apple tree, the Damson tree and diverse
sorts of other Plum trees, as the Plum tree of Paradise. etc.

How one ought to set them.
FOr to set these sorts of trees, ye must cut off the cions, twigges or
boughs, betwixt Alhallowtide and christmasse, not lightly after. Ye shall
choose them which be as great as a little staff or more, and look whereas ye
can find them fair, smooth, and straight, and full of sap wythall, growing of
young trees, as of the age of three or four years growth or there abouts, and
look that ye take them so from the tree with a broad chysell, that ye break
not, or lose any part of the bark thereof, more than half a foot beneath,
neither of one side or other: then proyne or cut of the branches, and prick
them one foot deep in the earth, well dug and ordered before.

How to bind them that be weak.
THose plants which be slender, ye must proyne or cut of the branches, then
bind them to some stake or such like to be set in good earth and well meddled
with good dung, and also to be well and deeply dug, and to be set in a
moist place, or else to be well watered in Summer.

How one ought to dig the earth for to set them in.
AND when that yet would set them in the earth, ye must first prepare to
dig it, and dung it well through out, a large foot deep in the earth. And
when as ye will set them every one in his place made (before) with a crow of
iron, and for to make them take root the better, ye shall put with your
plants, of watered otes, or barely, and so ye shall let them grow the space
of three or four years, or when they shall be well branched, then ye may
remove the^ and if ye break of the old stubby root and set them lower, they
will last a long time the more. If some of those plants do chance to put forth
cions from the root, and being so rooted, ye must pluck them up though they
be tender, and set them in other places.

Of Cions without roots.
IF that the said plants have of Cyons without roots, but which come from
the tree root beneath, then cut them not off till they be of two or three
years growth, by that time, they will gather of roots to be replanted in
other places.

To plant the Fig tree.
THe said plants taken of fig trees graffed, be the best: ye may likewise
take other sorts of fig trees, and graffe one upon the other, for like as
upon the wild trees do come the Pepins, even so the fig, but not so soon
to prosper and grow.

How to set Quinces.
Likewise the nature of Quinces is to spring, if they be pricked (as
aforesaid) in the earth, but sometimes I have graffed with great difficulty
(says mine author) upon a white throne, and it has taken, and borne fruit to
look on, fair, but in taste more weaker than the other.

The way to set Mulberies.
THere is also another way to set Mulberies as follows, which is, if ye do
cut in winter certain great Mulberye bows, or stocks, asunder in the body
(with a saw) in troncheous a foot long or more, then ye shall make a great
furrowe in good earth, well and deep, so that ye may cover well again your
troncheons, in setting them an end half a foot one from another, then cover
them again, that the earth may be above those ends, three or four fingers
high, so let them remain, and water them (in Summer) if need be sometimes,
and cleanse them from all hurtful weeds and roots.

Note of the same.
THat then within a space of time after, the said troncheons will put forth
Cyons, the which when they be somewhat sprigged, having two or three small
twigges, then ye may transplant or remove them where they list: but leave
your troncheons still in the earth, for ye will put forth many mo cions, the
which, if they shall have scanty of root, then dung your troncheons within,
with good earth, and likewise above also, and they shall do well.

The time meet to cut cions.
YE shall understand that all trees the which commonly do put forth cyons,
if ye cut them in winter, they will put forth and spring more aboundantlye, for
then they be all good to set or plant.

To set bush trees, as Goose bearies, or small Reysons,
THere be many other kinds of Bushe trees, which will grow of cions pricked in
the ground, as the Goose berye tree, the small Rayson tree, the Barbery tree,
the Blackthrone tree, these with many others, to be planted in winter, will grow
without roots: ye must also proyne them and they will take well enough, so
likewise ye may prick (in March) of Oziars in moist grounds, and they will
grow, and serve to many purposes for your garden.

The fifth Chapter treats of four manner of Graffings.
IT is to be understood that there be many ways of graffinges, whereof I have
here only put four sorts, the which he good, both sure and well proved,
and easy to do, the which ye may use well in two parts of the year and more,
for I have (says he) graffed in our house, in every month, except October and
november, and they have taken well which I have (says he) in the winter begun
to graffe, and in the Summer graft in the scutchine or shield according to the
time, forward or slow: for certain trees, specially young fair cions have
enough or more of their sap unto mid August, than others some had at
midsommer before.

The first way to graffe all sorts of trees.
ANd first of all it is to be noted, that all sorts of frank trees, as also
wild trees of nature, may be graft with graffes, and in the scutchin, and both
do well take, but specially those trees which be of like nature: therefore it
is better so to graffe, howbeit, they may well grow and take of other sorts of
trees, but certain trees be not so good, nor will prosper so well in the end.

How to graffe Apple trees, Pear trees, Quince trees, and Medler trees.
THey graffe the Pear graffe, on other Pear stocks, and Apple, upon apple
stock, crabbe or wilding stock, the Quince and Medler, upon the white throne,
but most commonly they use to graffe one apple upon another, and both Pears
and Quinces, they graffe on Hawthrone and crab stock. Another kind of fruit
called in French Saulsay, they used to graffe on ye willow stock, the manner
thereof is hard to do, which I have not seen, therefore I will let pass at
this present.

The graffing of great Cherries.
THey graffe the great Cherry, called in French Heaulmiers, upon the crabbe
stock, and another long Cherry called Guyniers upon the wild or sower Cherry
tree, and likewise one Cherry upon another.

To graffe Medlers.
THe Misple or Medlar, they may be graffed on other Medlers, or on white
throne: the Quince is graffed on the white or black throne, and they do
prosper well. I have graffed (said he) the Quince upon a wild Pear stock,
and it has taken and borne fruit well and good, but they will not long
endure. I believe (says he) it was because that the graffe was not able enough
to draw the sap from ye Pear stock: some graffe the Medler on ye quince, to
be great. And it is to be noted although the stock, and the graffe be of
contrary natures, yet notwithstanding neither the graffe nor scutchin, shall
take any part of the nature of the wild stock, so graffed, though it be
Pear, Apple, or Quince, which is contrary against many which have written,
that if ye graffe the Medler upon the quince tree, they shall ve without
stones, which is abusion and mockery. For I have (says he) proved the
contrary my self.

Of diverse kinds of Graffes.
IT is very true that one may set a tree which shall bear diverse sorts of fruit
at once, if he be graffed with diverse kind of graffes, as the black, white,
and green cherry togithers, and also Apples of other trees, as Apples and
Pears togithers, and in the scutchion (ye may graffe) likewise of diverse
binds also, as on Pears, Abricotes, and Plums together, and of others also.

Of the Graffing the Fig.
YE may graffe the fig tree upon the peache tree or abricote, but leave a
branche on the stock, and that must be according for the space of years,
for the one shall change sooner than the other. All trees above said, do take
very well, being graffed one with the other, and I have not known or found of
any others, howbeit (says he) I have curiously sought and proved, because
they say one may graffe on colewoortes, or on Elmes, the which I think are but
iestes.

Of the great Abricotes.
THe great Abricote they graffe in Summer in the scutchion or shield, in the
sap or bark of the lesser Abricote, and be graffed on Peache trees, Fig
trees, and principally on Damson or Plum trees, for there they will prosper the
better.

Of the Service tree.
OF the Service tree, they say and write, that they may hardly be graft on
other Service trees, either on apple trees, Pear, or Quince trees, and I
believe this to be very hard to do, for I have tried (says he) and they
would not prove.

The setting of Services.
THerefore it is much better to set them of curnels, as it is aforesaid, as
also in the second Chapter of the planting of cions, or other great trees,
which must be cut in winter, as such as shall be most meet for that purpose

Trees which be very hard to be graffed in the shield or stutchion.
ALl other manner of trees aforesaid, do take very well to be graffed with
Cyons, and also in the shield, except Abricotes on Peches, Almondes,
Percigniers, the Peache tree, do take hardlye to be graffed, but in the
shield, in Summer, as shall be more largely hereafter declared. As for the
Almonde, Percigniers and Peaches, ye may better set them of curnels and Nuttes,
whereby they shall the sooner come to perfection to be graffed.

How a man ought to consider those trees, which be commonly charged with fruit.
YE shall understand, that in the beginning of graffing, ye must consider what
sorts of trees do most charge the stock with branch and fruit, or that
do love the country or ground whereas you intend to plant or graffe them:
for better it were to have abundance of fruit than to have very few or none
good.

Of trees where on to choose your graffes.
OF such trees as ye will gather your graffes to graffe with, ye must take
them at the ends of the principal branches, which be also fair and greatest
of sap, having two or three fingers length of the old wood, with the new, and
those cions which have of eyes somewhat nigh together, are the best, for those
which be long or far one from another, be not so good for to bring fruit.

Those Cions toward the East are best.
YE shall understand, that those cions which do grow on the east, or Orient
part of the tree, are best: ye must not lightlye gather of the evil and
slender graffes, which grow in the mids of the trees, nor any graffes which
do grow within on the branches, or that do spring from the stock of the
tree, nor yet graffes which be on very old trees, for thereby ye shall not
lightly profit to any purpose.

To choose your tree for graffes.
AND when the trees, where as you intend to gather your graffes, be small and
yung, as of five or six years growth, do not take of the highest graffe there
of, nor the greatest, except it be of a small tree of two or three years, the
which commonly has to much of top or wood, otherwise not, for ye shall but
mar your graffing.

How to keep graffes along time.
YE may keep graffes a long time good, as from all hallowtyde (so that the
leaves be fallen) unto the time of graffing, if that they be well covered in
the earth half a foot deep therein, and so that none of them do appear
without the earth.

How to keep graffes before they are budded.
YE shall not gather them except ye have great need, until Christmas or there
abouts, and put them not in the ground, nigh any walls, for fear of Moles,
Mice, and water marring the place and graffes. It shall be good to keep
graffes in the earth before they begin to bud, when that ye will graffe betwixt
the bark and the tree, and when the trees begin to enter into their sap.

How one ought to begin to graffe.
YE may well begin to graffe (in cleaving the stock) at Christmasse, or
before, according to the coldenesse of ye time, and principally the Healme or
great Cherrye, Pears, Wardens, or forward fruit of Apples: and for Medlers
it is good to tarry until the end of January and February, until March, or
until such time as ye shall see the trees begin to bud or spring.

When it is good graffing the wild stocks.
IN the spring time it is good graffing of Wild stocks, (which be great)
betwixt the bark and the tree, such stocks as be of a latewarde Spring, and
kept in the earth before. The Damson or Plum tarieth longest to be graft: for
they do not show or put forth sap so sone as the others.

Mark if the tree be forward or not.
YE ought to consider always whether the tree be forward or not, or to be
graffed soon or latewarde, and to give him also a graffe of the like haste or
slownesse. Even so ye must mark the time, whether it be slow or forward.

When one will graffe, what necessaries he ought to be furnished withal.
Whenever ye go to graffing, see ye be first furnished with graffes, clay and
Moss, clothes, or barks of Sallowe to bind the graffes, or cloven briers, or
small Osiers to bind likewise withal. Also ye must have a small Saw, and a
sharp knife, to cleave and to cut graffes with all. But it were much better if
ye should cut your graffes with a great penknyfe, or some other like sharp
knife, having also a small wedge of hard wood, or of iron, with a hoked knyfe,
and also a small mallet. And your wild stocks must be well rooted before ye
do graffe them: and be not so quick to deceive your salues, as those which do
graffe and plant all at one time, yet they shall not profit so well, for where
the wild stock has not substance in him self, much less to give unto the
other graffes, for when a man thinks some times, to forward him self, he
does hinder him self.

Of graffes not prospering the first year.
YE shall understand, that very hardly your graffes shall prosper after if they
do not profit or prosper well in the first year, for when so ever (in the
first year) they profit well, it were better to graffe then somewhat lower
than to let them so remain and grow.

For to graffe well and sound.
ANd for the best understanding of graffing in the cleft, ye shall first cut
away all the small cions about the body of the stock beneath, and before ye
begin to cleave your stock, dress and cut your graffes somewhat thick and
ready, then cleave your stock, and as the cleft is small or great if need be,
pare it smoth within, then cut your incision of your graffes accordingly, and
set them in the cleftes as even, and as close as ye can possible.

How to trim your graffes.
YE may graffe your graffes full as long as two or three truntchions or cut
graffes, which ye may likewise graffe withal very well, and be as good as
those which do come of old wood, and oftentimes better, as to graffe a bough,
for often it so happens, a man shall find of oylettes or eyes hard by the
old slender wood, yet better it were to cut them of with the old wood, and
chose a better and fair place, at some other eye in the same graffe, and to
make your incision therevnder, as aforesaid, and cut your graffes in making
the incision on the one side narrows, and on the other side broad, as the inner
side thin, and the outside thick, because the outside (of your graffe) must
join within the cleft, with the sap or bark of the wild stock, and it
shall so be set in: see also that ye cut it smooth as your cleftes are in the
stock, in joining at every place both even and close, and especially the
joints or corners of the graffes on the heads of the stock, which must be
well and clean pared before, and then set fast thereon.

How to cut graffes for Cherries and Plummes.
IT is not much requisite in the healme Cherrie, for to join the graffes (in
the stock) wholly throughout, as it is in others, or to cut the graffes of
great Cheries, damsons or plums, so thin and plain as ye may other graffes,
for these sort have a more greater sap or pithe within, the which ye must
always take heed in cutting it to nygh on the one side, or on the other, but
at the end thereof chiefly, to be thin cut and flat.

Note also.
ANd yet if the said incision be more strayter and closer on the one side than
on the other side, pare it where it is most meet, and where it is to strait,
open it with a wedge of iron, and put in a wedge of the same wood above in the
cleft, and thus may ye moderate your graffes, as ye shall see cause.

How in graffing to take heed that the bark do not rise.
IN all kind of cutting your graffes, take heed to the bark of your graffes,
that it do not rise (from the wood) on no side thereof, and specially on the
outside, therefore ye shall leave it more thycker than the inner side: also ye
must take heed when as the stocks do wreath in cleaving, that ye may join
the graffe therein accordingly: the best remedy therefore is, to cut it smooth
within, that the graffe may join the better, ye shall also, unto the most
greatest stocks, choose for them the most greatest graffes.

How to cut your stock*
How much the more your stock is thin and slender, so much more ye ought to
cut him lower, and if your stock be as great as your finger, or thereabouts,
ye may cut him a foot, or half a foot from the earth and dig him about and
doong him with goats doong, to help him withal, and graffe him but with one
graffe or Cion.

If the wild stock be great and slender.
IF your wild stock be great, or as big as a good staff ye shall cut him
round of, a foot or thereaboutes above the earth, then set in two good
graffes in the head or cleft thereof.

Trees as great as ones arm.
ANd when your stock is as great as your arm, ye shall saw him clean of
round, three or four foot, or thereaboutes, from the earth, for to defend
him, and set in the head three graffes, two in the left, and one betwixt the
bark and the tree, on that side which ye may have most space.

Great trees as big as your leg.
IF the stock be as big as your leg, or thereaboutes, ye shall saw him
fair and clean off, four or five foot hie from the earth, and cleave him a
cross (if ye will) and set in four graffes in the cleftes thereof, or else
one cleft only, and set two graffes in both the sides thereof, and other two
graffes, betwixt the bark and the tree.

When the graffes be pinched with the stock.
YE must for the better understanding, mark to graffe betwixt the bark and
the tree, for when the sap is full in the wood of wild stocks being great,
then they do commonly pinche or wring the graffes to sore, if ye do not put a
small wedge of green wood in the clift thereof, to help them withal against
such danger.

How ye ought to cleave your stocks.
WHen so ever ye shall cleave your wild stocks, take heed that ye cleave
them not in the mids of the heart or pithe: but a little on the one side,
which side ye shall think good.

How to graffe the branch of great trees.
WHen so ever ye would graffe great trees, as great as your thigh, or greater,
it were much better to graffe only the branches thereof, than the stock or
body for the stock will rotte, before the graffes shall cover the head.

How to cut brauches old and great.
But if the branches be to rude, and without order (the best shall be) to cut
them all off, and within three or four years after they will bring fair new
Cions again and then it shall best to graffe them, and cut of all the
superfluous and ill branches thereof.

How ye ought to byride your graffes throughout for fear of wyndes.
ANd when your graffes shall be grown, ye must bind them, for fear of shaking
of the wind, and if the tree be free and good of him self, let the Cions
grow still, and ye may graffe any part or branche ye will, in the cleft, or
betwixt the bark and the tree, either in the scutchion, and if your bark be
fair and lose.

To set many graffes in one cleft.
WHen ye will put many graffes in one cleft, see that one incision (of your
graffe) be as large as the other, not to be put into the cleft so slightly and
rashely, and that one side thereof be not more open than the other, and that
these graffes be all of one length: it shall suffice also, if they have three
eyes, on cache graffe without the joint thereof.

How to saw your stock, before ye leave him.
IN sawing your stock, see that ye tear not the bark about the head
thereof, then cleave his head with a long sharp knife, or such like, and
knock your wedge in the intos thereof, (then pare him on the head round
about) and knock your wedge in so deep till it open meet for your graffes,
but not to wide, then holding in one hand your graffe, and in the other hand
your stock, set your graffe in close, bark to bark, and let your wedge be
great above at the head, that ye may knock him out fair and easily again.

If the stock cleave to much or the bark do open.
IF the stock do cleave to much, or open the bark with the wood to low, then
softly open your stock with your wedge, and see if your incision of your
graffe be all meet and just, according to the cleft, if not, make it until
it be meet, or else saw him off lower.

How graffes never lightly take.
Above all things ye must consider the meeting of the two sappes, betwixt the
graffe and the wild stock, which must be set just one with another, for ye
shall understand, if they do not join, and the one delight with the other,
being even set, they shall never take together, for there is nothing only to
join their increase, but the sap, recounting the one against the other.

How to set the graffes right in the cleft.
WHen the bark of the stock is more thicker than the graffe, ye must take
good heed of the setting in of the graffe in the cleft, to the end that his
sap may join right with the sap of the stock, on the inside, and ye ought
likewise to consider of the sap of the stock, if he do surmount the graffes on
the outsides of the cleft to much or not.

Of setting in the graffes.
ALso ye must take good heed, that the graffes he well and clean set in, and
join close upon the head of the stock: likewise that the incision which is
set in the cleft, do join very well within on both sides, not to join so
even, but sometimes it may do service, when as the graffes do draw to much
from the stock, or the stock also on the graffes do put forth.

Note also.
ANd therefore when the stock is rightly cloven, there is no danger in
cutting the incision of the graffe, but a little straight rebated, to the end
thereof, that the sap may join one with the other, the better and closer
together.

How ye ought to draw out your wedge.
WHen your graffes shall be well joined within the stock, draw your wedge fair
and softly forth, for fear of displacing your graffes, ye may leave within the
cleft a small wedge of such green wood, as is aforesaid, and ye shall cut it
of close by the head of your stock, and so cover it with a bark as follows.

To cover your cleftes on the head.
WHen your wedge is drawn forth, put a green pill of thick bark of willow,
crabbe, or apple, upon your cleftes of the stock, that nothing may fall
between: then cover all about the cleftes on the stock head two fingers
thick with good clay, or nie about that thickenesse, that no wind nor rain
may enter. Then cover it round with good moss, and then wreth it over with
clothes, or pills of Willow, Bryar, of Oziars, or such like, then bind them
fast, and stick certain long pricks on the graffes head amongs your cyons,
to defend them from the Crows, Iayes, or such like.

How ye ought to see to the bynding of your graftes.
BUT always take good heed to the binding of your heds, that they wax
slack, or shagge, neither on the one side or other, but remain fast upon the
clay, which clay remaynes fast (likewise on the stock head) under the binding
thereof, wherefore, the said clay must be moderated in such sort as follows.

How ye ought to temper your clay.
THe best way is therefore, to try your claye betwixt your hands, for stones
and such like, and so to temper it as ye shall think good, if so it require of
moystnesse or dryness, and to temper it with the hear of Beasts, for when it
dries, it holds not (otherwise) so well on the stock, or if ye kneade of
moss therewith, or mingle hay thin therewith: some do judge, that the moss
does make the trees mossie. But I think (says he) that comes of the
disposition of places.

To bushe your graffe heads.
WHen ye shall bind or wrappe your graffe heads with band, take small thorns,
and bind them within, for to defend your graffes, from Kites, or Crows, or
other danger of other fowls, or prick of sharp white sticks thereon.

The second way to graffe hie branches on trees.
THe second manner to graffe, is strange enough to many: this kind of
graffing is on the tops of branches of trees, which thing to make them grow
lightly, is not soon obtained: wheresoever they be graffed, they do only
require a fair young wood, a great Cion or twig, growing highest in the tree
top, which cions ye shall choose to graffe on, of many sorts of fruits if ye
will or as ye shall think good, which order follows.

TAke graffes of other sorts of trees which ye would graffe in the top
thereof, then mount to the top of the tree which ye would graffe, and cut of
the tops of all such branches or as many as ye would graffe on, and if they
be greater than the graffes, which ye would graffe, ye shall cut and graffe
them lower, as ye do the small wild stock aforesaid. But if the cions that
you cut, be as great as your graffe that you graffe on, ye shall cut them lower
betwixt the old wood and the new, or a little more higher, or lower: then
cleave a little and choose your graffes in the like sort which ye would
plant, whereof ye shall make the incision short, with the bark on both sides
like, and as thick on the one side as the other, and set so just in the cleft,
that the bark may be even and close, as well above as beneath, on the one
side as the other, and so bind him as is aforesaid. It shall suffice that
every graffe have one oylet, or eye, or two at the most, without the joint, for
to leave them to long if shall not be good, and ye must dress it with clay and
moss, and bind it as is aforesaid. And likewise ye may graffe these as ye do
the little wild stocks which should be as great as your graffes and to graffe
them as ye do those with sap like on both sides, but then ye must graffe them
in the earth, as three fingers off, or there abouts.

The third manner of graffing, is of graffes which may be set betwixt the bark
and the tree.
To graffe betwixt the bark and the tree.
THis manner of graffing is good when trees do begin to enter into their sap,
which is, about the end of February, unto the end of April, and specially
on great wild stocks which be hard to cleave, ye may set in four or five
graffes in the head thereof, which graffes ought to be gathered before, and kept
close in the earth till then, for by that time aforesaid, ye shall scantly
find a tree but that he does put forth or budde, as the Apple called Capendu,
or such like. Ye must therefore saw these wild stocks more charily, and more
higher, so they be great, and then cut the graffes which ye would set
together, so as you would set them upon the wild stock that is cleft, as is
before rehearsed. And the incision of your graffes must not be so long nor so
thick, and the bark a little at the end thereof must be taken away, and made
in manner as a launcet of iron, and as thick on the one side as the other.

How to dress the head, to place the graffes betwixt the bark and the tree.
ANd when your graffes be ready cut, then shall ye cleanse the head of your
stock, and pare it with a sharp knife, round about the bark thereof, to the
end your graffes may join the better thereon, then by and by take a sharp
penknife, or other sharp poynted knife, and thrust it down betwixt the bark
and the stock, so long as the incision of your graffes be, then put your
graffes softly down therein to the hard joint, and see that it do sit close
upon the stock head.

How to cover the head of your stock.
WHen as ye have set in your graffes, ye must then cover it well about, with
good tough clay and moss, as is said of the others, and then ye must
incontinent enuyron or compass your head, with small thorny bushes, and bind
them fast thereon all about, for fear of great birds, and likewise the wind.

Of the manner and graffing in the shield or scutchion.
THe fourth manner to graffe, which is the last, is to graffe in the scutchion,
in the sap, in Summer, from about the end of the month of May, until
August, when as trees be yet strong in sap and leaves, for otherwise it can
not be done, the best time is in June and July, so it is some years when the
time is very dry, that some trees do hold their sap very long, therefore
ye must farie fill it return.

For to graffe in Summer so long as the trees be full leaued.
FOr to begin this manner of graffing well, ye must in summer when the trees
be almost full of sap, and when they have sprung forth of new shewtes being
somewhat hardened, then shall ye take a branch thereof in the top of the tree,
the which ye will have graffed, and choose the highest, and the principallest
branches, without cutting it from the old wood, and choose thereof, the
principallest oylet or eye, or budding place, of each branch one, with which
oylet or eye, ye shall begin to graffe, as follows.

The big Cions are best to graffe.
PRincipally ye must understand that the smallest and naughty oylettes or
buddes of the said cions, be not so good to graffe, therefore choose the
greatest and best ye can find, first cut of the leaf hard by the oylet, then
ye shall trench or cut (the length of a barley corn) beneath the oylet round
about the bark, hard to the wood, and so likewise above: then with a sharp
point of a knife, slyt it down half an yuche beside the oylet or budde, and
with the point of a sharp knyfe softly raise the said shield or scutchion,
round about, with the oylet in the midst, and all the sap belonging there
unto.

How to take of the shield fro the wood.
ANd for the better raising the said shield or scutchion from the wood, after
that ye have cut him round about, and then slit him down, without cutting any
part of the wood within, ye must then raise the side next you that is slit, and
then take the same shield betwixt your finger and thumb, and pluck or raise
it softly of, without breaking or broosing any part thereof, and in the
opening or plucking it of, hold it (with your finger) hard to the wood, to
the end the sap of the oylet, may remain in the shield, for if it go of (in
plucking it) from the barks, and stick to the wood, your scutchion is nothing
worth.

To know your scutchion or shield, when he is good or badde.
ANd for the more easier understanding, if it be good or badde, when it is
taken from the wood, look within the said shield, and if ye shall see it
crack, or open within, then it is of no value, for the chief sap does yet
remain behind with the wood, which should be in the shield, and therefore ye
must choose and cut another shield, which must be good and sound, as
aforesaid, and when your scutchion shall be well taken of from the wood, then
hold it dry, by the oylet or eye, betwixt your lips, until ye have cut and
taken of the bark from the other cion or branch, and set him in that place,
and look that ye do not foul or wet it in your mouth.

Of young trees to graffe on.
But ye must graffe on such trees, as be from the bigness of your little
finger, unto as great as your arm, having their bark thin and slender, for
great trees commonly have their bark hard and thick, which ye can not well
graffe this way, except they have some branches with a thin smooth bark,
meet for this way to be done.

How to set or place your shield,
YE must quickly cut of round the bark of the tree that ye will graffe on, a
little more longer than the shield that ye set on, because it may join the
sooner and easier, but take heed that in cutting of the bark, ye cut not the
wood within.

Note also.
AFter the incision once done, ye must then cover both the sides or ends well
and softly withal, with a little bone or horn, made in manner like a thin
skin, which ye shall lay it all over the joints or closings of the said
shield, somewhat longer and larger, but take heed for hurting or crushing the
bark thereof.

How to lift up the ba^ke, and to set your shield on.
THis done, take your shield or scutchion, by the oylet or eye that he has,
and open him fair and softly by the two sides, and put them straight way on
the other tree, where as the bark is taken of, and join him close bark to
bark thereon, then plain it softly above and at both the ends with the thin
bone, and that they join above and beneath bark to bark, so that he may
feed well the branch of that tree.

How to bind on your shield.
THis done, ye must have a wreath of good hemp, to bind the said shield on in
his place: the manner to hind it is this, ye shall make a wreath of hemp
together as great as a Goose quill, or there aboutes, or according to the
bigness or smalnesse of your tree: then take your hemp in the midst, that the
one half may serve for the upper half of ye shield, in winding and crossing
(with the hemp) the said shield, on the branch of the tree, but see that he
bind it not to strait, for it shall let him from taking or springing, and
likewise their sap can not easily come or pass from the one to the other: and
see also that wet come not to your shield, nor likewise the hemp that ye bind
it withal. Ye shall begin to bind your scutchion first behind in the mids
of your shield, in coming still lower and lower, and so recover under the
oylet, and tail of your shield, binding it nie togithers, without covering of
the said oylet, then ye shall return again upward, in binding it backward to
the midst where ye began. Then take the other part of the hemp, and bind so
likewise the upper part of your shield, and increase your hemp as ye shall
need, and so return again backward, and ye shall bind it so, till the
fruits or cliftes be covered (both above and beneath) with your said hemp,
except the oylet and his tail, the which ye must not cover, for that tail
will shed apart, if the shield do take.

On one tree ye may graffe or put two or three shieldes.
YE may very well if ye will, on every tree graffe two or three shieldes, but
see that one be not right against another, nor yet of the one side of the tree,
let your shieldes so remain bound on the trees, one Month or more after they
be graffed, and the greater the tree is, the longer to remain, and the smaller
the lesser time.

The time to unbind your shield.
ANd then after one month or six weeks past, ye must unbind the shield, or
at the least, cut the hemp behind of the tree, and let it so remain unto the
Winter next following, and then about the month of March, or April if ye
will, or when ye shall see the sap of the shield put forth, then cut the
branch above the shield three fingers all about all of.

How to cut and govern the branches graffed on the trees.
THen in the next year after that the cions shall be well strengthened, and
when they do begin to spring, then shall ye cut them all hard of by the
shield above, for if ye had cut them so nigh in the first year, when they
began first to spring or budde, it should greatly hinder them against their
increase of growing: also when those cions shall put forth of fair wood, ye
must bind and stay them in the mids, fair and gently with small wandes, or
such like, that the wind or weather hurt them not. And after this manner of
graffing, is practiced in the shield or sutchio^, which way ye may easily
graffe the white rose on the red, and likewise ye may have roses of diverse
colors and sorts upon one branch or root: this I thought sufficient and
meet to declare, of this kind of graffing at this present.

The.vj. Chapter is of transplanting or altering of trees.
The sooner ye transplant or set them, it shall be the better.
Ye ought to transplant or set your trees, from Alhalowtide unto March, and
the sooner the better, for as soon as the leaves are fallen from the trees,
they be meet for to be planted, if it be not in a very cold or moist place,
the which then it were best for to tarry unto January, or February: to plant in
the frost is not good.

To plant or set toward the South, or Sunny place, is best.
Before ye do pluck up your trees for to plant them, if ye will mark the
southside, of each tree, that when ye shall replant them, ye may set them again
as they stood before, which is the best way as some do say. Also if ye keep
them a certain time, after they be taken out of the earth, before ye replant
them again, they will rather recover there in the earth, so they be not wette
with rain, nor otherwise, for that shall be more contrary to them than the
great heat or drought.

How to cut the branches of trees before they be set.
Whenever ye shall set or replant your trees, first ye must cut of the
boughs, and specially those which are great branches, in such sort that ye
shall leave the small twigs or sprigs on the stocks of your branch, which
must be but a shaftment long or somewhat more or less, according as the tree
shall require which ye do set.

Apple trees commonly must be disbraunched before they be replanted or set.
ANd chiefly the Apple trees being graffed or not graffed, do require to be
disbraunched before they be set again, for they shall prosper thereby, much
the better: the other sorts of trees may well pass vnbraunched, if they have
not to great or large branches: and therefore, it shall be good to transplant
or set, as soon after as the graffes are closed on the head of the wild
stock, as for small trees which have but one cion or twigge, it needs not to
cut them above, when they be replanted or removed.

All wild stocks must be disbraunched, when they are replanted or set.
ALl wild trees or stocks which ye think for to graffe on, ye must first cut
of all their branches before ye set them again, also it shall be good,
always to take heed in replanting your trees, that ye do set them again, in
as good or better earth, than they were in before, and so every tree according
as his nature does require.

What trees love the fair Sun and what trees the cold air.
COmmonly the most part of trees do love the Sun at noone, and yet the South
wind ( or vent d'aual) is very contrary against their nature, and specially
the Almond tree, the Abricote, the mulbery tree, the Fig tree, and the
pomgranade tree: certain other trees there be which love cold air, as
these: the Chestnut tree, the wild and eager Cherry tree, the Quince tree, and
the Damson or Plum tree: the Walnutte looueth cold air, and a stony white
ground: Pear trees love not greatly plain places, they prosper well enough
in places closed with walls or high hedges, and specially the Pear called bon
Crestien.

Of many sorts and manners of trees, following their nature.
THe Damson or Plum tree, does love a cold fat earth, and clay withal, the
(healme) great Cherry, does love to be set or planted upon clay. The Pine tree,
loves light earth, stony and sandy. The Medlar comes well enough in all
kind of grounds, and does not hinder his fruit to be in the shadow and moist
places. Hasell nut trees, love the place to be cold, lean, moist and sandy. Ye
shall understand that every kind of fruitful tree, does love, and is more
fruitful in one place, than another, as according unto their nature,
nevertheless we ought to nourishe them (all that we may) in the place where we
set them in, taking them fro the place and grounds they were in. And ye must
also consider when one does plant them, of the great and largest kind of
trees, that every kind of tree may prosper and grow, and it is to be
considered also, if the trees have commonly grown before so large in that
ground or not, for in good earth, the trees may well prosper and grow,
having a good space one from another, more than if the ground were lean and
naught.

How to plant or set trees at large.
IN this thing ye shall consider, ye must give a competent space, from one tree
to another, when as ye make the holes to set them in, not to nie, nor yt one
tree touch so another. For a good tree planted or set well at large, it
profits oftentimes more of fruit, than three or four trees, set to nighe
togithers. The most greatest and largest trees commonly are Walnuttes, and
Chestnuttes, if ye plant them severally in rank, as they do commonly grow
upon high ways, beside hedges in fields, they must be set.xxxv. foot a
sunder, one from another, or there aboutes, but if ye will plant many ranks in
one place togithers, ye must set them the space of.xlv. foot, one from
another, or thereaboutes, and so far ye must set your ranks one from another.
For the Pear trees and Apple trees, and other sorts of trees which may be set
of this largeness one from ye other, if ye do plant only in ranks by hedges
in the fields, or otherwise, it shall be sufficient of.xx. foot one from
another. But if ye will set two ranks upon the sides of your great alleyes in
gardens, which be of ten or twelve foot broad, it shall be then best to give
them more space, the one from the other in each rank, as about.xxv. foot: also
ye must not set your trees right one against the other, but entermedling or
between every space, as they may best grow at large, that if need be, ye may
plant of other smaller trees between, but see that ye set them not to thick.
If ye list for to set or plant all your trees of one bigness, as of young trees
like rods, being Pear trees, or Apple trees, they must be set a good space one
from another, as of.xxv. or.xxx. foot in square, as to say, from one rank to
another. For to plant or set of smaller trees, as Plum trees, and Apple
trees, of the like bigness, it shall be sufficient for them.xiiij. or.xv.
foot space, in Quarters. But if ye will plant or set two ranks in your
alleyes in gardens, ye must devise for to proportion it after the largeness of
your said alleyes. For to plant or set eager or sour Cherry trees, this
space shall be sufficient enough ye one from the other, that is, of x. or.xij.
foot, and therefore if ye make of great or large alleyes in your garden, as of
ten foot wide or there abouts, they shall come well to pass, and shall be
sufficient to plant your trees, of.ix. or.x. foot space? and for the other
lesser sorts of trees, as of Quince trees, Fig trees, Nut trees and such
like, which be not commonly planted, but in one rank togithers.

Ordering your trees.
WHen that ye plant or set ranks, of every kind of trees togithers, ye shall
set or plant the most smallest toward the sun, and the greatest in the
shade, that they may not annoy or hurt the small, nor the small the great. Also
whenever ye will plant or set of Pear trees, and Plum trees (in any place)
the one with another, better it were to set the Plum trees next the sun, for
the Pears will dure better in the shade. Also ye must understand, when he set
or plant many ranks of trees togithers, ye must have more space betwixt your
ranks and trees, (then when ye set but one rank) that they may have rome
sufficient on every side: ye shall also scarcely set or plant Pear trees, or
Apple trees, or other great trees, upon dead, or mossie barre^ ground
unstirred, for they increse (thereon) to no purpose. But other lesser trees very
well may grow, as Plum trees and such like: now when all the said things
above be considered, ye shall make your holes, according to the space that shall
he required of every tree that ye shall plant or set, and also the place
meet for the same so much as ye may convenient, ye shall make your holes large
enough, for ye must suppose that the tree ye do set, has not the half of his
roots he shall have hereafter, therefore ye must help him and give him of
good fat earth, (or dung) all about the roots when as ye plant him. And if any
of the same roots be to long, and bruysed or hurt, ye shall cut them clean
of, a slope wise, so that the upper side (of each root) so cut, may be
longest in setting, and for the small roots which come forth all about
thereof, ye may not cut them of as the great roots.

How ye ought to enlarge the holes for your trees, when ye plant them.
WHen as ye set the trees in the holes, ye must then enlarge the roots, in
placing them, and see that they take all downwards, without turning any roots
the end upward, and ye must not plant or set them to deep in the earth, but
as ye shall see cause. It shall be sufficient for them to be planted or set
(half a foot, or there aboutes) in the earth, so that the earth be above all
the roots half a foot or more, if the place be not very burning and stony.

Of dung and good earth, for your plants and trees.
ANd when as ye would replant or set, ye must have of good fat earth or
dung, well meddled with a part of the same earth where as ye took your Plants
out of, with all the upper crestes of the earth, as thick as ye can have it:
the said earth which ye shall put about the roots, must not be put to nigh
the roots, for doubt of the dung being laid to nigh, which will put the said
roots in a heat, but let it be well meddled with the other earth, and well
tempered in the holes, and the smallest and slendrest cions that turns up
among those roots, ye may plant therewith very well.

If ye have worms amongst the earth of your roots.
IF there be worms in the fat earth or dung, that ye put about your roots, ye
must meddle it well also, with the dung of oxen or kyne, or fleckt soap ashes
about the root, which will make the Worms to die, for otherwise, they will
hurt greatly the roots.

To dig well the earth about the tree roots.
ALso ye must dig well the earth, principally all round over the roots, and
more oftener, if they be dry, than if they be wet: ye must not plant or set
trees when it rayneth, nor the earth to be very moist about the roots. The
trees that be planted or set in valleys, commonly prosper well by drought, and
when it rayneth, they that be on the hills are better by watring with drops,
than others, but if the place or ground be moist of nature, ye must not plant
or set your trees so deep thereon.

The nature of places.
ON high and dry places, ye must plant or set your trees a little more deeper,
than in the valleys, and ye must not fill the holes in high places, so full as
the other, to the end that the rain may better moysten them.

Of good earth.
YE shall understand that of good earth, commonly comes good fruit, but in
certain places (if that they might be suffered to grow) they would season the
tree the better. Otherwise they shall not come to proof, nor yet have a good
taste.

With what ye ought to bind your trees.
Whenever your trees shall be replanted or set, ye must knock in (by the
root) a stake, and bind your trees thereto for fear of the wind: and when
they do spring, ye shall dress them and bind them with bands that may not
break, which hands may be of strong soft herb, as Bulrushes or such like,
or of old linen clowtes, if the other be not strong enough, or else ye may
bind them with Oziars, or such like, but for fear of fretting or hurting your
trees.

The seventh Chapter is of medecining and keeping the trees when they are
planted.
The first council is, when your trees be but plants (in dry weather) they
must be watered.
THE young trees which be newly planted, must sometimes (in Su^mer) be watered
when the time waxes dry, at the least the first year after they be planted
or set. But as for other greater trees which are well taken and rooted a good
time, ye must dig them al over the roots after Alhallowtide, and uncover them
four or five foot compass about the root or tree: and let them so lie
uncovered until the latter end of Winter. And if ye do then meddle about
each tree of good fat earth or dung, to heat and comfort the earth withal,
it shall be good.

With what dung ye ought to dung your trees.
ANd principally unto mossie trees, dung them with hogs dung meddled with other
earth of the same ground, and the dung of Oxen to be next about the roots, and
ye shall also abate the moss of the trees, with a great knife of wood, or such
like, so that ye hurt not the bark thereof.

When ye ought to uncover your trees in Summer.
IN the time of Summer, when the earth is scantly half moist, it shall be good
to dig at the foot of the trees, al about on the root, such as have not
been uncovered in the Winter before, and to meddle it with good fat earth: and
so fill it again, and they shall do well.

when ye ought to cut or proyne your trees.
ANd if there be in your trees certain branches of superfluous wood that ye
will cut of, tarry until the time of the entering in of the sap, that is, when
they begin to bud, as in March and April: then cut of as ye shall see cause,
all such superfluous branches hard by the tree, that thereby the other
branches may prosper the better, for then they shall sooner close their sap
upon the cut places than in the Winter, which should not do so well to cut
them, as certain do teach which have not good experience. But for so much as in
this time the trees be entering into the sap, as is aforesaid. Take heed
therefore in cutting then of your great branches hastily, that through their
great weight, they do not cleave or separate the bark from the tree in any
part thereof.

How to cut your great branches, and when.
ANd for the better remedy: First you shall cut the same great branches half
a foot from the tree, and after to saw the rest clean of hard by the body of
the tree, then with a broad Chisell cut all clean and smooth upon ye place,
then cover it with Ox dung. Ye may also cut them well in Winter, so that ye
leave the trunk or branch somewhat longer, so as ye may dress and cut them
again in March and April, as is before mentioned.

How ye ought to leave these greae branches cut.
OTher things here are to be showed of certain great and old trees only,
which in cutting the great branches thereof truncheon wise, do renew again,
as Wallnuts, Mulbery tree, Plum trees, Cherry trees with others, which ye must
disbraunch the bows thereof even after Alhallowtide, or as soon as their
leaves be fallen of, and likewise before they begin to enter into sap.

Of trees having great branches:
THe said great branches, when ye shall disbraunche them, ye shall so cut
them of in such truncheons, of length on the tree, that the one may be longer
than the other, that when the cions be grown good and long thereon, ye may
graffe on them again as ye shall see cause, according as every arm shall
require.

Of barrenness of trees, the time of cutting ill branches, and of uncovering
the roots.
SOmetimes a man has certain old trees, which be almost spent, as of the
Pear trees and Plum trees, and other great trees, the which bear scant of
fruit, but when as ye shall see some branches well charged therewith, then ye
ought to cut of all the other ill branches and bows, to the end that those
that remain may have the more sap to nourishe their fruit, as also to uncover
their roots after Alhallowtide, and to cleave the most greatest roots thereof
(a foot from the tronke) and put into the said cleftes, a thin slate of hard
stone, there let it remain, to the end that the humor of the tree, may enter
out thereby, and at the end of Winter ye shall cover him again with as good
and fat earth as ye can get, and let the stone alone.

Trees the which ye must help or pluck up the roots.
AL sorts of trees which spring cions from the roots, as Plum trees, all
kind of Cherry trees and small Nutte trees, ye must help in plucking their
Cions from the roots in Winter, as soon as conveniently ye can, after the leaf
is fallen. For they do greatly pluck down and weaken the said trees, in drawing
to them the substance of the earth

What does make a good Nutte.
But chiefly to plant these Cions, the best way is to let them grow and be
nourished two or three years from the root, and then to transplant them or
set them in the Winter, as is aforesaid. The Cions which be taken from the
foot of the Hasel trees, make good Nuttes, and to be of much strength and
virtue, when they are not suffered to grow to long from the root or foot
aforesaid.

Trees eaten with beasts, must be graffed again.
WHen certain graffes being well in sap, of three or four years or
thereabouts, be broken or greatly endomaged with beasts which have broken
thereof, it shall little profit to leave those graffes so, but it were better to
cut them and to graffe them higher or lower than they were before. For the
graffes shall take as well upon the new as old Cion being graffed, as on the
wild stock: but it shall not so soon close, as upon the wild stock head.

How your wild stock ought not hastily to be removed.
IN the beginning when ye have graffed your graffes on the wild stock, do not
then hastily pluck up those Cions or wild stocks so graffed, until ye shall
see the graffes put forth a new shewte, the which remaining still, ye may graffe
thereon again, so that your graffes in hasty remoouing may chance to die.

when ye cut of the naughty Cions from the wood.
WHen your graffes on the stocks, shall put forth of new wood, or a new
shewte, as of two or three foot^ long, and if they put forth also of other
small superfluous cions (about the said members or branches that ye would
nourishe) cut of all such ill cions, hard by the head, in the same year they
are graffed in, but not so long as the wood is in sap, till the winter after.

How sometimes to cut the principal members.
ALso it is good to cut some of the principal members or branches in the
first year if they have to many, and then again within two or three years
after when they shall be well sprung up, and the graffes well closed on the head
of the stock: ye may trim and dress them again, in taking away the
superfluous branches if any there remain, for it is sufficient enough to
nourishe a young tree, to leave him one principal member on the head, so that
he may be one of those that has been graffed on the tree before, yea and the
tree shall be fayrer and better in the end, than if he had two or three
branches or precidens at the foot. But if the tree have been graffed with many
great cions, the^ ye must leave him more largely, according as ye shall see
cause or need, to recover the cleftes on the head of the said graffe or
stock.

How to guide and govern the said trees.
WHen that your trees do begin to spring, ye must order and see to them well
the space of three or four years, or more, until they be well and strongly
grown, in helping them above in cutting the small twigges, and superfluous
wood, until they be so hie without branches as a man, or more if it may be,
and then see to them well, in placing the principal branches if need be, with
forkes or wandes pricked right and well about them at the foot, and to proyne
them so that one branch do not approach to nigh the other, nor yet frette the
one the other, when as they do enlarge and grow, and ye must also cut of
certain branches in the tree, where as they are to thick.

A kind of sickness in trees.
WHen certain trees are sick of the Gall, which is a kind of sickness that
does eat the bark, therefore ye must cut it, and takes out all the same
infection with a chesil, or such like thing. This must be done at the end of
winter, then put on that infected place of ox dung, or hogs dung, and bind
it fast thereon with clowtes, and wrappe it with oziars, so let it remain a
long time, till it shall recover again.

Trees which have worms in the bark*
OF trees which have Worms within (...) barks is, where as ye shall see a
swelling or rising therein, therefore ye must cut or clean the said bark unto
the wood, to the end the him or may also until: out thereat, and with a
little hook ye must: pluck or draw out the said worms, withal the rotten
wood that ye can see, then shall ye put upon the said place, a plaster made of
Ox dung, or of Hogs dung mo^^^ and beaten with Sage, and a little of, vnfleckt
lime, then let it be all well blende together, and wrap it on a cloth, and bind
it fast and close thereon so long as it will hold. The lies of wine shed or
poured upon the roots of trees (the which he somewhat sick through the
coldness of the earth) which lies does them much good.

Snayles, Antes and worms does mar trees.
ALso ye must take heed of all manner of young trees* and specially of those
graffes, the which many worms and flies do endomage and hurt in the time of
Summer, those are the snailes, the pismiars, or antes, the field snaile which
hurts also all other sorts of trees that be great, principally in the time
yt the Cuckowe does sing, and betwixt Apryll, and Midsomer, while they be
tender. There be little beasts calls Sowes, which have many legs: and some be
of them graye, some black, and some has a long sharp snowte, which be very
noisome, and great hurters of young graffes, and other young trees also, for they
cut of in eating the tender tops (of the young cions) as long as ones synger.

How ye ought to take the said worms.
FOr to take them well, ye must take heed and watch in the heat of the day
(your young trees) and where ye shall see any, put your hand softly underneath,
without shaking the tree, for they will suddenly fall, when one thinks to
take them: therefore as soon as you can (that they fly not away nor fall)
take him (quickly on the cion) with your other hand.

To keep antes from young trees.
FOr to keep the young trees from snayles and Antes* it shall be good to take
ashes and to mingle vnsseckt lyme, beaten in powder therewith, then lay it all
about the root of the tree, and when it raineth, they shall be beaten down
into the ashes and die: but ye must renew your ashes after every rain from
time to time: also to keep them moist, ye must put certain small vessels full
of water, at the foot of your said trees, and also the lies of wine, to be
spread on the ground there all aboutes. For the best destroying of the small
snayles on trees, ye must take good heed in the spring time; before the trees
be leaued, then if ye shall see as it were small weartes, knobbes or branches
on the trees, the same will be snayles. Provide to take them away fair and
softly, before they be full closed, and take heed that ye hurt not the wood or
bark of the said tree, as little as ye can, then burn those branches on the
earth, or al to tread them under your feet, and then if any do remain or
renew, look in the heat of the day, and if ye can see any, which will
commonly be on the cleftes or forkes of the branches, and also upon the
branches lying like toftes or troops together, then wrap your hands all over
with old clothes, (and bind of leaves beneath them and above them,) and with
your two hands rub them down therein, and strait way fire it, if ye do not
quickly with diligence, they will fall, and if they fall to the earth, ye can
not lightly kill them, but they will renew again, these kind of worms are
noisome flies which he very strange, therefore take heed that they do not
cast a certain redness on your face and body, for where as there be many of
them, they be dangerous: it is strange to tell of these kind of worms, if
ye come under or among the trees, where as be many, they will cast your face
and hands, (your covered body, as your neck, breast and arms) full of small
spots, some red, some black, some blewishe, which will so tingle and trouble
you like netles, sometimes for a day, or a day and a night after: they be
most on Plum trees, and Apple trees, nighe unto moist places, and ill airs yet
nevertheless, by the grace of God there is no danger (that I understand) to
be taken by them. Ye shall understand that if it be in the evening, or in the
morning, when it rayneth, they will remain about the graffing place of the
tree, therefore it will be hard to find them, because they are so small.
Moreover, it such branches do remain in the upper part of the bows or tree,
ye shall bind of dry straw about the bows all under, then with a wispe on a
poles end, set fire on all, and burn them.

A note in spring time of Fumigations.
Here is to be understand and noted, that in the spring time only when trees
do begin to put forth leafes and blossoms, ye must then always take heed
unto them, for to defend them from the frost, (if there come any, with
fumigations or smokes made on the wind side of your Orchards, or under your
trees) with straw, hey, dry chafe, dry Ox dung, of saw dust dried in an oven,
of tanners oze dried likewise, of Galbanum, of old shoes, thatche of houses,
of hair and such like, one of these to be blende with another: al these be
good against the frost in the spring time, and specially good against the east
wind, which breeds (as some say) the Caterpiller worm.

To defend the Caterpiller.
AND some do defend their trees from the Caterpiller when the blossoming time
is dry (if there be no frost) by casting of water, or salt water, every
second or third day upon their trees, (with instruments for the same, as with
squirtes of wood or brass or such like) for in keeping of them (...), the
Caterpiller can not breed thereon: this experience have I known proved of
late to be good. For to conclude, he that will set or plant trees, must not
pass for any pains, but have a pleasure and delight therein, in remembering
the great profit that comes thereby: against scarceness of corn, fruit is
good stay for the poor, and often it has been seen one aker of orchard
ground worth four akers of wheat ground.

FINIS.
Here follows a little treatise how one may graffe and plant, subtle or
artificially, and to make many things in Gardins very strange.
FOr to graffe a subtle way, take one oylet or eye of a graffe, slyt it round,
above and beneath, and then behind down right, then wreath him of, and set him
upon another cion, as great as he is, then dress him as is aforesaid, and he
shall grow and hear.

To graffe one Vine upon another.
FOr to graffe one Vine upon another, ye shall cleave him as ye do other trees,
and then put the vine graffe in the clift, then stop him close and well with
wax, and so bind him and he shall grow.

If a tree be to long without fruit.
YE shall uncover his root and make a hole with a piercer or small awger, in
the greatest root he has, without pearcing through the root, then put in a
pin (in the said hole) of dry wood, (as oak or ash) and so let it remain
in the said hole, and stop it close again with wax and then cast earth and
cover him again, and he shall bear the same year.

For to have Peaches two months before other.
TAke your cyons of a Peache tree that does soon blossom in the spring time,
and graffe them upon a frank Mulbery tree, and he shall bring of Peaches two
months before others.

To have Damsons or other Plums, unto Alhallowtide.
FOr to have Damsons all the Summer long unto Alhallowtide, and of many other
kind of sorts likewise; ye shall graffe them upon ye Goosebery tree, upon the
frank Mulbery tree, and upon the Cherry tree, and they shall endure on the
trees till Alhallowtyde.

To make Medlars, Cherryes and Peaches in eating to taste like spyce.
FOr to make Medlars, Cherries and Peaches to taste in the eating pleasant like
spice, the which ye may also keep unto the new come again, ye shall graffe
them upon the frank Mulbery tree, as I have before declared and in the graffing,
ye shall wette them in honey, and put a little of the powder of some good
spices, as the powder of cloves, of Cinnamon or Gynger.

To make a Muscadell taste.
FOr to make a Muscadell taste, take a gouge or chesill of iron, (and cut your
sap round about) then put in your gouge or chesill under your sap on your
cion, and raise three eyes or oylettes round about, and so take of fair and
softly your bark round about, and when he is so taken of, do annoint it all
over within the bark, with powder of cloves, or nutmegs, then set it on
again, and stop it close with wax round about, that no water may enter in,
and within thrice hearing, they shall bring a fair Muscadell reyson, which ye
may after both graffe and plant, and they shall be all after a Muscadell
fruit: some slyttes the bark down, and so put in of spice.

To set Apples and Pears, to come without blossoming.
FOr to make Apples, and Pears, and other sorts of fruit to come without
blossoming, that is, ye shall graffe them (as ye do other kind of fruit)
upon the fig tree.

To have Apples and Chestnutes rathe, and also long on the trees.
FOr to have Apples called (in french) de blanc Durell, or de Yroael, and of
Chestnuts very rathe, and long (as unto Alhollowtide) on the trees: and to make
such fruit also to endure, the space of.ij. years, ye shall graffe them on a
latewarde fruit, as pome Richard, or upon a pear tree, or apple tree of
Da^goisse.

To have good Cherries on the trees, at Alhallontide.
TO have Cherries on many trees, good for to eat unto Alhallontide, ye shall
graffe the^ upon a frank Mulbery tree, and likewise to graffe them upon a
willow, or sallow tree, and they shall endure unto Alhallontide, on the trees.

To have rath Medlars two Months before others.
FOr to have Medlars two months sooner than others: and that the one shall be
better far than the other, ye shall graffe them upon a Gooseberry tree, and
also a frank Mulbery tree, and before ye do graffe them, ye shall wet them in
Honnie, and then graffe them.

For to have rathe or timely Pears.
FOr to have a rathe Pear ye which is in France, as the Pear Cailonet, and
the pear Hastinean. For to have them rath or soon, ye shall graffe them on
the Pine tree: And for to have them late, ye shall graffe them on the pear
called in France Dangoisse, or on other like hard pears.

To have Misples or Medlers without stones.
FOr to have Medlers without stones, the which shall taste sweet as honey, ye shall
graffe them as the other, upon an Eglentine or sweet Brier tree, and ye shall
wet the grafs (before ye graffe them) in honey.

To have Pears bytimes.
FOr to have the pear of Anguisse, or Permain, or Satigle, (which be of
certain places so called) a month or two, before others, the which shall
endure, and be good unto the new come again, ye shall graffe them upon a
Quince tree, and likewise upon the frank Mulbery tree.

To have ripe or frank Mulberyes very sone and late.
FOr to have franck or ripe Mulberies very soon, ye shall graffe them upon a
rath Pear tree, and upon the Gofebery tree, and to have very late and to
endure unto Alhallowtide, ye shall graffe them upon the Medler tree.

To keep Pears a year.
HOw for to keep Pears a year: ye shall take of fine salt very dry, and put
thereof with your pears into a barrel, in such sort that one Pear do not
touch another, so fill the barrel if ye list, then stop it, and let it be
set in some dry place, that the salt do not wax moist, thus ye may keep them
long and good.

To have your fruit taste half apples, half pears.
IF ye will have your fruit taste half a pear and half an Apple, ye shall in
the spring take graffes, the one a pear, and the other an Apple, ye shall
cleave or pare them in the graffing ioynte or place, and join half the Pear
cion, and (...) straw, and if the time of winter be cold and very hard, then
put of hay above them on your straw, and take it away when as a fair time
comes: and thus ye shall keep your fruit fair and good.

The days to Plant and Graffe.
ALso (as some say) from the first day of the new moan, unto the.xiij. day
thereof, is good for to plant, or graffe, or sow, and for great need, some
do take unto the.xvii. or.xviii. day thereof, and not after, neither graffe,
nor sow, but as is before mentioned, a day or two days before the change, the
best signs are, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn.

Te have green Roses all the year.
FOr to have green Roses, ye shall (as some say) take your rose buds, in the
spring time, and then graffe them upon the holly stock, and they shall be
green all the year.

To keep Reysins or Grapes good a year.
FOr to keep Raysins or grapes good all a whole year, ye shall take of fine
dry sand, and then lay your reysins or grapes therein, and it shall keep them
good a whole year, some keep them in a close glass from the air.

To make fruit laxatiue from the tree.
FOR to make any fruit laxatiue from the tree, what fruit soever it be, make
a hole in the stock, or in the Master root of the tree, (with a great
pearcer sloope wise) not through, but unto the pythe, or somewhat further, then
fill the said hole with the joyce of elder, of Centori, of Seney, or of
Turbich, or such like laxatiues, the^ fill the said hole therewith, of which of
them ye will, or else ye may take three of them togithers, and fill the said
hole therewith, and then stop the said hole close with soft wax, then claye
it thereon, and put moss very well over all, so that nothing may issue or fall
out, and all the fruit of the said tree shall be from thencefoorth laxatiue.

A note for all Graffers and Planters.
ALso whenever ye shall plant or graffe, it shall be meet and good for you to
say as follows. In the name of God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost,
Amen. Increase and multiplye, and replenishe the earth: and say the Lords
prayer, then say: Lord God hear my prayer, and let this my desire of thee be
heard. The holy spirit of God which has created all things for man, and has
given them for our comfort, in thy name O Lord we set, plant, and graffe,
desiring that by thy mighty power they may increase, and multiplye upon the
earth, in bearing plenty of fruit, to the profit and comfort of all thy
faithful people, through Christ or Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Here follow certain ways of planting and graffing, with other necessaries
herein meet to be known, translated out of Dutch by L. M.
To graffe one Vine on another.
YOu that will graffe one Vine upon another, ye shall (in January) cleave the
head of the Vine, as ye do other stocks, and then put in your Vine graffe or
cyon, but first ye must pare him thin, ere ye set him in the head, then clay
and moss him as the other.

Chosen days to graffe in, and to choose your cions.
ALso when so ever that ye will graffe, the best chosen times is on the last
day before the change, and also in the change, and on the second day after
the change, if ye graffe (as some say) on the third, fourth and fifth day
after the change, it will be so many years ere those trees bring forth fruit.
Which thing ye may believe if ye will, but I will not. For some do hold
opinion, that it is good graffing from the change unto the.xviij. day thereof,
which I think to be good in all the increase of the Moon, but the sooner the
better.

To gather your cions.
ALso such cions or graffs which ye do get on other trees the young trees of
three or four years, or.v. or.vj. years are best to have graffs. Take them
of no under bows, but in the top upon the East side, if ye can, and of the
fairest and greatest. Ye shall cut them.ij. inches long of the old wood,
beneth the joint. And whenever ye will graffe, cut or pare your graffes
taperwise from the joint two inches or more of length, which ye shall set
into the stock: and before ye set it in, ye shall open your stock with a
wedge of iron, or hard wood, fair and softly: then if the sides of your
clefts be ragged, ye shall pare them with the point of a sharp knife on both
sides within and above, then set in your graffes close on the out sides and
also above: but let your stock be as little while open as ye can, and when
your graffes be well set in, pluck forth your wedge: and if your stock do
pinch your graffes much, then ye must put in a wedge of the same woodde for to
help your graffes: Then ye shall lay a thick bark or pill over the cleft
from the one graft to the other, to keep out the claye and rain, and so clay
them two fingers thick round about the cliffes, and then lay on Moss, but
Wool is better next to your clay, or else to temper your clay with Wool or
hair, for it shall make it bide closer and also stronger on the stock head.
Some take Wool next the clay and wrappeth it all over with linen clowtes: for
the Wool being once moist, will keep the clay so a long time. And other
some do take Woollen clowtes that have been laid in the juice of Wormwood,
or such like bitter thing, to keep creeping Worms from coming, under to the
Graffes. If ye graffe in winter put your clay uppermost, for so^mer your moss.
For in Winter the moss is warm, and your clay will not cleave. In Summer your
claye is cold, and your moss kepes him from cleaving or chapping. To bind
them, take of willow pills, of cloven briers, of Oziers, or such like. To
gather your graffe^ on the East part of the tree is counted best: if ye gather
them below on the under boughs, they will grow flaggie and spreading abroad:
if ye take them in the top of the tree, they will grow upright. Yet some do
gather their cions or graffes on the sides of ye trees and so graffe them
again on the like sides of the stocks, the which is of some men not counted so
good for fruit. It is not good to graffe a great stock, for they will be long
ere they cover the head thereof.

Of worms in trees or fruit.
IF ye have any trees eaten with worms, or do bring wormy fruit, ye shall use
to wash al his body and great branches with two parts of Kowpisse, and one
part of Vinegar, or else if ye can get no Vinegar, with Kowpisse alone,
tempered with common ashes: then wash your trees therewith before the Spring,
and in the Spring, or in Summer. Annis seeds sown about the tree roots,
drive away worms, and the fruit shall be the sweeter,

The setting of Stones, and ordering thereof.
AS for Almonde trees, Peach trees, Cherry trees, Plum trees, or others, ye
shall thus plant or set them. Lay first the Stones in water three days and
four nights, until they sink therein: then take them betwixt your finger and
your thumb, with the small end upward, and so set them two fingers deep in
good earth. And when ye have so done, ye shall rake them al over and so cover
them: and when they begin to grow or spring, keep them from weeds, and they
shall prosper the better, specially in the first year. And within two or three
years after, ye may set or remove them where ye list, the^ if ye do remove
them again after that, ye must proyne of all his twigges as ye shall see
cause, nigh the stock: thus ye may do of all kind of trees, but specially
those which have the great sap, as the Mulbery, or Fig tree, or such like.

To gather Gum of any tree,
IF ye list to have the Gum of the Almond tree, ye shall strike a great nail
into the tree, a good way, and so let him rest, and the Gum (of the tree)
shall issue thereat: thus do men gather Gum of all sorts of trees, yea the
common Gum that men do use and occupy.

To set a whole Apple.
ALso some say, that if ye set a whole Apple four fingers in the earth, all
the Pepines or curnelles in the same Apple, will grow up togithers in one whole
stock or cion, and al those Aples shall be much fayrer and greater than others:
but ye must take heed, how ye do set those Apples which do come in a leap
year, for in a leap year (as some do say) the curnelles or Pepines are
turned contrary, for if ye should so set, as commonly a man does, ye shall
set them contrary.

Of setting the Almonde.
ALmondes do come forth and grow commonly well, if they be set without the
shell or husk, in good earth, or in rotten hogs dung: if ye lay Almondes,
one day in vinegar, then shall they (as some say,) be very good to plant, or
lay him in milk and water until he do sink, it shall be the better to set,
or any other nut.

Of Pepines watered.
THe Pepines and curnels of those trees which have a thick or rough bark, if
ye lay them three days in water, or else until they sincke therein, they
shall be the better, then set them, or sow them, as is before mentioned, and
then remove them, when they be well rooted, of three or four years growth,
and they shall have a thin bark.

To plant or set Vines.
IF ye plant or set Vines, in the first or second year they will bring no
fruit, but in the third year they will bear, if they be well kept, ye shall
cut them in January, and set them soon after they be cut from the Vine, and
ye shall set two together, the one with the old wood, and the other without,
and so let them grow in plucking away al weeds from about them, and when ye
shall remove them in the second or third year, being well rooted, ye shall set
them well a foot deep (in good fat earth) with good dung, as of one foot
deep or there abouts, and keep them clean from weeds, for then they will
prosper the better, and in summer when ye Grape is knytte, then ye shall break
of his top or branch, at one or two joints after the grape, and so the grape
shall be the greater, and in the Winter when ye cut them, ye shall not leave past
two or three leaders on each branch, on some branch but one leader, which
must be cut betwixt two joints, and ye shall leave the young vine to be the
leader, also ye shall leave thereof three or four joints at al times, if a
young cion do come forth of the old branch or side thereof, if ye do cut him,
ye shall cut him hard by the old branch, and if ye will have him to bring the
grape next year, ye shall leave two or three joints thereof, for the young cion
always brings the grape: ye may at all times, so that the grape be once
taken and knitte, ever as the superfluous cions do grow, ye may break them
of at a joint, or hardly by the old branch, and the grapes will be the
greater: thus ye may order your Vine all the Summer long without any hurt.

To set or plant the Cherry.
CHerry trees, and all the trees of stone fruit, would be planted or set of
cions, in cold grounds and places of good earth, and likewise in high or
hilly places, dry and well in the shade: if ye do remove, ye ought to remove
them in November and January, if ye shall see your Cherry tree wax rotten,
then shall ye make a hole in the mids of the body two foot above the ground,
with a dig pearcer, that the humor may pass forth thereby, then before the
spring, shut him up again with a pin of the same tree: thus ye may do
unto all other sorts of trees when they begin to rotte, and is also good for
them which bear scant of fruit or none.

To keep Cherries good a year.
FOr to keep Cherries good a year, ye shall cut of the stalks, and then lay
them in a well leaded pot, and fill the said pot therewith, then put unto
them of good thin honey, and fill the said pot therewith, then stop it with
clay that no air enter in, then set it in some fair Seder, and put of sand
under, and all about it, and cover the pot well withal, so let it stand or
remain: thus ye may keep them a year, as fresh as though they came fro the
tree, and after this sort ye may keep pears, or other fruit.

Against Pismiars.
IF ye have cherry trees laded or troubled with Pismiars or Antes, ye shall rub
the body of the tree, and all about the root with the juice of Purslayne,
mingled half with vinegar. Some do use to annoint the tree beneath al about
the body, with tar and bird lyme, with wool oil boiled together, and
annoint the tree beneath therewith, and do lay of chalk stones all about the
tree root, some say it is good therefore.

The setting of Chestnuttes.
THe Chestnutte tree, men do use to plant like unto the Fig tree. They may
be both planted and graffed well, they wax well in fresh and fat earth, for
in sand they like not: if ye will set the curnels, ye shall lay them in water
until they do sinck, and those that do sinck to the bottom of the water, be
best to set, which ye shall set in the Month of November and December, four
fyngers deep, a foot one from another, for when they be in these two Months
set or planted, they shall endure long, and bear also good fruit, yet some
there be that plant or set them first in dung, like beans, which will be
sweeter than the other sort, but those which be set in the two months
aforesaid, shall first bear their fruit: men may prove which is best,
experience does teach. This is another way to prove and know, which Cheffnuts
be best to plant or set, that is: ye shall take a quantity of Nuttes, then
lay them in sand the space of.xxx. days, then take and wash them in water
fair and clean, and throw them into water again, and those which do sink
to the bottom, are good to plant or set, and the other that swim are naught:
thus may ye do with all other curnels or nuttes.

To have all stone fruit taste, as ye shall think good.
IF ye will have al stone fruit taste as ye shall fancy, or think good, ye shall
first lay your stones to soke in such licor or moisture, as ye will have the
fruit taste of, and then set them: as for the Date tree (as some say) he
brings no fruit except he be a hundred years old, and the Date stone must
soke one month in the water before he be set, then shall ye set him with the
small end upward, in good fat earth, in hot sandy ground four fingers
deep, and when the bows do begin to spring, then shall ye every night
sprinkle them with rain water, (or other if ye have none) so long till they be
come forth and grown.

Of graffing the Medlar and Misple.
FOr to graffe the Medlar or Misple: men do use to graffe them on the white
Hathorne tree, they will prove well, but yet small and sour fruit: to graffe
one Medlar upon another is the better, some men do graffe first the wilding
cion, upon the Medlar stock, and so when he is well taken and grown, then they
graffe thereon the Medlar again, the which does make them more sweet, very
great and fair.

Of the Fig tree.
THe Fig tree in some country, bears his fruit four times a year, the black
figs are the best, being dried in the sun, and then laid in a vessel in
beds one by another, and then sprinkled or strawed all over, every lay with
fine meal, then stop it up, and so it is sent out of the land. If the Fig
tree will not bear, ye shall dig him all about, and under the roots in
February, and take out then all his earth, and put unto him the dung of a
privy, for that he likes best: ye may mingle with it of other fat earth, as
Pigeons dung mingled with Oil and Peper stamped, which shall forward him much
to noynte his roots therewith: ye shall not plant the Fig tree in cold
times, he loves hot, stony, or gravely ground, and to be planted in Autumn
is best.

Of the Mulbery tree.
IF ye will plant the Mulbery tree, the Fig tree or others which bring no
seed, ye shall cut a twigge or branch (from the tree root) of a years
growth, with the old wood or bark, about a cubite long, which ye shall plant
or set all in the earth, save a shaftment long of it, and so let it grow, in
watering it as ye shall see need. This must be done before the leaves begin to
spring, but take heed that ye cut not the end or top above, for then it shall
wyther and dry.

Of trees that bear bitter fruit.
OF all such trees as bear bitter fruit, to make them bring sweeter, ye shall
uncover all the roots in January,) and take out all that earth, then put unto
them of Hogs dung great plenty, and then after put unto them of other good
earth, and so cover them therewithal well again, and their fruit shall have a
sweeter taste: thus men may do with other trees which bring bitter fruit.

To help barren trees.
HEre is another way to help barren trees, that they may bring fruit: if ye
see your tree not bear scantly in three or four years good plenty, ye shall
bore an hole with an auger or pearcer, in the greatest place of the body,
(within a yard of the ground) but not through, but unto or past the heart, ye
shall bore him a slope: then take honey and water mingled together a night
before, then put the said honey and water into the hole, and fill it therewith,
then stop it close with a short pin, made of the same tree, not stricken into
far, for pearcing the licor.

Another way.
IN the beginning of Winter ye shall dig those trees round about the roots,
and let them so rest a day and a night, and then put unto them of good earth,
mingled well with good store of watered otes, or with watered barley or wheat,
laid next unto the roots, then fill it with other good earth, and he shall
boar fruit, even as the boring of a hole in the master root, and strike in a
pin, and so fill him again, shall help him to bear, as before declared.

To keep your fruit.
ALl fruit may be the better kept, if ye lay them in dry places, in dry
straw or hey, but hey rypeth to sore, or in a barley mow not touching one the
other, or in chafe, and in vessels of Juniper, or Sypers wood, ye may so keep
them well in dry salt or honey, and upon bordes where as fire is nighe all the
Winter, also hanging nie fire in the Winter, in nets of yarne.

The Mulbery tree.
THe Mulbery tree is planted or set by the Fig tree, his fruit is first
sour and then sweet, he likes neither dew nor rain, for they hurt him, ye
is well pleased with foul earth or dung, his branches will wax dry within
every six years, then must he cut them of, as for other trees: they ought to
be proyned every year as ye shall see cause, and they will be the better, and
to plant him from mid February, to mid March is best.

Of Moss on the tree.
OF the Moss on your trees, ye must not let it to long be vnclensed, ye must
rub it of with a grate of wood, or a rough hear, or such like, in Winter when
they be moist or wet, for then it will of the sooner, for moss does take away
the strength and substance of the fruit, and makes the trees barren at length:
when ye see your trees begin to wax mossy, ye must in the winter uncover their
roots, and put under them good earth, this shall help them and keep them
long without moss: for the earth not stirred above the root, is one cause of
mossynesse, and also the barrenness of the ground whereon he stands, and
your moss does sucker in winter, flies and other vermin, and so does therein
hide them in Summer, which is occasion of eating the blossoms and tender cions
thereof.

To keep Nuttes long.
FOr to keep nuts long, ye shall dry them and cover them in dry sand, and put
them in a dry bladder, or in a fat made of Walnut tree, and put of dry Iuie
beries therein, and they shall be much sweeter. To keep Nuttes green a year,
and also fresh: ye shall put them into a pot with honey, and they shall
continue fresh a year, and the said honey will be gentle and good for many
medicines. To keep Walnuts fresh and green in the time of strayning of
Veriuice, ye shall take of that pommis, and put thereof in the bottom of a
barrel, then lay your Walnuts all over, then po^mis over them, and so Walnuts
again, and then of the pommis, as ye shall see cause to fill your vessel.
Then stop him close as ye do a barrel, and set him in your Seller or other
place, and it shall keep your nuts fresh and green a year. Some use to fill
an earthen pot with small Nuttes, and then put to them dry sand, and cover
them with a lid of earth or stone, and then they clay it, setting the mouth of
the pot downward, two foot within the earth, in their Garden or other place,
and so they will keep very moist and sweet until new come.

To cut the Peache tree.
THe Peache tree is of this nature, if he be cut (as some say) green, it will
wither and dry. Therefore if ye cut any small branch, cut it hard by the
body: the withered twigges ever as they wither, must be cut of hard by the
great branch or body thereof, for then they do prosper the better. If a Peach
tree do not like, ye shall put to his roots, the Lees of Wine mingled with
water, and also wash his roots therewith, and likewise the branches, then
cover him again with good earth mingled with his own leaves, for those he
lyketh best. Ye may graffe Peach upon Peach, upon Hasill, or Ash, or upon
Cherrie tree, or ye may graffe the Almonde upon the Peach tree. And to have
great Peaches, ye must take Cowes milk, and put good earth thereto, then all to
strike the body of the tree therewith both upward and downewarde, or else open
the root all bare three days and three nights, then take goats milk, and
wash all the roots therewith, and then cover them again: this must be done
when they begin to blossom, and so shall he bring great Peaches.

To color Peach stones.
TO color Peache stones, that all the fruire thereof shall have the like color
hereafter, that is: ye shall lay or set Peache stones in the earth seven days
or more, until ye shall see the stones begin to open, then take the stones
and the curnelles softly forth thereof, and what color ye will, color the
curnel therewith, and put them into the shel again, then bind it fast
together and set it in the earth, with the small end upward, and so let him
grow, and all the peaches which shall come of the same fruit (graffed or
vngraffed) will be of the same color. The peach tree ought to be planted in
Autumn, before the cold do come, for he cannot abide the cold.

If Peache trees be troubled with worms.
ALso if any peache tree be troubled with worms, ye shall take two parts of
Cow piss, with one part of vyneger, then shall ye sprinkle the tree all over
therewyth, and wash his roots and branches also, and it will kill the worms,
this may ye do unto al other trees, which be troubled with worms.

To have the Peach without stones.
FOR to make the Peache grow without stones, ye shall take a Peache tree newly
planted, then set a Willowe hard by, which ye shall bore a hole through, then
put the Peache tree through the said hole, and so close him on both sides
thereof, sap to sap, and let him so grow one year, then the next year ye
shall cut of the Peache stock, and let the Willow feed him, and cut of
the upper part of the Willowe also three fingers hye: and the next Winter saw
him of nigh the Peache, so that the Willowe shall feed but the Peache only:
and this way ye may have peaches without stones.

Another way for the same.
YE shall take the graffes of Peaches, and graffe them upon the Willowe stock,
and so shall your Peaches be likewise without stones.

If trees do not prosper.
IF that ye see that your trees do not wax nor prosper, take and open the
roots in the beginning of January or before, and in the biggest root thereof,
make a hole with an anger, to the pithe or more, then strike therein a pin of
Oak and so stop it again close, and let it be well waxt all about the pin,
then cover him again with good earth, and he shall do well* some do use to
cleave the root.

How to graffe Apples to last on the tree till Alhallowtyde.
How ye may have many sorts of Apples upon your trees until Alhallowtide,
that is, ye shall graffe your Apples upon the Mulbery tree, and upon the Cherry
tree.

To make Cherries and Peaches smell, and taste like spyce.
HOw to make that Cherries and Peaches shall be pleasant, and shall smell and
taste like spice, and that ye may keep them well, till the new do come again,
ye shall graffe them on the Mulbery tree, as is aforesaid: but first ye shall
soake them in honey and water, wherein ye shall put of the powder of Cloves,
ginger and Cinnamon.

To graffe an Apple which shall be half sweet, and half sour.
TO graffe that your Apples shall be the one half sweet, and the other half
sour: ye shall take two cyons, the one sweet and the other sour, some do
put the one cyon through the other, and so graffes them between the bark and
the tree: and some again do pare both the cyons fynelye, and so settes them
joining into the stock, enclosing sap to sap, on both the outsides of the
graffes, unto the out sides of the stock, and so settes them into the head as
the other: and they shall bring fruit, the one half sweet, and the other
half sour.

To graffe a Rose on the Holly.
FOr to graffe the Holly, that his leaves shall keep all the year grene, some
do take and cleave the Holly, and so grafs in a white or red Rose budde, and
then puttes clay and moss to him, and lets him grow, and some do put the rose
bud into a flyt of the bark, and so puts clay and Moss, and binds him
feately therein, and lettes him grow, and he shall carry his leave all the
year.

Of keeping of Plums.
OF Plums there be many sorts, as Damsons, which be all black, and counted
the best: All manner of other Plums a man may keep well a year, if they be
gathered ripe, and then dried, and put into vessels of glass: if ye cannot dry
them well in ye sun, ye shall dry them on hurdels of Oziars made like Lettis
windows, in a hot Oven after bread is drawn forth, and so reserve them. If a
plum tree like not, open his root, and power in all about the dregs of Wine,
mixed with water, and so cover him well again, or power on them stale vrin or
old piss of old men, mixed with two parts of water, and so cover him as
before.

Of altering of Pears, or stony fruit.
II a Pear do taste hard, or grauelly about the core, like small stones, ye
shall uncover his root (in the Winter, or before the spring) and take out all
the earth thereof, and pick out all the stones, as clean from the earth as ye
can about his root, then fifth that earth, or else take of other good fat earth
without stones, and fill al his roots again therewith, and he shall bring a
soft and gentle Pear to eat, but ye must see well to the watering of him
often.

The making of Cider and Pyrry.
OF Apples and Pears, men do make Cider and Pirrie, and because the use thereof
in most places is known, I will here let pass to speak any further thereof,
but this (in the pressing your Cider) I will counsel you to keep clean your
vessels, and the places whereas your fruit does lie, and specially after it is
bruised or broken, for then they draw fylthy air unto them, and if it be nygh,
the Cider shall be infected therewith, and also bear the fast after the
infection thereof: therefore as soon as you can, tun it into clean and sweet
vessels, as into vessels of white wine or of sack, or clarette and such like,
for these shall keep your Cider the better and the stronger, along time after:
ye may hang a small bag of linen, by a thread down into the lower part of your
vessel, with powder of Cloves, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger and such like, which will
make your Cider to have a pleasant taste.

To help frosen Apples.
OF Apples that be frosen in the cold and extreme winter. The remedy to have
the Ise out of them, is this. Ye shall lay them first in cold water a while,
and then lay them before the fire, or other heat, and they shall come to
themselves again.

To make Apples fall from the tree.
IF ye put of fiery coals under an Apple tree, and then cast of the power of
brimstone therein, and the fume thereof ascend up, and touch any Apple that is
wet, that Apple shall fall incontinent.

To water trees in Summer, if they wax dry about the root.
WHereas Apple trees be set in dry drownde and not deep in the ground, in
Summer if they want moisture, ye shall take of white straw, or other, and every
evening (or as ye shall see cause) cast thereon water al about, and it will keep
the trees moist from time to time.

To cherrish Apple trees.
IF ye use to throw (in Winter) al about your Apple trees on the roots thereof,
the urine of old men, or of stale piss long kept, they shall bring fruit
much better, which is good for the Vine also, or if ye do sprinckle or annoint
your Appte tree roots with the Gall of a Bull, they shall bear the better.

To make an Apple grow in a Glass.
TO make an Apple grow within a glass, take a glass what fashion ye list,
and put your Apple therein when he is but small, and bind him fast to the
Glass, and the Glass also to the tree, and let him grow, thus ye may have
Apples of diverse proportions, according to the fashion of your glass, thus may
ye make of Coucombers, Gourdes, or Pomecitrons, the like fashion.



THese three branches and figure of graffing in the shield in Summer is, the
first branch shows how the bark is taken off, the middle place shows, how
it is set to, and the last branch, shows how to bind him on, in saving
the oylet or eye from brusing.

To graffe many sorts of Apples on one tree.
YE may graffe on one Apple tree at once, many kind of Apples, as on every
branch a contrary fruit, as is before declared, and of pears the like: but
see as nighe as ye can, that all your cions be of like springing, for else the
one will out grow and shadow the other.

To color Apples.
TO have colowred Apples, with what color ye shall think good, ye shall bore
slope a hole with an anger, in the biggest part of the body of the tree, unto
the mids thereof, or there abouts, and then look what color ye will have them
of, first ye shall take water, and mingle your color therewith, then stop it up
again, with a short pin made of the same wood or tree, then wax it round
about: ye may mingle with the said color what spice ye list, to make them
taste thereafter, thus may ye change the color and taste of any Apple: your
colors may be of Saffron, turn soul, brasel saunders, or other what ye shall
see good. This must be done before the spring do come: some do say, if ye
graffe on the Olive stock, or on the Alder stock, they will bring red Apples:
also they say, to graffe to have fruit without core, ye shall graffe in both
the ends of your Cyon into the stock, and when they be fast grown to the
stock, ye shall cut it in the mids, and let the smaller end grow upward: or else
take a cion and graffe the small end of the stock downwarde, and so shall ye
have your apple tree on S. Lamberts day, (which is the.xvij of September) they
shall never wast, consume, nor wax dry, which I doubt.

The setting of Vine plants.


THese figures do show how ye ought to plant and set your Vines, in two and
two together, the one to have aparte of the old tree, and the other may be
all of the last cyon: but when ye plant him with a part of the old tree he
shall commonly take root the sooner than the new cion: ye must weed them every
month, and let not the earth be too close above their roots at the first, but
now and then lose it with a spade as ye shall see a rain past, for then they
shall enlarge, and put forth better. Further herein ye shall under stand after.

How to proyne or cut a Vine in Winter.


THis figure shows, how all Vynes should be proined and cut, in a
convenient time after Christmas, that when ye cut them, ye shall leave his
branches very thynne, as ye see by this figure: ye shall never leave above two,
or three leaders at the head of any principal branch ye must also cut them
of in the mydst between the knots of the yung cions, for those be the leaders
which will bring the grape, the rest and order ye shall understand as follows.

Of the Vine and Grape.
SOmewhat I intend to speak of the ordering of the Vine and grape, to plant
or set the Vine: the plants or sets which be gathered from the vine (and so
planted) are best, they must not be old gathered, nor lie long unplanted after
they be cut, for then they will sone gather corruption, and when ye do gather
your plants, ye must take heed to cut and choose the^, whereas ye may with ye
young cion, a joint of the old wood with the new, for ye old wood will sooner.
take root than the new, and better to grow than if it were al young cion, ye
shall leave the old wood to ye young cion, a foot or half a foot, or a
shaftment long, the young cion ye shall cut the length of three quarters of a
yard or there abouts, and ye shall choose of those young cions that be thickest
ioynted, or nigh joints togithers, and when ye shall plant or set them, look
that your ground be well dug in the Winter before, then in January ye may
both cut and plant, but cut not in the frost, for that is danger of al kind of
trees, or ye may plant in the beginning of February, and when ye do plant, ye
shall take two of those plants, and set or lay them together, a foot deep in
the earth, for two plants set together will not so sone fail, as one alone, and
lay them a foot long wise in the earth, so that there may be above the earth
three or four joints, ye may plant a young cion with the old, so that he be
thick or nigh ioynted, for then he is the better to root, and also to bring
fruit: then when ye have set or laid them in the earth, then cover them well
therewith, in treading it fast down unto the plants, but let the ends of your
cions or plants be turned upright, above the earth three or four joints, if
there shall be more when they be set, ye shall cut them of, and ye shall cut
them always in the mids, between the two joints, and then let them so
grow, and see that ye weed them always clean, and once a month loose the
earth round about them, and they shall prove the better: if it be very dry
and hot in the Summer after, ye may water them, in making a hole with a crow
of iron to the root, and there ye shall pour in water, in the evening. As for
the proyning of them is, when the grape is taken and clustered, then ye may
break the next joint or two after the grape, of al such superfluous cions as
ye shall see cause, which will cause the grape to wax bigger: ye may also break
away all such superfluous buddes or slender branches, which comes about
the root, or on the under branches, which ye think will have no grape, and
when ye proyne or cut them in Winter following, ye shall not cut the young cion
nigh the old, by three or four joints, ye shall not cut them like oziars, to
leave a sort of heads together on one branch, which does kill your vine, ye
shall leave but one head, or two at the most, of the young cions, upon the old
branch, and to cut those young cions three or four knottes or joints of, for
the young cion does carry the grape always, and when ye leave upon a great
branch many cions, they can not be well nourished, and after ye have so cut
them in Winter, ye shall bind them with cziars, in placing those young branches
as ye shall see cause, and in the spring time, when the branches are tender,
ye shall bind them so, that the stormy tempest or wind do not hurt them, and
to bind them withal, the best is, great soft rushes, and when the grape is
clustered, then ye may break of all such branches as is before declared, upon
one old branch three or four heads be enough, for the more heads your branch
has, the worse your grape shall be nourished, and when ye cut of any branch,
cut him of hard by or nigh the old branch, if your Vine ware old, the best
remedy is: if there grow any young cion about the r^te, ye shall in the Winter,
cut of the old Vine hard by the ground, or as nigh as ye can, and lot the young
Vine lead, and he will continue a long time, if ye cover and fill the place
about the root with good earth again. There is also upon or by every cluster
of grapes, a small cion like a pigges tail, turning about, which does take
away the sap from the grape, if ye pinche it of hard by the stalk of your
grape, your fruit shall be the greater: if your Vine wax to rank and thick of
branches, ye shall dig the root in Winter, and open the earth, and fill it
up again with sand and ashes blend together, and where as a Vine is
unfruitful and does not bear, ye shall bore a hole (with an anger) unto the
heart or pith, in the body or thickest part thereof, then put in the said hole a
small stone, but fill not the hole close therewith, but so that the sickness
of the Vine may pass thereby. The^ lay al about the root of good earth mingled
with good dung, and so shall he not be unfruitful, but bear well ever after: or
also, to cast of old men's urine or piss, all about the root of the barren
vine, and if he were half les^ or marde, he should grow again and wax
fruitful as before: this is to be done in Winter.

To have grapes without stones.
FOr to have grapes without stones, ye shall take young plants or branches,
and shall set or plant the top or small end downewarde in the earth, and so
ye may set two of them togithers for failing, as I have before declared of the
others, and those branches shall bring grapes without stones.

To make your Vine to bring a grape to taste like Claret.
TO make your Vine to have a grape to taste like claret wine, and pleasant
withal, ye shall bore a hole in the stock unto the heart, or pith thereof,
then shall ye make a lectuary with the powder of Cloves, of Cinnamon, mingled
with a little fountain or running water, and fill the said hole therewith,
and stop it fast and close with wax, and so bind if fast thereon with a linen
cloth, and those grapes shall taste like claret wine.

Of gathering your grapes.
AL grapes that men do cut before they are through ripe, the wine shall not be
natural, nor yet shall long endure good, but if ye will cut or gather grapes to
have them good, and to have good wine thereof, ye shall cut them in the full,
or soon after the full of the moon, when she is in Cancer, in Leo, in
Scorpio, and in Aquarius, the moon being in the waine, and under the earth.

To know if your Grape be ripe enough.
FOr to know if your grapes be ripe enough or not, which ye shall not only
know in the taste, but in sight and taste together, as in taste if they be
sweet and full in eating, and in sight if the stones will soon fall out being
chafed or bruised, which is the best knowledge, and also whether they be white
or blewe, it is all one matter: the good grape is he which comes out all
watery, or those which be al clammy as byrdlyme: by these signs shall ye know
when to cut, being through ripe or not, and whereas you do press your Wine,
ye must make your place sweet and clean, and your vessels within to be clean
also, and see that they have strong heddes, and those persons which do press
the grape, must look their hands, feet and body be clean washed, when as
they go to pressing the grape, and that no woman be there having there terms:
and also ye shall eat of no Cheboles, Scalions, Onyons, or Garlike, Annyseedes,
or such like, for all strong savors your Wine will draw the infection
thereof, and as soon as your grape is cut and gathered, ye shall press your
Wine after as soon as ye may, which will make your Wine to be more pleasant and
stronger, for the grapes which taryeth long vnprest, makes the Wine to be small
and ill, ye must see that your vessels be new fair and sweet within, and to
be washed with sweet water and then well dried again, and to perfume them
with Masticke and such sweet vapor, and if your vessel chance not to be
sweet, then shall ye pitche him on the sides, which pitche will take away all
evil and such stinking savor therein.

To prove or taste Wine.
ANd when soever ye will prove or taste any Wine, the best time is, early in
the morning, and take with you three or four soppes of bread, then dippe one
after another into the wine, for therein ye shall find (if there be any)
sharp taste of the wine. Thus I leave (at this present) to speak any further
here of the Vine and grape. If this my simple labor be taken in good part
(gentle reader) it shall the more hereafter encourage me to set forth another
book more at large, touching the art of planting and graffing, with other
things necessary to be known.

Here follows the best times how to order, or chose, and to set or plant
Hoppes.


IN this figure ye shall understand the placing and making of the Hoppe hills,
by every Sipher over his head: the first place is showed but one pole set in
the mids, and the Hoppe beneath, the second shows how some does chap
down a spade in the mids of the hill, and therein lays his Hoppe roots. The
third place is showed, how other some do set out one pole in the mids, and
the Hoppe roots at holes put in round about. The fourth place shows how
some choppes in a spade cross in the top, and there lays in his roots. The
fifth place shows how some do set four poles therein, and puttes the Hoppe
round about the hill. The sixth place shows that some use to make cross holes
in the sides, and there lays in the Hoppe roots. Thus many practices have been
proved good, provided alwais that your hills be of good fat earth, specially
in the mids down unto the bottom. This I thought sufficient to show by this
figure the diversity in setting, whereof the laying of the Hoppe is counted
the surest way.

THe best and common setting time of Hoppes, is from mid November, to mid
February, then must ye dig and cleanse the ground of weeds, and mix it well
with good molde and fat earth. Then divide your hills a yard one from another
orderly, in making them a yard asunder, and two foot and a half broad in the
bottom, and when that ye plant them, ye shall lay in every Hill three or four
roots, some do in setting of them lay them crossewyse in the mids of the
hill, and so couers them again, some settes the roots in four parts of the
hill, othersome do make holes round about the hills, and puttes of the
roots therein, and so couers them again light with earth: of one short root
in a year ye may have many plants, to set and lay as ye shall see it good, and
it shall be sufficient for every plant, to have two knottes within the ground,
and one without, some do chappe a spade cross in the hill, and lays in
cross the Hoppe, and so couers it.

To choose your Hoppe.
YE shall choose your roots best for your Hop, in the Summer before ye shall
plant the^, for then ye shall see which bears the Hop, for some there is that
brings none, but that which bears, choose for your plants, and set of those in
your hills, for so shall ye not be deceived, and they shall prosper well.

To sow the seeds.
SOme do hold, that ye may sow among other seeds, the seeds of Hoppes, and
so will increase and be good to set, or else to make beds and sow them
alone, whereby they may increase to be set, and when they be strong, ye may
remove and set them in your hills, and plant them as the other before
mentioned.

The setting your poles.
THe best time is in April, or when your roots be sprung half a yard long
or more, then by every plant or Hop, in your Hills, ye shall set up a pole
of.xiij. or.xiiij. foot long, or there aboutes as cause shall require, some
do use to set but four poles in every hill, which is thought sufficient,
and when ye shall set them, see that ye set them so fast that great winds
do not cast them down.

How to proyne the tree.
YE shall mark when the Hoppe does blossom, and knit in the top, which shall
be perceived to be the Hop, then take and cut up all the rest growing there
aboutes, (not having Hop thereon) hard by the earth, that al those which carry
the Hop, might be the better nourished: thus shall ye do in Summer, as ye shall
see them increase and grow, until the time of gathering.

To gather the Hop.
AT such time before Michelmas as ye shall see your Hop wax brown, or somewhat
yellowe, then he is best to be gathered in a dry day, in cutting your Hop by
the ground, then pluck up your pole therewith for shaking of your Hop, so
carry them into some dry house, and when ye have so plucked them, ye shall lay
them on borded loftes, or on hurdels of clothes, that the wind may dry them,
and the air, but not in the sun, for the same will take away the strength
thereof, nor with fire, for that will do likewise, and ye shall daily toss and
turn them til they be dry: to try them when they are dry, hold them in your
hand a space, and if they cleave together when ye open your hand, they are not
then dry: but if they shatter a sunder in opening your hand, then ye may be
sure they are dry enough. If not, let them remain, and use ye them as is
before said. Ye shall understand the dryness of them is to preserve them and
long to last, but if need be, ye may occupy them well vndryed, with less
portion to sow.

What Poles are best.
YE shall prepare your Poles of such wood as is light and styffe, and which will
not bow with every wind, the best and meetest time to get them is in Winter
when the sap is gone down, and as soon as ye have taken of your Hop, lay
your Poles in sundry places until the next spring, whereby they may endure the
longer.

How to order and dress your hills.
AFter the first year is past, your Hop being increased to more plenty of
roots in your hills, ye shall after Michelmasse every year, open your hills
and cast down the tops unto the roots, uncovering them, and cut away all the
superfluous roots, some does pluck away all the roots that spreades abroad
without the hills, then opens the hills and puts of good new earth unto them,
and so couers them again, which shall keep them from the frost, and also make
the ground fat, so shall ye let them remain unto the spring of the year, in
February or March, then again if ye shall see any superfluous roots ye may
take them away, and cup them up, and your Hop shall be the better, then again
cast up the earth about your hills, and clensing them from all weeds and other
roots, which will take away their strength, if the herbs remain, so let them
rest till your Poles may be set therein.

Of ground best for your Hop.
THe Hop delights and loves a good and reasonable fat ground, not very
low, nor yet to moist, for I have seen the^ prove well in Flaunders, in dry
sandy fields, the Hoppe hills being of good fat earth, ye may (as some say
for great need, make your Hoppe grow and bear on any kind of rockie
ground, so that your hills be great and fat earth, but the lower ground
commonly proves best, so that it stand well and hot in the Sun.

A note of the reast abouesayde.
YE shall mark and understand, all this order above said, is to have many
hoppes and good, with a few roots and plants placed in a small plotte of
ground. Ye shall understand, the wild hoppe that growth in the hedges, is as
good to occupye as the other, to set or plant in any other place, but look ye
take not the barren hoppe to plant, some hoppe will be barren for want of good
earth, and lack of dressing, which ye shall perceive (as I have told you) in
the Summer before, that when they should bear they wylbe barren, which is for
want of good fat earth, or an unkind year, or lack of weeding and good
ordering. Therefore such as are minded to bestow labor on the ground, may
have as good hoppe growing in this country, as is in other countries: but if
ye will not go to the cost, to make hoppe yardes, ye may with a light charge
have hoppes grow in your hedge rows, to serve as well as the other, and
shall be as good for the quantity as the other in all respects: ye may (for
lack of ground) plant hoppe roots in hedge rows, when ye do quick set
up poles by them when time shall require in the spring, and to bestow every
winter after the gathering your hoppe, on every hill head, a shouel full of
dung to comfort the earth, for the^ will they bear ye more plenty of hoppe
the next year following: to conclude, you that have grounds may well
practice in all things before mentioned, and specially to have hoppe in this
ordering, for your selves and others, also ye shall give encouragement for
other to follow hereafter. I have heard by credyble persons, which have
known a hundredth hills, (which is a small plat of ground, to bear three
hundredth pound of Hoppe, so that the commodity is much, and the gaynes great:
and one pound of our Hoppe dried and ordered, will go as far as two pound of
the best Hoppe that comes from beyond seas. Thus much I thought meet and
necessary to write, of the ordering and planting of Hoppe.

How to pack your Hoppes,
WHen your Hoppes be well tossed and turned on boorded floores, and well dried
(as I have before showed) ye shall put them into great sackes according to the
quantity of your Hoppes, and let them be trodden down hard together, which
will keep their strength longer, and so ye may reserve them, and take at your
pleasure. Some do use, (which have but small store) to tread them into dry
fattes, and so reserve them for their use, which is counted the better way and
the less portion does serve, and will longer keep their virtue and strength.

Wishing long life and prosperous health,
To all furtherers of this common wealth.
FINIS.
Here follows a necessary table (by Alphabete) to find out quickly all
several particulars in this book before mentioned, by the numbers in this
table, seeking the like number on the pagine or leaf.
A
ABricotes graffed. 22 Antes or Pismiars on trees. 51 Antes on young trees. 51
Antes or Pismiars about trees 58 Antes or Pismiars on Cherry trees. 67 An Apple
to be set whole in the earth. 67 Apple trees graffed. 20. Altering of hard
Pears. 76 Altering or transplanting. 38 Apple trees disbraunched. 40 Apples
without blossoming. 56 Apples to be had rathe or late. 56 Almondes to be
greater than other. 59 Almondes set of the curnell. 37 Apples to remain long
on the tree. 74 Apples which are frozen to help. 76 Apple trees to be
cherished. 77 Apples to be made fall from the tree. 77 Apple trees to be set,
not to consume. 79 Apples to grow of diverse fashions. 79 Apples cions to
graffe diverse sorts on a tree. 78 Apples to be colored.
B
Barennesse of trees and branches cut. 47 Barennesse of trees to help. 70
Beasts broosing on trees or graffes. 48 Binding of trees being weak. 27
Binding of graffes against winds. 28 Binding of graffes. 31 Binding of trees,
and with what. 45 Boughs broken to remedy. 13 Bushes or small trees to be
set. 19 Branches to be set in the earth. 16 Branches another away. 16
Branches old how to be set. 28 Branches to be set and governed on trees. 38
Branches to be cut before they be set. 39 Broken branches to cut of. 13
Bushing of graffe heads. 31
C
Caterpillars on trees. 53 Changing the fruit of curnels. 7 Chestnuttes to be
set. 68 Cole worte hard to be graffed. 23 Chestnuttes in rank. 41 Chestnuttes
to have rathe and late. 56 Cherry trees to be set. 10 Cherry trees set. 11
Cherry trees graffed. 12 Cherries with the difference. 15 Cherries to be
graffed one upon another. 16 Cherries graffed to be great. 20 Cherries graffed
and how to be cut. 26 Cherries to taste like spice. 35 Cherries to have long on
the trees. 56 Cherries to plant or set. 67 Cherries to be kept in good air. 67
Choosing your graffes or cions. 23 Cleaving your stocks. 28 Cleaving your
stocks of Cherries and Plum trees. 18 Cherry how to be tempered. 31 Covering
your cliftes, on the head. 31 Curnelles watered. 66 Curnelles to be set. 2
Curnelles taken out of the pressing of fruit. 2 Cutting of principal members.
49 Cutting of principal roots. 3 Cutting of great roots. 43 Cutting of cions
with the time. 19 Cutting the heads of your stock. 27 Cutting, proying and
when. 46 Cutting great branches. 46 Cutting of branches in replanting. 14
D
Damson trees to be set. 11 Damsons to last long on the trees. 35 Days on the
Moon to graffe on. 58 Days best to plant or graffe. 60 Date tree set of a
stone. 68 Defending your trees from Snayles. 51 Deep setting or shallowe. 16
Deep digging and donging. 17 Differences of Cherries. 15 Donging your trees of
Pepines. 3 Dong and good earth for trees. 43 Diverse kind of graffes. 21 Digging
the earth for slips. 17 Digging the roots all about. 44 Disbraunching al wild
stocks, before they are repla^ted. 40 Drawing forth of your wedge. 30
E
Earth with the use thereof. 2 Earth to be made good. 44 Earth good for trees.
43 Earth to be dug for slippes. 17 Elmes hard to be graffed. 21 Emettes or
Antes. 58
F
Fensing your graffe heads. 31 Filbardes to be set. 10 Fig tree graffed. 21
Fig trees to come forward. 69 Fig trees to be planted. 18 Forward trees
to be marked. 14 Four ways of graffing. 19 Furnishers to be had. 24 Fruit
charging the tree. 22 Fruit to have the taste of half an Apple, and half a
Pear. 57 Fruit how to keep from the frost. 59 Fruit to be made laxatiue. 60
Fruit to taste as ye shall seem good. 68 Fruit to be kept long. 71 Fumigations
in the spring time. 53
G
Graffing all sorts of trees. 20 Graffes of Plumtrees to graffe with. 11
Graffing of Plums and Cherries. 11 Graffing four ways. 19 Graffing of
Service, or set. 6 Graffes of diverse kinds. 21 Graffing the Fig tree. 21
Graffing all sorts of trees. 20 Graffes to be kept long. 23 Graffing how to
begin. 24 Graffing wild stocks. 24 Graffing things to graffe with. 24
Graffes not prospering. 25 Graffing well and sound. 25 Graffes how to be
ordered. 25 Graffing how to take heed of the bark. 26 Graffes pinched in the
stock. 28 Graffing the branch or great tree. 28 Graffing many cions on one
head. 29 Graffes which do lightly take. 29 Graffes to be right set in the
head. 30 Graffing the second way of branches. 32 Graffing the third manner,
betwixt the bark and the tree. 33 Graffing in the shield. 34 Graffing in the
Summer. 34 Graffing with great big cions 34 Graffing on young trees. 36 Graffing
three or four heads on a tree. 37 Graffing artificially or subtly. 54
Graffing one Vine on another. 54 Graffing times, and when. 58 Graffing one Vine
with another. 60 Graffes how to be gathered. 61 Graffing without core. 70
Grapes without stones. 83 Grapes to taste like claret. 83 Grapes when to be
gathered. 83 Grapes to know when they are ripe. 84 Great Nuttes or Plums, set
of curnels. 59 Great Cherryes to be graft. 20 Great branches how to be cut.
47 Governing of trees cut. 49 Ground best for hoppes. 88 Gum to be gathered
on trees. 65
H
Hasell Nuttes to be set. 10 Heddes of graffes to be covered. 34 Heddes of
graffes to be dressed. 33 How to graffe the shield. 35 How to set trees at
large. 41 Helping of trees. 48 Helping of mossy trees. 45 Holes for the roots
enlarged. 43 How to remove trees. 5 How to leave great branches cut. 47
How to take worms on trees. 51 Hoppes how to plant. 85 Hoppes how to be
chosen. 86 Hoppes seeds to be sown. 86 Hoppes to be proyned or weeded. 87
Hoppes when to be gathered. 87 Hoppe hills how to be dressed. 88 Hoppe ground
the best. 88 Hoppes how to be packte best. 90
K
Keeping graffes long. 23 Keeping Antes from trees. 51 Keeping young trees from
Snayles. 51 Keeping young trees in the Spring. 53 Kanker or worm in the bark.
50
M
Making Syder. 6 Making Orchardes in few years. 7 Marking the stock in
taking it up. 16 Medlers graft. 20 Medlars bow to be graft to wax great. 69
Medlars again to be graft. 20 Medlars or other fruit tasting like spice. 55
Medlars sooner two months than others. 56 Medlars without stones. 57
Medicining of trees. 45 Medlars, principal times to cut. 49 Many trees
following their natural earthes. 40 Moss on trees. 71 Moss taken from trees.
45 Mulbery tree to be set. 18 Mulbery tree to come rath or late. 57 Mulbery
tree. 69 Mulbery to be planted. 71 Muscadell taste in Grapes. 55 Multiply or
augment trees. 6
N
Nature of the graffes. 21 Nature of places. 44 Negligence of the planter. 5
Nuttes graft. 59 Nutte in graffing. 26 Nuttes and what does make them good. 48
Nuttes to be kept long and green. 72 Nuttes how to be set. 8 Nuttes and stones
which be like the trees. 9 Noynting the trees beneath. 68
O
Orchardes making in few years. 7 Ordering your trees in ranks. 42 Ordering
Plum trees and Cherry trees. 11
P
Packing of Hops. 89. Pains taking in planting. 53 Peches rathe or timely. 55
Peche trees how to be cut. 72 Peches how to be colored. 73 Peche trees with
worms. 73. Peches without stones. 73 Pears to be altered. 76 Pears to come
rathe. 56 Pears to keep a year. 57 Pepins to be watered. 66 Pepins taken
from the press. 2 Pyne tree to be set. 10 Pinching of the graffes. 28 Pismiars
or Antes. 67 Pismiars to be destroyed. Another. 58 Planting in valleys. 44
Planting trees at large. 41 Planting without the root, and also with the
root. 59 Planting of the Vine. 66 Planting Nuttes. 9 Placing the shield on
the tree. 36 Plums to be graffed. 59 Plums how to be kept. 75. Plum trees if
the like not. 75 Plum trees to be set. 11 Plum graffes to be cut. 26 Plums
tasting like spice. 55 Poles for Hoppes. 87 Poles which are best. Prayer in
graffing and plant^^^ (...) Profit that come by (...) (...) Proyning or
cutting (...) (...) Proyning what trees. 15 Proyning Cyons. 16 Proyning of
trees and when. 46 Proyning of hoppes. 87 Pultrie to take heed of. 2
Q
Quyne Apple how to be graffed. 58 Quinces for to plant. 18 Quinces to be
graffed. 20 Quince again to be graffed. 21
R
Raysons of grapes to keep a year. 60 Ranks to be set. 41 Remedy against
broken bows. 13 Remoouing or replanting trees. 3 Replanting in the meetest
times. 5 Roots to be cleansed. 12 Roots to be cut. 43 Roots rebated in
replanting. 15 Roots to be uncovered. 47 Roots uncovered. 46
S
Services graffed or set. 6 Service trees. 22. Service tree set. 22 Saving the
stock before ye graffe. 26 Setting trees in rank. 4 Setting of Nuttes. 8
Setting of Filbardes, or hasell Nuttes. 10 Setting toward the South or sunnie
place. 39 Setting plums or Damson trees. 13 Setting all sorts of Cherries. 11
Setting of bushe trees. 19 (...) how to be bound. 36 (...) taken of, to know
if he be good or (...) 35 (...) 76 Syder making. 7. Sickness in trees. 50
Syons when to be gathered. 61 Syons pluckte up. 3. Syons without roots. 18
Syons which are best. 23. Slender stocks or trees. 27 Small trees of
curnelles. 3. Snayles on trees. 51 Sowing of pepynes or curnels. 2 Space from
rank to rank. 4 Staves to stay your cions. 14 Stock heddes to be well
cut. 27 Stock heds cloven to much, or the bark head do tear. 29 Stocks
not hastily to be removed. 48 Stones of fruit to be set. 64 Swelling of the
stock or graffe. 13
T
Taking heed in graffing. 26 Taking up of trees. 14 Taking of ye shield from
the bark, and to set him on again. 36 Times best to graffe in. 60 Times and
manner of graffing four ways. 19 Times to cut Cions. 19 Times to set Nutte
trees. 8 Times when to uncover the shield. 38 To keep years a year. 57
Transplanting after Michelmasse. 39 Trees graffed or vngrafte, to make Sider. 6
Trees of wild Nuttes. 10. Trees to be taken up, 14 Trees of great cions
prickte in the earth, without roots ^ Trees hard to be graft, with shield or
scutchion. ^ Trees charged with fruit. ^ Trees to change cions or graffes on.
^ Trees to choose to graffe on. ^ Trees to mark, which be forward. ^ Trees as
bygge as your leg. ^ Trees having great braunchesse. ^ Trees hurt or eaten
with beasts. ^ Trees being long without fruit. ^ Trees which do not prosper.
74 Trees with worms or fruit. 64 Trees bearing bitter fruit. 70
V
Vines how to plant. 66. Vine or grape. 80 Use of earth in sowing your
curnelles. 2 Uncovering of the tree roots. 45
W
Walnuttes set. 9. Walnuttes how to be kept. 72 Walnutts trees what they love
best. 40 Watering trees against the Caterpiller. 53 Watering trees or plants.
4. Watering of trees. 45 Weeding your beds or ground. 2 Wedges in graffing,
how to be softely drawn forth. 30 What trees loves fair sun; and what
love cold air. 40 What dong to dong your trees. 45. When to proyne. 46 When
to uncover your trees. 46 Why fruit savor or taste not well. 9 Wild trees
plucked up. 3 Wild stocks removed. 48 Wine how to prove or taste. 84 Worms
among roots. 44. Worms in the bark. ^5 Worms that do eat in trees. 51
Worms of a strange nature, and how to take them. 50 Worms in trees of
fruit. 64 Worms in the peache tree. 7^
FINIS.

