A Book of fishing with Hook and Line, and of all other instruments thereunto
belonging.

Another of sundry Engines and Trappes to take Polcats, Buzards, Rattes, Mice
and all other kinds of Vermin and Beasts whatsoever, most profitable for all
Warriners, and such as delight in this kind of sport and pastime.

Made by L. M.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by Edward White dwelling
at the little North door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne.

First the knowledge of angling with the Hook and Line.
HEre will I declare briefly unto you, how to angle with the hook and line, in
what times best, and in what places of the water to take fish. First in
standing pooles, ye shall angle where the water is something deep. There is no
great choice of any place where it is any thing deep, either in poole or other
standing water: but in a river, ye shall angle best where it is deep and
clear by the ground, being gravel or clay without any mudde or weeds, and in
whirling waters, or in a covert, as under a hollow bank or roots of trees, or
long weeds floting above on the water, all these places are troublesome: also
it is good angling in deep stiff streams, or in falls of waters and wears,
and in fludde gates, and mill pooles, and it is good whereas the water rests
by the bank, or where the stream runs nigh thereabout, being deep and
clear by the ground, or any other place where ye may see any fishhoue above in
the water, or has any other feeding place to resort, or on that side the water
where the wind has no great power.

What times best to angle.
HEre shall ye understand what time of the day is best to angle, from the
beginning of May, unto the month of September fish will byte. The best angling
to take fish, is early in the morning from four of the clock until it it be
eight a clock, other be meetly, but not so good as in the morning: also the
euenings be indifferent good to angle, if it be some what calm withal, or else
not good, the wind blowing from the South or West.

Also if it be a cold whistling wind in a dark lowering day, for the dark
louring weather is much better to angle in: then in a clear sunny day, and
from the beginning of September unto the end of April, ye shall spare no time
of the day to angle, and likewise many poole fish will byte best in the mid day
about noone. If ye shall see any time of the day, the Troute, or Grayling
leap, ye may then angle to him a double worm, according to the same month,
and if the water does ebb and flow, the fish in some place will byte best at
the ebb, and in some places at the flood, according to the places of rest, as
behind pillars and arches of bridges, or such like suckering places in the most
quiet water.

In what wether to angle in.
HEre ye shall understand in what wether ye shall best angle as aforesaid in
the dark louring day, when the wind blows southly from the South or West:
in the Summer season when the sun is very hoie, it is then naught to angle,
but from September unto April, it is then good in a fair sunny day, the wind
being then good: if it have any part of the Orient or East, it is then naught
to angle, for they will not byte, or when it is a great wind, snow, rain, or
hail, or in a great tempest of thunder, or lightening, for it fears them, or
else in a swooly hot wether, all these times are not good to angle for to take
fish.

Of twelve lets in taking fish.
YE shall here understand there be twelve manner of impediments or lets which
causes a man to take no fish, without other cunning that may hap by
casualtie. The first is if your harness or lines be not fitly made* the second
is, if your baits be not good nor fine: the third is, when that ye angle not
in the biting time: the fourth is, if that your fish be fearful of the sight
of man: the fifth is, if the water be very thick, white or read by any flood
late falen: the sixth is, if the fish for cold do not stir abroad: the
seventh is, if the wether then be too hot: the eight is, if it be in rainy
wether: the nynth is, if then hail or snow do fall: the tenth is, if it be in
any tempest: the eleventh is, if then it be a great wind: the twelfth is, if
the wind blow from the East, for that is worst, and commonly neither winter
nor summer the fish will then byte: the West and North winds be good, but the
South wind best of all.

To take the Salmon.
THe Salmon is a gentle fish, but he is cumbrous to take: for commonly he is
but in deep places of great rivers, and commonly in the midst of the river:
he is in season from March unto Michaelmasse, and ye shall angle to him with a
red worm, from the beginning to the ending, and with the bobbe worm that
breeds in the dughill: also there is a sovereign bait that breeds on the
water docke: the Salmon byteth not at the ground, but at the flote or above: ye
may also take him with the dubbe worm at such time when he leapeth, but it
has seldom seen, and ye shall take him in like manner as ye do take the
Trout, or Grayling, or the Dace.

For the Troute.
THe Troute is in season from March unto Michaelmasse, he uses commonly a
clean gravely ground, and in a stream: ye may angle to him at all times with
a ground line, lying or runniug, saving in the leaping time, then with the
dubbe fly, and early in the morning with a running ground line, and further
in the day with the flote line. Also ice may angle to him, in March with a
Menowe hanged on your hook by the nether part without any flote or plumbe,
drawing it up and down in the stream till ye feel him fast, but if ye
angle to him with the fly, ye shall strike when he is a foot and more from
your bait, for the comes so fast ye may in the same time angle to him with a
ground line, and bayted with a red worm, for that is a good sure bait, and is
most used. Also in March, April, May, September and October take the Menow on
your hook: in December, January and February drag with the bobworme at the
ground: in June, July and August, fish with made flies on your hook: on the
upper part of the water, for that is a sure bait and is most used.

In April take the red worm, and also of Iuneba, otherwise called seven eyes,
or the great canker worm that breeds in the bark of a great tree, and the
red snaile. In May, take the stone fly or Caddis worm, and the bobbe worm
under the Cowtorde: also ye may take the silk worm, and the bait that
breeds on a Fearne leaf.

In June take the red worm and nippe of his head, and put it on your hook,
and a codworme before. In July take the great red worm, and the codworme
together. In August take the flesh fly, and the great red worm, and the fat
of bacon, and bind it about your hook. In September take the red worm, and
the menow. In October, take the same, for they are special good for the Troute
in all times of the year, from April unto September, the Trout leapeth, then
angle to him with a dubbed or armed hook according to the said months, for
he is strong in the water.

For the Grayling.
THe Grayling, otherwise named Vmbre, ye may angle for him as ye do for the
Troute, and these are commonly his baits: in March and in April ye shall take
the red worm: in May ye shall take the green worm, and asurall grayled
worm, and the Docke canker, and the worm on the hawthorne: in June, the bait
that breeds between the bark and the tree of the Oak: in July, the bait
that breeds on the Fearne leaf, and the great red worm, and nippe of his
head, and put it on your hook with the Codworme before: in August the red
worm and the docke worm, and all the year after use chiefly the red worm.

For the Barbyll.
THe Barbell is a subtle and a strange fish to take, and very dainty to take
his bait: these are commonly his baytes, in March and in April ye shall angle
to him with fresh cheese laid on a board, and so cut it in small pieces
square, the length of your hook: then take a candle and burn it or smeare it
on the end at the point of your hook tillit look yelow: then bind it on your
hook with Fletchers silk, and make it rough like a welbede worm, and this is
very good for all somer season: but in May and June ye shall take the
Hawthorne worm, and the great red worm before: in July the red worm for a
chief bait, and the Hawthorne worm together, and also the worm that
breeds in the water dog leaf, and the young Hornet worm together: in Angust
and for all the year, take the tallow of a sheep and soft cheese of each
alike, and grind or scrape them well and small together, till it wax fine and
tough, then put a little wheat flower, and make it into little pellets, and
this is a good bait to angle at the bottom, and see that it do sink alone in
the water, or else it is not good for this purpose.

The Carpe.
THe Carpe also is a strange and dainty fish to take, his baits are not well
known, for he has not long been in this realm. The first bringer of them
into England (as I have been credibly informed) was master Mascoll of
Plumsted in Sussex, who also brought first the planting of the Pippin in
England: but now many places are replenished with Carpes, both in pounds and
rivers, and because not knowing well his chief baits in each moves, I will
write the less of him, he is a strange fish in the water, and very strange
to byte, but at certain times to wit, at four a clock in the morning, and
eight at night be his chief biting times, and he is so strong enarmed in the
mouth, that no weak harness will hold him, and his biting is very tickle: but
as touching his baytes, having small knowledge by experience, I am loath to
write more then I know and have proved. But well I wot, the red worm and the
Menow be good baits for him in all times of the year, and in June with the
cadys or water worm: in July, and in August with the Maggot or gentle, and
with the coal worm, also with paste made with honey and wheat flower, but in
Automne, with the red worm is best, and also the Grasshopper with his legs
cut off, which he will take in the morning, or the whites of hard eggs steeped
in tarte ale, or the white snaile.

The Cheuyn.
THe Cheuyn is also a wary fish to take, and very fearful: In March he will
byte at the red worm at the ground, for commonly he will byte at the ground
and somewhat deep at all times of the year, in April, the cadyee or ditch
canker, and the canker that breeds in the bark of a tree, and the worm that
breeds between the bark and the Oak tree: also the red worm, and the young
frogge his legs and feet cut off, also the stone Cadyce fly, and the bobbe
worm under the cowturd, likewise the red snaile: in May, the bait that
breeds on the Ozyar leaf, and the docke canker together put upon your hook,
and the bait that breeds on the fern leaf, also the eodde worm, and a
bait that breeds on the hawthorne, and the worm that breeds on the oak
leaf, and also the silk worm, and the coddeworme together: in June, take
then the Crekets and the Dor fly, and also the red worm, the eade cut off,
and a codde worm before, also the worm in the Oziar leaf, and young frogs,
the feet cut off by the body or by the knee, also the bait on the hawthorne,
and the codworme together, and the dunghill grubbe or worm and a great
Grasshopper: in July, the Grasshopper, and the humble Be in the meadow the
waterest, also young wasps and white young Hornets taken in their combs, and
the great branded fly that breeds in paths of meadows, and the flying
Pysmyars, which be in the pismyar hills: in August, take the Colewort worm,
and the Gentle or Magot until Michaclmasse, and in September, take then the
red worm, and these baits when ye may get them, which is, Cheries, young Myse
not haired, and the sow worm that breeds in posts of the house.

The Breame.
THe Breame is a noble fish counted and a dainty, he is good to take, he is a
strong fish in the water, ye shall angle to him from March unto August with the red worm, and then with the Butterflye, and the green fly, and also with
the bait that breeds among green reed, and a worm that breeds in the
bark of a dead tree, and to take young Bremets, take the Gentiles or Maggots,
and from August all the year after ye shall take the red worm, and if ye
angle for him in the river, ye shall then take of brown bread, for that is
good, yet some do use in April and May, the worm that breeds on the Elm
and willow, and chewed bread is very good, and all other baits used for the
Cheuyn, but specially young waspes.

The Tench.
THe Tench is a fish that feeds at the bottom, and most part of the year
among the mudde, and most he stirs in the months of June and July, and in
other times of the year but little: the Tench is an evil byter, and very
subtle to take with the angle, his common baits are these, for all the year
they take brown bread tosted and smeared with honey in likeness of a buttered
toste, also they take the great red worm, and for a chief bait, take the
black blood in the heart of a sheep, and mix it with flower and honey, and
temper them all together something softer then pappe or paste, and anoint
therewith your red worm on your hook: it is very good both for this kind of
fish, and for other also, and they will byte thereat much the better at all
times.

To take Perch.
THe Perch is a dainty fish and passing wholesome for a man, he is also a
free and greedy byter: these are his baits, in March they take the red worm,
in April, the bobbe worm under the cowdung, in May, the hawthorne worm and
the codworme, in June the bait that breeds in an old hollow oak, and the
great canker: in July the bait that breeds on the Ozier leaf, and the great
hobbeworme that breeds in the dunghill, and the flyeboate worm that breeds
on the weed raggewort, and the codworme: in August, then take the red worm
and the Maggots or gentiles, and the Menow tied by the lip, and for all the
year after, ye shall take the red worm, for that is best.

The Roche.
THe Roch is a wholesome fish and easy to take with the angle, for he is a
ready byter: these are his baits: in March ye shall take the red worm, in
April, the bobbe worm under the cow dung, in May, the bait that breeds on
the oak leaf and the flying Emmat, and the bobbe worm that breeds in the
dunghill: in Iime the flying Ante, and the bait that breeds in the Ozier,
and the codworme: in July, the worm in the flagge root, and ye shall take of
house flies, and the bait that breeds on the oak, and the worm that
breeds in the small nutte, and also the gentiles, till Michaelmasse, and after
Michaelmasse take the fat of Bacon. Another special bait, take fair wheat
and sees it like farmantie: then take it out of the water and dry it, then
fry it with honey, and good store of saffron, and then put it on your hook,
and the fish will byte thereat marvelous fast But before ye angle, ye shall
cast into the water a few crummes of bread, or take some trummes and fry them
with some honey, and mix it with saffron, and see ye fry it not too much, for
this is good and a chieft bait.

The Dace.
THe Dace is a gentle fish to take, and quick at the vayte, he biteth all the
summer me the top of the water, and they angle to him without the flote in
March, his bayte is the red worm, in April. the bobbe worm under the cow
torde, in May, the docke canker, and the bayte that is under the slow thorn,
and the worm on the oak leaf: in June, the codworme, and the bayte that
breeds on the Ozyer, and the white worm in the dunghill: in July then take
house flies and the slyes that do breed in pysmyre hills: also the codde
worm and gentilles or magots, and those use until Michaelmas, and if the
water then becleare, ye shall take fish when other take none: and from that
time forth, take baytes for him as ye do for the Roch, for commonly of their
bayts and biting be all alike.

The Bleke.
THe Bleke is a little fish in biting, and commonly he bytes not nie the
bottom, but above and in the midst of the water. His baytes from March to
Michaelmas, are the same baytes which are written before for the Roch. And also
the Dace, saving for all the summer season, angle for him as much as you may
with the house fly, and for the winter season, ye shall angle to him with
Bakon flesh, and other baytes made meet for his purpose, as hereafter ye
shall more understand thereof.

The Ruff.
THe Ruff is a wholesome fish and good to byte, and ye shall angle to him with
the same baytes, in all the months of the year, as I have told you before of
the Perch, for these two fishes are in eating and feeding all alike, saving
that the Ruff is not so big as the Perch, for they are commonly always
less of growth, but the red worm is chief for them both.

The Flounder.
THe Flounder is also a wholesome fish for sick folks, and he will be infresh
waters and rivers, he is free in biting, but a subtle byter after his manner,
in nibling long ere he take the bayte: and commonly when he sucketh his meat,
he feeds at the ground, and therefore ye must angle to him with alying ground
line: and they use for him but one manner or bayte which is the red worm, for
that is the common and chiefest bayte for him, and all manner of fish.

The Googing.
THe Googing is a good and a wholesome fish, he is a ready byter, and byteth
commonly at the ground, and his bayts through out the year are these: the red
worm for the chiefest, also the codde worm and the gentell: and ye must angle
to him with a flote or eorke, and let always your bayt be within two fingers
or an inch of the bottom or less, or else for to dragge on the ground, for
so it is best and most soonest to take them. He uses in deep places with
clean sand or gravel ground at the bottom, as at wayers, bridges, and
miltayles.

The Menow.
THe Menow is a small fish and a bold byter, and byteth commonly at the
bottom, as the Googine: it is aholefome fish to eat if he be gauld. For when
he shines in the water, he is then bitter, though his body be small: and he
is a great ravening byter, and will have the bayte before other fish: ye shall
angle to him with the same baytes as ye do for the Gogin, saving they must be
small. And with a small hook, or else ye shall often be deceived by them: some
angles to them with a line of two hooks or three, two together and on other
hook above: they will be in all shalow places as in ditches, and such like.

The Yeele.
THe Yeele is a greedy feed, and he byteth always at the bottom, ye shall
see commonly holes in the bottom of the water, if ye put in your hook there,
ye shall soon have him byte if he be there, and he will hold very hard a
long time, ye must therefore hold your line stiff, and he will yield at
length if ye pluck and strive with him hastily ye are like to loose him. And
when he lies in a hole, it shall be best for to angle to him with your proch
hook, as is showed after, but when you angle to the bottom for the Gogin, ye
shall often times take the Yeele when that he runs abroad, as often they will
specially in the evening. The great red worm is the chiefest bayte for him, or
a Menow, or any piece of gutte, or such like.

The Pyke.
THe Pyke is a common deuourer of most fish, where he comes for to take him,
ye shall do thus. Take a codling hook, well armed with wire, then take a
small Roch or Gogin, or else a Frogge a live, or a fresh Hearing, and put
through your armed wire with your hook on the end, and let your hook rest in
the mouth of your bayte, and out at the tail thereof, and down by the ridge
or side of the fresh Hearing, and then put your line thereto, and draw it up
and down the water or poole, and if he see it, he will take it in haste, let
him go with it a while, and then strike and hold, and so tire him in the
water. Seen do put the hook in at the check of the bayte, and forth at the
tail: but when ye will lay your line, then must ye put a plummet of lead upon
your line, a yard from your hook, and a flote in the midst between the
lead and your bayte, that it sink not to the bottom, for then the yeeles
will eat your bait away. Ye may lay in your baits without flots and often ye
may speed of pykes: and if you will see a good sport in a pond where as there
is store of Pykes, you shall put in a Goose, and put a frogge a live on a
hook, and tie it with a strong pockthreed (to the Goose foot) a yeard long or
more, and in short space ye shall see good snatching and tugging between the
Pyke and the goose. An other manner in taking the Pyke there is: ye shall take a
live Frogge, and put him on your hook at the neck between the skin and the
body on the back part, and put a flote as is aforesaid, then cast it in a
river or pound, where ye think the Pyke haunteth, and ye shall soon take him:
and the best laying or angling for him, is toward night. Also another manner
is to take him: take the same bait aforesaid, and put it into a safetida, and
then cast it in the water with a long line and a hook, and ye shall not fail
of him soon after.

An other bait for him: Take Boares grease a safetida, neppe, so boil
altogether, then take a Roch, or other small fish, and dry it in your bosom:
and take and anoint him with the foresaid ointment, and then put him on your
hook, and cast it into the water, and you shall speed: also some do use to
dragge for the Pyke with a bleke, Roch, or Gogin, in drawing it up and
downeithe water, sometimes above, and sometimes beneath, for so he will soonest
come, if he see it, and some anglers do put the hook in at his gill, and out
at his mouth, and so draws the bayte, as though he did fly from the Pyke,
which is taken for the better way to make him more eger to take it.

The Loch, and the Millers thumb.
THe Loch and the cull, or Millers thumb, they are good and wholesome fish,
they feed at the bottom, and lie most part in weeds, roots, and holes in
banks, and to angle for them, ye must lay to the bottom, they do seldom byte
at an hook, but the red worm is their chiefest bayte that I do know for
them, for their food is commonly at the bottom, in sucking such as lies on
the bottom of the water.

The manner of feeding and preserving your quick baits.
NOw I will tell you how you shall feepe and keede your quick baits, which
is, you shall feed and keep them al in general, but every manner by himself,
with such things as they breed in, and upon, and so long they be quick and
new, so long they are fine and good, but when they be once dead, they are
then nothing worth, out of these be excepted three broodes or kinds, that is
to weete, of hornets, humble bees, and waspes, which ye shall bake them after
the bread is drawn out of he oven, and then dippe their heads in blood, and
let them so dry, and also for the magots when they be bred, and wax great with
their natural feeding, ye shall continue and feed them, (surthermore) with
sheep tallowe, and with a cake made of flower, and honey, which will cause
them to be more greater, and when ye have cleansed them in a blanket bag
with sand, keep it hot under your gown, or other warm thing two hours or
three, then they will be best to your purpose, and ready for to angle with, and
for the frog, when ye angle with him, ye must cut off his legs by the
knees, and also the grasse-hopper, his legs and wings by the body, all other
made baits I will here let pass, but use them as ye think good.

Baits to last all the year.
HEre I will speak of certain baits to last all the year. The first is made
of bean flower, and lean flesh of the hippes of a cony, or of a catte, with
virgin wax, and sheep tallow, so beat them in a mortar, and then temper
them at the fire, with a little clarified honey, and so make it up in small
balls, and therewith ye may bait your hook according to the quantity, and
this is a good bait for all manner of fish, that uses the fresh waters.

Another.
Take the suet of a sheep, and cheese, of each like quantity, and bray them
together long in a mortar, then take flower and temper it therewith, and then
delay it with honey, and so make balls thereof. and this is a special bait fo
the barbell also.

Baits for fi^eat fish.
THe baits for great fish, ye shall keep in mind this rule, that is,
whensouer ye do take a great fish, ye shall open the maw of him, and look
what ye find therein, make that your bait for that time, for that is always
best and most surest. There is many other making of baits, but for lack of
knowledge therein, I will here pass them over, and some not so needful as
necessary as these aforesaid.

Of twelve kinds of made Flies to angle, for the trout, in Summer with other
fish.
THere has been used twelve manner of flies, made and set unto the hooks to
angle withal, on the top of the water, the which Flies are to angle for the
grailing and darce, and chiefest for the troute, and also for the chub, like as
now ye shall here me tell and declare, each by him self, the counterfeiting of
them.

First for the dunne Fly.
1 The dun Fly (in March) the body is made of dunne woolle, and the wings of
the partridge feathers.

2 Also there is another dunne Fly made, the body of black wool, and the
wings is made of the black drakes feathers, and of the feathers under the
wings of his tail.

The stone Fly.
3 The stone Fly (in April) the body is made of black wool, made yellow under
the wings, and under the tail, and so made with the wings of the drake.

The ruddy Fly.
4 The ruddy Fly, in the beginning of May, is a good Fly to angle with aloft on
the water, the body is made of read wool, lapt about with black silk, and
the feathers of the wings of the drake, with the feathers of the red capons
tail, or hakell.

The yellow Fly.
5 The yellow Fly (in May) is good, the body made of yellow wool, and the
wings made of the red cocks hackell or tail, and of the drake littid, or
coulered yellow,

The black Fly.
6 The black Fly or lowper, (in May) the body is made of black wool, and
lapt about with the herle of the peacockes tail, the wings are made of the
wings of a brown capon, with his blew feathers in the head.

The sad yellow Fly.
7 The sad yellow Fly (in June) the body is made of black wool, with a yellow
list of either side, and the wings taken of the wings of the bozard, bound
with black bracked hemp.

The More Fly.
8 The moorerish Fly is also good, made with the body of duskish wool, and the
wings made of the blackishe male of the drake.

The tawny Fly.
9 The tawny Fly is good at Saint Willams day, or unto midde June, the body is
made of tawny wool, and the wings made contrary, one against the other, made
of the whitishe maile of the wild drake.

The waspe Fly.
10 The waspe Fly (in July) the body is made of black wool, and lapped about
with yellowe threede, and the wings are made of the feathers of the bozard.

The shell Fly.
11 The shell Fly is good at Saint Thomas day, or midde July, the body is made
of green wool, and lapped about with the herell of the peacocks tail, and
the wings made of the wings of a bozard.

The dark or drake Fly.
12. The dark drake Fly (in August) is good, the body is made of black wool,
and lapped about with black silk, his wings are made of the maile of the
black drake, with a black head. Thus are they made upon the hook, lapt about
with some cork like each Fly before mentioned.

Here follows how to couller your lines, to angle with.
NOw to learn how to color your lines of hear according to the color of
each water and season, in this wise, first ye shall take the hair of a white
horse tail, the longest and strongest ye can get, the rounder hair the
better it is. Then ye shall divide it six parts, and ye shall color each
part by him self, as yellow, green, brown tawny, russet, and the duske
color. And to make a good green, take a quart of small ale, and put it into a
pan, and put thereto half a pound of Alum, and so put therein your hair,
and let it boil softly half a hour, then take forth the hair and let it
dry, Then take a pottel of water and put it in a pan, and put therein too
hand full of Mary golds, or of wixen, and then press it with a tile stone and
so let it boil softly half an hour, and when the scum is yellow, then put in
your hair, with half a pound of coperes beaten into fine powder, and so let
it boil the space of half a mile way, then take it down, and let it keele
the space of five or six hours, and so take forth your hair and dry it,
which will be the finest green for the water, also the more of coperas ye do
put in it, the greener it will be, or ye may put in steed of it, of verdigrece.

Another kind to make another green, as thus, ye shall put your hair unto a
wood fat, of plunket color and it will be a light color, and to make it
plunket color, then ye shall sees it in goldes or wixen, like as I have
aforesaid, unto this color ye shall not put coperas, nor verdegrece, for it
will do better without.

To make yellow hair.
FOr to make yellowe hair, ye shall sees it with alum, as I have before
showed, and after that with goldes or wixen, without coperas or verdegrece.
Also another yellow ye shall make thus. Take a pottell of small ale and stamp
there in three handful of green walenut leaves, so put them together, and lay
your hair therein, so long till ye have it so deep color as you desire.

To make a russet.
FOr to make your hair russet, ye shall take a pint of strong lie, and half
a pound of soote, with a little of the juice of walnut leaves, and a quantity
of alum, then boil them well altogether in a pan, then take it off, and when
it is cold, put therein your hair, and so let it lie till it be a dark
color, so as ye will have it.

To make a brown color.
FOr to make your browue color, ye shall take a pound of soote and sees it in
a quart of ale, and with so many of walnut leaves, as ye shall think good, and
when they shall wax black, take it off the fire, and put therein your hair,
and so let it lie still therein till it be as brown as ye will have it. Also
another brown color, take of strong ale, and soote, and temper them
altogether, and therein put your hair, and let it remain so the space of two
days and two nights, and it will be well.

To make a tawny hair.
FOr to make your hair a tawny color, ye shall take a quantity of lime, with
the like of water, and so put them together, and put your hair therein, and
let it rest four or five hours, then take it out, and put it in tannars ouse,
for a day and it will be well.

Also ye shall keep the first part of your hair white still, for your lines to
be reserved for the dubbid hook, to fish for the troute, and grailing, and
also to make small lines, to angle for the roche, and the darce, and such.

Lines fit for each water.
HEre ye shall know in what water to angle, and for which season of the year
your coulered lines will best serve.

The green colered line will serve in all clear waters, from April unto
September.

The yellow line is good to angle in every water which is clear, from
September unto November, for it will be like the weeds, and other withered
grass which is in the water.

The russet line is best to angle withal in winter, and serves best all the
winter, unto the end of April, as well in rivers, as standing pooles.

The brown coulered line to angle withal, serves for any water that is
black, or of dedish color, be it in rivers or standing waters.

Anglers and fishers.
THe tawny coulered line to angle withal, serves best for those waters that
are heathy, or moorish color. Thus much for your lines and cullers. practiced
according to the color of waters, wishing that all anglers would not angle in
unseasonable times, as from midde March to mid May, for then is the chiefest
spawning time, and increase of fish. A great number there is in this realm
which gouerns waters that spares no time to kill, nor cares for no time to
save, but takes at all times, which makes fresh fish so dear, and so scant
in rivers and runiung waters. There is so many tillars, but ^ew that seeks to
save and preserve them, they will not suffer the fish so long as the time to
spawne, but troubles the waters with nets and weles both night and day, and
many Gentlemen lets their waters (as it should appear) without any exception
of tunes in the spring, for they make all times alike, not so much as sparing
the spawning time, as March, April and May.

Thus much touching anglers, and all other fishermen, for these three months
aforesaid, which I will speak more hereof in their places.

To order the red worm.
When ye gather them, put them into a box or bag, with wet moss under and
above, and they will store therein, then take and put them in parcely, fenell,
margeram, if ye change them each night and put them in new dung or earth, ye
may so keep them good to angle six weeks.

Here follows how to make your hooks.
IF ye make your hooks of wier, it is the easier to cut the board, with a hard
steel knife and bend it (when ye have made the barbe and the point) with a
pair of plyars, or with an instrument, with a bowed wier in the end, and when
ye have bowed him cut the shanke of what length ye think good, then batter him
at the end, and smooth it with your file, and it done, then heat him red in
the fire, and quench him in cold water, and it will be hard again, if it be a
steel needle ye must hold it in the fire, till it be red hot, or over a
candel, and then let it cool of himself, and so it will be soft as wier, and to
have the knowledge of this instruments, and also how much your hooks and
lines, shall be for every fish, here may ye see the figures of your instruments
and hooks.

pike hook, the proch.



NOw when ye have made thus your hooks of al sorts, then must ye set them to
your lines, according in greatness and strength, for every fish in this wise.
Ye shall take small red silk, for a great hook double, but twiste it not, and
for small hooks, let it be single, and therewith fret your hooks in doubling
your lines end, and your silk or hair on the inside of your double line, then
fret or whippe it so fair as ye shall see good, then next your hook at the
bought put throw your silk or hair, in going round about the hook three
tunes, then pluck first your silk or hair hard down, and then your line, so
cut it off hard by the end of your hook (in setting your line on the inside
of your hook, and so it is done.

Now must ye know your hooks, how to angle for every kind of fish.
I Will tell you with how many sufficient hairs ye shall angle for every
kind of fish. For the Meno with a line of one hair, for the small or wexing
roche, the bleke, the gagin, and the ruff, with a line of two hairs, for the
darce and the great roche, with a line of three hair, for the perch, the
flounder, and the small breme, with a line of four hairs, for the cheuin
chubbe, the breme, the tenche, and the yeele, with a line of six hairs, for
the troute, the grailing, the barbyll, and the great cheuin, with a line of
nine hairs, for the great troute, with twelve hairs, for the sawmon, with a
line of fifteen hairs, and for the pike, a chalk line, and brown it with
your brown color aforesaid, and armed with a wier, as hereafter shall be seen,
when I speak of the pike.

To know how to plumbe your line.
YOur lines must be plumbed with lead, finely and thin beat, and lapt close
about your line next your hook, and the next lead to your hook must be from
your hook a foot long or else somewhat more: and every plummet ought to be
of the quantity according to his line in bigness. There be three manner of
plummets and plumbings, which is for a groundline lying, and another for a
groundline running: and the third line is the flote line set upon the ground
line lying, with ten plummets joining altogether, running upon the ground with
xx. or ten small plummets: and for the flote or cork line, lead or plumbe
him so heavy, that the least pluck of any fish may pluck it down, and make
the leads or plummets sincke: for them, make them round and smooth, small and
close to the line at both ends, that they fasten not on weeds in the water,
which will be a let to your angling, and for the more understanding how they
use them, here shall be the figures.



There is also a line without cork to fish with, which they use in some places
in summer to angle for the Darce, the Blcke, and the Trowt, which they use to
cast his line into the water, and still to draw the line, so that he may
always have a sight thereof, and never let the hook and bayte sincke to the
bottom of the water out of sight: but always casting and drawing or moving
the bayte, and keeping it tight, that as soon as the fish do bite, he gives
a tutch, and so keeps his line tight, and lets the fish tire her self on the
hook, and then takes her up gently, this is the chiefest way to have both line
hook and fish: for in snatching and striking hard when the fish bites, you put
your line in danger, or tearing the mouth of the fish, and sometimes so loose
him.

There is also an other kind of angling for the Pyke, which is calde dragging,
your hook being armed with wire for sheering, when you would dragge for the
Pyke, you shall take a small Roch, or a Gogin, and with a needle of wood made
thin and flat: put it in at the gille, betwixt the skin and the body of
the Roch, and so forth at the tail, and draw your armed wiar and hook
after, and place your hook close under his gill, and so dragge for him as ye
do for the Darce. If it be with a single hook you shall put in your armed
wiar at the mouth of the Roch or Gogin, and it will serve well enough, as ye
may here see by figure, there is to drag with a live Frogge, and tie the double
hook under his neck and hippes.

The single hook.

The double hook under the gill.

The armed hook

Ye may if ye lust, place your double hook at the mouth of your fish as is
declared of the single hook: but then must you have the bigger bayte, that the
double hook may lie or join close to the head of the bait, and then it will
do well.

There is another kind of hook, calde a proching hook, which is made without
a bark, this kind or manner of hooks are to put in a hole in the bank, or
betwixt two bordes at a bridge or water, or betwixt two stones where they lie
open, for there commonly lies the great Yeles, and there put in your proch
hook a little way, and if there be any yeeles, they will take it anon: which
proch, is wier whipped on a packethreedes end, and covered with a great worm,
and therewith proch into the said holes, as by example for the better
understanding, ^o here may you see the figures.

The proch vnbaited.

The proch hook without out the rod.




The rod bayted with a worm.

As soon as ye feel she has the bait, pluck away your rod, for it does
nothing but guide your proch into ye holes, and then draw softly your
packthreed line, and hold a while and he will yield, if you do pluck hastily,
he will hold so stiff, ye shall break your line, or tear his mouth:
therefore hold hard still, and at length he will yield, and come forth. And
where ye shall see any hole in the buttome of a brook or river, there is like
to lie an yeele, put there in your proch, and he will soon byte if he be
there. Thus much for the order of the proch hook to take the Yeele.

The manner of laying of hooks.
THere is also a kind of laying of hooks armed for pikes, in pooles and
rivers, ye shall b^yte them as ye bayte the hook in dragging for the Pyke: and
here is to be noted of two manner of layings of hooks, the one way is to the
bottom of the water without cork, and the other is with the flote or cork,
to cast in your bayted hook without a cork, it will sink to the bottom, and
then the yeele will have it as soon as the Pyke: and if he cannot swallow it,
he will byte away the bait by little and little: therefore to lay from the
bottom is best for the Pyke, ye shall cast your bayted hook and line with a
cork, of what depth ye lust, for so it will not sink to the bottom.

Also to lay for the yeeles, ye shall bait your hooks with menowes, gogins,
or loches, great worms and such like. And to stick pooles in the banks, with
lines at the ends so that your baits may lie on the bottom of the water, for
there the yeele will soonest take it, but lay not nigh roots of trees or such,
for they will wrappe them so, ye shall never come by them.

Also let your lines be of good great packthreeke, sticking the said poles or
pinnes of wood in the banks, and your lines to be of two or three fatham, some
more, some less: and for your proch hook to bait him with the great worm,
or the menowe is best, or with a Loch, or small Gogin, so if a great yeele
come, he will swallowe it hole. Thus much for laying of hooks for the Pyke and
Yeele.

Also to take yeeles in winter, some have used to lay in pondes and running
waters, faggots of hay, with a bough of Willow put in the midst, and bayted
with some garbage of foul or beasts, bound with two bonds, and to pluck it
up (after it has lame two or three days) with hook or cord, and you shall
have yeeles therein: when it is a land do but crush it with your foot and the
yeeles will come out if there be any. If ye lay it in the midst of a river,
you may pluck it into your boat. Thus you may take many yeeles in winter.

Here is how to save and preserve fish.
FOr so much as I have before showed certain ways and practices how to take
fish in rivers, pooles, and standing waters. I will here declare certain ways
how for to maintain fish, and the chiefest ways to save and preserve them in
rivers, pooles, and standing waters, against such deuourers and rauerers as
has and will destroy them, as Herne, the Dobchicke, the Coote, the Cormorant,
the Sea-pie, the Kings fisher and such like: as also the Otter, who is a common
destroter of pondes and standing waters, and a great deuourer of and spoyler of
rivers, brooks, and running waters, which shall be declared in their places.

The Herne.
And first, to take the Hearne, which destroys much young fish or other, if
they come nigh the shallowe places or banks: the Hearne is fearful and
subtle for to take, therefore some do bayte a hook, or proch hook with a
Menow or other small fish, or with the gobbet of some Yeele, then make your
line green, or like the water where she hauntes in a shallow place or other
where she resorts, there put in your pin in the earth of the shallow water,
and lay your bait so that she may wade half a feet deep unto it, for else
the Kite or Crow will soon have it, for she will soon swallow it and so be
taken.

The Otter.
They take the Otter or water Wolf, in a well made and devised for the nonce,
as shall be showed in his place, which well is not made in all points like unto
other weles, where he will eat the fish and come forth again safe before he
be drowned. Therefore there is invented among the fisher men, a well for to
take him made with a double teme or tonuell, and against the utmost teme within
is set an yeirne like a gredyeirne with four hooles staying and sliding upon
two round sticks, which must be set upright in the well before the teme, to
hold up the yeirne: which two sticks must be fast bound to the well, both
above and beneath, then must ye have a good stiff rod, the one end shall be
set over the well to hold up the gredyeirne or grate, and the other end of the
rod, must reach over the inner teme, and a small oziar tied at that end of
the rod, which small Oziar must be made with a round knot, and so put down
upon the end of the nethermost Oziar in the midst of the inner teme, but a
very little way put on that when the Otter is within the first teme, he comes to
the second where the fish is, and there he puts off the Oziar, and the rod
flirtes up, and the gredyerne falls and stoppes the utmost teme where he came
in, and as soon as he hears it fall, he will turn back, without touching
any fish, gnawing at the gredyerne where he came in, and so is drowned.

And when ye have a well of fish robbed with the Otter, or your layer, of weles
with fish spoiled and robbed with the Otter, there lay your Otter Well, well
bayted with fish, and so ye shall soon take him. Which Otter Well must be made
of good round Ozyars of the Hasell rod or gore rod, for those are the best.
These Otter Weles are made at Twyford, by sides Reading. There be two of the
Gootheriches which lives much by making of such, and other weles. Also the
Otter well is made at Dorney, by Windsor, of one called Twiner. If your Otter
well be old, and not strong, and if the Otter chance to break it and escape,
ye shall hardly take him of a long time after, for he is very subtle to be
caught again in such a well. There be that has provided many ways ere they
could take him. Thus much here for the setting of the Otter Well, and here
shall follow the said Otter Well, with his proportion how to be made and set,
the more casier to make them where as they have not been seen before. To
know if an Otter do haunt river or ponde, you must watch the waters in the
night, then shall you hear him plunging and chasing the fish all night by ests
and banks ^^des, so watch or else your fish may be kilde and you know not how
nor when.

Here follows the Otter Well.
The fashion of the Otter well, with two handels above the better to lay him,
he must be three quarters and more, betwixt teme, and teme in length.

This figure under shows the setting of the gredyerne, before the teme of the
well, and when he falls, to rest on two stiff oziars on the lower part of the
said teme, as ye make see above: but when ye shall set for tyle the said
gredyerne, it must be plucked up above the mouth of the Teme, which temes
mouth, all the oziars must be cut even by the wreth, save those two that must
hold up the gredyerne beneath as ye may see. Which mouth of the teme, must be
betwixt vi. and vii. inches deep, so that a good pretty dog may creep to
(...) ^oo little, the Otter will then gnaw the well, also the (...) must fall
easily on the two stirkes that stay him, and she gredierne to be brother then
the mouth of the teme, which gredierne must be put in the well when the well is
a making, because it can not be put in when it is made, except ye make it with
playing joints on the middle vane to fold, but on the one side of the
gredierne, and so ye may set him in, and take him out when the well is made, or
when you will at any time. They do use to make him without any joints, but
plain and all flat bars, setting to four round hoopes, of yeirne on the
four corners of the gredierne: which gredierne is made with five flat bars,
and so used, waying about two pound weight, because it may fall the sooner.

For the Water-ratte.
THe Water-rat is a hurtful vermin to kill fish, especially Creuis, Loches,
Culles, and Trowtes lying in holes of the bank. They will soon destroy much
other fish and spaune in shallow rivers and brooks, to kill them it is hard to
do: but where as ye shall see their path on banks sides, there set a
deadfall, for they do range abroad a nights like other Rats, and will be where
as is corn milles, and fulling milles, to eat corn, and gnaw clothes, and
lives much like to other Rattes, and will pill oziar barks and such like. Also
to take them in weles is hard, except the weles lie shallow, and nigh the top
of the water by the bank: so a small Otter well made for the nonce bayted, may
possible deceive them. They cannot tarry long under water, wherefore they will
not hunt deep, nor rob weles if they lie deep, for they commonly take fish
nigh the top of the water. But some men do think a very good way to take
them, that is: to pin square bordes against the holes where they haunt, which
bordes must have a great hole in the midst, and set just against her coming
in or out, fast pinde to the banks: then make a latch and set it on the out
side of the board, tyld as yon tyle the Fox latch, as ye shall see in his
place: which hole in the board on the nether part, ye shall set three or four
pricks of wyar to hold any thing that comes out or in. This practice may
easily be made.

To lay poisoned baits, as pieces of cheese, flesh or such, and to straw the
powder of Orsenike thereon, to be laid in ests, where other things come not. I
know not what good it will do, for whereas ye touch any thing with your bare
hand, they will not lightly come at it. Thus much for taking the water Rattes
or Otter.

To preserve spawne in spawning time.
A Chief way to save spawne of fish, in March, April, and May, is thus, ye
shall make fagots of wheat, or rye straw, all whole straw not bruised, or of
reed, bind these faggots together with three bonds, and all about thereon
stick of young branches of willowe. Then cast them in the water among weeds,
or by the banks, and put in each faggot two good long stakes, driven fast to
the ground, and let your fagots lie covered in the water half a yeard or more.
So the fish will come a shed their spawne thereon, and then it will quicken
therein, so that no other fish can come to destroy or eat it, and as they wax
quick they will come forth and save themselves. Thus much for the preserving
of spawne in the spring and spawning time.: this is a good practice to preserve
the spawne of all scaled fish. These fagots ye may make and lay in all rivers,
pounds, or standing waters. Your sagots had need to be a yeard and a half
long, and bound with three bands not hard, two bands a foot from the ends,
and an other band in the midst, and lay them as I have before declared. Also
some do use to hedge in corners in rivers, and pondes with willow, and thereon
fish do cast their spawne and so breeds.

The manner of way to take Sea-pies.
The Sea-pie is a foul that uses the seas, and breeds much in Islands in the
sea, and lives most by fish and worms, and where as they use in fresh rivers,
they destroy much fish, young fry, and such as swimmes nigh the top of the
water, and will be in shallow places of the water: and there they haunt to take
and feed on them. Therefore the fisher men have invented a way how to take
them, which is: ye shall lyme two small Oziars, and bind the ends that are
next the bayte, almost cross wise. Then take an other short stick, and bind
the one end unto your ends of cross twigges as ye may see before, and put that
short stick through the fish or bayte. Then lay it on some water leaf,
rushes, or such like in the midst of the river, and as soon as they shall see
it, they will take and fly away with it in their bylles, and soon they shall
be lymed therewith.

The other way of laying these lymed twigges is, ye shall put a small short
stick in the bayte, as ye may see a fore. And at the hinder end tie a thread
an intch long, and to that thread tie your lymed twigges, and when she takes
and flies away with it, she cannot fly far but she will be lyined, for the
twigs will turn and touch her wings, and then she will fall. Thus ye may take
many Sea-pies, both in summer and winter, and the like way ye may take both
Crows and other Pyes, to take the Kyte therewith, he will hardly be lyined,
because he takes the bayte in his feet, and the other takes it in their
bills. Thus much here for the taking of the Sea-pie.

Here shall follow the knowledge how to replenish your fish pondes.
FOr to save and maintain in mayers, pooles, and standing waters, for such as
have not rivers, it shall be good to save, keep, and maintain all such fish
as may be nourished and bred in fresh waters: as Pyke, Breame, Tench, Prch,
Troute, Darce, Roch, and such like, and the Carpe for one of the best, which
has not been here in England but of few years past. The Trout will not
like but in running and swift waters, and hard gravel at the bottom. The
slymie fish is the Tench, the Seacod, and the Yeele, and yet they are commended
for a good feeding meat for man, but many will disdain the fresh yeele, and
esteem it as a flaggie and slymie meat, saying: he will gender with the water
snake, which thing possible may be, but the yeele of the fresh river is tried a
good and wholesome meat, you shall have also the Lampre, and the Lamporne, which
are called venomous fish of the Sea, but when they have scraped and cleansed
them in the fresh running waters. Notwithstanding, they are then good and
wholesome meat. The excrements of standing pooles are frogs, which in many
places being well dressed, they eat like fish, and is calde a kind of fish, and
do taste as well as a young poullet, for I tasted my part of many.

It is a good thing to have plenty of fresh water fish, in rivers and pooles,
and standing waters: and a great pleasure for man sometimes to take with his
angle a dish of fish in those waters whereas fish is plenty and well
preserved, not to use any other engines, but with the hook: and by such means
as the laws of this realm does permit and allow, not to use fire, handguns,
crossebowes, oils, ointments, pouders, and pellets made to cast in the waters
to stonny and poison the fish, nor yet to use all sorts of nets, and such as
are deuourers of fish, as bow nets, casting nets, small trammels, shoue nets,
and draught nets: which are destroyers of fish before they are grown to any
bigness. These are not meet to be used but of certain Gentlemen in their
several waters, I would wish no running waters should be let to any fisher
man, without order what mesh, what nets, he or they shall use to fish with, and
in what months of the year to refrain fishing, upon pain to forfaite his
lease and all such engines.

Also it shall be good for all Gentlemen and others, having the government of
any rivers, brooks, or standing pooles, to replenish them with all such kind
of fish as may there be preserved or bred, as well of straying as others. There
is a kind of fish in Holand, in the fennes besides Peterborrow, which they
call a poult, they be like in making and greatness to the Whiting, but of the
color of the Loch: they come forth of the fenne brooks, into the rivers
nigh there about, as in Wansworth river there are many of them. They stir not
all the summer, but in winter when it is most coldest weather. There they are
taken at Milles in Wells, and at wayers likewise. They are a pleasant meat,
and some do think they would be as well in other rivers and running waters, as
Huntington, Ware, and such like, if those waters were replenished with them, as
they may be with small charge. They have such plenty in the fenne brooks,
they feed their hogs with them. If other rivers were stored with them, it
would be good for a common wealth, as the Carpe which came of late years into
England. Thus much for the fenne pult.

Of clensing your pondes from weeds.
IF you will have profit of your fish, in your pondes and pooles, ye must have
a care always to cleanse them from three year to three year, in taking away
all weeds, rushes, and flagges, for they do greatly stuff and trouble the
fish, and makes them to be more slymie, and of a worser taste. Likewise ye must
see always for Otters and Water-rats, haunting your pondes and pooles: ye
shall best know if there be any in the night season, for then they hunt abroad
for fish: then seek to take them by such means as before mentioned, which else
they will soon destroy all your fish. Also it is not good to suffer any to
shute with guns nie your ponds or rivers, for it fears and astonish the fish
greatly, and worst of all in spawning tune, and many will die ^^ereof: ye may
watch the haunt of the Otter and Ratte, and strike them if ye can with the
trowte spear, which is a very good thing to kill them, if it be well done, for
so many have been kilde.

Here shall be showed a care of lauing your pondes in saving the water where it
is scant for to save your fish alive.
IN lauing your pondes and pooles, the greatest care is (if there be any scant
of water) to keep and bestow it so, that the water which is cast forth, may
remain nie the sides of your pondes and pooles, that ye may recover it soon
again to save the rest of your fish, while ye cleanse forth the weeds and
mudde, which will let the water to come quickly to the scoopes. Therefore it
shall be best to cleanse the sides and banks first of all: in having all such
tools ready, as shall be needful thereunto: as mattockes, spades, shoules,
scauelts, scoopes, and such like: to dispatch it as quickly as ye can. And when
the water is lower then the Rat-hole in the banks, ye may set such engines
before their holes to kill them at their coming out as aforesaid, for they
will lie always in the holes above the water, to smother them in their holes
ye shall hardly do, if ye then let them escape, they will soon convey them
selves away in the night or before night, and will run very swift. Thus much
for lauing your pondes.

There is also a care always to maintain your pits and stuis with fish.
HOw your pits and stuis should be used to keep fish in, your stues and pits
ought to be often renewed and helped with great and small fish from time to time,
and refreshed often with small fish among: for if ye do always take, and none
put to, your store shall soon decrease. It shall be good also to put carefully
your fish therein, both small and great, and see that none be hurt if ye may,
to put (...) Tench with them it shall do well. And it shall be very good
husbandry, to prick and set about the hands, of willow, sallo, or alder,
which will be good to defend the heat in summer, from your fish, and to avoid
the cold in winter: but the falling of leaves will increase mudde greatly, and
also stinch your pondes.

How to nourish your fish in pooles, mayers, and standing waters.
IT is most certain, the fish which is in rivers, and running waters, are at
more liberty then those which are closed in pondes and pits: for those in
running waters, the water brings to them always some what to feed on, and
there also the small fish do nourish the great, but the fish enclosed can get
no such thing. Therefore it shall be good to cast unto them of small fish, and of
guts and garbage of fish and of beasts, and figs cut small, and nut curnels
broosed, or broosed wheat, worms, grains of bruinges, white bread, all
sorts of salt fishes cut and hackt in small pieces, and such like. If your
fish nourish and fat not with these, ye must feed them with the frettes or
gubbins of market fish of the fishmongers: if yet they be lean, it shows
plain they were taken from the seas, which fish are raueners, or they have
come from rivers nigh the seas, but the fish in pondes are restraint from those
liberties. Therefore continually they must be fed.

Of the taking of fish diverse ways.
THere is diverse manner of ways in taking fish, in some places according to
the Country, and the nature of great waters is one, and of rivers and pooles,
is an other where they inhabit: so likewise is the diversity of the fish.
Also in fishing, some manner of fishing is in the Seas, an other manner is in
sweet waters, an other manner for great fish, an other manner for yeeles, other
ways for Roches and small fish, an other way for the Carpe, and such like. Now
seeing there is so many diversities in taking fish, it willl be hard to
express and long to write. Wherefore here I leave that knowledge to those that
use to fish, and sell in markets. In speaking here in general of the
commodities for the father and his famelie, in taking of fish for the common
wealth, whereof the principal manner is, with nets, weiles, lines, and hooks.
Thus I have showed of replenishing your pondes to have plenty of fish, and
clensing your pondes from weeds, and a care for your emtie pondes, and how to
maintain your pits and stues with fish. Also to nourish the fish in your
standing waters, and declaring of diverse ways in taking of fish. Thus much
taken of Stephanus in French.

Pour Amorcer, or gather Tortues.
TAke Salarmoniacke eight drams, of Scalion Onions one dram, the fat of veale
ten drams. So beat them together, and being made in pellets like beans, cast
them by their haunt to the Tortues, and they will come themselves to the smell
thereof, and so ye may take them.

To make it dry.
TAke the lees of strong wine mixed with oil, and put it in a place where ye
know it will dry, let it so remain till it wax black, and they will come to
the place, where the oil shall be put, and so ye may take them. Ye may take
also Salarmoniack thirteen drams, and the butter of goats milk eight drams,
beat altogether, and make small soft pellets thereof, and therewith rub what
grain, or small lynseede not broken, but dride: and they will feed there all
about, and will not depart, and strait way ye may so take them.

To take Loches or small fish.
TAke the branne of wheat meal, two pound, of lenten pease, half a pound,
mix them together, and beat them with a sufficient quantity of brine, and
put thereto half a pound of sessame. Then shall ye part it in pieces, and
throw them here and there: for as soon as ye have thrown it in the water, all
the small fish will come unto it, and remain in one place, although they be
300. paces off. Also ye may take the blood of an Ox, Goat, Sheep or of a
Hog, with the dung that is in the small guts of them. Also of time,
peniryall, leekes, sauerie, margerum, garlic, with the lees of good wine, of
each in like, with the grease or marow of the said beasts, so much as ye
seem good: beat them a part, and then mix them a like together, and so make
small pellets thereof, and cast it where ye will have the fish to come an hour
before ye cast in your lines: or else take the blood of a black Goat, the
lees of good wine, of barley meal, all in like portion: beat them all
together with the lites of a Goat, and then cut them in small pieces and make
pellets thereof, and so use them as above said.

Another way.
TAke half a pound of garlic, of burnt sessame as much, of pouliot, of
organie, of time, great margerum, of sauerie, of wild stauisacre, of each two
and thirty drams, of barley meal, one pound, of wheat as much, and of the
bark of a Frankincense tree thirteen drams, work all together with branne,
and cast it to the fish, and they will assemble thereabout.

To take Perch.
THe Perch is not so easily taken with hook, nets, or bownet, but rather with
proper baits made and used in a troubled water: therefore ye must make baits
with the liver of a Goat, and the snaile, or take the yellow butter fly which
flies: of Goats whay, called fromage de cheureau of each four drams,
opopauicis two drams, hogs blood four drams, galbony four drams, beat all
well together, and sprincle it all over with pure wine, and make thereof small
pellets, or as ye make perfumes, and dry them in the shade.

To take the Samon as well in the River, as in the Sea.
TAke eight drams of Cocks stones, and the curnels of pine apple tree burnt,
sixteen drams: beat all together a like, till it be in manner of a meal.
Another. Take the seeds of wild Rue, eight drams: the fat of a veale, eight
drams: of Sessame, thirteen drams, beat all together, and make small loaves
thereof, and use them as the other before mentioned. Thus much more taken from
Stephanus in French.

To take much fish by a light in the night.
YE shall distill in a lembeck of glass, a quantity of glowormes that shines
in the night, with a soft fire, and put the distilled water into a thin vial
of glass, and thereunto put four ounces of quicksiluer, that must be purged
or past thorough leather, or Kidde skin. Then stop the glass that no water
enter, and tie it in the midst of your bow net for breaking, and so cast it in
the water, and the fish will soon come unto the light, and covet to enter into
the net, and so ye shall take many. And some does suppose if ye do but take a
certain of those glo-wormes, and put them in a thin viole or glass, and
then stop it close, and tie it in the net, they will shine as well and give
as much light. But then I doubt they will not long be alive without meat,
except ye put herbs unto them in the day and let them feed, and use them in
the night as before. So ye may reserve them for your purpose (I think) a long
time.

To take Yeeles in the winter in hay or straw bottles.
YE shall make long fagots of hay, wrapped about willow boughs, which ye shall
put in the midst of your bottle or faggot of hay, and then sink it in the
deep by the bank, and so let it lie two or three days, and tie a with or
rope thereunto that ye may soon pluck it up on land or boat: and so ye shall
take yeeles therein good store, in a cold weather very good. And if ye bait
or lay in your fagotte guts or garbedge of a beast, ye shall be the more
certain to have them in a small time.

How to breed and increase yeeles in rivers, pondes, and standing waters.
THe common saying among fisher men is, if ye will have in your pits and pondes
(being of a sweet water) great plenty of Yeeles in few years, ye shall dig
two round or square turfes, or so many as ye will have, and cut them on a
sweet ground, and a short grass, a foot or more round or square turfes,
whereon the dew shows most in the morning before the sun do rise. Then
take them up and clappe the green sides together one upon another, and pin
them fast together with pricks of wood. Then carry and lay them softly in
what pit or pond ye list, and ye shall see experience. This is to be done in
the month of May, by the dew then on the ground, and at no other time else of
the year to be good.

The Gase for to catch Menowes.
THis Gase, is a round net of small mesh, with a hoope of yeirne, or great wier
half an intch about, and to let sink in a ditch, or brook which is not
deep, and so hold it a while by three strings like a ballans, with a loope in
the top, and therein to put through a staff or poale, and ye shall have
within a while so many Menowes which will come and gase at it, as will cover
it: ye must hang a small plommet in the midst, to make it sink. And also the
roundes must be flat oyster shelles tide to, and the squares must be scarlet or
red cloth sowed on: your hoope and net, may be three quarters and a half of a
yeard broad from side to side. Thus much for the Gase.

How to bobbe for yeeles.
THere is also a taking of yeeles with great worms drawn through on a long
threede one by an other, and then feulded up three fingers deep, and then tide
above all together, and a big string tide thereunto, and fastened bnto a
short poale, which ye shall hold in your hand. This is used to bobbe at the
coming of a flood water, and at the ebbing water of any water that ebbes and
flows. Also it is used after a great rain in brooks and running waters, ye
must let your bobbe touch the bottom, and so up with it softly again, and so
use it still, and ye shall feel when any yeele do bite: then pluck it up not
very fast, for then he will forsake the worm he has hold of, and as soon as
he feels the air, he will leese his hold, therefore ye must have a vessel
on the water always ready, that he may fall therein. Thus much for the
bobbing for yeeles.

The yeele spear to take yeeles.



The Otter Spear.

THe Yeele spear is made with five thin bars, cut in the sides with teeth,
to hold that yeele that is within them, and made with thicker and rounder
plates above toward the socket, which socket must be made strong, and therein
put your poale or staff, which they use in mudde, rivers, and brooks, to take
a dish of yeeles at pleasure: but it is evil to use the yeele spear whereas
there is Teech, or Carpe, for they will commonly lie in the mudde when the
water is beaten or troubled, and thereby they may soon be stricken and die
thereof.

The Otter spear is used when a man hunteth the Otter in rivers or brooks,
when as a man shall chance to see him vent above the water, then to throw the
spear at him, which spear has a line tide at the end, and a small box
fastened at the end of the line, that when ye have stricken him, ye shall the
sooner perceive him where he diueth in the river. Or if ye chance to find him
lying out of the water, there to strike him, and let him go into the water, and
so kill him.

To breed Millars-thumbes and Loches, in shallow brooks or rivers.
THe fishes called Loches, and the other called Millars-thumbes or Culles, they
always feed in the bottom of brooks, and rivers. They are fish wholesome to
be eaten of feeble persons having an ague, or other sickness. These fish
delight to be in sandy gravel in rivers and brooks, and they are very easy
to be taken with small travel, in removing the stones where they lie under,
for they cannot swim fast away. Therefore in certain shallow rivers and
brooks, they do use to breed, and save them ye may in laying round heaps of
pebble stones or flint, in shallow places of the said rivers and brooks,
half a foot deep of water or less. Like as there is a shallow river running
from Bareamstede to Chestum, and so to Chaue: also by Croyden and other places,
wherein they might breed of the said fish great store, if they were so given.
The like river runs in Hampeshiere by sides Altum, increasing by diverse
springes, and runs shallow in many placed, and by a certain parish there
called the Parson thereof has told me, he has had so many of the said
Culles and Loches, to his tithe weekly, that they have found him sufficient
to eat Fridayes and Saterdayes, whereof he was called the Parson of Culles.
This order of stones are laid hollow in shallow places less then half a
foot deep of water. Which fish among the said heaps of stones does there
lie safe, and so breeds: and there they are saved from the water Rats, and all
other fowls, which otherwise would still devour them. These store of fish, men
might have in diverse such like rivers in this Realm, if they would take the
like pain, to lay such heaps of stones as is above set down: which shows
the manner of laying them round in the bottom, the circuit of two yeardes
about, or as ye shall see cause. Thus much I thought good to show for the
maintenance and breeding of Culles and Loches. Also it is evident in other
Countries, the great care they have in preserving their fish, especially in the
spring: as in France, no fisher men or other, shall lay any engines in rivers or
brooks in the night, as flewes, stalles, buckes, keeps, weles, and such like,
from mid March, to mid May: for then the fish does shed their spawne among
weeds and bushes, nor shall not beat the waters or brooks with any plonging
poales, nor yet the fisher men to fish at no time, with any net under four
inches mash, because they shall not kill the small fish before they are well
grown, upon pain of forfaite and loss of all such engines. There is also
prohibited, that no fish shall be taken and sold in markets, which are out of
their season: as the Lampre and Lampornes, which are venomous in the Sea before
they be scoured in fresh water, and not in season from mid March to mid
September, for they will (being out of season) look russet and speckled upon
their bellies. Also Oysters and Muskles, are not good from mid March, to mid
September: and likewise Salmons and Trowtes, are in season from mid March to
mid September, and after wax out of season. Smelts not in season from mid
March to mid September or after. Cockles and such are not kindly but in the
months of March, April, and May: all the rest of the year not wholesome to
be eaten or sold. Moreover Darce, Roch, Perch and such like, are not kindly to
be kilde from mid March, to the end of May: for in these times they do cast
their spawne, and then they will be rough and broken, scaled and pilde for a
while, after they have so cast their spawne. And being then out of season, they
are not so wholesome nor yet good of liking. All these before mentioned with all
other which are out of season, are forbid to be taken and sold in markets, or
otherwise privily eaten, upon the like penalty before mentioned. I would to God
it were so here with us in England, and to have more preseruers, and less
spoylers of fish out of season and in season: then we should have more plenty
then we have through this Realm. Also I would wish that all stop nets, and
drags with casting nets, were banished in all common rivers through this Realm
for three months: as in March, April, and May, wherein they take fish out of
season as well as others, with great spoils of spawne, both of great and small
fish, for they use such nets with small mesh, that kills all fish before they
come to any growth and good service for the common wealth. Who so ever do
prevent such, they shall do good to the common wealth. And water Bayles which
are appointed to see so such nets in rivers, and running streams (which is
thought) they neglect their duties, for they let the fisher men use what nets
they list, as the voice goes: and Gentlemen which owes the waters lets them
also alone, and the fisher men they say they pay such rents, they must take
what they can, so herein are none y^ cares for the preserving of the common
wealth: whereby fish cannot increase, nor yet suffer to grow. So I leave,
wishing that careful men were put in office, and such as favors the common
wealth, and all other put out that seeks for their own profit only. Then
should we have within few years, much plenty of all river fish, and also a
great sparing to flesh, if they would use fish as they were wont on Frydayes,
Saterdayes, and fasting days commanded by our Prince, and so truly kept of
all people, from time to time.

The breeding of Creuis.
THe fresh water Creuis, commonly lives and lies in banks and holes in rivers
and brooks, and they are a wholesome fish for all sickne and weak persons.
They will east their spawne in the spring about the month of May, and will
shed it on stones, and weeds in the bottom, whereof most is eaten up with
yeeles and water rats, as some do suppose. Therefore it were not unmeet to
make fagots of hole straw to save the spawne as aforesaid. Also they will
soon be driven with floods down the stream, in few years they will greatly
increase, if they be not taken with men's hands, and killed with Rats for they
will lie in holes and under stones, and weeds, and so are soon taken: for
they cannot fly fast away, If they be taken in May, it will be a great spoil
of their increase, for commonly then they do shed their spawne. The Water rat
is also a great deuourer of them lying in holes: and whereas many rats are,
they cannot lightly prosper or increase there. Thus much for the fresh water
Creauis. Ye may store any brook or river with the Creuis, but especially he
loves the sandy and gravely running waters.

The Kings fisher.
THere is a bird which is a great destroyer of all young fry and small fish,
and he is called the Kings fisher: he is about the bigness of a Lark, and
does commonly breed in banks, sides of riues and brooks, in the spring of
the year: his feathers are green and blewe, and he will always haunt about
the sides of rivers and brooks, whereas small fish is, and as soon as he has
caught a fish, he will straight way (...) to the next bough, and there will sit
on a twigge and eat the fish, and so fetch an other. Thus he lives by the
devouring of all sorts of small fry, such as he may take and carry away. For
to take this bird, they use to mark where his haunt is, and there they set
down a bush or branch, and they put a limed twigge under the said bush or
branch: for so soon as he has taken a fish, he will fly to the next bush and
light on that under twigge lymed, and so they take him. Also they say this
bird, being dead, if he be hanged up by the bill with a thread in your house
where no wind blows, his breast will always hang against the wind, whereby ye
may know perfectly in what qnarter the wind is at all times, both night and
day. Thus much of the bird called the Kings fisher.

The Cormarant.
THe Cormarant is also a great destroyer of fish, he uses the fresh waters,
and will diue under the water, and will take and eat fish of three and four
years growth. How to take or destroy them I know not well, otherwise then to
destroy their nests in breeding time, whereas they breed in Islands, and rocks
by the sea: some may be destroyed in rivers and pooles, with crossebow, or
handgun, other ways I have not known or heard of, not with lime lines except
it be in the night, and then they will pike them soon clean again.

The Dobchicke.
THe Dobchicke is likewise a water foul, and they will be always commonly on
rivers and pooles, and they are nigh as great as the Teales, and are of color
black, and they will commonly diue under the water to take young fish, as I
have seen in rivers and brooks. How for to take them, the fisher men some
do use to lay on the water long lines of small threede knit full of little
corkes, a handful a sunder on the line, and cut four square like big dice,
and so limed and fold on aracle, as I shall show hereafter: and where they see
them haunt, they will spread the said line before them on the water, and then
with their boats, drive them to the said line, and so many are taken. Thus much
for taking the Dobchickes.

This ra^le, turns round of the middle staff, and as ye see the threede limed
with small corkes, that is fold thereon, so long as ye will have it of length
to lie on the water, and each cork to be but four fingers a sunder, or less,
shall suffice.

The More-coore or bauld Coote kills fish also.
THe More hen or bauld coote, lives likewise on waters, and they also eat
fish if they can take them. To kill or take these, I know no other way, but
with lime, or with the gunne, or such like to kill them.

The making of a water lime, a very good and a perfect way.
YE shall first wash your birdlime in running water, that no knots be found
therein, nor yet motes, but pike them out as clean as ye can in the washing.
Then take and boil it in a pot or skillet, and in the boiling put in a little
rosome, with some fresh grease, or goose grease, and so let it boil softly a
pretty space in storing it still. Then take off the same lime, and put it to a
weat testorne in water, if it come with the lime, it is good, if not, boil it
longer until ye see that proof. Also in steed of rosom, ye may take white
turpentine, for that is better. And this kind of water lime, will hold both
in water and frostie wether.

The Ospray.
THe Ospray is a bird like a Hawke, nie as big as the Tarcell of a goshawke,
he lives by fish, and is a great destroyer of fish: for I have seen him take
fish in the midst of a great ponde, they say he has one foot like a Ducke,
and the other like a Hawke, and as he flies nie over the water, the fish will
come up unto him. How to take him I know no other way but to watch where he
prays to eat his fish, for he will fly to some tree there aboutes, and there
to kill him with the handgunne, which I have seen in Hampshire. Thus much for
the Ospray.

The tempering of bird-lime, and it will serve also well in water.
TAke a pound of bird lime, cleanse and wash it in running water very clear
that no knots be left therein. Then beat out the water and dry it again.
Then put thereto two spoonefuls of sharp vinegar, and so much goose grease as
will make it subtle to run: and put thereto half a spoonefull of lamp oil,
and a little Venice Turpentine. Then boil all these together in an earthen
leaden pan, and stir it always, and let it but bubble and play softly.
Then take it off the fire, and so reserve it and use it at your pleasure, warm
it when you will have the use thereof.

Lime made of Misteltoo.
DYoscorides says, they do gather the berries in Automne, in the full of the
Moon, (for then they are of most force) and then they broose them, and so let
them lie for a space and rotte, and then they wash them in running water, till
they be clean like other lime, and therewith they do take birds, as with
other bird lime, made of Holly barks.

A pretty way to take a Pie.
YE shall lime a small threede, a foot long or more, and then tie one end
about a piece of flesh so big as she may fly away withal: and at the other
end of the thread, tie a shoe buckle, and lay the flesh on a post, and let the
threede hang down, and when she flies away with it, the threede with the
buckle will wrappe about her, and then she will fall, so ye may take them.

FINIS
A Book of Engines and traps to take Polcats, Buzardes, Rattes, Mice and all
other kinds of Vermin and beasts whatsoever, most profitable for all
Warriners, and such as delight in this kind of sport and pastime.



LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by Edward White dwelling
at the little North door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne. 1590.

A hutch to take Polcats, as also other Vermin.
THis manner of Engine is called of Warriners, a hutch, and it is made of
bordes, four square, to be removed or to stand still, with two falling bordes
at the ends: which two bordes must fall into two rygals on both sides of the
ends for flipping (...). Also there is two la^hes and strings tide to the
falling bordes on the ends to hold them up, crossing upon two pillars which
are made fast on the upper board of the hutch, with a line made fast on the
back side coming over the ends of the said lathes down to the bridge on
the fore side. Which bridge is tide within to the back side or board of the
hutch an inch from the bottom board. Some do make them with another pillar in
steed of the back string, but this is as good a way, ye may choose which way
ye will have it.

A latch trappe for the water Ratte, to be made of board with a hole pinde
against the Rattehole in the bank of brooks, pooles, or rivers.
THe latch must be set no wider but two inches and a half hie, so that they
must creep through when (...) comes in or out: it may be set within the water,
and ab^^^ the water, where commonly they lie about all day, and come out toward
night.

This is called the dead-fall for Polcats, or other Vermin.
THis engine is called a dead fall, it is made with a square piece of timber or
such like, waying about half a hundredth pounds or more, with a hole boared in
the midst of the upper side thereof, and therein a hooked crook set fast. Also
there is four forked stakes which must be set fast in the ground, and laying
thereon two cudgils a cross, on which cudgils, ye shall lay a long staff or
poale to hold up the dead fall by the crooch: under which crooch ye shall put a
short cudgel, with a line made fast thereunto, which line reaches down to
the bridge beneath: which bridge ye shall make within five or six inces broad,
like those that are made for the foresaid hutch.

Also on both sides of this fall, ye may set it with board, pale, or such like:
either ye may hedge it with close rods, and to make it ten inches hie or more.
The four spreading corners, are made to show the low hedges, that no vermin
shall pass so easily by, but come through the fall, and the passage must be
made no wider then the fall is broad. Some Warreners do make no tay of the
bridge behind, but sets it loose against a pin before the clicket, and so it
stays upon the fall.

The latch or Fox trap.
THis Engine is called a Latch or Fox trappe, it is made with a thick piece
of wood of two inches in the bottom, and so made taper wise upward. There is
also two other square pieces set on the ends of the bottom piece, and made
with two regals for the latch to rise and fall in, as ye may see by example: in
turning on a pin in the lower rigall at the hinder end. Which latch with the
clogge, must be made with his edge downward, as the other is upward: then
shall ye have between the latch, and the lidger, a small round stick, tide at
the hinder end with a string, and passing through the foremost rigall, and at
the end thereof must be two or three small holes or nickes made for the pin
that must hold up the latch with the clogge, and so soon as that stick or
bridge is put down, the latch with the clogge falls, ye must bush above the
latch, for any thing leaping over, whereas ye see it poudered. Your latch may
be made half a yeard and more wide.

This latch is to set against a bank or other hill side.
THis engine or latch, is called a dog latch, almost like the other before,
but that his two pillars or posts are set fast in the ground, and there must
be also a hole made within the latch on the inside of the bank or hill side,
where the latch must be set: and therein ye may bait it with what bait ye
will, for a dog or other Vermin. Also upon the upper side of the latch,
there is notches made one by an other all over. Then is there a bar in the
top which runs upon a pin, and runs into every notch, and holds down
the latch, so that the said latch cannot rise, what soever be within it will
hold him fast there, be it dog, or other vermin: there is also a weight
hanging at the end of the latch, to make it fall more quickly.

The latch trappe.
THis engine is called a latch or brake trappe, it is made with four thick
bordes or pieces of timber, in length three quarters of a yeard or less, ye
may make them as ye shall think good, either to sit still in the earth, or
often to be removed. But if ye will make them to remove, then must the upper
fallers be more heavier made. These four pieces must be pind at both ends, and
the two upper bordes or fallers, must lie within the two nether, as ye may see
by example. Then is there within those nether bordes, a long bridge, which
must be tide at the nether end of the catch with a string, and that bridge
has four holes at the other end, for a pin to put therein to bear and
hold up the two fallers. Which pin is put into one of those holes of the
said bridge, and the other end of the pin, stays under the great square
pin that is between the fallers, and the string that is tide to that pin,
is tide above to a trounchin, which trounchin lies on two forked stakes, set
in the ground, as ye may see by example by the nether part of the trappe. Also
the nether parts are rebated on the out side, and made edge wise upward, and
hedged on both sides as ye may see. And to fall toward the hedge is best.

The foot trappe.
THis engines is called Fox trappe or foot trappe, because it takes all by
the foot. It is made with a thick board or planke, of nine or ten inches
broad. And commonly a yeard and a half long, with a hole made in the middle,
nearer the one end, then the other. Also the planke has iiij. holes, at each
end two, to stake down fast the planke to the earth, that it be not plucked up:
then there is a poale set, or tree bowed down to the end of the planke, and to
the end thereof is tide a strong line, which line must come under the end of
the planke, and drawn out at the foot hole, with a short strong clicket of
wood tide thereunto with a short string, which clicket must be set against the
narrow place of the foot hole, and the other end in the nicke on the falling
board, which must stay against a short flat pin of wood, which must be set
under the planke whereas ye see two swmall pricks, to hold up the falling
board: and to that also is tide a strong lingell or other line, which line is
laid round about the hole of the foot board or fall, on the planke, and covered
all over with dust, sand, or earth, for fear of suspicion. This trappe may be
set against Fore holes, or other muce, with hedges on both sides the planke
that he shall pass no other way, but on the board. Also your falling board must
be brother under, then your hole.

The Wolfes trappe.
The square borded, and the poale, and pin in the top thereof.

The whole trap with cover, platter, poale, and bait.

THis Engine is called a Wolf trappe or pit. It is a large hole dug six
foot square, and two yeards commonly and a half wide from side to side, and
borded all round, both bottom and sides up to the top, with a poale set fast
in the midst thereof, almost as hie as the top of the pit. Then is there
a pin of yrne put through the midst of a large platter of wood or such
like, and that pin set fast in the top of the said poale: and there upon it
is laid and made fast, some beasts liver, or such like: or else a goose or
ducke, which is tide fast thereon. Then toward night they make a train unto
the trappe, and they cover the said pit with hurdles, bordes, or such like,
round about (saving a space) and they lay of green turfes thereon, so that
when the Wolf, or Fore, do come and find the bait, they can not reach it,
without they tread on the platter, which plarter is set ticklish thereon, and
as soon as he treads on the side, it tilts down, and rise up again, and the
Wolf or other falls down into the pit: and if other do come, they are
served the like. Thus much for the Wolf trappe. For the Fore, if he annoy
them, they will lay a piece of a sheep liver new, at his hole, and put
therein closoly of the powder of rats-bane, which will so kill him. Also the
powder of Aconitum called in Latin, in English Wolfes bane, the powder put or
strowed on flesh will kill them. Touch them not with your bare hands, for they
will find it and forsake it.

The kragge hook.
THis Engine I call a dragge hook, because it is made like a dragge, it is
made of yeirne or great wiar, and turns on the Weuell, like the weuell of a
loggar, or like on a gray-hound collar. The husbandmen in France, will hang
them on branches, of diverse trees about their grounds, to take the Fox,
Wolf, or dog if he take it, but chiefly for the Fox: they use to hang them
so hie from the ground, that a Fox must leap at it, before he can catch it.
Which hooks are baired and covered with livers of beasts, or other flesh, and
when he catches the hook in his mouth, he cannot deliver himself thereof, but
hangs and turns about with the hook in his mouth on the weuel and line: and
hereunto they make trains with some garbage against night, as they commonly
do to other engines, and by this engine, they do destroy many of their Foxes,
which otherwise would devour many of their Lambs, and poultrie. For men that
dwelles me the sea side where rocks are, there the Fox will be, there it
shall do well to set up iebbets and hang your dragges thereon, and so shall
ye destroy your Foxes in short time.

The Hare pipe.
THis Engine is called a Hare pipe, because it is made hollow, they are
commonly made for the hare, of pipes of Elder, of six or seven inches long,
and for the Foxes and dogs, they are made of yrne plate, nie ten or eleven
inches long, with two sharp pikes in the mouth thereof, and the more they
pluck and draw, the more it strikes in and pierce the flesh of the beast. And
also for the Fox or other such, it shall be good to arm the string or line
with red wiar fer weering. Which line, the one end is put in at a hole made in
the pipe side, as ye may see, and so drawn double out at the mouth of the
same. The other end comes through the pipe, and is tide unto some pin set
fast in the ground, or to some bough. They are commonly set in muses where they
pass through: but for the Fox, they pitch the hare pipe in some places, at
the mouth of his hole, when he is hunted or other wise, or in musis where he
hauntes to meus houses in killing their lambs, pigges, or other poultrie. Then
see that ye stop all other passages there aboutes, so shall ye be sure to
save your poultre, or else to take him. Ye may make trains at your pipe hole,
as is before mentioned of the other.

The whippe or spring trappe.
THis Engine, is called the whip, or spring, it is set thus: there is a string
tide unto the end of some poale set fast in the ground, or to some tree: unto
the said string is made fast a small short stick, with a nicke in the lower
end thereof, made thin on the upper side: then the poale is bowed down with
it, unto an other stick set fast in the ground with a nicke also, and thin
edge under. Then shall ye join both the nickes together, as ye may see by
example, as tickle as ye can. Then open the end of your string, set it in some
muse, or where ye think good. And when any Fox or other thing do pluck the
said upper string a side, then the nicke slippes by, and the poale starts and
so holds him up, as ye may easily see by example. Thus much for the spring
trappe. There is yearly kilde with Foxes in this Realm as many do judge, of
lambs ten thousand, of poultrie twenty thousand, of Rabbets and Conies nie
forty thousand couple: besides young Faunes in many Parkes and Forests.

The double trappe to take Rattes or Mice.
THis Engine or trap, it is almost made with a square board in the bottom, and
also above, and aqout five inches in height with a thick board in the midst,
as ye may see pointed with five nails, and nailed fast to the upper and
nether board, in parting the trappes. There is also two falls naylde with
leathers on the upper board, which is hold up and tilde with a string, which
string has a clicket or wedge, and is stayde on a short piece of wood, and so
tilde with hooked wiar, which wiar goes through a big hole, and stays on
the upper board by a cross wiar, and on the lower end of the crooked wiar the
bait is put on within the trappe, at the further end of the trappe: and there
against ye may see certain wiars set from the upper board to the nether
board, to tice the Rats there to seek to go out. Which is thought yearly
they destroy through England forty quarters of corn.

A trappe or fall for Buzardes, and Kytes, with a hurdell.
THis Engine is called a fall or trappe to take Buzardes and Kytes, which is
after this sort, ye shall set a hurdell on the ground where ye think good.
Which hurdell is holden up before with a crooked stick, and that crooked
stick holden up with a forked stick put under him, which forked stick must
stand loose on the ground, without the nether bridge or forked stick. Also in
setting up the nether end of the crooked stick that holds up the hurdell,
must be made small and slightly put into the clift of the forked bridge and
stick: which forked stick is made fast, and tide with two threedes to the
ground, under the back of the hurdell, as ye may easily perceive: and when ye
do tile or set it up, it shall be good with the crooked sticks end, to let
the bridge stand a handful hie from the ground, and put therein the end of
your crooked stick as tickle as ye can, that when any thing comes to take the
bait and treades it down, the hurdell falls suddenly on them.

The Basket fall.
THis Engine is called the Basket fall to take Kytes and Buzardes, it is set
and tylde in all things like unto the hurdle before, with all things
thereunto belonging. This Basket is commonly made nigh three fatham about in the
skirtes, and so hie that a man may well stand upright within him, The
Warriners do commonly in some places use (in Rabbet time) to set him in
plains, in warrens, and in parkes, whereas Connies are bred, and so they take
the Kyte and the Buzard, in this Basket.

The Iay trappe to set about corn fields, or orchards.
THis Engine is called a Iay trappe: it is made with a poale of seven or eight
inches abount, and seven or eight foot long or hie, set fast in the ground
about your wheat, or other fruit. There is made in the said poale two holes,
one beneath and the other above: in the nether most hole, there is a spring
wand set fast therein, and bowed unto the hole above, which hole ye shall put
through a string, tide fast to the end of the spring wand, with a knot
thereon, to stay it that it shall not slip back again. Also on the fore
side of the hole, ye must put a blunt pin of wood with a round end of seven
or eight inches long, set loosely in by the knot to stay the string: which
pin ye shall see cloven in the midst, and in that cleft they use to put a
cherie, or wheat ear, for a bait. Then shall ye spread finely, and lay the
string about on the said short pin, and your string to have a running noose.
Also the trappe of your stake must be made sharp that no foul shall light
thereon. And when any lights on the short pin to catch the bait, it falls
down, and the string thereon takes them by the legs. Thus ye may set many
such about your grounds, ye may make these trappes on boughs in trees to take
them at all times of the year if ye list.

The bow trappe for Rats or other Vermin.
The hole to tie the string of the bridge.
The clicket*
The lidde.
The hole to tie the string.
The hole to put through the string on the side.
The pin for the string.
The hole to carry it by.


THis engine or trappe with the bow, is made like a box, of a whole piece of
wood, with the lidde opening and shutting above, and this side is unbent, she
wing the left side and the lidde, and clicket, taken out: with holes and the
string for to set him, as more plainly shall be showed bent and set.

The bow trappe set.
The lidde.
The hole to tic the string.
The hole to carry it.


THis is side shows him bent, with the holes and pinnes how to bend him: as
the pin on the lidde is to hold the string bent. And also the pin set
above the clicket, is to order the string coming from the hole of the bridge
unto the clicket, which must stay up the bridge crossed and bayted, when he is
set. The pikes are set to hold fast when he is put dowe.

The Dragin trappe for Mice or Rattes.
THis engine or trappe is made of wood like the stock of a Bell, with two
holes at the ends, and therein is put through hair or cord double, and the
lidde put between, and so wreath the hair one way toward the lidde upon the
under hoope, with sharp wyars set round on the upper lidde, and a long bridge
under, falling within the nether hoope with a staff set fast above on the
stock, to tie the string and clicket, which must hold up the lidde: the upper
trappe lies with the mouth toward you, and the lower with the side toward
you.

The fall for Rats or other vermin.
THis engine is called the Ratte trappe or fall, which is made with a thick
bottom board, and two thinner bordes on both sides, and there is two staves
set fast through the bottom board, then the fall must be a thick board and
heavy withal, and at the ends thereof must your staves go through easily to
fall and rise, which two staves have holes above, which staves must also go
through the long bridge above, and at the holes ye must put in two pins to
hold up the said bridge. Then must ye set fast another staff in the midst
of the fall, with a latch in the top thereof loose set to fall up and down:
which latch must have a string, which string comes down to the bridge
beneath, with a small clicket fastened thereunto: and the bridge is fastened
beneath on the backeside or board, an inch from the bottom board, and so it is
done. Ye may make them to take water Rats in setting them in the water, in the
sides of your ponds and rivers, and bayted with carrion, but then ye must set
rows of short nails under the fall planke, and those will stay either ratte
or other fish, if they go through it, and put down the bridge.

The box trappe.
THis engine or trappe, is to take mice, or rattes, which is made of a thin
board of two inches and a half broad, and eight inches long, with a round bole
cut through the board in the one end, and a box ioynde and glued therein,
which box must have a hole above, and therein ye must put your crooked wyar
that must hold the batte within the box, and stayed above on the said box
with a cross wier. Then shall ye see the falling wyar tylde up with a string
or thread, and fastened unto a long clicket, which is staid with a crooked
wiar, that holds the bait within: the said clicket to be made of bone, for
that is better then wood except it be hard The seochin in the midst of the
box, is as it were, made for the bait. The four sharp wiars beneath the
box, are to hold the mouse or ratte when the wyar falls. The bar cross by
the box, is to stay the wyar, it shall not fall out, or fall too low. And the
end of the falling wyar is fastened with two cross bars, and riueted through
the board, and the end of the falling wyar also, so it is done.

The spring trappe for Mice.
THis engine or trappe, is to take mice, it is made with a board of two inches
thick, and in the one end, ye must boore so big holes as a mouse may
easily creep therein, so many as ye shall think good. Then must ye boore
against every of the said holes, four small hole with a piercer through the
said board. And all those holes next the end, ye shall put in strong threeds on
the upper holes of the board, so they may be set on the end of the spring, and
lie round in each great hole nie the brinke. Then must ye put a small threede
through the board double, and tie him on the spring stiff, to hold down the
spring: and those strings next the end, must bear no tight, but lie slack,
and as they gnawe a sunder the other thread to come to the bait, that takes
them by the belly, or neck: and ever as your inner threedes are bit a sunder,
ye may soon put or draw them through with a small wyar again. Also the other
ends of the springs must be fast set in holes, boared with a small wimble. Ye
may make the like to take Rattes, if ye make the holes square and bigger.

The dragin trappe with a great wyar.
THis engine or trappe, is to take Mice and Rats, it is made of two thin
bordes: the nether board is made round at the one end, and broad at the other
end, like a swallow tail. Then is there an other board set on edge in the
midst thereof, which board has a great wyar bowed and nailed thereon, as ye
may see: and the round bowght thereof must lie close on the round end of the
nether board. Then is there two short square bordes nailed and spreading
toward the great wyar. Also ye see at the top of the upright board, a long
mortis, wherein the wiar that must hold the clicket and bait, must go
through and there stay on another wyar, and the like is holden up with the
upper end thereof: which clicket, do stay on the top of the middle or
upright board, and so tide thereat with a threede which holds up the great
wyar, when that ye will set or tyle him: also the nether board is set round
with sharp wyars to hold mouce or ratte, and they must stand all within the
bowght of the great wyar, and it is done. This shows with the side toward
you, or the half thereof.

The Samson post for Rattes.
THis engine is called the Samson post, it is stayde up on three pieces, and
one bears the burden of all, with the help of the other two pieces, and made
as ye may see, with notches one to stay upon the other. These three sticks
which ye see, the broadest is called the bridge, and that is made broad and
thin and long withal, to reach under the planke or board a good way, and
bayted at the end thereof. The next is the cross bar which stays up the
planke or board, set in a nicke in the end of the bridge. The third is the
pillar or post set almost upright, which stays the bridge for falling to the
ground, which bridge must always stand from the ground an inch or more, that
he may the sooner fall when he is touched. Also ye may make them in length as
ye shall see cause for the breadth of your bordes or plankes, which must be
somewhat heavy always.

A Mill to take Mice.
THis engine or Mill, is made of ij. thin bords, and thicker in the midst, then
at the ends. The one half of the breadth is set in and joined within the other
half, and boared with a percer thorough the midst, and there is put through a
great wyar, or a small pin of wood, as ye may see, and that pin is put into
a thick board of four inch board, which board lies on some table or other board
from the ground half a yeard, or as ye shall think good: and set some pan
or pot with water under your mill, and bait your mill on both sides of each
leaf with some butter, mixed with otmele and sugar, and set all other things
away, and so shall ye drown threescore or more perhaps in a night, as I have
seen done, if there be store. Ye shall make your mill to turn very easily,
that the least weight thereon shall turn it. Also set your Mill an inch from
your square board that the pin is in, and bait your board with some otmeale,
to tice them to the mill. Thus may ye soon destroy them, if your house be
troubled with them never so much.

The square mouce trappe.
The mouce trap with a dish and a filboll.
THis engine or square mouce trappe, is made of two bordes, with a hole boared
thorough them both at the lower end, and a pin set set fast in the hole of
the nether board, and comes through the upper board: which upper board rises
and falls thereon. Then is there a string tide at the said pin with a long
bridge, and a pin on the upper board before with a short string and a clicket
tide thereunto, to stay up the upper board, and so it is done. This is a slight
way, and soon made for mice.

The other trappe, is with a dish or bowl, tylde up with a silboll, such as
they make to fill puddings, which is made with a thin stice of wood or such
like, with a tail of three inches long, and thereon is the bait tied. The
filboule his bowght is commonly one inch and more hie, to hold up the dish,
that the mouce touch not the dish before she come to the bait. Then when she
stirs the bait, the dish falls over the filboll, and the filboll within, and
the mouse also. Then ye may set a vessel of water, and let the mouse fall
therein. And thus it is used, and also quickly made.

To take the Buzard with three twigs limed.
THis engine is to take the Buzard in the spring of the year, as in March and
April, which is made thus: with three small rods growing on the end of some
bough, or three small twigs set on the end of a pretty big stick, and of a
shastment long. Ye must so place them that two twigges must lie always on the
ground, and the other stand or lie over. The stick must have a hole board in
the end as ye may see, and therein to fasten the mouse tail, or a threede with
a live mouse tide unto it. Also the twigs must be finely laid with lyme, and
in a morning laid on the ground, whereas ye shall see any Buzard nie, and as
soon as ye are departed, if she spy the mouse, ye shall see her come unto it,
and so taken, which is a very good way to take them in the spring, but at
other times not so good. Also the Buzard may well be taken in March and April
with setting three limerods, and bayfed in a plain with the liver of a conny
or such like.

The Moull trappe.
TO set this Moull trappe, where any Moull has cast, ye shall first place two
trestles over her casting, then tread it down with your foot softly, so long
and so broad as your fall is, or more. Then lay a poale cross over your
tresles, and there on hang your trappe over the trench. Then set a short stake
with the bridge therein, against the midst of your fall, as ye may see by the
figure: and set your stake so that the bridge end may lie and touch the earth
all over in the trench cross. For when the Moull does cast, she will put up
that end of the bridge which do cross the trench, and the other end will fall
on the clicket, and so the trappe falls, and the long nails set at both ends
of the fall, kills her, which way soever she comes or goes. Your fall must be
two foot long, and four inches broad, and four inches thick, for the
heavier the better it is. If it be too light, ye may remedy it as ye think
good. Also ye may set your long nails in a thencher or thin board, and
nail that to your fall at both ends, and let the next nails on both sides be
four inches from the bridge. Thus much for the moull trappe, ye may thus kill
them in gardens, woods, highways, or where ye shall think good without
any watching of them.

The following trappe.
THis engine is called, the following trappe for Mice, it is made with two
square bordes, the bottom and the fall board, with edge bordes of an inch hie,
round about the nether board, and set with two wing bordes of each side one,
with a cross lath over the midst to tie the string of the clicket. Which
string comes down to the bridge, plast with a cross bridge, and then is there
wreathed cord, or hair, under the lath above, and in that wreath, is put the
following staff, which as soon as the lidde do fall, that following staff
holds it down, and the falling board is nailed with two leathers, as ye may
see, to the lower board: and also the bridge is tide under unto the lower board
with a string. Thus much for the understanding of the following trappe.

The griping trappe made all of yrne, the lowest bar, and the ring or hoope,
with two clickets, and a turning pin, which ring is set fast to the sides of
the lowest bar,
MOre unto it is, a plate round in the midst, with five holes cut out, and a
sharp yrne pin in the midst, which plate has a spring on both sides under
the edge of the plate, and they stir not of joints up and down, as the
other does, but stands fast in touching the cross pin under the plate.

Here is more with two springs vntylde on both sides, in holding together the
two hoopes with nails.
NOw when the two springes are opened abroad and hold down, here it is to be
showed as he stands tyled with the two springes, down flat to the long
bar on both sides, which springes are made of good steel, and as soon as
the clickets which hold them down under the plate when both the outward
clickets be stirde. The two springes shuts them suddenly together and there is
in the two shutting hoopes sharp pinnes of yrne set one contrary to the other,
with holes made for those pinnes to go thorough and shut close together, that
it will hold any thing, if it be but a rush or straw, so close they shut
together. The two hoopes on both sides outward are made bigger and bigger
upward, to hold more close when they come together, as ye may perceive by the
hoopes within the springs, on both sides. Then there is at the ends of the long
bars two square holes, which holes are made to pin the long bar fast to
the ground, when ye set or tyle him in any place at your pleasure. His
clickets may so be made, that if any Otter, Fox, or other, do but tread
thereon he shall be soon taken. This ye must bnide a piece of meat in the
midst, and put it on the prick, and so bind it fast, and in pulling the
bait, the clickets will slip and the springes will rise, and so it will take
him. Thus much for this kind of trappe shall be sufficient to understand the
order thereof.

The square box trappe.
THis trappe is to take mice with any small square box, which box ye shall
set an end, and make the cover so he may fall of his own accord. Then tyle
him up with a small stick with a nicke, and set it in the midst to hold up
the cover. Then put cheese on the top of the stick within the box. So when
she bites the bait, the stick shakes, and the lidde falls down, and so the
mouce remaynes in the box. Thus ye may take many mice with small charge, and
soon done.

A spring for a Buzard or Dunkite.
THis engine is called a whippe spring, made and set to take Buzardes and
kites, and commonly set by a bush side, it may also be set in a plain, the
spring must be of some growing poale, or some rod set fast in the ground
where ye think best. There is also two stakes set half a yeard a sunder fast
in the ground, and that stake with a crook, must stand toward the looce of
the spring, and tild with a clicket, which clicket above must stay under the
crook: and the nether end there of must stand in the nicke of the end of the
bridge, which has a hook at the other end about the other stake, which bridge
must stand three inches from the ground, and thereon spread your line as ye
see, with a shoe buckle to slide soon. Then bait your bush side made some
what hollow that she can come no way to the batte but over the bridge: which
bait may be a Conies head, or some eats flesh. Thus much for the spring.

The hoope net for the Buzard, set against some bush in a plain or open
place.
THis engine called the hoope net, is made thus: ye must have a good big
rod of two inches about, and bow him round, so that he be a yeard hie in the
midst. Then tie his two ends with a small packthreed, within three quarters
and a half quarter, which bowed rod ye shall put on a piece of some hay
net, of an ell long, and the other side of the net, on the ground line. Then
set two pins fast in the ground, tide with packthreede to the two lower ends
of the bowed rod, which must turn easy, and not fly up. Then set before
your bridge, with hoolie and pin as ye may see, with a bowed stick, and a
clicket at the other end, which clicket is tide with a string reaching to the
side of the hoope, and the other part unto the spring rod, which rod must lie
on the ground, that when the bridge is put down, it pluckes the hoope over the
Buzarde and so holds it still do one, which hoope must be set up right against
some bush, and covered with some light fearne. And this is an excellent way in
winter to take them.

The order for setting and drawing the chafe net, for Crows and Sparrowes,
as hereafter shall be declared.
YE shall first make your trenches for your net, and staves, according to the
length of each thereof, and your said trenches and staves, to be without the
ends of your net. First piune down the back line of your net in the trench,
with four small hooked pinnes, so done, then measure three yeardes from the
further end of your net, and there knock down a stake, and tie your draging
line thereat. But set your stake so that your line, and net may fall straight
when he is drawn: then knock down in the two vppen ends of your staff
trenches, two hooked pins to hold your two staves, as ye may see in their
places. Then measure from the near end of your back line, five yeardes
toward your hand, and there knock down another stake, and fasten your pull
thereat, and draw your line through it, and pull your line so far as ye will
draw your net, and there you must knock down an other strong stake with a
hole through a foot above the ground, and there tie your drawing line to a
short stick to draw by when ye will, and tie your line so tight it may come
stiff in bending your net. Then bent it, and put your line in the notch of
your surther staff, and fasten it to the hooked pin in the trench, till ye
have bent the other staff in the near trench. Then gather up your net, and
lay it under your line in the trench, so done: cover your net and staves, with
some short straw or chafe, and cover your drawing line with fearne or such
like. Then bait your shrape nie the back line, with offall corn, or chafe
mixed with oats, seeds or such like: and let it so remain three or four
days, if ye will, without laying your net, so they will be the bolder to
come when your net is laid, and the more number will know, and not seave the
net. Also your staves for the Sparrowe net commonly must be twelve handfuls
long, or nigh four foot: and the casting staves for your Rooke net, may well
be a handful longer. The length between your staves and trenches for your
Sparrowe net must be two and twenty foot, or according to the length of your
net. And so for your Rooke net. Your back line may be a small line, but your
drawing line had need be strong, and somewhat bigger than a halpeny haltar, to
way down the net. Some do use to lay stones, and cloddes by, (if he draw
alone) to lay them on the out sides of the net, while he takes or killes the
Crows. Wherefore if these nets were used in each parish thorough England,
according to the statute: there would not be the tenth Crow alive, which is
now in this Realm, with in these few years, and as some do judge, the
Crows and birds do eat and spoil as much grain yearly, as would go nigh
to find all the people and cattle of the gretest shiere in England for one
year. For it is thought they devour and spoil yearly in and for each parish
in this Realm of this grain, viij. bushels. There is counted two and fifty
thousand parishes, so then there is two and fifty quarters of grain
destroyed yearly by Crows and such like, besides a number of other pultrie
about men's houses devoured by Crows and Kytes, and chiefly it is thought,
thorough the negligence of slothful husbands, which yearly toils and
labors to sow corn, and regardes not after the saving of the same, or yet to
wage or give to other (according to the statute) that would in winter and other
times be glad to take pain to take and destroy them. Thus I have declared
touching the destruction of corn by crows and such like, and the profit and
gain that would come thereby, in using the said nets in each parish
thorough the Realm which nets may well be used all the winter, and also from
March till Midsommer or somewhat after. Ye may also bait your shrape, with
flesh, or some carrion, and so ye may take Kytes, flesh Crows, Ravens, and
such like, when ye see cause. The laying your net is easle, but to make him
cast well, is all in the setting the tail pin, and placing the pully stake,
in drawing your upper line. Also in July and August ye may well use the lime
bush, and the call for Sparrowes.

A bait to kill Rattes and Mice.
TAke of Argentum sublimatum, of regal, and of Arsenicke, of each a dram, with
twenty figs of the fattest, one ounce of hasell nuts rleane pilde and
beaten, twelve walnuts pild, and half a pound of wheaten meal, also a pound
and two ounees of hogs grease, with a little honey beaten and kneaded with the
foresaid simples. First beat all into fine pouders, and then mire them all
together, so done, then make them into little pellets, and lay them in your
house where ye shall think good, for the Rattes to receive, and set water by
them. Taken out of Dutch. Or you may take sweet cream mixed with sugar, and
laid in shelts and strowe the fine powder of Arsenicke thereon.

Another compound for Rattes.
TAke sweet cream, and mix it well with sugar, then take the crummes of
white bread, with small pieces, and put therein, and make it somewhat thick.
Then make it sees, and stir it still till it be as thick as pappe, then
take it off the fire, and put therein of scraped cheese, and stir it all well
together: so dove, take the fine powder of regal, and powder of Arsenicke, and
put it therein, and stir it well all together: so ye may lay it on shelts, or
tyle stones, where ye shall think best: yet some herein, will but strew the
said pouders thereon, when they have laid it, and it will serve so very well,
or make the herb Pedelion in powder, and lay it on your meat, which herb is
the field clof.

An other way for the same.
TAke of fair cold water, and mix it with fine wheat flower, and then work
it well all together, and see there be no lumpes of flowar unbroken, then boil
it softly, and stir it always for burning: and when it waxes thick put in
sugar, then take it from the fire, and mix it with a little clarified honey,
and being thick like pappe, put therein as much as ye shall see good, of the
fine powder of Arsenicke, and then beat and stir it all well together, and
so when it is cold, ye may lay it where ye shall think good.

A bait for Mice.
TAke sweet butter, otmeale, and the pappe of a roasted apple, with a
quantity of wheat flower, and sugar. Then work these all together, and put
therein of the powder of Argentum sublimatum, so work it well together like a
paste, and so make it into small pellots, and lay it where ye think good.

Another to kill Mice. ^. Dioscorides.
TAke the powder of white Elleborie, otherwise called neesing powder, and mix
it with barley meal. Then put to honny, and make a paste thereof, then bake
it, or sees it, or fry it, and it will kill those Mice that eats thereof.

An other for Mice.
TAke of barley meal a quantity, and mix therewith clarified honey: then put
thereto a quantity of the powder finely beaten of Antimoneum, which is like
unto red glass, also put therein a littel clarified sheep suet, then beat
and work them all together, and make it in paste, and use it as the other
before rehearsed, ye may put of sugar therein if ye list: and here is to be
noted, that when ye shall lay these baytes aforesaid in your houses, ye must
then keep all other things from your Rattes and Mice, or else ye shall not
have your purpose of them sulfilled, which may be laid for Pies and Crows.

An other for Rats, Mice, Woolfes, or Foxes.
TAke the root of an herb called in Latin, Aconi^um: in English, Wolfes
bane: and make it into a fine powder, then stowe of that powder on flesh, or
other thing what ye will, and it shall kill them soon after they have taken it.

To take Ravens, Pyes, and Crows.
YE shall take of Nux vomica, so called, which ye shall buy at the
Apothecaries, they are gathered in the sea, and are as broad as a piece of
four pence, and a quarter of an inch thick or more. Those which are the
whitest within, are counted for the best, when ye will ocupie any, do grate,
or cut one small in thin slices, then beat it into powder if ye can, the
finer it is the better, and the sooner will make the Crows or Pyes to fall.
Put of the said powder into a piece of flesh, and so lay it abroad, and ye
shall soon see Pie, or Crow or Raven take it. Then must ye watch hun a while
after, and ye shall perceive him to fall down, then must ye follow to take
him. But if ye let him remain one quarter of an hour, he will recover
again, for this nux vomica it does but make them drunk, and dyzie for a time.
The Kyte I have not seen taken, for he will cast it up again.

The spring net for Buzard or other kind of foul.
THis spring net or hoope net, is to take the Buzarde on the plain, or to take
Crows, Pyes, or other small birds with their natural baits, as the worm
for the Blackbird, and the Nytingale: it may be made with a hoope of wood, or
of yrne, or steel wyar, ye must bring the ends together forty as ye shall
think good. Then lap those ends with horse hair, or packth^eed, so often about
the ends as ye see good: then put a piune of yrne, or of wood, between the
said hair or line. Then turn and twist the hair as ye do for a mouce
trappe, so stiff as ye shall see cause, so knock that yrne pin into the
ground where ye will set your net. Then take a small string that must be tide
in the midst of ye hoope, which string must have a knot at the end, so put it
under the wreath of hair, and through a hole in a pin of wood set in the
ground before the yrne pin, and let the knot of the same string, rest in the
said hole. Then fill the said hole with an other short pin of wood made
blunt, putting it slight into the hole, to stay the knot of the string that
keeps down the net, and on that short pin, make a hole, or slit, and put a
thorn with a bait thereon: and when any thing do touch the bait, the short
pin will soon fall, and the string slips through the hole, and so the net
turns suddenly upon the foul. Thus much for ordering this kind of net.


