The ROSARIE of our Lady.

Otherwise called our Ladies PSALTER.

With other godly exercises mentioned in the Preface.

ANTVERPIAE, Apud Ioannem Keerbergium. ANNO M. D. C.

the Virgin and Child flanked by adoring angels and saints

THE PREFACE, Containing diverse Annotations concerning the Rosarie of our
Lady: and the other Exercises here following: With the causes of composing
and printing the same, in this form; and certain commodities ensuing hereof.
FOR so much (benign Catholic reader) as every thing is better understood,
by the explication of his proper, or usual name, it is first of al to be noted,
that the name of ROSARIE (which properly signifies the place where roses do
grovve, or be reserved) is here used for the form of prayer, which the
renowned religious father S. Dominicke, about the year of our Lord 1200 (or
as some think, a Religious Priest called Peter of Amiens in Picardie, above an
hundred years before) instituted, of certain Pater nosters, Aues and Credes,
together with certain principal Mysteries to be meditated, in honor of our
blessed Lady, the virgin MARIE, framed by the number of five, like to a Rose,
that has five leaves: Whereof it is called the ROSARIE OF OUR LADY.

Which name of Rosarie is used sometimes largely, and sometimes strictly, Taken
largely it contains fifteen Decades or Tennes (that is to say, fifteen
times one Pater noster with ten Aues) and three Credes; and has fifteen
Mysteries applied thereunto, that is, to every Decade one Mystery. And the
same is also called OUR LADIES PSALTER, because it has so many Aues, or
salutations of our Lady, as there be Psalms in the Psalter of David, which
are an hundred and fifty. But strictly taken (as it is commonly meant, when
one is appointed for penance, or for pardon, or for other like cause to say a
Rosarie) it contains only five Decades, to wit, five Pater nosters and
fifty Aues, with one Creed. So that in the great Rosarie (or Lady Psalter) be
contained three particular Rosaries. And these three are resembled to three
sorts of Roses, white, read, and damask. For as these three colors do
signify, joy, pain, and glory: so these three Rosaries do contain three
sorts of Mysteries to be meditated, joyful, sorrowful and glorious.

This form of praying, the first institutor of the Rosarie, did so accommodate
to the use of al faithful persons, as it might be both a necessary help to
unlearned people, and also a most profitable exercise to the most learned in the
world: as well for the better avoiding of idle, and hurtful distractions in the
often repetition of the same prayers, as also for the more fruitful eleuating
of the mind, meditating upon the chiefest Mysteries of our faith, which
concern our Lord and Redemer his coming into this world, and his going our of
the same, and the happy effects of both.

For touching his coming into this world (which was so long and earnestly
desired and expected) in the first Rosarie are to be meditated these five
joyful Mysteries. First, how the Archangel Gabriel declared to the immaculate
virgin MARIE, that she should conceive and bear the Son of God. Secondly,
how the same sacred Virgin visited her cosine Elizabeth.

Thirdly, the Nativity of our Lord, with his Circumcision, and adoration by
the Sages. Fourthly, the Purification of the unspotted virgin mother, and
Presentatio^ of our Lord in the Temple. Fifthly, the finding of our Lord in the
same Temple, when at the age of twelve years, he had been lost three days.
Likewise in the second Rosarie, are to be meditated five sorrowful Mysteries
pertaining to our Saviors going forth of this world, by his most painful
Passion, and death, which are these. First, his great agony, and pensive
prayer in the garden. Secondly, his cruel whipping, with other many extreme
and vile injuries. Thirdly, his crovvning with thorns, and condemnation to
death. Fourthly, his carrying of his own Cross. Fifthly, his crucifying, and
death thereupon. Finally concerning the effects of his coming into this world,
and of his going forth of it again, in the third Rosarie are to be meditated
these five glorious Mysteries. First, the Resurrection of our Lord. Secondly,
his Ascension into heaven. Thirdly, the coming of the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, the
blessed death and Assumption of our Sovereign Lady in soul and body. And
fifthly, her Coronation and singular dignity, above al other Saints and
servants of God.

Thus much in general is evident by the tradition, and continual practice of al
Catholic nations, for the space of four or five hundred years at least: that
is, since the time of S. Dominicke, or before. And of the same antiquity and
authority is the use of Beads, which were inverted for the better observing
of the prescribed number of prayers, in saying the whole Rosarie. And
considering, that no man can well meditate upon any Mystery, except he both
particularly know, and perfectly remember, the special points thereof, we can
nor doubt, but that Christian people vere both taught the particular points of
all the above mentioned fiftene Mysteries, and also had some form or order
prescribed, vvherby they might the better remember the same points, every one
in his place. Which instructions being, not commonly extant, and the use of
Beads also inhibited, and made dangerous to Catholics, living amongst
Heretics in this age; for remedy of both these defects, a certain Catholic
Priest, and prisoner for the Catholic Religion, in the tower of London and
there also deprived both of books and Beads, framed for him self a form of
meditation in saying the Rosarie, by noting so many particular points in
every one of the fiftene Mysteries, that each Mystery serving his own decade,
every Pater noster, Aue and Creed should have their competent and particular
points allotted. Whereby as well the just number of prayers, may without beads
be exactly observed, as also sufficient and apt matter be redely remembered, and
the mind more elevated to God, and idle distractions better avoided.

This private Exercise, albeit very imperfect (as not purposed for the print,
but rudely writre^, and given to a private friend) yet did so content and please
some well disposed persons, that presently, without knowledge of the author, they
caused it to be printed, and so made common to many. Whereby at last it came
into the hands of one, that knew better the authors meaning. who finding many
faults and defects in the edition, thought good to correct and a mend the
same, and adorning it with Images to set it forth anew, as well to satisfy the
good desires of such as first did print it, as also for the like profit to
others, who either had it not, or understood not the use thereof before.

And for all their sakes has also added hereunto, the Corone of the same most
facred virgin, first instituted by the aforesaid religious father S. Dominike,
or by some of his folovvers, and lately reduced into the like form, by the
same author, and now first printed with the like pictures. For the better
understanding of the name, use, and fruit vvherof, it is to be noted, that it
is called the CORONE, or Crown of our Lady, because it contains so many
AVES, or salutations of the B. Virgin, as she is supposed to have lived years
in this world, before she received her Crown in heaven, which are
threescore and three. And it is divided into seven parts, Every part
containing one Pater noster and ten Aues, saving the last, which has one
Pater noster and only three Aues, with a Creed in the end. In saying of which
Corone, certain particular points of the singular privileges, virtues, and
dignities of the same B. virgin, grounded upon the testimony of hohe
Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, are so accommodated to every Pater noster,
Aue, and Creed, in historical order, from before her Conception unto her most
glorious Coronation, that as nere as well may be observed, in the first part
are proposed those things to be meditated, that belong to the preparation made
for her coming, before she was borne. In the second, such as pertain to her
birth and education. In the third, how she cooperated with the B. Trinity, in
Christ's incarnation and natiuite. In the fourth, her participation with him,
both in joys and afflictions, most part of his life in this world. In the
fifth her singular compassion in the time of his Passion, and death. In the
sixth, the rest of her life, with her death and assumption. And in the seventh
and last part, her most glorious Coronation, and exaltation above al Saints
and Angels, next to her son above al created persons.

And because Christ's Crown and glory is above al, here is added also an other
godly exercise called the CORONE OF OUR LORD. Which albeit in dignity is
first and chiefest, yet here it is placed in order of the time in which it was
instituted, by a certain holy Heremite in monte Camaldulensi, in the year of
our Lord 1515. allowed and priuileged with indulgences by Leo the tenth, and
others his successors. This Crown consists of thirty and three Pater
nosters (according to the number of years, which our Savior lived in this
world) and four Aues with one Creed. And so is divided into four parts, each
part co^taining ten Pater nosters, and one Aue, saving the last which has
but three Pater nosters, and one Aue, with the Creed in the end. And to these
prayers are likewise applied certain Articles or points, of our Saviors acts
and sufferings, to be meditated in this order. In the first part, of his coming
into this world. In the second, of his conversation amongst men for their
salvation. In the third, of his going forth of the world, by his bitter Passion
and death. And in the fourth part, of his most glorious victory and Exaltation.

Finally here is also added an other brief ROSARIE of fiftene Pater nosters,
with so many Aues, and one Creed, in memory of seven principal sorrows and
eight joys of our B. Lady. Which Rosarie who so ever says daily, shall in the
space of a year, recite so many Pater nosters, and Aues, as our Savior
sustained wounds for us in one day, as is said to be reveled to S. Brigit.

And thus much might suffice for this Preface, touching the contents, and
occasion of printing this little book, but that some may perhaps move a doubt
or two against this manner of praying, which I thought necessary here to solue
before I conclude.

The first doubt is, upon what authority or godly example this numbering of
prayers is grounded.

To which I answer, That we have for this, not only the practice of the whole
Church of later time, that is, of four or five hundred years (which is a
sufficient warrant to al Catholics, for that so universal a practice of the
whole Church, can not be erroneous (as S. Augustine Proves in his exposition of
the. 118. Psalm. v. 43. and very often against the Donatists) but also the
confirmation of holy Scriptures, and examples of Christ him self, and of
diverse Saints even from the primitive Church to our time. As for example, we
read in the 6. chap. of Isay, and in the 4. of the Apocalypse, that the Angels
and other Saints, cease not day nor night to repete continually one thing,
saying: HOLY, HOLY, HOLY Lord God of Hosts. Which form of praising God.
the Church militant in the self same words observes in the Canticle TE DBVM,
and in the Preface of the daily Sacrifice. Likewise the Royal prophet David
offered up his holy prayers, and praises to God seven times every day, as him
self testifies in the 118. Psalm. And the whole Church of Christ does the
same, in the seven Canonical hours. Also our B. Savior in the garden of
Gethsemani, the night before his death repeted the same prayer three times, as
the Eua^gelists do exactly note. And (in the 18. of S. Luke) he commands,
that we continue and persevere in prayers. Which the vulerned (especially) can
not do, but by often repeting the same prayers. S. Barthlemew the Apostle,
agreably to his Masters instructions, prayed every day an hundred times (as
witnesses Abdias) The same did St. Macha^us in Egypt, many years together
(as Zozomenus records lib. 6. cap. 29) And St Paul the Heremit recited every
day three hundred prayers (as is written in his life). For observing of which
number, he put so many little stones in his bosom and taking them forth one by
one after every prayer, when al were so removed, he knew thereby that his
task of prayers was accomplished. Even as Catholic people do now by their
beads, and may do by observing the particular points of the Mysteries, set
down in this book, and that without book (after some diligent practice) or
by any other like means.

An other doubt is. How this manner of praying, with meditation, upon such
Mysteries, as are not expressed by the words of the prayers, may help
attention, or produce the fruit of prayer, and not rather hinder the same, by
leading the mind of purpose into other cogitations, different from the proper
and literal sense of the words? For solution hereof it is to be noted, that in
vocal prayer there be three sorts of attention that may be observed, and three
fruits which may be reaped (as the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas teaches 2. 2.
q. 83. a. 13.) One attention is to pronounce the words perfectly, and
distinctly. An other is to attend to the sense of the same words, either
literal or spiritual. The third attention is, to remembrer the cause why we
pray, or the thing we pray for, which ought ever to be the glory of God, the
salvation of our own and other souls, or some other good thing directed
thereunto. And the first effect of prayer is, to merit: the second, to obtain
that which is duly requested; and the third is a spiritual refection of the
mind. So then I answer to the doubt proposed: that to all the three effects it
is necessary, that we intend and purpose to have the first attention. but if
afterward of frailrie the mind be carried away, the fruit of that prayer is
not therefore lost, or frustrat, but has his effect, by virtue of the former
intention and purpose. And the same is to be said of the second attention, if
one (that understands the language, in which he prays) does purpose to
mark the sense of the words, and yet afterward fails to perform it. But
between this second, and the first attention this is the difference, that
albeit this second is profitable, yet it is not so necessary as the first,
neither in the beginning nor in the rest of the prayer. For those that pray in
a tongue they understand not, can not have this attention, and yet their prayer
is profitable, and fruitful, by the universal judgment of al Doctors. The
third attention, by which the mind is lifted up to God, and good spiritual
desires and cogitations, is not only necessary in the beginning (like as the
first attention is) but also most necessary of all the three, to be kept still
without interruption, in respect of the third effect. And this the vulerned may
also have, praying in an unknown tongue. And it sometimes so abounds, that
the mind forgets al other things; as S. Thomas, and before him S. Hugo de
Victore, and others do teach. And in this case it supplieth also the defects,
which often happen in the other two attentions, as well in those vocal prayers
which we are bound unto, by precept of the Church, or other obligation (so
there be no notable defect in reciting the words) as in other prayers, which
we are not bound to say. And finally this attention perfecteth, so much as can
be in this transitory life, the spiritual repast of the faithful soul: which
attention ceassing, necessarily the refection of the mind therewith also
vanishes, but yet the other two effects do not therefore cease, but remain
still. For not with standing the mind be carried, by humane frailty without
voluntary consent, to think upon base and terrestrial things, yet the prayer
may both merit increase of grace, and obtain the things that be asked. And
much less is every euagation of mind in prayer to be reputed a sin, but that
only which we either volunrarily admit or willingly desire, of some vain or
hurtful thing. And so you see the manner of praying proposed in this book does
not hinder due attention, as the objection presupposes, but greatly helps
the same, and brings also other spiritual commodities. Of which some may be
here briefly noted.

For first, besides that the mind is hereby directed to the best and most
necessary attention required in prayer, such also as be not so well instructed
already, may by this form of saying the Rosaries and Corones here ensuing,
learn many particular, and most necessary points of Christian doctrine: which
being once known, can not but move a true Christian heart to some, more or
less, cogitation and meditation of so great and singular benefits, bestovved
upon us by Almighty God. And the more one shall meditate upon the same, the
more also shall his knowledge be still increased. So knowledge and meditation do
mutually help and increase each other, but one without the other avails
little. For as meditation without knowledge is erroneous: so knowledge
without meditation is dry and fruitles. But both together vvil easily
inkindle the soul with the love of God, and feed it with a spititual
refection, and stir up and inflame the desire to al possible endeavor for the
increase of Gods glory, and health of their own and other men's souls.
Likewise out of this variety, and copy of divine Mysteries and benefits,
the well disposed may at al times and occasions, choose sufficient and fit
points to meditate upon in all their prayers vocal or mental. And finally, by
diligent vewing and beholding the pictures here placed, every one may better
conceive and consider the Mysteries by them represented, and be perhaps more
moved to devotion by sight thereof, then by only reading. If any therefore will
use this exercise, no doubt but for revvard of their pains, they shall reap
hereby no small fruit and increase of piety. You at least (my dearly beloved
in our Lord Jesus Christ) who have not better means to further your devotions
vvithal, use this help. And vouchsafe of your charity to commend al us, (who
to do you good have bestovved labor and cost, in setting forth this little
work) amongst your other dear friends, unto our B. Lord, and to his B.
mother our Lady, to our propre Angels, and special Patrons, and the whole
Court of heaven, in your svveete devotions. Amen. 25. of March. 1590.

Your own al and ever in Christ, T. VV. P.

THE FIRST ROSARIE OF OUR LADIES PSALTER; resembled to a white Rose, containing
five joyful Mysteries.
In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

cross encircled by five roses

WHat soever thou do (o my soul) in word or in work, do al in the name of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and to the glory of God. For God forbid I should
glory, saving in the CROSS of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

1. Mysterium gaudiosum.
the annunciation and incarnation 1. PATER NOSTER

The Annunciation, and Incarnation of Christ.
THe most Blessed Trinity, one God Almighty, most just and most merciful,
forseeing al makind fallen from most happy estate (wherein he was created) into
infinite misery and calamity; As to have lost original justice, grace,
virtues, and most excellent gifts, and qualities, by transgressing Gods
commandment: And contrariwise to have incurred, sin, death, and eternal
damnation: And that he could not be restored to his former estate, by the work
or virtue, of any man, or Angel, or any other pure creature: of his infinite
love (which is most agreeable to his Divine goodness) decreed defore al worlds,
that the Son of God (the second Person of the same most Holy Trinity)
should take man's nature, and being made man should pay our ransom by his death
on the Cross. And so not only in general take away the sin of the world, but
also in particular justify, sanctify, and bring al those, to whom this most
sovereign means is rightly applied, to everlasting life, for which we were
first created.

1. Aue Maria.
Our merciful Lord promised this MEDIATOR, immediately after the fall of Ada^
saying: that the seed of a woman should crusse in pieces, the serpents head.

2. Aue Maria.
Our heavenly Father renewed the same promise to the holy Patriarch Abraham,
saying: In thy seed al nations shall be blessed.

3. Aue Maria.
Almighty God eftsoon iterated the same promise, to king David saying: of the
fruit of thy Ioynes, I will set upon thy seat. And establish his kingdom for
evermore.

4. Aue Maria.
About 4000. years from the creation of the world, the Archangel Gabriel being
sent from God, to the most pure virgin Marie, saluteth her: HAYLE FVL OF GRACE,
OUR LORD IS WITH THEE; BLESSED ART THOU AMONG WOMEN.

5. Aue Maria.
The most humble virgin is trubled with this speech, thinking with her self,
what manner of salutation this may be! For she expected nothing less, then to
hear herself so highly praised.

6. Aue Maria.
Fear not MARIE, says the Angel: for thou have found grace with God. Behold
thou shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his name JESUS,

7. Aue Maria.
She inquiereth: How (or by what means) shall this be done, for I know not
man? Having before this vowed perpetual virginity.

8. Aue Maria.
The Angel answers: the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Hieghest shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore, that which of thee shall be borne Holy
shall be called the Son of God.

9. Aue Maria.
Behold Elizabeth thy cousin, she also has conceived a son, in her old age,
and this month is the fixed to her that is called barren. For there shall not be
any thing impossible with God.

10. Aue Maria.
The holy virgin answers: Behold the ha^dmaide of our Lord, be it done to me
according to thy word. And immediately THE WORD IS MADE FLESH, and dwells with
us; God and man in one Divine Person.

2. Mysterium gaudiosum.
Mary visits St. Elizabeth 2. PATER NOSTER.

Our blessed Lady visits St. Elizabeth.
THE most humble virgin, who even now, received an Embassage from heaven, by
an Archangel sent from God: who by the same Archangel is denounced full of
grace: who has now conceived in her virginal womb, the Only Son of God,
Christ our Lord, Redemer of the world: who is now made the mother of God,
and Queen of al creatures: by how much she is higher exalted, so much the
more lowly she be haueth her self; judging it a dutiful office for her
self, the younger, to visit her aged Cousin Elizabeth, now six months gone
with child. Whereupon, neither pretending her own preeminent dignity, nor
disdayning the mean estate of her cousin, nor terrified with the length or
sharpnes of the journey, nor hindered with what other impediment soever,
which might stay her in this purpose, addressing her self to travel al on
foot, goes with speed into the hil-countrie, into a city of Judah, called
Hebron. Admire therefore (my soul) as well the humility as magnanimity of the
virgin, mother of God. Who thought no office to base nor hard, for her to
undertake that perteyneth to piety.

1. Aue Maria.
The blessed virgin coming to the city, goes into Zacharies house, saluteth
her cousin Elizabeth, congratulating her conception of a Son, by Gods special
favor.

2. Aue Maria.
As Elizabeth hears the salutation of the sacred virgin, the infant leapeth
in her womb for joy. And is withal sanctified in his mothers womb.

3. Aue Maria.
And Elizabeth replenished also with the Holy Ghost, cries out with a loud
voice, saying: BLESSED ART THOU AMONG WOMEN, AND BLESSED IS THE FRVIT OF THY
WOMB.

4. Aue Maria.
And further considering the worthiness of the humble virgin, and her own
means, admiring says: Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord does
come unto me!

5. Aue Maria.
The virgin mother prophecieth, and praises God with a Canticle, saying: MY
SOUL DOES MAGNIFY OUR LORD. AND MY SPIRIT HAS REIOICED, IN GOD MY SAVIOVR.

Au^ Maria.
Eliza^eths time being come to be delivered, she bareth a son, whereof her
neighbors and kinssolke hearing come and co^gratulate the same with her

7. Aue Maria.
The eight day the child is circumcised, many desiring to have him called
Zachary, after his father; his mother would have him called JOHN At last his
father writes, JOHN IS HIS NAME.

8. Aue Maria.
And forthwith Zacharies mouth is opened (who had been ten months dumme,
because he did not believe the Angels words, that his wife should bear a
son) and he prophecieth, saying: BLESSED BE OUR LORD GOD OF ISRAEL.

9. Aue Maria.
And all that hear these things admire in their hearts, saying: What an one,
trow ye, shall this child be! For the hand of our Lord was with him.

10. Aue Maria.
Our B. Lady taking leave of her cosine, returns toward Nazareth the next
day after the circumcision of the child. as it seems, for the text says; She
tarried with Elizabeth about three months. And this day the Church
celebrateth the Visitation of our Lady.

3. Mys terium gaudiosum.
the Nativity 3. PATER NOSTER.

The Natiuitate of our Lord.
AFter the holy virgin returned to Nazareth, from visiting her cousin, her
husband Joseph perceiving her to be with child, is much trubled in mind, and
doubtful what to do. For on one side he fears the law, if he conceal, that
his wives conceiving is not by him: On the other side, he knows the virgin,
his spouse, to be of so godly, chaste, pure, and immaculate life, that he dare
not accuse her, nor bring her into any (be it never so small) suspicion. She in
the mean time being most humble, and most modest, reueleth not, no not to her
most dear husband, this so great a Mystery, wrought in her by the power of
God. In fine Joseph being just, and holy, to avoid perplexity, determines
secretly to leave her: But while he thus thinks, behold an Angel of our Lord
appears to him in sleep, saying: Joseph son of David, Fear not to tarry
with Marie thy wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.
And she shall bring forth a Son: And thou shall call his name JESUS. For he
shall save his people from their sins.

1. Aue Maria.
By commandment of Caesar Augustus, that al should be enrolled, every one in
the place whence they were descended: Joseph with his spouse goes to Bethlee^,
a city of David, because they were of his house and family.

2. Aue Maria.
There by reason of their poverty, and great concurse of people, not finding
row me in any Inn, they take a poor lodging (as they may) in a stable.

3. Aue Maria.
In this place our Lord and Savior, King of al kings, the Son of God is
borne, wrapped in clothes, and laid in a manger by an ox and an ass, and is
warmed by their breaths.

4. Aue Maria.
Forth with an Angel appearing to Shepherds says to them: Behold, this day
is borne to you a SAVIOVR, which is Christ our lord in the city of David, and
you shall find him swadled in clothes, and laid in a manger.

5. Aue Maria.
And suddenly, there was with the Angel an heavenly army, praising God, and
singing: GLORY IN THE HIGHEST TO GOD: and in earth peace to men of good will.

6. Aue Maria.
Then say the shepherds: Let us go to Bethlehe^, and see this thing which God
has done, and showed to us. And going with speed, they find the child laid
in a manger, and so returning glorify God.

7. Aue Maria.
The eight day the child is circumcised, and his name called IES us: that is
SAVIOVR, according as the Angel had before signified to the virgin mother, and
to Joseph his supposed father.

8. Aue Maria.
Three Sages (Kings or Princes) knowing by the apparition of a glorious star,
that the king of Jews (their expected MESSIAH) is borne, come from the Last to
Jerusalem, to adore him.

9. Aue Maria.
King Herod and al Jerusalem with him are trubled, hearing these news: yet
there the Sages learn of the hiegh Priests, that Christ sho^uld be borne in
Bethlehem.

10. Aue Maria.
The Sages going toward Bethlehe^ see the star again, and it leads them
even to the house, where they find the child, and adore him; every one
offering three gifts; Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

4. Mysterium gaudiosum.
the presentation of Christ at the temple 4. PATER NOSTER.

The Purification of our Lady, and Presentation of our Lord.
KIng Herod expects the return of the Sages, whom he had willed, to seek
diligently for the child, and when they should find him, to inform him
thereof, that he also might go and adore the same newborn king (for so he
pretended, meaning in deed to murder Christ in the cradle) but God warned the
Sages by an Angel in their sleep, not to return to Herod; and so they teturne
into their country by an other way. In the mean time, the immaculate virgin
(needing no purification, nor being bound to that ceremony of the Law, yet
vvilling to observe the custom of other women) prepares for her journey, as
also to make her oblation, according to, yea and above the same law, a pare of
turtles and two pigeons; for albeit a pare of either of both sorts vvou^d
have suffised for that purpose: yet she offers of each sort a pair: And that
not without Mystery, the turtles being solitary birds, signifiing the
secret sighs and cries of the servants of God: and the pigeons being sociable,
signifying the public prayers of the whole Church. Both which she offers
now in heaven, as Patroness of al.

1. Aue Maria.
The virgin mother goes up to Jerusalem, carrying thither her son, with her
oblation, Joseph her husband, and supposed father of JESUS, accompaining and
assisting her.

2. Aue Maria.
The sacred virgin presents her Son to God in the Temple, the fourtith day
after his birth.

3. Aue Maria.
Simeon, a just and religious old man, had received an answer of the Holy
Ghost, that he should not die, til he had first seen the ANOINTED of our Lord,
that is, CHRIST the expected MESSIAH.

4. Aue Maria.
This holy old man Simeon (by the particular providence of God) is present in
the Temple, when the child JESUS is brought thither by his parents to be
presented.

5. Aue Maria.
The venerable old man seeing the child JESUS, takes him by and by into his
arms, and his heart full of joy rejoices in spirit.

6. Aue Maria.
So soon as he can speak for joy, he blesses God, saying: NOW THOU DO
DIMISSE THY SERVANT, O^ LORD, ACCORDING TO THY WORD, IN PEACE. BECAUSE MINE
EYES HAVE SEEN THY SALVATION.

7. Aue Maria.
The parents admiring the things that are sproke^ concerning the child, Simeon
blesses them, and says to the mother: Behold this child is set, unto the
ruin, and unto the Resurrection, of many in Israel.

8. Aue Maria.
And he says moreover to the mother; A sword shall pearce thyn own soul;
that is, grief and compassion of this thy sons Passion, shall be to thee as
death it self, or, as a svvorde passing through thy heart.

9. Aue Maria.
An ancient religious widow called Anne, who remained night and day in the
Temple, serving God by fastings and prayers, does also prophecy of this
child, to all that expect the redemption of Israel.

10. Aue Maria.
After they have done al things according to the law, they return homewards
in peace and safety, God not suffering Herod to suspect, that this is the
child, whom he fears, and seeks to destroy.

5. Mysterium gaudiosum.
Mary finds Jesus at the temple 5. PATER NOSTER

The finding of our Savior, when he had been three days lost.
KIng Herod perceiving, that he is deluded by the Sages, is exceeding angry,
and sending a troop of soldiars, murdereth all the men children, that are in
Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof; from two years old and under, To the
number of fourteen thousand: who al, by special privilege receive crowns
of Martyrdom. In the mean time Joseph admonished by an Angel, taking the
child and his mother, and parting the same night, flees into Aepypt: and so is
fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias: Our Lord ascends upon a light cloud (Christ
being carried by his mother a virgin) and shall enter into Egypt: and the Idols
of Egypt shall be overthrown before his face, and the heart of Egypt shall
languish; verified by the falling down of Idols, whilst Christ is in Egypt,
which was about the space of six years. Then Herod dying, they return into
the land of Israel. But hearing that Archelaus reigns in lurie, for Herod his
father, they fear to go thither; and Joseph being so warned in sle^epe, they
repair into the quarters of Galilee, and dwell in Nazareth, vvherof our
Savior is called JESUS of Nazareth.

1. Aue Maria.
JESUS being twelve years old, according to their custom at the solemn day
of Pasch, he and his parents go up unto Jerusalem, to keep there the Feast.

2. Aue Maria.
The days of the Feast being expired, the child JESUS remains in Jerusalem,
his parents returning homewards not knowing of his abode.

3. Aue Maria.
They supposing him to be in the company, go a days journey without him and
at night they seek him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance, but find him
not.

4. Aue Maria.
The next day they return very sorrowful and lamenting, toward Jerusalem to
seek him there.

5. Aue Maria.
After three days they find him in the Temple, sitting in the mids of the
Doctors, hearing them and asking them questions.

6. Aue Maria.
Al are astonished that hear the child speak, as well at his wisdom in
demanding, as in his answers.

7. Aue Maria.
His mother says to him: Son, why have thou so done to us! Behold, thy
father and I sorowing did seek thee.

8. Aue Maria.
He says to them: What is it that you sought me? did you not know that I must
be about those things which are my fathers affairs?

9. Aue Maria.
He then goes down with them to Nazareth, and is subject to them; Dwelling
there together the greatest patt of his life in this world.

10. Aue Maria.
The virgin mother observes and keeps in her heart all the doings, and sayings
of our Savior; diligently meditating thereupon.

Caepit JESUS facere et decere.
Jesus preaching to a crowd CREDO IN DEVM PATREM.

THe eternal Son of God, the increated wisdom of the Father, our Lord and
Savior, having taken upon him the form of a servant, esteemed vulgarly a
carpenter, and a carpenters son and as altogether unlearned, in the thirtith
year of his age, bidding his mother farewell, being now to dwell no more in her
family, goes to John the Baptist, and is baptized of him in Jordan. And
thence he departs presently into the desert, there fasteth (not eating nor
drinking any thing at al) forty days and forty nights, then is tempted by
the Devil, and va^quisheth him. Afterward he manifests him self to the
world; preaches penance; calls disciples; And by good life, heavenly
doctrine and miracles, draws unto him i^numerable folowers; He institeth the
Sacrament of Baptism, for the Remission of sins (whereof John's Baptism was
only a figure) teaches the perfection of justice, namely of Alms deeds,
Praying and Fasting. For which albeit the High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees,
Saducees, Herodians, and the rest of the wicked, do diverse ways persecute him,
yet he never thelesse perseuereth doing good to al; confuting their errors,
reproving their sins, soluing their malicious and captious questions;
derecting their calu^niations, even the secret cogitations of their hearts; and
to avoid their vilanous purposes seeking to murder him, he flies often from
them, and that sometimes miraculously. Finally having in this manner conuersed
in the world, three years and something more (having also lately in his
Transfiguratio^, showed to certain of his Apostles, some glimse of his glory)
at last he enters into Jerusalem riding upon an ass colt, his disciples and
the people triumphing, spreading their garments, and strawing boughs of Palms
and other trees in the way, receive him as their king, with joyful
acclamations; the children also crying in the Temple: HOSANNA TO THE SON OF
DAVID. Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord! HOSANNA in the
hieghest! O King of Israel!

The second Rosarie of our Ladies Psalter: resembled to a red rose:
containing five sorrowful Mysteries.
In nomine Patris, and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Jesus crucified encircled by five roses

GOD forbid that I should glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord JESUS
Christ: who humbled him self, made obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross.

1. Mys terium dolorosum.
Jesus prays in Gethsemane while his apostles sleep 1. PATER NOSTER.

Our Saviors Agony in the garden of Gethsemanie.
Our Lord and Savior the night before his passion, when he had eaten the
Paschal lamb with his twelve Apostles, taking water and a towel was heth al
their feet. And then exhorting them to humility, and purity of life, he
instituteth and administreth the most blessed Sacrament, and Sacrifice of his
own body and blood, in the forms of bread and wine. And withal instituting
the Holy Sacrament of Orders, co^ma^deth his Apostles (for them selves and
successors) to do the same, that is, to consecrate and offer in Sacrifice, his
body and blood (being, according to the order of Melchi sedech, the Sacrifice
of the new Testament) til he come again to judge the world. Judas then goes
out. And our Lord instructs, exhorts and comforts the rest, promises
them the Holy Ghost, prays his Father for all the elect. And so goes with
the eleven Apostles into the garden of Gethsemani. which place Judas also knew,
for that our Lord used to go often thither with his disciples.

1. Aue Maria.
Our lord entering into the garden with his disciples, said to them: Sit you
here, whilst I go yonder and pray.

2. Aue Maria.
JESUS taking Peter, James and John, a little further, beginning to wax
sorrowful and sad, says to them: My soul is sorrowful even to death: abide here,
and watch with me.

3. Aue Maria.
And parting also from these three a stones cast, he prays saying: My FATHER
if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me. but yet not my will, but
thine be done.

4. Aue Maria.
JESUS comes to his disciples, and finding them asleep, says to Peter: Even
so? Simon sleep thou? could thou not watch one hour with me? watch ye and
pray, that ye enter not into tentation.

5. Aue Maria.
He goes from them again, and prays as before: MY FATHER if it be possible,
take this chalice from me. yet not as I will, but as thou will.

6. Aue Maria.
He comes again and finds them sleeping: for their eyes were very heavy,
and they wist not what they should answer him. Neither says he any thing to
them

7. Aue Maria.
Leaving them he goes again, and prays the third time, the self same
prayer: MY FATHER, if it be possible, take this chalice from me. yet not my
will, but thine be done.

8. Aue Maria.
And there appears to him (either all the three times, or at least the last
time) an Angel from heaven, strengthening him. ^ singular humility! the Lord
of al is comforted by his servant, the Creator by his creature!

9. Aue Maria.
And whilst he prays long in agony, HIS SWEAT BECOME THAS DROPS OF
BLOOD, trickling down upon the ground.

10. Aue Maria.
Coming the third time he says: sleep ye now and take rest (shortly after) it
suffices, the hour is come: behold, the Son of man shall be betrayed into the
hands of sinners; rise, let us go: behold, he that shall betray me is at hand.

2. Mysterium dolorosum.
Jesus is scourged 2. PATER NOSTER.

Our Saviors apprehension, contumelious handling, and most cruel whipping.
AS our Lord and Savior was yet speaking behold the traitor Judas Iscariote
one of the twelve comes, and with him a great troop with lanterns, torches,
swords and other weapons, who al at the voice of JESUS saying: I AM HE, going
backward fall to the ground, yet he suffers them to rise again. And Judas
saluting his Master with a kiss (which was the sign to know him from his
Apostles) they lay hands upon JESUS. Peter draws his sword, and cutteth of
the right ear of Malchus, one of the high Priests servants. Which our Savior
presently restoring, and healing, bids Peter put. up his sword into the
scabbard; for that it is his Fathers will, he shall now suffer for all mankind,
otherwise he could have many legions of Angels to defend him, if that were
more agreeable to Gods goodness, and man's salvation. Then the disciples leaving
their master, run al away. And so is the prophecy fulfilled: I vvil strike
the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

1. Aue Maria.
JESUS being bound is first brought to Annas, then to Caiphas. By them both he
is examined of his disciples, and of his doctrine, falsely accused, and strooken
on the face by a servant.

2. Aue Maria.
Caiphas adiureth our Savior to tell him, if he be Christ the Son of God; who
answering that he is so, they judge him a blasphemer, and guilty of death;
using him most spitefully and cruelly.

3. Aue Maria.
Most base fellows do spitt in the face of Christ our Lord; they strike him
with their fistes, and covering his eyes beat him, and bid him read, who is it
that strikes thee?

4. Aue Maria.
In the mean time Peter denies our Lord thrice. but JESUS looking upon him,
he goes forth of the palace, and weepeth bitterly. The Jews calling a
council, condemn JESUS as guilty of death.

5. Aue Maria.
Early in the morning the chief of the Jews, with their whole council deliver
JESUS, prisoner to Ponce Pilate, Caesar's deputy. Then Judas, seeing that JESUS
is condemned to die, hangs him self desperately.

6. Aue Maria.
Pilate asking what accusation they bring against him, they say: if he were not
a malefactor, we would not deliver him unto thee. Pilate testifying his
i^noce^cie, they will needs have him crucified.

7. Aue Maria.
Then they accuse him, of subuerting theit nation, of forbidding to pay tribute
to Caesar, and of calling him self king. not answering at al to the first two
(being frivolous) he confesses, that he is a king, but his kingdom is not of
this world.

8. Aue Maria.
Pilat perceiving that Christ is of Galilee, sends him to Herod, by who^ he
is demanded many curious questions, mocked as a fool, and sent back to Pilat.

9. Aue Maria.
Pilat bids the people choose of two only, either Barabbas or JESUS to be
delivered; they choose Barabbas. he offers them also JESUS, but they al cry;
Away with him, and give us Barabbas.

10. Aue Maria.
Pilat (to mollify their stony hearts) causes our B. Savior to be so
cruelly vvhipped, that from the head to the foot al his body is torn
therewith, rec^iuing (as is said to have been reveled to S. Brigitte) 5490
wounds in one day.

3. Mys terium dolorosum.
Jesus is crowned with thorns 3. PATER NOSTER.

The crovvning of our Savior with thorns, and his condemnation to be
crucified.
AFter that our Savior is most cruelly whipped, the souldiars bring him into
the court of the palace, where (as to a scorneful stage play) the whole band
coming together, they mock both him and the whole nation of the Jews, in
sulting upon their poor and miserable title of a King and Kingdom. They pull
of again his own clothes, and put on his body (al imbrued with blood) a
purple garment. Then platting a crown of horrible strong and sharp thorns,
they put the same on his tender and most sacred head. And leaving nothing
undone, that may serve either to scorn or torment him, they put a reed in his
right hand, and so setting him in a high place, bowing their knee in derision
salute him, saying; HAIL KING OF THE JEWS. And withal most spitefully defile
his most sacred face with their abominable spitle, beating him also with their
fistes, as the Jews had done the night before.

1. Aue Maria.
They take the reed out of his hand, and there with beat the crown of thorns
into his head; forcing thereby more sacred blood to burst out, and run over al
his body.

2. Aue Maria.
Pilat supposing that the sight hereof should move the Jews to so much pity
as to spare his life, bri^geth forth our Savior thus arrayed, into the utter
court.

3. Aue Maria.
So showing him, in his purple garment, with his crown of thorns on his head,
a reed in his hand, al his body miserably torn, and imbrued with blood,
says to the Jews, BEHOLD THE MAN.

4. Aue Maria.
The high Priests and the people cry aloud, Crucify him, crucify Him, as if
they said, Thou have now well begun, hold on, crucify him: for this manner of
whipping well besemeth one that is to be crucified.

5. Aue Maria.
Pilat moved with this cruelty in anger says, Take you him, and crucify him:
for I find no cause to do it. They reply, that die he must, and he must be
crucified.

6. Aue Maria.
The Jews seeing Pilat for all their importunity not disposed to crucify
Christ; they threate^ him with his allegiance to Caesar, crying: If thou
release this man, thou art not Caesar's friend.

7. Aue Maria.
Pilat hearing this new cry, brings forth JESUS, and sits again in the
judgments seat resolving rather to put Christ to death, though he know him to
be most innocent, then to hazard his credit with Caesar.

8. Aue Maria.
Yet once more he shows JESUS to the Jews, exprobrating and saying: Lo here
your king. they cry, Away, away with him, crucify him, we have no king but
Caesar.

9. Aue Maria.
Seeing all this nothing prevails, he washes his hands, protesting before
the people; I am innocent of the blood of this just man: look ye to it. the
people cry: His blood be upon us, and upon our children.

10. Aue Maria.
So Pilat overcome with clamor of the people, and with fear of Caesar,
gives sentence, that JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS be nailed upon the
cross, and there hang until he be dead

4. Mys cerium dolorosum.
Jesus falls while carrying the cross 4. PATER NOSTER.

Our Savior carries his Cross toward Caluarie.
THE souldiars lead our Savior (now condemned to death) from the judgment
seat into the court of the palace, where they call again together the whole
band, and pulling of the purple robe, which sticked fast in his former
wounds, they draw our more fresh blood, and put on him his own clothes, but
leave the crown of thorns fast fixed in his head, both for his greater
torment, and greater ignominy, lest perhaps he might appear like no king at
al, or should lack a pillowe, to rest his head on, hanging on the Cross. And
having in the mean time prepared a most terrible heavy Cross, they lay the
same upon his sore shoulders, to carry to the mount of Caluarie; tormenting him
by the sight and weight of so huge a burden, before he come to be nailed
thereon. And yet much heavier to him is the continual meditation of our sins,
for which he suffers all this, especially our ingratitude, in that we
neither go about to imitate his example in taking up our crosses, and following
him, not yet duly consider, what he has done for us his miserable creatures
and unworthy servants.

1. Aue Maria.
So JESUS going forth of the city, bewayling under the cross our sins,
marketh the way as he passes with his own blood, that whosoever will follow
him, may not miss of the right path of his steps.

2. Aue Maria.
His most sacred mother, the immaculate virgin (carrying also her most heavy
cross of compassion) meets our Savior, whose sight and presence greatly
increases his former sorrow and pain.

3. Aue Maria.
Our Lord being now weak of body and extreme weary after so great travel and
loss of blood, falls down groueling on the ground, under his Cross.

4. Aue Maria.
The cruel tormenters beat our sweet Savior (lying on the ground as a meke
lamb, or a poor worm, and not a man) and spurn him with their feet,
thrusting and haling him forward.

5. Aue Maria.
Yet fearing he should die in the way, and so escape death on the Cross, they
compel one Simon Cyrenean to carry the Cross of Christ, the rest of the way to
Caluarie.

6. Aue Maria.
A great multitude of people follow JESUS: among which certain devour women
bewail and lament him, knowing how unjustly he is tormented, who did hurt to
none at al, and good to very many.

7. Aue Maria.
JESUS turning to them says: Daughters of Jerusalem weep not upon me, but
weep upon your selves, and upon your children. For the days shall come, when
al Jerusalem shall be more miserable, then now ye think me to be.

8. Aue Maria.
A special devout woman, called Veronica, reaches him a handkerchiefe, to wipe
his face with all, being al embrued with sweat and blood, and with filthy
spitle of the abominable tormenters.

9. Aue Maria.
Our Lord gives her the handkerchiefe again, not foul (as might be expected)
but al fair, and in it the most comfortable image of his own sweet visage
expressed.

10. Aue Maria.
Our Savior comes to Caluarie: a place execrable, full of carkases and dead
men's bones, in which none but notorious malefactors used to be crucified. Here
many think, that Adam was buried.

5. Mysterium dolorosum.
Jesus is crucified 5. PATER NOSTER.

Our Saviors crucifying, and death upon the Cross.
COming to the top of mount Caluarie, in steed of such confortable good wine
as usually was given, to refresh and strengthen the hearts of them that were to
die, they give unto our sweet Savior (al vvearied and afflicted) vinegre
mingled with myrrh and gal, which when he had tasted, he would not drink.
Then again rhey pull of al his clothes, with such fury and fiercenes, as
brings more blood out of the innumerable wounds of his sacred body, and so
racking his arms and legs, with great violence to the length of the Cross,
with many knockes of hammers they nail him fast thereunto, pearcing through
the most tender veins, sinevves, flesh and bones, of both his hands, and both
his feet, with great and rugh nails. And for more reproach and ignominy,
they place our B. Savior* between two theenes, as though he were the wickedest
of them al, and put a title over his head, containing his name, his country,
and the cause of his death, written in Hebrew Greek and Latin, JESUS OF
NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS. And so they set up the Cross, the foot falling
into a hole made for that purpose.

1. Aue Maria.
Consider now my soul, and think with thy self, how al his holy body is
miserarably shaken, and what fluddes of most precious blood, do run forth of
those four great wounds.

2. Aue Maria.
What sorrow also it is to our Savior to hear the Priests, Elders, Scribes
and others, both of the greatest and vilest sort to blaspheme him, now
hanging on the Cross, for their sakes, and for all mankind.

3. Aue Maria.
Meditate also his most perfect charity, who not only prays for all the
world, but also particularly for those that now crucify him, and blaspheme
him, saying: FATHER FORGEVE THEM, FOR THEY KNOW NOT WHAT THEY DO.

4. Aue Maria.
Likewise consider, and admire his exceeding mercy toward paenitents, so
graciously grau^ting to the poenite^t thief, more then he asks, saying; THIS
DAY THOU SHALL BE WITH ME IN PARADISE.

5. Aue Maria.
And much more may thou admire the depth of his love, toward al just
persons, and namely toward his dear mother, and beloved disciple, whom he
commends each to other, saying to her, BEHOLD THY SON, and to him, BEHOLD
THY MOTHER.

6. Aue Maria.
Great darkness continuing three hours together, al are astonished. Christ as
man offers him self in Sacrifice to God: and that in extreme pains. which
at last he expresses saying: My GOD, MY GOD, WHY HAVE THOU FOR SAKEN ME?

7. Aue Maria.
Our Lord afflicted with bodelie drynes and most sollicitous to save mankind,
says: I THIRST: his flesh in deed desiring to be refreshed with drink, and
his spirit to be recreated with the salvation of souls.

8. Aue Maria.
They vvrappe a sponge full of vinegre, in hyssope, and offer it to his mouth.
which out svveete Lord mekely taking, says: IT IS CONSVMMATE.

9. Aue Maria.
Having therefore accomplished al according to Gods ordinance for mankind, with
strong and loud voice he says: FATHER INTO THY HANDS I COMMEND MY SPIRIT.

10. Aue Maria.
And so preventing death, though he could have lived longer, bowing his head
he gives up the ghost: fulfilling that himself had said before, No man takes
my life away from me, but I yield it of my self.

Erit sepulchrum eius gloriosum.
Jesus is taken down from the cross CREDO IN DEVM.

AT what time the Son of God dyed upon the Cross, for the redemption of
mankind, it pleases also the same Divine power, intestimonie and confirmation
of so vvnderful a Mystery, to show sundry miraculous and strange events,
apparent to the whole world. and water.

The third Rosaire of our Ladies Psalter: resembled to a damask rose:
containing five glorious Mysteries.
In nomine Patris, and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

the risen Christ encircled by five roses

OUR Lord JESUS Christ was obedient unto death: eue^ the death of the Cross.
For the which God has exalted ^im, and has given him a name, which ^s above
al names.

1. Myst^erium gloriosum.
Christ rises from the tomb 1. PATER NOSTER.

The Resurrection of our Lord.
THE most holy, and ever glorious soul of our Lord and Savior, leaving his
body dead on the Cross, goes incontinent into the lake called Limbus Patrum
by whose presence the souls of the Saints of the old Testament (hitherto kept
in darcknes) are replenished with most clear light, incomparable gladness and
joy, receiving their long expected beatitude, which consists in the vision
of God. And so our Savior there performs that which he promised the penitent
thief saying: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. The third day
(shortly after midnight, as the ancient Fathers of the Church do think) the
same most glorious soul returning into the body, both together making a
perfect man, comes forth of the grave without opening the same. And by and by
an Angel descending from heaven, remoueth the stone from the door of the
monument, and sits thereon. Whereat the watchmen are frighted, and running
into the city tell the High Priests that which had happened. Who ^ssembling
together with the Elders in ^ouncel, give a great sum of money to ^^e
souldiars, to say, that his disciples came ^y night and stole him away, when
they ^vere a sleep.

1. Aue Maria.
In the mean time our glorious Savior appears to his dear mother, before
al others meriting this consolation. As al godly Christians may easily
conceive, though the same (as needles) be not recorded in the written Gospel.

2. Aue Maria.
To holy Magdale^ and other two, coming to anoint the body, an Angel
testifies, that he is risen: she runs to tell the Apostles, and returns
with them: they departing again our Lord appears to her.

3. Aue Maria.
He appears again to holy Magdalene, and to the other two returning
homewards, they adore him, and he bids them go tell his disciples, that they
shall see him in Galilee.

4. Aue Maria.
The same day he appears to S. Peter, and confirms him in faith. Perhaps
also to S. John, for his consolation. for he, after he saw the sepulcher,
believed. Joan. 20.

5. Aue Maria.
Likewise our Savior appears to S James the just, called our Lords brother
as it is most like the same day. for it is said, the after the chalice of our
Lord, he did neither eat nor drink, til he had seen him risen from death

6. Aue Maria.
The same day he appears to two disciples going toward Emaus, talking of
him but not believing his Resurrection, til (having invited him as a stranger)
they know him in breaking of bread.

7. Aue Maria.
Also the same evening our Lord appears to ten of the Apostles gathered
together, the doors being shutt. Only Thomas being absent will not believe the
rest of the Apostles telling him, that they had seen our Lord.

8. Aue Maria.
The eight day our Lord appears again to the eleven Apostles, and says to
Thomas. Put here thy finger into the holes of my hands, and thy hand into my
side, and be not incredulous, but faithful. Thomas answers: MY LORD, AND MY
GOD.

9. Aue Maria.
Again our lord appears to Peter, James, John, Thomas, Nathanael, and other
two, at the sea of Tiberias. There he makes Peter his Vicar general in earth,
and chief Pastor of his Church; vvithal fortelling him that he shall be
crucified.

10. Aue Maria.
He appears again to the eleven in Galilee, where he commands them to
preach the Gospel, and minister the Sacraments in all the world, promising to
assist them by his Spirit, til the worlds end.

2. Mysterium gloriosum.
the Ascension of Christ 2. PATER NOSTER.

The Ascension of our Lord.
HOw often, and to what persons our Lord and Savior appeared, between his
Resurrection and Ascension, besides the apparitions here to fore mentioned, is
unknown to al mortal creatures. Nevertheless we may not doubt, but he often
appeared to his blessed mother, who for many causes, best of al others,
deserved his most comfortable conversation. And it is also undoubtedly
believed, that he appeared sometimes to his servants Enoch and Elias, as yet
living in their mortal bodies, in the terrestrial paradise. And that he
appeared often to his Apostles, and familiarly conuersed with them, not only
the Ancient Fathers, but also the holy Scriptures do testify, affirming that
he showed him self alive to them, after his Passion in many arguments, for
forty days appearing to them, and speaking of the kingdom of God. to wit,
of the Church, and of al functions and offices to be done therein. Amongst other
things, he instituteth the rest of the seven Sacraments, not instituted before,
and ge^eth full authority power and commission ^o his militant Church, for the
bringing of ^oules into the Church triu^pha^t* the souls delivered from Limbo,
the mean while ^olowing him whither soever he goes.

1. Aue Maria.
Finally, the fourtith day after his Resurrection, our lord appearing in
Bethania unto his Apostles (lately returned from Galilee) commands them not
to depart from Jerusalem, til they be endued with power from above.

2. Aue Maria.
He says moreover unto them, that they shall be witnesses of his Passion,
Resurrection, and Remission of sins, in Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and
Samaria, and eue^ to the vt most part of the earth.

3. Aue Maria.
In the mount Oliuet our Lord now ready to ascend into heaven, for his last
farewell in earth, lifting up his hands blesses the whole Church, imparting
his grace (as at diverse other times he did) by an external sign.

4. Aue Maria.
Having thus bestowed his blessing, he ascends directly into heaven, a great
number beholding him, until he being covered with the clouds, they lose sight
of him.

5. Aue Maria.
And vvhilest they look still after him, if perhaps they may see him amiddes
the clouds, behold two Angels (in shape of men) stand by them in white
garments.

6. Aue Maria.
The Angels say unto them: Ye men of Galilee, what stand ye looking into
heaven? This JESUS who is assumpted from you into heaven, shall so come as you
have seen him going.

7. Aue Maria.
Then they al adoring him, go from mount Oliuet into Jerusalem, with great
joy thanking our Lord, for his wonderful benefits, bestowed and prepared for
man's salvation.

8. Aue Maria.
And being come into the city, our B. Lady the mother of our Lord, with the
Apostles and other faithful, in all almost an hundredth and twenty, going up
into a chamber, with one mind persevere in prayer.

9. Aue Maria.
There S. Peter as chief Pastor of the whole company, publishes an election
to be made of an Apostle, to supply ludas too me. Which he does not by any
commandment of Christ expressly written, but by suggestion of Gods spirit,
agreeable to the Scriptures.

10. Aue Maria.
They appoint two, Joseph and Mathias, and praying God to declare by directing
of the lottes, which of them he had chosen to the Apostle ship, the lot
falls upon Mathias, and he is numbered with the other eleven Apostles.

3. Mysterium gloriosum.
the Holy Ghost comes to the Apostles and Mary 3. PATER NOSTER.

The Coming of the Holy Ghost
Seeing the most holy virgin the mother of God, full of grace, the holy
Apostles endued also with power and authority, and all the faithful being
already just, did nevertheless persevere praying ten continual days, for the
coming of the Holy Ghost, promised them by our Savior: how much more ought
we wretched sinners, most frail and weak vessels, to persevere in penance
prayer and obsecratio^, that we may receive the Holy Ghost, either for
remission of our sins if yet we remain in that state, or for increase of
grace, if we be already restored into Gods favor? And here, o my soul, thou
ought to be so much more dilligent in meditating this Mystery, because here
thine own free consent, and cooperatio^ is necessarily required to thy
justification; whereas in thy creation, redemption, and vocation, thou did,
nor could nothing at al further nor hinder Gods work. But now except thou
do volu^tarily accept of the grace offered thee, and cooperate therewith,
thou shall not only never attain eternal life, but also incur greater
damnation, for so great benefits by thee neglected.

1. Aue Maria.
The tenth day after the Ascension, being the fiftith from Easter, the third
hour (from sune rising) suddenly comes a sound from heaven, as of a vehement
wind and fills the whole house where they were praying.

2. Aue Maria.
And immediately there appear to them parted tongues, as it were of fire, which
do light and rest upon every one of these 120. persons, so praying together.

3. Aue Maria.
And they are al replenished with the Holy Ghost receiving abunda^t increase
of grace, with the seven gifts: of wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude,
knowledge, piety, and of the fear of our Lord.

4. Aue Maria.
This voice being heard the people flocking together of many nations and
diverse languages, every one hears the Apostles speak in his own tongue,
the great works of God.

5. Aue Maria.
Some deriding say, These men are full of new wine. But S. Peter confuteth this
surmise, proving that JESUS, whom they had crucified, is risen, and ascended,
and has sent the Holy Ghost. And 5000. are converted and baptized.

6. Aue Maria.
The Apostles preach boldly Christ crucified, confirming their doctrine by
Scriptures, and miracles, notwithstanding the Jews command them, and that
with threats, not to speak at al of JESUS.

7. Aue Maria.
Ananias and Sapphira for their sacrilege, at S. Peter's word fall down dead.
Others are cured of diseases even by the shadow of S. Peter, who with others
being cast in prison, are delivered by an Angel, and preach openly in the
Temple.

8. Aue Maria.
They are al apprehended again and brought into the council, indicted for
tra^sgressing the commandment of the High Priests, but they answer, That God
must be obeyed rather then men. Finally they are vvhipped, and thereof they
rejoice.

9. Aue Maria.
S. Steven (with six others) is made Deacon, preaches Christ, works
miracles, confounds the adversaries, is accused of blasphemy, and stoned to
death. But is crowned in heaven. And many, by his death and prayers, are
converted.

10. Aue Maria.
The twelve Apostles make the Creed, and going into diverse parts of the world
preach the Gospel. Saul a notorious persecutor is converted, and made a chief
Apostle. And so preaches Christ converting many nations.

4. Mysterium gloriosum.
Mary dies in bed 4. PATER NOSTER.

The death and Assumption of our B. Lady.
When the Apostles, according to their function, preach the Gospel of Christ,
and travel in gaining souls (in diverse and specially in these parts of the
world; Peter first in lurie, then in Syria, Antioche and other places, finally
in Italy: Andrew in Achaia, James the greater in Spain, John in Asia, Thomas
in India, James the less in Jerusalem, Philip in Phrygia, Bartholomew in
Scythia, Matthew in Aethiopia, Simon in Persia, Thadaeus in Mesopotamia,
Matthias in Palestina, Paul in most parts of the world) the whole Church
floorishing in all kinds of virtue, above al others the most sacred virgin, the
mother of God excels: who albe it so excellently endued with divine
knowledge that she teaches the Evangelists many things, concerning our
Saviors Incarnation, Nativity, education, and other like Mysteries, best
known to her of al mortal persons; yet being a woman, and most humble of al
creatures, she neither preaches openly, nor conuerseth with many, but lives
in private state, in continual exercise of al virtues, leaving in the world by
her whole life, a most perfect Rule and lively example, to al those that
desire to tend toward perfection.

1. Aue Maria.
After our Lords A scension, his B. mother our Lady, being more fry, then
ever before, from vvorldly cares, imployeth her self wholy to devotion. S.
John the Evangelist providing for her al necessaries temporal and spiritual.

2. Aue Maria.
After fifteen years more expectation, it is reveled to the sacred virgin,
that she shall change her mortal life for life immortal, and so enjoy the
everlasting fruition of her blessed son.

3. Aue Maria.
She humbly beseketh her son our Lord, that he vvil voutchsafe to grant her,
the sight of his Apostles, before she part out of this transitory life.

4. Aue Maria.
All the Apostles at one instant are taken up into the air, and brought into
lerusalem, to visit the B. virgin, except S. James already martyred, and
Thomas who by Gods special providence comes somewhat later.

5. Aue Maria.
The Apostles and other Apostolical men being thus met together, the most holy
soul of the sacred virgin, sweetly parting from the body ascends into
heaven with a troop of glorious Angels.

6. Aue Maria.
Her sacred body (of which God took flesh) is most honorably buried in
Gethsemani, with Apostolical and Angelical music, most heavenly melody.

7. Aue Maria.
The same Angelical quier remains three whole days at the sepulcher, singing
Psalms Hymns and spiritual Canticles, praising God and the mother of God.

8. Aue Maria.
After three days the Angels cease singing, and Thomas the Apostle arriving,
with most fervent devotion beseketh the rest of the Apostles, to grant him the
sight of the most venerable and sacred body.

9. Aue Maria.
To satisfy his deuote desire they open the sepulcher. Where finding only the
linen, most sweet and fragrant, in which the holy body had been wrapped,
the body it self can nowhere be found in earth.

10. Aue Maria.
Whereupon these so many and so excellent eye witnesses do assuredly deem, that
he who took flesh of this imaculate body, has assumpted the same into
heaven, reunited to the soul in eternal glory.

5. Mysterium gloriosum.
Mary is crowned in heaven by the Holy Trinity 5. PATER NOSTER.

The Coronation of our B. Lady.
THE Apostles are again restored to the places from whence they were brought:
and by them and others the death and Assumption of the most immaculate virgin,
mother of God, is denounced in all parts of the world. And so begins more and
more to be fulfilled that prophecy of hers, saying: FROM HENCE FORTH AL
GENERATIONS SHALL CALL ME BLESSED. For even from her Assumptio^, the whole Church
of Christ began (as still it continues) most solemly to celebrate, not only the
asce^ding of her most holy soul into heaven (as of other Saints) but also the
resurrection assumption and glorification of her body in heaven, where she
enjoying the perfect vision of God, in the highest degree, after her son of
al creatures, is established Queen of heaven, and of al blessed Saints and
Angels, adorned with so excellent a crown, as no earthly thing can express,
though often prefigured by diverse excellent things and persons, but al
infinitely inferior to the thing it self.

1. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Queen of al holy Co^fessors, and holy Angels: for that fhe in
this life keeping in Matrimonial state, Angelical purity, was blessed with
fruit whereby mankind is redeemed.

2. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of holy widows, and of Archangels: who being saluted by an
Archangel, conceived the son of God; And afterward became an example and
consolation of al faithful widows.

3. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of virgins, and Angelical Principalities: who so far
excelled al others in virginal purity, as a Queen excels her subjects in
princely dignity.

4. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of al Religious Orders, and of Angelical Potestats: because
she renouncing the world, and by vow of virginity excluding the ordinary
manner of conceiving, conceived by the Holy Ghost our Redemer.

5. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of Evangelists, and of Angelical Powers: for that she
instructed even the Evangelists in divine Mysteries, and conceived and bare
him, who only is the author and worker of al miracles.

6. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of al holy Bisshops and Postors, and of Angelical
Dominations: because she (by giving her special assent to that the B. Trinity
had decreed) brought into the world the bread of life, the true food of
souls.

7. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of Patriarchs, and of the Angelical Thrones: for that she
by an ineffable means conceived, and nine months bare in her womb, the Son
of God, her own also proper son.

8. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of al holy Prophets, and of the holy Cherubims: for that
she more perfectly knew al divine Mysteries (being the mother of God) then any
other mere creature whosoever.

9. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Q. of al Christ's Martyrs and Apostles, and of the burning
Seraphims: for that she far excelled them (vvherin they excel the rest of
Gods servants) in fervent charity.

10. Aue Maria.
She therefore, who excelled in grace al orders of men and Angels, does also
excel the same in most high degree of glory; and is placed and crowned, by her
own most excellent son, the Queen of al creatures.

Omne iudic^^m dedit Filio: quia Filius Hominis est.
Christ presides over the Final Judgment CREDO IN DEVM.

BE thankful (o my soul) to the most B. Trinity, one aeternal God: who created
thee after his own Image, to the end thou should serve him, and thereby
inherit his heavenly kingdom. who also to redeem thee, being through sin
become the bond slave of the Devil, and guilty of aeternal death, and
damnation, sent his own only Son (the second Person of the same Holy
Trinity) to take flesh of man and to be borne of a virgin, to live in
poverty, labors, tribulatio^s, and worldly miseries: and finally to suffer
the most ignominious, and painful death of the Cross. who the third day rose
again, for thy justification: the fourtith day following ascended into heaven,
for thy glorificatio^; And after ten days more, sent the Holy Ghost (the
third Person of the same most B. Trinity) in visible signs to his Church
(the^ beginning in Jerusalem) to continue with the same Church, to the end of
the world; that by his grace and operation, thou, and every soul, should
be made partaker of these so great benefits, so dearly purchased by our sweet
Savior. And in particular be thou most thankful, for that by this grace of the
Holy Ghost (which thou by no means could deserve) thou art now a member of
the Catholic Church; and thereby partaker of diverse Sacraments, and other most
holy Mysteries, and of all the prayers and merits of the faithful in this
world, yea and of all the court of heaven. By which graces also thou have been
washed from thy sins, justified and sanctified. and that not once only but
often, thy Redemer not hitherto suffering thee to die in thy sins, as many
others have done, but still offers thee his grace and sweet pardon, ready to
receive thee, when and how often soever thou do truly convert, and sincerely
wilt accept thereof; eue^ at this instant, except thou thy self repel the same
from thee. And finally, so thou persevere in his service to the end, he will
give unto thee (my soul) shortly after death, and to my body for thy sake, in
the general judgment day, when al flesh shall rise again, an inaestimable
crown of glory, and life everlasting. AMEN.

The Corone of our B. Lady: With certain particular points to be meditated,
in saying the same.
In nomine Patris, and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Mary encircled by a crown of thorns

BE mindful (o my soul) of the Passion of our Lord, and of the Compassion of
our Lady, his mother. Suffer thou with them in this world, that thou may
reign with them in glory.

In sudore vultus tui, vesceris pane (...)
Adam and Eve labor after the Fall 1. PATER NOSTER.

Certain singular Priuilegies of the B. virgin Marie, before her Nativity.
THE aeternal wisdom of God ordayning before al worlds, that Christ our Lord
should be borne of a virgin, die upon a cross, and thereby redeem mankind from
the captivity of sin and damnation, into which we fell by the tra^sgression
of A da^ordayned withal, that there should be extant in the world, at the time
designed, a certain virgin excelling al other creatures even the pure Angels,
in grace and sanctity, who should be the mother of this our Redemer. And by
cooperating with him to our salvation, as old Eve had done with Adam to our fall
and destruction, should do more then recompense the hurt of the former. For as
Adam was the proper and principal cause, and Eve the next occasion of sin and
death: so Christ is the only proper cause, and his mother the next occasion of
grace and life. Whereupon says sweet S. Bernard: Albeit by one man in deed
and one woman, we were excedingly damaged yet (God be thanked) by one man and
one woman al losses are repared. And that not without great increase of graces.
For the benefit does far excede the loss. Our merciful Father giving us for
a terrestrial Adam Christ our Redemer; and for old Eve Gods own mother.

1. Aue Maria.
Our merciful Lord promises this singular virgin, straight after the fall of
man, saying to the serpent: I vvil put enmity, between thee and the vvoma^,
between thy seed and her seed, but she shall bruyse thy head in pieces.

2. Aue Maria.
The first woman being by sin the mother of death, yet is called EVA, that
is, the mother of the living, in figure of this blessed virgin, ordained to be
the Mother of life.

3. Aue Maria.
Likewise Sara, Rachael, Anne, Elizabeth and others, being long barraine, but
afterward mothers of notable issue, are figures of this singular virgin the
Mother of God.

4. Aue Maria.
The bush also of Moses, Aarons rode Gedeons fleece, the arc of the covenant,
the glass without spot, the garden in closed, and other shadows of the old
Testament, do signify the same fruitfulnes of this sacred virgin.

1. Aue Maria.
And for other singular virtues of al sorts, she is prefigured by Rebecca,
Marie the sister of Moses, Debora, Iael, Judith, Hester and other most noble
persons, and things.

6. Aue Maria.
The Prophets do most clearly fortel this blessed virgin: A rod shall spring
of the root of Iesse: A virgin shall conceive and bear a son: A woman shall
enuiron a man. And many the like.

7. Aue Maria.
This singular spouse of God is likewise described by Solomon: A lilie amongst
thorns: Al bewtiful: Fair as the moon: Chosen as the sun: The sea star.
etc.

8. Aue Maria.
Of this marvelous virgin the Sybilles (Phrophetisses of God among the
Heathens) do thus sing: (was nigh: Now comes the virgin clear, the golden
age dra-Nevv Offspring does appear, sent from the heavens high, Which is Gods
issue dear.

9. Aue Maria.
Anne the wife of Ioachim, after twenty years barrainnes, conceiueth by Gods
special favor this noble virgin, so often promised, prefigured, prophesied,
and before al worlds elected the Mother of God.

10. Aue Maria.
And lest she should be at any time, the child of wrath, Gods enemy, or
slave of the devil, she is by singular privilege (as many piously think)
preserved from al sin, and with the infusion of her soul replenished with
grace.

Qu^e est is^a qu^ progreditur quasi aurora cousurg^s^.
Mary's nativity 2. PATER NOSTER.

The Nativity of the B. virgin; and her life til she was espoused.
LIke as the morning driving away the nights darkness, besides the light which
it brings, for shows a greater light to be at hand: even so after four
thousand years darkness in the whole world, first shines the most pure virgin
void of al sin, and full of grace: plainly signifying by her singular
virtues, the true light and fountain of al grace (which lightened her, and all that be lightened) to be very nere at hand. For now is borne the singular
spouse, ordained to be the mother of God, who was so long since promised to her
noble Ancesters; prefigured by many miraculous Mysteries; for told by
Prophetical oracles; the renowned virgin without spott, borne of the blessed
seed of the Patriarchs, of the excellent race of the Prophets; of the holy
stock of Leui, and of the Royal blood of Judah; every way adorned with all kind
of generositie, and endued in the highest degree with most clear sanctity
because she is to conceive, and bear the fountain and flower, the beginning
and end of most holy and true Nobility.

1. Aue Maria.
This virgin is called MARIA, that is, The sea, Bitterness of the sea, Mistress
and Lady of the sea, or Exalted. Whereby are noted diverse things happening
unto her, joyful, sorrowful, and glorious.

2. Aue Maria.
Coming to the use of reason and thinking seriously of God, she dedicateth her
whole life to his service, firmly purposing never to offend him more nor less,
in thought, word, nor deed.

3. Aue Maria.
At the age of three years she is presented in the Temple: where (alacrity of
mind supplying imbecillitie of body) she ascends the fiftene stepps before
the door without help of any.

4. Aue Maria.
From morning til nine a clock she is only occupied in Divine service: thence
til noone in handie work. After meat (being very small) she imployeth the rest
of the day in reading sacred books.

5. Aue Maria.
Her whole life (as a most perfect rule of al perfection) shines in all
virtues: namely in humility, obedience, prudence, modesty, gravity: in
singular faith, hope, charity, and contempt of the world.

6. Aue Maria
The virtue of virginity (hitherto unknown in the world) she does singularly
observe thereto binding her self for ever by religious vow: as also to poverty
and obedience.

7. Aue Maria.
She is of al chaste persons most chaste, of al good the best, of al wise the
vvisest, of religious the most religious, amongst al she only attayneth the
full perfection of Religious state.

8. Aue Maria.
She attayneth also to that special knowledge of Gods counsel, amongst other
Mysteries reveled unto her, that God shall be borne of a virgin, and by death
upon the Cross shall redem mankind.

9. Aue Maria.
Whereupon she desires above al, that she may once see this our Redemer, and
that she may be admitted to employ her humble service to that most noble virgin
his mother.

10. Aue Maria.
Being by the Priests (her Superiors) espoused to Joseph (a godly young man)
she signifies to him her vow of perpetual virginity. Whereof he allows so
well, that he also voweth perpetual chastity.

E^^it m^^ magna qui potens est.
the Wise Men present Mary and child with gifts 3. PATER NOSTER

The Annunciation with other Mysteries to the Purification.
AL things being accomplished that should go before the coming of Messiah, the
most blessed Trinity se^deth an Ambassador Gabriel an Archangel, or (as some
holy Doctors think) one of the high Seraphins, to the most gracious virgin
Marie, as it may seem for three special causes. First, to signify unto her in
the behalf of God almighty, the maker of heaven and earth, that she shall
conceive and bear the Son of God, that is, the second Person of the same
most holy Trinity, the long promised SAVIOVR of the world. Secondly to
require, to the effectuating hereof, the consent of the same blessed virgin,
without which the Divine goodness will not accomplish this most excellent work.
Thirdly, that by Angelical testimony this great Mystery may be notified to
the whole world, which is so joyful to Angels and men. For by this means
Angels receive a Head, by whom the ruin of their fellows is to be repared.
And men enjoy a Redemer, by whom al mankind is to be ransomed from captivity
of sin, and of everlasting death.

1. Aue Maria.
The holy virgin being in contemplatio^ the Angel unexpected saluteth her
saying: HAIL FVL OF GRACE, OUR LORD IS WITH THEF: BLESSED ART THOU AMONG
WOMEN. whereat she is trubled.

2. Aue Maria.
Fear not MARIE (says the Angel) for thou have found grace with God. Behold
thou shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name JESUS. He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Hieghest.

3. Aue Maria.
She then demanding, by what means she shall conceive, seeing not by man, the
Angel answers: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Hi^ghest shall ouershadow thee.

4. Aue Maria.
The B. Virgin answering again: Behold the handmaide of our Lord, be it done
to me according to thy word: the Son of God i^ the same instant made the
Son of man, and the virgin is made the mother of God.

5. Aue Maria.
Presently she visits her cosine Elizabeth, at whose coming the Infant in
Elizabeth's womb leapeth for joy of Christ's preseuce. And the mother admireth
the great humility of the Mother of God.

6. Aue Maria.
The B. virgin, after three month, returning home, appears to be with
child: Joseph is therewith trubled, but an Angel tells him, that she has
conceived by the Holy Ghost.

7. Aue Maria.
They go to Bethleem according to an Edict made by Caesar. There our Lord is
borne, and laid in a manger; the Angel, sing, the shepherds visitie the
Infant, and glorisie God.

8. Aue Maria.
The eight day the child is circumcised, and his name called JESUS, a name that
is above al names. For God in giving us. SAVIOVR, powers as it were upon us al
his own bountifulnes.

9. Aue Maria.
Three Sages, seeing a strange and bright star appear, come from the East to
Jerusalem, seeking the king of the Jews. And finding him in Bethleem, they
offer unto him gold, myrrh, and frankincence.

10. Aue Maria.
The most pure virgin (not obliged thereto) observes the ceremony of
Purification, presents her son in the Temple. Where Simeon joyfully
receives him into his arms. Yet fortelleth the mother of sorrows to come.

Virgula ex ar^matibus mvrrhae et thurts.
Mary and Joseph rest during flight from Herod 4. PATER NOSTER.

The most special tribulations and comforts of our Lady, from her Purification
to the Passion of our Lord.
HErod seeking to kill our Savior in his infancy, Joseph warned in sleep by
an Angel to fly into Aegipt with the child and his mother, presently parts
away the same night. In which banishement for their sustenance, something the
holy virgin gains by spinning and sowing, something Joseph gets by his
carpenters art, the rest they receive of alms, so much as suffices for their
state of poverty, which they profess. For having meat and clothes in very
mean sort, they require no more. And as well in Egypt, as after and before,
in this happy family always remains, with singular peace, a most holy
contention. For that every person humbling them selves, vvil needs be much
inferior to the other two. JESUS being in deed Lord of heaven and earth, yet
lives subject to his mother, and supposed father. the B. virgin nourishing and
tending her own son, yet honoreth him, as he is also the Son of God; and
obeys Joseph as her head and Lord. Joseph helps and directs them both in
temporal affairs; yet with al humble and due reverence honoreth the Son as
Lord and king; and the mother as Lady and Queen of men and Angels.

1. Aue Maria.
Herod being dead, Joseph returns with the child and his mother into the
Land of Israel: but fearing ARchelaus his son and successor in Judea, they
dwell in Nazareth in Galilee.

2. Aue Maria.
JESUS being twelve years old remains in Jerusalem unknown to his parents.
Who seeking him at night amongst their kinsfolk, and not finding him, return
the next day, and seek him in Jerusalem.

3. Aue Maria.
After three days they find him in the Temple sitting amongst the Doctors,
hearing them and asking questions. To his mother he answers, that he must be
about his Fathers business.

4. Aue Maria.
The thirtith year of his age he takes leave of his mother, as no more to
dwell with her. About this time Joseph dies. And so the mother virgin and widow
dwells with her cosines.

5. Aue Maria.
Our Lord is baptized of John, fasteth forty days: Then calls disciples,
and preaches the kingdom of God; And at his mothers instance turns water
into wine at a Marriage.

6. Aue Maria.
She most devoutly hears her son Divine Sermons: often sees his Miracles:
diligently observes the diverse affections of men, and continually meditateth
upon al.

7. Aue Maria.
A certain woman, bursting out in mids of the troop, in praise of Christ
and of his mother, says: Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes
that gave thee suck.

8. Aue Maria.
Whereunto our Lord joins greater praise, saying: Yea blessed are they that
hear the word of God, and keep it. As much to say: as my mother is more
blessed for hearing me, then for hearing me.

9. Aue Maria.
Seeing many thousands follow and admire her son, and others busy to
destroy him, she remains still in one state, knowing far greater matters are
yet to come.

10. Aue Maria.
Whilst others receive our Lord with triumph into Jerusalem, as their King,
only his dear mother meditateth upon his Passion, which he is to suffer
within few daves after.

Tuam ^p^^^^ animam pertransibit gladius.
Mary observes Jesus on the cross 5. PATER NOSTER.

The Compassion of our Lady: at our Lords Passion and death.
What a sacred ftorehouse of al virtues the B. virgin is, does abundantly
appear in her whole life, but most specially in the time of her son our
Lord his Passion and death. Where above al other virtues, her fervent charity
(Queen of all the rest) does most excel: which neither the obstinate rancor of
the high Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and other deadly enemies, nor the most
wicked treason of Judas, nor the extreme ingratitude of the Jews his own
people, nor the raging fury of most bloody executioners, nor any other
malice could anievvhit diminish, but in deed contrariwise infinitely increased
the same. For how much further she sees sinners run in wickedness to their
everlasting ruin, so much the more she thirsts after their repentance and
salvation. And therefore seeing her own death suffices not to redeem mankind
(for whom she is most vvilling to yield her life) she spares not her own
son (as our heavenly Father spares him not, nor he him self) but most freely
offers him to suffer all that the exact justice of God requires for the
redemption of the whole world.

1. Aue Maria.
Our Lord praying in the garden, his B. mother also praying at home sees in
spirit (and after hears by his disciples dispersed) that her son is taken,
and brought bond to Annas, and to Caiphas.

2. Aue Maria.
She sees also in spirit (and in the morning hears) that he is falsely
accused, vilely and most cruelly handled, beaten, mocked, spit upon, and by the
Jewish council judged guilty of death.

3. Aue Maria.
In the morning she understands, that he is delivered unto Pilate, by him
sent to Herod, there derided and sent back; Then most cruelly whipped: Crowned
with thorns, and condemned to the Cross.

4. Aue Maria.
Then going forth (with S. John and others) she meets her son al embrued
with his own blood, crowned with thorns, and carrying his own Cross upon his
sore shoulders.

5. Aue Maria.
She sees her sweet son fall down under his Cross. Which then an other is
compelled to carry, lest he should die in the way before he be crucified.

6. Aue Maria.
She sees her son, and Lord (being nailed through both hands and both fee^^
to the Cross) hoissed up on height, and from thence his most sacred blood
streaming down even to the ground.

7. Aue Maria.
Then she hears him mekely pray for those that do blaspheme and crucisie him:
Also promise paradise to the penitent thief: And commend her self and his
beloved disciple, each to other.

8. Aue Maria.
Again she hears him complain, that he is destitute of al temporal
comforth: op^^^ssed with thirst: affirm that al is consum^ate: and commend
his spirit into the hands (...) his Father.

9. Aue Maria.
An other great wound she sees made ^n her sons side with a lance, from
whence issues his last blood, and wa^er withal. Neither does she yet depart
^^om the Cross.

10. Aue Maria.
She takes the dead body into her ar^es. Which when she has a little
behol^en, and washed with tears, it is taken ^^om her again, buried, shut up,
and guar^ed that none may take it away.

Conseruat omnia verba haec conferens in cord suo.
the risen Christ visits Mary in her chamber 6. PATER NOSTER.

The acts of our Lady from Christ's Resurrection to her own death and
Assumption.
THE wonderful Mystery of Christ's most sacred Passion being accomplished;
some busy in this sort, some in that sort, as they were very diversely
affected; and almost al either doubting, or altogether despairing of our Lords
Resurrection; only the most faithful virgin mother firmly believes, and
assuredly expects her Sons Resurrection the third day. Whereupon she
retyring to her chamber, after that she has awhile meditated upon the sacred
wounds of her dear son and Lord, and other torments by him suffered, she
turns her cogitatio^s from that tragical act, to think what he now does
where he is. And so as well in the sepulche she adoreth him as God, knowing
that his human flesh, albeit without soul, yet is continually united to his
Godhead, by which it was assumpted: as also in Limbo, where his soul by his
excellent brightness driving away the wonted darkness, triumphs over death,
losseth the captivity of the old fathers, and by his most glorious presence
makes that place, which hitherto was a prison, to be to them as heaven or
paradise.

1. Aue Maria.
The third day, our Lord rising from death appears first of al to his dear
mother: who being nearest unto him, both by nature and grace, best deserved
that privilege.

2. Aue Maria.
She often enjoys his conversation til his Ascension; and then of al others
is also most joyful for his exaltation; most assuredly believing and hoping in
him and above al desiring his glory.

3. Aue Maria.
On Whitsunday all the faithful are replenished with the Holy Ghost, but she
most abundantly; who by how much she was more full of grace before, is so much
more capable of increase thereof.

4. Aue Maria.
The rest of her life being most free from al worldly cares, and altogether
attending to Gods service, she passes with the deuoutest Christians.

5. Aue Maria.
When the time drew nere that she should go to her son, he first voutchsafeth
her the sight of al his Apostles then living, except S. Thomas, who by special
providence comes after her death.

6. Aue Maria.
The Apostles, and other Apostolical persons, attending about her, and Angels
singing praises of God, and of his mother, she most sweetly yeldeth her ghost.

7. Aue Maria.
The Apostles lay the holy body with all solemitie, in an honorable tumbe in
Gethsemani. Where quires of Angels do sing three days together.

8. Aue Maria.
After three days, the Angels cease singing, and Thomas the Apostle comes,
who requesteth most instantly his fellow Apostles, that he may see and reverence
the sacred body.

9. Aue Maria.
They willing to do him this favor open the tumbe, but find nothing, save only
the linen, wherein the body had ^ene wrapped, and those yelding a most ^weete
savor.

10. Aue Maria.
Whereby these so notable eye witnes^es do undoubtedly judge, that our lord, who
took flesh of this body, ^ath raised, and already glorified, and ^ssumpted
the same into heaven.

Eta ergo ADVOCATA nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos convert.
Mary seated in glory in heaven PATER NOSTER.

The Coronation of the glorious virgin the mother of God.
SEeing the glory of every Saint in heaven is so great, as no tongue can
express, nor the mind of man understand (for neither eye has seen, nor care
has beard, neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what things God
has prepared for them that love him) how much less can the glory of the
mother of God (exalted above all the quires of Angels) be uttered or conceived
by any mortal man? But shall we therefore be silent and say nothing at al
thereof? shall we also cease to think and meditate thereof, because it so far
surmounteth both our sense and understanding? No, in no wise can we ^e so
excused; but so much the more we are bound to rejoice, and as we can ^seing we
can not as we would) utter forth the praises of the mother of mercy, mother of
grace, mother of life, mother of glory, mother of God, now ^eigning Queen of
heaven, whom also ^l generatio^s (of the faithful in earth) do call ^lessed,
devoutly serve, religiously honor, every where preach, magnify; and humbly
beseke to obtain for us al things behooful for our salvation.

1. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Queen of al holy Confessors, widows, and Virgins; And of the
Orders of Angels, Archangels, and Principalities.

2. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Queen of al holy Religious persons, Pastors, and Bishops; And
of the Angelical Potestates, Powers, and Dommations.

3. Aue Maria.
She is crowned Queen of al holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs and Apostles;
And of the Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims: And of al created persons.

Credo in Deum.
BE thankful therefore (o my soul) to the most blessed Trinity, who for thee
and for all mankind, has not only sent the Son of God JESUS CHRIST, a new and
heavenly Adam, to redeem the world from the thraldom into which we fell
through the old terestrial Adam: but also vvheras our old mother Eve was in a
sort, the cause or occasion of our ruin, (by suggesting to Adam that sin,
which was our universal destruction) has bestowed upon us a new and most
blessed woman, the immaculate virgin MARIE, who in like sort, is a means of
our salvation, by cooperating with our Savior, in diverse Mysteries of our
Redemption, and by continual intercession for us to her Son, much more
profiting us, by each of these ways, then the other woman did us harm. And to
thee (o^ most sacred virgin) what thanks shall I render, for thy exceeding great
benignity and goodness toward me, and the whole world? Or with what praises
shall I (a poor wrech) extol thee? whose incomparable excellency (as a shadow
may resemble a body, or a figure signify a truth) was long before thy birth,
represented by the brightness of the sea star; by the beauty of the moon; the
clearnes of the sune; the bush burning and not consuming; Aarons rod; Gedeons
wool-fleece; the looking glass without blemish, the fountain of the gardens;
the welspting of living water; the garden iuuironed; the lilie of the valley;
the palm tree in Cades; the rose in Ierico; the bewtiful Olive; the high Cedar
in Libanus; the Cipresse tree in Sion; the tower of David; the throne of
Solomon; the city of God; the gate of heaven, and by many the like: And by all
the renowned women from the beginning of the world; but by none of al these, no
nor by all together, can be sufficiently expressed thy singular graces, gifts,
virtues, priuilegies, and dignities, who art al fair, never touched with any
spot. who always remaining a virgin, have conceived him in thy womb, whom the
heavens could not comprehend. Who art the singular spouse of the Father of
heaven, the mother of the Son of God, and above al mere creatures, full of the
Holy Ghost, the inaestimable gemme of the celestial and terrestrial world.
which we thy Catholic clients, every where most assuredly believing, and
sincerly professing, do admire thy singular grace, and congratulate thy most
praeemine^t glory. To thee we repair, craving in all our necessities thy
praerogatiue intercession, because next to thy son, thou art our advocate,
our hope, our refuge, our comforth, our help, our supreme Lady and Queen,
mother of al good, mother of Christ, mother of God. we therefore most humbly
beseech thy celestial Majesty, voutsafe to entreat thy son for us sinners,
now and in the hour of our death, that we may be made worthy of his
promises, through the same Christ our Lord thy Son, who with the Father and
Holy Ghost lives and reigns one God world without end. Amen.

The Corone of our Lord. With particular points to be meditated, in saying the
same.
In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

depiction of the risen Christ

THE B. Trinity decreed before al worlds, that the Son of God should be
borne of a virgin, by death on the cross redeem mankind, and judge the whole
world.

The coming of our Savior into this world.
1. Pater noster.
The Archangel Gabriel sent from God saluteth the B. virgin MARIE, and
imparteth to her, that she shall conceive the Son of God. whereunto she
consenting, CHRIST IS INCARNAT, God made man.

2. Pater noster.
The B. virgin visiting her cousin Elizabeth, the Infant in Elizabeth's wom be is
sanctified, and leapeth for joy of our Saviors presence.

3. Pater noster.
Our SAVIOVR is borne in Bethleem, wrapped in clothes and laid in a ma^ger.
Angels declare his birth to poor shephards, and sing: Glory to God in the
hieghest.

4. Pater noster.
The shephards presently do visit this child in Bethleem: and finding al as
the Angel had told them, they return glorifying God.

5. Pater noster.
The eight day following the child is circumcised, and his name called JESUS,
that is, SAAIOVR. for he shall save his people from their sins.

6. Pater noster.
Three Sages, called Gaspar Melchior and Baltasar, coming from the East adore
him: each one fotering three gifts, gold frankincense and myrrh.

7. Pater noster.
Our Lord is presented in the Temple. His mother offers a pair of turtles,
and two pigeons. Simeon joyfully takes the child into his arms. He and holy
Anne do prophecy.

8. Pater noster.
Herod seeking to kill our Savior in his cradle, Joseph warned by an Angel
flies with the child and his mother into Egypt.

9. Pater noster.
Herod kills all the male-children, under two years old, in and nere Bethlee^.
They are al Martyrs. And the Devils fly out of the Idols in Egypt.

10. Pater noster.
Herod being dead Joseph with the child and his mother return from Egypt, and
dwell in Nazareth of Galilee, not daring to go into Jury, for fear of
Archelaus Herod's son.

1. Aue Maria.
The virgin mother cooperateth with the B. Trinity, and our Savior, in all
these Mysteries; meditating upon the same.

Our Saviors conversation in this world.
1. Pater noster.
Our Lord at the age of twelve years, remaining in Jerusalem, unknown to his
parents, after three days is found in the Temple sitting amongst the Doctors.

2. Pater noster.
His mother demanding why he stayed behind them, he answers, that he must be
occupied in his Fathers affairs. And so returning to Nazareth, lives subject
to them.

3. Pater noster.
In the thirtith year of his age, he is baptized by John Baptist. The Holy
Ghost descending upon him, a voice declares: This is my Son, in whom I am
well pleased.

4. Pater noster.
In the desert, he fasteth forty days and forty nights, is tempted and
vanquisheth the Devil: Instructing us, as well by example as by word, how to
fight with the spiritual enemy.

5. Pater noster.
Then he calls disciples, preaches the kingdom of heaven to be at hand, and
to be obtained paenance, and by perfect works of justice.

6. Pater noster.
He confirms his doctrine by miracles, Scriptures, reasons, testimony of
good men, and by his own so perfect life, that none can charge him with any
sin.

7. Pater noster.
He often foretells, that he shall be betrayed in Jerusalem, delivered to the
Gentiles, mocked, whipped, spitt upon, crucified, and the third day shall rise
again.

8. Pater noster.
That none be scandalized with his Passion, he fortelleth of the glory to
come; And before three of his Apostles is transfigured, showing them a glimse
of his glory.

9. Pater noster.
He often detecteth the calumniations, of his enemies, conuinceth their errors,
reproves their sins, and sometimes delivers him self miraculously out of
their hands.

10. Pater noster.
He rides into Jerusalem, is received with great triumph, and saluted king of
Israel. And drives buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

2. Aue Maria.
The B. virgin is partaker with her son in joy and tribularion; most
diligently hears his divine word, and of al others most faithfully keeps
the same.

Our Saviors passing forth of this world.
1. Pater noster.
Our Savior eats the Paschal lamb with his twelve Apostles, washes their
feet, and instituteth the B Sacrament and Sacrifice of his own body and
blood.

2. Pater noster.
He prays in the garden, that the cup of his Passion may be taken from him;
yet submits his will to his Fathers will, sweateth blood, is comforted by an
Angel, and betrayed by Judas.

3. Pater noster.
He is brought bound to Annas, and Caiphas; scornfully and cruelly handled,
falsely accused, thrice denied by Peter, and condemned by the Jews council as
guilty of death.

4. Pater noster.
In the morning he is delivered to Pilate, by him found innocent; yet sent to
Herod, by him also judged innocent, but mocked as a fool, and sent back to
P^late.

5. Pater noster.
The Jews with great clamor require, that Barabbas be delivered, and JESUS
crucified. Pilate to appease their fury, causes our B. Savior to be most
cruelly whipped. where he receives 5490. stripes.

6. Pater noster.
They put on him a scarlet robe, a crown of thorns, and a reed in his hand,
saluting him as King. Pilate so shows him saying: ECCE HOMO. the Jews cry,
Crucify him, Crucify him.

7. Pater noster.
Pilate washes his hands, protesting that he is innocent; the people cry,
his blood be upon us, and upon our children, and Pilate fearing to offend
Caesar judges Christ to be crucified.

8. Pater noster.
Taking away the scarlet robe, but leaving the crown on his head, they cause
him to carry his own cross; he falls vndet it, but lest he die in the way,
they force an other to carry it.

9. Pater noster.
Our Savior crucified between two thieves, destitute of al temporal comforth,
in extreme pain shows exceeding patience, and infinite charity toward al,
friends and foes.

10. Pater noster.
After three hours (al things being now consummate) he yeldeth the ghost. His
soul presently triumphs in limbo: in the evening his body is honorably
buried

3. Aue Maria.
His constant mother above al others suffers with him: the svvord of sorrow
often pearcing her heart and afflicting her with the pains of death.

The glory of our Lord after his Passion.
1. Pater noster.
The third day our Lord rises gloriously from death, delivering out of limbo
all the Saints of the old Testament; appears first to his mother, then to
others: disposes many things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

2. Pater noster.
The fourtith day he ascends into heaven, sits on the right hand of his
Father, our singular and proper Advocate, by whom we have many intermediators,
and intercessors.

3. Pater noster.
Upon Whitsunday he sends the Holy Ghost in visible signs: By whom he
gathers, governs, sanctifies, conserueth, and glorifieth his Church
continually to the end of the world.

Credo in Deum.
OUR Lord JESUS CHRIST, who before al worlds was ordained to be the Redeemer of
mankind: Who at the time appointed was borne of the virgin MARIE, in great
humility and poverty: who sustained most great labors, calling al men to
penance, inuiting al by example and word to grace, desirous to save al: who
after infinite traualies, reproaches and torments, at last suffered the most
ignominious, and most bitter death upon the Cross: who finally is gloriously
risen from death, ascended into heaven, from thence sent the Holy Ghost: who
continually conserueth, and sanctifies his Church in earth: The self same
Lord and Redemer will come again in great power, and Majesty, Judge of al,
Angels and men: And will render to every one (according as they shall deserve
well or evil) everlasting pain, or everlasting glory AMEN.

A brief Rosarie of fiftene Pater nosters and Aues with one Creed: in memory
of eight joys and seven sorrows of the most B. Virgin MARIE.
In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti.

Blessed be the most holy, and indivisible Trinity, now and ever world
without end. Amen.

1. Pater. Aue. The first joy.
The Annunciation and Conception of Christ, whereby God is made man, and the B.
virgin the mother of God.

2. Pater. Aue. The second joy.
The B. Virgin visiting S. Elizabeth, the infant in Elizabeth's womb, both the
mothers, Zacharias, their kins folk, and neighbors do al rejoice.

3. Pater. Aue. The third joy
Our Savior is borne, the Angels sing the shepherds visit the Infant, the
Sages adore him.

4. Pater. Aue. The fourth joy.
Presenting her son in the Temple, Simeon joyfully takes the child into his
arms: he and holy Anne do prophecy.

5. Pater. Aue. The first sorrow.
Joseph with the child and his mother fly into Egypt, parting away by
night.

6. Pater. Aue. The second sorrow.
Our Savior being twelve years old, is lost three days, his parents seking
him with great grief.

7. Pater. Aue. The third sorrow.
In the thirtith year of his age, our Lord takes leave of his mother, as no
longer to dwell in her family, Joseph also dies.

8. Pater. Aue. The fourth sorrow.
The B. Virgin hears that her son is taken; cruelly handled, vvhipped,
crowned with thorns, and condemned to be crucified.

9. Pater. Aue. The fith sorrow.
The afflicted mother meteth her son carrying his Cross, and sees him fall
down under it.

10. Pater. Aue. The sixth sorrow.
She sees her son crucified between two thieves, and after extreme pains,
to yield the ghost.

11. Pater. Aue. The seventh sorrow.
She takes his body in her arms, And it is taken from her again and buried.

12. Pater. Aue. The fifth joy.
Our Savior rising from death, first of al appears to his dear mother.

13. Pater. Aue. The sixth joy.
The blessed mother rejoices above al others, for her sons Ascension, and
exaltation in heaven.

14. Pater. Aue. The seventh joy.
She also rejoices most for the coming of the Holy Ghost, and is therewith
most abundantly replemshed.

15. Pater. Aue. The eight joy.
The glorious mother of God, is both in soul and body assumpted into heaven,
and exalted above all the orders of Angels.

OUR Lord JESUS CHRIST, in whom there could never be any sin, And the most
blessed virgin his mother, being always preserved from al spot or blemish
thereof, suffered extreme pains; and so entered in to their glory, leaving unto
us example to follow their steps. How much more then are we (most miserable
creatures, being loadden with sins, compassed about with infirmities, and
subject to al dangerous tentations) bound to sustain necessary chastisments,
and sweet corrections, rejoicing in hope, patient in tritribulation, instant
in prayer, not to be wearied in our minds, nor faint under the rod of our
heavenly Fathers discipline, that we may at last reign with them, be glorified
with them, and made heirs of God, fellow heirs of Christ our Savior, and our
most blessed Lady his mother, of aeternal joy and glory, which no man can
take away from us. Which he grant unto us, who with his own blood purchased
the same for us, by the intercession of his most sweet mother, and of al his
glorious Saints. AMEN.

LITANIES GATHERED OVT OF THE CORONE OF OUR LORD.
KYrie eleyson. Christ eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Christ audi nos. Chiste exaudi
nos.

1 Ab Angelo Gabriele annunciate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 2 Baptistam tuum in
vtero sanctificans, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 3 Ex virgin nate, and ab Angelis
agnite, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 4 A Pastoribus in praesepio visitate, CHRIST
Miserere nobis. 5 Circuncise, and nomine IESV appellate, CHRIST Miserere
nobis. 6 A Magis (Gentium primitijs) adorate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 7
Presentate, and in Simeonis vlnas suscepte, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 8 In
Aegypto cum parentibus exulans, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 9 Simulachra
Aegyptiorum destruens, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 10 Archelaum fugiens, Nazareth
inhabitans. CHRIST Miserere nobis.
Virgo benedicta his omnibus cooperata, or a pro nobis.

1 Triduo amiss, and inter Doctores inuente, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 2 In
Patris negotijs semper occupate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 3 A Ioanne in Iordane
baptizate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 4 In deser to ieiunans, and tentatorem
vincens, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 5 Exemplo and verbo legem Dei docens, CHRIST
Miserere nobis. 6 Miraculorum and sermon is virtute potens, CHRIST Miserere
nobis. 7 De Passione tua, and Resurrectione praemonens, CHRIST Miserere nobis.
8 In monte coram Apostolis transfigurate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 9 Ab
inimicorum fraud and furore te liberans, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 10
Ierosolymam cum triumpho ingrediens, CHRIST Miserere nobis.
Virgo sacratissima actionum Filij tui particeps, ora pro nobi^.

1 Sacramentorum and Sacrificij Institutor, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 2 Patris
voluntati tuam submittens, and sanguinem sudans. CHRIST Miserere nobis. 3 A
concilio Iudeorum falso condemnate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 4 Pilato tradite,
and ab Herod irrise, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 5 Barabbe postposite, and
dirissime flagellate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 6 Spinis coronate, coccino
indute, and illuse, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 7 Pilati sententia ad morte^ Crucis
damnate, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 8 Crucem tuam baiulans, and sub illa corruens,
CHRIST Miserere nobis. 9 Cruci affixe, and omni solatio destitute, CHRIST
Miserere nobis. 10 Sponte tua pro vita mu^di moriens, CHRIST Miserere nobis.
Virgo afflictissima, plus omnibus Filio tuo compassa, ora pro nobis

1 Tertia die a morte gloriose resurgens, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 2 In coelum
Ascendens, and ad dextera^ Patris sede^s, CHRIST Miserere nobis. 3 Spiritu
Sancto de caelis misso Ecclesiam tuam regens, CHRIST Miserere nobis.
Virgo gloriosa anima and corpore in coelos assump ta, or a pro nobis.

. Oportuit pati Christum.. Et ita intrare in gloriam suam.
Oremus.
Christ omnipotens, qui ab aeterno Filius Dei existens, humanum genus in
tempore Nascendo laetificasti; Patiendo and Moriendo a peccati captiuitate
redemisti; Resurgendo ab inferis liberasti; Ascendendo in caelos adduxisti;
praesta quaesumus: vt qui summis hisce beneficijs laeti gaudemus; venientem
quoque te Iudicem securi videamus, and gloriosum Remuneratorem habeamus. Qui
viuis and regnas, cum Deo Patre, in vnitate Spiritus Sancti Deus. Per omnia
saecula saeculorum.

AMEN.
LITANIES GATHERED OVT OF THE CORONE OF OUR LADY.
KYrie eleyson. Christ eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Pater de caelis Deus, tua te
orante praeelecta virgin, Miserere nobis.
1 Ad serpentem conterendum foemina promissa, Ora pro nobis. 2 Matter viuentium
in Eua nominata, Ora pro nobis. 3 Per faeminas supra naturam fertiles figurata,
Ora pro nobis. 4 Per res multas mirabiles praesignificata, Ora pro nobis. 5 Per
omnes clarissimas mulieres praenotata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Oraculis Propheticis
praenu^ciata, Ora pro nobis. 7 Singularis Dei Sponsa a Salomone descripta, Ora
pro nobis. 8 A Sybillis (diuino spiritu afflatis) decantata, Ora pro nobis. 9
Ioachimo and Annae diuinitus data filia, Ora pro nobis. 10 Singulari priuilegio
a peccatis praeseruata, Ora pro nobis.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, tua te orante pia Matre virgin, Miserere nobis.

1 Virgo virginum MARIA dicta, Ora pro nobis. 2 Gratiam vt nunquam peccares
consecuta, Ora pro nobis. 3 Triennis in templo praesentata, Ora pro nobis. 4
Diuinis and pijs operibus semper intenta, Ora pro nobis. 5 Virtutibus omnibus
plenissime exornata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Religiosae virginitatis cultrix prima,
Ora pro nobis. 7 Perfectum vitae statum plene adepta, Ora pro nobis. 8 Filij
Deiex virgin nascituri praescia, Ora pro nobis. 9 Futurae Dei Matri ancillandi
studiosa, Ora pro nobis. 10 Iosepho nupta, virgo semper permansura, Ora pro
nobis.
Spiritus, Sancte Deus, tua te ornate singulari sponsa, Miserere nobis.

1 Ab Angelo salutata gratia plena, Ora pro nobis. 2 Quod Deum conciperes ab
Angelo edocta, Ora pro nobis. 3 In Matrem electa ancilla Dei professa, Ora pro
nobis. 4 Dato consensu statim Matter Dei facta, Ora pro nobis. 5 In cuius voce
exultat in vtero Baptisa, Ora pro nobis. 6 De tua prole, anxio viro, tu quoque
anxia, Ora pro nobis. 7 De Christo nato gaudens Matter alma, Ora pro nobis. 8 De
IESV circunciso Matter afflicta, Ora pro nobis. 9 Adorantibus Filium Magis Matter
laeta, Ora pro nobis. 10 Filiu^ presentans de doloribus praemonita, Ora pro
nobis.
Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus tua te orante excellentissima persona creata,
Miserere nobis.

1 Post exilium in Aegypto Galilaeae incola, Ora pro nobis. 2 De Filio amisso
Matter dolorosa, Ora pro nobis. 3 De illo inuento Matter consolata, Ora pro
nobis. 4 Simul existens Matter, Virgo, Vidua, Ora pro nobis. 5 Aquam in vinum
vertendi Filio causa, Ora pro nobis. 6 Factorum and verborum Filij
obseruantissima, Ora pro nobis. 7 Propter insignissimum Filium Matter laudata,
Ora pro nobis. 8 Quia Deum audisti, qua^ quia genuisti, magis beata, Ora pro
nobis. 9 In aduersis and secundis aequabilissima, Ora pro nobis. 10 Filio Rege
salutato, Passioni attenta, Ora pro nobis.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, tua te oxante Matre tecum in Cruce
patiente, Miserere nobis.

1 Ob Filium inimicis traditum Matter maestissima, Ora pro nobis. 2 Ob Filium
vilissime tractatu^ Matter tristissima. Ora pro nobis. 3 Ob Filium flagellatum,
and spinis coronatum, Matter afflictissima, Ora pro nobis. 4 Filio crucem
portanti pia Matter obuia, Ora pro nobis. 5 Filium sub Cruce corruente^ Matter
contemplata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Filio crucifixo, Matter cord transfixa, Ora pro
nobis. 7 Matter per Filium discipulo commendata, Ora pro nobis. 8 Matter,
moriente Filio, dolores mortis passa, Ora pro nobis. 9 Matter Filij latus videns
aperiri lancea, Ora pro nobis. 10 Matter exangue Filij corpus in vlnas amplexa,
Ora pro nobis.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, tua te orante Matre gloriosa, Miserere
nobis,

1 A Resurgente Filio Matter prima visitata, Ora pro nobis. 2 Ascendente Filio
plus omnibus gauisa, Ora pro nobis. 3 Spiritus Sancti gratia super omnes
repletissima, Ora pro nobis. 4 Mundi curis libera diuinis intentissima, Ora pro
nobis. 5 Apostoloru^ concursu moriens honorata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Super omnes
Angelos scande^s Filio proxima, Ora pro nobis. 7 Sepulta Gethsemani coelesti
cum Psalmodia, Ora pro nobis. 8 Vt Thomas veneretur, in tumulo quaesita, Ora
pro nobis. 9 Apostolis quaerentibus nullibi inuenta, Ora pro nobis. 10 Corporis
quoque gloria in coelis potita, Ora pro nobis.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, ipsa te orante caelorum Regina, Miserere
nobis.

1 Angelorum Archangelorum, and Principatuum Regina, Ora pro nobis. 2
Potestatum, Virtutum, and Dominationum Regina, Ora pro nobis. 3 Thronoru^,
Cherubim and Seraphim omniumque Sanctorum Regina, Ora pro nobis.
. In omni tribulatione and angustia nostra:. Succurrat nobis pijssima Virgo
Maria.
Oremus.
INterueniat pro nobis quaesumus Domine IESV Christ, nunc and in horamortis
nostrae apud tuam clementiam B. Virgo Maria Matter tua, Domina nostra, cuius
sacratissimam animam, in tua Passione, doloris gladius pertransiuit. Ettu o
Domina nostra, coelorum Regina and Imperatrix gloriosissima, in tuam benedictam
fidem atque singularem tutelam, and in sinum misericordiae tuae nossuscipe.
Tibi hodie, and quotidie, and in hora exitus nostri, animas nostras, corpora
nostra, fortunas nostras, totam vitam nostram and vitae finem commendamus: vt
per tuam sanctissimam intercessionem, and per tua merita, omnia nostra
dirigantur and disponantur, cogitationes, verba, and opera, secundum tuam,
tuique Filij voluntatem. Per eundem Dominu^ nostrum IESVM Christu^ Filium tuum:
Qui cum Patre, and Spiritu Sancto viuit and regnat Deus, in saecula saeculorum.

AMEN.
The doleful state of our B. Lady, under the Cross of her Son.
STabat matter dolorosa,
Iuxta Crucem lachrymosa,
Dum pendebat Filius.
Cuius animam gementem
Contristantem and dolentem,
Pertransiuit gladius.
O quam tristis and afflicta,
Fuit illa benedicta
Matter vnigeniti!
Quae maerebat and dolebat
Et tremebat, cum videbat,
Nati poenas inclyti.
Quis est homo qui non fleret,
Christi Matrem si videret,
In tanto supplicio?
Quis non posset contristari,
Piam Matrem contemplari,
Dolentem cum Filio!
Pro peccatis suae gentis,
Vidit IESVM in tormentis,
Et flagellis subditum.
Vidit suum dulcem natum
Morientem, desolatum,
Dum emisit spiritum.
Eia Matter fons amoris,
Me sentire vim doloris
Fac, vt tecum lugeam.
Fac vt ardeat cor meum
In amando Christum Deum,
Vt sibi complaceam.
Sancta matter istud agas,
Crucifixi fige plagas
Cordi meo valide.
Tui Nati vulnerati,
Tam dignati pro me pati,
Poenas mecum divide.
Fac me vere tecum flere,
Crucifixo condolere,
Donec ego vixero.
Iuxta Crucem tecum stare,
Te libenter sociare
In planctu desidero.
Virgo virginum plaeclara,
Mihi iam non sis amara,
Fac me tecum plangere.
Fac vt portem Christi mortem,
Passionis eius sortem,
Et plagas recolere.
Fac me plagis vulnerari,
Cruce hac inebriari,
Ob amorem Filij.
Inflammatus and accensus,
Per te virgo sim defensus,
In die Iudicij.
Fac me Cruce custodiri,
Morte Christi praemuniri,
Confoueri gratia.
Quando corpus morietur,
Fac vt animae donetur
Paradisi gloria. Amen.
. Tuam ipsius animam pertransiuit gladius.. Vt reuelentur ex multis cordibus
cogitationes.
Oremus.
INterueniat pro nobis quesumus Domine IESV Christ, nunc and in hora mortis
nostre, apud tuam clementiam beata virgo Maria matter tua, cuius sacratissimam
animam in hora tue Passionis, doloris gladius pettranfiuit: per te IESV Christ
Saluator mundi: Qui cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto viuis and regnas in saecula
saeculorum.

AMEN.
THE APPROBATION.
Libellum himc, a viro Anglo, docto and pio perlegendum ^^rauimus; eiusque
iudicio probatum, imprimendum duximus. 25. Ianuarij. 1599.

Matthias Archiepu^s Mechliniensis.


