The Husbandlye ordring and Gouernmente of Poultrie.

Practiced by the Learnedste, and such as have been known skilfullest in that
Art, and in our time.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Purfoote, for Gerards Dewse. 1581.

To Mistrisse Katherine VVoodford (wife to master James Woodforde Esquier)
and chief Clarke of the Kitching to the Queens Majesty Leonarde Mastall
wishes a prosperous estate in health long to continue.
THe remembrance of your Worshipful Parents, gentle mistrisse VVoodforde,
unto whom my father and his family have always borne good will, and you
showing likewise a continual courtesy toward me and them, perceiving also
your wise and orderlye using your house for your family and housholdes with
a desired mind to further the same in knowledge, how to use and govern
Poultrie to profit for maintenance of your said housekeeping, which thing you
have been desirous to know, with the ordring of strange vvildfoule, how to
preserve and keep them to pleasure and profit. I having known your parents
(in Brestall) and you from my youth, showing herein my good will toward you and
your fathers house, to farther and pleasure your desired mind therein, the
remembrance thereof has moved me at this present to enterprise and translate
out of French Columella and Stephanus into English, certain orders for
government of the said poultrie, and also the ordring of diverse other
vvildfoule, beesides many other approved collections and practices learned in
this realm, necessary to be known to all good householders, desiring you to
be the patron and defender hereof in print, in so doing I shall think my
travail well bestowed, and my time well spent. Thus I leave, vvishing you a
prosperous estate, with increase of worship long to continue to the pleasure
of God.

Finis.
To the Reader.
FOr so much gentle Reader, as beasts and Cattaile is profitable to man's
living, so is also poultrie and other foul a good thing for the common wealth,
and specially to them that are housekeepers, as well for the Gentleman, as the
husbandeman, and to farther the mayntainaunce of the same, I have taken some
pains therein, which here thou shall find gentle reader, as well for the wild
foul as others, such order for the government thereof, as has not here before
been written, or reuealde in our english tongue, with a ready table by Alphabet,
to find out any thing herein contained.

by L.M. 1581.

The Argument.
THe gouernemente of Poultrie is chief thing to be maintained for the state
and keeping of a house, which thing in respect, al men's houses ough^ to have,
specially the Husbandmanne who ought to have understanding her in, how to rule
and govern the same about his house, in which they ought t^ be careful from
time to time, as vve^ how to save them as, to breed them, a hereafter shall
more plainelye appear Taken forth of Columella and Stephanus in french, with
diverse other approved practices.

The nourishing and government of Poultrie.
The Order of Columella for the hennehouse. Cap. 1.
First it shall be good to make and prepare you a henhouse to save and keep
your poultrye in, and so to set it if ye can at the east end of your house,
made close, and to closed beneth with stone, or other ways ^ade strong, that
no vermyne may break (...) to them by night: made with perch and neastes
within for them to lay and sit in when breeding time shall be: or at other
times to lay in, and to place your hens above from your other poultry, and
your Duckes and Geese beneath, each by them selves, that they may not fight one
with another, for they will not so well love the house, but lay and sit in
corners, and ^edges and out places abroad, and thereby they are often kilde.

Again ye shall make the like nestes beneath for your duckes and geese, as
above for your hens, and your duckes placed by themself, and your Geese
themselue^ and to see that your henhouse be close (...) thed round about
above, for fear of Kn^ues by night, and other dangers, and (...) that ye make
places for them all about the sides of the henhouse to sit, and to lay in, with
separations each by himself, all ye shall use to feed them before the he^
house door morninges and eueninges which will cause the young poullets the
better to love the hennehouse, and to v^^ them so nightlye, will cause them and
the old hens to seek no other place to (...) or rooste in. Thus much of
Columella for the hennehouse.

Stephanus Opinion. Cap. 2.
Our Hen house ought to be built on the orient or east part of your house, by
^^me smoke house or kitchen, that yt smoke (which is very good for poultry)
may ^^me unto them. And your hen house (...) be made of one length and one
room of ^eyght, turning toward the oryent or ^ast part of the house, and ye
shall make other in the side or end, one narrow entering ^or them to lay, and
come to roost at night, ^e shall also make a pertitio^ above for the ^ennes to
sit, with perches thereon, no^ ^ette very hye from that flower, and placed
^ne perch a foot from another, and also half a foot one perch above
another, and set so wide as they may be vii foot square within the perches,
and on the midst ye shall make two entryes, one on the right side, and
another on the left side, which shall be good to go and come to the other two
^houses. This entres shall be made at the ends joining to the walls, which
is to be made each against other in coming into the house, against which wall
shall be made such moderate fire, in such sort their entering be not let, and also
look that the smoke do not annoy ye other house of your foul, the room for
your hens to sit and lay in, must be set vii. foot high, and to be made
as large as half the height or more.

Also ye shall make in each separation, a small window against the east fide
of your house, that the poultry may see day to come forth amornings into ye
court to feed, and likewise ye must have a care to shut the door of their
entering when they be come in to rooste at night, to be the more assured of
them, and to leave those wyndowes open, which are made with lathes, so made
that no vermin may come in to devour the^ by night, for they must have some
clear light to see the better when they go to roost, and those persons that do
keep them, ought to see specially to those that do sit, and ready to hatche,
or have new hached, for else there will be soon some loss of them. Your
Separations within, ought to be made close and strong: that one do not trouble
another of them that do sit, or hatche their young. Some do take it to be a
very good way to stick poles before in diverse places of your hen house
walls, and thereon to hang pannyers or baskets for your hens to lay and
breed in. Also ye must put in each nest a nest egg, which will cause the
hens to lay therein the sooner: and ye must so place your perches acrosse,
that your hens may come and fly easily unto their nests from time to time,
and ye must always see that your henhouse be kept clean: for when it lies
foul, it will cause the poul^ry to forsake the house, and to seek abroad some
other cleaner place to roost in: for it it not good for them to roost where
much of their dung is, because it will cleave unto their feet, which will
cause them to have the gout in their feet, for this cause they cut their
perches square for them (...) roost on, for if they be round they cannot so
well sit thereon. These perches being made square, they make two holes in ^he
walls of each side of the hen house, and puts the perches therein, so that
they ^e not in height from the flower two foot, and the one to be set as far
from the other, so that the poultrye shall not strive one with the other for
their places: and after this s^rte is the best way to make a ^heune house for
your poultry to rooste in. Also ye shall make some place in their corte, to
have always ready water for the^, when they have sedde. It is not good to have
water for them but in one place, to drink in, and that the water be kept
always clean: for if the water be foul and salt, it will make the^ have the
rye or rume, and it will increase also the pippe on their tungs. Therefore ye
must not keep them from water, which water would be set in vessels after
this manner. Some prepare troughes of lead to put their water and meat in: but
it is most certain, those that are made of wood or burnt earth, are most
wholesome and best for them, the which vessels (for water) ought to be
covered above, the one half of the vessel whereas the water is, and therein
to have holes half a foot asunder, wherein the poultry may put their heads
and drink when they have eaten: for if ye cover not their water, they will
sone mar it with their feet. Some do make vessels with holes in the cover
above, which way is not so good: for the poultry when they are above thereon,
they will dung into it, which will defile and mar their water. And see that
no lathes or holes be broken, and that their perches be straight and even set
for them to sit on. Also in some places as soon as the poultry is gone forth in
ye morning, they do cleanse the henhouse once or twyse aweeke, and puts their
dung aparte for to help the garden, and also meadows, and their pens ^ nests
must be often refreshed with clean straw, and the hen house windows or
door ought to be shut up as soon as the sun is down, and opened again in
the morning with the rising of the sun. Their troughes also in winter twice a
day to be ^lensed, and thrice a day in summer, so that always their water
may be fresh and ^leane. It shall be good also to cast some ^^esh straw
often beside the Dunghill, and also before the henhouse, whereas the pullets do
use to scrape, and to mix it with some sand, ashes, or duste: to give them a
pleasure to scrape and to baske them in the sun, which they will do to
cleanse their feathers: and look ye cast far from your bouse your pomes of
fruit or wine when as ye streyne them, for the eating thereof does cool your
hens, and do let them from laying. Also let there be no bright iron set up in
the henhouse: for the brightness thereof will make them to gaze thereat, and
so fear them, that they will go nigh to forsake the house: ye must see also to
avoid the danger of Owls, Cats, Foxes, Wesils, and Polecats, with such like,
which will nightly devour all that they may come by: and likewise on the
day, with Buzardes, and Puttockes, Kites, Pyes and Crows, which often
destroys their eggs abroad, and also in their henhouses, if places therein
be open: they will also devour young Chickens, Duclings, and Goslinges under
their dammes, or if their dammes be not nigh them, or for lack of good
tendaunce. Also whereas the hen often times will depart from her chickens (and
sudden loses one) as to fly on walls, or pales, or such like: ye shall
therefore clippe the ends of her great feathers of one of her wings, and not
once to suffer them to enter into your garden, for if they catch once your
Garden when they are young, and by long custom being there brought up, they
will commonly after love the same place where they are so brought up in, and by
that means ye shall have your Garden spilt, and it will hinder them from
laying: as for the Cocks and Capons, it is thought good not to shorte^ or
clippe their wings: therefore ye must use to bind or set thorns, or, lay
bushes of thorn on your walls, tops of pales, or low hedges: or else with
lath nailde to the tops of your pale posts, and then put through your laths
pacthred, breast high of a Cock, from the tops of your pales, and that will
let the^ from coming in: for the pacthred will hit them on the breasts, when
they would light on the top of the pale, and so it will put them down
again. And see also to other of your poultry, if they use to fly or mount on
walls or houses, to cut their wings for fear of loosing of them, and to use
for their meat and drink as is fore mentioned.

Signs in a good Cock Cap. 3.
STephanus Says, the signs in a good Cock are these: his body large and
deep withal, well and right irested, his comb iagged and read, his eyes
round, and great gray or whitishe, his byll crooked with some red and yellow or
after an azure color, his beard or chekes, of the color of roses drawing
toward a white and red, his neck feathers fair and long of a golden color
somewhat changing, his legs black and well stalled, great and short, his
claws short and strong, his hinder claw wrincled and sharp, his tail fair
and straight, great and heavy. Also Columella says, it is not good to keep a
cock, if he be not stout, hot, and knauishe, and to be of the same color as
the hens are, in having as many claws.

But in his body to be more hier raised, his comb to be hye and red as blood,
and straight withal, his eyes black, or azure color, his beke short and
crooked, with a gray crest shyning like red on white, and all his feathers from
the head to the breast, to be of a changeable color varying like gold or
yellow, his breast large and big, his muskels on his wings big like ones
arms, with long wings, his tail fair and long with two ranks of crooked
rising feathers, and to be often crowing, is a sign of a lusty courage, the red
color is thought to be the best Cock, his legs short and ^^tong, his thyes
great and thick, and well covered with feathers, and armed well with long
spurs rough and poynted, (...) it is not meet for fighting cocks to be without
fair spores, notwithstanding if ^^^y do foewe fair, strayghte of body,
light, fyerce, eager in battle, vigilante, ^^^dye, and often trowing, and not
easily ^^^rde: These are the signs of a good ^^^ck, for often times he must
resist to defend (...) hens, and to kill Serpents which ^^ll brag against
him, or other vene^^us beasts, and for these Cocks to ^^^e but five hens
shall be best, for these Cocks which are so hardy to fight with ^^er Cocks
which tread their hens, they are hoar of nature and so lascivious, ^^hough
they cannot tread themselves (...) more, yet they will not suffer other ^^ckes
to serve their hens, now for to ^^ke that heat of jealousy, ye shall slitte
^^o pieces of thick leather, and then put ^^em on his legs, and those will
hang o^^er his fecte which will correct the vehe^^e^t heat of his iealonzy,
which is in him. Thus much here for your Cock.

The signs and properties of a good Hen. Cap. 4.
THe signs of a good Hen are these to be of a tawnye color, or of a russet
which are counted the cheifest colors and those hens next, which has ye
pen^ of their wings blackishe, not all black but part: as for the graye and
white hens are nothing so profitable, the Hen with a tufte of feathers on her
head is reason^ble good, and the low featherde hen also: their heads not to
be great, and the^ tails ought to be in a mean, and he breast large, her
body deep and long, f^ the greatest hens of body are not the a^ test hens
to lay, nor yet for that purpo^ so natural, or if a hen have v. claws as
the Cock, they are then more apt t^ be trodden, and takes least: as for tho^
hens which has hinder claws, the will commonly break their eggs in
sitting thereon, and they sit not so surely a^ others, and will often times eat
their egs^ also those yt are very fat, or has the flux^ of the bellye, they
lay the egg then with out a shell: as for your young hens a^ first they
know not how to cover nor go^erne their young chickens, wherefore it were
better to fat the^ or put the^, to some other purpose for your profit. As for
those hens which do call or crow like the cork, or does creke and scrape,
to help the same, ye shall pluck of the greatest feathers of ^er wyngs, and give
her of millet wheat to^kte, and also of barley, and barley past ^^^in sinale
inorsels, and crummes of bread tem^pred in water with some barley meal, (...)
ye shall keep her in a close place for a (...). Ye shall also pluck the
feathers of (...) head, thies and breast, and to eat those (...) in February is
the best: and for hens (...) fat, for they will not lay so well, wherefore
ye shall put chalk into their ^^^ter, and mix also their meat therewith,
(...) at will make them more lean: or tem^^^ their meat with the powder of
brick, (...) it will do the like. If any hen have (...) flux of the belly,
ye shall give her for (...) first meat, the whites of eggs hard ^^ed, and
beaten with two parts of boyld ^^^sons: and for those hens which use to
^^ake, and is in a rage with heat, They will ^^mmonly hide their eggs, and eat
them. Therefore ye must use to plaster an egg shell with plaster, or paste
upon pappe, and anoynte it all over with the yelke of another egg, and if she
do break it and find nothing within, so she will at length leave that use. Or
lay in ye nest a piece of chalk like an egg, and it will serve as well for
that purpose, and ye shall never leave but a nest egg in the nest after she
have laid, also when a young hen do begin to clock, then she would sit, if ye
will not have he^ fit, put a small pen through her nostrils, for young hens are
more meeter to lay then to sit, and the elder hens are better for to sit and
bring up young chickens then to lay. Some do use when they would have a hen to
sit, they rub her all under the belly with strong nettles, and some Farmers
wives are so presise, which do wette their bellies in the cold water, to quench
they heat, and some do use to make them fast from meat four days, and shuts
them up i^ a pen. But then if ye will they shall no^ sit, ye must within
two days after tha^ she is once coold of her heat, and have so fasted, then
put her in the morning unto the cock to make her forget her sitting, ^d so she
will begin again to lay. And if (...) will have a Capon to lead your chyc^ns,
it is best for to take a great fethered upon, and rub his belly with nettels
as ye do the hen, and if the capon be young, he will the better give himself
to love the chickens the sooner, and he will brood and govern them as well as
the hen: when you take your capon for that purp^se, ye must take him toward
night, for then it shall be best, and put the chickens vn^^ him, if he will not
then cover them, net^^e his belly well again with sharp net^^^s, and so keep
him in the coope or pen, the space of two or three days: or so long until ye
see him have a love unto the chickens.

When to set your hens. Cap. 5.
^E shall set your hens in the increase of the Moon from the tenth day to
the ^^^teenth is best, so that they may hatch in the increase of the next new
Moon. The day in sieting that do give life and form unto the chickens are
xxi, and of Peacoks, Geese, and Duckes, and other water foul, are nine days
more. Therefore when ye set your eggs with other, ye must give their eggs to
the hen ten days before her own eggs, and then give her four eggs of
hers, or five, not above, and let them be of the fairest and greatest eggs ye
can have, for little eggs will bring small chickens. Also if the hen be
negligent to turn her eggs, and do not sit close or even on them, it were
good sometimes (when she is gone abroad) gently to turn them, and there be
some women that think it long when the hen does sit, not to let her abide the
end of her hatching, but within fourteen days that she have sit, she takes
forth all the eggs one after another, and lokes them in the sun beams, and if
she cannot see no blody streks within, she throws those eggs away, and takes
others. And likewise after the xxi. day, if she see they remain unclosed, she
takes and rayses the hen from the neste, but the good sitting hen will no
more return to sit after that she is so raised and touched.

Ye may chose your eggs in the sunnebetwixt your hands, and put them under
the ^en again, and those eggs which ye doubt are not good, and will not hatche
in due time through the hardness of the shell, ye shall bathe them in a vessel
of wood, with luke warm water about the xxviii. day, and those that do swim
above, cast them away, and put the other under her again, ^^^t ye must not
constrayne the hen to rise from her neste: when ye do this, also ye ^aye do
great good and save some chickens when ye hear them begin to piepe in the
shell, and cannot come forth by hardness thereof. Then must ye help the hen
and break the top of the shell or pick it softly with your finger, although
it be the natural office of the hen to do it: ye must fulbreak it that the
head of the chicke may come forth, so shall ye use all those that have hard
shells, to help the hen in the ^^^e of hatching.

The time best to set your young hens. Cap. 6.
IF ye will have your young hens and pul^^ lets to sit, it shall be best to set
them in ^^e Second year of their laying: until the third and fourth year:
also ye may fette many hens at one time together, and it shall be good
before ye set your heune, to lay under each neste a piece of some iron: for as
they say, it is good against thunder to preserve the chickens: and also good
against the breding of the pyppe, or increasing of a monstrous nature in the
eggs, or to lay of bay leaves about the nests, is good against the thunder, or
to put therein the heads of Garlic, or of grening wede as some say is good
against the pyppe: or increasing of monstrous fruit in the eggs, ye may have of
xx eggs, xxi chickens: for some egg will have two yeolkes, and those will
bring two chickens.

They do use also to set the hen in the beginning of the Moon, from the
second day to the fourteenth, (as says Florentine) and Columella says, it
is good setting hens from the tenth unto the fifteenth, to the end the hens
may hatche and unclose in the increase of the next new moan, for there is no
more necessary hatching days for the hen to bring forth chickens, but xxi.
and for other water foul xxviii. vaies: also when the hen is gone of her
nest, ye shall come and search the bottom of her nestes and stir the straw a
little, that nothing be grown or fallen therein to wet and rusty the nest:
some do use to perfume the neastes with Brimstone, before they set the eggs
under the hen, for they say, it will keep the eggs from ill in the sitting,
as often it chances some chicke will be dead in the shell. Ye shall also set
her with marked eggs, to see when she has turned them, ye must chose to set
the most fairest and newest eggs of her own if ye can possibly have them, and
they use commonly to set their hens all the summer, from the seventh of
February unto the xxii. of September. As for other times it avails little or
nothing, much like the first setting, because the time then is commonly cold as
a part of winter, and in November, December, and January nothing avails to
sit: In February they use to set a hen with xv. eggs, in March with xix. and
in April with xxi. for the most greatest number to set is not to be
received above xxiii. eggs, and from the second of October they use to set no
more, nor they ought not to set no more, if they have not Duens to set their
Eggs in, as they have at Malte and at Beauceron, and those Chickens and
Pullets are very evil to bring up in Winter, and so likewise the common
opinyon of them is, that from mid June the Chickens profit but smallie,
because they do not grow nor increase in the heat of Summer, but very little,
if ye will not be to curious (as some be) in giving your hen other eggs to
sit on as well as her own, as the Goose Egg, Pecocke, Turquie and Ducke, if
ye set these with hirs, ye shall put them to the hen seven or nine days
before her own eggs: and the common order to set eggs in number is od, as to
set seven, nine, eleven and thirteen, etc. which is to make them lie round
in the neast, and to have the odd egg in the midst: if ye set Fezante
eggs with your Hen eggs, ye need not doubt to set them altogether, for
they ask all one time to hatche and vnclofe, then if ye will have them to be
Females, take the roundest wrincled eggs and also to have them all males take
the long rough eggs, as they say they will be males, also some do choose the
egg which the hollow croune in the side of the coppe for the Females, and also
the croune in the top under the shell for the males: again some do say to
have males, set your hen on the masculyne day in the forenoone, as on
Tewesdayes and Thursedayes, Saturdaye and Sundaye: and for the females, set
your hen in the afternoon on the Feminine days as monday and Friday, and
some do observe this ceremony in setting a hen, which is, not to put one Eg
after another into the neast with her hand, but lays them first in a wooden
platter, the^ gently puts them altogether in the neast, and ye must take heed
that the Coeke or other hens do not sit in her neast when she is risen,
for the Cock with his spores will break the eggs, and the other hens in
sitting therein, will make her forsake her neaste, ye shall therefore set meat
and water by her twice a day, that she may have no occasion to rise and seek
her meat, and her eggs to cool in the mean time, for if a Hen have great
hunger, and tarrye long in seeking her meat, some hens will hardlye return
again, if that she be not of a frank and a free nature.

Of Chickens newly hatched. Cap. 7.
THe Chickens which are newlye hatched should be put into a sieve and perfumed
a little with rosemary, which is good to save the^ from the pippe: ye must not
of two days give them any meat, if one hatche before an other, but keep them
under a hen that has but few, till the rest be unclosed, and yet the hen
her self will keep them tender enough under her wings without hurting, the
first and second day being past, ye shall take them out and crum them some
tender bread, or otemele soked in milk, or sodde wheat, Curdes, or barlye
meal, mixte and soked in Wine and water, with a few Leeke blades hacked small
and then a little boiled.

This order will save them from the catarre, the rye, and the pippe, and from
the second day to the sixte day, ye shall keep them with the hen in the
house. Then at the end of six days, ye may let them go abroad with the
damme, and then give them of the foresaid meat, and if ye have many other
sitting at the same time, if they do hatche, put them unto a more elder
Chickins, and to feed them with the other, or ye may put them to a Capon,
and use them as is aforesaid, and then let the youg hens be put again to
the Cock, but give not a hen above xxv. chickens for to feed, for they
cannot be all well covered, also ye must see to the hen that keeps them,
that she be not hot and defirous of the cock, for then as often as she
couers them, she will hurt them and scrat them, in putting them often in a
heat, nor she will not labor nor scrape for their meat, nor yet take regard of
the place, that y^ young may follow her, wherefore it were better (being so
hot) not to let her depart the court, or to put her in some pen, or tie
her by the leg with some string the space of one month or six weeks,
until they be more stronger to guide and help themselves with some other.

Also there is a cur iositie of those persons which will hatche chickens
without the hen, which thing may be done, but it is not so sure nor so
commodyous, which is: they set the eggs an end in an Oven, always of a
temperate heat, upon hen dongue, and they lay bags of feathers under and
above, and tournes them often. Then on the eyghteenth day they do has them
in luke warm water, and on the one and twentieth day, they help to break the
shelles, and so takes them forth, and does nourish them as other chickens.

Again they may do this another way which is, they mark the day as they set
them in the oven, (as they do another hen) and then they take so many eggs
as they think good to set, and settes them an end in the oven, on bags of
sifted hen dongue, in compassing them round therewith, like a neaste, and
then they make a bed of hen dongue, and lays it over the bags, on the
which bed they set their eggs an end, as before is declared, and then they
cover them with other hen dongue, and lays bags thereon again, so that
there do no other thing touch them, then after the fourth and fifth day they
turn the Eggs gently once a day, and sets them so that one Egg do not
knock another, and at the fifteenth day the chickins will begin to pick in
the shells, then ye must help them forth, and break the tops of the
shelles, and set them unto another Hen that has but a few chickens, and
these chickens are in all things of their own proper nature.

How to keep eggs long. Cap. 8.
THe houswife that would profit by keeping and selling of eggs, she must (as
some say) keep them in a warm place in Winter, as in straw and such like,
well covered therein, and in the spring toward summer, in fresh branne, or
meal according to the ancient counsel, which under correction I believe the
contrary, for the straw is fresh and warm and the branue or meal is hot, it
follows then that eggs kept hot, will not endure nor last good so long as
those that are kept cold, as those which are kept in dry salt, or to
sleke them in salie water it does deminish, but ye shall not doubt those eggs,
to take any evil cast thereby, a sweet selld is also good for to keep them
in both in winter and also in Summer.

Again, Columella says, the manuer to keep eggs long time, is, in the
winter in straw, and in summer in branne or meal, some do put them first five
or six hours in fine beaten fault, and then they wash them and lay them in
straw or bran, and some keeps them among beans, and others keep them in
bean meal, and some do let them remain in unbeaten fault, and other some
do soke them in brine or salt water, but like as chese do keep them from
rotting, yet thereby they will diminishe and waste, and they will not be so full
of meat as those which are newly laid: wherefore the best is, if they
trouble you, to sell them, because those which are put in brine, cannot so long
be kept full, but will waste: hens, duckes and others will lay without the
Cock, but will not be young.

Eggs to gather and keep. Cap. 9.
THese kind of poultrie hens are accustomed to lay eggs all the year but
specially in the spring they do commonly begin (in could countries) to lay
first in Iaunarie, about the fifteenth day, but if ye feed and nourishe them
well, they will lay souer, wherefore it shall be good in bringing them forward to
give them barlye half sodde, for that will make them hot, and to lay more
sooner and more oftener, and also greater Eggs then others, but ye shall mix
with this Barlye, of Millet Wheat sodde which will also heat, and increase
more courage in the hens, and also to give them of the other meat
aforesaid, which ought to be given to the goers abroad, and to give to each
hen 4. ounces of Barley, mixed with millet wheat: if so be you have not
fetches, give them of the Wheat calde myl.

Ye shall see also to so many as do lay abroad, to have from time to time of
clean straw in their neastes, and often changed with fresh straw, for a laying
hen does like that well, for it will keep them from fleas and other like
vermin, which often they bring with them when they come to their neastes to
lay: ye shall mark also those hens when they lay, although most hens do
give a warning when they have laid, in, cackling, and yet some Hens will hold
their peace when they have laid, and some hens will (when they have laid) but
clock, wherefore ye must look and vistte their Neastes when they have laid,
and then gather their eggs together, and all those hannes that have laid that
day, for those eggs are best to be put under a hen that clocks, as for
the other eggs ye may sell: the cheifest eggs to hatche are those which are
newest laid, and yet ye may set other eggs also which are older laid, so they
be not above ten days old.

Eggs to have all Winter. Cap. 10.
Hens commonly begins to lay betwixt February and march, and then young
hens lay a year and half well, and at the two years end they are then better
then at the first, and then must ye see that they be well fed, as sometime
with good Ores mixte with Fenicreeke, to make them more hoter, and if ye will
then have them to lay great eggs, your Hens must not be to fat, for
commonly pullets and fat hens will lay small Eggs, pullets because they
are but young, and old hens because they are so fat, therefore ye must mix
their meat with chalk and put of beaten brick into their troughes with some
wine and water mixte, and so let them have it daily for a space, or to give
them of Barlye half sodde and mixed with tares, or the grain calde millet.
Wheat. Hens do commonly seace laying about the third of November, when the
cold begins to come, and then feeding on blackbriers, elder, and other
fruit, but for being troubled, ye might choose of the fairest hens for to
lay eggs all the Winter, as well as at other times, which order is, ye must
nourish them with tosted bread, and then soked ale or small Wine, mixte with
some water: Some do take of Water and milk, and sokes the tostes therein,
from the evening to the morning and so gives it them on the morrow to their
breakefast, and at night they give them some otes, or barlye, and for ye time
ye must not let them be trodden of the cock, and after the first laying also,
let them be kept from the Cock, and so they will long continue good, and
when your hens are past three years it shall be best to sell or to eat them,
for after those years they will hardly lay but wax barren, therefore it shall
be good to change them for youger hens if ye can: and again, some do mark
the places of those hens which are given to lay mute, or make no noise, those
hens must not be let go abroad to seek their neastes (for else ye shall
have small profit of them) but only to bath them in the sun, when the day is
fair, and the^ to fee them had in again. If a hen be trodden of a crow, as
some be, she either dies or waxes barren, or prospers not after.

Chickens of a later brood. Cap. 11.
THose Chickens that come of a later brood, some good huswiues does hold
opynion, that they will be better layers, then those yt come in the spring, the
other says they are best for that purpose, if they may be norished and well
fed in the first winter, but yet by your leave, they will be more tender in cold
times, then the other that are bred in the spring: because they are all winter
brought up in the house, wherefore they are calde house chickens: but those
hens that brings up their chickens abroad, and never comes in the house all
summer, are the best, and they will be much fayrer and harder to live then
the other brought up in the house: and also more profitable if she can keep
them from spoiling till they be great.

How to feed Chickens from the damme. Cap. 12.
TO feed and nourishe Chickens from the damme, ye must use to give them meat
thrice a day, in the morning, noone, and at night, and also to give fresh
water, and always set by their meat, so shall ye always keep them fair
and from the pippe: for when they have eaten any meat they will desire to
drink thereunto, and if they have not always fresh water by them, they will
seek and drink of the next puddle and foul water they find, and that will
soon breed in them the pippe, by the which it causes a mortal poyso^ in
them, and it will make them droope, and hang their wings, and at length dye
thereof. And ye must cleanse out all the tares and darnell, from the barley and
other meat ye give them, and so feed them with the foresaid meat till they
wax more stronger: ye must also perfume them with penneriall, and rosemary,
and to perfume your other poultrie, ye shall take Isope, Linseed or flax, and
burn it, and hold the heads of your poultrie with their mouths open, over the
said fume, and this will preserve them also from the pippe.

The pippe, and the cause, to help also. Cap. 13.
AL Poultrie are subject to the pyppe on the tongue, which will grow on the end
thereof like a thin scale, and it will let them to feed. One occasion there is
when they lack drink, or else when they have drunk trobled or filthy water,
or have eaten of filthy and stinking meat out of the channel, donghill, or
other durtye place, whereas lies the garbage of some filthy flesh, or such
like, or any evil sauoure will breed the pippe. Therefore if ye fume your
poultrie sometimes with Sauine, Bays, Rosemarye, or Gynnsper, it will save
them from the pippe.

Also they say the pippe will be a hard scale on the tip of their tongues and
to help the same, (some takes it of with his nail) and some do steep a cloue
of Garlic in oil olive, wherewith they chafe and rub his bill, and they do
make the^ to eat of stauesaker among their meat, also Dioscorides says, the
beries and leaves of Priuet to be given them, will preserve both Cocks and
capons from the pippe: again, some do use to give them Garlike cut in pieces
with butter, and given them when the pippe is take of, and then with your mouth
to spurt a little Ale, Wine, or Bear into their mouths: Again, other some
do raise the pippe softely with their nail, or the point of a Knife, and so
takes it off gently, and wash it then with ale or bear, and so let him go, or
to rub it with salt and Vinigere, or lay thereto of beaten Garlic which is
counted good against the pippe: again others do keep the pippe when it is
taken off, and gives it him to drink with ale or bear, and they say it will
help, whereof they have a proverb which says, if he eat not the pippe, the
pip will eat him: and also to save them from the piype, some do put into
their throtes the blades of Garlic stieped in warm oil, and do sprinckle
their bills with men's brine warm, and then holds them close together along
time after, so that by the bitterness of the urine, makes the^ to cast the
pippe, and fleame at their nose. Wild grapes mixte with other meat, is good
for them or beaten and stampte and so given to drink with water. These are
good remedies for poultrie that are sieldome sick, if fleame have already take
their eyes, they will not then eat, then must ye slit their jaws to cause ye
matter to come forth that is gathered under their eyes, then rub it with a
little beaton salt and parcelie, this grief breeds commonly when they abide
much cold, weate and hunger, or in summer when they drink of a standing
puddle, or foul water, as is before said: again, Chickins when they wax
old, are subject to have the Rye in their head and eyes, catarres, rumes, and
distillations, at their nostrils: through the cold and numnesse of their
feet, and to drink the water of yse, or frosen water, or too much cold taken
through the fault of the henhouse, being to open in the night or sitting abroad
on Trees, or under the eaues of houses when it raynes, and such extreme
cold, causes them to be more founded in their feet, which in some poultrie
breeds the gout, specially in tender birds, as young Turquies and such, and
also the gout may come by the drinking of ice water, all these do breed the
like diseases aforesaid, whereby many dies thereof.

To help the Catarre or rewme in poultrie. Cap. 14.
THey teach to put a pen cross through their nostrils, and then they do
bathe them with luke warm water, and some time they do warm their feet,
specially of such as are yet young and tender: and some do use to lap them in
woollen clothes, wool, and in feathers, and so keeps them in a vessel by the
fire side, or in some warm oven, or such like place, then if the Catarre do
still continue on the eyes and toward the beak, ye must then gentlye cut it,
and lance the impostume, and put that matter forth that is conieiled therein
and so put thereon a little beaten salt.

How many hens to a Cock. Cap. 15.
COlumella says xii. hens shall be sufficient for one good cock which will
cause them the rather to be of one color, and yet says he, our ancestors
did use to give but five hens to one cock, which caused the^ rather to be
of diverse colors some white, some gray, some reddish, and some taunye, some
black, and some of a speckled color, which are not thought to be so good as
the red and graye speckled: and to have hens all of one color is best, and the
hens all of one color (save the white) are counted the best laiers. Again,
Stephanus says that twelve hens to one good Cock is sufficient, and yet (says
he) our auncetours did give but five Hens to a Cock, which being so few (as
some judge) it did cause the^ to be neither white nor gray, but part reddish
tawnye, and black, which are (among the rest) not counted the best Hens to
lay or breed.

Of Hens that hatches abroad, as in bushes. Cap. 16.
Hens that sit abroad or other poultrye, ye shall take her and blindfilde
her softly in the evening, and take up all her eggs, with so much of the nest as
ye can, and then set her where ye shall seem good, and lay therein her eggs as
they were before, and then set the hen softly thereon, and deck the nest
with green boughs like the place she came from, and so shut her in all that
night, on the next day give her meat and water: but let her not forth the
space of three days, but give her meat and water in the place, and so she
will sone forget the other place. Thus ye may have her and her chickens in more
safty then to let her sit abroad: ye must not rashly set all sort of hens, but
first learn and know their natures, for some will sit well, and sone forget
her chickens: others will bring up and nourish chickens better then sit, and
some in sitting will break their eggs as aforesaid which are better to sell
the^ sit: also as soon as a hen have ended her first lay, she will then
covet to sit, wherein you must have reason, and see that ye set her with no
more eggs then she may well cover, the number of eggs that ye ought to set a
hen, may not be above twenty and three, and they ought to be all of one
sort, as of one hen, and yet not always of one hens laying, for ye must give
the^ according to the time in January they give unto a hen xv. eggs, in March
xix. and in April xxi. and so all the summer unto the first day of October
xxi. and after that time no more, for if ye breed Chickins in the cold winter
they are like to dye.

Cause of Flux in poultrie. Cap. 17.
ALso the flux of the bellye in Poultry which thing does make them weak it
comes often times to poultry by eating of moist meat, or else they have eaten
of some laxatiue herbs, or if their henhouse have been left open all night,
or taken some cold sitting upon trees abroad, or in open places a nights, or
else by eating of some fruit, these and such like will cause them to have the
flux, which does much weaken them, whereby they will not lay so soon nor
desire the Cock.

Remedies against the flux. Cap. 18,
THe Remedies are these, ye shall take and make powder of the husks of
Acornes, then mix it with barlye meal, and with red wine, so make a paste
thereof and give it them, or cast it unto them cut in small pieces, or give
unto them the whites of eggs hard roasted, and then beaten with two parts of
the curnels of great reysons beat to fine powder, and so made in paste as the
other and cast unto them. Another, they make paste of beaten barley, with chalk,
and mixed with the water wherein Poungarnets or Quinces have heene sod in, and
so do ye give it unto them.

Against stopping of the belly in Poultrie. Cap. 19.
IF your Poultrie be stopped in the vent and closed up, specially often times in
young chickens. They do take and open the vent with a straw or such like, and
then clippe away all the feathers about the vent or tuell, and also on the
insides of both their thies, to the end their dung thereby be not holden or
kept long, which often times is the cause of the stopping of the tuell, or vent,
and for the stopping of the greater poultrie, they use to put a quantity of
honey among their water, and also their meat, and that will help them again.

Against lice and vermin in Poultrie. Cap. 20.
WHereas lyce, fleas, hoggelice, sow worms and such like, do trouble and
hurt poultry, so that they cannot quietly feed nor rest a nights, whereby they
will wexe poor, which increases when they cannot bathe in dust, Sand, or
ashes, they get them also in scraping abroad among foul straw, or on
dunghils, or gotten when they fit in nests not made clean, or in the henhouse
by their dung lying long there, which corruptes their vodyes, and breeds lice
and fleas, the remedy, ye shall take ye powder of pepper mixed with warm water,
and therewith bathe them, or take fine powder of stauesaker, and mix it with
lie, and so wash them therewith, or to bathe them in soap water, which is
good to kill lyce, or the fine powder of pryuer, mixte with viniger, and so
wash them therewith, again some do wash them with Wine wherein Commen is
sodde, and Stauesaker, or with the Water that wild fetches or tares has been
sodde in, all these are good to kill lice and Fleas in poultrie.

Of Vermin that bytes and stinges poultrie. Cap. 21.
YE must also from time to time look unto your poultrie for stinging or
biting with venomous worms, by haunting their houses, and breeding in the
dongue or old walls, as spyders, Eftes, snakes, shroue mice which is venomous
of nature and house mice or field mice, which will trouble poultrie, or Todes
which will covet to sit on warm eggs: also against biting, ye shall anoint
the venomed place with oil of Scorpyon, or put thereon of Methridate, also
give them a little Triacle with ale or bear, moreover against Vermin that
deuoures poultrie and eggs in the henhouse in the night, the auncyents did
counsel to strew and set poses of rue in the open holes or door, and likewise
they council to cast of Bryne all about on the walls and sides of the
henne-house, the doors and windows, and to embroy or annoint the walls, and
the doors and windows of the henhouse, with the gall of a Cat, dog, or Fox.

Of sitting hens that rise in weat and raynie days. Cap. 22.
WHen as your hens do sit, after they have sat a day or two, yea three days
or more sometimes, not rising to eat, then hungar will constrayne them to rise,
and when they go abroad to seek their meat and water, if the day be then
weat, ye shall not suffer the^ to go abroad and weat their feet, for when as
they return unto their neaste, and touch their warm eggs with their weat
feet, the eggs thereby may soon chill, and thereby come to small proof,
therefore in weat times and raynie days let not your hens that fit go
abroad to seek their meat, but set meat and water by them, so long as it is
weate abroad: so shall their eggs come to good, otherwise they shall be in
danger of chilling by her weat feet, and thereby come to naught, as those
eggs which do chill, whereas the hen in seeking meat abroad, is long
absent from her neaste, in mean time they cool, and for those hens that will
break their eggs and eat them, ye shall make a neast egg, and plaster him
all over with whytes of Eggs beaten with plaster and chalk, and laid
thereon and dride in the air, and when it is hard it will be like the shell
of an Eg, and make that the neast egg, ye may make neaste Eggs of plaster
and chalk, and use them as is before declared.

What time to carue young Cock chickins. Cap. 23.
TO cut young Cockrels to make them Capons, the time thereof is best to cut or
carue them soon after their dam have left them, or when they cry or pule no
more after her, as when they begin to crow and wax hot to tread the pullets.

The gelding or caruing of them is, to take away in the^ the hot desire they
have to tread the pullets, and to make them chaste, wherein there is two
manner of ways, which is not only to loose their stones, but also when their
spores is seard with a hot iron and so consumed. Then after if any spur do
swell or rancle, ye shall cover it with potters earth or clay til it be hole.
This way is more difficult, and yet used among the Greeks at Delose.

The common way of cutting or caruing is not to be dispraysed, and is most
known as this way: they take them in the morning commonly (the sign being
good, and on the wane of the Moon) and lays the cock in her lap upon his
back, in trussing up his legs by his sides, the^ the caruer pluckes first
away the Feathers above the vent, and takes up the upper skin with the point
of the Needle, and slits it ouertwart an inche long, and then takes up the
under thin skin, next the guts and slits that likewise, then the Earuer
annoyntes her forefinger of her right hand, with Oil or butter, and puts it
gently to the raines of the cock on the left side, and with her finger brings
forth the stone. Then she annoyntes the forefinger of her left hand, and puts
it unto the stone on the right side of the Cock, and with her finger bringes
it forth, so done, she places the guts and sowes the skin up again with a
threede, and then annoyntes that place with some fresh butter, and lets him
go, but if the day then be cold or weate, keep them in the house warm for a
day or two after their Caruing, but if it be fair, let them go abroad and when
they are a year and a half old, there is no more disposition or rankenesse in
them, then ye may choose and take the most fairest and greatest Capon to
govern and lead your Chickins, although there is not so great stoutnesse in
him, as in a cock.

Against the inflaming of the eyes and the hawe. Cap. 24.
Against the inflaming of the eyes in poultrie, ye shall boil in water
sothernewood, and wheaten bread, and therewith bath their eyes, also ye may
bathe them with the distilled Water of pourcelayne and Woman's milk, or with
the juice of Pourceleine mixte with a little honey, or the juice of Sheapheardes
purce mixte with Woman's milk. And against the hawe in the eye, ye must rub
the eye with bole Ammoniac, Common and honey, beaten all well together, as much
of the one as the other, and so lay it too, or if ye have the practice to lift
it up warilye and lightly with the point of a needle, and so take it away, also
the juice of ground iuie with the Berries or leaves stampte with water or wine
is better, and plaster wise lay it too, and remove it once in 24. hours and it
will help.

Cramming and fatting of Capons. Cap. 25.
WHen as ye take up your Capons to make them fat, ye must prepare of
wheaten meal, or barlye meal mixte with two parts of branne. Then ye shall
heat ale or bear, but ale is the better, or luke warm Worte, and therewith
temper your meal and branne. Some do put thereunto fresh hogs grease, or of
sheep, or oil Olive, and when it is all tempered together, they take a small
piece, and make and roll it betwixt their hands, of two inches long or more,
and small at both the ends, like this figure ^, then they dippe it in milk,
ale, or oil, and give a Capon so many thereof as ye shall think good, to a
great Capon xx. roles, and to the other as ye shall see cause: thus ye must
feed them twice a day at morning and evening, and so ye shall make them
fat in a month or less, but always ye must see that their meat is
digested before ye give them any more, for some be of a slow digestion, and if
ye give meat upon meat they will loath it: Again, they do fat Capons in
some countries, as in Mauce, and in Britain (as they say) when they would
fat them, they siele up their eyes, as they do other birds, and so gives
them meat to eat, as Corn half sodde, and then made in paste, and so into
pellets like yt other, or made in small morsels, and feeds them therewith, and
so they are made sault in six or ten days at the most, but ye must keep the^
from Vermin, and filing themselves with their own dongue.

Meat for hens and other poultrie, and where and when to feed them. Cap. 26.
THe best meat and feeding for, your hens is bruised Barlye, or Fetches, or
bruised pease, likewise of wheat calde Millet, or the wheat panicke, these are
the cheifest for them to eat, for these do both heat and dry them,
wherefore they use to siste out the coursest of the wheat, and mix it with
the other, and to give them all wheat it were to costlye, in many places, ye
may therefore give them the seeds of cockle, with branne and other meal not
much sifted, but if there be not some meal with it mixte, it will not then
give them so good an appetite.

And for those hens that are lean, they do give them the leaves and seeds of
Mellilot herb, for that is very good to make the^ have an appetite to their
meat, and whereas ye cannot have that, then ye may give the^ the pomes of
straind grapes (if they lay not) or raisons stampte with Barlye meal, for
that will make them more given to lay, or if ye give them the seeds of Raye,
it will cause them also to lay, but after Autumn they lay then sildome,
because they straye abroad and eat berries and cold fruit not ripe, which
makes them not disposed to lay: then must ye give them store of meat twice a
day in your court, morning and evening, to cause them to tarry that strayes
abroad then let them not go far from the henhouse at night, not to tarrye
long a morninges for their meat, for straying abroad, and have no care of that
place, and every night for to tell them if ye have all or not, for soon ye may
be deceived, also ye must sayc Sand or Ashes along the wall sides for them to
bathe in, for thereby they cleanse their feathers from vermin and filth: if ye
will beleetie Heracleus an Ephesian which says, that Hogs do cleanse them
in the mire and durte, and poultrie do cleanse them in sand, ashes, and dust.

To fat hens best. Cap. 27.
Because it is the common office of the Councreyutan or woman to fat hens, and
poultrie, so likewise it is for ye craftsman to buy keep and se^^ them, and
because it shall not be vinn^^ ete for both sorts to feed them, ye shall
hunderstand ye must do this: ye (...) prepare a warm place and dark, and put
each hen by her self in a pen; made so narrow that she cannot almost
turnt her ther^^^, and those pens in u^^ have on (...) sides two holes the
one ^^pu^ forth her head, and the other her tag^^ and and ^^^pe, and so to give
her meat (...) she has disgrested that in her craw, and to cleanse her pen
often, that her dongue do not hinder her fatting, ye must also put clean
straw under her, or soft hay of the later season, for if they stand hard
in the pen, they will scantly fat, ye must place all the feathers on her
head and under her wings, and on her thies, those of her head and wings
because there shall come no Lice to trouble her, the other feathers on her
thighs, because the dongue shall not annoy and cumber her tuell, her meat
shall be Barlye meal made in past with water, and fashioned in pellets long
ways, after this figure ^ or as it is before declares, for the feeding or
cramming the Capon, and so to make her to swallow them, the first day it shall
be best to give her but little meat, until she be accustomed to digest it,
for above all ye must see that she digest her meat well, and give her no
more so long as she has any meat in her croppe, and when she is filde, let
her go a little without the pen, so that she go not far, then if any thing
prick or bite her she will complain, and so ye may help her, and thus ye
may see the general rule how to fat hens, and if ye will have them fat
and tender withal, ye must kneade your barley meal with water and honey, and
that will fat them, and make them tender meat: some do put into 3. parts of
water, one part of wine, or strong Ale, and stiepes wheaton bread therein, and
that will also fat the^ well, if ye begin to fat them in the new of the
Moon, as it is counted best, ye shall have her fat about the twencith day
after, also in the mean time if she do refuse her meat, ye must then
diminishe or give her less, so many days as ye have fed her, the full time
that ye should fat her, is but xxv. days, thus much for their meat, and
fatting of hens.

The feeding of big Chickins. Cap. 28.
THe feeding or fatting of big Chickens in the Coope or pen: They do
commonly give them steeped bread in Ale, sometimes of dry bread, and their
drink milk and water, or of soked bran in milk, and sometimes ye must give
them barley, and to feel them one after another, if there be any thing in their
crops, for if that which they have eaten is not gone or consumed, nor their
craw yet empty, that signifies undigested and like not yt meat, then give
them no more till they have digested that, and for younger Chickins that go yet
with the damme, ye must not let them go far abroad, till they be strong,
but let them remain with the hen in the house, or pen, and give them
otemeale or Barley meal, till they be more stronger and keep them as much as
ye may from venomous worms, as Adders, Suakes, Todes, and such, for if they
breathe and blow on them it is a poison come to them as evil as the pestilence
which kills them, against such venomous worms the remedy is: ye shall
burn in that place the horn of a Stagge in powder, or of Gallamum or Woman's
hear, or hogs Dog, or Cats hear, for the smoke thereof will cause the Snake
or Adder to fly, and void, ye must see to have them in temperate places, not
to here nor to cold, for they may not (being young) endure much heat (...)
much cold, wherefore it were good to keep them temperate in the pen with the
dam fortye days, till they be more able to go abroad, ye must also clip the
down between their theyes, and under their rumpe, that their dongue wax not
hard, and stop the natural Conduite, therefore ye must see often unto them
that their ventes may have issue.

To feed or cramme young pullets. Cap. 29.
FOr the feeding and cramming of young pullets a very good way is this, to make
them fat and tender to eat, ye shall keep them in a dark place as aforesaid
or blindfield them: then take ground barlye small, and sifte our all the branne
thereof, then they do use to moysten the said barlye meal with warm milk,
and some takes ale, and some bear, and so they cramm^ and feed them as
aforesaid, morning and evening, in giving to them so much at once as they may
well digest and to help their digestion: some do mix with their meat of
Mustarde seed, or annie seeds: thus ye may fat them in short space.

Ordring and letting forth Poultrie amorninges. Cap. 30.
YOu that have henhouses, your hens and poultrie ought to be let forth a
morninges with rising of the sun, or within half an hour after, and to
rooste at night half an hour before sun set, this has been the common use
among farmers houses in most countries, and in Autumn some will not let them
forth of the henhouse a days for a certain time, but gives them meat and
water there thrice a day, or oftener then others, for they give unto each hen
eight ounces of grain a day, and those that goes abroad but four or six
ounces a day, and those that be kept in pens to feed, to use the^ as is
before declared, and they ought to have on the Sun side, a long window made
with lath, that the sun may shine on them, which will make them to pick and
cleanse their feathers, and thereby will like the better, and those that shall
look unto them must be painful, clenlye and trusty, otherwise there is
small profit or gaynes to be had by the breeding of them but travel and datly
charge, therefore ye must look well unto them always, specially, when they
are young and tender, for else there is no gains but loss, and time spent in
vain.

The order in caruing Poultrie of some here in England. Cap. 31.
SOme do use to carue or cut young cockrels when they be nigh a quarter old or
more, as being hatched in march, they carue them in August following, or when
they do grow in a heat, and wax proud and crow often, or do offer to
tread the young pullets, and rooste before the hens, then it shall be best to
carue them, and suffer them not to go to long (for as some do say) if they
tread before they are cut, their flesh will not be so tender, and the older
they wax the more danger it shall be to cut them, wherefore to carue them
betimes shall be always best.

The order of caruing here in England of some is thus: they take them up in the
morning, then the caruer sits down on a low stool, and another person holds
the body of the Cockrel in her lap, bowing his feet close by his sides, and
holding them down with his hands fast on his bellye, and laying him on his
back, and turning his tail toward the Caruer. Then the Caruer shall pluck
away with her right hand all the feathers and down clean from his pannell,
the breadth of a shilling or more to make the skin bare, then the Caruer
takes a steel needle, and pricks through a part of the upper skin, and so
takes it up and cuttes it ouerthwarte his pannell, an inche and a half, and
next his guts ye shall have another thin skin and take up a part of that
warily for pricking his guts, nor let him strive as little as ye may, for if he
do, he is in more danger to prosper after, then the Caruer with the forefinger
of the right hand shall spit or annoint it with oil, and with her finger
lift up softly his guts, in putting softlye down her forefinger unto his
raynes (on his left side) of his rompe, and there plucks away his stone with
her forefinger to the cut place, and so take it out with her forefinger and
thombe, then the Caruer spits or annoyntes the forefinger of her left hand,
and then puts it softly down to the raynes on the right side of the Cock, and
there takes up the other Stone with her forefinger, as in the other side, if
there be any, for some will have but one stone, then put in his guts and
place them again, the^ with a needle and thread sow up close the skin
again, that no wind enter into the waund, and beware in stitching his guts
with the skin, then annoynte it al over with fresh grease, and so let him or
them go, but then if the time or day be cold, weat, or windy, the best is
to keep them in the house a day or two after, and give them meat and water,
and they will be nothing the worse.

Other things necessary to know for the keeping of Poultrie Cap. 32.
THose that will gain and follow my counsel they must first consider how
many hens they may keep, and then be ginne to nourishe them accordingly,
first to know what time one ought to gather eggs to use and keep: then after
to hatche and how they should be set to the hen well, some in setting eggs
within xxiiii. hours, will take each egg, and look on them against a Candle
or sun, if there appear red strekes in the eggs, those she settes, and
those whith has none, takes them away and eats them, and when your heune
has hatched, look to the nourishing of your Chickens well, till they be able
to do some pleasure: in doing this, they shall gain in governing well all your
poultry about your house, yt number that he must have, he must consider off:
Many Farmers may well have two hundred head of poultrie: to nourishe and
govern this number well, it shall be enough for one person to feed and save
them from dangers, also take heed of being a white hen, for she is counted
no good layer, and she is seen far of, whereby she is in more danger then
others: and the black hen is no good layer, nor good to keep, for she is in
danger to be trodden of the flesh Crow, and then she will never prosper
after: therefore keep such hens as are of a good color breeders and
layers, as the gray, the broune, and red feathered, and such and their bodies
to be big and large, then they will lay the greater eggs, their breast full
and square with a great head, her creastes read and straighte, and her claws
to be indifferent great, which is a good sign in them, and those which have
five claws so they have no spores growing on the insides of their legs for
those with spores, is a sign of males or male kind, and they will sieldome
lay nor abide the treading of the cock, and when they sit they will break
their eggs with their spurs, therefore choose to keep those that are best to
nourish and lay, and sell the rest. Chickins after their hatching will lay
within seven months after, as being hatchte at Lammas, will lay at March
next after, and in Autumn: because they seace laying by eating of fruit
abroad, some do think it good then to keep a less number, and sell all
above 3. years old, and those that sieldome lay, and not good to breed, or
mar their eggs in sitting, and those that crow like the cock, or tread on
other hens, these sorts of poultrie are not profitable, nor yet good to
keep, nor those Chickens which are of a later brood, as hatched after the
fifteenth day of September, for the time then will wax cold, and they will
smallye grow and increase of body, but to keep your Cock chickins till they
tread the hens it shall be best, and then to choose the fairest, the reason
is: for ye shall hardly find a good cock, til ye have seen their proof, then
to choose and take those ye like among other, the red cock is counted one of
the best, and when your hens do seace laying by eating fruit in Autumue,
some do keep so many hens in the house, as be layers all the time of
Autumn, and there gives them meat and water for a season, and thereby they
have had plenty of eggs, so that you keep their house clean, and for them that
goes abroad in Autumn, to give them Corn it is but lost, but let them shift
for themselves for that time, and those ye keep in the house, make their
pearches and neastes, so that one sit not over another, for filing those
under, nor their pearches set nigh together, for biting or fighting one with
another of them which will cause them to have less love to the house, and
when ye have boughte strange poultrie and young, put them first in your hen
house at night, straude before with some meat, which will make them after to
love the house, and so use them with meat two or three eueninges after, till
they be acquainted with the henhouse. Thus much necessary so know of the
nature and gouernmente of poultrie. Also, if ye set Geese together in pens,
if one hatch before an other, those that since will rise from their eggs and
let them cool, and go with the other that hatched therefore let not one Goose
see an other hatch before hen own be come forth: Barlye half so^ and fed,
will make hen or ducke to lay great Eggs: if ye mix it with the seed of
Citisus so called in french.

The nature and gouernmente of Geese. Cap. 33.
GEese among other foul are most profitable for husbandmen and also for
others, because their bodies is a common meat, they do pleasure to the
Geutlema^ and yeoman, and the grease profitable other ways, and among other
water foul those which the Greeks do call Amphibia fowls of two kind of
lives, because they feed as much on the water, as on ye land. Among all
other the Goose is most profitable for the buier, and also the seller and to
the husbandman, because they need not have to great a charge and care for
their meat as other must have, for they do keep as good a watch always as the
Crane or Dog, all water Foul must have water, wherefore the Goose cannot
live or be kept long without water and Grass, it shall not be good to keep
them where there is low brousing herbs, for they will croppe, kneble, and
eat so far and so hye as they may reach, but if ye have any boyde ground
or place by some poude or lake where they may have gresse or corn to feed
them, there it shall be best for the^ to be, I am of this opinyon, not by any
great proof, but because I see they are kept with small pain and travel,
wherefore we may with small charge have both the Geese and their feathers,
which feathers in some places they take not as ye take Corn in the field
once a year, but feathers some takes twice a year, which is, they elippe in
April, and pluck in August, for then they will come off lightlye, Geese where
as they come they will stain the ground, and for that cause if the country or
place will not bear them, they ought to have but certain, as every husband
man to have one Gander, and three geese, because they are a poison to grounds
but to keep in your several Court or houses and yeardes ye may have so many
as ye shall seem good.

Of places and houses for ordering of Geese. Cap. 34.
Columella says, those which has a desire to have a number of Geese, or
other water Foul, they ought to make places and houses for them to breed or
fat, and to be used after this sort it would do well, which is: ye must
have a large court close palde or walde of nine foot hye, that no Vermin may
enter into them, and all about within the same, to make allies and galleries
with partitio^s, and such chambers for one alone to sleep in, and over the
same to set your house for them made strong with Stone or Brick 4. foot
square, plaste about your court, and to each house a close door for them to
come in and out to lay, and also to shut them in when ye shall have cause,
then if there be not a ponde or river nigh unto the^, and to the house, ye must
then make one else to seek their water far off, which is not good, for
Geese that sit must have water to bathe them, when they rise from their
neast, or else (as some say) their eggs will not prosper, if there be no water,
you must make a ponde, and clay it in the bottom, for the water to remain,
and made somewhat deep, that they may plunge therein, for a saying is, a
Goose will not like without bathing and washing her often, no more then a
Beast without Pasture.

A ground and pasture best. Cap. 35.
THe ground and pasture to nourishe Geese best, is that which is like a
marishe or moist ground replenished with grass and other herbs, also ye
must sow other kind of feeding for them, as Fetches, mellilot, the three
leaued grass and fenigreke, and specially of Citory, which the Greeks call
Cerys, also it shall be good to sow of Lettise, for that is a tender herb
for the Goslings, and Geese does love them well, al other poulse is meat for
them.

To choose Ganders and Geese with all white Feathers. Cap. 36.
STephanus says, ye must provide to have of the greatest Ganders and Geese
that ye can get, and those which are white feathered, yet ye shall have many do
breed black Geese, and have them as tame as the other, but they come of the
wild kind and are skant so fruiteful as the other, nor so good to have,
wherefore nourishe as few of ye black Geese as ye may, because their flesh is
not so good, for it is more dryer, nor their feathers so wholesome for beds as
the other. The goose is very profitable for the husbandman and others, and also
they are great marrers of grounds, of profit, because there is no great
charge or care in breeding them, and they yielde mauye Eggs, and bring forth
many young, to great profit, for their Feathers serves many ways, for beds,
for Arrows, and quils for writers: and they are also hurtful unto grounds,
in stayning and marring Meadows, and Fields with their dongue, if they be not
kept out, they bruise herbs in gardens and spoil corn in Fields, their
dongue stayne al grounds where they come, so that no Beast will scant feed
after them, the wild hurt common fields, a number of them in half a day will
destroy a great piece of wheat, if it be but low, and the house Geese is more
hurtful, for they in feeding will pluck up the roots of Corn, with the
blades, and where they dongue there comes nothing after, but evil weeds: the
Ganders are loving to all the young Goslings: they are better to be all white
then gray, or mixte with two colors, and the black color is worste of all,
and of least goodness.

The laying and setting of Geese, and feeding the young Goslings. Cap. 37,
THe Goose does lay at three times in the spring, if she do not sit, at
first she will lay five Eggs, then four, and then but three, and some will
lay at each time twelve eggs, and some more, which time is from the first of
March, unto the end of June, and then no more, wherefore ye shall not forget
her first lay, but set them, for they will prove best, and ye time best to
set your Geese, is after winter is gone, as from the first of March unto
June, and not after, and when they have laid their later lay, they will covet
to sit, all the rest of the year they lay not, ye must also look well to
their laying, that they lay not abroad, for when they are enclinde to lay,
they will take up strawes as they go, and will cast them aside here and
there, on each side of them, and soon after then they will lay, wherefore
toward night ye must take them up, and feel how many be ready to lay, which
ye shall perceive if she be nigh laying, ye shall feel the end of hev egg
hard at her vent, then shut her up, and put her alone in a neast till she
have laid, so she will seek that place again to lay, where she have been
before, and when you set her take heed of her eggs, for ye must set her
of her own eggs, for a Goose loves not to sit but of her own eggs, if ye
set her of others, ye must have part of hirs withal, and then mark all the
other eggs, or else hers with ynke or such like, for they say, a Goose will
not hatche the eggs of another, if she sit not of her own withal. They set
the Goose on her eggs, as the pehenne on her eggs, with five or more under her,
but at least they set her with three eggs, ye may set a Goose with seven or
nine eggs, and the most do set a Goose but with fifteen Eggs, ye must
also remember when ye set her, to lay in ye straw under her of strong net
roots, which will (in hatching) preserve ye goslinges and is special good
against the stinging with nettles, for thereby (they say) they shall take
less hurt by stinging, and if there chance any to be stong, they dye thereof
commonly soon after.

To hatch in cold times the Goose will have then thirty days, and in
temperate times she will hatche (being well used) in xxv. days at the most,
and when they are hatched they must not then go abroad, or forth of the pen,
house, or court, the space of ten days till they wax more stronger, but
feed them in the house with the Dam, and give them Barley meal, or ote meal,
or stieped wheat, some do give them Garden cresse chopte small therewith,
which will make them to have an appetite, they give them sometime of stieped
barlye, or malt, or meal, chopped with Hemtockes and so given, or else with
barlye meal stieped, and mixed with honyed water, it shall be good to keep
them in the house with the damme, and there to feed them with meat and water,
till they may fly the danger of Crows and Kites, for when they are small,
the flesh crow will fette them away, if any remain behind the damme: and
when they are able to avoid the crow, then ye may let them go abroad with the
damme, or in a fair day being young, ye may put them abroad with the dam,
having one to keep them, and setting a Basin of water and meat by them, or
else not put abroad, and ye must look they be not stung with nettles, or
scrat with briers and thorns, nor when they have great hunger to let them go
abroad, but to give them Succorye small chope, or the tender leaves of Lettise,
if ye then let them go abroad to feed in pastures being young and hungry, they
will force themselves to pluck at herbs, which grow fast, and so falls
back, and lie sprauling on their backs, are so taken with Kytes and Crows.
Therefore it shall be more sure to keep them with the Damme in the house till
they are more of strength, and give them of mill wheat, or other wheat steept
in water and set by them, and when they are more stronger, ye may put them
in houses with others to fat as hereafter shall appear. Stephanus says, at
the months end ye may then chose your young geese and fat them, then take the
fairest and put them up into a court or pen, and fat them, for the younger
sort of geese ye may fat them in xxx. days, and the elder sort in two
months, ye must give the^ meat thrice aday, of barley mele and whay, or to
give them steeped wheat in water and honey. The barley does make their flesh
white, and the whaye does norishe and fat them. Some do take figs new
dride, and thereof makes a paste and gives them, and their drink must be bran
and water: and some when they do fat them, do pluck their feathers of their
heds and bellies, and the great feathers of their wings, and then sieles up the
eyes of the old Geese when they fat them, and gives them beans and pease and
fair water, which is a good fatting meat for ye country Goose, and also they
feed them with all sorts of poulse, first soked in warm water and branne which
do feed them well, and many do give them branne alone, made somewhat fat,
and does also give them of lettise, of Succorye, or Cressis to make them have
an appetite, and feeds them so thrice a day.

The fatting of young Geese. Cap. 38.
COlumella says, when young Geese are four months old, then they take the
greatest and fairest to fat them, for while they are yet but young, it is the
better fatting of them, then when they are more older, and these need not to
have no other thing but Barlye meal, and the flower of meal, and to be fed
therewith thrice a day, and they must have drink continually with their
meat, ye must also keep them in a close house or dark pen, and kept warm
withal, which serves much to make them forward to fat, and thus in two
months ye may fat the^ well, or in six weeks, the sooner when they are young
and tender, then when they are tough and old, and some will change their
meat often, and they will feed the better, and be the sooner fat.

How many Geese to one Gander, with other government. Cap. 39.
OUr Aunceters did give but 3. Geese to one gander, and we give six, but for
marring and staining of meadows, pastures, and fields, they are profitable for
the husband and keeper of house, as any other foul, and they require a small
tending, but when they are young, for the space of 3 weeks, or a month, and so
long to have a keeper till they be out of danger of the Crow and Rite, and to
keep them from eating evil weeds, as henbane which is calde the death of
Geese, and Hemlocke which is not good for them to eat much thereof, for it
will make them sleep so much, that they may be soon taken, and are in danger
(as some say) to dye thereof, to have many in a flock is not good, they use
not above thirty Geese in one flock, and our Aunceters did use but xx. in a
flock, for the bigger will beat, and be master always of the lesser, both
abroad and in houses, therefore it shall be good to part each breeding houses
by themselves, which houses must be always kept dry, for they love to sit
dry a nights, and to be strewed with fresh and soft straw, or with soft hay,
and often to be cleansed for breeding of Vermin, because that Geese are more
subject thereunto, then the hens are, the rest of their government and meat
is like unto other foul, and take heed of briars, nettles, Snakes, and other
venomous worms, while they are young, for a small thing killes them soon after
their hatching.

Of the feathers of Geese, which are best, and what time to pluck them. Cap.
40.
THe profit that many good huswittes do find by Geese feathers and others
is this: they use in many places yearly to take a fleece of their Geese, as
men do of their sheep, which feathers commonly they take in July and
August, and in some places they take their Geese feathers twice a year, in
march they clip all save their bellies, to cover their young, and they pluck
in August, and some do pluck in March, and says their feathers will come
the sooner or rather then when they are clipte, for in clipping the quilles
remain still till melting time, wherefore plucking them is rather counted
better (then clipping) to have two fleeses a year. Thus ye may use them as ye
shall see cause, to have their feathers for a more profit to furnish yearly
your beds which are occupied daily, as in Innes and such, but whereas there
are great pondes or rivers nigh your house, it is great danger to pluck the
feathers of their bellies, for whereas such cold waters are, it is a danger to
kill them, as experience has showed in some places of this realm, therefore if
ye pluck their bellies, to keep them from such places for a time it shall do
best. Of all feathers the swanne is the cheifest, and the feathers of the white
Goose next, the black or gray Goose feather next him and the Capon and pullet
next, likewise al other land foul, then Ducke, Wegin, Teale, and such water
foul are next, and are best to be rather put in cushions then in beds, because
they are more hotter, and a greater soker of men in beds, then the other, and
the Pigion worste feather of all, for they soke too much to be put in beds,
and are unwholesome, for they say if a sick person lie on a pillow of pigions
feathers, he shall long continue so without departing, which thing I hardly
believe, and likewise all sick feathers or bloodye Feathers are not good to be
put in beds, nor Coshions, because they do commonly breed worms, therefore
it is not good to put any in beds or coshions: thus much concearning the nature
and goodness of the Gose feather and others.

Of Duckes, Teales, Sheldrakes, and such like, Cap. 41.
Columella.
TAme Duckes (among the rest of water foul) is most profitable for the
husband man's house, and for once a year they are layers of many eggs, and
breeders also of many young, with a small attendaunce as the goose, save in the
time while they are young, and to have the like places convenient to nourishe
them in as the goose, but somewhat more chargeable, because they are great
feeders, and for all other sorts of water foul, as wild ducks sheldrakes,
wigions, morehennes, cootes, and such foul of the ponds: ye shall hardlye make
them tame being old, and likewise all other birds that uses to feed in
waters and marreshes, which are calde of our auncientes, birds of double
living or nourishment, to nourish and keep such which are accustomed so to
feed, and keep them in house, ye must choose a plain place closed about with
hye walls of xv. foot and covered above with railes, wyar, or nets of big
cord, to the end they fly not out, nor eagles, Rites, bozards, or crows,
shall come in, and all the walls without and within ought to be polished
smooth, to the end that cattes, or other venomous worms may not catch hold and
climb to come in, and in the midst of the same court ye must make a ponde of
two foot deep, So long and wide as the place will serve, and that the water
there may run full continually to the brinime thereof, that the banks may not
be marde, and also made with plaster, and cimmond in the bottom, and all about
the sides, paued with smooth stone, that no weeds do grow therein, but that the
foul may have clear water still run through, and in the midst ye shall make a
mount of earth, and thereon sow beans of Egip, and such other green herbs
as commonly comes in waters, to cover and hide those foul therein: for some of
them loves to be hid in tuftes of grass, roses, sedge, and such: notwithanding
ye must not cover their holes, for (as I have said) the water must be all the
day without weeds, to this end, that in the heat of the day, when they would
come forth to bathe and pick them they may then swim and plunge in the
clear water at pleasure, for so it is best agreing to their nature, whereas
they may enter into water at their will to take pleasure and watch for small
fish therein, or flies upon the water. Therefore ye shall do them great
wrong, to put them where they cannot come to the water when they would, and
all about beneath at the bottom of the walls, ye shall make holes xx. foot
from the water, and all the sides covered with berbes, and by the wall sides to
make holes of stone, a foot square, then cover the^ to make their nestes
therein, and garnished all about with boughs and branches which they will
like the better, and ye must make a channel for to convey the running water.
and use to feed your foul in the said water as other foul, and to give them
myll wheat or pannicke wheat, or other grain, and feed them in the said
water, or with barley, ground corns, and pomes of reasons, which is also good
for fish, which ye shall put in the water (to feed them) of Creuis shrimpes,
loches, Menues, bansticles, and such river or brook fish, which will never
wax big, all these they will take pleasure to hunt after in the water. The
wild Ducke when she lays, the Drake shall not know, for if he might know,
he would suck all her eggs, they tread in the time of the spring, as other
wild Foul do, in March or after, in which time ye must cast unto them of
rushes, or ventes, and small twigs into their court, which they will gather,
and make their neastes withal. There is an ancient rule that whenever ye
would have a great flock of these foul, ye must gather of wild Ducke
eggs where they lay, and put them to a hen to hatche, and when they are
hatched, they will then leave their wildness with use of the hen, and then
when they wax big, ye may put them into your close Court, as I have
aforesaid, and these will breed and multiply, for if ye take wild Duckes
which are accustomed to live at liberty, and the^ shut up in a close place,
they will never lay, being so kept, very few or none. A saying is, if ye
touch the eggs of a wild Ducke when she lays, with your bare hand, she
will not come and lay no more there, and if ye take away still her eggs and
leave but one, she will still lay till she be so poor, that ye shall take
her on the neast. This shall suffice here for the keeping of the Duckes, and
other Water Foul.

How to take your wild Ducks in the Court. Cap. 42.
Stephanus.
WHen as you would have any of your wild Duckes taken, to make them more
tamer, ye shall cast (in the court) unto them grain mixed with the lies of wine
sweet wine, or sower, and lay it on their accustomed place to feed, give them
also paste made with Wine, or a leuin paste with branue and Wine lies, cast it
in the said place, and when they have eaten thereof, they will be drunk, then
ye may take and choose of the best without great trouble of the other foul.

The common feeding and the nature of Duckes. Cap. 43.
THe Ducke is a gross, greedye, and filthy feeder, and a hot Bird of
Nature, and still will be eating. They use to feed them with all kind of
pulce, as ye feed a hog, and to have them fat they give them gurgions of
corn, but ye must always let them have water by them, for they must still be
drinking as they eat, they love also to wander in summer in the evening, in
August and September to seek after Worms, Beetles, Frogs and Todes, and they
will eat them, and when she has hatched, she is careful of her young, if any
of ye young be stong or angerde they be so peuishe, they will dye straighte
way, and yet many lets them go with the dam into Waters or pooles, being but
two or three days old: she will make her neast her self, against she lay
and sit, and so she hatches in xxv. days, or xxviii. at the most.

The wild Ducke will steal from the Drake, and when she has laid and hatched
she is very subtle when she has young, for if any person come nigh them, she
will fly flappering nigh before him on the ground as though her back were
broken and could not fly, thus will she tise him a good way from her young, and
then will she take her flighte to her young again. Duckes eggs hatchte under
a hen will be of a better meat, then those hatched with a Ducke. Duckes are
not good to bring up chickens, for she cannot call as the hen will to every
crumme she finds, and the Ducke loves the water, and the Chickin the Land, nor
the Duck cannot scrape as the hen will, nor the hen good to bring up
Ducklinges, for she loves not to go into the water with them, and thereby often
times they are taken away with the Bozard, or Ryte, when she cannot help them,
and those Ducks that have been brought up under a hen, the Drakes of that
brood will desire to tread the hens, and one Drake is sufficient for vi.
Ducks, also Duckes that are trod of the Crow, they never prosper, and are
vuwholesome to eat, as they say, again they say, the Ducklinges that are
brought up under a hen, they will be always desirous to be about the
house, and on the dry ground nigh the house not abroad, nor yet in waters,
which is their nature, whereby your house and courts cannot be long clean
kept where they use, and yet by nature they should commonly love the water.
Thus much for the nature and feeeing of Duckes.

Of Turquie hens profit and also disprofite. Cap. 44.
STephanus says, they that first brought these Turquies into France, calde
the^ the peacocks of Indie, which does rather enrich the mouth, then any great
profit to the farmer or breeder: for they are a right cofer for oats, and a
sack for corn, a gulf, a swallower of barns, a deuourer of much meat. They
cannot receive so much pleasure by them, but as much trouble and anger when
they are great, for they be great strayers abroad, and being young they are
always crying for meat, with puling and complaining of the rye, or gout, or
such like, and soon dye thereof if they be not well kept. True it is, their
flesh is delicate, but heavy and hard of digestion: therefore they must be
well basted and larded, and yet there is much more goodness in the flesh of
Peacockes, then in them. They were brought into England about the eight and
twenty year of the reign of king Henry the eight.

The nourishing of old Turquies. Cap. 45.
THe nourishing of these foul, is like the feeding of hens and other
poultrie, and with the like meat when they are big, and as much tendaunce or
commonly more, because they will straye abroad to seek their meat, it may be
well said to the farmer or breeder: so many Turquyes in his court, so many
moilecoltes in his stable to feed. Their trayning in deed is more easyer then
of other Peacockes, nor does not demand such open air, but their feeding is a
more greater destruction in Gardens, of leekes, onions, and al other kinds of
other good herbs, which they will eat, and will commonly feed of grass, as
well as the goose, and are as fulsome in the house as the geese.

The age of Turquie cocks best to tread. Cap. 46.
YOur Turquie cocks that ye keep to tread your heunes, ought not to be
passing a year, or two years old, three years is the most or too much, for
being old they are so heavy in treading, they will commonly hurt the hens,
in broosing their backs and treading of their feathers of their backs, and
also it is not good to keep two cocks in treading time: for one will hinder
the other, so shall your hens eggs come to small profit in setting, and ye
shall have some cocks will pecke and kill the chickens if they be put forth
being very young, and again ye shall have some cocks will love and keep their
chickens as tender as the hens. Therefore be sure to know your cock to love
the chickins, when ye put them forth young, and also when they go feeding
abroad, they will not lightlye keep one place to rooste in, as other poultrie
will, wherefore ye must daily look unto them for leasing, for sometime they
will sit in high ways on the ground, sometime on low places nigh the ground,
and here is to be noted, ye must not use your hogs to feed on carren or dead
flesh about your house, for if they catch eating of flesh, they will not
stick to eat your poultrie on their nests, or your Turquies when they sit
on the ground a nights, or any low places nigh the earth, and they will not
stir if ye touch them, wherefore they are in more danger of stealing or
devouring diverse ways, then other poultrie are.

Of the Turquie hens sitting, hatching, and nourishing the chickens. Cap. 47.
THe Turquie hens do commonly lay as the house hens do, but they will
commonly lay away in secret places of their own seeking, as in bushes, hedges
and such, if ye look not well unto them. They begin to lay in March, and they
do use to set them in April when ye great cold is past on nine or eleven
eggs, sometimes more, they do hatche in xxv. days, and when they have
hatched, ye must feed them with curdes soked in strong ale or wine, and such
tender meat, as sod wheat in ale or bear, for the hens will never call or
feed their young (as other hens will) therefore ye must give them often
meat being young in six or eyghte days till they wax more of strength, and
then ye may give them sod barlye, and more stronger meat, the dew will kill
them, if they eat thereof, and to bring up your Turquie chickens in the
house, they will not like so well, as to let them go with the Damme in some
safe place abroad, and better they will like abroad then in the house, but in
wete and cold times ye must see them kept warm a nights, or else they will
soon catch the gout, crampe, or the rye, and being yet young they can bide no
cold abroad, also those hens that lays their later lay and sit, they
bring up their chickens about mid Auguste, or after, which chickins are so
tender in winter following they will hardly prosper, for they may abide no
cold, but have the like diseases aforesaid, therefore to sell or eat them is
best, the best time for Turquie hens to hatche (here in England) is in
April, when the chief cold is past, and also to house them in winter is
best, to keep them from the diseases before mentioned.

When as any of your Turquies have the rye and therewith droope, ye shall make
a long pellet or two, with soap, butter and pepper, mix them altogether, and
so give it them a morninges, and they will mende, and if your Turquies be
great, and having swollen eyes in winter by cold, ye shall slit it with a sharp
Knife, then shall ye see the humor leap out, then wash it with ale, or
wine, and if it fill again, open still and wash it till it be whole, also when
they begin to droope, ye shall put down their throtes, two or three of sow
worms with many feet, and then take fennyll a little, and broose it, then
make it like a pellot, and put it after down their throtes, and so let them go
and they will amend. Thus ye may keep the^ safe (with good looking to) from
time to time, till they be great as the damme.

The feeding and the ordering of Turquie hens and chickens. Cap. 48.
THey use in some places to give the Turquie chickens new hatched curds and
antes eggs, for seven or eight days, of barley meal, mixte with penniriall,
and made in paste with good ale or wine, little prinke but curdes, and antes
eggs, and ^o give them mellilot herb with otemele and milk, which is a
great feeder: or Isope, or to give them of percely, and sometimes they give
them chopped onions, leeke ^lades, time, and such like: any of those chopped small
with the, foresaid barley mele or otemele, and tempered with strong ale, ^r
beer, and made in paste (as aforesaid) and so given in small pellots, it will
save them and deliver them from the rye, pippe and swelling in their heads,
and the gout in their feet, which commonly comes of cold and to much drink:
also in winter ye may mix with their meat a little aqua^ite with ale, which
will in likewise save them from the the rhume, and other diseases: moreover
when as any have taken cold on their feet being but young, if ye rubhis
legs and feet (with neats oil) in wet and cold times, it will save the^
from the crampe, and when they are great and old, Some (for want of other
meat) do feed them in winter with hawes, and heps, black beries, nut
Kernels, acornes, and such, which things they will eat, being himgry, for
they are hot birds of nature and great raueners withal, among the hens,
the white Turquie hen is exteemed better then the other colors, to hatch
and bring up their chickens: for they are of a more harder and kinder nature
then the other commonly are, and will keep their chickens better: also if a
Turquie hen do hatch and bring up other hen chickens with hers, when they
wax big, she will know they are none of her kind, and she will beat them
and drive them away, and so long as your turquye chickens be young, ye shall
give them of sod barley in ale or beer, or stieped in wine and it will preserve
them from those dyseases, which commonly they are troubled with all here in
England, for our country is more colder (as it should seem) then from whence
they came first, and so long as they are yet young, they are tender and soon
hurt by venom and stinging with nettels and such, till they be a quarter old
or more.

The common feeding of Turquies. Cap, 49.
THe nourishing and common feeding of those kind of foul, is as I have said
like the feeding of other poultrie and hens, and with as much or more
diligence, else there is no difference, but they must have much more meat,
and their training is easy: but to have tendance while they are yet young,
their manner of feeding I have before declared: they are filthy birds in a
house, wherefore the maid must come always after them with a beesome, to
cleanse where they have been, the hens will lay like our hens, if they be
well kept all the year: and when they have laid a certain time, they will
covet to sit, and ye may use them as you do other hens, and to give their
eggs unto other hens to sit and govern while she end her lay. Their
diseases and remedies are like other poultrie^ wherefore it is superfluous to
say here any more, but as some do say, when they are very fat, they will not
lay so well nor take the cock, as when they are kept in a mean.

Of Peacockes the nature and feeding Cap. 50.
THe Peacocke is a strange bird to seed and to govern, for they hardly be so
familier with any person, as other birds will. A brief rehersall of
Columella, which says, to nourishe peacockes requires a more diligence in a
Civil person, then in a rude and troublesome farmer: for it is the part of a
good keeper of birds, to seek all means he can to make them gentle and
tame, in so doing, ye may easily nourishe these kind of birds, or else not,
and to have places made fit for them to be kept in: the greatest part of
their feeding they provide for themselves abroad. The Pehenne does willinglye
nourishe her young, as though she were in bondage unto them. They do prepare
for them a square court with high walls to nourish and feed them in, and
there use them to the call when they do feed them, like other poultrie. Their
delight is to be alw^ies among bushes abroad, and they cover their walls, and
makes round about long galleries for the^ to walk under, with perches made
square, and mortred on the walls, and often to be made clean. Before three
years the hens are commonly barren, and of small heat, and after three
years they will breed well. The Cocks have an amorous heat, as much as the
house cocks, and therefore they give him five or six hens, for he is ready
to tread the hen that comes from laying. Wherefore he marres the eggs of
some within the hen, which are not yet already formed, and he will not
suffer her to bring them to perfection, and by the anger then of that hen,
the egg fales from her before they are half ripe: also at the end of winter
ye must feed both male and females, and give them plenty of meat to make the^
in more heat, to give parched beans on the imbers when they are cold, is a
good feed for them, to give to each bird twelve ounces thereof, and to use
it four or five days together.

And also to feed each by themselves in their pens, and to set fair water
by the^ always, and when ye put them abroad, let the males go with the
females which will do well, ye shall have some Cocks so sterce, that they
will not suffer other cocks to tread their hens. Therefore in all such times
it shall do well to separate them with perticions, in hotter countries the
pecockes do enter into their heat, when the East winds commonly blows: as
says Fauonius, which is from the xv. of February, unto March or after, the
sign when they enter into heat, is, when the Cocks do spread their tail
feathers, ye saying is, they make a wheel. So when the hens are trodden, ye
must look they lay not in out places abroad, but in their houses, and at
eueninges ye must feel if any hen be nigh to lay, or hard with egg, for
in laying they will let them sodayn fall from them, wherefore ye shall shut
them up which will lay, so that they lay not abroad, but in their houses,
which must be strewde thick with straw under their perches, to save their
eggs when they fall from them, for as they sit on their pearches, sudden
their eggs falls from the hens, and then if they light not soft, they
break. Therefore make your pearche the lower, that they fall not so far, and
their laying is in the morning, then search diligently for to gather up their
eggs, which eggs will sooner hatche being new then being old, and when ye
set any hen, those pehennes that sit not, will lay their layinges in the
spring of the year, and those that sit wax so poor and troubled in
bringing up of her chickens, those hens will lay no more that year, the
other that lay commonly thrice, the first time she will lay commonly five
eggs, the second time four eggs, and the third time she will lay but
three or else two eggs.

The time best to set your pehenne. Cap. 15.
ANd when you will set your hen, ye must set her with some hen eggs
withal, which ye must choose to be fair, ^lde and great, and set your hen
with the^, in the beginning of ye Moon, and set her with nine eggs to sit
thereon nine days, of which eggs there oughce to be five Pehenne eggs, and
four hen eggs, and on the tenth day, take away all the hen eggs, and
put under her four other hen eggs, to the end that on the thirtith day,
after, in the next new Moon, all will hatche together, and when the hen does
rise and is gone from her neast, ye must turn her Eggs with your hand, and
those that ye turn, mark the upper sides thereof with ynke, that ye may
know which is turned when she rises again, and when she has hatched let her
then go with the young, not far abroad before five and thirty days, but tie
her by the leg with a long string, and so keep her in, ye must also see to the
young pecockes, where the damme do love them or not, for some will forsake
them, and ye shall suffer no other hen that have young Chickens, to come where
the Pechicks are, until they be great, for she which have other Chickens of
hers, her nature is such, she will hate and forsake her own Chickens, and
love the other, because she sees the Pechickes greater and fayrer then her
own. The pehennes have the like disease, as other poultrie have, and are cured
with the like medecines, as the rye, ^ippe, and such and when they are seven
months old, ye must then see they be had to roost a nights with their dammes,
but let them not sit on the bare earth, if they sit thereon, ye shall set
them on pearches as aforesaid, to the end they take no cold, for that will
bring them to like diseases as the other.

Of the goodness of the Pecocks flesh, and their nature in laying. Cap. 52.
STeph^^us says, that Pecockes flesh does nourish much, and are great eaters,
and hard to bring up or breed. They need no daily tendaunce, but let yt young
go with their dammes. They will mar Gardens and fields of corn, they love a
hot temperate air, and to breed alone in bushes: our auncetoures did make
enclosures by their Garde^s and houses, with cages therein for them to go in,
and other closures to nourish them in: but we make not so great matter of it,
it shall suffice her to lodge them above the hennehouse, and yet they love to
be at liberty, and fit on hie Trees, rather then in houfes or places beneath,
which places ought to be daily clean kept, and where as they sit a nights,
ye shall often find their eggs fallen from them, and after a hen has laid
and hatched, and brought forth her young, she will lay sieldome in three years
after, and when a Hen begins to lay, she will steal from the Cock, and
lay in some secret place, then he will not seace to seek, if he can find
her, if he then find her neast, he will break all her eggs, for he hates to
see the young till they have creastes on their heads: about thyrtie days she
will hatche, and being hatchte, they keep them in the pen or neast with the
dam, that the Cock see them not, for he will then pecke and hurt them, till
they have their creastes or Combs on their head, then after he will love them
well, wherefore unto that time ye must keep them well and warm, for they will
soon be sick, and the most part very sieldome lives till they be great,
the Cocks be hardy, and they say he cannot abide to see any venomous
worms, as Snakes and such, but will fight with them and kill them.

The hatching and feeding of young Pechicks. Cap. 53.
THe first day of their hatching, they perfume them with rosemary in a sieve
over coals, and then they give them barley meal tempered with wine, and made
like a thick paste, and soft Cheese kneaded therein, but press out all the
Whaye, for Whaye or clear milk dath much annoy them, also ye shall sometimes
throw unto them of Grasshoppers, in taking away their legs, and sometime they
do give them weuels, Sow Worms, and Spiders for to cure them, for they will
chiefly seek for those things, and wild where they haunt, and if they find
few thereof, after s^r ^^ckes they give the^ boyld barley as they do the da^^e,
and lets them go with her, but keep them from cold and rain, for they will
soon pule and draw their wings incontinent after by a little cold taking,
specially if they be not hatched by mid June, in Autumn being the^ but young,
they will never endure all the winter, in hatching they turn her eggs when
she is from the nest, for her eggs being great, she cannot turn her self:
therefore ye must then turn them with your hand as is before declared, and
mark the upper sides of them, else ye may turn the^ amiss, and when they be
hatched, give all the pechickes to the pehenne, and all the hen chickens unto
the house hen, but let not her come where the pechickes are, and if she see
them, because they show more fair and greater then hirs, she will not after
love her own chickens.

The sickness of Pehennes. Cap. 54.
PEhennes and Peacockes are very fick when they mue their feathers, which is a
kind of chillness as some do suppose: then must ye heat the^ with honey,
wheat, oats, and beans ground great, they are also in a great heat, in ye
canicular days, then must ye give them always fresh water because of their
heat, they do give to each cock, v. hens for change, for when her eggs are
but tender within her, he will tread her again, and so broose those eggs
within her, and so they fall from her and come to naught. Thus much for the
government of Peacockes and Pehennes.

The nature and feeding of Swannes. Cap. 55.
STephanus says, the haunt and feeding of Swannes, is like ye feeding of geese
their delight is in certain places, as in rivers, pooles, brooks, mixes and
standing pooles, and they are as soon made tame as geese. They use commonly
myres, and fresh waters, but they hurt and destroy much fish, and sometimes
they eat of green corn, if it be nie their haunt, as well as the tame or
wild Goose, to have a coople in your ponde, or two couple for great need,
where as many Swans are bread, there is no great store of fish, they tread
their hens on the water, as well as on the Land, the hens will make their
neasts themselves, without cover. They delighte to build on Islands compassed
with water, they must often be cleansed, for they file much, if they have not
sufficient meat, ye must feed them, and give them bread soked in water, and
certain small fishes, for these foul are gluttons and raueners of meat, and
therefore they must often be fed. They lay and sit but once a year, and most
commonly they lay but three eggs, except they like the place, and be well
fed withal, then they will have five, some seven, and some nine young synets,
but that is sieldome seen. When they choose their makes they will lightly not
change, so long as hoth do live, and if some other Cock Swanne do chance
to tread his hen, he will know it, and then he will never leave him, till
he have kilde him that has done it: and the Cock sittes when the hen is
gone to feed.

The nourishing and fatting of Swannes. Cap. 56.
THey use to fat Swannes, both in open Courts, and in houses, and they give
them such meat as they do in fatting of Geese, as soked bread, fod barlye,
ground beans, with Otes, al poulse, and such like: they chiefelye do love
moist meats, and thus may ye fat them in six or eight weeks, in often
changing their meat, and clensing their places, for they do file much: The
flesh of old Swannes ingendereth evil juice, and increaceth Melancholy. Thus
much of Swannes.

The order and profit of Pigeons, and place for them. Cap. 57.
STephanus says, the profit in nourishing pegins, is no less then the
profit of poultrie, specially where they breed many and often, and where
the sale for them is good, in some places they have taken at one flighte two or
three hundereth pair of young Pegions to sell, and bestow other ways, and
these foul need not so much loking to as other foul, true it is, they are
great eaters and deuourers of corue in fields, and therefore it is not
permitted or thought good for most men to build the^ Douehouses from the earth,
but where there is much erable ground of theires in those fields nigh
thereunto.

Let us then for the easement of the farmer have a Douehouse from the ground
made and set in a place meet and hye for it, by his house, or over his house
in a tower, or Touret of stone or claye, and placed very nigh some water,
because a Pegion is a hot bird, and do heat the meat they have taken to
give their young, therefore they rquire water, also it is certain the Pie, and
the sparrow, as well the Males as the Females, do cover their Eggs when the
hen is gone to feed, the cocks do sit in the mean time on their eggs,
thus they use to cover, till the young be out of their shelles, so does not the
mule doves therefore it is not so much to be regarded, whether the Douehouse
be open or not, but places for them to come and go, (...) to make a window
towarde^ the southside, in summer for them to sleep in, and in winter to give
heat into the pegiouhouse, and make your house sure at the foundation, and well
plastered within, and with smooth stone couched close in the bottom, for fear
of their dongue do not corrrupt the place which must be fair and even within,
and the chapts and holes always seen too, and stopped close for fear of Weesels,
polecats, rattes and mise, for these do commonly happen in douehouses which
are not well seen to^ye shall dress your Douchouse without, close made, for
in Creuisses and crackes, vermin will seek to enter, and so will devour both
old and young doves, for the like danger is in a douehouse, as in a henhouse,
therefore ye shall make two centers, about your dove house without, like
battelmentes of stone, board or lead, one in the midst of the wall without,
and another under the windde or eaues, where as the Doves may enter, or sit and
proine them thereon. Some do nail plates of lead all about the window unto
the walls, and they make as it were a Percullis setnye with laths together,
which may be drawn up evening and morning for danger of bats, owls, and
Cats, and on the top of the cover or lover, they make the figure of a Dove,
to draw other flying by to come there, ye may also place sparrow p^ts all
about your Douehouse without, and hang fagots of thorns by, but always see
to your Douehouse, that none of these evil vermin aforesaid d^e haunt your
house, for they will fear the old, and devour the young.

To replenish your Douehouse, and to choose the best breeders. Cap. 58.
AT the beginning for to furnish your douehouse with young Doves, it shall be
thought sufficient to have xx. pair of young pegions with feathers, but coming
forth, for those are best: to have old doves it is a danger, for they will
retourn home again to their first company, and commonly such a care they
have, or else to some other company. Among the cheifest breeders it is good to
have the ash color, the brown, and the black pegion, also the gresild with a
copte head, and the russet color, and those which are gilded about yt necks,
and those which have red eyne, and read feet, are most frankest and best
breeders, and cheifest replenishers of houses, the whice pegion is not so good
a breeder, and she is se^ue far off, and thereby most in danger of Kites,
Bozardes, Ringtayles, Dwles, and Hawks. The dark yellow, or dun Pegion, and
the red and tawny color they breed fieldome, but to serve for the Kitchen,
and make them tame, ye shall give them first mil wheat, and then fetches, ^^en
Comine, for these graynes will make them love the house much, and sometimes
^^giue them the gurgions of sifted whe^^ Les them not go forth of the house of
fiforene ways after ye have taken them and when ye give them leave to go
forth, let it be cowaides the evening, or in a (...) or ray ^^ie time, to the
end they may trourn, and not tar ay long forth of the d^^chonse.

Times to feed them, and to maynetaine your brood. Cap. 59.
TRue it is, that Pegions are more charable to the Farmer in Winter, then in
Summer, or in times of frost and snow or when the wheat is not blossommed, for
then they can find nothing in the fields but bents and cadlocke seeds,
wherefore there is a charge about two months and more then to give the^ meat,
once or twice a day ye shall do well, in this time you must let your first
brood fly, to replenish your house all the year after, which time they call
from March to into April, for those young Pegions then bredde, will be the
fattest and tenderest Dou^s of al their broodes for thue year.

And Columella faith, after this order ye must feed both Culuers and
housedoues, and because of such great profit by them, I will here (says he)
say little, but cheefelye it pertaynes to a good Farmer, to have these sort of
Foul, because there is small charge to feed them in open wether, for then
they will fly abroad far from the house, to seek each corner of the field
for meat, and soon return again, yet notwithstanding for two or three
months they must be fed as is aforesaid for so shall ye better maintain
and save them, and being nigh villages and great towns, is dangerous for
taking with nets, and killing diverse other ways, therefore in such times the
best is, to feed them in the Dove house at noone, for then is the best time.

Also flower not your Dove house with earth, for that is to cold in Winter,
whereby they will not like so well to feed thereon, it is best therefore to
feed them on hye places, with windows toward the South, and the walls
within made with holes one above another. Like your henhouse with pertitio^s of
lath, lome or board, for them to breed in, or in pottes of earth fastened
against boords, for them to go and come at pleasure, and also your house and
holes ought to be made white, for that color pleases them well, and see
always to keep your Douehouse clean, as before is sayd^.

Of the meat and drink for pegions and flying abroad. Cap. 60.
COlumella says, when Pegions (...) fly together about your house, it does
reioyte them, and soon they return again to their yo^g, their water ought to
be like as for your hens, not so as they may enter in deep, but shallow for
them to bathe in, for fear of chilling their eggs, nor to cbuer their eggs,
nor to cover their young, also ye shall give them meat beside the Douehose
without, in some clean place where there is no dongue. The best grain for them
is fceehes, orobe, ears, milwheat and cockle seed, and the rubbis ye cast
out of wheat, and such thing as ye nourishe hens, ye must often cleanse
and sweep your Douehouse, for the cleauer it is kept, the better they like
thereof, and where they are so kept, they will love that house the better, and
hate all other which are foul kept, and if they be able, they will fly
away, and come no more there, which have been often seen and proved and to
remedy the same, there is an old conunaimdement of Democritus, which says:
Take the young of a bird called buse, which buildes with clay and durte,
conunonly under battlementes, put each one of them in earthe^ pots by
themselves. Then cover and stop the pottes close with playster^, and so hang
them in corners of the Douehouse, and that will make them love the^ dove house
so, that they will never forsake it.

Also if ye will have Pegions to breed, let them not be old, nor yet too young,
and keep those which has large bodies, wherefore ye must not separate them
before they have brought forth their young, and where so many are fed together
they are commonly final of body, if they join with other flightes, or with
some other kind, the young Pegions do fat best under their dammes, and when
they are somewhat strong ready to fly, some pluckes their feathers, some
breaks their legs, so that they shall not depart from the house, but then
ye must feed well their dams that they may nourish well their young, and some
does bind their legs, for if they break them, as some suppose, it will be
painful, and thereby they will wax Ieane, wherein they say it is not best to
fat them, and again to bind their legs, they will strugle, and so torment
themselves, that will hinder also their fatting, therefore to break their
legs, their pain is no more but for two or three days at the must, and it
takes away all hope of going out, or flying abroad.

Also to feed Pegions, take the se^mme that comes of seething bryne, and the
offall of dregs of the bryne tubbe, and then take lome dry and put them
together, and work it like a mortar, then put thereto old chamber lie, and
so make thereof Loves, and lay them in your douehouse on a boorde, and the
pegions will gladlye feed thereon, and so shall ye have them love the
douehouse ye better, also if ye mix it with Comen seed, wild tares, or
cockle seed, it will be the better, and they will have a more love unto the
house.

How to perfume your Douehouse, to cause them to breed and to love it. Cap. 61.
STephanus says: if ye often perfume your douehouse with Genoper or Rosemary,
and sometimes with a little frankensence, or with some Lauender, these will
make them to love the Douehouse more then any other, and those Doves which ye
have made tame, when they do begin to breed, ye must then give them
liberty, and cast along by the walls small grain or seeds, or where they use
to bathe them, and so they will bring many other unto them, beside your
twenty pair that ye first put in, that within forty days ye may have two
or three times so many more, for they breed three times in a year and the
good breeders four times a year, and there is no great care for them, but to
keep your douehouse clean, and cleanse the neastes of the old and young, to
keep them from fleas and lyde, and other Verinine, more needful in Summer
then in winter.

Pegions seeking their meat far, are raueners of corn. Cap. 62.
COlumella says, Pegions are great raueners, and far fliars to seek meat,
commonly four or six miles, sometimes ten miles, yea some do suppose they
will seek forty miles, and come again at night, which thing I scantly
credit, yet surely they are strong and swifte foul of flighte, and will
continue long in the air, again, some do say, put a pair of doves in a
house, and let them lack no meat nor water, and they will devour a quarter of
wheat, and a Tonne of water in one year, therefore they are calde ravening
birds, deuourers of Corn, and reapers in fields, viziters of reekes, glenars
of sheaues, and thieves in Barnes, notwithstanding if ye will not so maintain
your douehouse, ye must let fly the first breed, (as is before said) in
March and Aprll because yt through many occasions in a year many kill your old
doves, and by that means your Douehouse is replenished again.

To draw Pegions to your Douehouse. Cap. 63.
SOme do teach, take and roast a spayde bitche, take forth her guts, and fill
her belly with Commine seed, mixte with baye sault, and when she is well and
dry roasted, let her be cold, then lay her in the midst of your Douehouse, on
a hye boorde and ye shall see the Doves will eat of her gladly, and so many
other Doves that smelles them which have eaten thereof, they will come to the
Douehouse with them.

Again to make a paste or stimie matter to cause Pegions to resort to your
Douehouse, which is? Take so much as ye think good of a gum which the
Italians call Sorgo, or Meige, which grows as hie as Parsenippes, or Commine,
and it bears a bigger seed, boil of the said gum in Commine water, and
when it has sodde and is flimie like buck lie, ye shall put thereto a quantity
of Commine, and some honye, and then give it a boil or two more, and stir it
always for burning too. Take of this being all hot, and annoint the holes of
your Douehouse therewith, so that the pegions in going in and out, may rub
their feet and legs thereon (which sent will dure for certain days after)
and so many other as do smell the same, will follow them to the house, and
after they will not depart from thence, also to lay in your Douehouse ye
stalks of Lauender cut a shaftment long, the Doves will gather them to build
their neastes, and thereby will smell thereof, which will cause other Doves
(so many as do smell them) come to their douehouse, and for the like some to
take of sand stones (which is a soft greet) and boyles of them in brine to
soke, and then lays them on a table in the Douehouse, and the Pegions will
feed thereon, some pours on the said stones the scumme that comes of boylde
brine, which the Doves will like well, other do use to lay on a boorde of
fault stones, which the Pegions will feed on, and it will cause them not to
seek far abroad, others do use to soke of soft bricks, in bryne, and then
lays them on a boorde in the douehouse, and Pegions will feed thereon, al
these are thought good to train doves to the house.

The nature and profit of wood pegions, Culuers, and rough footed doves. Cap.
64.
COlumella says, the Wood Pegion is soon perceived from other doves, they are
not so fruitful to lay as hens, and yet more profitable, for they will have
young viii. times a year, and if the females be gnod nourses, the young will not
be lean, and if they be fair, lean or barrain ye may fat them like
hens, and sell them, in like manner ye may fat Woodeculuers, but they are
more rauenars and eaters then the other, and very hard to make tame, if they
be old, they love soked bread in wine, and that will soon fat them, but ye
must not forget to lay of gravel for them to baske in, the Woodeuluer loves in
winter to eat of yuie berries, and they lone to breed on low Trees, and will
have but two young at once.

The rough footed Dove, as some judge, comes of the wild kind, and yet they
are to be made as tame as hens, they are great eaters, and are very hot of
nature, they lay and bring forth young viii. or ten times a year, if they be
well fed. They will never have passing two young at once, or one alone, and as
soon as the hen has hatched, she will suffer to be toden again of the
Cock, they are loving birds one to another, and the Cock will sit on the eggs
while the hen feeds abroad, and he will feed the hen in sitting (as
the Rookes do) and also he will feed the young pegions.

How to take Owls that haunt your Douchouses. Cap. 65.
OUles that haunt your Douehouse by night, they destroy many Doves both old
and young. To take them, some do set a ladder to the roof of the house before
the sun go down, and somewhat dark, they tie on both sides of the roof, a
dead dove, and lays their bellies upward, and do stick lime rods in claye
round^ about them, or limde strawes, and thereby takes them, and some ties a
live Pegion a pretye way of the house on the ground, and sticks lyme rods
round about her, or prick sticks half a yearde hye from the ground, and
puts small packthreede limed in the cloven tops of the rods, other takes
them in wedging a mouse tail in the hole of a board, and lays that on the
ground, or ties a bird with a string on the ground, and pricks lime rods about
her, and so takes them, in a light Mooneshine night, in a dark night they lay
for the owl in the owl flight, for the^ is best setting for them: if she
enter into the house she kilth all she can, both old and young, and will
remain there, for she cannot get forth again at the Lover, and she will
commonly feed of the forepart, the neck and the shoulders, by that ye may
know it is an Owl, and she will be and sit all day in one of the holes. Thus
much for the taking of the Owl, there is also calls to make them come to the
place in treading time, but I have not the practice thereof, therefore here I
will leave with it.

For Polecats and Weazels that haunt your Douehouse. Cap. 66.
IF Vermin haunt your Douehouse, as Fechons, kenes, Polecats, Weazels and
such, ye must mark the holes where they get in to your Douehouse. There ye
shall set a which or fall of four foot long, close by the Douehouse side,
then ye shall hedge it so that nothing shall pass any other way, but if your
Which or fall be staynde in taking or scaping of any of the^, they will not
come to the bayte within on the burge, which ye shall bayt with a new conye
liner, or such like, if that serve not then set your fall in some other place,
or there, and hedge it, and cover it with thorns, that they may pass no other
way but through the fall, and after any is taken y^ must cleanse and air your
fall or Whitch^ if this serve not, ye shall put the powder o^ Arsenike into the
slits of livers, and tha^ will poison them, but see that no other thing come
there to eat it, before ye tak^ it up, and thus ye may destroy them i^ short
space, if ye keep the outsides smoot^ that no Weasill climb up into the
house, from time to time. Other ways there is by setting pottes in the
ground, with bayte in them, and with a fall, like a pitfall.

To take Bozardes and stares, that molest your Douehouse. Cap. 67.
THe Bozarde, and Puttock, that haunt your Douehouse, will sudden strike at
your Doves sitting on the house, and so killes many, when any such do haunte
your Douehouse, ye shall set stales of live Doves on the ground with limed
straws, or tie a live mouse and wedge her tail into a stick compassed with
three graynes or twigges lymbde, then lay it on the ground a pretye way of
the Douehouse, and watch it, and ye shall see her strike at ^t, and so be
taken, and likewise set limde ^traws about your douehouse on ye ground ^r small
timde twigges, thus ye may ^ake them in the spring. Again, Stares ^ill
commonly haunt a douehouse in the ^inter time chiefly: which do molest the
doves in driving them from place to place and beating them out of their holes,
and if it be cold, they will covet to sit under the Doves Wings, and being
hot of nature themselves, will make the doves so hot, that thereby they will
become leapers, and they will have dry spots on them like pockes, therefore
when you see Stares haunt your Douehouse, in the night ye shall cover the lover
that no Pegion go out, and then go in with a Lantern, for they will fly to
the light, and so with clapnets ye may take them, and they will kill the young,
and also suck ye Doves eggs.

How to Cock your Douehouse. Cap. 68.
SOme says, if a Douehouse do remayn^ five or six year without taking the
old cocks, they will not prosper nor breed, because of so many old Cocks alive,
which cannot tread themselves, nor yet will suffer the young Cocks to tread
their hens. Therefore some do cover the lover, and in a winters night goes in
with a candle and lantern, and with a bush net taken all yt comes, and puts
the^ in baskets, and so choose out all the old Cocks, and kills the^, and lets the
rest remain, which old cocks ye shall know by their great bodies and heads for
they are bigger then the younger, and they will have a ring of blew whitish
feathers about their necks, and the young cocks will have none: Again, some
do set a ladder before night to the lover, and in the night one or two goes
up the ladder with a lanthorn and light, and couers the lover hole with a net,
and sets the light by the Lover, then one knockes at the door beneath, or else
goes in, then will ye doves come to the light, and ever as they come, take the
old Cocks and kill them, but this way (as some judge) is not so good as the
other, for they will bruise themselves in flying against the posts and walls,
in the dark house, and some do hold opinyon to let them alone is best,
without taking the old Cooks, for I have hard some say, that after their
Cocking their Douehouse have not been so prosperous as before, Wherein here ye
may choose which way best to take. Thus much for the cocking your douehouse.

Of Pegion dongue. Cap. 69.
THe nature and propertye of Pegion dongue is to heat the earth, therefore
keep well their dongue ye take out of the Pegion house, and meddle it when ye
list with cow dongue, or other horse dongue, and it does more then Sheep
dongue, for Pegion dongue is very hot, which will serve to amend cold and
naked places, in your fields or meadows, and also to refreshe and sucker old
trees against cold and weat.

Of Turtle Doves. Cap. 70.
COlumella says, to nourishe Turtles for profit, it is superfluons, for they
will lay no eggs in your Cages nor hatche young, therefore from the time you
have taken them, they keep them to fat more sooner then many other Byrds,
but not in all times of the year a like, for in winter there is great care to
fat them, and in this time there is more plenty, and the price does
diminishe, in Summer they will fat themselves if they have meat to eat,
there is no other pain but to feed them with mil wheat, not because they will
not fat with other wheat, but because they love myl wheat better, and yet
in Winter they are as soon made fat (as Wood Culuers) with sops of bread
soked in Wine, and like with other things, and they do not entreat them like
other Pegions, in holes, but stones set in the walls, not with partitions,
but as stays for them to sit on, they must be closed with nets round, that
they fly not forth, and thus they use to fat them with mil wheat, and other
wheat which must be given dry, half a bushel a day is enough for six
score Turtles and always they must have fresh water in clean vessels, and see
that their dongue mar not their feet, which donge is good to keep for the
fatting of trees, as all other birds ^aue those that swim, and to fat these,
ye must choose the youngest rather then the ol^est, also about harvest, the young
Turtles ^re big enough to fat, then they use to fat them.

Stephanus says, those foul are rather to be nourished then to breed. They
are used as Fezantes, with branches applied to the wales, and fastened wiar,
with doors hard by, also in the corners ye shall make places for them to
pearche on, and set branches of Genoper and Bays, about your trees set
against the walls, also ye shall fasten small pannyers to the walls, to
tyce them to lay, if they have any desire thereto.

And ye shall place your cover for your cage the height of a man, and places
made round for them to rooste under, and strawde with fresh straw, renewing it
often, and make places for the^ to eat, with troughes for them to drink in,
and change it often They love the hot air, in cold times they pass the
Seas in flocks, from on^ country to another, they are made tam^ as our house
poultrie, which is very har^ to do, for they are not to be fed, but for the
delicateness of them in feasts and banquets. The Turtle is more easy to mak^
tame, then other Quayles or Partrich^ and to fat also if they be taken young,
an^ by giving them wine, they make the^ forget their liberty, for they will
be very angry when they are first take, and they never lay enclosed, nor fat
scantly in winter, they are contrary to other foul, as Geues and such, their
nourishment is fetches, barley and most of other grain, ye shall give fresh
water in a vessel, so they may bathe therein, and lay by of grauilye send to
scower and heal them, when they are sick, and look to their bills for the
pippe, and take it away if there be any, also look to their feet for
troubling with their dongue, and also under their wings, if they have any
vermin, ye must help them as you do your poultrie.

The ordering and fatting of hearnes. Cap. 71.
STephanus says, I have before resited of the great curiosity of diverse kinds
of fowls to nourish, and here again I must faye the like of the hearne, for
she is but expense, without profit to any. True it is, for princes and great
Lords, to tame to fly for pleasure, otherwise the Hearne alone, it is but the
dainty mouth to eat the flesh, as ye saying of some is, the hearne is a
royal meat, but this pleasure costs double charge, for she is a great
spoyler and deuourer of fish, we may think them the father of a familye in
household, be it Prince or great Lord will sometime take pleasure in the flight
of the hearne, or for his mouth, there is no other reason to be made, then for
to make a place to keep them in, noc only for pleasure, but also profice for
his Lord or master, now to make this place to fat them and keep them in
bondage, which loves daily to be abroad alone, and solitarye in their mind, and
yet not rest long in a place, except it please them well, for she is
waywarde, fearful, and delights to build on high Trees, a place for them
may well be made for two occasions, one to nourishe them in for the pleasure of
the Prince, and again to have them ready at need for any banquet, and those
that are so closed, will call others that fly by, and cause the^ to breed
there abouts.

Also ye must consider of the place meet for them, to keep them in, for if it
rain not there sometime, she will take no pleasure therein, nor yet breed, but
mourn, and so pyne and die, also ye must houe a running water through the
midst of your court or place, for the Hearn is a watrish Foul, and has
pleasure for to look for fish in waters, to take Eeles and other small fish.
The place for them ought to be covered all over with lathes, set nigh together,
and walde or boorded round, six foot hye, so that other Hearnes if they will
may make their neastes thereon, and their feeding shall be live Eeles, or
cut, and cast in water, and to give other small fish, sometimes the
entrails and livers of beasts cut small, or dogs flesh cut and given
them, to fat for flighte or banquet, they will not lightly breed being in
bondage, they be a pleasure for flying, but not to let fly nie their Court,
for the rest will be afraid, and those that come there to breed they will
forsake the place and build there no more.

The ordering and nourishing of Partridges. Cap. 72.
THe Partridge is a dayntie Byrd, and lives in fleldes among bushes and hedges,
the Cocks are stout and hot of nature, and the hens also, and will lay
above twenty eggs at a time, and bring forth their young, they breed but
once a year, which is in the spring, the Cocks will fight for their hens,
and he which has the victory will constrayne the other Cock to follow him
and run after him, as does the hen, their feeding is very dainty with millet
wheat, or of pannick wheat or other wheat, also if ye take the Partridge eggs
and set them under a hen that sits, she will hatch them and bring them
forth and nourishe them like house chickens, they must be fed with antes
eggs, till they be of a more strength, and of a good bigness, then ye may
feed them as ye do house chickens, and those which ye so nourishe and feed,
ye may easilye keep them tame in your Courts, and they will breed from
time to time, and nourishe their young, if ye help them with antes eggs, while
they are young, and ye must make pretye places on the ground for them to breed
in, and covered with boughs, for they love commonly not to be seen or have
any to look and behold them, ye must give them of fresh water, shorning and
evening, and keep their court clean.

Quayles feeding and their nature. Cap. 73.
Quayles are a dayntie flesh used for banquets, they are of nature furious
fighters, and currishe, therefore they that keep them, let not them have so
much liberty as other Fowls have, nor yet so much light, therefore they
cover their cages with canuas, or leather, for mounting and busiyng their
wings against the sides of the Cage, they put their meat and drink in vessels
a part, each Quayle by himself, which will make them sooner to fat, they
love to eat green wheat, and also of other wheat, which is their
principal meat. They use much that circuit where they are commonly bred,
they breed in Corn fields, and in Pastures, they will have five or six at a
time and breed but once a year, they love the place whereas there grows
much elleborye, called neesing powder, of some: whereof Didimus says, their
flesh is laxatiue, and also will make ones head heavy and also will make ones
head heavy and evil, and for this cause some do sear^^ them with Wheat, and
boyles them well therewith, if any find grief thereby, they drink the
decoction that millet is sodd in or the seed of Myrre, which is good also to
give Quayles to eat, the young loves to be feeding among grass, to be picking
on flies and such. The tame ye may use them to a call, as ye do your chicken.

The Gulles how to feed. Cap. 74.
GUlles do breed in the rocks, and banks of the Sea, in extreme cold
weather they fly from the Sea into the Land, and lives on mountains and
playnes, and they feed there on worms and such as they can get, and they
that do fat them do take them ready to fly, in holes and rocks by the Sea
side, and then they feed them, the old are not good to fat, they feed both
with fish and flesh, as the livers of beasts, and fresh sea fish as place
and such, cut in small pieces and given them, their vessels of water ought to
be pannes of earth, filde with fair water, then lay therein brick battes or
stones that they bathe not therein, for they will desire to bathe, and that
will keep them lean, their meat must be chopte rewe, and laid on boordes,
and they commonly fight (and cry) one with another, and they be great
rauenars, and ought to be fed twice or thrice a day with sweet meat, and
they use to lay it in fair water to keep it sweet two or three days, they
breed but once a year, and will have four or five in a neast, or more.

Of Puets. Cap. 75.
PUets are birds or foul that breeds in Rocks and banks by the Sea, they
are taken young from the neastes like the Gulles, and fed for banquets, they
are a dayntie flesh, and pleasant to eat. They are kept to fat in large
houses and courts, for some do use to put them in parts, for they will fight
like ye gulles, one with another, and those that they intend to eat shortly,
they feed them a part with curdes, for that will soon fat them, and make
their flesh white, s^p^^te, and fair, so will not those fed with flesh, as
lyuers of Oxen and sheep, smally chopped as is aforesaid of ye gulles and laid on
fair boords twice a day, for they are rauenars, and to give the^ fair water
laid with stones like as ye do for Gulles aforesaid, for bathing will keep the^
lean, and they breed but once a year, and have 5 or 6 at a time, or me.

Of Fesantes and their nature. Ca. 76.
STephanus says, it is a great curiosity to nourishe the old Fesants which
Columella does name them hens of Numidie but for those yt may feed them, it is
both pleasure and profit, but ye must have one to do no other thing, for they
require great attendaunce, and ye must make their Court somewhat hye, set also
with bordes against the walls, round about ye court in length, and their
pearche made so to sit where the sun may shine, and each byrd his place,
and also to have one general house to cleanse the hens, and to give them meat,
and closed all above, and before with laths very nie together, about the height
of a pole from the earth well couerd all over, also the Fesante Cocks and
hens, are byrds of a stout courage, and are not content to be enclosed or
made tame, if they be above a year old, and the old hens are grieved, and
disdayneth to lay or sit, and the young will not so soon agree with the air,
being so constrained there: because it is not like the Region from whence they
were take, also there must be given to one male two females, the Females lay
but once a year and she begins in March, and layth some twentye eggs by
order, or she stint, and then she sits on all together, or ye may give xv. of
hits, and the rest of other strange eggs ^f ye will, she sittes thyrtye
days, and in setting them ye must have the like dilli^euce as of your house
hens, and these ^ust not be without their houses, and the ^ong being once
hatched, shall have a mix^ure made of sodde barlye branne, then ^olde and given,
and to give them wheat ^eale, the which ye shall sometimes ^ire together and
so given, sometimes of ^rashappers, and the eggs of Ants, and ^ten to change
their water to have it still ^eane, for they are subject unto the like seases
as the house hens are.

How to fat Fezantes. Cap. 77.
THe auncientes did use to fat and nourishe the Fesantes, both Cocks and
hens not only for increase, but as we^ for feasts and banquets, and in the
beginning they give them water and wine mix together, to make them forget their
natu^ rall place and then they feed them wit^ barlie meal steeped in water,
and groun^ beans, and stieped barlye mixte togethe^ with millet, and also
naues and linseed boylde, then dryde, and mixte with barley meal, and likewise
to heat them and (...) purge them, they did use to give them f^nigreke the
space of five days, and so the were cleansed and mude in forty days, a^ thus
some keeps them that are of skill, nourishing of dainty Foul, and Colmella
says, ye may well give them me to fat them for banquets, for few or no being
wild hens are given to lay or sit being kept in bondage and bredde up abroad.

Of Godwits, Knots, and Stynts. Cap. 78.
THe Godwits, and Knots are taken young, they breed in holes and Rocks by the
Sea, and also in Islands nigh the Sea, they are exteemed a dayntie meat, and
pleasant, and costlye to keep, and make fat, for they are commonly fed
with Wheat, and fair water other feeding I have not known.

Of Plouers. Cap. 79.
THere are two kind of Plouers, the one is called the green Plouer, which ^ue
call the Lapwing, and the other is called ^he gray Plouer which breeds in Islands
^ye the Seas, or in great heathes, and ^arrishe grounds, and also the green
Plouer breeds commonly in marrishes, ^eathes, Fields, and such, they breed
^ut once a year, and when they lay as in Harche and April, they will not have
^ast four or five young, their feeding is ^mmonly on Worms and flies and such
as they can get, they will hardly be made came being enclosed, for they are a
wild kind of peuishe birds to tame. They are fed with wheat and Water,
like the other foul aforesaid, the young green Plouer is easter to make tame,
and they use to keep the^ in gardens to kill worines and gives them worms and
water, but then beware the Rite and the Catte, thus much for the Plouers.

Of the Bitter and Curlew. Cap. 80.
THe Bitter is a strange kind of foul, and lives commonly in Fennes, and in
morish heathes, they are evil to be made tame. Their flesh is pleasant to
eat, and are kept for banquets, they are fed with raw livers of beasts, and
such like, they are yrefull, and will strike sodaynlye at a man's face, and
stand lurking in a corner like the hearn, and they fear the sight o^ a man's
face, and those that do fat them they do cram them with raw flesh cut in
small pieces, which they will cast it v^ again. Therefore when ye cramme then
ye must put a double threede over his bil^ to posse his nostrils, and through
his nostrils put a small stick or quill, and that will keep the thread up,
and let him from casting up his meat again, if that were not, he would
cast it up incontinent.

The Curlew is a foul that feeds commonly in moist grounds and heathes,
their flesh is pleasant to eat, they feed commonly on worms and such, and they
fat them with wheat and fair water, other feeding I know not what is best for
them, Thus much for the Bitter and the Curlew.

Of Blackburdes and Thrustles. Ca. 81.
THe Blackbyrde is a dayntie flesh to eat, and they are more charable to
keep then many others, and they that shall keep them in cages being taken
old, and brought from other countreies, they are hardly saved to be
transported, also if ye put the old to be fed in cages, some thereof will
sodain^y die of envy and fear, when they are taken of the Fowler and put to
fat, therefore the best remedy is, ye shall take of came Blackbyrds and put
unto ye wild, and when they are accustomed to be serust, the wild in seeing
the tame feed, they will feed also, and so forget their anger and liberty,
and thus ye may best bring the wild to be tame, and to receive their meat
with the other.

Also their cages must be made toward the South, with pearches of wood set in
the walls to sit and proyne, when they have eaten, and ye must not set their
pearches above a man's height, that in standing on the ground they may touch
them, ye shall not feed them where their Pearches are, for keeping their meat
more clener without their dongue, and for their meat, some do use to feed
them with dry figs, and barlye Flowar beaten together, and give them
thereof, so they may leave some, also sometimes they chewe it in their mouths,
and so gives it unto the^, but where as many are, it is not quite cost to feed
them, and other some are of opinion to feed and give them of diverse kinds of
meat is good, for fear if they should be weary of one meat, as sometimes t^
give them worms, antes, wheat, hard eggs and soked bread in water, and the
seeds of wild tares, or Charuel seeds, or wild Olives, or yuie berryes, and
wild Apples, for when they are in the Woods, they eat of all these, but in
their Cages it will trouble them, and yet cause them to provoke appetite,
which is necessary, for the more they eat, the sooner they will be fat,
and ye shall fill also their vessels with mill wheat, which is the cheifest
meat for their delight, the other do serve but as sauce of pleasure, their
drink ought to be clear water and often changed, and thus ye may fat the
blackebyrde, so may ye nourishe and fat the Thrustle, and Fieldfare, other
birds there is, which are not so necessary to be fed, nor yet so profitable.
Thus I leave for the governing and fatting of Blackbyrdes and Thrustles, with
all the government of poultrie and Foul aforesaid.

To make white birds come of any eggs. Cap. 82.
TAke your eggs of what byrd ye will, and lay them two days long in honye and
then put them again in the neast, and let them be sat on, and ye shall have
them white.

To make hens of the color of your eggs ye set her. Cap. 83.
YE shall take some Eggs of a brood hen, and color them with what color
ye will, and put them to the hen, and ye shall see the Chickens to be of the
same color ye colored the eggs.

For Geese. Cap. 84.
IF ye set a Goose where as she ca^ come by no water to bathe her, when she
rises her eggs then will not prospe^ nor come to any perfection, Also when
goose have satte her time, and cannot w^ break and unclose her eggs, ye sha^
burn the stalks and leaves dride of colewortes before her neast, and perfume
her neast therewith, and soon after they shall unclose and hatche, likewise if
ye have diverse brood Geese, and but one Gander, some Ganders will love but one
or two Geese and hate the rest, therefore it shall be good to have mo Ganders
then one to serve their Goslings, for when the Goose leads and goes before her
young, the crow will take some behind her, and therefore ye shall see the
Gander come behind his goslinges, and thereby saues many from the Crows and
Rites.

To make hens lay.
TO cause hens to lay all the winter, take the croppes of nettles when they
are ready to seed, then dry them, and mix them with bran and hempeseede, and
so give it your hens a morninges, and they will lay, ye may also give them
the seeds of Cowmake, a weed amongst ^orne so calde in Turnars Herball,
which will also cause them to lay.

For breeding Capons.
ANd those that would breed many Capons, ye must not then have any Cock
that is used to fight, for then he will always beat your Capons, and not
suffer them to be at rest but hunt and kill them at length.

Finis.
The table of all the principal matters in this Book, following by Alphabet.
A.
Against the pippe. Cap. 13,
B.
Bytters how to make fat. 80. Blackbyrdes how to nourish. 81. Bozardes that
haunt douehouses. 67.
C.
Capons how to fat 25. Catarre or rewme in poultrie. 14. Caruing of poultrie.
31. Caruing young chickens. 23. Chickens newly hatched. 7. Chickens of a later
brood. 11. Chickens fed from the Dam. 12. Cocking of a Douehouse. 68. Culuers
and their nature, 64, Curlewes how to feed. 80.
D.
Dongue of Pegions profitable. 69 Ducks profitable for the husband. 41 Ducks
vvild to nourish. 42 Ducks and their nature. 42.
E.
Eggs to keep long 8. Eggs how to gather and save. 9 Eggs without a Cock.
9. Eggs to make white birds. 82. Eggs to have all the vvinter, 10. Eyes
enflamed of poultrie. 24.
F.
Fatting of Capons. 25. Feeding great Chickens. 28. Feeding young poullets. 29.
Feeding of poultrie. 26 Fieldfares how to feed. 82 Feathers of geese which are
best. 40. Fezants how to fat. 77 Fezantes and their nature. 76. ^luxe in
poultrie to help. 18.
G.
Ganders white are the best. 36. Geese and their government. 33. Geese and
places fit for them. 34 Geese what pasture best. 35. Geese al white are the
best. 36. Geese young how to fat. 37. Geese young to fat. 38. Geese how many to
one gander. 39. Goslinges how to feed. 37. Godwits how to nourish. 78. Goulles
how to nourish and fat. 74.
H.
Haw in the eyes of poultrie. 24 Henhouse to order and make. 1. Hens with their
good properties. 4. Hens when best to set them. 5. Hens young to set. 6. Hens
how many meet for a cock. 15 Hens that use to hatche abroad. 16. Hens that
sit and rise in weate vveather. 22. Heunes of the color of the eggs y^ set
her. 63. Hens how to make fat. 27. Hearns to nourish and to fat. 71.
K.
Knots how to feed. 78.
L.
Lice and varmine in poultrie. 20 Letting forth poultry a mornings. 30
M.
Meet when to feed poultrie. 2^
O.
Ordring Poultrie a mornings. 3^ Owls that haunt a Douehouse. 6^
P.
Partridge how to nourish. 7^ Perfuming the douehouse. 6^ Pegions to draw to
the douehous. ^^ Pegio^s with profit and place for the^. ^^ Pegions to
replenish your house. 58 Pegeons and best breeders. 58 Pegions to feed and
maintain. 59 Pegions that fly abroad to feed. 60 Pegions that seek their
meat far. 62. Pegions and their nature. 64. Peacockes and the goodness of
their flesh. 52. Pehens their nature in laying. 52. Pechickes hatching and
feeding. 53. Pehens and their sickness. 54. Pegins dong good for trees. 69.
Pippe the cause and remedy. 13. Plouers how to nourishe. 79. Polecats that
haunt dove houses. 66. Puets how to fat. 75.
Q.
Quails how to nourishe. 73.
R.
Rough footed doves to keep. 64.
S.
Sheldrakes to nourishe. 41. ^^gnes in a good Cock. ^^. Stares that molest
doves in their noses. 6^ Stynts how to nourish. 78. Stopping the flux in
poultrie. 1^. Swans nature and feeding. 5^ Swans how to nourish and feed. 5^
T.
Teales how to nourish. 4^ Threstles to fat. 8^ Things good in keeping poultry.
32. Turquie hens and their profit. 4^. Turquies to nourish. 45. Turquie cocks
best treaders 46. Turquy he^s in hatchi^g their yo^g. 47. Turquy hens the order
and feding. 48. Turquie chicke^s how to nourish. 48. Turquies the common
feeding. 49. Turtle doves to nourishe. 70.
W.
VVezels that haunt a douehouse. 66.
FINIS.

