A SERMON PREACHED before his MAJESTY at Oatelands, on the 28. of July 1622.

By EDMUND MASON, his Majesty's Chaplain, and Vicar of NEVVARKE in
Nottinghamshire.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXII.

MATTHEW. 16.21. The last words of the verse are these.
The Third Day.
AS in the Garment of Christ, The Nature of the Text.
as well as his Body, so in the Hemme of Christ's Garment, as well as the
Garment, the woman with the bloody issue, Matthew. 9.13. tells us, there is
saving virtue: both benefit and comfort for saving Faith, to touch and take, in
the very Hemme. His Body wherein He wrought and suffered for us, was that
sacred Person of the Divine and Humane nature together, whereof we are members
and partakers, by the Touch of that Faith, 2. Cor. 10.5.
that Saint Paul says, Believes only, and captiuates Reason in obedient
adoration. His Garments, wherein He was seen and known of us, and for us,
were the works and sufferings of that most sacred Person, His active and
passive obedience in our flesh to the whole Law, wherewith our imperfect
obedience is covered and accepted, by the Touch of that faith, that S. Paul
says, does not believe only, Gal. 5.6.
but works through love. Lastly the Hemme of these Garments, wherewith the
unmeasurable obedience, of this incomprehensible Person, was cut out,
fashioned, and confined to us, and for us; This was the needful Circumstances
of Time, Place, Means, Manner, with other Virges, and Borders of His works
and sufferings: in all which, as He showd, He wrought as Man, and for man, and
not as God only; so in, and through them, the Circumstances of our Actions,
their times, place, means, manner, gather Holiness and acceptance, by the
Touch of that Faith, which Saint Paul says, Romans 12.6.
does not only believe and work, but is the measure and proportion of our
Actions to His. Romans 12.6.

The Garments of Christ's works, must be hemmed in with Circumstances, or else
they cannot be suitable to us, nor for us. Ours they cannot be, unless they be
of our Fashion. No more then himself can be Ours, unless He take our Form.
And yet the fashion only, does not make them Ours: we must touch a'm too, take
hold of a'm, and put a'm on. And that we may do so, the Sum of saving Faith,
our Creed tells us, our Faith must touch and gather virtue, from the Hemme, as
well as the Garment, the Circumstance, as well as the substance, the manner, as
well as the work, that Christ did for us.

It is not enough to believe He was borne in our flesh, unless we believe the
means too, of a Virgin, and the Virgin Mary too: No benefit nor comfort else.
It is not enough to believe He suffered for us, unless both the manner,
Crucified, the means, Pontius Pilate; the intent, Dead; the extent, Buried;
unless all these be touched, faith gathers no virtue. It is not enough to
believe, He descended, unless our Faith reach to the very circumstance of
place, into Hell. It is not enough to believe He Rose again, unless our Faith
touch, and gather virtue from the very Hemme and circumstance of time, The
Third Day.

So we might go on, The scope of it.
till He come again to Judgment, at the last Day: But here the Third Day
stays us. And this Hemme of time, requires our Touch, and consideration, not
of the work of the day, and the benefit of it; for it is not Easter now; but
only of the day of the work, and the benefit of it, the Third Day; for it is
the Lords Day.

And a Hemme it is, and no better: an historical and dry circumstance of time
only. But it is in our Creed, and that touches us nearly. And in all our
Creed, it is the only circumstance of Time there mentioned. Doubtless there is
some Redemption in it. With the woman with the bloody issue, let us but touch
it a little; there may chance come that virtue from it, that may redimere
tempus, Ephesians. 5.16.
as Saint Paul says: at least show, the Redemption of Time, and turn the
vanity, and vexation of the Days of Earth, into the certainty and Comfort of
the Days of Heaven. For that is the purpose of the Text.

And according to that purpose, The Division
Let us divide our discourse into a twofold touch, and consideration. One, of
Historical faith, the spiritual man's left hand, touching the Hemme of Time
only, that Christ did rise upon a Third Day. Another of Justifying, and saving
faith, the spiritual man's right hand, Touching the virtue of this Hemme, that,
For us it was Necessary, that Christ should rise upon a Third Day, and no
other. The Hemme I will touch in a word; the Virtue, by your patience, I will
handle, but not in many words: the Discourse, The First Touch concerning the
verity of the Third day.
and the Text shall be short alike. And

Touching the Hemme of time first, It is touched a little too much. Touched it
is, as God would not have his Anointed touched. Angunt dum tangunt. As the
multitude touched Christ in Iayrus house, when the woman with the bloody issue
touched him too. But in their touching, Confligunt and afflictant, says Saint
Peter: In stead of gathering virtue from him, they throng, and press him,
molest, and afflict him with their Touching: And so the old adversary of Faith,
the Devil, he has taught many to touch this circumstance. Where he cannot
hinder the Touch of Knowledge, yet to corrupt, or hinder the Touch of Faith, he
has taught a'm to press it with doubts, afflict it with questions, Disputare
malle quam viuere: To dispute with it, to do any thing to it, rather then
believe, and be whole. Some dispute the Integrity of three days. Others call
the Hours to account, and in their Auditt find not above forty. And yet let
either of these be touched with a Tertian Ague, they will confidently say,
their fit returned the third day, when it is not yet above forty hours, since
the fit departed. A Fever it is, and an evil spirit that vexes these
disputers: For the story in the Gospel is clear enough in short. Take we the
Jews reckoning of time, according to Gods measure of a Day in the beginning,
Genesis 1. Genesis 1.5.
from the beginning of the evening, till the evening returned again; and then
it is plain enough, that upon the day of the Jews Preparation, whereon Christ
suffered, He was both dead, according to the Scriptures, Math. 27.46. Mar.
15.42. Luc. 23.54.
and as some gather, buried by Joseph and Nicodemus, three hours before
Sunset, and that is one day. For I preach to day, though I preach not all the
day. Then all the evening and morning, the whole day of the Jews Sabbath, He
lay in his grave, and that is another day. Then all the evening quite through,
until the morning, of the first Day of the week, Math. 27.66.
He was sealed in His Sepulcher; And that is the third day, wherein He rose
gloriously from the Dead, and fully accomplished our Justification against the
sting of Romans 4.25.
Death, our Sin, the strength of sin the Law, the victory of Hell, our
Condemnation; Over all which, there was Conquest, Triumph, and perpetual
Dominion both taken in, and given to our flesh, by that his Resurrection, the
third Day.

And by that his Resurrection only, I do not say; but I add too, as a
masterpiece in this great Building, by that his Resurrection, The third Day.
Together they went, and together Faith must touch a'm, as the woman touched the
Hemme, and the Garment together. The third Day is a prop and stay to Faith, as
well as the Resurrection. For to keep my word;

Let us leave now the Left hand touch of Historical faith, That such a thing,
was so done, by such a Person, at such a time; which the Devil, that teaches
others to disput, yet himself believes; and convicted in understanding,
trembles at the very Hemme of time; The Second Touch, concerning the Necessity
of the third day.
And come to the Right hand touch of Justifying and saving Faith, That such a
thing was so done, by such a Person, at such a time, for me, and you, and the
whole world, to justify our conquering satisfaction to God, with full power of
the Sons of God; to do all good, and resist all evil, either to be done, or
suffered: This virtue and benefit of Christ's Resurrection, Faith cannot draw
from it, to the souls rest, and stay of the mind, unless the assent of Faith
to Christ's Resurrection, be stayed, and determined upon the (...), the very
third Day, it was done in, and no other. Neither the first Day, wherein he
suffered, Nor the second Day, the Jews Sabbath, Nor any Day beyond the third
Day. That Christ may resolve my Faith, that he is the Christ, and rose again
for me, He must not only rise, but rise the third Day, and no other.

And, to Discover this Mystery of Godliness, As these Days of Christ are
three; So I find accordingly, three several Days of the Church and mystical
body of Christ, as also three several Diuinities, and Lights of these three
Days, all inlightening the necessity of this Third Day. The first is the
Divinity of the Primitive Day, the Good Friday of the Church, wherein Christ was
persecuted, and suffered in his Members, and mystical body, through Heathenisme
and Heresy; The light of which day, was simplicity of Faith unto salvation.

The second is the Divinity of the School Day, what we call the Popish Day, the
Jews Sabbath of the Church, wherein the mystical body of Jesus Christ lay
wrapped in the Linnens of Jewish Ceremonies, and buried in the Newfound
Sepulcher of humane inventions; the light of which day, was Subtilty of
Reasonings; and, where there was not more Mist then Sunshine, unto salvation
too.

The third is the Divinity of the Reformed Day, the Resurrection Day of the
Church, when after a dark evening, and a little cloudy dawning of trouble, and
persecution in the beginning of Reformation, the Sun of Righteousness rose
gloriously in our Hemisphere, enlighte^ing our wosterne world, with the simple
subtilty of Saint Paul's foolish wisdom unto salvation, called, Preaching of
the Gospel.

All these Days gave their several lights to this point in hand, and from the
same Sun of Righteousness, though neither with equal force, nor in the same
measure. The first shows the Necessity of the third Day, in respect of the
Person, in whose Name Christ rose, that is Adam. The second, in respect of the
Person, wherein Christ Rose, that is God and Man. The third, in respect of the
Persons to whom, and for whom he rose, that is, Jews and Gentiles, the sons
of Adam.

But let me light a'm up all, The Necessity of the Third Day in respect of the
Person, in whose Name Christ rose.
and as our Savior wills, let me set, a'm upon the table, and in their own
order and discourse: First the simple Faith of the Primitive Church, both
touched the Necessity, and drew forth the Benefit of the Third Day, upon the
plainest grounds, that are laid, and laid open in holy Scripture; Tertul.
aduer. Iud. cap. 13. Athan. de Incar. verbi Chrysostom Hom. 89. in Mat.
and yet not allneither. Tertullian, Athanasius, and Chrysostom, to take the
marrow of their simple meaning, all pitch their consent, upon these two
especially. No differring the rising beyong the third Day, say they; Partly for
the Comfort of his friends, that expected it should be then, Partly for the
Conviction of his enemies, that endeuour'd it should not be then. Had he risen
any day, but the promised third Day, all his Disciples and friends would have
turned Thomases, and, as he did, have required another Touch and fingring of
him, ere they would have believed and taken Comfort. Mat. 27.62.63
And had he not risen upon the appointed third Day, (until which Day the
soldiers were appointed, by the Priests entreaty, and Pilates charge, to watch
the Sepulcher, with the seal upon it, to make all sure, for fear, forsooth,
his most fearful Disciples should steal him away, who were ready, God wot, to
steal themselves away, out of all sight) Had he not then risen in the presence
and sight of the very soldiers, the soldiers had not testified his
Resurrection, to his enemies as they did, Matt. 28.11. Mat. 28.11.
His enemies had not been convicted by the Testimony, Matt. 28.12.
as they were and showed it, by corrupting the soldiers to conceal the truth.
For that corruption to conceal, was a plain confession, that they were
indeed, only they would not seem to be convicted, and taken in their own
snare.

The spite of His enemies, and the Devil in them, was at the third Day only.
The comfort of his friends, and simple faith in them, was in the third Day
only. It was the third Day only, that could convince the one, and comfort the
other; and it did both. But why, I beseech you? and what was this conviction
and comfort of this third Day? Was it the bare return of the natural body to
life again the third Day, that malicious fear would have hindered? Ioh. 11.47.
The Devil indeed was angry when Lazarus was raised to life: or was it the
bare fruition of his bodily presence and company again the third Day, that
simple faith expected comfort in? There was comfort indeed in this: Ioh. 11.45.
and both comfort, and faith, followed Lazarus raising: But this is not comfort
of simple, but of sensual Faith. In this comfort, that is believed, because it
is seen or felt; there is a mixture of flesh, a composition of sensual
delight, from which the Touch of simple faith is most pure and free.

For simple Faith is an evidence of things unseen, says S. Paul, Heb. 11.1.
And our Savior tells Thomas, that, Beatifica fides, The blessed, or blessing
faith, is that, that neither sees nor feels, and yet then believes most: It
uses no help of fence, but the fence of hearing only: Romans 10.17.
It comes by hearing only, and what it hears was foreshewne in the typical
body, and done and performed in the Natural and real body of Christ Jesus,
that it verily believes, is communicated to His Mystical body: And what it so
hears, and believes, it believes evidently, though it see it not; It tastes
really, though it chew it not; It feels and enioyes substantially, though it
touch it not, nor finger it, or else it is not simple, but sensual.

Another comfort therefore we must find for simple Faith in the third Day.
And S. Chrysostom gives it: The comfort, Loco sup.
says he, that simple Faith in his friends expected, and Deuillish malice in
his enemies would have hindered, it was that unseen comfort, that S. Paul
speaks of, 1. Cor. 15.20. 1. Cor. 15.20.
That Christ rising the third day, was manifested to be Primitiae dormientium;
The first fruits of them that sleep in hope of Resurrection to life. This was
the comfort simple faith looked at, and the Devil had good cause not to abide.
He, the first fruits of the mystical body, and therefore as He, so all the
rest, of his kind and generation, with Him. And He therefore the first
fruits, and no other, that was raised from the dead, because He only, and no
other was raised the third day. Here was the cause of the Devils watch and
seal. Iayrus daughter was raised, but upon the first day. The widows son
was raised, but upon the second day, the burial day. Lazarus was raised, but
upon the fourth day. The Devil neither watched these, nor sealed their graves.
Only Christ, was raised the third day: and therefore He only, and no other,
the terrible and comfortable first fruits, of them that sleep.

Do you question the reason yet, and think the argument weak? I Will resolve
you in a word.

First, in the Legal and Typical first fruits, though we find no express
Law, necessity, nor mention of the third day for their offering; Yet this Law
we read Leuit. 23.15. Leuit. 23.15.
and a statute for ever, that the sheafe of the fruits to be accepted for
them, was to be wau'd before the Lord, the morrow after the Sabbath, seven
Sabbaths complete, before the feast of Pentecost. And this morrow, after that
Sabbath, was just this third day and hour, when Christ only, and no other was
wau'd and lifted up from the dead, the first fruits of all his kind. So the
type is sure for us, that He was only the prefigured first fruits, because He
only was raised upon this morrow.

But if this will not serve, In this Evangelical and substantial first
fruits, we find an express necessity of this third day, according to Gods
Economy, and Dispensation of grace unto us. 1. Cor. 15.21.22.
And S. Paul tenders it in the place before named. Almighty God of his mere
mercy, purposing to recover mankind, from under the curse of death, so sweetly
disposed of it, that, as by man came death, so by man also should come the
Resurrection from the dead. As by the first Adam, whose flesh and blood we are
by generation, Death; So by the second Adam, whose flesh and bone we are by
Regeneration, Resurrection to life. As, and So; in due proportion and
resemblance. As therefore in the first Adam, the first fruits of all living to
the world, all die, and from him Ecclesia morientium, a congregation of fallers
into death, were gathered; so in the second Adam, Christ, the first fruits of
all that die to the world, all are made alive, and from him Ecclesia
resurgentium, a congregation of risers to God were gathered. As Adams
congregation was gathered by a rising, to fall, from life unto death; so
Christ's congregation was gathered by a falling, to rise from death unto life.
As Adam rose, and fell, and gathered his congregation, the third day after
life; so Christ rose, and stood, and gathered his congregation the third day
after death. And here is Saint Paul's As, and So.

The full proportion, between the two Adams, whereupon simple Faith in
hearing, both determines her assent, and to the conviction of all malice,
gathers this comfort, that Christ was indeed the Person, in whose name He
came, Her second Adam, her first fruits, her perfect pattern and samplar of
her nature, estate, and condition, in that He only, and no other, was raised
the third day, and no other. And this was Primitive Divinity, what S. Paul calls
the chaste virgin, simplicity in Christ Jesus, 2. 2. Cor. 11 3.
Cor. 11.3.

Nor in the second place, The necessity of the third Day in respect of the
Person wherein Christ rose.
does the school subtilty at all corrupt this virgin simplicity, or obscure
this light, with any forced or false glosses: It rather inlightens it more,
bringing more instruction with comfort to the touch of Faith, in respect of the
Person wherein Christ rose. And thus they reason, the third day to Faiths,
apprehension. 1. Cor. 15. sio^ 14 to 20.


Most certain it is, as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. that were it not for the
resurrection of the dead, there is nothing so vain, as the assurance, nothing
so miserable, as the preaching, and preachers of Christ Jesus. It is only the
hope of the resurrection, that makes you serve Christ, and us serve you. Now to
hope for this, it is fit we be fully instructed in it, and to be instructed in
it fully, we must first be fully assured, both of his Humane Nature, that
should rise, but alone could not, and of his Divine Nature, that could not but
rise, but alone would not without the other. For to believe our resurrection,
we must first believe our selves to be partakers of both these Natures: Of
both together, or else no resurrection. The Divine without the Humane needs
not, the Humane without the Divine cannot. And to believe our selves partaker
of both these, our faith must first be confirmed, in the truth of them both, in
our first fruits, our second Adam, with whose entire nature we participate by
resurrection, as with the first by generation. He must have both, or we
cannot; if He have both, we want neither. To confirm therefore our faith in the
truth of Christ's Divine Nature, that would die, but should not, it was
necessary He should rise soon. To confirm our faith in the truth of his
Humane Nature, that should rise, but alone could not, it was necessary He
should not rise too soon And this soon for his Divinity, and not too soon for
his Humanity, was the third Day only. Soon, says his Divinity, and not
beyond the third Day; not too soon, says his Humanity, and not before the
third Day. hastening his resurrection upon the third Day, it appeared
manifestly, there was something in his flesh, and that bodily, that death might
swallow with the flesh, as a fish does a hook, or a Hawke casting: but death
could not hold it, not digest it, not convert it into her substance of
corruption and putrefaction, which begins the third Day, and especially in a
wounded body.

She had snatched Christ's body greedily upon the Cross; But when she came to
endew it, put it over, and convert it into her substance of corruption, at her
due time, the third Day, it would not do; she could not choose but restore
him, and with him all, that by faith in him had any part of the Divine Nature.
Could that holy one have seen, much less feel any corruption, the Divine
nature, that dwelt in him bodily, had not been there. But (...), says Saint
Peter, Act. 2.24. Act. 2.24.
It was not possible that such a Person should be holden of the pains of
death. Of Death, He might be, and was for a while; true flesh required it,
true God willed it: But of the pains and penalties of Death, the corruption
and putrefaction of the third Day, (...), it was impossible that Divinity
should be held by a'm.

So long it was possible, but no longer, and as so long, and no longer, was
necessary to show Divinity was there; so, so long, and no sooner, was necessary
to show Humanity was there too. A pawse did well for that. The first or second
day had been too hasty: He would not else have appeared Man, and something
that might die: His death would have been suspected a swound, a fit of an
Apoplexy, perhaps but fayn'd, and so all faith vain, and hope comfortless.
Till the third Day therefore he stays, because so long to stay, as it was
necessary to show his mortal nature, so it was sufficient to show it. For in
less then that time, by many hours, no man seems dead, and is alive, but
either shows some tokens of life, or dies out right. So that in a word, To
stay so long as the third Day, was necessary to show his Humanity, which should
not rise any sooner, and it did show it; To stay no longer then the third Day,
was necessary to show his Divinity, which might stay no longer, and it did show
it. It was the third Day only, that could give faith assurance, her head, and
first fruits was such a Person, and rose in both the Natures of God and man.

Nor is it assurance only, but Comfort too, says the school; for in that this
Divine and Humane Nature stayed thus in the grave, two whole nights, and one
whole day, it is our consolation, says Thomas, Thom. Aqu. q. 53. ar. 2. con.
that Christ by his own bodily death which in him was all light, through the
righteousness, and innocence of his flesh, has fully destroyed our two deaths,
both of soul and body, which in us, are all darkness through sin. Hos.
13.14.
Ero mors tua O mors, O death I will be thy death, was fulfilled in these two
nights. Death is now dead, and has no more power over us, then it had over Him;
but in our death now, we are conformable and subject to him only. Our head
stayed a while in death, but was not detained by death: as long as He thought
it convenient for our belief of His Humane Nature, so long He stayed: when He
thought it convenient for our belief of His Divine Nature, He rose again: He
both stayed and rose at his own will, having slain death with the Divine
Nature, for seazing unjustly upon the innocent Humane Nature. To show that just
so the members partaking with that Head, conformable in nature, though not
equal in virtue and power, no more then my toe is to my head; yet just so they
die, and just so they are detained in death. In death they are detained, but
not by death at all, or any power of hers, but only by the will of Christ
their head; so long as he pleases, they shall rest in hope, and no longer.

Before he was our head in time, which was at the third Day, Ephesians. 1.20.22.
Ephesians. 1.20, 22. Death was a darkness, and a deep prison; and that, to them
that died in the hope of his first coming. But since he is risen the third
Day, and has taken away the darkness of our two nights, the darkness of
death is taken away. Phil. 1.22.
Mori mihi lucrum, to die is gain; to be in her prison, is to be in liberty;
to be detained in death, is to be in light and life. But to whom? To those
only that communicate with that Head, that rose the third Day; because he was
God, and could have risen sooner, and yet rose no sooner then the third Day;
because he was man, and would show that man has now power, as to destroy, so to
dispose of death, and as in himself, so in all his members.

And thus far the light of school subtilty leads us, to the virtue of this
Hemme, in respect of the Person wherein Christ rose: It proves his Divine
Nature, his Humane Nature, his power over death, our liberty in death, at his
dispose only, and not at deaths at all, and so before we are aware, The
necessity of the third Day in respect of the persons to whom and for whom
Christ rose.
we are gotten into the third respect, To our selves, and those persons, to
whom, and for whom he rose.

But we are but entered only: to show it more fully, the light of reformed
wisdom remains now, which, as in this point, it neither opposes, nor departs
from, either primitive subtilty, or school subtilty: so it is a third
witness, to establish the virtue of this third Day, and all together will make
up the wise man's triple twisted cord that cannot easily be broken.

Our first reason of the third Day (for I must make haste, as in all points
else) is, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, and the word of God be
clear in our eyes and hearts: nor is it ours first, but S. Paul's first, 1.
Cor. 15.4. 1. Cor. 15.4.
And that he rose again the third Day, according to the Scriptures. And when
S. Paul names Scriptures, as when our Savior names a'm, he means either the
prophesies of the third Day, or the types and figures of the third Day, or both
together; and both together, I believe, he means; for both there were of it,
and according to both; and to fulfill both, Christ rose again the third Day.

The prophecy we find, This prophecy is commended by S. Paul Ephesians. 2.5.6.
which with the whole passage I was forced to cut of for Breuity. verba Pauli
Conuiuificauit Conresuscitauit. Tertul. loc. sup.
Osee. 6.2. After two days he will revive us, in the third Day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight: It is not him only, but us; and for us
sure, and not for himself only, both the Prophet bespoke it, and Christ did
it. And as it is spoken of the long expected Messiah; so Tertul. vrges it so
strongly against the Jews, as if Christ had risen only the third Day, to
fulfill this prophecy, and remember the Jews of it.

The reviving, the raising, the life, the universal benefit, the whole
prophecy, they saw all fulfilled to the very expected hour, and by none else,
but by Christ only, and at no time else, but the third Day only. They fulfilled
the prophecies, in killing their Messiah, but would not believe their Messiah,
in fulfilling the prophecies. But, as the fashion is, they killed the Prophets,
and buried all the prophecies. And let us let the prophecy pass, and perish
with our Sermons, and make nothing of it, as the Jews did.

That they could forget a prophecy, when they could kill a Prophet, it is so
ordinary amongst us, as it is no wonder in them. But yet their beloved
remembrancers, 2. Cor. 1.22.
whom S. Paul says they loved above all things, that is, Types, signs, and
figures, as they could not kill a'm, so it was very strange they could not
remember a'm, and this third Day put a'm in mind of.

Amongst many other, had they but remembered either Isaac among their fathers,
or Joseph amongst their brethren, or Jonas amongst their ministers and servants
this very third Day had been argument enough, that the Riser the third Day was
their full Messiah, both King, Priest, and Prophet. Both their Isaac, and
Priest to sacrifice, and be sacrificed for them: their Joseph and King to feed,
save, and comfort them: and their Jonas and Prophet, to teach and instruct a'm
in the right way, and all because He rose the third Day. First Isaac going with
his father to be sacrificed for him, Genesis 22.4.
Genesis 22.4. Until the third Day, he was no better then a dead man, neither in
his fathers opinion, nor his own condition: But the third Day he was revived
and raised again from the dead, and made the first fruits of the blessed seed,
16.18.
at the 18. verse. Then Joseph until the third year, was a poor prisoner in
the stocks, Psalm. 105.18.
the iron entered into his soul: But in the third year, he was delivered, and
made the governor and commander of all Egypt, Genesis 41.1.
Genesis 41.1. Lastly, Jonas, for three days was in the Whales belly, Ion. 2.10.
and what better then dead? But then the fish could not hold him, but cast him
up on the dry land, and he became the great Prophet of the Gentiles, and
Preacher of Repentance to them.

Now all these foretold Christ, or who but He? The Jew will not name another;
and all this Christ only fulfilled, or who but He? Can the Jew tell us? And
when did He fulfill all this, but upon the third Day? But the Jew will not
believe it. What virtue therefore the Jews would not gather out of this Hemme,
let it flow unto us of the Gentiles, to whom the promise, and the Hemme
reaches. That Christ rising the third Day, according to these Scriptures; it is
Christ, and none else, that is our Isaac, both our sacrifice for sin, and yet
our first fruits of the blessed seed. It is Christ, and none else, that is our
Joseph, both the bond-seruant that was sold by us, and for us, and yet our only
Lord and releeuer in all want. It is Christ, and none else, that is our Jonas,
both our pledge punished for us, and yet our preacher of amendment to safety.
The sacrifice in fear, the foundation of hope, the freedom in bondage, the
succor in want, the pledge in danger, the guide in error: all this Christ is,
and therefore is, because it pleased him to rise our Isaac, our Joseph, our
Jonas, our King, Priest, and Prophet, our full Messiah according to the
Scriptures, the third Day.

Thus He fulfilled His Fathers word, third Day, according to that word; and
for that, faith is emboldened, to take His fathers word, and give credence to
his bare word. And next to His fathers word, which is our next reason, to
fulfill his own word and prediction of Himself, and purchase faith to it too,
He kept the day too. Athan. loc. sup.
This was Athanasius reason before us, but we make it fuller, and find more
virtue in it. He rose the third Day, because He had said, He would; and my text
is the first word, that ere He gave for it: and therefore He will keep his
word with us, whatsoever He has promised. This was Athanasius reason and
comfort, He is a man of his word. And it is much this, but it is not enough. He
had said, He would rise the third day, and He did so, and He put it into my
Creed; and in all my Creed there is no circumstance of time but only this:
therefore He will not only keep His word with us, as well as Gods; but He
will keep His time with us to a minute. He will not only pay the full sum
He has promised, but He will pay it at the day; He will not break an hour.
This is the comfort and virtue that faith suckes from the third Day, and from
no particle in the Creed besides.

When the Angels at the Sepulcher, Luc. 24.6. said to the women, Why seek ye
the living amongst the dead? He is not here, but is risen; He adds too;
Remember, how he spoke unto you, when he was yet in Galilee, saying. The Son
of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and
the third Day rise again. It is remember (...), not what only, but how, not
the matter, but the manner; Remember that. He will keep it, though He die for
it; and though He die for it, He will rise again the third Day, to keep it to
a minute. Please you, see one reason yet, why, of all the actions of Christ for
us, recorded in the Creed, only this action of rising, though of all the most
difficult, yet it is to be believed with the circumstance of time, and no
other; it is to show, that be the doubt, the difficulty, the danger, the
improbability, the impossibility, in respect of the means, what it will, yet
whenever He has promised, He keeps that, as well as whatsoever He has
promised.

And, howsoever familiar custom, has brought both the exercises and ordinances
of godliness, into such contemptuous neglect, as there is scarce any reverence
to a divine presence, to be found in divine service; Yet when you pray, when
you are baptized, when you receive, when you hear, when you confess, when you
are absolu'd, when you relieve, when you forgive, when you entertain, defend,
or advance the Prophets: Dixit? Has He promised any thing at these times?
Factum est; it is done at those times. Why? Upon what Article of my Creed is
this grounded? Why, remember the third Day. He that was crucified, dead,
buried, sealed up, and watch't in his grave, and in all eyes, it was impossible
He should keep either word or time: And yet then He kept both, and to the very
(...), in the stricktest manner; as we say in our Baptism, Doubt you not
therefore, but earnestly believe, when you are baptized, He then regenerates,
when you pray together, He is then in the midst, when you receive the
Communion; it is then his body and blood, when you hear the word, He then
speaks, when you confess your sins, you then confess to him, when you are
absolu'd by the Keys, He then absolues you, when you relieve, He then
receives, when you forgive your enemies, He then forgiues, when you
entertain, defend, or advance the Prophets, you then, even then, entertain,
defend, and advance even Christ himself. And this is some virtue more, that
our times are certain, and at his appointed times: let the means be dead, and
all reason and probability buried and sealed up from us, yet we are sure of
Him, He is there then, and He keeps his time duly. But yet this is not all
He has done for our times; we are not yet come to times full redemption.

To conclude all, time too. Touch the Person of Christ Jesus we must, with that
Faith only, that believes only, and adores the mystery of grace, so are we
justified in Him, made members of Him. Touch the Garment of his works we must
with that Faith only, that does not only believe, but works through and
resembles his love; so are we sanctified in him, and covered with His
righteousness. Touch the Hem of His garment, the circumstances of His works we
must, with that Faith only, that does not only believe and work in gross,
but is the measure and proportion, fashioning our conversation to His in
heaven, our time, place, means, manners, to His only, so are we glorified in
Him, with the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Now to show in some sort this measure and proportion betwixt Christ and us, S.
Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 15.23.
1. Cor. 15.23. There Ordo Resurgentium, An Order of Risers, erected by Christ
himself, and himself is the president of that order. First Christ, and then
they that are Christ's in order: and this, I dare say, is Gratus sermo, an
acceptable saying: For all men desire to be of this order. It is neither
scandal to greatones, nor imputation to meaner in Kings Courts, to say, we
courteirs would all verygladly rise, and be installed in this order of risers.
But if you would do so, you know, there is a credit and a Creed to be
remembered; To get into this order, you must follow your Prince and president;
And to keep order with him, you must keep his times duly, his very days, and
those are but three days now, and no more; for I have yet another mystery to
tell you.

Abbreuiatum faciet Deus opus super terram: Thom. Presat. in decal.
So the old ones read that place of Esaias, cited by S. Paul, Romans 9.28. which
we read thus, Ashort work will the Lord make upon earth: and this short
work, say they, is the work of our redemption from eternal evil, Phil. 2.7.
with restoration into eternal good. Wherein as God the son, our Lord,
abbreuiated the equality with God, into the fashion of man, and that man, the
meanest of men, a poor Minister and servant, to redeem the division between
God and man, and make the Highest God, and the lowest man, at one again: so
the same Lord, and servant, has wrought out and perfected this redemption, and
union amongst men by abbreuiation only, and making short work in all.
Generations, persons, place, words, time, all the measures, by which, either
the kind, condition, content, knowledge, or the actions of men are differenced,
and divided, they are all now abbreuiated and made shorter: we are redeemed now
from distinctions of kindred, and all generations are abbreuiated into the
Newbirth in the lauer of regeneration, wherein we are all now of one kind and
blood: we are redeemed now, from distinction of condition, for all persons are
abbreuiated into the Person and body of Christ, wherein we are all members of
one Person, of one suffering and honor: we are redeemed now from all
distinctions of contents; for all places are abbreuiated into the Church and
Communion of Saints, wherein, meum is tuum, and tuum is meum; Our desire the
same because our possession and content is one and the same: we are redeemed
now from distinction of knowledge, and division of understanding; for all
words are abbreuiated into these three, faith, hope, and charity: These are
all our study, and the study of all alike, for the measure of all knowledge.
Lastly, we are redeemed now from the distinction of endeavors, and division of
will and choice in doing; for all time, the measure of all actions, is
abbreuiated in these three days of Christ, the Preparation, the Sabhath, the
Resurrection. And as we have no kindred to derive to, but the Newbirth, no
condition of honor, but in the Person of Christ, no content in place, but in
the Communion of Saints, no words to study, but faith, hope, and charity: So we
have no time to observe for the measure of all our a^tions, but only these
three days, and we have no actions at all, to will, choose or do, but what are
measured and fitted to these three Days; the Preparation, the Sabbath, the
Resurrestion. These are the measure, samplar and pattern, to our days, or
else of Christ's order we cannot be.

The days of our life, must be our day of Preparation, our Good Friday, as was
Christ's, and as it was His, and no otherwise. In it, we must labor against
sin and Satan, as Christ did, we must suffer from sin and Satan, as Christ
did, we must die in conquest of sin and Satan, as Christ did. And now, how
like the order? But be not dismayed; for after this will succeed our Jewish and
Typical Sabbath, the day of our rest in the grave, as Christ did, in the hands
of Christ only, and not of deeath at all, no more then he did. And then will
yet follow, the spiritual and heavenly Sabbath, the Lords day, and the day of
Lords, the day of resurrection unto life, and full enstallment in this order.

This the order: Both habited, armed, and timed like your President you must
be; and then, as in other orders, it is a fellowship, as well as an order.
August. in 29 Psalm.
Hoc sperate mea membra quod in capite praecessit, says Saint Augustine; and
it is the Word and Motto of your order: What the Head enioyes, let the member
expect; what is gone before in the Head, according to his virtue, let the
member expect in his measure and condition. As, let our first day be
troublesome, as Christ's was; yet it shall be short, and the shortest of the
three, as Christ's was. Let our second day of death be longer by many hours, as
Christ's was; yet it shall be as long in rest, as Christ's was. Let our third
day be long before it come; yet it will come, and come early, as Christ's did,
and when it does come, it shall never know evening, as Christ's did: And that is
a further comfort yet in this third Day.

The time of the member of Christ, is redeemed and is abbreuiated into three
Days only, and but two of those Days have nights belonging to a'm. The third
Day has no night, but is ever day, as Christ's was. In these three Days His
state, and condition is by succession, first trouble with the Cross, then rest
in death, then happiness in Heaven. First trouble with the Cross, for which
he has the Grace of Faith, both begun, and perfited here, to lead, and defend
him all his first day. But faith has a night, and dies with him and his Cross.
Then comes his rest: for which he has the grace of hope begun here, to
assist faith, but perfited in death, to establish him in comfort, all his
second day. But hope has a night too, and leaves him, when he leaves to rest
in death. Then comes his happiness, for which he has the grace of love,
begun here, to make faith and hope active, continued in death, to sweeten
hopes rest, but perfited in eternal life, with God that is love in esse, with
whom there is no night, but always day without either end or change: And then
time is redeemed into eternity.

And now you, most Honorable, and blessed order of Risers, may it please you,
value your order, with the honor and rule of it, as you are regenerated in
Christ, members of his body, Saints by Communion, students of faith, hope, and
charity, and of the order of the Resurrection to life. The blood that runs in
your veins, is Sanguis Dei, the blood of God: And then S. Peter's (...) is your
Charter of Privilege, against all power of death. You die not, when you die,
but only to end your troubles, and show you are of a mortal nature; you shall
rest in peace, as Christ did. Impossible it is, but the blood of God should
rise. But ah the misery! The servant is not above his Lord, the Disciple is not
above his Master, the member is not above the Head. And rise we cannot,
possibly, but as our Head did, upon a third Day. And to rise upon a third Day,
it is impossible, unless two days go before it. Nay, nor rest can we
possibly upon a second day, unless the first day go before it. So it is
ordered now, and there is no breaking of it: No skipping to the Resurrection
day, without both the Sabbath, and preparation: No, nor any getting to the
Sabbath, without we take our rise at the preparation. The rise both to rest,
and rising is here only. Is there no rise here at combat with the cross?
Why then no rest in death, and then no happiness in the resurrection. Is there
no fighting faith with base and dishonorable temptations? why then no resting
hope, and then, no rising love. Had not Christ resisted unto death, He had not
died in conquest; and had He not died so, He had not risen in triumph and
glory. But all this our Prince and President must do, and did for us, and all
this we must do for him. And if all this we do, and in this order; If faith
feel a good Friday, and have so fought with the Cross; as at the hour of
death, though faith die, yet hope and love stand conquerours above all
temptations. Then as sure as Christ our head, conquered upon the preparation,
rested upon the Sabbath, and rose again upon the third day; so sure shall our
hope rest secure and sweetly in death, our second day, and after death our love
shall rise in triumph upon the third Day, to enjoy that happiness, that faith
fought for here, hope rested in, in death, and love only enioyes without
night or fail. To which happiness, He bring us, that, to purchase it as
dearly as gloriously for us, was crucified, dead, buried, and rose again the
third Day, Jesus Christ the righteous: To whom, with God the Father, and God
the Holy Ghost, one true, eternal, everliving, only wise God, be ascribed,
as is most due, all honor, praise, power, glory, dominion and thanksgiving,
the first, second, and third Day, and for ever.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXII.


