THE SICK Man's Salve.

VVherin the faithful christians may learn both how to be have them selves
patiently and thankefully, in the time of sickness, and also virtuously to
dispose their temporal goods, and finally to prepare them selves gladly and
godly to die: Made and newly recognized by Master Tho. Becon. 1561.

Math. 11. Come unto me all ye that are sick and diseased, and I will comfort
you.

CVM PRIVILEGIO per Septennium.

THOMAS BECONVS SACROSA^CTAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.


Ora expressa vides, viuos imitantia vultus.
Quod potuit calamo pictor and art vides.
mentis qua^ nullus potuit tibi reddere pictor.
Effigiem scriptis, praebuit ipse suis.
The Names of all such books, as Thomas Becon, has hitherto made and set
forth.
i. The News out of Heaven. ii. The Christmas Bancket. iii. The Potation for
Lent. iiii. The Pathway unto Prayer. v. The Cathechisme. vi. The Nosegaye. vii.
The Pollecie of War. viii. The Book of Matrimony. ix. David's Harp. x. The
New years gift. xi. The Inuectiue against swering xii. The Governance of
Virtue. xiii. The Dialogue of Christ's birth xiiii. The Inuectiue against
whordo^ xv. The Solace of the Soul. xvi. The Jewel of Joy. xvii. The Castle
of Comfort. xviii. The Fortress of the faithful. xix. The Flower of godly
prayers. xx The Principles of christen religion xxi. The True use of fasting
xxii. The Pomaunder of prayer. xxiii. The Christen knight. xxiiii. The Sickmans
Salve. xxv. The Relics of Rome.
TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Basil Felding Esquier, Thomas Becon wysheth
the favor of God, continual health and prosperous felicity.
CHrist our Lord and Savior, considering what and how great carnal security
and fleshly quietness reigns in mortal men of all ages, Colos. iii.
yea, and that in them, that profess godliness, that is to say: Christians,
which by their profession ar dead unto the world, and have their life hydden
with Christ in God, in somuche that they being occupied about worldly and
transitory things, which sone perish and come to naught, do utterly neglecte
the things that appertain unto the salvation of their souls: in many places
of his holy Gospel admonishes us to watch and to make provision for our
latter end, least we be found unready wha^ we shall be called out of the
world. In the Gospel of blessed Mathewe he has these words: Math. xxiiii*
watch, for you know not what hour the Lord will come. Of this be ye sure, that
if the good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come he would
surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also
ready. For in such hour as ye think not, will the son of man come. In S.
Marks Gospel also he says. Watch, for ye know not when the master of the
house will come, Mark. xiii
at even or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing or in the dauning, least if he
come suddenly, he find you sleping. And that I say unto you, I say unto all.
Watch* Yea take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. Again
in the Revelation of blessed John he says. Behold I come as a thief. Apoca.
xvi.
Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, that he walk not naked,
and men see his fylthines. Apoca. xxii.
Item, Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his deeds shall be. i. These. v*
The holy Apostle S. Paul likewise exhorts us, that we sleep not as other
do, but that we watch and be sober, nether that we fall into fleshly
quietness, promysing our selves long life, health and rest in this world,
least soden destruction fall upon us.

For the day of the Lord (says he) shall come even as the thief in the night.
Certes our mortal estate declares evidently, that we be so bound unto death,
that we are not certain of our life not one hour. Out of hand may death oppres
us, for any certentie that we have of the contrary. What thing is your life,
says S. James? Jacob. iiii.
It is a vapor that appears for little time, and then vanishes away. Job.
ix.
My days, says Job, are more swift then a runner, yea they are passed away
as the ships that be good under sail, and as the Egle that flies unto the
pray. Again he says: Man that is borne of woman, has but short time to live,
and is full of mysery. He comes up and is cut down like a flower. Job. xiiii.
He flies as it were a shadow and never continues in one state. The Prophet
also says: Esaias. xl.
All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof is as the flower of the field.
The grass is withered, the flower falls away: Even so is the people as
grass, when the breathe of the Lord blows upon them. Thus sewe the misery,
vanity and shortness of our mortal life painted out before our eyes and that
these things are true, daily experience proves. Notwithstanding such is our
blindness, fondnes and madness that we utterly forget the uncertainty of this our
wretched and short life and promise our selves the florishyng years of Nestor,
Gene. v.
or the long life of Methuselah. We may right well be lykened to that ungodly
richman, of whom we read in the Gospel of Luke, Luke. xii*
which made provision for a great number of years, promising him self long
to live upon the face of the earth, and forgetting him self to be mortal and
bound unto death. But when he thought least of death and was most busily
occupied in getting and gatheringe together the goods of ye world, God said
unto him: thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul again from thee.
Then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? Psalm. xxxix.
The Psalmograph says: He heapeth tresure upon treasure, and yet knows he
not for whom he gathers it. After this sort do we behave our selves at this
day. We moyle and turmoyll our selves in studiyng and devising how we may come
by the gifts of glassy fortune. We refuse no pains, no labors to become
ritche and welthy in worldly goods. Yea so blinded are our hearts, that the
nerer we approach unto the end of our life, ye more studious, careful and
diligent are we to get the substance of this world. We remember not this
saying of the holy Apostle. i. Tim. vi.
Godliness is great rytches, if a man be content with that he has. For we
brought nothing into ye world neither may we carry any thing out. But when we
have fode and raiment, Psalm. xxxix.
let us therewith be content. The holy scripturs calls us strangers and
Pilgrims in this world, i. Pet. ii.
and declares that we have here no continuyng city, Heb. xiii.
but we seek one to come. Notwithstanding as though there were none other life
after this, or else as though we should for ever here remain and never depart,
we travail about ye getting of worldly substance. Iere. viii.
Al, as the Prophet says, even from the lowest unto the hiest set their minds
on filthy lucre. Esaias. lvi.
They are shameless dogs, that be never satisfied. Hereto agrees the saying
of the Apostle, Philip. ii.
all seek their own advantage and not that, which should set forth the glory
of Jesus Christ. And as in covetousness, so likewise in all other abominable
sins do we most wickedlye walk. And all things come to pass, because we
remember not the shortness of this life and forget our latter end. This
considered the wiseman right well, when he says: Whatsoever thou take in
hand, remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss, Eccle. vii. Deuteronomy. xxxi^
Moses also says, O that men would ones be wise and understand, and make
provision for their latter end. There is not a stronger bit to bridle our
carnal affectes, nor a better scholemaister to keep us in an order then the
remembrance of our latter end, then to remember that we shall not always here
remain, yt we are but strangers and pylgrims in this world, that we shall
leave behind us, whatsoever worldly substance we have here, either painfully
gotten or carefully kept, that we shall die the death, that we shall appear
before the judgment seat of Christ and receive according to the works which
we have done in this life, either everlasting glory or perpetual pain. But
these things seek we not to remember, but rather to forget, and therefore fall
we into all kind of ungodliness and dissolution of life. And when the time
comes, that God visits us with sickness or otherwise plageth us for our
evil behauour, then do we not prepare our selves unto the cross, as we ought
submitting our selves to the good pleasure of God, and being contented
patiently and thanckfully to receive what so ever is laid upon us at the
appointment of God, but we rather murmur and grudge against God, and with
unwilling hearts suffer that loving visitation of God, almost wishinge that
there were no God to plage and punish us, but that we might here live
continually and go forth to sin freely and without punishment. And when death
approaches, and no remedy can be found against ye violence thereof, then do the
ungodly and wicked livers beholding the miserable face of their conscience,
which presents unto them nothing but sin, ye wrath of God hell fire, and
everlasting damnation, begin to despair and straight yield them selves to the
pleasure of Satan to be for ever and ever tormented in that lake that burns
with fire and brimston, Apoca. xxi.
the^ selves their souls and consciences consenting and assentinge thereunto.
For what other end can be looked for of a wicked and ungodly life? Is it to be
thought, that he which through sin has served the devil all the time of his
life, can at his latter end look for the enheritaunce of everlasting glory,
wherewith God rewards the^ ye painfully labor to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life? i. Cor. ix.
S. Paul says. So run, that ye may obtayn, that is to say, so train your life
in all Godlynes and virtue to the uttermost of your power while ye live in this
world, yt after ye have finished your course here, ye may enjoy ye glorious
reward of eternal life. A corruptible crown is not obtained without great
pains taking, and shall we look for an everlasting crown by leding an ungodly
and wanton life? ii. Tim. ii.
No man is crowned, says the apostle, except he fights lawfully. In this
world therefore, wherein our life is nothing but a knighthod or warfar, Job. vii.
must we lawfully, valeantly and mightily fight and strive against our ennemies
ye devil, the world and the flesh, and by fervent and diligent prayer unto God
so triumph over the^ through the help of our graund captain Christ, yt we may
have a glorious spoill of our ennemies, and garnishe our selves with all kind of
victorious and roial robes I mean, all good works and godly virtues. Where
such a life is led, there must a good end be, and everlasting life may with a
fre conscience and assured hope be looked for. And to bring this to pass. Who
labors not to the vttermoste of his power, namely if he be of God, and
looks for a better and more blessed life after this? How we should fight
against our adversaries and lead a good life in this world I have declared
abundantly heretofore in many of my books. In this treatise, which I have
now in hand, entitled ( The Sickemans Salve) my mind is to show unto the
faithful christians, how they ought to make provision for their latter end,
that they may depart in the faith of Christ, and be of the number of those of
whom it is written. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord. Apoca.
xiiii. Psalm. cxvi
Again. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. For
what should it profit a man to win all the world, Mat. xvi.
if at the last he loses his soul? Therefore in this my work I have declared
first of all, The contents of this book.
how the faithful christians ought to behave them selves patiently and
thankefully in the time of syckenesse.

Secondly, how they should virtuously dispose their temporal goods.

Thirdly, after what manner they ought to prepare them selves gladly and Godly
to die.

Finally I have enterlased many comfortable exhortations unto the sick, and
diverse godly and necessary prayers, some to be said of them that are sick, and
some of other for such as are diseased.

This treatise, after that I had finished it, calling to remembrance how
greatly I am bound to your right worshipful Maistership, considering also your
most hearty zeal and fervent affection toward the true and Christen religion
(all superstition and papistry laid aside) I thought it my bounden duty to
send unto you as a testimony of my good will and thankful heart toward you,
most entirely desiryng you to accept and take in good part this my little
gift, although much more base then it may seem in any part worthy to recompense
the least point of your unfeigned friendship diverse ways heretofore declared
unto me.

God preserve your right worshypfull Maistershyp, with the most virtuous
Gentlewoman your wife, and all your godly children in continual health and
prosperous felicity. Amen.

A PLENTIFVL table containing all the principal matters of this work for the
spedier finding of the same.
A
ADa^ cause why we all perished. 300 Amos ye Prophet killed. 317 Admonishions,
profits. 226 Against the fear of death remedies 313 Against the stinges of
death. 316
B
Bankettinge, children ought to beware. 212 Baptism. 418 Belefe, what it is.
444 Belefe in heart. 418 Body committed unto the earth. 136 Bodies shall rise
immortal. 137 Bodies of the faithful, ought not to be vylye handled. 173
Brazen Serpent. 76 Burialles. 173
C
Call continually on the Lord. 45 Cayin repented, but lacked faith. 378
Change lead for syl. uer. 323 Cherefull geuer. 40 Children fearing God. he
will not leave them comfortles. 270 Children ought to beware of il company. 208
Children must beware of swearing. 209 Children must love and help their mothers
211 Christ author of our salvation. 154 Christ prayed for an habitation for us.
159 Christ our phisitio^. 385 Christ has reconciled us. 391 Christ a savior
for all ages. 394 Christ saves us freely. 406 To Christ al things ^e subject.
234 Christ's wounds Christ's words heals our wounds. 414 Christ's alter
was the cross. 422 Christ overcame Satan for us. 337 Christ the head corner
stone. 353 Christ fulfilled the law for us. 367 Christ put away ye cause of
hatred. 369 Christ has put out the handwriting. idem Christ has paid our
debt. 570 Christ the Lord of all faithful. 232 Christ the anointed. 233
Christ our Lord. 234 Christ's humanite. 236 Christ a sacrifice for sins. 242
Christ's death has conquered Satan. 249 Christ's going down to hell. idem
Christ's resurrection. 250 Christ's assention. 251 Christ a sufficient
mediator. 253 Christ the mighty Samson. 254 Christ gives gifts unto men. 256
Christ ascended to prepare a place for us. 257 Christ taken up in a cloud.
258 Christ coming to judgment. 259 Christ wrought all things in his
humanity for us. 260 Christ's blood washes clean our sins. 88 Christ the
true Samaritaine. 103 Christ a loving Physician. 105 Christ submitted his will.
121 Christ forgeueth both the fault and pain. 284 Christ's church lynked
together. 269 Christ gave him self for his church. 282 Christ disciple, who?
23 Christian, why he fears not death. 287 Christians ought to help scholars.
144 Church or Congregation. 268 Communion 172 Complaint of the wicked. 58
Comfort to them that calls upon God. 29 Cross of tribulation. 17 Conscience
quiet, how? 101 Comfortable calling of sinners. 388 Conscience at rest. 128
Confession of sins unto God. 375 Correction in this world 54
D
Daniel preserved by prryer. 111 David reioysed not in him self. 50 David
mourned and fasted for his son. 162 Death, gate to everlasting life. 304
Death a chaungyng to a better life. 308 Death a passage. 158 Death of the
righteous. 67 Debtors forgeuen. 143 Debtes. 12.14 Departed are not lost. 157
Desire of prayer. 426 Doctrine of Papists after this life. 194 Doubting faith
obteyneth no promise. 439 Duty of good seruau^ts 225
E
Eldest son. 138.139 Esaias sawne in sonder. 327 Ezechias ^^ued.xv. year more.
110 Exhortation to the sick 46.449 Executours charge 169 Examples of old
women, 219
F
Fallen on sleep, 157 Fatherles children what they ought to do, 215 216, 207
Faith, 416, 334 Faith and prayer, sure armours, 344 Faith in the sure promyses
of God, 377 Faith makes us the sons of God, 380 Faith the rote of all
virtues, idem. Faith rycher then all treasures, 380 Faith yt is vnshake^ 443
Faithful shall have possession in the kingdom* 179. Faithful rewarded and
unfaithful. 180. Faithful belefe never dies. 89. Flesh lusts against the
spirit. 15. Fyry Serpent. 335.
G
God loves where he chastises. 14. God wounds and makes whole. 21. God
makes a way out in temptacion. 21.27 God a loving father. 27 God helps in all
needs 82.30. God tries his, how. 30 God wrought wonderfully for Joseph. 31.
God gave quietness unto David after his storms. 32. God restores us after his
tempta^ion. 33. God never forsakes his. 38. God present to our sickness. 46 God
suffers the wyc. ked to flourish. 58. God not present, where the cross is
absent. 61 God takes not his mercy from his. 70 God, when he repents? 71 God
pours out his blessing, when we sease to sin. 72 God turns his wrath 76
God why he punishes. 74 God has no pleasure in the death of a syn. 94 God
commands to call to him in our trouble. 108 God has respect to the poor.
109 God hears hearty prayers. idem. God suffers us not to be tempted above
our strength. idem. God present in trouble. 11^. God never forsakes the^ that
trust in him. 114 Goods of the syck how to be disposed before death. 123.133
God te^dreth our souls health, 117 god forgeueth freely, 126 G^d hears the
prayer of the humble. 129 Go^ a father, a husband unto the faithful wydowe,
202.138 God forgeueth both the faut and pain, 176 God the father, 227 God
does what his pleasure is, 228 God maker of heaven and earth. idem, God the
son, 231 God the holy ghost, 261 God the holy ghost quicneth al things, idem
God the holy ghost makes us new vessels idem, God the holy ghost, tea^heth
all ye faithful. 261 God the father, God the son, God the Holy Ghost. 263
Gods wrath terrible to conscience. 330 Gods word drives away Satan. 342 Gods
word heleth. 344 God casts down and sets up, 351 God brings out of
trouble. 358 God apointeth no time of help. 393 God a father of mercies 401
God delights in compassion, 285 Gold and Silver. 323
H
Heart stony, 375 Heart circumcised, 95 Harken unto God, 409 Heari^g gods word.
423 Heathen have no hope, 161 Heathen wyshed eternal joy. idem. Holy men
tempted, 95. Household of God. 97
I
James slain with the sword, idem John baptist beheaded, 318 Job a faithful
soldier, 37 Job in him self same but sin. 52 Jeremy stoned* 317 Joy
comes after heauynes, 73, 28 Joy when our brethren depart in the faith*
152, 161, 154 Ioies unspeakable, 200 Joy in heaven when a sinner repents,
104 Judas repented but had no faith, 378 Jews murmuring. 75 Jews repented,
idem Jews believe the immortality of, etc. 307
K
Kingdom of God mete for who? 24 Knowing one an other after this life. 326
L
Labor and not loitour 396 Labor to win Crist 411 Law makes no man
perfect. 126 law an heavy burden, 363 Lazarus gods fre^d, 20 Lords coming
unknown* 4 Life frail and transytory, 2 Life uncertain, 3 Live well and die
well. 42 Life ended our Joy begin. 196 Ly^e follows death, 7
M
Man has but a short time, 1 Man hartye, how? 5 Man blessed whom God
punishes, 21 Man not pure in the sight of God. 48 Man an whole lompe of sin,
49 Manasses an Idolater 77 Manrsses bound with chains, 79 Manasses repe^teth,
80 Manasses prayer, 25 Manasses his sins in numerable, 399 Martirs by diverse
ways put to death. 319 Maria magdalene a grievous sinner. 387 Marriage forbide^
ought not to be, 203 Maidens that be goely, ought to be preferred before
riches. 2^3 Maids ought to bewar^ of naughty packs, 217 Men's wills ought to
give place, 118 Men kdowen by their works, 190 men ar tried faithful, 26
Mercy unto the poor delivers from sin, 213 Ministers. 150 Monthmyndes,
178 mothers ought to bring up their children in ye fear of God. 205 mothers a
care for their children. 139 Mourning gowns. 151
N
The Name of Jesus, how all knees bow thereto. 1^1
O
One oblation of Christ has made us pericte. 177
P
Papists, ennemies to ye cross of Christ. 176 Papists allege scriptures.
429 Papists a kingdom of lies. 430 Papists would have us doubt in our
salvation. 34 Papysticall scholinge. 440 Peter repented and believed. 378
Predestination* 415 People helped here. 148 People desirous to have knowledge.
149 Plages cease. 81 Pleasure not the way to heaven. 23 Pleasures of the
wicked. 57 Prayers ought to be made fo, whom? 149 Prayer for the syck. 116
131.150.295.341.451 Prayer theffect 138 Promyses of God comfort. 354 Psalms
of thancks for them taat be departed. 162 Publican humbled him self. 387
Punished in this world why? 55 Purgatory rakers 146
R
Remedies against thuught taking. 320 224 Against desperatio^. 229 Against
temptations of Satan. 331 Against the laws curse. 361 Against sin. 372
Against want of merits* 403 Repentance, 415.374. It obteineth mercy 399 It
comes by preaching. 150 Reward of sin. 57 Resurrection of the body. 287.257
Rich gloton. 19 Riotous son repents. 91
S
Satan tempted diverse and many ways. 360 Satan most busiest at our last
end. 332 Satan overcome by prayer, 339 Schollerslare to be helped. 143
Scriptures calls us to repentance, 190 Seace from labors. 152 Seek the
Lord while he may be found. 185 Servant ought not to be forgotten that serve
well. 221 Servants, 141 Sermons to be preached. 148 Sickmans will, 135 Sick
man takes his leave, 292 Sick ought to give thancks to God 43 Scripture
shows us the great mercies of God, 84 Sick in sin what to do? 105 Sick
visited, a godly deed, 8 Sick what to be learned. 9 Sick comforted, how
idem, Sick sone disquieted. 294 Syck exhorted willingly to dye. 198 Sickmans
exhortation unto his wife, 200 Sickmans, exhortation to his children, 206
Syckmans exhortation to his son, 210 Syckma^s exhortation to his daughters.
217 Sickmans exhortation to his servant. 220 Syckmans faith, 227 Si^nnes a
messenger of death, 131 Sickness irksome to man 10 Sycknes takes away joy. 13
Sycknes, no token of Gods anger, 20 Sins forgeuen. 283 Sins forgeuen for
Christ's sake, 286 Syngyng, 171 Sleep not in death, 345 Soul yielded into the
hands of God 136 Steue^ stoned to death. 138
T
Thersians mourn when their children are borne 165 The thief found mercy 100
They that cry in trouble are helped. 113 Things happen for the best, to the
pacient, 36 Toby ever feared God. 39 Toby full of good works. idem, Toby an
example to us 40 Toby content to suffer the plague. 41 Trouble brings
vnderstandidg, 72 Tromperies for to feed their bellyes, 178 Trust in Christ's
promyses and thou shall not dye, 147 Trust of the life to come 168 The tree as
it falls fo it lies, 191
W
Water of life, 481 Women wept for christ 169 Wife of the sick. 137 A wife
discrete is the gift of God. 214 Wicked life to the riotous son, 91 Wicked
son repe^teth idem, Wicked son confesses his faults, 92 Wicked son
furgeuen 93 Wicked people receive pain 290 wicked a terrible end 56 Wicked
servants rewarded, how? 186 Wydowes how they ought to mary, 204 Wounded man
spoiled. 101 Worldly friendship slippery, 325 Worldlinges live all in pleasure,
18.24 Worldly joy, 25 Workers in the vyneyarde, 359 Work while it is day,
186.187
Y
Riotous minds, 175 Youth ought to beware of whordome, 213 Youth must take heed how they mary. idem, Young women ought to be obedient to their husbands,
218 Young weme^ should bring up their children in norture, idem Young women ought
to be no gudders* 291 Young women comely apareled. idem.
FINIS.
THE SICK MAN'S SALVE.
Philemo^. Eusebius. Theophilus. Christopher. and Epaphroditus the sick man,
talk together. Philemon. OH, full truli is it said of the holy man Job, that
noble myrroure of perfect patience: Man that is borne of a woman, Job. 14.
has but a short time to live, and yet in the time that he lives, he is
replenished with many miseries. He comes up, and withers away again like a
flower: He flies as it were a shadow, and never continues in one state* It is
not yet two days since I saw my neighbor Epaphroditus, as me thought, well
and ^usty, yea and in perfect health, and behold he sent unto me even now
his servant Onesimus, that I should come unto him, with all expedition all
other businesses set a part, If I ever entend to se him a live? oh good god,
what a world is this? Ah most loving Christ, what a sodeine change is this?
Our life is not without a cause compared of the holy Apostle. S. James to a
vapoure, James. iiii.
which appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Who will trust a
life so frail, so transitory, so bond unto mortality? Who can iustlye
persuade him self to live many years in this world, seeing that in it so
suddenly health is turned into sickness, valeaunce into imbecillitie, strength
into weakness, joy into sadness, comfort into desperation, life into death?
The rich man persuaded him self that he should live long in this world, Luke.
xii.
as blessed Luke declares in his holy Gospel, when he said, considering the
great abundance of his revenues that came yearly in: what shall I do?
because I have no rome where to bestow my fruits? This will I do: I will destroy
my barnes, and build greater, and therein will I gather all my goods, that are
grown unto me, and I will say unto my soul: soul thou have much goods laid
up in store for many years, take thine ease, eat drink, be merry. But god
said unto him: thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul again
from the. The^ whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? The
continuance of our life is not certain so much as one hour, neither is any
man ^able to say, I shall live til to mo^ow. For albeit nothing is more ^erten
then death: yet is nothing ^ore uncertain than the hour of death. It shall
therefore become all christen men that tender their own health, diligently to
mark and continually to remember this friendly admonition and louinge watchword
of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Mat. 24.
watch, (says he) for you know not what hour your Lord will come. Of this be
ye sure, that if the good man of the house knew what hour he thief would come,
he would surely watch and not suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye
also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, will the son of man come.
Mark. 13.
Again he says. Watch, for ye know not when the master of the house will
come, whether at even: or at midnighte, whether a^ the cock crowing: or in the
dawning, least if he come suddenly, h^ find you sleping. And that I sa^ unto
you, I say unto all. Watche^ Also in an other place he says: Apoc. 16.
behold. I come as a theif. Happy is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, least he walk naked and men see his filthiness. Ah Lord God, not yet
two days past whole and strong, and now sick and weak? O the unsteadfastness
of man's life. Who^ would not this provoke to watch and to considre his latter
end? as the godly man Moses admonishes, Dout. 32.
saying: Ah would God men would be wise and understand and make provision for
their latter end. So should nether sickness nor death be soden unto them, so
should all dissolucion of life be rejected, and godliness of co^uersacion
embraced, as the wise man says: In all thy works remember the latter end,
and thou shall never sin. Eccl. 7.
I desire much to visit my neighbor Epaphroditus occording to his hartye
request, and to comfort him in these his pains, and to instruct him how he
ought both patiently and thankfully bear this cross of sickness, which God
has laid on him, but I wish greatly to have the company of mine old
familiars and approved friends, Eusebius, Theophile, and Christopher. I sent my
son Theodore and Rachell my Daughter for them, I much marvel of their long
tariaunce. But behold where they come. Neighbors and friends welcome,


Euse We rejoice to se you in health thanking you most heartily for the loving
kindness, which heretofore many times you have showed unto us. But wherefore I
pray you have you sent for us.


Phile. Have ye not heard, how our neighbor Epaphroditus is grievously vexed
with sickness?


Theophi^punc; Is ou^ neighbor Epaphroditus sick?


Phi. He is sick, and that very sore.


Christo* Sorry am I to hear this


Philemon. We are in the Lords hand as the claye in the potters, Iere. xviii.
to do with us what so ever his good pleasure is. Therefore let us not bear
heueli this work of God in our neighbor, least we seem to strive against his
godly will, seeing we use daily to pray. Math. vi.
Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven, having also an example of our
savior Christ which praid unto his heavenly father on this manner. Not as I
will, but as thou will, o father. Math. xxvi.



Euse. How long has our neighbor Epaphroditus been sick?


Phi. Not yet two days.


The. I mucch marvel of this his soden sickness.


Philemon. It is no marvel at all, seeing sickness follows health, and death,
life, as the shadow accompanies the body Ye know neighbors how charitable a
deed it is to visit the sick, and to comfort the diseased. It is one of
those works, which being don in the faith of Christ shall be rewarded at the
last day in the face of the whole world with then heritance of the heavenly
kingdom as ye may see in the gospel of blessed Matthew, I was sick, and ye
visited me, Mat. 25.
says our Savior Christ. The wise man also says: Let not them that weep
be without comfort, Eccle. 7.
but mourn with such as mourn. Let it not grieve thee to viset the sick, for
that shall make the to be beloved.


Christop. This saying differs not much from the saying of S. Paul. Rejoice
with them that rejoice, Romans 12
and weep with them that weep. Be of like affection one to another.


Phile Let us therefore go and visit our sick neighbor Epaphroditus, and
comfort him with the heavenly consolacion of the holy scriptures, that he may
bear this his sickness both the more pacie^tly and thankfully. For to this end
did I send for you, that we should go together unto him, and to confort him.


Theo. We were to much unkind and unworthy the name of a Christian, yea of a
man, if we should disdain to accompany you going about so godly a matter,


Phile. Well, Eccl. 7
then let us go. For as the preacher says: It is better to go into an house of
mourning the^ into an house of banketinge for there all men be admonished of
their latter end, and the living co^sidereth what afterward shall become of
them, I pray the Lord our God, that we may find him at our coming, in his
whole mind and perfect memory.


Eusebi. I beseech the Lord our God also, that his pains be not so
outrageous, that when we come, he have no mind to hear what shall be said unto
him, so shall our labor be lost.


Christop. Gods will be don in all things.


Phile. We will do our duty, let God wurke his pleasure. Now are we at the
house, I will be so bold neighbors as to lead you the way,


Theoph. I pray you go sir, we will follow you.


Epa. the sick man. Iere. xx.
Oh, cursed be the day, wherein I was borne, unhappy be the day, wherein my
mother brought me forth. Cursed be the man that brought my father the
tydinges to make him glad, saying: Thou have gotten a son. Let it happen unto
that man, as to the Cities which the Lord turned up side down. Let him hear
crying in the morning, Gene. xix.
and at none day lamentable howling. Why sluest thou not me as soon as I came
out of my mothers womb? O that my mother had been my grave her self, that the
birth might not have come out but remained still in her, Wherefore came I forth
out of my mothers womb? to have experience of labor and sorrow? Ah how sick
am I, my strength is gone, my sight fails me, my tongue flottereth in my
mouth, my hands tremble and shake for pain, I can not hold up my head for
weakness. If I attempt either to stand or to goo, my legs fall down under
me. No part of my body does her right office, my memory is paste. My senses
fail me. What so ever I taste, is unpleasant unto me. What other thing am I,
the^ a dead corpse, brething? For my skin upon me is turned to black, Job. xxx.
and my bones are dried up with heat. Yea miserably am I tormented, and
altogether weary of my life. What can be pleasant unto me but present death? Ah
woe worth the time that ever I was borne, O yt some hill might fall down and
ouerwhelme me, that I might shortly be rid out of this pain.


Philemon. O Lord God good neighbores, these be words proceeding rather from a
desperate heart, then from a pacient mind. But why do I cease to go in? The
father of mercies and God of all consolacion be present with us.


Theo. Ame^.


Phile. Peace be unto this house, and to so many as love the Lord Jesus
unfeignedly.


Epa. O mother, Iere 15.
alas that ever thou did dest bear me. Alas, why died I not in the birthe? Why
did I not perish, as soon as I came out of my mothers womb?


Philem. Neighbor Epaphroditus, Job. 3.
God give you a pacient heart, a quiet and contented mind. According to your
request, I am com unto you with certain of my neighbors, being very desirous
to see you, and notwithstanding not a little sorry to behold you in this case,
not that you are visited of God with sickness: but that you so impacientlye take
this loving visitatio^ of god, which chances unto you, not for your hurt and
destruction: but for your commodity and saluatyon.


Epaphro. Welcome, welcome, neighbors all. Oh how sick am I? Oh that the end
of my life were at hand. Job. 10.
It greueth my soul to live. All joy is gone with me.

This sickness has utterly marred me.


Phi. Say not so neighbor Epaphroditus, yea rather think, that this your
sickness is the loving visitacion of God and brings (although to the body
wekenes and trouble,) yet to the soul valeaunce and consolation.


Epa. Gods loving visitation?


Philem. Yea neighbor Gods loving visitation. For so ar we taught by the word
of God. Apoca. iii.
God himself says, as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. The wise man also
says. My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, Pro. iii.
neither fainte when thou art rebuked of him, For whom the Lord loves, him
he chasteneth, and yet delyteth in him as a father in his own son. What
son is he, says. S. Paul. whom the father chastneth not? Heb. xii.
If ye be not under correction (whereof all are partakers) than are ye bastardes
and not sons.


Epa. There is no father that so ha^dleth his son, as I am handled. Oh what a
change is this, yea and that within two days? For from gladness to sadness,
from pleasure to sorrow from health to sickness, from quietness to trouble, from
strength to feebleness, yea in a manner from life to death am I suddenly fallen. O
miserable wretch that I am.


Phile No manner chastising for the present time seems to be joyous but
grievous, Hebr. xii.
as the Apostle says, nevertheless afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them, which are exercised thereby. Blessed is the man says
saint James, Iam. i.
that suffers temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.


Epa. Me thought I was in case good enough, before I was oppressed with this
sickness. For the^ I lived pleasauntlye, but now I lie here weping and mourning,
and full of sorrow and care.


Phile. This is the judgment of the flesh which ^uer lusts against the
spirit. Gala. v.
Against such careless fleshli livers, ^eare what our Savior Christ says.
Luke. 6.
Woe be unto you that are rich, for you have your consolacyon. Woe be unto you
that are full, for ye shall ho^ger. Woe be unto you that now laugh, for ye shall
wayle and weep. Hear what he says on the contrary part. Mat. 5.
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall receive comfort. And also in a
another place he says. John. 16.
Uerely, Uerely I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, but contrariwise the
world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow: but your sorrow shall be turned to joy. The
blessed Apostle says also. 2. Titu. 2.
If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him. If we suffer with
him, we shall also reign with him.


Christo. Brother Epaphroditus, the way to enter into glory is the Cross. For by
that way did our elder brother Christ enter into the kingdom of his father.
Luke. 24.
And the blessed Apostle says: By many tribulacions must we enter into the
kingdom of God. Act. xiiii.



Epaphro. What mean you by the cross. What the Cross is.



Chri. Temporal affliction as penury, honger, evil report undeserved,
persecution, enprisonment, los of Goods, sickness, and whatsoever mortifieth
the old man.


Epaphro, I can not easly be parswaded, that these things are sent of God to
such as he loves: but rather to such as he hates.


Christoph. Not so neighbor Epaphroditus. For the righteous and godly taste more
of the cross in this world, then the wicked and ungodly. Abel, Jacob, Joseph,
Moses, David, Helias, Zachari, Jeremy, Miche, Job, Toby, Ihon Baptist,
Stephen, Paul, James Peter, with many other which were the^chosen people and
friends of God, were not fre from the cross, in so much that many of them were
most cruelly put to death where as the wicked worldlings lived all in
pleasure, and had all things according to their hearts lust.


Eusebius. This is also proved true by the saying of our savior Christ: Ihon.
xvi i Ti mo iii
ye shall weep and lament, says he, but contrariwise ye world shall rejoice.
And the Apostle, says, all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus: shall suffer
persecution. Hither pertains the saying of. i. Pete, iiii.
S. Peter. The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God. If
it first begin at us: what shall the end of them be, which believe not the
Gospel of God? And if the rightous scarsely be saved: where shall the ungodly
and the sinner appear? Wherefore let them that are troubled according to the
will of God, commit their souls to him with well doing, as unto a faithful
creator.


Phi. This thing ca^ by no means better be perceived, Luke. xvi
then by considering the history, which blessed Luke tells in his Gospel of
the unmerciful rich man and of pore Lazarus. The rich gloton was Gods enemy
and an adversary to all good me^, unkind, churlish, and unmerciful, and yet how
plesantly, and wealthely lived he all his life time? We do not read, that he
tasted any thing at all of the cross, but that he was rich, welthy, galantly
apparelled, fared daintely every day, and lived in all kind of pleasures
according to his hearts lust, and yet the end of him was everlasting damnation,
that this saying of our savior Christ might be found true. Luke. vi
Woe be unto you that are rich: for you have your consolation. Woe be unto you
that are full: for ye shall ho^ger. Woe be unto you that now laugh: for ye shall
wail and weep. Contrariwise, Lazarus being Gods friend (and dearly beloved of
God) was pla^ged with poverty, honger, thirst, cold, nakedness, sores, sickness,
and diverse mortal diseases, which never departed from him so long as he lived:
and notwithstanding both patiently and thanckfullye did he bear this his
Cross, Eccle. xi.
even unto the death, being persuaded that prosperity and adversity, life,
and death, poverty, and wealth, are of God, and therefore immediately after his
departure out of this world, he was received into everlasting glory. This
history brother Epaphroditus declares euidentely, that sickness or trouble sent
of God unto the godly, is not a token of Gods wrath and heavy displeasure, but
rather a sure argument and manifest sign of his good will, love and favor
toward us. Blessed is he, says the Psalmograph, Psalm. xciiii.
whom thou (O Lord) nourterest. Again, he says: it is highly for my wealth,
Psalm. cxix.
that thou (O Lord) have corrected me, that I may learn thine ordinances.
Hereto agrees the saying of S. Paul. When we are judged of the Lord we are
chastened, i. Cor. xi.
that we should not be damned with the world. In the history of Job it is also
written, Io^. v.
blessed is the man whom God punishes: therefore refuse not thou the
chastening of the almighty. For though he makes a wou^d, he gives a plaster,
though he smite, his hand makes hole again. God is faithful, says the
Apostle, i. Cor. x.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but shall in
the mids of the temptacion make away, that ^e may be able to bear it. ii. Cor.
i.
For he ^s the father of mercies, and God of all consolacion, which comfort
us in all our trouble, which knows also how to deliver the godly out of
temtation. ii. Peter. ii
All these textes borrowed out of the holy scriptures with many other, do
evidently declare, that the cross is laid upon the godly at Gods appointment,
and that not for their hurt and destruction, but for their health and
salvation. For though our outward man perish: i. Cor. iiii
yet thinward man is renewed day by day. For our trouble, Esaias. ^ii
which is short and light prepares an exceading and an eternal weight of
glory unto us, while we look not on ye things which are seen, but on the things
which are not seen. For ye things which are seen, are temporal, but things
which are not seen are eternal.


Theo. Our elder br^^ther Christ, which never commi^ sin, i* Peter. ii
and in whom no guile nor de^ceat was found, entered not into glory but by the
cross, as thapostle says: We se that Jesus for the suffering of his death was
crowned with glory and honor. heb. ii.
Therefore may not we look to possess the enheritance of the heavenly kingdom
by living all in pleasure health, joy, and worldly felicity: but rather by
suffering the cross yt is laid upon us at gods appointment both patiently and
thankefullie. For the disciple is not above the master, math. x
nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the disciple yt he be as his
master is, and that the servant be as his Lord. Lu. xiiii
Whosoever bears not his cross and comes after me (says our savior
Christ) he can not be my disciple, Apoca. vii



Chri. In the reuelacion of blessed John we read that they which were araied
with long white garments and are continually in the presence of the seat of
God, and serve him day and night in his temple, came out of great tribulation.


Philem. It is truth. For such are most mete for the kingdom of God, nether
can the voluptuous worldlinges be partakers of the heavenly enherita^ce, which
in this world taste of no cross, but live in all pleasure after the desires
of the flesh. It is not possible that a man may live here pleasauntly with the
world, and afterward reign gloriously with Christ, for the frendshippe of
the world, Jacob. iiii.
is enmity with God. Whosoever will be a friend of the world, is made the enemy
of God. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? Or what
company has light with darcknes. Or what concord has Christ with Beliall? ii.
Cor. vi.
Either what part has he yt believes with an infidel? worldly joy and eternal
felicity can not agree together. Therefore whosoever is fre from the cross in
this world, he has no part in the kingdom of Christ and of God. So that you
neighbor Epaphroditus have a great occasion to thancke the Lord our God, that
it has pleased him to remember you with this his louinge visitation, and
through this sickness to declare his good and fatherly will toward you. For
by laying this cross upon you, he proves you, whether you be constant in your
faith and profession or not, and whether you will pacientlie and thanckefullie
b^are this his worcking in you, which is unto your everlasting salvation or
not. And after this manner does God handle all such as he receives unto glory,
as the wyseman says: Eccle. ii.
What soever happens unto thee, receive it, suffer in heauiues, and be pacient
in thy trouble. Eccle. iii.
For like as gold and silver are tried in the fire: even so are acceptable men
in the furnace of adversity. Again he says: the oven proves the potters
vessel, Eccle. xxvii.
so does temptation of trouble, try righteous men. List wise said Raphael the
Archaungell unto Toby: ^ob. xii.
Because thou wast accepted and beloved of God, it was necessary yt temptacion
should try thee. And as Moses said unto the children of Israel: ^e^t. xiii.
the lord your God proves you, to wete whether ye love the Lord your God
withal your heart and with all your soul. S. Peter also says: i. Pet. i.
ye are now for a season in heaviness through manifold temtacions, that ye
trial of your fath being much more precious than gold that perishes, and yet
is tried by fire, might be found unto the praise, glory and honor at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.


Epah. This comfort well my weak mind to here of you out of ye word of God
neighbor Philemon, that this sickness, which I now suffer is the loving
visitation of God, and a token of Gods good will toward me, again, that the
faithful and friends of God are in this world subject to the Cross more than
the unfaithful and enemies of God,


Phile. I am heartily glad to hear you so say. And doubt you not, but that this
your gentle God and loving father, will turn this your sorrow unto your great
comfort. i. Cor. x.
For he is a faithful God, which will not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength, but shall in the mids of the temtation make a way, that ye may be
hable to bear it, as the Psalmographe says: Psalm. xxx.
His wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is life.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

Thou (O Lord) have turned my heaviness in to joy: thou have put of my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness. Again he says: Thou O God, Psalm.
lxvi.
have proved us, thou also have tried us like as silver is tried. Thou
broughtest us into the snare, and laidst trouble upon our loins, thou
suffredst me^ to ride over our heads. We went through fire and water, and thou
broughtest us out into a welthy place, Psalm. lxxi.
Item: O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refresh me, yea and broghtest me from the deep of the earth.
Thou have brought me to great honor and comforted me on every side. Therefore
will I praise thee and thy faithfulness O God. Also in another place he says:
they that sow in tears, Psalm. cxxvi.
shall repe in joy. He that now goes on his way weping and bears forth good
sede, shall doutles come again with joy, and bring his sheues with him.
Thauncient father Toby in his prayer unto God says: Tobi. iii.
after a storm, O Lord thou make the weather fair and still: after weping
and heaviness thou geuest great joy. Thy name O God of Israel, be praised for
ever.


Epa. Amen. Amen, good Lord I trust thou will do so with me.


Phile. Doubt ye not neighbor, but if ye call on the name of the Lord, ye
shall find great comfort. For as that princelike Prophet says: Psalm. xxxiiii.
The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of al
their troubles. The Lord is nie unto the^ that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be of an humble spirit. Great are the troubles of y^
righteous, but the lord delivers the^ out of al: he keeps all their bones so
that not one of them is broken.


Eusebius. These are comfortable sentences neighbor Epaphrodotus.


Epa. Confortable in deed.


Phi. And no les true then comfortable, as diverse histories of the holy
scriptures do evidently declare.


Epa. I pray you rehearse some of them for my comfort.


Phi. I will do it gladly. As I may let pass the ancient Patriarchs. What a
cross laid God upon Iosephes shoulders in Egypt? yea and that for no fault
that he had committed but only to prove and try his faith, love, obedience,
patience, thankfulness and perseverance. He suffered Joseph being a godly and
chaste young man to be falsely accused of his whorish mystres, Genesis xxx.xix.
and to be cruelly thrown of his master into prison, where he continued certain
years in captivity and thraldom. But behold ye merciful dealing of God with
his faithful servants. Afterward, wha^ God by proving him, had found him
faithful, constant and pacient: he delivered Joseph out of prison, restored him
unto his liberty, won him into ye kings favor, in so much yt the king took of
his ring from his hand, and put it upon Ioseps hand, and araied him in cloth of
rains, and put a golden chain about his neck, and set him upon the best charet
yt he had save one. And they cried before him: bow the kne. And king Pharao
made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.


Ep. O ye great mercies of God.


Phi Before God quietly satled king David in his kingdom (of whom he reports
in this manner, i. Reg. xvi. Act. xiiii.
I have found David ye son of Iesse a man after mine own ^art, which shall
fulfill al my will) how hunted he him by king Saul even as the ferret hunteth
the cony? yea after the death of Saul what trouble and disquietnes had he
through the wicked conspiracy of his children against him being so loving,
gentle and natural a father? Notwithstanding afterward God brought him unto
great honor, glory, riches, quietness, and al kind of wealth, wherein he
continued unto his death, which was both glorious and full of years.


Epap. iii. Reg. ii.
A blessed end.


Phi* To who^ is the history of pacient Job unknown? Job. i.ii.
His Cross was so grievous, that I know not whether the like trouble has
chaunsed to any mortal man since his time or before Al his substance in one
moment almost was lost, all his cattle were driven away.vii.M. sheep iii M.
Camels.v.C. yoke of Oxen and v.C. she asses. All these were taken away suddenly.
His house fell down, his children that were within were slain. Of all that ever
he had, nothing remained untouched, that might comfort him any thing at all,
but only his wife, and she seems to be left of the devil, only to this
purpose, even to mock and scorn her husband, and to move him to blaspheme the
name of God. Which thing without al doubt grieved the holy ma^s mind more,
then all his calamities and wretchednesses. Furthermore his friends which came
out of far countries to comfort him, seeing his sorrow and pain to be most
^ehement, being also wonderfully astonished with the horrible greatness of the
plage, by the space of ^ii. days spoke not one comforta^le word unto him. For
they ^hought (although not truly) that God had cast this most grievous pains
upon Job worthily, even for his sinful life and wicked conversation. And did
they not at the last fall to mocking and taunting of that good man, and told
him that those plages happened unto him for his sins, by the righteous
judgment of God? for they thought it a matter of hie iniquity and unworthy
Gods righteousness yt so great calamities and miseries should causeles chance
unto any holy and innocent man. Job. ii.
Moreover after the loss of al his goods, after the driving away of his
cattle, the casting down of his house the cruel death of his children and
servant (which, all the most pacient man very quietly suffered) what
intolerable pains suffere^ he on his body? Did not Satan through Gods
suffrance smite Io^ with marvelous sore biles from the sole of his foot unto ye
crown^ of his head, so that he sat upon the ground in the ashes, and scraped
of the filth of his sores with a potsherd? Oh who is hable to express what
pains he suffered? And notwithstanding being on every side most miserably
plaged his mind continued still constant and perfect in abiding the good
pleasure of the Lord his God, being thoroughly persuaded that all those plagues
and punishments were not tokens of Gods anger, but rather of his singular good
will and fatherlye favor toward him. For as he most patiently suffered the
loss of all his goods and the death of his children, so with like constancy
and lusty courage, did he bear the most grievous wounds and bitter sorrows of
his body, speakinge no blasphemous, impacient, or vnreuerent word against God,
in all his trouble, but mekely, patiently, and thankefully, brast out into
these and such like words: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job. i.
and naked shall I turn thither again. The Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away. Even as it has pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass, blessed
be ye name of the Lord, Job. ii.
If we have received prosperity at the hand of the lord, why should we not
abide adversity also?


Epa. Oh God grant me the like patience.


Christo. Doubt ye not of ye goodness of God neighbor. Be strong and steadfast in
the Lord your God, abide pacientlie his good pleasure, and he shall work al
things for the best, Psalm. xxxvii.
as the Psalmograph says: O tarry thou the Lords leisure, be strong, and he
shall comfort thine heart, therefore put thou thy trust in the Lord. Esaias. xxx.
In silence and hope shall your strength be, says the Prophet. O how good is
the lord unto the^, James. iii*
that put their trust in him, and to the soul that seeks after him? The good
man with stilnes and patience tarieth for the sauinge health of the Lord. The
righteous have cried, and the Lord has graciously heard them, and delivered
them out of all their troubles.


Phi. But now neighbor mark the end of the history. Psalm. xxxiiii.



Epa. Say on, in the name of God.


Phile. After that God by diverse kinds of punishments had thoroughly tried this
holy, perfect and pacient man Job, and had found him in all points a constant
and ^aleaunt soldier, not hable to ^e overcome with any kind of ^lague that
Satan could lay on ^im, the Lord greatly commended ^is constant faith and
faithful con^ancie, and gave unto him twyse twyse so much as he had before.
For he had now.xiiii.M. sheep, Job. xiii.
vi.M. camels, a.M. yoke of Oxe^ and a.M. asses. He had.vii. sons also,
and.iii. daughters. And after this he lived an.C. and.xl. years, in much joy
and quietness, so that he saw his childrens children into the.iiii. generation,
and died being old and of a perfect age.


Epa. Oh, blessed be God. For he is ever good to his servants and never
forsakes the^ that put their trust in him.


Euse. Of this holy man Job saint James also makes mention, James. v.
saying: Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the
Lord made. For the Lord is very pitiful and merciful.


Phile. Will it please you neighbor to hear the history of thauncient father
Toby* which is also very comfortable*


Epa. Yea very gladly. For it does me much good and eases well my pain to hear
your godly talk.


Phi. This Toby was a faithful man and even from his very childhod feared God,
and led a virtuous life. He forsook not ye way of truth nether defiled he him
self with any kind of Idolatry. Tob. i.
He worshipped the Lord God of Israel faithfully, offering of all his first
fruits and tithes. Whatsoever he might get, he departed it daily with his fellow
prisoners and brethren. He was full of good works, he gave largly unto the pore,
he fed the ho^gry, he gave drink to ye thirsty, he clothed the naked, he lodged
the harborles, he visited the sick, he redeemed the captives and prisoners, he
buried the dead. There was no work of mercy that he had left undone. He was rich
and plenteous in all good works. And whatsoever he did, he did it with a
joyful and ready heart. For God, ii. Cor. ix.
says S. Paul, loves a cherefull geuer,


Epa. A blessed man and a faithful servant of God. Tob. ii.



Phi. And yet mark what follows. It happened upon a day, yt he had buried the
dead, and was weary, came home and laid him down by the wall and slept. And
while he was a sleep, there fell down upon his eyes warm dong out of the
swalowes nest, so that he became blind.


Epaphr. A pitiful chance.


Phile. This tentacion did God suffer to happen unto him, yt they which came
after, might have an example of his patience like as of holy Job.


Epaphro. But how did Toby take this te^tacion?


Phile. Uery Godly, quietly, patiently, and thankefully. For in so much as he
ever feared God from his yougth up, and kept his commandments, he grudged
not against God, that the plague of blindness chaunsed unto him, but remained
steadfast in the fear of God, and thanked God al yt days of his life.


Epaphr. But what was the end of the matter? Continued he blind unto his dying
day? Did not God deal mercifully with Toby, as we heard before of Job?


Phile. Yes verily, i. Reg. ii, Deuteronomy. xxxii. Tob. xiii. Sap. xvi.
for God scourges and heals. God ledeth unto hell and brings out again. God
kills and makes alive. God after a storm makes the weather fair and calm.
God after weping and heaviness, gives great joy. When God had throughlye
tried Toby, and found him constant in his faith, he restored unto him his sight
again. For the which Toby most humbly thanked him and said: Tob. xi.
O Lord God of Israel, I give the praise and thanks, for thou have chastened
me, and made me whole again.


Christo. O praised be the Lord our God, which is marvelous in his Saints,
and holy in all his works.


Epa. Lived Toby long after his sight was restored unto him?


Phi. Toby (says the scripture) after he had gotten his sight again,
lived.xlii. years in great joy and wealth, and saw his childrens children. Tob.
xiiii.
And when he was.C. and.ii. years old he departed in peace and was honorably
buried.


Epaphro. A blessed end.


Phi. Of a good life comes a good end. Thus have you heard out of the holy
scriptures brother Epaphroditus, that the Cross, that is to say corporal
affliction is not a token of Gods anger, but of his favor, and that he lays
temporal punishment more customably upon his friends, than upon his ennemies,
yea and that not to destroy them, but to prove and try them, even as the fire
tries the gold. For as thaungel Raphaell said unto Toby: Tob. xii.
Because thou wast accepted and beloved of God, it was necessary, that
temtacion should try thee. You have heard also the loving kindness of God
toward his faithful and constant servants, how after a just trial made, he
restores them unto a more blessed state, than they were in a fore. Therefore
take a good heart unto you and faint not. Be strong in the Lord. Be faithful
unto the end. Be pacie^t in this your sickness. Be tha^keful for this loving
visitation of God. Abide the good pleasure of God. Suffer him quietly to do
with you what soever his good will is. If you will thus do: dout ye not, but that
god will be merciful unto you, and bring that thing to pass, which is most for
your comfort and profit. Romans xv.
For whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, that through patience
and the comfort of the scriptures we may have hope.


Epaph. The Lords will be done in me. He knows what is most mete for me a
wretched sinner, let him therefore work his good pleasure in me: Rom^. xiiii.
come life, come death. For if we live, we live to be at the Lords will, and
if we die, we die at the Lords will. Whether we live therefore or die, we are
the Lords. A prayer.
Only O heavenly father I beseech thee for Christ's sake, to give me a pacient
and thankful heart, that I never grudge against thy blessed will, but be
obedient unto it in all things, that when the pains of my sickness be most
bitter: I may lift up my heart unto thee, Psalm. vi.
call on thy blessed name, and say: O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation,
nether chasten me in thy displeasure. Have mercy on me O Lord, for I am weak.
O lord heal me for my bones are vexed. My soul also is sore troubled: but
Lord how long will thou punish me? Turn thee (O Lord) and deliver my soul, oh
save me for thy mercies sake. Psalm. lxxxv^^^
O my God save thy servant, that puts his trust in thee. Be merciful unto
me (O Lord) for I will call daily upon the. Comfort the soul of thy servant, ^or
unto thee (O Lord) do I lift ^p my soul. For thou Lord art good and
gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee.


Theo. Neighbor Epaphroditus his is unto us a singular pleasur and great
comfort to hear so god^y words proceade out of your ^outh. Be diligent
continually (...) call on the Lord, and he in all our afflictions and
troubles, shall (...) undoubtedly your strong tower, our mighty shield, and
invincible fortres. He will not leave you nor forsake you, but assist you and
be present with you in your sickness, according to this his promise: Psalm.
xci.
Because he has trusted in me, I will deliver him, I will defend him, because
he has known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will graciously hear him,
yea I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him and glorify him. With long
life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.


Ep. I must needs confess most gentle neighbors, that I have received much
consolation and great comfort of your company, and specially that (...) have
thus enarmed, yea and fortressed my breast with the co^forta^ble sentenses and
histories of the holy scriptures against the bitte^ storms of adversity, and
I hart^ly thank you for your pains. Not^withstanding this must I nede^ say unto
you, that I find not my self in my conscience to be of such godliness and
virtue, that I dare compare my self with Joseph, David, Job, and Toby, whom
ye recited unto me, but much inferior both unto them and unto their godliness
of life, so that although they being righteous of the very love, which God bare
toward them, were assailed with adversity, to this end, yt their faith and
constancy might be proved and tried unto the example of other, yet I find in my
self such imperfection, yea such abundance of ^in, that it may justly be
thought that this sickness, which is laid upon me, comes from such a God,
as is angry with me for my ^innefull life, and therefore is his heavy hand thus
laid upon me. What think ye good neighbors.


Philemon. Brother Epaphroditus this humbling of your self in the sight of the
Lord our God, is a certain argument and sure token of your everlasting
salvation. For he that exalts him self shall be made low, Mat. xxiii
but he that humbles him self, shall be exalted. God is an enemy to ye
proud, i. Pet. v.
but he is a friend to the humble and lowly. Prou. xx
Truth it is, that in ye sight of God no man is pure and clear from sin.
Iaco. iii
Who is hable to say. My heart is clean, and I am fre^ from sin? In many
things we all offend. i. John. i. Romans iii
If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in
us. Luke xvii
All hau^ sinned, and want the glory of God We all are unprofitable seruau^ts
Every man is a lier. Psalm. cxvi Psalm. li.
We were be^gotten in sin, conceived in sinn^ and borne in sin. Our heart
(...) leude and unsearchable. Ier. xvii.
All our righteousness are as cloth pollu^ted with menstrue. Al have swarued and
gone out of the way, Esaias. lxiii. Psalm. xiiii
they are altogether become unprofitable, there is not one that does good, no
not one. The most perfect among us all, may well say with the sinful
Publicane: Luke. xviii.
O God be merciful to me a sinner. Math. vi.
We may worthily pray, as our savior Christ taught us, forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive the^ that trespass against us, God found no truth in
his servant, and in his angels there was folly. Job. xiii.
How much more in them yt dwell in the houses of clay, Job. xxx.
and whose foundations are but dust? The stars are unclean in the sight of
God. How much more then man, that is but corruption, and the son of man,
which is but a worm? And albeit Joseph, David, Job and Toby, be set forth in
^he holy scriptures with great commendations, yet may we not think that they
wanted their faults. Job. xxv.
For no man that is borne of a woman is clean before God, although he be but
one day old. How often does David confess him self a sinner? How often does he
fle unto God and pray for the remission of his sins? How often does he cast
away his own righteousness, and with strong faith, lay hand on Gods mercy? Among
many other, are not these his words? Have mercy on me (O God) according to thy
great mercy. Psalm. ii.
And according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I knowledge my
faults and my sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I sinned, and
done evil in thy sight. etc. Also in another place. Psalm. xxv.
Oh remem^ber not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy
mercy think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness. For thy names sake (O
Lord) be merciful unto my sin. For it is great. Look upon mine adversity,
and misery, and forgive me all my sins. Again. Out of the deep have I called
unto the Lord, Psalm. cxxx.
Lord hear my voice. Oh let thine ear consider well the voice of my complaint.
If thou Lord wilt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse (oh Lord) who may
abide it? But there is mercy with thee. etc Item. Psalm. cxiiii.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant (O Lord) for no man living shall
be justified in thy sight. Thus see you how holy David, whom the scripture
commends so greatly, bosteth not his own righteousness, but humbles him
self in the syghte of God, and wholly betaketh him unto Gods mercy. Now hear
what Job, whom the scripture so greatly commends, says of him self, Job. ix.
If I will justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me. If I will put
forth my self for a perfect man, he shall prove me a wicked doer. Again. If I
wash my self with snow water, and make mine hands never so clean at the well,
yet shall thou dip me in the mire, and mine own clothes shall defile me. And as
concerning the godly man Toby, how little he trusted in his own innocence and
righteousness, these his words do manifestly declare: O Lord (says he) be
mindful of me, Tob. iii.
and take no vengeance of my sins, nether remember my misdedes, nor ye
misdedes of mine elders. for we have not been obedient to thy commandments.
etc. And as David, Job, and Toby, humbled them selves in the sight of God, so
likewise does the whole company of all the faithful, that the glory of our
salvation may be Gods alone, as he says by the Prophet: Thy destruction, O
Israel, Ose. xiiii.
comes of thy self, but thy salvation comes only of me. Therefore though ye
feel sin to be in you, as who is without it? yet despair not, nether be
dismaide, but with strong faith make haste unto the glorious throne of Gods
great mercy, lament your sorrowful case, crave favor and remission of sins in
Christ's name, of Gods most hie majesty, and without doubt you shall have your
hearts desire. Psalm. cxlv.
For the Lord is gracious and merci^ul* long suffering and of great good^es.
The Lord is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over all his works. O
trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redemption. Psalm. cxxx.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.


Epap. Oh my heart. Ah what a grievous pain did I feel now even at my very
heart. God be merciful unto me.


Eusebius. Be on a good comfort neighbor (I pray you) God shall work all things
for the best. Ye may se what frail vessels we are, and how little a pain does
greatly trouble us.


Epa. Ye say truth. But to you neighbor Philemo^ once again. Me think if God
should punish me in this world for my sin so should it be a token rather of his
anger then of his favor toward me.


Phi. Nay, not so neighbor. I^ is rather an evident token of his singular love
and hearty good will to^ward you, which lovingly corrects you in this world,
that ye man repent, knowledge your fault, a^mend your life, call for mercy and
so live worthy your profession, again that through this temporal pain, ye may
be fre from everlasting plagues, Apoc. xxi.
and never come into that lake, that burns with fire and brimstone. i. Cor.
xi.
This witnesses s. Paul, saying: While we are punished, we are corrected of the
lord that we should not with this world be condemned. Psalm. xxxvii.
When God suffers the wicked in this world to flourish like a bay tree, and
licenciously to sin without any punishment, as he suffered the ritche
glotton, of whom ye read in the Gospel of blessed Luke, Luke xvi,
it is an evident argument, that such one is reserved unto the pains of the
world to come, Mat. x^^^
which never shall have end, where weping and gnashynge of teethe shall be, as
ye see it chanced to the before said ritche glotton, unto whom God said:
son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, Luke. xvi.
and contrariwyse, Lazarus received pain. But now is he comforted, and thou
art punished: so does our savior Christ threaten the ungodly, Luke. vi.
saying: Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger, Woe be unto you that
now laugh, for ye shall wayle and weep. The holy Apostle also says: What
son is he, Hebr. xii.
whom the father chasteneth not? If ye be not under correction (whereof all are
partakers) then are ye bastardes and not sons. A terrible end therefore
abides them, which in this world licenciously and without punishment do sin.
For all such be bastardes and no sons, therefore have they no part of the
heavenly enheritaunce.


Epa. Yet the world judges otherwise. For they think such only to be beloved
of God, as walowe in all kind of worldly pleasures, as the filthy sow in the
mire, so long as they live, and never taste of any adversity


Phile. But the holy scripture judges otherwise. For those voluptuous
Epicures which in this world say: Sap. ii.
Come and let us enjoy the ^leasures that are, and let us sone ^se the
creature, like as in youth. Let us fill our selves with good wine and ointment,
and let there no flower of the time go by us. Let us crown our selves with
roses before they be withered. Let ^here be no fair medowe, but our ^ust go
through it. Let every one of you be partaker of our volup^uousnes. Let us leave
some token of our pleasure in every place, for that is our portion, else get we
nothing. etc. Shall in time to come, ^ry out on this manner and say: Sap. vi.
We ^aue erred from the way of truth the light of righteousness has not
shined unto us, and the sun of understanding rose not up upon us. We have
weried our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction. Tedious ways have
we gone, but as for the way of ye lord, we have not known it. What good has
our pride done to us? Or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? All
these things are passed away like a shadow etc. Such words shall they that
have sinned, speak in hell. For the hope of thungodly is like a dry thistil
flower that is blown away with the wind. etc. Therefore we may well conclude,
that such as enjoy continual prosperity, live at their hearts ease, obey
their sensual appetites, are free from all adversity, and as the
Psalmo^graphe says: come in no misfortune like other folk, neither ar^
plagued like other men: shall not reign with God in glory, nether have they
any portion in the land of the living. For though they prosper for a little
while in this world be puffed up with pride, swell for fatnes, do what they
list, rule as they will, have plenty of riches in possessiom, have the world
at commandment. etc. Yet are they set in slippery places, and shall be cast
down and destroyed Yea suddenly shall they consume, perish, and come to a
fearful end. I have seen says that Princelike Prophet, Psalm. 37.
thungodly in great power, and flourishing like a grieve bay tree. And he
vanished away, and lo he was gone, I sought him, but he could no where be
found. etc. For the wicked shall perish together, and the end of the ungodly,
is everlasting damnation.


Christo. If it please you, I will tell you a history, that I heard once.


Epa. I pray you tell on good brother Christopher.


Chri. An history.
Saint Ambrose that godly and courageous Bishop traueiling at a certain time
toward Rome, chanced by the way to go unto a great richemans house to lodge.
after other talk he demanded of the man of the house, how the world went
with him, and in what case he stood. The rich man answered: sir my state has
always been fortunate and glorious, I never tasted any kind of adversity. I
never had sickness or loss of goods. All things hitherto have chanced unto me
according to my hearts desire. When. S. Ambrose heard this, he said unto the^
that accompanied him: Rise, and let us go hence with all expeditio^, for the
Lord is not in this place. And when they were departed from the richemans
house, eue^ straight ways, thearth suddenly opened and swalowed up the man with
all that ever he had, so that nothing at all remained.


Phile. A notable history, declaring that God is not there present, where the
cross is absent, and that things can not long continue in safe state, where
God favors not. Psalm. xxxvii.



Theo. Here was that thing fulfilled that is spoken by the Psalmograph. The
ungodly shall sone be cut down like the grass, and be withered, even as the
grene herb. etc. Yea a little while and the ungodly shall be clean gone: Thou
shall look after his place, and he shall be away. Thungodly shall perish, and
the enemies of the Lord shall consume as the fat of lambs, yea even as ^he
smoke shall they consume away. Again in an other place. Thou, O Lord, do set
the vngod^y in slippery places, and castest them down, and destroiest them. O
how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end? yea even like
as a dream when one awaketh, so shall thou make their Image to vanishe out of
the city.


Phile. Where continual success of things is: where al things at all times
serve and content the fleshly appetites of voluptuous worldlinges: where no
affliction nor trouble is: there is not God, there is not his grace, favor,
and blessing. He that is free from the cross, has no enheritaunce in the
kingdom of heaven. Yea, it is a most certain sign of everlasting damnation,
where a life is led without affliction. For whom the Lord loves, Hebr. vii.
he chasteneth, they are bastardes and no sons that sometime feel not the
Cross. Act. xiiii.
Who ever went unto heaven by joy and pleasure? By many tribu^lations (says
the Apostle) must we enter into ye kingdom of God. Hereunto pertains the
saying of the virtuous woman Judith: Iudit. vi^^.
Our father Abraham being temted and tried through many tribulations, was
found a lover and ^rend of God. So was Isaac, so was Jacob, so was Moses, and
al ^hey that pleased God, being tried ^horowe many troubles, were found
steadfast in faith. Blessed ^s the man, that suffers temp^ation, says saint
James, James. i.
for when ^e is once tried, he shall receive ye ^rown of life, which the lord
has ^romised to them that love him.


Euse. I red once of a certain her^it, An history.
which was wo^t every year to ^e sick, wherein he greatly delited and felt much
quietness of conscience ^eing persuaded, yt his sickness ^as the loving
visitation of God, and an unfeigned token of Gods singular good will toward him.
It chanced that by the space of an whole year he was fre from al manner of
sickness. Which thing when he considered, he was inwardly sorry and wept
beyond all measure, grievously complaining that God had forgotten him, and
denied him his grace.


Phile. This history also shows how necessary and wholesome, sickness is to a
Christen man, and that corporal affliction is a certain persuasion to a
faithful conscience of Gods singular good will and fatherly favor toward
us, as he him self testifies, saying: as many as I love I chaste^ and rebuke.
Apoc. iii.
The wise man also says: Proverb. iii.
My sonn^ despise not the chastening of the Lord, nether faint when thou ar^
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, him he chastneth, (...) yet deliteth
in him, as a father i^ there in his own son.


Epaphro. So follows it, that they, whom God visits with sickness in this
world, and lays the cross upon their shoulders, are more dear unto him than
those, which all their life time, live in all wealth, joy, and pleasure.


Phile. Yea verily, so they bear their cross willingly, patiently, and
thankfully. For by the cross are christen men known, as noble men's servants
by their Lords cognisances. He that bears not the cross, is not Christ's:
For such as will be his disciples, he commands them not to seek how to
flee ye cross, that they may live al in pleasure, but he bids them take the
Cross upon their shoulders, Math. xvi.
and follow him. If any man will follow me, (says our savior Christ,) let him
forsake him ^elf, and take up his cross, and fo^ow me. The head bare the
cross, the members also must do ye same, or else pertain they not unto the
head. For there is none other way to enter into glory, but the same way that
our head Christ entered by, Luke. xiiii.
which is the cross. Whosoever bears not his cross and comes after me,
(says the Lord Christ) he can not be my disciple. The servant is not greater
then his Lord nor the disciple above his master.


Chri. That such as bear the cross and be tried with diverse tribulations are
more dear unto god, tha^ they which live all in pleasure, the history of the
rich and unmerciful glotton, Luke. xvi.
and of poor and pacient Lazarus proves evidently. For as ye hard before, the
welthie epicure which lived galantlie and pleasauntly all the days of his
life, even unto his dying day, so son^ as he was dead, was carried of the
Deuell and his Angels into the flames of hell fire: where he was miserably
tormented: contrarywyse, pore and sick Lazarus, who^ the wicked world esteemed
most vile, most abominable, yea, and utterly despised and cast away of God,
Esaias. lxiiii.
whom also fortune never favored, but adversity co^tinuallie assailed,
immediately after his departure was most tenderly and joyfully borne of the
blessed Angels of God into the bosom of Abraham, i. Cor. ii.
where he has such joys as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nether is
any man's heart able to think them.


Euse. Here is that fulfilled and found true, which the Psalmograph speaks,
Psalm. cxv.
both of the death of the faithful, and of the unfaithful. Concerning the
faithful (he says) preci^us in the sight of the Lord, is ^he death of his
saints. Of the ^nfaithfull he also says: The death of sinners is worst of
all. As ye joys of Gods people begin not till after their death: Psalm. xxxiiii.
so likewise the sorrows and pains of ye wicked do chiefly begin at their
death, and so for ever and ever continue.


Epaph. Happy is that man therefore, which has and ends his sorrow in this
world, that after this life he may have the perfect and true joy, which
knows no end


Phi. He is thrice happy, as they use to say, and greatly blessed of God.
Therefore.s. Austen prayed on this manner and said, O Lord burn me here, cut me
here in this world, that thou may spare me for ever after. Only give me
patience pleasing unto thee, and necessary unto me.


Christo. Like vn^to this are the words of a certain ancient father, which
says, I know that diseases chance unto men for their sins. And it is
be^ter here patiently to bear afflictions and pains, then after death to
suffer everlasting punishments.


Theo. S. Gregory says, that God sparith some in this world, to torment them
afterward, and some he tormenteth here, which he will afterward spare. This is a
christen man's comfort, yt by present tribulation, he shall escape everlasting
damnation. For according to the common proverb, God punishes not one thing
twyse.


Epa. Of these your words I conceive a good hope, that although God punishes
me justly for my sins yet he will not take away his mercy from me.


Phil. No, be you sure. For these are his words by the Psalmograph. Psalm.
lxxxi^
If they forsake my ^aw, and walk not in my judgments. If they break my
statutes, and keep not my co^manndeme^ts, I will visit their offenses with the
rod, and their sins with scourges. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my truth to fail. My covenant will I not
break nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Here God our merciful
father, promises, yt though he punishes us for our sin and wickedness, that
by this means he may call us unto repentance and amendment of life, yet will
not he take away from us his mercy and loving kindness, but when so ever we
turn unto him, repent us of our former life, call on his blessed name, believe
and hope to have remission of sins for Christ's sake, and labor to frame our
life according to the rule of his holy testa^me^t, he will surely receive us
ioy^fully, pardon all our iniquities and as derely love us, as though we had
never offended his deuin^ majesty. God says also by ye Prophet Jeremy: Iere.
xviii.
when I take in hand to rote out, to destroy, or to wast away any people or
kingdom, if ye people (against who^, I have thus devised) convert from their
wickedness: I repent of the plague, that I devised to bring upon them. Esaias. lv.
The prophet Esaias also says. If thungodly forsakes his way, and the
unrighteous man his own Imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, he will
surely be merciful unto him. For he is very ready to forgive. He will not
always be chyding, (says the Psalmograph, Psalm. ciii.
) neither keeps he his anger for ever. Yea like as a father pitieth his own
children, even so is the Lord merciful unto them that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but duste. My
thoughts (says God) are to give you peace and not trouble. Ier. xxix. Why God
punishes us
Though the lord punishes us for our sins, yet does he not punish us, to
cast us away and to condemn us, but to call us unto repentance, to mortify
our fleshly lusts, and afterward to make us the more circumspect in observing
the rules of our profession, yt is, the christen profession as that princelike
Prophet says: Psalm. cxix.
It is greatly for my wealth, that thou have punished me and brought me low,
even that I may learn thy righteous ordinances. Esaias. xxviii.
Uexatio^ or trouble (says the Prophet) gives understanding. And wha^soeuer
we repent and cease to sin, the Lord straightwais remoueth and takes away
the cross that he has laid upon our backs, and pours his blessing again
plentiously upon us. For though he makes a wou^d, Job. v.
he gives a plaster, though he smite, he makes whole again. i. Reg. iii*
The Lord kills and makes a live, brings down to the grave, and fetches
up again. The lord makes poor, and makes ^ich, brings low and lifts up
again. Tob. iii.
After a storm (O lord) says holy Toby, thou make the weather fair and
calm: after weeping and heaviness, thou geuest great ^oy. Thy name (O God of
Israel) ^e praised for ever.


Eusebius. If God ^oueth a man and entendeth to make him partaker of everlasting
glory: he will not cease to punish him, until he knowledgeth his ^ault,
repents, and become a new ^an.


Phi Ye say truth. For unto ^his end does God correct such ^s he loves, and
entendeth to ^aue. The Lord says by the Pro^het, that he will punish his
people, which sin against him, and ^un on whoring after strange Gods, until
they confess their falt and say: I will turn again to my first husband, Ose.
ii.
for at that time was I better at ease, then now.


Chri. This is a great comfort for a christen man in his affliction to hear,
that God punishes him in this world to this end, yt he may cease to sin,
that he may repent, turn again unto the Lord his God, and so for ever be saved.


Epaph. But I pray you rehearse unto me out o^ the holy scripture, for the
quiet^nes of my conscience, some histories which may declare unto me that God
punishing sinners for their disobedience, does afterwar^ when they repent and
turn, for^geue them, and receive the^ again into his favor.


Philemon. In the fourth book of Moses, called N^^mery, we read that the
pepole (...) Israel murmured and grudged ^^gainst God and against Mose^ saying
unto Moses: wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt, Number. xxi.
for to die in the wilderness? For here is neither bread nor water, and our
soul lotheth this light bread.

Now se ye the sin of the Israelites. They murmur, they grudge they are
unfaithful, impatient, and disobedient against God and against his lawful
magistrate: now hear again the reward of sin. Wherefore the Lord sent fiery
Serpents among the people, which ^tong them, and much people of Israel died.
Here have ye the punishment of the sin. Now hear also ye ^emedy against this
punishment, and the salve against this plage. Therefore the people came unto
Moses and said: we have sinned, for ^e have spoken against the Lord ^ against
thee. Make intercession ^o the Lord that he take away the ^^rpentes from us.
Here the people of Israll repents, confesses their sin, turns again
unto the Lord, and besecheth Moses to pray for them unto the Lord. Repentance
confession of the sin, conversion unto the Lord, and faithful prayer are
the means, whereby Gods wrath is turned away from us, and his plagues cease.
For when Moses had made intercession for the people, the Lord said unto him.
Make a brazen serpent, and set it up for a sign, that as many as are bitten,
may look upon it and live. And Moses made a seruent of brass, and set it up
for a sign. And when the Serpents had bitten any man, he beheld the serpent of
brass, and was healed* Here se you the mercy of God, e^uen in the mids of
the cross to^ward penitent sinners. The Is^raelites sin: God plagueth: the
people repents: God turns a^way his plague: and heals the^.


Epa. A comfortable history. Be there no mo such in the holy scriptures?


Phi. Uery many.


Ep. Rehearse the^ I pray you. For I delight to hear such comfortable histories.


Phile. I am very glad. ii. Pet. xxx^^^
Manasses. king of Judah was an abominable Idolatoure. He went to and built ^he
hill altares which good king Ezechias his father had broken ^owne. And he
reared up altares ^or Baal, and made groves, and worshipped all the hosts of
heaven, and served them, and he built ^ltares in the house of the Lord, whereas
the Lord yet had said: In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever. And he builded
aultares for ^l the host of heaven in the courts ^f the house of the Lord. And
he ^urnt his children in the fire, in ^he valley of the son of Hinon. ^e was a
sorcerer: he regarded ye crying of birds, used enchauntments* and maintained
workers with spirits, and seers of fortunes, and wrought much evil in the
sight of the Lord to anger him withal. And as he him self was an Idolatar and
forsook the Lord God of his fathers: so likewise made he Judah and the
enhabiters of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse then the Heathen. etc. Now
have ye heard how grievously king Manasses sinned against ye Lord his God.


Chri. His sins were great and worthy of much punishment.


Eu^ Yea of everlasting damnation, i^ he were handled according to his deserts.


Epa. I pray you, what b^^came of him?


Phi. Albeit ye sins of this Manasses were great, ye^ behold the loving
kindness of Go^ toward him and his people. Before he sent any punishment amon^^
them, he raised up his Prophets which exhorted both him and his subjects to
turn from their evil, to repent, and to walk in the ordinances and laws of
God, but both he and his people would not hear the gentle admonitions of God
by his Prophets, nether regard them.


Epa. O stony hearts. But how than?


Ph. When ye Lord ^aw, yt by no means they would ^urne from their
abominations. ^ went forth still to effe^d, he brou^ht upon them the captains
of the ^ost of the king of the Assirians, ^hiche took Manasses in hold, and
^ound him with chains, and ca^^ed him to Babylon,


Theo. O the ^^ghteous judgments of God.


Epa. ^ere we hear yt Manasses was ^unished for his sins: yea, and ^^at
worthily, but did God cast (...) away for ever?


Phi. Ye shall ^ear. Wha^ Manasses was in tri^^lation, he besought the lord his
God and humbled him self exceadingly before the God of his Fathers, and made
intercession to him, and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. And than Manasses knew yt
the lord was God. After this he became a new man, and took away strange Gods,
and Images out of the house of God and all thalters that he had buil^ in the
mount of the house of God and Jerusalem, and cast them ou^ of the city. And he
prepared tha^^tare of the Lord, and sacrificed ther^ on peace offringes and
thanck of^fringes, and charged Judah to seru^ the Lord God of Israel.


Chri. (...) happy change.


Epaph^. Yea O the great mercies of God.


Phile. I^ this history many notable thin^ges are to be learned. First, if a^^
such as God entendeth to save, (...) offend, and break his holy
commandments, the Lord will not suffer them to escape unpunished, but he
visits them with his loving rod of fatherly correction, that by this means
he may call them to repentance and save them. Secondly, we learn, that when
the Lord corrects us, and casts us into trouble, than as we see in
Manasses, we make haste unto ye Lord, seek him, pray unto him, humble our
selves before his divine majesty, and become new men, as ye psalmograph says:
When he slew the^, Psalm. lxxviii.
they sought him, and turned them early, and enquired after God. And they
remembered, that God was their strength, and that the ^hie God was their
redemer. God him self also says by the Prophet: In their adversity they shall
ear^y seek me, Ose. vii.
and say: come, let us turn again unto the Lord, for he has smitten us, and
he shall heal us: he has wounded us, and he shall bind us up again. Thirdly
it sets forth unto us the great and exceeding mercies of God toward penitent
sinners, whom so sone as they convert and turn, he receives into his favor,
forgeueth them, takes away his plagues, and restores them to their former, or
else much better state according to this saying of the Prophet. Esaias. lv.
If the ungodly will forsake his ways, and thunrighteous his imaginations and
turn again unto ye lord, the Lord will surely have pity on him, for he is very
ready to forgive. Forthly, we learn of this history: what the duty of such is,
whom God to fore has plagued, and now restored to their former state. Uerely,
to become new men, to walk for ever after in the fear of God, to mortify
their carnal affectes, to fle from sin, as from a venomous Serpent, to
garnishe their conversation with godly and christen manners, Luke. i.
and to serve the Lord God in holiness and righteousness all the days of their
life. So says the Psalmograph: Psalm. cxix.
It is greatly for my profit, that thou, O Lord have corrected me, that I may
learn thine ordinances. Here to pertains the saying of ye Prophet. Esa.
xxviii.
Uexation gives understanding (O Lord) thou have corrected me, and thy
chastning have I received, as an untamed calf, says the prophet Jeremy. Ier.
xxxi.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art my Lord God: yea, as as soon
as thou turnest me. I shall refourme my self, and when I understand, I shall
smite upon my thigh.


Epaph. Many godly lessons have you taught us out of this history brother
Philemo^. They that read and consider the histories of the holy scriptures on
this manner, The true use of reading the holy scriptures.
they are no vain readers, but they read with much profit.


Phile. This is the true use of histories, otherwise to read them avails
little. In the histories of the holy scriptures as in most pleasant mirrors
and goodly glasses, we behold our frail nature, our wicked will, our beastlyke
manners and sinful life. We se Gods justice, punishment and vengeance upon the
disobedient and stifnecked transgressers of his holy commandments. Again, we
behold his tender mercy and loving kindness toward penitent sinners, and how
ready he is to forgive, whansoeuer we turn unto him. Moreover in holy
histories, we consider what our duty is toward God, after we have received
benefits of him. Uerely to labor unto the vttermoste of our power, to be
tha^kfull unto him, and to live worthy his kindness. These and such like
things must the godly reader consider, when he reads the histories of the
holy scripture, or else his reading avails little.


Theop. It is truly said.


Ep. I remember that I heard once ye prayer, which Manasses king of Judah prayed
unto God, when he was a prisoner in Babylon. I would gladly hear it again.


Phi. Is there not a bible here?


Eusebius. Here is one.


Ep. I pray you turn unto ye prayer and read it unto me.


Eusebi. The prayer is this. The prayer of Manasses
O Lord almighty, God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of the
righteous sede of them, which haste made heaven and earth withal thornament
thereof, which have ordained the sea, by the word of thy commandment, which
have shut up the deep, and have sealed it for thy fearful and lawdable name,
which al men fear and tremble before the face of thy virtue, and for the anger
of thy threatening, which is notable to be borne of sinners. But ye mercy of
thy promise is great and unsearchable: for ye art the Lord God most hie above al
thearth, long suffering, and exceading merciful, and repentant for the malice of
men. Thou lord after thy goodness have promised repentance of the remission of
sins: and thou that art the God of the rightous, have not put repentance to the
righteous Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, unto the^ that have not sinned against
thee: but because I have sinned above the number of the sands of the sea, and
that mine iniquities are exceeding many, I am brought low with many bonds of
Iron, and there is in me no breathing, I have provoked thine anger, and done
evil before thee in committing abhominatio^s, and multiplying offenses. And now
I bow ye knees of my heart, requiring goodness of the (O Lord) I have sinned,
lord I have sinned, and I knowledge mine iniquity, I desire thee by prayer (O
Lord) forgive me: forgive me and destroy me not with mine iniquities, nether
do thou alwais remember mine evils, to punish them, but save me (which am
unworthy) after thy great mercy, and I will praise the everlastingly all the
days of my life: for all the power of heaven prayseth the, and unto thee
belongs glory world without end. Ame^.


Epa. A fruteful and godly prayer. God give me grace so to repent and to pray
that I may have the lord my God merciful unto me. For I have also grievously
offended my Lord God, and I most humbly beseech him for his names sake to have
mercy on me, and to forgive me.


Phile. Be on good comfort and weep not. Esaias. lxiii.
God seeing your repentaunt and faithful heart has freely forgeuen you al your
sins, and cast them away behind his back, so yt he will never remember the^
more. The blood of Jesus Christ, i. John. i.
Gods son has made you clean from all sin. Hebr. x.
By thoffring of Jesus Christ's body done once for all you ar sanctified and
made holy. Psalm. xxxiii.
Ye are the blessed of God, for your iniquities are forgeuen, your sins are
covered, and no unrighteousness shall be laid to your charge.


Epa. God grant.


Phile. It is most certain. Where repentance and faith is: there is also Gods
mercy, favor, loving kindness, and remission of sins. Sap. xi.
Thou (O lord) says ye wise man, make thee as though thou ^awest not the
sins of men for ^epentance sake. And the Prophet ^aieth. Esaias. xxviii.
All that believes on him ^he speaks of Christ) shall not be ^onfounded. Romans
x.
And Christ says of ^im self I am the resurrection and ^he life. John. xi
He that believes on me, ^ea though he were dead, yet shall ^e live. And
whosoever lives and ^eleueth on me, he shall never die. ^lso in another place
he says, ^od so loved the world, John, iii.
that he ^aue his only begotten son, that ^hosoeuer believes on him, should
^ot perish, but have everlasting ^^fe. For God sent not his son in (...)
the world to condemn ye world, ^ut that the world through him ^ight be saved.


Epap. Godly and ^omfortable sentences. God give (...) grace never to forget
them.


^hristo. Amen.


Epa. You brother ^hilemon have rehearsed two notable and comfortable histories
out of the old testament, which declare that God punishing sinners for their
disobedience, does notwithstanding afterward when they repent and turn,
forgive the^ and receive them again into his favor. Rehearse unto me also I
pray you one or two histories out of the new testament, concerning that matter.


Phi. I will do it very gladly. Ye remember the history of the prodigal son
written in the Gospel of blessed Luke?


Ep. What is that, I pray you.


Phil. Blessed Luke tells, Luke xv.
that a certain man had two sons, and the younger of them said unto his
father: father give me the portion of the goods that to me belongs. And he
divided unto them his substance Hitherto have ye heard of the fathers
liberality toward his son It follows: and not long after ^hen the yo^ger
son had gathered (...) yt he had together, he took his ^^urney into a far
country* and there ^e wasted his goods with riotous ^^uing. Here se we the
wickedness ^f the son. Now behold ye plage of God. And when he had spent al:
there ^rose a great dearth in all yt land, and he began to lack, and went and
^ame to a citezen of the same coun^ry, and he sent him to his farm to ^epe
swine. And he would have fil^^d his belly with the cods that (...) swine did
eat, and no man gave unto him. Thus see ye into how ^reat misery he is fallen
for the ^ifusing of his goods. Behold ^ow again his repentant and sorow^^ll
heart: The^ he came to him self, (...) said: how many hired servants (...) my
fathers have bread enough? ^^d I perish with honger. I ^ill arise, and go to
my Father, and will say unto him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee: and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of
thy hired servants. And he arose and came to his father. Now mark also the
pitiful compassion and tender mercy of the father toward his son. But when he
was yet a great way of, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and
fell on his neck, and kissed him* And the son said unto hym^ father I have
sinned against heaven and thy in sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son. Bu^ the father said to his servants bring forth the best garment, an^
put it on him, and put a ring o^ his hand, and shoes on his feet And bring
hither that fat calf, ^ kill it, and let us eat and be merry for this my son
was dead, and i^ alive again, he was lost, and i^ found. And they bego^ to be
mer^ ^n this history do ye se ye exceeding ^reat mercy of God toward peni^^nt
sinners most lively painted (...) set forth. So sone as this wast^^l son
repented him of his rio^ous living, and had a mind to re^urne home unto his
father, and (...) humble him self before him, and (...) desire mercy and
forgiveness ^f his sins, oh how gladly and ^ow joyful did his father
louing^^ embrace him, swetely kiss him, ^^^endly salute him, heartily enter^ain
him, and so derely receive him ^^to his favor, as though he had ^euer offended?


Epa. O the great and infinite mercies of God.


Phi. ^ere see ye that to be true, which ^od him self says by the prophet:
^hou disobedient Israel tourn a^ain says the Lord, Iere. iii.
and I will not ^t my wrath fall upon you. For I ^n merciful, says the Lord,
and I ^il not always bear displeasure against thee. etc. O ye disobedient
children, turn again (saying:) lo, we are thine, for thou art the lord our
God, and so shall I heal your back turnings. Esech. 33
By an other Prophet he also says: as truly as I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked but much rather yt the wicked turn
from his way and live. Turn you, turn you from your vngodli^waies, O ye af the
house of Israe^ oh, wherefore will ye die? The wickedness of ye wicked shall not
hurt him, whenever he conuerteth from his ungodliness. Esech. 18
Again by ye aforsaid Prophet, he says: repen^ and turn you from al your
iniquities, and your iniquities shall work^ you no displeasure. Cast away fr^
you, all your wickednesses, where in ye have offended, and make yo^ a new heart
and a new spirit. An^ wherefore will ye die? O ye house ^f Israel? For I will not
yt any man ^huld die, says the Lord. Return ^herfore and live.


Ep. Are these wor^es spoken as well to us as to ye people of Israel?


Phi. Ye to us. Of a truth, Act. x.
says blessed Peter, I per^eiue yt there is no respect of persons (...) God,
but in all people, he yt fea^eth him, and works righteousness ^s accepted with
him. Is he ye God of ^he Jews only? Romans iii.
Is he not also ye God of the ge^tils? yea even of the ^entiles also, says
blessed Paul. For it is God only, Romans ii.
which iustifi^th the circumcision yt is of faith, and ^ncircumcision through
faith. ^or he is not a Jew which is a ^ew outward, nether is it circu^^^sio^,
which is outward in ye flesh. ^ut he is a Jew, which is hid wt^^, and the
circumcision of the heart (...) true circumcision, which consi^eth in the
spirit, and not in the ^^ter, whose praise is not of me^, but of God. There is
no difference between the Jew and the gentill. Roma. x.
For one is Lord of all, which is rich unto all that call upon him. John. ii.
For who so ever does call on the name of the Lord, Romans xv.
shall be safe. Therefore what so ever things were written aforetime, they
were written for our learning, that we through patience and the comfor^ of ye
scriptures, might have hope.


The. Ephe. ii.
Ye gentiles, says s. Paul, we^ in times past without Christ, be^ing aliauntes
from the Common^^wealth of Israel, and straunger^ from the testaments of the
promise having no hope, and being with^out God in this world. But now by the
means of Christ Jesus, (...) which sometime were a far of, (...) made nie by the
blood of Christ^ For he is our peace, which hat^ made of both one, and has
brok^ down the wall, that was a sta^ between us, and has also put away
through his flesh, the cause of hatred, even the law of commandments
contained in the law written for to make of twain one new man in him self, so
making peace and to reconcile both unto God in one body through the cross, and
slew hatred thereby: and came and preached peace to you, which were a far of,
and to them, which were nie. For through him we both have an entrance in one
spirit unto the father. Now ther^ore, ye are not strangers and fo^einers, but
citezins with ye sain^es, and of the household of God, and ^re built upon the
foundation of (...) Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ him self being the head
cor^er (...) stone, in whom what buil^^ng soever is coupled together, (...)
grows unto an holy temple (...) the Lord, in whom ye also are builded
together, to be an habitation of God through ye holy ghost:


Epa. Blessed be the Lord our God, which has made us gentiles also partakers
of his heavenly blessings. But brother Philemon, hitherto have ye rehearsed
out of the new Tastament but one history. Your promise was to recite two at
the least. Fulfill your promis I pray you.


Phi. In the gospel of John, John. v.
we read, that there was a certain man, which had been diseased.xxxviii.
years, pla^ged of God (without doubt) for his sins. So sone as our saui^our
Christ perceived, that he ha^ a mind to be made whole he sai^ unto him: Rise,
take up thy bed (...) walk. And streightways the (...) was made hole.
Afterward Chr^^^ found him in the temple, and (...) unto him: Behold thou art
(...) whole, look thou sin no (...) after this, least a worse thing chance
unto thee. These worde^s of our savior Christ do plainly declare that this
man was a grievous sin, and that this his long disease, sickness and trouble,
was cast upon him for his sin and disobedience against the Lord his god. And
yet note, so sone as he had a mind to be made hole even before he made his moan
unto Christ, or knew whot Christ was, this most loving and gentle savior made
him hole, and bad him sin no more.


Euse. Here is ye fulfilled, which God speaks by the Prophet. Esa. lxv.
It shall be that or ever they call, I shall an^were them. While they are yet
but thinking how to speak, I shall hear them.


Phi. The history of ye thief, Luke. xxiii.
which was put to death with Christ, is not to be let pass. What a malefactor
and wicked person he was, the holy scripture does declare. Notwithstanding so
sone as he humbled him self, repented him of his former life: confessed his
sin, and called upon Christ for mercy, saying: Lord remember me, wha^ thou
come into thy kingdom, he was straightwaies received into favor, and hard
these most comfortable words at the mouth of Christ: Uerely I say unto thee,
this day shall thou be with me in paradise.


Chri. Here is also the saying of God by the Prophet found true: at al times
when a sinner turns unto me, says ye Lord: I will no more bear his
iniquities in mind, but freely forgive them.


Epa. Here is than a good and comfortable lesson, that whenever we turn from
our wickedness, the Lord our God will for^geue us our sins, and give us favor,
grace, mercy, life and everlasting glory.


Phi. Truth it is brother Epaphroditus. Believe it, and all things shall go well
with you. You shall find much comf^rt and great joy in your conscience. A quiet
and merry heart shall you have within you, Romans x.
as s. Paul says: We being justified by says have peace that is to say:
quietness of conscience toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
also it chanced unto us to be brought in through faith unto this grace, wherein
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Luke x.xv.
How greatly also do the histories of the wounded man and of the lost sheep*
(as I may let other pass) set forth gods exceading mercy toward penitent
sinners, be they never so grievously wounded and diseased? A certain man says,
our savior Christ, descended from Jerusalem ^o Hierico, and fell among thieves,
which robbed him of his raime^t, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. And it chanced that there came down a certain Priest that same
way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And likewise a Leuite, when he went
nie to the place, came, and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain
Samaritan, as he iourneyed, came unto him, and when he saw him, he had
compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, and poured in
oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to a common Inn,
and made provision for him-And on the morrow, when he departed, he took two
pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him: take cure of him, and what
soever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will recompenc^ thee.


Ep. There was small chariti^ both in the Priest and in the Le^uite.


Phi. You say truth.


Epa. But who was that Samaritan? For he was very gentle and louinge.


Phi. Christ Jesus the Lord which is the self gentleness and love, which also
refuses no labor, no pain, no cost,, in seking our salvation. He it is
alone, Esaias. liii.
which, as the Prophet says: has taken on him our infirmities, and borne
our pains. i. Pet. ii.
He him self as Peter says, bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we
being delivered from sin, should live unto righteousness, By whose stripes ye
were hea^ed. For as ye were as sheep going astray, but are now turned unto the
shepeheard, and Bishop of your souls.


Epaphroditus. You ^pake of the lost sheep also.


Phile. Truth. Luke. xv.
Blessed Luke tells the parable on this manner.

What man of you having an C. sheep (if he lose one of them) does not leave
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he
find it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy.
And as soon as he comes home he calls together his lovers and neighbors,
saying unto them: rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.
Hereof our savior Christ concludes: I say unto you, that likewise joy
shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over ninety and nine
just persons, which need no repentance. This parable with the other of the
woman that lost a grote, sets forth maruelouslye the louinge kyndnesse of
Christ toward penitent sinners. For of that he also concludes and says:
Likewise I say unto you, shall there be joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repents.


Epaph. Great comfort is there, for penitent sinners and weke consciences: in
these histories and parables which you neighbor Philemon have full gently
declared unto me.


Phile. I ^m glad brother Epaphroditus ^o hear you so say. And be ye well
^ssured, they are no less true than ^omfortable. Mat. xix.
Persuade your self that Christ is a most loving and ^aithfull Physician to so
many as ^ele them selves diseased, yea he so ^uche tendreth our health, that ^e
calls us unto him, and pro^iseth that he will ease us of our ^rief, if we will
come unto him, and ^eal all our diseases. Math. ix.xi.
They that ^e strong, need no Physician, but ^^ey yt are sick. And Christ came
^^t to call the righteous, but syn^^rs unto repentance. If ye ther^^e feel your
self sick and grieved ^ith the burden of sin, come unto the Physician Christ,
Luke x.
show him your wounds, and he will undoubtedly heal them, as ye heard before of
the wounded man. Despair not though your sins be never so great and
innumerable. Luke. xx.
For the son of man came to seek up and to save that was lost. Christ is that
lamb of God, John. i.
which takes away the sin of the world. i. Tim. ii.
This is a true saying and worthy of all men to be received, that Christ Jesus
came into this world to save sinners. Esaias. xxviii.
Whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Roma. x.
Because he has pu^ his trust in me, Psalm. xci.
says God by the Psalmograph, I will deliver, ye^ I will defend him, because
h^ has known my name.


Epaphro^ Than I trust whether the Lord my God punishes me for the tr^^all of
my faith, or for my sins that by this means he may ca^me unto repentance,
it is no token of his wrath and heavy displeasure toward me.


Phile. No, be ^e well assured. Proverb. iii.
For whom the Lord loves, him he chastneth, and yet delights in him, as a
father ^n his own son. What son ^s he, whom the father chastneth not? If
ye be not under correction, (says S. Paul,) whereof all are ^artakers, Hebr.
xii.
then are ye bastardes, and not sons. And God himself ^aith: Apoc. iii.
As many as I love, I re^uke and chasten. So that this ^our sickness is the
loving visi^ation of God, sent unto you, not ^or your destruction, but for your
^aluation.


Epaphro. I may then ^e bold to call upon the Lord my God in this my sickness.


Phile. Why not? God has commaun^ed you so to do, and has also pro^ised to
hear you


Epaphroditus. Where is that commandment and promise of God?


Ph. It is written in a certain Psalm by that Princelike Prophet David.


Epa. Psalm. i.
Let me hear it.


Phil. Call on me, says God, in the time of thy trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall honor me. Here God does not only command us to call o^
him in the time of our trouble, but he also promises graciously to hear us,
and to grant us ou^ request. And for this his benefit^ he requires nothing
of us, Math. i.
bu^ thanks giving.


Chri. Full grati^ous is the Lord, and a strong hold i^ the time of trouble, he
knowet^ them that put their trust in him* The Lord is nie unto them tha^ are of
a troubled heart, Psalm. 33.
and will sau^ such as be of an humble spirit^^ The Lord heals those that
a^^ broken in heart: Psalm. 147.
and gives m^^decine to heal their sickness. The Lord remembered us (says
Psalmograph, Psalm. cxxxvii
) when we were in trouble, for his mercy endures for ever. Unto whom shall I
have ^espect, or whom shall I favor, ^aith God by the prophet? Uerely ^uen
him, Esaias. lxxvi.
that is miserable, poor, ^ow brought, troubled in spirit, and ^^andeth in
awe of my words.


^hi. Truth it is, zach. i.
that the Lord is ^ood and gracious unto the^ that ^ut their trust in him, and
to the ^ule that seaketh after him. ^herfore brother Epaphroditus, ^re not in
this your sickness dili^ently and without ceasing to flee unto God with hearty
and fayth^^ll prayers, nothing doubtinge (...) that he will favorably hear
(...), and grant you, whatsoever (...) ask according to his will as s. ^ohn
says: i. John, v.
this is the trust that ^e have in him, that if we ask ^y thing according to
his will, (...) hears us. And if we know yt he hear us whatsoever we ask,
we know that we have the petitions that we desire of him. For the Lord is nie
unto all that call on him, yea that call on him in truth. Psalm. cxlv.
After this manner did all good men and women behave them selves, whansoeuer
they were assailed with any kind of trouble or adversity. iii. Reg. xx.
King Ezechias wha^ he was grievously sick, and had received a commandment
from God, that he should set his house in an order, for he should die an^ not
live, turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, the Lord heard
him, made hi^ whole and saved him alive.xv^^ years after. The three children
Sidrach, Dan. iii.
Misach, and Abednag^ when they were cast into the fy^rie furnace because they
would not worship the golden Image (...) the commandment of king
N^^buchodonosor, prayed unto ye Lord and he both graciously heard the^ and
delivered them. Daniell being in the den of Lions, Dan. vi.
praid unto God, Dan. xiii.
and was preserved. Susanne forsaken of all men, and at the point to be stoned
unto death through the unjust and false accusations of two wicked Judges, praid
unto the Lord her God, and she was both heard and safely delivered. Luke. xxiii.
Our savior Christ in the time of his trouble and passion, prayed so
fervently unto his heavenly father, that his sweat was like drops of blood
trickeling down to the ground. Act. vii.
Blessed Stephen when the stones came batteryng about his body, prayed
earnestly. Act. xii.
When Peter was in prysone, there was Prayers made of the Congregation for him.
Many other such like examples have we in the holy Bible, which declare
unto us, yt all good men and women in their adversity, have always fled unto
God by fervent prayer for remedy neither have they been deceived of their
purpose. i. Cor. x.
For God is faithful, which will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, but shall in the mids of the temptation, make away, that we may be
able to bear it. For the Lord him self says: Psalm. xci.
forasmuch as he has put his trust in me: I will deliver him, I will be good
to him because he has known my name He has cried unto me, and I (...)
graciously hear him, I am wit^ him in trouble, I will deliver hi^ and bring him
to honor. Wit^ long life will I satisfy him, an^ show him my salvation. When
I was in trouble, Psalm. cxx.
says David, I called upon ye Lord, and he heard (...) Again he says, I will
call upon (...) Lord, which is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe from
mine enemies. The sorrows of death compassed, and the ouerflowinges of
ungodliness made me afraid. The pains of hell came about me, the snares of death
ouertoke me. But in my trouble I called upon the Lord, and made my complaint
unto my God, and he full graciously hard my voice from his holy temple, and my
complaint came before him, so that it entered even into his ears. And as the
Psalmograph in all his trouble cried unto the Lord and was helped* so did all
his faithful ancestors, as these his words do declare, and they al so were
hard. Psalm. xxiii.
Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them. They called upon thee, and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded. And unto this day have all yt faithful in their adversity
cried unto ye Lord, and have received help. Romans x.
For there is one lord of all rich enough for all that call on him, Joel. ii.
Act. ii. Esaias. xxviii.
so that whosoever calls on the name of ye Lord, he shall be safe. For none
shall be confounded, yt puts his trust in him. This poor man cried says
David, Psa. xxxiiii.
and the Lord hard him, and saved him from al his troubles. For the angel of
the Lord pitcheth his tent round about them that fear him, and delivers them.
O taste therefore and se, how gentle, gracious and loving the Lord is, blessed
is the man yt trusts in him.


Euse. Brother Epaphroditus, all these sentences and histories which our
neighbor Phi^lemon has here recited unto you out of the holy scriptures, ought
to encourage you to pray unto the Lord God in this your sickness with a strong and
unshaken faith, and to be fully persuaded that God will both graciously hear
you, and also work that in you, which shall turn most unto his glory, and unto
the salvation of your soul? Esaias. l^^*
For behold, the Lords hand is not so shortened, that it can not help, nether
is his ear so stopped, that it may not hear. Psalm. lxviii*
Our God is such a God as saves. With the lord our God there is health, and he
laith his blessing upon his people. Psalm. iii.
Whom did God ever despise, that called faithfully upon him? Eccl, ii.
For God is gracious and merciful, he forgeueth sins in the time of trouble,
and is a defender for all them that seek after him. Eccl. xxxvi^



The. The wise man says: son in thy sickness, despise not thy self, but
pray to the Lord, and he shall heal thee. Here is a commandment given to
pray unto God in the time of our sickness, and also a promise added, that he will
hear, heal, and help us, as he says by the Psalmograph: Psalm. i.
Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
honor me


Chri. James. v.
S. James in his Epistle also says: If any be diseased among you, let him call
for the elders of the congregation, and let them pray over him, and anoint him
with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall
be forgeuen him.


Phile. That God being faithfully called upon, will help in the time of
sickness: we have many examples in the holy scriptures, which may worthily
comfort us and stir up our faith toward God, lokyng for help at his most
merciful hand. But for this present, let this one example of king Ezechias
suffice, iiii. Reg. xx.
whom being appointed to die, after he had called ^n the name of the Lord, the
lord our God graciously heard his request, restored him to his health, and gave
him.xv. years mo to live in this world after that his sickness.
Notwithstanding, brother Epaphroditus, all be it we doubt not but that you
praying unto God in this your sickness, God will mercifully hear you, and work
that in you which shall be most unto his glory: and the health of your soul,
yet forasmuch as you know not what is most expedient for you, be content in all
your prayers to submit your will do the good will of God, which without all
doubt tendereth the health of your soul more than any mortal friend tendereth
the health of your body. In all temporal and worldly things, that you crave of
God in your prayers, prefer the will of God unto your own will, and be content
to receive at the hand of God, as shall be his godly pleasure to appoynte. For
whether we live or die, Romans xiiii.
we are the Lords. An example hereof have you of our savior Christ, Math.
xxvi. Mark. xiiii. Luke xxii.
which a little before his passion, being greatly dismayed with the terrors and
fears of death, prayed unto his heavenly father, that these bitter pains and
torments, which were at hand for him to suffer, might be removed from him, so
that he might not suffer them, but be fre from them. Notwithstanding knowing
that the will of his heavenly father is ever best and most perfect, and that
all wills of men ought t^ give place unto his godly will, h^ wyshed rather
the will of God t^ be done, then the will of him be^yng man, and so submitted
hy^^ self to Gods holy will, being con^tented to suffer in his body, wha^soeuer
should be his godly pleasure to appoint. The words of Christ's prayer in this
behalf, are these: Math. xxvi.
O my father, if it be possible, let this cup depart from me, notwithstanding
not as I will, but as thou will. Again, O my father, if this cup can not go
from me, but that I must drink it, thy will be done. That we ought in all our
prayers for temporal things, to submit our will to the good will and pleasure of
God, and no more to desire of him, then may stand with his blessed will.
Christ our Lord and savior teaches us in that common prayer, which we call
the Pater noster, where we pray on this manner. Math. vi.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. This manner of praying, Mat.
xxvi^.
practiced the Leper, which came unto Christ to be healed of his Leprosy.
Lord (says he) if thou will, thou art hable to make me whole. Here this
faithful Leper confessed Christ through ye almighty power of his Godhead to be
able for to cleanse him, and to make him whole, not withstanding he submitted
his will to the will of Christ, that if the Lord Christ, thought it not mete
to make him whole, but yt it was better for his salvation to continue a leper
still, he refused not to suffer that plague of leprosy upon his body even unto
the very death. Thus affected, neighbor Epaphroditus, must we all be whansoeuer
we ask any te^porall or worldly thing of God. And this trade follow you in
this your sickness, when you pray unto God. Desire God to remove this your
disease from you, and to bless you again with the benefit of health, that
you may live long and se good days on earth, yet in these your prayers be
content to submit your will to his godly will, yea though death should follow,
knowing that if death do ensue of this your sickness, it shall be no loss, but
advantage unto you, as saint Paul says: Phil. i.
Christ is to me life, and death is to me auantage. On this manner did Christ
our elder brother submit his will unto the will of his heavenly father, as you
before heard, and so humbled himself, that he became obedient unto death, even
ye death of ye cross. Note now what follows: Phil. ii.
wherefore God has also exalted him on hie and given him a name, which is above
al names, that is ye name of Jesus every kne should bow, both of things in
heaven and things in the earth, and things under the earth, and that all
tongues should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the praise of God
the father. He that humbles him self, Luke xviii. ^. Pet. v.
shall be set hie. For the Lord is a friend to them that be humble, and submit
their wills to his godly will and pleasure.


Epa. O Lord thy will be done and not mine.

A prayer.
I confess (O heavenly father) that my manifold wickednesses and innumerable
sins, have not only deserved this sickness, which is thy most gentle,
fatherly and loving correction, but also very hell, and the bitter pains
thereof, if thou should handle me according to my deserts, I have sinned, I
have sinned, O lord God, against thy holy laws and I have broken thy blessed
commandments, most grievously offending thy glorious majesty. Whatsoever I
suffer, I worthily suffer, ah wretch that I am. My sin I confess, and with
an humble heart and broken spirit, I fle unto the throne of thy favorable
mercy, most humbly besechinge thee for Jesus Christ's sake to forgive me all my
sins which I have committed against thy divine majesty, from the hour of my
birth unto this present time, and to receive me into the holy fellowship of
those thy blessed and chosen people, whom before the beginning of ye world,
thou did appoint heirs of thy heavenly kingdom in Christ Jesus our lord,
that they might for ever and ever reign with thee in glory. Ah, lord give me
grace to bear this cross both patiently and thankfully. Suffer me not once to
murmur, grudge, or spurn against thy holy will, but with a pacient and
thankful heart to wait on thy blessed pleasure, being always content to
bear, whatsoever burden thou laiest on my shoulders, with this persuasion and
assured faith, that whatsoever I suffer, is unto the glory of thy name, and
unto the health of my soul. (O Lord) thy will be done, and not mine.

Amen. Amen.

Neighbors, I am very sick, and my pain increases more and more.


Phi. The Lords will be done in you neighbor Epaphroditus. Fear not, Romans
xiiii.
no although present death were at hand. For whether you live or die, ye are
the Lords. God has sealed you up in Christ's blood unto everlasting life.
Your name, Luke x. Ephe. ii.
doubt ye not, is written in the book of life. Ye are of ye nombre of those,
whom God, before the foundations of the world were laid, has chosen in
Christ to be his sons and heirs, ye are the dearly beloved son of God. Ye
are enheritours of Gods glorious kingdom. God for your earnest faithes sake in
the blood of Christ, has forgeuen you al your sins, that ever ye committed
against him from the day of your birthe unto this hour. He has cast away all
your iniquities ^ehind his back, so that he will never remember them any more.
Ye are counted among the^, Psalm. 3^.
whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose sins are covered, and unto
whom the Lord imputes no sin. God loves you, God cares for you, God is
on your side, who then can endomage or hurt you? Who can lay any thing unto
your charge? Romans ^.
It is God that justifies you, who then can condemn you? ye need not fear
either satan or sin, or any other thing that should trouble your conscience.
For there is no damnation to the^ that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the
spirit of life, through Jesus Christ has made you fre from the law of sin
and death. For what ye law could not do (inasmuch as it was weke because of
the flesh) that performed God, and sent his son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and by sin damned sin in the flesh, that the ryghtedusnes of the
law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.


Epa. I thank you neighbor Philemon for your gostly and comfortable
instructions. For I am well comforted with these your words, and I faithfully
believe, that God the father for his promise sake made unto all faithful
penitent sinners in Christ's blood, has so freely and wholly forgeuen me all my
sins, that he will never remember them more, nor lay them unto my charge, but
so love me and tender my salvation, as though I had never offended his fatherly
goodness. And in this faith I submit my self, my body, and soul, and all that
I have unto his godly will, to do with me in all things, Romans xiiii.
whatsoever his good pleasure shallbe. A prayer.
For live we, die we, we are the Lords. And lord I most humbly beseech thee, call
to remembrance thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, which have been
ever of old. Psalm. xxv.
Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy
mercy think y^ upon me, O lord for thy goodness. Turn the unto me and have
mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery. The sorrows of my heart ar
enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles. Look upon mine adversity and
misery and forgive me al my sin. O keep my soul and deliliuer me, let me not
be confounded, for I have put my trust in the.


Phi. I much rejoice to see in you these works of faithful repentance. This
humbling of your self before ye majesty of God, this lamenting of your sins,
this faithful and hearty calling on the Lords name for remission of sins in
Christ's blood, for the tranquillity, peace, quietness, and reast of conscience,
for the favor and grace of God, for gods will to be done in you, is without
doubt a sure seal unto your conscience, that God loves, favors and
tendereth you, yea and that much more the^ any natural father makes of his
son. Eccle. xxxv.
Who so serves God (says the wise man) after his pleasure, shall be accepted,
and his prayer rea^cheth unto the clouds. The prayer of him that humbles him
self, goes through the clouds, till she come nie. She will not be comforted,
nor go her way, until the highest God have respect unto her. The Lord is nie
unto them yt are of a contrite heart (says the Psalmograph) Psalm. xxxiiii^
and will save such as be of an humble spirit. Luke xviii.
The sinful Publican, thus hu^bling him self, obtained the favor of God,
remission of sins, and went home more righteous than the proud Pharisey.
Math. viii.
So likewise the Centurion confessing his unworthiness for the receiving of
Christ into his house, obtained health for his sick servant. Likewise the
Leper with diverse other, humbling them selves before Christ, obtained their
hearts desire. Psalm. ci.
For God, says David, has respect unto the prayer of the humble, and such as
be destitute, and despises not their desire, but hears their mournings, yt
he may deliver them and save them.


Eusebius. Now neighbor, how do you? I pray you be strong in God, and rejoice in
his saving health.


Epa. O neighbor Eusebius, my body is weak, my hear is faint, my wits are
feeble, my memory almost fails me: no part of me is fre from sickness and
pain. A prayer.
But Lord, I beseech thee, strengthen thou me, and endue me with power from
above, that as ye spirit is ready: Math. xxvi.
so likewise the flesh, which is ever weak and unready, may be obedient to thy
godly will, and freely consent to the working of thy blessed pleasure. Luke xvii.
Mark. ix.
Lord encrese my faith. Lord, help my unbelief. Lord, remember not mine old
sins, but have mercy upon me, and that sone, for I am come to great misery.
Psalm. lxxix.
Healpe me, O God my Savior, for the glory of thy name. O deliver me, and be
merciful unto my sins for thy names sake.


Euse. God has ever be me^^full unto you, and so will continue unto thend,
doubt you not.


Ep. That is my only comfort. A prayer. Psalm. lxviii.
And Lord, I most humbly pray thee, confirm yt which thou have begone to work
in me, and keep me blameless against the coming of thy dear son. But where
is my loving neighbor Philemon? I would be glad to have his counsel in a
certain matter. Where is he?


Phile. Neighbor, here at hand. What is your pleasure?


Epa. I perceive right well, yt my sickness does not discrease, but increase,
so yt I can not long continue in that state, wherein I am now. And I think
^erely, yt the lord my God has sent this sickness unto me as a messenger, to
before warn me of my departure from this world, yt when he come, he may not
find me unprepared or unready. And I most heartily thank him for it. Therefore
neighbor Philemon and neighbors al, I think it best even out of hand to dispose
my temporal possessions, and to set an order in such worldly goods as God
has lent me, that after my departure there be no dissension nor strife for
the^, among such as I most wish to be linked together with perpetual amity,
and continual friendship. It shall also, I trust, be a great quietness unto my
mind.


Phile. If you have not already brother Epoporoditus, disposed and set an order
in your temporal things, I wish it to be done with all expedition. For such
things ought to be considred, when we be most perfect in health, forasmuch as
our life is uncertain, and we know not, how sone death comes.


Epa. I thought not that the time of my life had been so short, and therefore I
deferred the matter. But I se now, Mar. xxiiii. Mark. xiii. Apoc. xvi.
that no man is certain of his life until to morrow: therefore ought we all to
watch, and to provide that we be not found unready, when the Lord comes.


The. When that godly king Ezechias was sick, iiii. Reg. xx.
God sent the Prophet Esaias unto him, and willed him to say unto him on this
wise. Thus says the Lord God: Set thy house in an order, for thou shall die
and not live. Here learn we ye good will of God, which is, that they, whom
the Lord has endu^ed with the goods of the world, should before their
departure set a godly order and quiet stay in their ^emporal possessions.


Epaph. You ^ay truth neighbor Theophile, and ^herfore I pray you bring hither
^en, inck, and paper, withal expedi^ion, and let my will be written. ^or I
thank the Lord my God, I (...) as well contented to leave the goods of ye
world, as ever I was to enjoy them. And in this behalf I have to thank the lord
my God, that since I came to the use of reason, The true use of riches.
and had any worldly possessions at all, I have always made them to serve me,
and I never served them, but at all times could be contented to depart from
them whansoeuer the glory of god, and the commodity of my neighbor did
require.


Christ. Than did you use your goods aright. And you were not rich in the
world, but in the Lord, and of the no^bre of those, of whom it is written:
blessed are the poor in spirit, Math. v.
for unto the^ belongs the kingdom of heaven The Psalmograph says: Psa.
lxii.
If riches do abound, set not thy heart upon them. i. Cor. vii.
And the holy Apostl^ commands, that they which use the world should be as
thoug^ they used it not. For the fashion of this world goes away Saint John
also says: i. John. ii.
Se that ye love not the world, nether the things that are in the world: for
all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the father, but of the world. And the
world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will of
God, abides for ever.


Epa. God grant al men, to follow this doctrine. O Lord how sick am I? Where
is the pen, Incke and paper?


Euse. Here sir.


Epaph, Wright neighbor Philemon I pray you.


Phile. What is your pleasure that I should wright?


Epaphrodi. On this manner.

IEpaphroditus the unprofitable servant of God, The sickemans will.
weke in body and notwtstanding strong in mind do willingly and with a fre
heart, render and give again into the hands of the Lord my God, Soul.
my spirit, which he of his fatherly goodness gave unto me, when he fashioned
this my body in my Mothers womb, by this means making me a living creature,
nothing doubting, but that this my Lord God for his mercies sake set forth in
ye precious blood of his derely beloved son Christ Jesus our alone savior and
redemer, will receive my soul into his glory, and place it in the company of
the heavenly angels and blessed saints. And as concerning my body, Body.
even with a good will and fre heart, I give it over, commending it unto the
earth, whereof it came, nothing doubting, but that according to ye article of
our faith at the great day of the general resurrection, when we shall all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, I shall receive it again by the
mighty power of God, wherewith he is able to subdue al things unto him self,
Phil. ii.
not a corruptible, mortail, weak, and vile body as it is now, but an
incorruptible, immortal, strong, perfect, and in all points like unto the
glorious body of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Have ye written this,
neighbor Philemon?


Phi. Yea forsothe Sir. But what is your mind now, concerning your world ^y
possessions.


Epaph. First as touching my wife: Wife.
with whom I ^oupled my self in the fear of God, and refusing all other women,
I ^inked my self unto her, living with her in the blessed state of honoura^le
wedlock, by whom also tho^owe the blessing of God, I have ^ad certain
children, whereof part ^re gone before me unto the lord, and part yet remain a
live, albeit I dout not, but ye god, after my departure according unto his
promis, will be unto her an husband, yea a father, a patron and defe^der, and
will not suffer her to lack, if she go ^orth to live in his fear, to serve
him, and diligently to call on his holy name, yet forasmuch as God has blessed
me with worldly substance, and she is mine own flesh, and whosoever provides
not for his, i. Tim. v.
has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel, I bequeth and give unto
her for term of her life, this house wherein I now dwell, with ye
appurtenances, and all the household stuff contained therein. And after her
departure, I will that my eldest son (whom now I only have alive of all my
sons) have the house. Let this suffice for my wives portion, who^ I doubt
not, God will take into his protection, and so provide for her in the time of
her short pilgrimage, that she shall want no good thing. Only I crave this at
her hand, that she be diligent in training up my children in the fear and
doctrine of the Lord: so shall God be unto her an husband, and to her children
a father. Moreover as concerning my children, albeit I am fully persuaded that
God according to his promise will be a father unto them, and if they live in
his fear, he will not se the^ lack, yet both ye law of God, and of nature
requires, yt I should also have some care for them. Son.
Therefore unto my son I bequeath the house and the land, which I have given
my wife for term of her life, frelye to be his own after his Mothers
departure. And if God so appoynting, he chances to depart before his mother,
I will that the house and the land, Daughters.
go to the use of my.ii. daughters. Have you written these things.


Phile. Yea sir. But what now for your daughters.


Ep. If they be godly brought up, I doubt not, but if they live, God will
aboundauntly provide for them. Notwithstanding I give unto each of them.ii. C.
pounds, of good and lawful money to be paid in the day of their marriage. And if
my son fortune to die: I give unto them also my house and my land.


Euse. Sir we be all mortal, both old and young, and God knows how sone we
shall depart hence. For as the common proverb is: As Soon to the market for to
be soulde,
Comes the young sheep as the oulde.
What if al your children die before they come to marriage?


Epaphro. My will is, that in such case, all I have given them, shall go to the
use of the pore. I will that they be mine heirs. I pray you neighbor Philemon,
write so.


Phi. I have done so. Servants



Epaphro. I think it convenient to give to my servants somewhat, that it be
not said, they have served an unthankful master.


Chri. Sir that is very mete. For the wise man says: Eccle. vii.
whereas thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil, nor the hirelyng
that is faithful unto thee. Love a discrete servant as thine own soul,
defraude him not of his liberty, nether leave him apore man.


Epaphr. I give to every one of my servants.vi. pound.xiii. ^hillinges.iiii.
pence, to be paid in the day of my burial. Write it.


Phile. It is done.


Epa. God bless them, and increase them, for they have served me both honestly
and faythfullie. The Lord our God ^eale with them, as they have dealt with me.


Theo. They have done but their duty.


Phile. But neighbor Epaphroditus, whereof shall these sommes of money be raised?


Epaph. God has blessed me abou^dantly. Ye shall have it in my cou^ting house
with a more sum.


Christ. Debtors.
But now sir, concerning your debts: what order will you appoint for them?


Epa. The Lord my God be thanked, I owe no man any thing, but love and good
will. My chief study has ever been, to keep my self out of debt. And if at any
time I ought any thing, to labor unto the utter most of my power, to
dispatche my self of that debt withal expedition. I neue^ counted other men's
goods min^ own. That I truly got with min^ own labor, yt did I always coun^
mine own, my debtes being onc^ paid. I owe nothing, many ow^ me, but forasmuch
as they be por^ men, and can not pay that they ow^ me, except it should be unto
their great hindrance, yea I think unto their utter undoing. I freely forgive
all my debtors what so ever they owe me, unto the vttermoste farthing, even as
I would God ye father should forgive me all my debts for Christ's sake. Wryght
this, that I have forgeuen all my debts, so that none hereafter shall demand
any det of any man, in my behalf.


Phi. I have done your appoyntme^t.


EU. Neighbor Epaphro ^itus seeing ye god has richly blessed you with the goods
of this world ^t were very expedient to remember ^he pore scholars of ye
universities of Ca^bridge and Oxford. Scholars of Cambridge and Oxford.
For if they ^e not maintained, all learning and ^ertue will decay, and a very
bar^ary shall brast in among us, and at ^he last bring this our realm into
^estructio^. And verily the love of many now a days toward good letters is
very cold, in so much yt we se daily many good wits compelled for lack of
exhibition to forsake the university, and to become serving men, which kind
of life is most abominable, and vnwor^thy a good nature.


Epa. I have not in times past been altogether unmindful of the universities.
What benefits the students hau^ heretofore received at my hands I will not here
rehearse: God an^ they know it. And the knowledge thereof, I would wish rather
to b^ learned of other, then to be hear^ of me. Surely I think him (...) good
christian, nor friend unto hi^ country (which if he be able) r^^fuseth to help
forward the study of good wits. I pray you neigh^bor Philemon set in.ii. C.
pound^ of money, one. C. to be given vn^^ the university of Cambridge, the
other unto Oxford.


Phile. This Godly and charitable deed.


Epa. Have ye done?


Ph. Yea forsooth sir.


Epa. Let me se, what now remains.


Chri. Sir, will it please you to remember the poor? Poor p^^ple.



Epa. I never forgot them, since the Lord my God, gave me any portion of
worldly goods, I always considred to what use, they were given me: verily,
that I should distribute part of them to the necessity of ye pore saints. And
I thank the Lord my God, so have I don: yea, and that with a good will and
free heart. ii. Cor. ^.
For God loves a chere^ull geuer, I have not been of the mind ye some are,
which, so long as they live, gredely gather together, and bestow nothing at
all upon the poor. But when they se nothing but present death, then ^ash they
out, and liberally give unto the pore scilicet, because they ^an keep it no
longer, I trust, I have laid up for my self all ready treasures in heaven,
Math. vi.
where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through or steal. For I have ever thought it better to send my works before
me, while I live in this world, than to have them sent after me I know not by
who^, wha^ I am gone. Purgatory rakers.
These purgatori rakers shall nether rake nor scrape for me with their masses
and Diriges, when I am departed. Phil. iii.
For I trust no such works. Neither do I any thing regard ye prayers of such
as have ye belly for their God. But as touching the pore. I give unto
them.iiii. C. pounds, which I will have bestowed, no^ upon idle lubbers and
sturdy quea^nes, but upon the halt, the lame, the blind, the sick, and such
other as be comfortles. And in this no^^ber also of the pore, I comprehend
prisoners, pore maids, young me^, which have not wherewith to set up their
occupation, and my neadie neighbors. These.iiii. C. pounds are in four
several bags, lying in my countyng house by them selves, with this wryghting
upon every one of them. Money for the poor. This money I will have distributed
with all haste, if it be possible, even before I depart. Have you written in
this monye for the pore?


Phile. I have done it. Hie ways.



Epa. The hie ways may not be forgotten, which in many places are very foul
and ieopardous. Unto the repayring of them, I give. xl. pounds. Write it. For
I think this also to be a deed of charity, and a commendable worck before God
to repair hie ways, that the people may safely and without danger trauaill by
the way


Chr. The ^et is very godly without all doubt.


Ep. Neighbor Philemon, I pray you, put in that. xl. pound for the hie ways.


Phi. It is done already.


Epa. That which I should chiefly have remembered, I had almost forgotten


Euse. What is that?


Epi. Sermons.


Phile. What is your mind in that behalf? Sermons.



Epa. This. At the time of my burial, when the people be gathered together, I
would gladly have some learned man to make a Sermon, wherein the people may be
admonished of their mortality, and be taught, how they ought to dispose them
selves in this life, that when the time come, they may yield up a good soul
into the hands of the living God. For his pains I appoint. x.s. to be given
him. Also I give for the preaching of four score sermons at other times, when
it shall be thought most convenient xx. pounds. And as I with these Sermons to
be preached by godly and discrete learned men: so I wish them to be preached
in such places, as the people have most need of doctrine and teaching. For the
Lord knows, the people perish for want of godly knowledge. Esa. lvi.
The greatest part of our beneficed men (God help us) are blind guides, and
dom dogs, not once able to bark. The people are desirous to know God, and
omong the great multitude of so many beneficed men, none almost either is able,
or else endeuoreth him self to bring them unto Christ. It is in these our days
found true, that is written in the gospel. Math. ix.
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. It behooves
therefore every Christen heart to pray the Lord of the harvest, that he will
send laborers (not loyterers) into his harnest, and to procure so much as
lies in his power, that the word of God may be universally preached, that the
people may repent, turn unto ye Lord our God, and serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life, which can not be brought to pass,
where the word of God is not preached. Luke. i. Romans x.
How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not hard? How shall they hear
without a preacher? To declare therefore my good will toward the word of God,
and the salvation of the Christians, I give.xx. pounds for the preaching
of.lxxx. sermons. I pray you note it in my will,


Phi. It shall be done.


Epa. To bear all these charges, ye shall have ye money in my cou^ting house


Chr. Sir concerning the costs of your burial, what order will it please you to
make in that behalf?


Epa. Ministers.
Let ye ministers with the other officers of the church have their duties
according to the custom. Mourning gowns.



Eu. How many mourning gowns sir, will ye give?


Epa. Of what mourning gowns speak you?


Eu The manner is (as ye know) yt when a man of honest reputation departs,
and is brought to be buried, there should follow him certain in fine black
gowns, and certain pore men and women in courser cloth.


Epaph. Unequally handled, that the pore should have the worst, and the rich or
wealthy the best. And call ye these mourners?


Eu. So are they called.


Epa. For who^ should they mourn.


Euse. For you.


Ep. Why for me? Because good things have chanced unto me? Because I have
passed over ye dangerous sea, and am come unto the haven of quietness? Or
because I am delivered from al evil and set in a blessed and joyful state? I
think that at the burials of the faithful, there should rather be joy and
gladness, then mourning and sadness, rather pleasant songs of thankesgeuing:
then lamentable and doleful diriges. Let the infideles mourn for their dead:
the Christians ought to rejoice, when any of the faithful be called from this
vale of misery unto the glorious kingdom of God.


Phi. i. These. iiii.
In deed that most worthy Apostle S. Paul would not have us mourn for them that
are fallen aslepe, as the Heathen do, which know not God. Apoc. xiiii.
And s. Iho^ says in his revelation. I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto
me: wrighte. Blessed are the dad, which die in the Lord. For from henceforth
the spirit says, ye they are at rest from their labors, pains and travails.
etc. The Psalmograph also says: Psalm. cxvi.
O full precious in the sight of the Lord is ye death of his saints. Hereto
belongs the saying of the wise man. Sap. iii.
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and the pain of death
shall not touch them* in the sight of the unwise they appear to die, but they
are in peace. Again in another place. Sap. v.
The righteous shall live forever more: their reward is also with the Lord,
and their remembrance with the highest. Therefore shall they receive a glorious
kingdom, and a beutifull crown of the Lords hand. For with his rightha^d shall
he cover them, and with his own holy arm shall he defend the^. Luke. xvi.



Chri. Blessed Luke declares in his Gospel, ye so sone as Lazarus was dead,
(which in his life time, was diversely afflicted, and miserable punished with
many sores and diseases,) he was received into the bosom of Abraham, where he
enjoyed all pleasure, felicity and comfort. Such as die in ye Lord, are not to
be mourned, but God is rather to be thancked for their Christen departure. For
they are now in reast. They are with him, Esaias. xxv.
in whom alone, al glory, joy, comfort and felicity is. God has wiped away al
tears from their eyes, Apo. vii.xxi.
so that they are past al sorrow al mourning, all pain, why than should other
mourn for them, ye ar in so joyful state? The eye has not seen, Esaias. lxiiii.
i. Cor. ii.
nor ye ear has hard, neither has it entered into ye heart of man, what joys
god has prepared for them that love him. Ser. de mortalitate.



Theo. Saint Cipriane in his sermon of mortality has these words: how much it
profits to go out of the world Christ him self the author of our salvation
and prophet shows, which when his disciples were sad, because he said, John.
xiiii.
that he should depar^ from them, spoke unto them say^^ing: If ye had loved me,
ye would have reioysed, because I go unto the Father: teaching and showing by
these his words, that when our friends, whom we derely love, depart out of
the world, we ought rather to rejoice, than to be sad. Thereof the blessed
Apostle Paul, being myndfull, says in his Epistle: Phil. i.
Christ is to me life, and death is to me a vauntage. He thinks it great
advantage to be rid out of the snares of this life, when he shall be no more
subject to any offense, or sin of the flesh, but be exempted from the
afflictions that do trouble us and delivered from yt in venimed chawes of the
devil, by going unto the joy of eternal salvation, through the calling of
Christ. Also in the same sermon he says: I my self, being the most simple of
all other, have through the goodness of God diverse times, as well by Revelation
as otherwise, received instruction manifestly to affirm and preach, that our
brethren, which be delivered from the world, by the calling of God, ought not
to be mourned for, seeing they be not lost, but sent before to make the way for
us that do come after. We should not therefore covet them again which be dead,
nor mourn for the^ any otherwise, then we use to do for such as have taken
their iourny into a strange land. And for them we ought not to wear black,
sense they in heaven be clothed in white. ^po. vi.
Herein we should not give occasion unto the gentiles, yt they might justly
reprove us, when we mourn for them as dead and lost, whom we do affirm to be
living with God. etc. And a little after he says: The Apostle Paul does
reprove and blame such as do mourn at the departure of the persons y^ they
love. i. Tes. ^^^.
I would not brethren (quod he) that you should be ignorant concerning them,
which be fallen on sleep, that you sorrow not as other do, which have no hope.
If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so then, also the^ which
sleep by Jesus, will God bring again with him. He declares, that such as be
sorrowful at their friends departure, have no hope. Why should we that live by
hope, that believe in God, and trust that Christ suffered for us, and is risen
again, that remain in Christ, and be risen by him, and in him, ^e so vnwylling
to depart out of this world, or else mourn and lament such as be departed, as
though they were lost, sense Christ our lord and our God does admonish us,
^aying: John. ^^.
I am the resurrection and ^he life, he that believes on me, yea though he were
dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
die. If we believe in Christ, and trust his words and his promises, we shall
never die, but shall com with glad suerty unto Christ, with whom we shall ever
live and reign. And yt in the mean season we do die, we do but thereby pass
to immortality. For except we depart from hence, the life everlasting can not
come. Death is no departure, but a passage, to ye intent yt this worldly
journey once over run, we may come unto eternity. Wh^ will not make haste to
a better estate? Who will not desire to be changed and transfourmed into the
likeness of Christ, and to come out of hand to the dignity of the heavenly
grace? which thing Paul the Apostle does declare. Our co^uersacion, says he:
Phi. ii.
is in heaven from whence we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
which shall transform our vile body, that he may make it like unto his
glorious body. And Christ the Lord, does promise, that we shall be such, when
that we may be with him, live with him in his eternal seat, and rejoice with
him in his heavenly kingdom, he prays unto the father for us on this manner:
father I will that they, which thou haste given me, be with me where I am, that
they may see my glory which thou have given me, for ye did love me before ye
making of the world. Therefore we ^ught nether to mourn nor to la^ent for
coming unto the seat of Christ, to ye glory of ye heavenly king ^o^, but
ought rather according to ^he promise of God, according to ^he faith of the
verity to rejoice (...) our departure and transformation. Hitherto have I
rehearsed the words of. S. Cipriane, which do manifestly declare that they
which die in the Lord: are in a blessed state, Apoc. xiiii.
and therefore not to be mourned nor lamented. I fear least I have been tedius
unto you in rehersing so much of.s. Cipria^s mind concerning this matter.


Epaphro. You have rather neighbor Theophile comforted me, then molested me:
yea, you have right well confirmed my faith, and mightily encouraged me to go
unto this battle, and willingly to give over this my life, forasmuch as I am
thoroughly persuaded, that after my departure from this vale of mysery, I shall
come unto a glorious kingdom, and shall se God, face to face. And one thing I
noted in the words of. S. Ciprian, which you have reheased, and tha^ is this:
yt we ought not to wear^ black clothes and mourning gowns for them, which are
delivered from the world, and are gone to God, seeing they be clothed in whight,
and wear joyful apparel, and are in heaven with God, reigning in glory and
eternal felicity.


Euse. In deed it is a point of fondness to mourn for the^ that are in joy,
and to be sorry for them that are merry. The Apostle says: Rejoice with them
that rejoice, Romans viii.
and mourn with them that mourn. Seeing that the faithful, which are
delivered out of this world, are in ^oy: it is more semely yt we should ^oy in
God with them, tha^ mourn and be sorry for them, as though ^hey were in worse
case now, then ^hey were before. Let the Heathen ^ourne, which have no hope,
for ^he departure of their friends, the ^rue christians, which are perswa^ed,
that such as die in the Lord, are in much better case then they ever were in
this world, we ought rather to rejoice, and to singe psalms, praises, and
tha^kesgeuings unto God, for the christian and godly departure of their
brethren, and for their blessed estate, wherein God has placed them. Apoc.
xiiii.
For the holy scripture pronounces them blessed and happy, which die in ye
Lord. Psalm. cxviii.
And ye Psalmograph says: precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of
his Saints. Sap. iii.
The wise man also says, that ye souls of the righteous are in peace.


Chr. They therefore which are in so blessed estate, are not to be mourned nor
lamented, but God is rather to be thancked for them.


Th. The holy scripture declares, that king David prayed unto the Lord for the
child, ii. Reg. xii.
which he ha^ by Bethsabe, Urias wife, when i^ was sick, and that he fasted,
an^ lay all the night upon the earth, in so much that the Elders of his house
arose and went unto him, to take him up from the earth, but he would not,
nether did he eat meat with them. But when he heard that the child was dead,
he arose from the earth, and washed and anointed him self, and changed his
apparel, and came into the house of the lord and worshipped* and afterward
came to his own house, and commanded that they should set bread before him,
and he did eat. And when his servants maruelling at these things, said unto
him: What thing is this, that thou have done? Thou did fast and weep for the
child, while it was alive, and as soon as it was dead, thou did arise up
and eat. He answered: While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept. For
this I thought.

Who can tell, whether God will have mercy on me, that the child may live. But
now seeing it is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him any more? I
shall go to him, and he shall come no more again unto me. In this history yt
godly wisdom of David, is greatly to be considred. For hereof may we learn to
pray unto the Lord our God for our sick friends, so long as they be alive,
and to seek all means possible at the Lords hand, to obtain health for the
diseased. But if the good will of God be to take them out of this world, then
are we taught, here no more to mourn, to weep, to lament, and to be sorry for
them, but rather with a joyful heart to worship the lord, (as David did) and to
give him most hearty thanks, that it has pleased his goonesse to deliver our
brethren or sistern from this sinck of evils, I mean this world: and to receive
them into his blessed kingdom. Heathen like mourning, therefore, is to be
banished from the burialles of the Christians.


Euse. The manner among the Thracia^s is, The manner of the Thracians.
that when any child is borne, and comes into the world, they weep, lament
and mourn, but when it goes out of ye world, they rejoice and are merry.


Epaphr. What moves them so to do?


Euse. When a child comes into the world, they consider into what great
miseries he is like to fall, if he live: contrariwise, when he departs hence,
they know that an end of all sorrow and care, of all pain and trauail is come.
Therefore the one thing moves them unto sadness, the other unto gladness.


Phi. There is great plenty of histories, which declare, that the very hea^hen
have taken ye death of their dear friends patiently, so far is it of, that
after ye manner of some which profess Christ, they immoderatly took the death
of their friends, wept, wayled, mourned, wrong their hands, tare their hear
rent their clothes, and in manner killed them selves with sorrow and thought
taking. When our Savior, Luke xxiii.
Christ went unto his death, certain women followed him, weeping and mournyng,
to whom he said: Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children.


Theo. Is he to be lamented and mourned for which is removed from thraldom
unto liberty, from mysery unto wealth: from darkness unto light: from ieopardy
unto safety: from sickness unto health: from mortality unto immortality:
from corruption unto uncorruption: from pain unto joy: from transitory things
unto everlasting things: from the company of men, unto the fellowship of the
blessed angels and heavenly spirits. etc? Let the Heathen which have no hope
of the joyful immortality of the soul, nor of the glorious resurrection of
the body, mourn, weep, and lament for their diseased: let the faithful
Christians be joyful in the Lord, and thank God for his great mercy and
infinite goodness, which he has showed upon the brethren, by calling them from
this vale of wretchedness unto his heavenly kingdom. Apo. xiiii.
For the voice of God even from heaven, pronounces them blessed, happy, and
fortunate, which die in the Lord.


Phi. What is your mind, therefore neighbor Epaphroditus, concerning
mourning gowns?


Epaphr. If it were not for offending other, and that it should also be some
hynderaunce unto the poor, I would wysh rather to have none, than otherwise.
For I would have no man mourn for me. My trust is, that so sone as my soul
shall be delivered out of the prison of this my body: it shall straight ways
possess the blessed enheritance of the heavenly kingdom, and reign in glory
with God for ever. What need shall I have then of mourners? Or wherefore should
any man mourn for me? Notwithstanding: I will not strive with the^ for their
garments. Let my wife, and my children wear what garments they will, at my
burial, so they be such, as become the professors of true godliness. Only
this I require, that.xxx. pore men and women, do accompany my body unto the
burial, and that each of the^ have a gown of some convenient color. I will
also that.xxx. poor children be there also, and that every one of them have a
semelye gown. And after my burial, I will that both those pore men, women, and
children, come home unto my house, and have some repast, for ye refection of
their bodies. And so ^et them depart in the name of the lord. Have you written
this neighbor Philemon?


Phile. Yea sir, it is done.


Epa. I am glad of it. To se that these things may be done, according to my
will, I make my wife sole executresse, and you neighbor Philemon, with my
neighbors Christopher, Theophile, and Eusebius, here present, I make you four
mine overseers, char^ing you in the name of God, and as ye will answer before
the high judge Christ, at the dreadeful day ^f dome: yt ye se these my
bequestes ^ruely, diligently, and faithfully fulfilled.


Chr. we were twyse ungodly, if we should not satisfy your desire and will,
being so Christen and righteous.


Epa. I bequeath to every one of you four, for your pains taking, five
pounds sterling, not to the end to make you hearlinges, but that it may be a
token of my hearty good will toward you.


Chr. Sir, will it plese you to be buried in the church, or in the churchyard?


Epa. All is one to me. Psalm. xxiii.
The earth is the Lords, and all that is contained in it, I am not curious of
the place. Wherso^euer I lie, Phil. iii.
I doubt not, but ye lord our God at the last day shall raise me up again, and
give me a body like unto ye glorious body of our Lord and savior Christ
Jesus* Let the body therefore return unto the earth from whence it came and the
spirit unto God, Eccle. xi.
which gave it.


Eusebius. Your children ar^ buried in the churchyard.


Ep. Bu^y me there also. God give us all a joyful resurrection. Burials.



Theo. Sir, what solempnitie will you have at your burial?


Epa. What mean you


The. Solemn singing, de^out ringing, holy sensing, prie^es pattering,
candels lightning, ^orches brenning, Communions ^aying, and such like.


Ep. No kind of superstitious custom do I al^ow. That is godly, I only
commend. As touching your solempn ^inging, Singing.
it is all one to me, whi^her you sing or say. Those Psalms, hymns, praises
and thankesgeuinges that be appointed to be ^ong or said at the burial of ye
faith^ul, let them be done in the name ^f God wtal cherefulnes of mind. ^s for
your devout ringinge, Ringing.
I ^raue no more but one ^el to be e^her tolled or rong, for to gather ^he
people together, to hear the word of God, and the thanks g^^uing. The ringing
of the Belles can do my soul no good. And a^ for your holy sensing, priests
pattering, candels lighting, torches brennyng: away with them, a^ things
superfluous and vnprofi^table. Now as concerning Communions, Communion.
saying or singing: the^ serve not for the burials of them that are departed,
but for the exe^^cises of them that be alive, tha^ by that means they should
call t^ remembrance the death of Christ and the fruits thereof, as the Apostle
says: ^^ Cor. xi.
So often as ye shall eat o^ this bread, and drinck of the Cupye shall remember the
Lords death till he come. Note.
These sumpteous ^ costly burials, are not to be commended, nether do they
profit either body or soul, but only se^^forth a folish, vain, and boasting
pomp.


Phile. The burial of the ^aithfull, ought to be done honest^^, but not
sumptuously. Neither ^^ught the dead bodies of the chri^^ians, to be vilely
handled, but ^onestly buried, for the hope of the ^^orious resurrection. So did
A^^aham bury his wife Sara. Genesis xxiii. and.l.
Io^^ph his father Jacob, and diverse ^^her, as the holy scripture men^^neth.
The bodies of the dead, ^^ith S. Austen, Lib. 1. de C^uitate dei. Cap. xiii.
are not to be de^^sed, and to be cast away, and ^^ecially the bodies of the
righte^^s, and of the faithful, whom as ^^strumentes and vessels unto all ^^od
works, the holy ghost has ^^ed. But as concerning sumptu^^s burials,
thaforesaid author (...), ^
they rather comfort the ly^^g, the^ help the dead. As sump^^us exequies profit
nothing ye ^^ul ritche men: so in like manner (...) or no exequies at all,
hinder ^^hing the sepulture of the poor saints. That galant company o^ the
ritchemans servants (o^ whom we read in the Gospel o^ Luke) Luke. xvi.
buried their master gorgeously in the sight of me^, notwith^sta^ding his soul
was carried down into hell fire, where it lies in mos^ miserable torments. What
profited him the gorgious, galan^ pompous. and costly sepulture o^ his body:
seeing his soul lies with out redemption in those most in^tollerable flames of
that lake which burns with f^re and brim^stone? Apo. xxi.
We read not, that Lazaru^ was so sumptuouslye buried, n^ that he was buried at
all, notwt^standing the angels of God ca^^ and carried him (not into a tombe^
marble) but into the bosom of Abraham. And the golden mouth^ Doctor, says
in a certain H^^mily. ^^m. 84. in ^^. C^. 20.
When thou hear that t^^ Lord did rise again naked, ce^^^ I pray thee, and
leave of the fond and vain charges that thou bestow^est upon funerals, and
burying of dead bodies. What means this superfluous and unprofitable cost,
seeing that it hinders the^ greatly that do it, and avails nothing at all
the dead, but rather hurts them. etc.


Epa. Simply, not sump^uously, honestly, not honorably ^et me be buried. I
require no more. You have written all these things according to my desire,
^eighbor Philemon?


Phi. Altoge^her.


Ep. Then am I at a point with ^he worldly possessions, and I trust ^n a good
forewardnesse toward God


Chr. The custom in times ^ast was, Months minds and year minds
yt there should be month ^^ndes and year minds kept for the ^ead.


Ep. To what end?


Chapter That ^^e dead might be remembered and ^^ayed for.


Epa. Wherefore should ^^ey be praid for?


Chr. That their sins (say they) might be forgiven them.


Epa. Which they, say so?


Chri. The Papists.


Epa. I have nothing to do with papists, nor with their doctrine. God bless
me from them. Phi. iii.
For they are enemies of the cross of Christ, deprauers of the holy
scriptures, and corruptours of Christen souls. I believe that a man, even in
this world, has perfect and full remission of al his sins, or else he shall
never have it. God in this world, does either forgive all the faults, and the
pain due for the same: or else h^ forgeueth none at all. I fear nothing at
all, the Popes boylyng^ furnace (I mean purgatory) Chr^^stes blood, is a
sufficient purgatory for my sins. The blood ^ Christ, Gods son, has cleansed
v^ from al sin. i. John. i. Hebr. ix.
The blood of Christ has purged our conscience from dead worckes, to serve the
liuin^ God. We be sanctified, and made holy by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ done once for all. Heb. x.
With the one only oblation of his blessed body, and precious blood, has
Christ made perfect for ever and ever: them that are sancified. I require none
other purgatory to pourge and cleanse my snnes, but the blood of Christ. Ephe. v.
For Christ has offered him self aswete smelling sacrifice unto God the father
^or my sins, yea and that so perfect, absolute, consummate, and ^n all
points, so omnisufficient: that there can be found no imper^ection in it.
Christ has borne away all my sins on his body. By the stripes of Christ's
body, ^m I healed. Christ died for my ^^nnes, Esaias. liii. 1. Pet. 11. Romans iiii.
and rose again for my iu^^ification. Christ is made of God unto me, wisdom,
righteousness, ^^anctification, and redemption, that as it is written, he that
reioyseth, should rejoice in the Lord, i. Cor. i. Hier. ix.
Christ is enough for me. Let the Papists seek their salvation at whose hands
they list.


Phile. Where as the Papists heretofore have taught for the maintenance of
their idle bellies, that men's sins after their death be forgeuen the^,
through the sacrifice of that most wicked and abominable Popish Mass, and by
pilgrimages going, by tre^tals, by Diriges, by ye good deeds of other. etc. It
is a plain^ error, and against the word of God. For remission of sins, the
fauo^ of God, and everlasting life, is either gotten or lost in this world. H^
which through his own repen^tance and faith in Christ's bloud^ obtains not
forgeuenes of hi^ sins in this world: shall neue^ have it by ye means of
other (...) after this life. John. iii.
It is written, he believes on the son of God, has everlasting life. But he
that believes not in him, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. So many as die, are either faithful or unfaithful. If they be faithful,
so have they in possession straightways everlasting life. If they be
unfaithful, then does the wrath of God abide upon them, and they receive ye
reward of infidelity, which is everlasting da^natio^. And albeit this appears
manifestly of the words above rehearsed: yet the history of the unmerciful ^ich
man, and of ye pore Lazare, pain^eth it out very lively. Luke xvi.
In ye ye se, yt ^he faithful man, which was La^arus, so sone as he died, was
re^eiued into the bosom of Abraham. Contrariwyse, the unfaithful man which was
the unmerciful gloto^, ^as carried down streightwais in (...) hell fire. The like
thing is manifestly set forth in the two thieves which died with Christ. Luke
xxiii.
The one repented, believed, and called for mercy unto Christ, God and man
saying: Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom, and Christ
answered him: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Here se we that this
theife both repented and believed, for how shall they call on him (says saint
Paul) on whom they have not believed? Roma. x.
And therefore was received into glory. The other which continued in his
unbelief, and so died without repentance and faith, obtained the reward of
unbelief, that is to say: the wrath of God and eternal damnation. They
therefore that die, are either faithful or unfaithful. If they be faithful:
so have they out of hand the reward of faith, which is everlasting glory, if
they be vn^faithfull: than receive they their reward of unfaithfulness, and
misbelief, which is eternal damnation. If the Papists can find the third
kind of men (which are nether faithful nor unfaithful) then will we consent
unto their Purgatory, for such have nether place in heaven nor in hell. But
such sort of people, the holy scripture knows not. Therefore knows it not
such a place of purging after this life, as the Papists have heretofore
devised.


Eus. The blessed Apostle. Romans ii.
S. Paul says: God shall give to every one according to his own deeds. ii.
Cor. x. i. Cor. ii.
Again, to the Corinthians, he also says: Every one shall receive his ^owne
labor. ii. Cor. v.
In an other place he also says. We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ that every man may receive the works of his body according to that
he has done, whether it be good or bad. Gala. vi.
Item. Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows in
his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. But he that sows in the
spirit, shall of the spirit, reap life everlasting. Let us not be weary of
well doing. For when the time is come: we shall reap without wearines. While
we have therefore time let us do good unto all men, and specially unto them,
which are of the household of faith. Hereto agrees the saying of our savior
Christ. Math. xvi.
The son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his angels, and then
shall he reward every man according to his deeds. Again, I will give every
one of you according to his deeds. Apoc. ii.
Out of these scriptures we learn* that we sha^ not be rewarded according to
other men's deeds, but according unto our own deeds. If we have wrought
nothing at all in our life: what shall other men's deeds than do us good, after
our death? And I doubt whether any man (Christ alone excepted) have good deeds
sufficient for him self.


Chri. If we consider well the history of the ten virgins, Mat. xxv.
it shall easly be perceived, that no man have scasely oil enough for him
self. Yea, were not the great mercies of God set forth to all faithful penitent
sinners in ye precious blud of Christ: we with all our oil, should perish. For
everlasting life is the gift of God, Romans vi.
through Jesus Christ our Lord. If thou (O Lord) should narowly look upon
our iniquities, (says the Psalmograph) O Lord who were hable to abide it?
Psalm. ciii*
But there is mercy with the in store. etc.


The. The holy scripture moves us to do good while we are alive, and not to
trust other men's works, to be done for us, when we be dead. Eccl. xiiii.
The wyseman says: do good unto thy friend, before thou die, and according to
thy ability, reach out thine hand, and give unto the poor. Be not
disapoynted of the good day, and let not the portion of the good day ouerpasse
the. Shall thou not leave thy trauails and labors unto other men? In the
dividing of thy heritage, give and take, and sanctify thy soul. Work thou
ryghteousnes before thy death, for after thy death, Eccl. xviii
there is no meat to find. Again: Abide thou not in the error of the ungodly,
but give God thanks before death. As for the dead, thanckfulnes perishes from
him as nothing. Give thou thanckes in thy life, yea, while thou art living and
whole shall thou give thanks, and praise God, and rejoice in his mercy. O how
great ^s the loving kindness of the lord, and his merciful goodness unto ^uch as
turn unto him? Pro. iii.
Salomo^ ^n his proverbs says: withdraw ^o good thing from them that have
^ede, so long as thy hand is able ^o do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, go
thy way and come again: ^o morrow will I give thee, where ^s thou have now to
give him. Hereto agrees the saying of the ^reacher: Eccle. ix.
whatsoever thou art a^le to do, do it out of hand, for in ^he grave that thou
go unto: here is neither work, counsel, knowledge nor wisdom. The prophet
also says. Esa. lv.
Seek the Lord, ^^hyle he may be found, and call upon him, while he is nie.
Let the ^ngodly forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so shall God be merciful unto him.
Our savior Christ says in the Gospel. I must work the worckes of him that
sent me, John. ix.
while it is day. The night comes, when no man can work. Walk while we
have light, least ye darkness come on you. John, xii.
etc. While ye have light, walk in the light, that ye may be ye children of
light. I say unto you, make you friends of the unrighteous Mammo^, that when ye
shall have need, Luke. xvi.
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. That servant, Mat. xxv.
which received one talent of his Lord, and gained nothing therewt, but went
his way, and hid it in the ground; was cast into utter darkness, where wepinge
and gnashinge of teeth shall be. The.v. folishe virgins, because they had no Oil
in their lamps, were not suffered to enter into the marriage. Moreover the most
worthy Apostle. S. Paul says. Gal. vi.
While we have time, let us do good unto all men, and special^y unto them,
which are of ye household of faith. These and diverse other textes of the holy
scripture move us to do good our selves, while we be alive in this world, and
not to trust the works of other to be done for us, when we be dead. For by our
own works, and not by other men's, shall we be judged. Every man shall bear his
own burden. Every man shall receive the works of his own body according to yt he
has done, whether it be good or bad: Gala. vi. ii. Cor. v.
every man shall receive his reward according to his own deeds. Behold I come
quickly (says our savior Christ) and my reward is with me, ii. Cor. iii.
Romans ii. Apoc. xxii.
yt I may give to every one according as his work shall be.

And saint John pronouncing them blessed, Apoc. xiii.
which die in ye Lord, says on this manner. Their works follow the^. He says
not, other men's works shall follow the^, when they be dead, but their own
works do follow, and presently accompany them* as the shadow does ye body,
even unto ye throne of Gods majesty, to be testimonies and witnesses of their
true and unfeigned says. They therefore are to much fond and negligent of their
own salvation, which trust other more then them selves in matters pertaining
unto the health of their souls.


Chri. There is an old saying in Latin, and as I thinck, no^^les true tha^ old.
It is this. Da tua, dum tua sunt, post morte^, tunc tuae non sunt.

Give thy goods while they be thine, for after thy death, they be none of
thine.


Euse. I remember when I was a child, I learned.ii verses of my scholemaister,
which I have not yet forgotten, I will rehearse them unto you. Quod sibi
quisque serit, praesentis te^pore vitae
Hoc sibi messis erit, cum dicitur Ite, Venitae.


That a man sows for him self in ye time of this present life, that shall be
his harvest or reap, when it is said: Go, Come.


Epap. What mean you by that, Go: Come.


Eu. You know that to the unfaithful it shall be said, Mat. xxv.
go ye cursed in to everlasting fire, which is prepared for ye devil and his
angels. But to the faithful, it shall be said on this manner: Come ye blessed of
my father, possess the kingdom, which was prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world.


The. S. Paul has a sentence much like unto your verses: Gala. vi.
whatsoe, ^er a man sows, says he: yt shall he also reap. For he that
sows in his flesh, shall of the flesh, reap corruption. But he that sows
in the spirit, shall of ye spirit reap life everlasting.


Phil. It is not without cause, that the holy scripture does so diligently call
us unto repentance, faith, and good works in this present world. For
everlasting life even in this world is either gotten or lost. As God finds
us, so judges he us. Every tree is known and judged by her own fruit, and
not by the fruit of other trees. Every man likewise is judged by his own
works, and not by the works of other, as Christ says to the unprofitable
servant: Luke. xix.
Of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou evil servant. Teophilact says.
Mat. xxv.
The virtue of my neighbor shall scacely be enough to defend him self, so
far is it of,
that it can profit me also. For all men shall be declared to be righteous by
their own works, and not by the works of their neighbors. Eccle. xi.



Euse. The Preacher says. When the tree falls (whether it be toward the
Southe or north) in what place so ever it fall there it lies.


Epap. What is meant by that.


Euse. The tree signifies every one of us, yt are the children of Adam. We fall,
that is to say we die, either toward the south, or toward the north, that is,
either in the state of salvation or damnation. In what state soever we die, in
the same remain we. There is no change after this life. Either with poor
Lazarus we go into the bosom of Abraham, Luke. xvi.
or else with that unmerciful rich man into the fire of hell. There are but
two places after this life, hell and heaven. If we depart in the faith of
Christ, we go straighawayes unto the glory of heaven. But if we die in
unbelief, than go we to the Devil, as the scripture says. He that believes on
ye son, has everlasting life. John. iii
But he that believes not on the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides upon him.


Christo. S. John Chrysostom says, he that washes not away his sins in
this present life, shall find no comfort afterward. etc.


Theph. The same doctor also has this saying. Let us not think (says he)
that when we come thither (he means unto the judging place of God) mercy shall
be given unto us, seeing we do not so behave our selves in this world that we
may deserve to have forgeuenes, though Abraham should pray for us, though Noe,
though Job, though Daniell should make intercession for us. Therefore while we
have time, let us prepare for our selves, that which may stand us in stead a
fore God an other day.


Eus. Hereto agrees the saying of S. Ciprian: Then (that is to say, Tract.
(...) demet
after death) shall repentance be without fruit, and the sorrow of pain,
weping also shall be in vayn, and prayer shall be to no purpose. Therefore make
provision, while ye may, for your safeguard and life. Again he says. When we be
once departed out of this world, there is no more place for repentance, there
is no effect of ^atisfaction. In this world life is either lost or gotten.
Here through the worshipping of God, and the fruit of faith, provision is made
for everlasting salvation.


Epa. I se than both by the authority of ye holy scriptures, and of the
ancient doctors, that the works which are done for them that are departed
out of this world by other, are but vain and unprofitable, whether they
depart in faith, or otherwise. For ye faithful depart straightwaies unto
glory, and the unfaithful unto everlasting pain. The one sort have no need of
prayer, for they be already in most blessed state and joyful reast. And the
other are in so damnable case, that prayer can do no good for them, no though
Abraham, Noe, Job, Daniel, and all the best that ever lived should pray for
the^. For in hell there is no redemption. And Abraham said to the rich man.
Luke. xvi.
There is between us and you a great space set, so yt they, which would go from
hence unto you, cannot, neither may they yt are there come hither unto us.


Phi. The truth is neighbor Epaphroditus, ye papists have long bewitched the
eyes of ye simple, Purgatory a place of the Papists devising.
by making the^ believe, that the souls of the faithful go not straightwaies
after their departure, unto eternal glory, but rather unto purgatory, a place
of their own devising for the maintenance of their idle bellies, there to lie
miserably puling, til they be redeemed by tre^talles, by pilgrimages going, by
pardons. etc. Our savior Christ in the gospel teaches and makes mention of
two ways. But ye third is not found in the holy scripture. One is a straight
way, Math. vii.
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. The other is a broad
way which leads unto destruction, and many there be yt go in thereat.


Ep. I believe and am throwly persuaded, yt by yt merits of his precious blood,
which said unto ye penitent thief, Luke xxiii.
this day shall thou be with me in paradise, my soul immediately after the
departure from this vile body, shall be received unto glory, and ^se ye
glorious majesty of God, Psalm. xxvii.
face to face, as ye Psalmograph says, I believe to see the pleasures and good
things of the Lord in the land of the living. I fear the Popish purgatory and
the pains thereof nothing at all. My pain ends in this life. And the end of
this life is the beginning of my joy. This hope lies up buried in my breast.
Therefore will I have neither month minds nor year minds kept for me, nor no
idle Papists and superstitious Massemongers sing or say for me. For I doubt
not, but that the Lord my God has prepared me a vessel unto honor, and has
written my name in the book of life, and has also made me his son and heir
of eternal glory, Sap. v.
this is enough for me.


Chr. The righteous (says the wyseman,) shall live for evermore, their reward
also is with ye Lord, and their remembrance with the hiest. Therefore shall they
receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown of the Lords hand.


Epa. Neighbors, now am I at a point with the goods of ye world, yea and with
the world it self, so that I may say with the holy Apostle: The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.


The. He is an happy man and greatly blessed, Gala. vi.
which forsakes and gives over the world, before the world forsakes him.
For such obey this commandment of S. John. Love not the world, i. John. ii.
nor those things that are in the world, albeit I doubt not (neighbor
Epaphroditus) but that you shall right well recover your health, and live yet
many years among us.


Epa. No neighbor Theophile. The end of my life is at hand. And I most
heartily thank the Lord my God for it. Phi. i.
For I wish to be losoned out of this life, and to be with Christ. Psalm.
xliiii.
Like as the heart desires the water brokes, so longs my soul after thee, O
God. My soul is a thurst for God, yea even for ye living God. When shall I come
to appear before the presence of God* O how amiable are thy dwellinges, Psalm.
lxxxiiii.
thou Lord of hosts? My soul has a desire and longyng to enter into the
courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh rejoice in ye living god. I had
rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, the^ to dwell in the tents of
the ungodly. O blessed are they, Psalm. cxlii.
yt dwell in thy house (O Lord) for they will be always praising thee, (O lord)
deliver my soul out of the prison of my body, that I may come and give thanckes
unto thy blessed name. Deal with me (O lord) according to thy will, Tob. iii.
and commau^d my spirit to be received in peace. For it is more expedient for
me to die the^ to live.


Phile. I greatly rejoice in the Lord my God, good neighbor Epaphroditus, to se
you in so good a mind, and to hear so godly words proceed out of your mouth.
These things are evident testimonies of your good conscience toward God. Fear
you not, the Lord has sealed you with his hol^ spirit, and made you through
his mercy, a vessel unto honor.


Epa. Now that an order is taken concerning my worldly possessions, I wish to
have my wife, and my children with my servant brought hither unto me, that I
may take my leave of them, and commend them unto ye lord my God. I pray you
neighbor Eusebius call them hither.


Euse. It shall be done.


Epa. Oh, how sick am I? My wekenes increases more and more. Lord be
merciful unto me, A prayer.
and give me grace patiently and thank fully to bear this Cross, and in the
mids of this my sickness, always to say. Thy will, O heavenly father be done
and not mine.


Phi. Be strong in the Lord, good neighbor, Math. xxvi.
and faint not, and you shall see the wondrous works of God. For God will
either shortly restore unto you your health: or else make an end of this your
pain by taking you from this wretched world, and place you in his glorious
kingdom.


Epa. God grant. But is my neighbor Eusebius come again?


Chri. Yea sir.


Epa. Where is he?


Euse. Here sir am I.


Epa. Where is my wife and my children and my servants?


Phile. They are all here present.


Epaphr. The sickma^s exhortation unto his wife
COme hither wife. You see in what case I lie here, sick, weak, and the
prisoner of God, loking every hour for my departure out of this world. And
this visitation of God is unto me welcome, and I thank the Lord wtal my heart
for it. I doubt not, but that when I am once gone out of this wretched life, I
shall be in a far better case then ever I was in this world. Therefore I pray
thee good wife, be not heavy, neither take thought for me, but rather pray,
that ye good will of God may be done in me. And be as well contented, that I
should now at the calling of God go from thee, as ever thou wast to have me in
thy company, I have run my raze. I have passed those years, which the Lord
appointed that I should live in this world. And now is the time of my departure
come. And I give over this my life willingly, and with a free heart. Therefore
take no thought for me. And doubt thou not (sweet wife) but if ye go forth
to live in the fear of God, and to please him, God in the time of thy
wyddowhod will be an husband unto thee. He will be thy patron and defender. He
will be thy mighty shield and strong buckler. He will provide and before see, that
thou and thine shall want no good thing. Psalm. cxlv.
For he has promised in his holy word, that he will take charge of the widows
and defend their cause. Exo. xx. Esa. i.x. Iere. v.xii. Zach. vii James. i.
He has also given a strait commandment to the magistrates and head rulers,
to look unto wydowes, and to deliver them from oppression. And his holy Apostle
says, that ye pure and undefiled Religion before God ye father, is to visit,
help, and comfort widows. Therefore I doubt not but the Lord our God, will
abundantly provide for thee and thine. Notwithstanding wife, forasmuch as from
the first time o^ our marriage unto this present day thou have always been unto
me a true, faithful, honest, diligent, and serviceable wife. I have made the
mine Executresse, and given unto thee in my will, such a portion as shall
aboundau^tly satisfy thee, both unto the bringing up of thy children, and also
unto the maintenance of hospitality: God has sent me enough, Psalm. xxxiii.
and therefore I leave unto thee and thine enough. I pray God send you always
his fear before your face, so shall you never uant. To forbid the marriage
after my departure according unto the property of some husbands, I will not.
ii. Cor. vii.
For the holy Scripture says: the wife is bound unto the marriage, as long as
her husband lives. If her husband die, ^he it at liberty to marie with whom
she will, only in the Lord. If thou therefore after my depar^ure (O wife, have a
mind to marye again, marry in the name of the lord our God. For I know, as
the wise man says, Sa^. viii.
that no man can live chaste, except God gives the gift. Only have this care,
that he, with whom thou do determine to couple thy self in the blessed
state of honorable wedlock, be such a man as fears God* loves his word, is
well reported of his neighbors, deals ryghteoussly with all men, embraces
virtue, despises vice. etc. Follow not the manners of certain old dotinge
wydowes, which for bodily lust in their old crooked age, couple the^^selues to
yonkers, which might right well have been their children, and unto whom they
might also have given suck. But to what end such marriages come for the most
part, daily experience teaches. The one marieth for bodily pleasure, the other
for covetousness. Such marriages are not blessed of God. Choose thee therefore
such an husband as loves thee, and not thy goods only, as is equal to the in
condition, state, and age, as also will tender my children, and be a father
unto them, and see them brought up in ye fear of God, and in ye knowledge of
his blessed word. Pray unto God, and he shall give the good success in all thy
trauayles, look diligently to the ver^uous education and brynging up of my
children. Graffe in their parts so much fruit of Gods spirit, as is possible,
and wede out of their minds all kinds of vice and wickedness, that their
breasts may ^e made the Temples of the holy ^host. Look well unto thy servants.
Give them their couenauntes, and ^uffer them not to be idle. So go^erne thy
household, yt there may ^e found in it no vice but virtue, no wickedness but
godliness, no sin but honesty and christen be hauour. And be thou thy self,
an example of godly life to thy children and servant: so may thou be sure
to have obedient children and faithful servants. Yea so shall y^ be well
reported of thy neighbors, and be loved both of god and al good me^.

The sickma^s exhortation unto his children
Now my children, come ye hither unto me, God bless you, and send you many,
yea and those joyful and quiet days upon the earth. Ye see in what case I am,
sore, sick, and very weak, abiding the good pleasure of God. The end of this
my life is come, and I am glad of it, and most heartily thank the lord my God.
Let it not dismaye you, (my most dear children) that I shall now be taken
away from you. For albeit, that I being your natural Father, shall no more
serve you nor provide for you, as hitherto I have done, yet doubt ye not, but
if ye go forth, as ye have begone, to fear God, and to serve him, he will
not leave you comfortless, but in my stead he will be a father unto you,
receive you into his tuition, and provide better for you than ever I was able
to do. Therefore if ye will have God a merciful and gentle father unto you:
fear him, love him, honor him, serve him, pray unto him, call on his
blessed name, be thanckfull unto him for his benefits, and in all things
seek to please his godly Majesty. Give your minds to the reading of the holy
scriptures, and what so ever ye read therein, practice it in your ^ife and
conversation. Be not only favorers, but folowers also of ye word, not only
lovers but also ^iuers of the gospel, not only professers, but also practisers
of gods holy law, so shall God bless you, and al good men love you. Avoid
idleness and to much childish pastimes. Let no time of your life pass away
without fruit. Escheue all evil company, and have nothing to do with them,
that be ungodly. Desire always the fellowship of them that be good and virtuous.
Have all your whole confidence and trust in the Lord your God. Take nothing in
hand, before ye have craved his help by fervent prayer. And after the thing
done, give God most hearty thanckes, knowledging him to be the geuer of all
good things. The Saboth day, and such other feastiful days, spend them
holily and godly. Give your selves to prayer, to hearing of Sermons, and reding
the word of god. Se that ye defile not the name of ye Lord your God with vain
and unlawful oaths. Reverence your elders, Honor your mother, be obedient
unto her pray for her, do for her, whatsoever lies in your power, that God may
bless you and give you long and joyful life upon the earth. Be no evil
speakers. Be courteous and gentle unto all men. Let no lightness appear in you,
nether in gesture nor countenance. Be true and faithful. Cast away all pride,
and embrace humility. Avoid superfluous eating and drinking. Use temperance in all your doings. Be not moved unto anger, but be pacient and ready to forgive.
Be merciful to the poor. Help all men to the uttermost of your power. Study
to do good unto all, and to hurt none. Love all me^, yea even your very
enemies. Be not overcome of evil, Romans xii.
but ouercom evil with goodness. If ye observe these few lessons, ye shall
continue in the favor of God, and God as a most merciful father shall bless
you and cause you to prosper on the face of the earth.

BUt now hear thou my son the words of thy father, The sickma^s exhortation
unto his son.
and imprint them well in thy memory. Of all the sons that God has given me
since I was married to this thy Mother, thou alone art left a live. And I
thank God for thee. For in thee lies the hope of my posterity. Look therefore
yt thou seruest God all the dais of thy life, yt thou may be the father of
many children through the blessing of God. If thou do rese^ble me as in
countenance and lineamentes of body: so likewise in manners and conditions of
life and conversation, it shall not repent me to have begotten such a son:
nether shall it forthynke thee to have had such a father. Tob. iiii.
Take heed therefore that thou do not degenerate and grow out of kind.
Honor thy mother all the days of her life. Pray for her, and do for her
whatsoever lies in thy power. Remember yt God has appointed thee to be the
staff of her old age, nether forget thou what and how great pains she has
suffered for thee. Proverb. i.
Beware of riotous company, and have alwais the fear of God before thine eyes.
Eccle. vi.
Keep company with such as have understanding, and lean unto their wisdom and
counsel. ii. Tim. ii.
Be sober minded, and eschew the lusts of youth, but follow ryghteousnes,
faith, love, and peace: with them that call on the Lord with a pure faith. When
thou shall come to the possession of such worldly substance, as I have
appointed for thee, through ye goodness and liberality of God: look that thou
do use, and not abuse thy goods. Spend in measure, and as present necessity
shall require. Beware of superfluous expenses. Avoid banketting and delicious
fare. Prou. xxi
For whosoever loves delicately to fare, shall come to poverty. Thinck that
well spent, that is honestly spent in thy own house. Extraordinary
bankettinges look that thou flee, remembering that, that, which is gotten
through long time, is consumed in a very little space. Tob. iiii.
Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from the pore, so shall it
come to pass, that the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from the.
Be merciful after thy power. If thou have mutch, give ple^teously, if thou
have little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little. For so gatherest
thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessity. For merci delivers
from all sin and from death, and suffers not the soul to come in darkness. A
great comfort is mercy before ye hie God unto all them that show it. In the
time of thy youth take heed thou defilest not thy self with whoredom, but
bring an honest and chaste body unto the blessed state of honorable wedlock.
And when the ripenes of thy age does require ye to marry: take heed whom thou
chosest to be thy yokefellow. Follow not the corrupt manners of ye wicked
worldlings, which in chosing their wives, have their principal respect unto
the worthiness of the stock: unto the welthines of the friends, unto riches,
beauty, and such other worldly vanities. Consider thou rather ye godliness than
the worthiness of the maids parents, the honest and virtuous bringing up of
her, her chaste and sober behauoure, her Christen and godly manners, her
modesty, gravity, sobriety, and womanlines, her faith, obedience, humility,
silence, quietness, honesty, howsewiuelines, and such other fruits of Gods
spirit. Let her be no Papist, nor Anabaptist. nor Epicure, but one of the
household of faith, and such one as fears the Lord God unfeignedly. With such
one couple thy self in the fear of God, Pro. ix.
and know her to be the gift of God, as Salomo^ says: house and richesse may
a man have by the heritage of his elders, but a discrete wife is the gift of
the Lord. Therefore when thou art once joined with her in ye holy order of
Matrimony: seek after no strange flesh, beware of whoredom, Pro. v.
entangle thy self with no other woman's love, but be glad with ye wife of thy
youth. Let her breasts always satisfy thee and hold thee ever content with her
love. And if God send thee children thank him for them, Ephe. vi.
and study to bring them up in the fear, nourtour and doctrine of the Lord,
that they may learn to know God, eue^ from the very cradels. Colos. iiii.
Order thy household godly and honestly. Cherish thy servants, and give them
their couenauntes, remembering yt thou also have a master and Lord in heaven.
Love thy neighbors, dwell quietly among them. Luke. vi.
Lend unto the^ gladly whatsoever they need, if thou have it. Oppress not thy
tenaunts. Raise not thy rents. Take no incomes nor synes. Be content with the
old and accustomed paimentes. Bring up no new customs. Maintain the
lawful liberties of ye town wherein thou dwell. Be no unprofitable member of
the common wealth. Diffame no man, but speak well of al men. Hurt no man, but
to the uttermost of thy power be beneficial to all men. ^ob. iiii.
Let never pride have rule in thy mind, nor in thy word, for in pride began al
destruction. Who so ever works any thing for thee: immediately give him his
hire, and look that thy hired servants wages remain not by the ouernight.
Math. vii. Luke. vi.
Look that thou do never unto an other man the thing, that thou would not
another man should do unto thee. Tob. iiii. Esaias. lviii.
Eat thy bread with the hongry and poor, and cover the naked with thy clothes.
Ask ever counsel at the wise. Col. iii. Tob. iiii.
Be always thanckefull unto God, and beseech him, that he will order thy ways,
and that whatsoever thou deuisest or take in hand, it may remain in him. My
son do these things, and God shall bless thee, and prosper all thy doings.

WHat shall I say unto you my little Daughters? The sickma^^ exhortation unto
his daughters.
I pray God bless you* and make you joyful mothers of many Children. Serve
God. Obey your mother. Be diligent to please her. Give ear to her wholesome
admonitions and follow them. Do nothing without her counsel and aduisement.
When your age shall require to be married, follow the counsel of your mother,
and other of your faithful friends, which wish you to do well, in choising your
husbands. Take heed ye be not corrupted with the gifts of noughty packes, nor
deceived with the flattring tongues of wicked and unthrifty persons. For many in
these our days seek not the woman, but the woman's substance. Couple your
selves with such as fear God, love his word, and be of honest report. And
when ye be once married, Ephe. v. Colos. iii. ^. Pet. iii.
reverence your husbands, know the^ to be your heads and governors appointed
of God, obey them, and submit your selves unto them. Hebr. xiii.
Suffer not your love to depart from your husbands, neither know any man
besides them, but keep the bed undefiled, yt your Matrimony may be honorable
and pure in the sight of God, and of his holy congregation. And if God blesses
you with children, look yt you bring them up in the glory of God in his fear
and doctrine. Engraffe in their young breasts, even from their tender age, virtue,
godliness, and good ma^ners, look well unto your household, and be an example unto
your maids of godliness and honesty. Be no gadders abroad, nor haunters of
Tauernes, but keep your houses continually, except some earnest and lawful
business provoke you to go forth. Be no bablers nor vain talkers, but for the
most part use silence. 1. Tim. ii.
For silence is an orname^t and precious Jewel unto a godly woman. Aparell
your selves in comely array, with shame fastnes and discrete behauioure, not
with broyded hear, either gold or pearls, or costly garments, but as it
becomes women yt profes godliness through good works. Let the hid man, i. Pet.
iii.
which is in the heart be without all corruption, so that ye spirit be at rest
and quiet, which spirit before God, is a thing much set by. For after this
manner in the old time did the holy women, which trusted in God, tier them
selves, and were obedient to their husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham and
called him Lord, whose daughters ye are, so long as ye do well. If you observe
these few lessons, which I your sick father have now given unto you: doubt ye
not, but ye shall right well prosper and live a joyful and quiet life on
earth. Yea God shall be your father and defendor. Well, stand a side a little
while. Gods blessing be with you. Come hither ye my servants.

The sickma^s exhortation unto his servants. i. Par. xxix
SIrs, ye see in me what shall be the end of all flesh, even a departure from
this world. For we are but strangers and pilgrims on the earth, as our fathers
were before us. Hebr. xiii. and.ix.
We have no continuing city here, but we seek one to come. The ordinance of
God is, that all men shall once die. There lives no man, Psalm. xxxix.
that shall not die. A man in his time is but grass, and flourishes as a
flower of the field. Our life is even a vapor that apeareth for a little time,
Hebr. xi.ix. Psa. lxxxix. Psalm. ciii. Esaias. xi. James. iiii.
and then ^anisheth away. On this condi^ion came we into the world, that we
should leave it again. We have ^een sure of death, ever sense we were conceived
in our Mothers womb. These things do ye now ^e practiced in me: ye time of my
departure out of ye world is at hand. I thought it good therefore to send ^lso
for you, and to take my leave of ^ou, til we mete again in ye king^om of God. I
thank you for the ^ood service yt ye have done me. I ^aue not forgotten your
seruisea^le hearts and good wills toward ^e. If the good pleasure of God ^ad
been, that I should longer have ^ontinued with you, I would have ^onsidred your
service better. But ^ have given to every one of you ^uche portion of money, as
shall de^are some part of my thanckefull ^ well willing heart toward you? This
now remains to be craved at your hands. As ye have hitherto faithfully,
truly and honestly served me in my life time, even so after my departure, so
long as ye^tary here, show the like faithfulness, truth and honesty toward
your mistres. Consider, that as long as I lived, I was a stay unto her, and
unto her things. But now her chief hope next unto God, consists in you.
Therefore I pray yo^ look well unto the things, which appertain unto her. Se
that nothing go to wast. Provide that through your diligence, her things may
rather increase then decrease. Ye know rightwell the duty of a good servant,
notwithstanding even at this my departure from you, I will put you in
remem^braunce of it, that when I am gon^ ye may yet remember my admonitions,
and the more spedely aunswe^ unto your vocation. The duty of a good servant
The duty of a good servant is to serve his master and mistres willingly and
with a fre courage even for conscience sake, Ephe. vi Collos. iii. i. Tim. vi.
Titus. ii. i. Pet. ii.
not with the eye, but with ye heart, to obey them, to honor the^, gently to
answer them, not to pick or steal away their goods, but to be faithful
unto them in all thingee. Se therefore yt ye on this manner behave your selves
toward your mistres: avoid al stubbernes, churlishnes, cursed speakinges,
telling of tales, lying, picking, wast, idleness, negligence and sluggishnes.
Eschew all evil and riotous company. Fly dronkennes and whordome. Abstain
from vain oaths and folishe pastimes. So behave your selves in all your life
and conversation: that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of.
Yea, let the light of your godly behauioure so shine before men, i. Tim. vi.
that ye may do worship to the glorious gospel of our savior Christ in all
things. Titus. ii
And in thus serving your mistres with a glad, ready and faithful will,
think your selves to serve the Lord your God, and to do that thing, which
is pleasant in his godly sight, and that he also will se your pains
recompensed, Collo. iii.
as the holy Apostle says: ye servants be obedient unto the^, that are your
bodily masters in all things, not with eye service, as men pleasers, but in
singlenes of heart fearing God* And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as though
you did it to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing, that of the Lord ye shall
receive the inheritance, for ye serve ye Lord Christ. But he that sins,
shall receive according unto his sin. For there is no respect of persons
with God. If ye serve your mistres truly and faithfully, hereafter when ye
shall your selves be householders. God shall likewise send you true and faithful
servants. But if ye serve her falsely and ungodly: then shall ye of your
servants be likewise served hereafter. Luke. vi.
For with what measure that ye mete withal, shall other mete to you again,
says our Savior Christ. Live therefore according to your vocation in the
fear of God, and ye shall prosper right well. God shall bless you, and never
leave you succourles, as the holy man Toby says. Tob. iiii.
Be not afraid, truth it is, we lead here a pore life, but great good shall we
have if we fear God and depart from all sin, and do well. Well, the blessing
of God be with you, I am very faint:


Ph. No marvel. For ye have talked a great while.


Epa. I trust, my talk has not been evil.


Phil. Forsooth it has been both good and godly. I pray God give both them and
all us grace to follow these your most wholesome and christen admonitions.
But sir, will it please you to take your leave of your wife, children and
servants, and give your self to reast for a little while? Peraduentur it shall
do you much good.


Epaphro. Sleep I can not. And I am loathe to let them go from me. For the
sight of them is comfortable unto me, and as me thincketh eases my pain.


Chri. God comfort you and ease your pain.


Epa. Before they depart from me, I wysh greatly even in their presence to
confess my faith, yt both you and they may be witnesses before God and the
world, that I die a Christen man.


Phile. Although we nothing doubt thereof, yet we greatly desire to hear the
confession of your faith, that we may be able to testify hereafter, that you
departed in yt faith of Christ.


Epa. Hear then.

I Unfainedly believe with my heart, The sick^^^ faith.
and freely confess with my mouth that there is one only true, Esa. xiiii. i.
Cor. viii. Math. xx^^^ i. John. ^
living, immortal and everlasting God, God the father, God ye son and God
the holy ghost.iii. distinct persons in the godhead, and notwithstanding one
very God in substance, of like majesty, glory, might power, judgment and will.

As touching the first parson in the deity, Of God the father.
I unfeignedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my mouth, yt he is
the God, which alone is the father not only of our Lord and savior Christ
Jesus, ii. Cor. i. Psalm. ii. Ephe. iiii. ^
whom of him self from everlasting, he begot his natural son, and therefore
likewise true and immortal God, but also of all ye faithful, not by nature
but by adoption, whom he has chosen to be his children in Christ Jesus before
the foundations of the world were laid, to love, favor cherish, comfort,
norish, govern, defend and bless the^ both corporally and spiritually. This
God the father I believe and confess to be almighty and hable to do, Gene. xvii
Psalm. cxv. Mat. xix. ^ach. viii. Apoc. xvi.
whatsoever his godly will and pleasure is* With him all things are possible.
There is nothing to hard for him to do, neither is any thing impossible in
his sight. This God the father almighty I believe and confess, Gene. i. Psalm.
lxxxix.
that he is the creator and maker of heaven and earth, and of all things
contained in the^. Of nothing by his wonderful and almighty power made he the
heavens with the blessed angels and heavenly spirits, that are in them. The One
he chose to be his glorious seat, the other he made to be his Ministers, to do
his blessed will and holy commandment.

This God the father almighty made also the earth of nothing with her
increase, Esaias. xliii.
and gave breath to the people that are in it, and spirit to the^ that dwell
therein. The heavens, the earth and the sea, with all that ever is contained in
them, are the creatures of this God the father almyghtye, created unto this
end, even that they should set forth, magnify, praise, and commend the
majesty, power, might and glory of this most mighty and glorious god. Prou.
viii.
And whatsoever he made, he made it through his only begotten son, by who^ al
things were made and without whom was made nothing yt was made. John. i.
For when he made the heavens, this his only begotten son was present, when
he hanged ye clouds above, when he fastened the springes of the deep, when he
shut the sea within certain bounds, that the water should not go over the
marckes that he commanded. When he laid the foundations of the earth, he was
with him, ordring all things, deliting daily, and rejoicing always before him.
For the son of God caused the iyght that fails not to arise in the heaven,
Eccl. xxiiii.
and covered all the earth as a cloud. Psalm. xxxiii
And that prince like Prophet says: By the word of the Lord (which word is
Christ the natural son of God) John. i.
are the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by ye breath of his mouth.
This God the father almightye maker of heaven and earth, I believe and am fully
persuaded, that he for Christ's sake (by faith) is my most merciful father,
i. Pet. i.
and that I am borne again of him not by mortal but immortal seed through
the word of God, which, lives and abides for ever, and so am become his
son, and that he therefore loves and favors me, governs and defends me,
^eadeth and nourysheth me, and finally, has made me his heir and fellow heir
of eternal glory with his only begotten and most derely beloved son Christ
Jesus our Lord and savior. Roma. viii.
Now have ye heard my faith concerning God the father.


Phil. It is a faith both true and christen, and from the beginning received of
all godly parsons. Will it please you likewise to rehearse your faith concerning
Jesus Christ ye son of God, yea God and man.


Epaph. This it is.

I unfeignedly believe, Of God the son.
with my heart and freely confess with my mouth ye, Jesus Christ the second
person in the godhead is the only Math. viii and.xvii.
begotten son of God, John.i.
yea and true, immortal and everlasting God, Romans i.
begotten of God the father before any beginning, Hebr. i.
of like majesty, might, power, and glory with God the father, Collos. i.
of the same nature, essence, being and substance. Jesus.
I believe that this Jesus Christ which is the very brightness of his fathers
glory, and the very image of his substance, first begotten before all
creatures, is our Lord, even the Lord of all ye faithful. Math. i.
And I believe that as he is called Jesus, that is to say, a savior: so
likewise he is both able and will save me from al my sins. A God that is
righteous, Esaias. xlv.
and such one as saves, there is none but he. Act. iiii.
There is salvation in none other. Iere. xvii.
Neither is there any other name under heaven given unto men, wherein we may be
saved, but only the name of Jesus. Of him therefore alone as of an almighty
savior do I look for my salvation. Psalm. ixx.
For vain is the saving health that is looked for of any other. And as he is
called Christ, Christ.
ye is to say, anointed, because he is the King and Priest of all the people
of God, and is anointed with the true ointment, John. iii.
eue^ with the fulness of the holy ghost (for God gives not the spirit by
me^ure unto him, Psa. xlv.
but he has anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows) eue^ so
do I believe, that out of him even as out of a lively spring and flowing
fountain, this oil of gladness, I mean the holy ghost, come forth upon all
the members of Christ, and they also in him, and tho^om him are made Christ's,
that ^s to say, the anointed of the lord. For of his fulness have all we
received, even grace for grace. John. i.
And whosoever believes on him (as says the scripture) John. vii.
floods of living water shall flow out of his belly. As I am of this Christ
called a christian: so do I believe, that this Christ has anointed me with his
holy spirit, and therewith also sealed me up unto everlasting life* For they
that are led with the spirit of God, are the sons of God. For the same spirit
certifieth our spirit, Math. viii.
that we are the sons of God. If we be sons, then ar we also heirs, the
heirs I mean o^ God, and fellow heirs with Christ of eternal glory.

Furthermore I believe, tha^ Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God, is
called our Lord not only because he is Lord of al^ things, in as much as he
is Go^ and has all things in subjection unto him by the right of his di^uine
nature, but also because h^ is the Lord, ruler and governor of all the elect
and chosen people of God, and myghtely delivers them from the power, violence
and tyranny of Satan, sin and death by this means making them his own and
peculier people, and continually defends and preserves them against all
evils and perils, whereunto they should daily fall through the deceitful
suttelties of Satan, the vain persuasions of the world, and the poysonfull
entisements of the flesh, if by the mighty power of him they were not preserved.
i. Cor. viii.
For although there be many lords yet have we but one lord, eue^ Jesus Christ,
by who^ ar althings and we by him. And this Jesus Christ ye only begotten son
of god, I faithfully believe to be my lord, my protector, my mighty shield,
bukler and defender, and yt he has delivered me from the tirany of Satan from
ye law of sin and death, Romans viii. Romans v.
and brough^ me in through faith unto this grace, wherein I stand and reioys^
in hope of the glory of God.

Of Christ's humanity.
Moreover I unfeignedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my mouth that
this Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God, Hebr. iiii.
is also very true and natural man, of the same flesh and blood with us, and
like unto us in all points, sin alone except. Esaias. vii.
And he became man not after the manner of other men, but by the wonderful
operation, and above natural working of Gods natural spirit. Math. i.
For he was conceived of the holy ghost, and borne of the Uirgin Mary. That
which was conceived in her, was not of man, but it came of the holy ghost. Luke
i.
For ye holy ghost came upon that godly maid, and the power of the hiest
ouershadowed her, and so conceived she and brought forth Christ her true and
natural son, a pure and undefiled Uirgin before the birth, in the birth, and
after the birth. Psalm. ii.
It was necessary, that Jesus Christ should be so both conceived and borne, Romans
v.
that by this his pure and clean birth, Ephe. ii.
he might wash and put away the corruption and filthiness of our nature,
which was distained in the fall and ^inne of Adam. For it was not co^^enient,
Job. xiiii.
that he which was come ^o purge the world from all sin, ^huld in any point
be spotted with ^iune, Eccl. xxxiiii.
but that both his conceptio^ and nativity should be so pure and without
blemish, Psalm. ii.
that by the pure^es thereof, the filthiness and corrup^ion of our conception and
nati^itie might be put away. Ephe. ii.
For of ^e unclean, who can be cleansed? ^ll we be unclean in Adam both
^^ncerning our conception and ^rth, for after yt God had made man like unto his
own similitud^ and Image, Gene. i
he placed him in paradise, Gene. ii.
and gave him liberty t^ eat of all the fruits in the garden of pleasure,
except ye tree of knowledge of good and evil. Gene. iii
But man disobeyed the Lord his God, and transgressed his holy commaund^ment.
Roma. v
Through the which disobedience and transgression of God^ holy commandment,
Ephe. li
sin, curse and death came over al mankind so that now in Adam so many a^ are
borne after the common cours^ of nature, are begotten, conceived and borne in
sin. John. iii
They are the children of wrath, and defiled wit^ all uncleanness both bodily and
gho^ly. Psalm. ii
Now when there was no he^ nor comfort for man, whereby ^ might be redeemed out
of Satan power, and delivered from his i^^tollerable miseries, Gene. vi.
wherewith ^ was to much wretchedly wra^^ped and brought into slavery (for now
man wtal his thoughts, imaginations, devices, words, deeds, enterprises. etc.
is become through the sin of Adam: wicked, vnpure, ^ilthy and sinful) then God
that merciful father had pity upon mankind, and promised them a sede, even
Jesus Christ his only begotten son, Gene. iii
which should tread down the head of the serpent, overcome ^he devil with all
his power, and re^tore us to life again. Psalm. ii. Psalm. cxiv Titus, ^
And likewise as god is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
and ^rue and faithful in all his words: ^uen so has he kept al his promi^es
truly. Gala. iiii
For when the time was (...) he sent his only begotten (...) dearly beloved
son into the ^ombe of the virgin Mary, Math. i. Luke i.
where of whom through the working ^f the holy ghost, he became flesh, ^^at is
to say, true and natural man, as the scripture witnesses saying: John. i.
The word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw his glory, as the glory
of the only begotten son of the father full o^ grace and verity. He brought
no^ his body with him from heaven (as certain heretics affirm) bu^ as he
received all his divine nature and substance of God the fa^ther alone: even so
likewise did h^ take all his human nature and substance of the pure virgin
Mary alone, through the wonderful operation of the spirit of God, Romans i.
a^ S. Paul says, he was borne o^ the sede of David after the flesh Again
he says, Hebr. ii.
he that sanctif^^eth, and they which are sanctif^^ed, are all of one. For
which ca^^ses he is not ashamed to call the^ brethren, Psalm. xxii.
saying: I will declare the name to my brethren, and in the mids of the
congregation will praise thee. And again I will put my trust in him.

And again. Esaias. viii.
Behold here am I, and the children which God has given me. Forasmuch therefore
as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also him self likewise
took part with them, for to put down (through death) him, ye had lordship over
death, that is to say, the devil, and that he might deliver them, which
through fear of death were all their life time in danger of bondage. For he in
no condition takes on him the angels, but the sede of Abraham takes he on
him, wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be merciful, and a faithful hie Priest in things concerning
God for to pourge the peoples sins. Hebr. iiii.
etc. This only begotten son of God by taking flesh of the Uirgin Mary,
became like unto us in all things, sin alone except. Psa. ii.
I believe that by his pure conception and undefiled nativity, my conception,
and my birth, which coming from Adam, Ephe. ii.
was altogether vnpure and defiled, John. iii.
is cleansed, and that no part of that sinful birth is imputed unto me, John.
i.
but ye through faith in this most blessed sede of the Uirgine, Romans viii.
I am born a new and begotten of God, so that he is my father, and I am his
son, and therefore enheritor also of his heavenly kingdom.

Furthermore I unfeignedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my
mouth, yt this seed of the woman Jesus Christ, at the commandment and will
of his heavenly father (which from everlasting by his godly providence
ordained his only begotten son, to be a sacrifice for the sins of his
people, that through his only oblation they might for ever and ever be saved)
suffered many grievous pains on his body under the Heathen ruler Pontius Pilat,
and that he was crucified, died and was buried. All those bitter pains and
grievous torments he suffered, not for him self, but for us, for our iniquities,
sins and wickednesses, that he might reco^cile us unto God the father. His
pains satisfied for the pains due unto us for our faults, Esaias. iii^
as ye prophet says, he only has taken on him our infirmities, and borne
our pains. Mat. xxviii.
He was wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickednesses.

For the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and with his strypes
are we healed. i. Pet. ii.
As for us, we have goone all astray (like sheep) every one has turned his own
way. But ye Lord has heaped together upon him the iniquity of us all. He was
cut of from the ground of the living, which punishment did come upon him for
the transgression of my people, says God, which in deed had deserved that
punishment.

Ephe. ii.
He was crucified and nailed to the cross, that by the suffraunce of his
flesh, he might put away the cause of hatred, even the law of commandments
contained in the law written, and so wyn us again unto the favor of God.
For it pleased the father, Collos. i.
yt in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to reconcile all thing unto him
self, and to set at peace by him through the blood of his cross, both
things in heaven and things in earth. Collo. i.
His blessed body crucified, and nailed to the cross, buffeted, beaten and
scourged was a sweet smellyng sacrifice and a right dear offering unto God the
father, Ephe. v.
sufficient enough and hable to the vttermoste to put away all the sins of
the faithful and all the pains due for the same. It satisfied at the full the
justice of God, and apeased his wrath, sturred up through sin against the
posterity of Adam, and made God of an angry Lord and righteous judge a most
merciful father and gentle savior. Nether need the faithful go for salvation
unto massemongers, unto iusticiares unto monkish hipocrites, nor yet unto
saints. The sacrifice of Christ's body, which he him self that everlasting
priest offered on the altar of the cross to God the father, is a plenteous,
full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world,
if they repent, believe and amend. We need no such daily sacrifices, as the
Papists hearetofore for lucres sake have devised. As Christ Jesus is an
everlasting Bishop, Hebr. ix.
so abides his sacrifice, which he once for all offered on the Cross, of full
virtue, power, might and strength, even unto the end of the world. Jesus
Christ yesterday, Hebr. xii.
and to day, and the same continues for ever. For as much therefore as Christ
endures for ever and has an everlasting Priesthode: Hebre. vii
he is able also ever to save them to the uttermost and unto the full, that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. For he
is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands (which are
similitudes of true things) but is entered into very heaven for to appear now
in the sight of God for us, not to offer him self often, as the hie priest
enters in to the holy place every year with strange blood, for then must he
have often suffered sense the world began. But now in the end of the world
has he appeared once to put sin to flight by the offering up of him self.
And as it is appointed unto all men, yt they shall once die, and then comes
the judgment: ii. Pet. iii
eue^ so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto them
that look for him shall he appear again with out sin unto salvation. We are
sanctified and made holy by the offeringe of Jesus Christ's body done once
for all. Hebr. ^
With one only oblation has Christ Jesus made perfect for evermore them that
are sanctified. Adue therefore to all new counterfaict and strange sacrifices
devised for lucres sake, by the crafty conueyance of man through the subtle
suggestion of sly Satan, let the faithful people of God embrace that
sacrifice, that offringe of Christ's blessed body, which he him self offered
unto God the father on the altar of the cross once for all, for the sins of
the world. Let them cleue and stick unto that. Let them repose their whole
affiaunce, and put all trust in that sweet smelling sacrifice, and say with
the holy Apostle, God forbid, Gala. vi.
that I should rejoice in any thing, but in ye cross, passion, and death of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So may they be sure never to perish, but to have
everlasting life.

Again. This Jesus Christ the son of God, and the son also of the glorious
virgin, after that he had suffered many bitter pains and grievous torments
having upon the cross, died the death of the body and was buried. I believe
that Christ by his death has conquered, Hebr. ii.
vanquished, subdued and overcome him that had Lordship over death, that is to
say, the devil, that he might deliver them, which through fear of death were
all their life time subdued unto bondage. Yea by his death Satan's power is so
broken, and the violence of death so weakened, that we may be bold to say.
Death is swalowed up into victory. Death where is thy sting? i. Cor. xv.
Hell, where is thy victory. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is ye law. But thanks be unto God which has given us wictorye through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Christ after the death of his body went down in his soul to hell, Of
Christ's going down to hell. Psalm. xv. Act. ii. zach. ix.
as clearly appears by the ^criptures, not that he should there ^uffer mo
pains (which had all ready on the cross suffered to the vttermoste and done
whatsoever was needful for our redemption) Osee. xiii i. Pet. iii
but to break the pride of Satan and to destroy the fury of the hellishe
powers against the chosen people of God, that all the faithful thereby might be
delivered from death and hell, Ose. xiii.
and triumphantly say with the Prophet, O death I will be thy death, O hell, I
will be thy destruction.

Of Christ's resurrection. Romans iiii Psalm. iii. Ose. vi. Act. iii. Romans i.
And likewise as Christ died for our sins, so I unfeignedly believe with my
heart, and freely confess with my mouth, that he rose again the third day
through the power of his father, for our justification according to the
scriptures. And by this his resurrection and life, he has not only showed him
self a glorious and triumphante conqueror over Satan, ii. Tim. ^
death and hell, but he has also brought life and immortalltie unto light, and
assured us of the resurrection of our bodies, that as he is risen from the
dead, so likewise shall we with our bodies rise again out of the earth at the
last day. i. Cor. x^
And therefore is he called the first fruits of them that are fallen aslepe.

Moreover I unfeignedly believe with my heart, Of Christ's Ascension.
and freely confess with my mouth that as Jesus Christ the son of God, and
the son of the Uirgin Mary, showed him self oftentimes after his
resurrection unto his disciples: Mark. xvi Luke. xxiiii Act. i. Romans viii*
so likewise he ascended unto heaven in their presence perfect God and perfect
man, and sits at the righthand of God ye father almighty, above all rule,
power, might and dominion, Ephe. i.
and above all yt may be named, not only in this world, Collos. ii.
but also in ye world to come. For God the father has put all things under
his feet, and has made him above all things the head of the congregation,
Math. xxviii
which is his body, and the fulness of him, that fills all in all. Al power
is given unto him both in heaven and in earth. Apo. xix.
He is a lord above al lords, and a king above all kings. i. Timo. vi.
Yea he is an almighty God with his father, of ye same Majesty, might, power
and glory, and not withstanding inasmuche as he is man, he is also our
intercessour, Romans viii. i. Tim. vi. i. John. ii.
mediator, and advocate. For he is not gone up into heaven to be an idle gaser,
nor to neglect his church, but to pray for the faithful to make intercession
for them unto God the father, to be our mediator and advocate, and to appease
the wrath of God the father, if at any time through sin it waxes whote
against us, and to win us again unto his favor, and to keep us in the same
unto the end. Christ is a sufficient mediator, advocate, and inter^cessour.
We need not seek help of other, neither yet call on the saints departed
that they may pray for us, and plead our cause before God. The man Christ
Jesus alone, i. Tim. ii. i. John. ii. Romans viii. Hebr. vii.
which gave him self a raunsom for all men, is our sufficient mediatoure,
advocate and intercessour as the holy scripture teaches in diverse places.
Whosoever therefore refuses to pray unto this man Christ Jesus to be his
mediatoure and advocate unto God the father, and ^leeth unto other: without all
doubt, he is an ennemy unto Christ, and to the vttermoste of his power, he
^aboureth to make Christ (as they ^se to say) Jack out of office. For since
the time of his ascension ^is chief and principal office is to ^e our
intercessoure, mediatoure, and advocate.

He ascended also into heaven Psalm. lxvi.
to lead captivity captive, and to give gifts unto men. Ephe. iiii
Satan that old enemy of mankind had taken us captive, made us his bond slaves
through sine, carried us away with his craft and subtlety from the Lord our
God, and brought us in to his kingdom of darcknes, which is the dreadful
kingdom of sin, death and hell. Thus were we in great misery, and should for
ever have been damned, if we had not been helped by some other means, then we
withal our wits could devise. Luke. xi.
Therefore even of very pity and tender compassion came one, which is much
stronger the^ Satan, Apoc. v.
even Christ that mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah, a right conqueror, Osec.
xiii.
a strong Sampson, a valiant subduer of death, sin, and hell, a puissaunt
vanquisher of Satan. i. Cor. xv.
etc. He as a king of glory mightily brast into Sata^s kingdom, brake open the
gates of hell took the Prince of darkness, Hebr. ii.
bound him, took him prisoner, made him his bound slave, destroyed his Empire,
led away his prysonners, bringing them again into most joyful and blessed
liberty, so that al they, which believe in this most mighty Emperor and
valeaunt conqueror Christ Jesus: John. iii.x^^
are delivered from the tyranny of Satan, and from the power of sin death and
hell. Roma. ^*
There is no damnation now unto them, which are engrafted in Christ Jesus.
Satan, sin, death and hell withal the infernal army cannot hurt ye elect
and chosen people of God. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? Roma. ^^^
It is God that justifies* who is he that can ^ondemne? It is Christ, which
died, yea rather which is risen again, which is also on the rightha^d of God
and makes intercession for us. Who shall then seperat us from the love of God?
etc.

Psalm. lxviii.
And as Christ by his most glorious and triumphant Ascension has led captivity
captive: so likewise has he given gifts unto men, Ephe. iiii.
even that holy ghost, that spirit of truth, that comfortoure, which works
in the hearts of the faithful new mocions and spiritual affectes, Ioh.
xiiii.xv.
faith, hope, love, fear, humility, modesty, mekenes, patience, Gala. v.
Roma. viii.
long suffering, joy, peace, quietness of conscience, tem^peraunce, goodness,
mercy. etc. It mortifieth the old man, and quieneth the new man, which is
renewed unto the knowledge and Image of him, Collos. iii. Ephe. iiii.
yt made him* which after God is shapen in righteousness and true holiness.

Again Christ ascending up in^to heaven by ye power of his godhead, has
prepared in the kingdom of his father everlasting and joyful dwelling places,
for so many as believe in him, as he him self witnesses, Ioh. xiiii.
saying: I go to prepare a place for you, and I will come again unto you, and
take you unto my self, that where I am, ye also maybe. He has also
ascertained us of our ascension, and going up into heaven, not only in soul
but also in body. He corporally is risen again and gone before into the
glorious kingdom of his father, to declare that we also after the general
resurrection shall both body and soul be carried into heaven. The members must
needs be like the head. Christ our head is risen again, therefore shall we his
members rise again. Christ our head is ascended and gone up into heaven both
body and soul: therefore shall we his members ascend and go up into heaven both
body and soul also, Christ our head was taken up into Heaven in a cloud both
body and soul, therefore shall we his members also be taken up in a cloud to
meet the lord, and so shall we both body and soul dwell with the Lord Christ
our head for ever and ever, i. T^^. iiii.
as the holy Apostle testifies, saying: If we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so them which sleep by Jesus, God will bring again with him. i.
Cor. xv.
For this say we unto you in the word of the Lord, that we which shall live,
and shall remain in the coming of the lord, shall not come yer they which
sleep. Math. xxiiii.
For the Lord him self shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and the voice
of the Archaungell and trompe of God. Dan. xii.
And the dead in Christ shall arise first: then we, which shall live (eue^ we
which shall remain (shall be caughte up with them in the clouds to mete the
Lord in the air. And so shall we ever be with the Lord.

Finally I unfeignedly believe with my heart, Of Christ's coming unto the
judgment.
and freely confess with my mouth, that as the Lord Christ is ascended into
heaven: so shall he come again from heaven with power and much glory, nobly
accompanied with thousands of blessed* Angels and heavenly saints, for to
judge the quick and the dead, the faithful and unfaithful, and to give*
every man his reward according to that he has done, Acts. i.
whether it be good or badde. Ephe. Ind.
And when he thus gloriously shall come unto the judgment, Apo. i. Acte^. x.
ii. Corin. v
all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they
that have done good, Ihon. v.
unto the resurrection ^f life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation. Math. xxv
The faithful shall go into eternal life, Dan. xii.
the unfaithful into everlasting damnation. Roma. iii
Every man shall be reward according to his deeds, that is to say: praise,
honor and immortality to them which continue in good doing, and seek
immortality. But unto the^, that are rebels, and that do not obey the
truth, but follow unrighteousness, shall come indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguishe, upon the soul of every man that does evil.

Now have ye heard of my faith concerning Jesus Christ God and man. And I
believe al things that I have spoken to be undoubtedly true. Note.
And I am fully persuaded, that Jesus Christ my lord and savior wrought all
the things yt ever he did in his humanity for me and for my salvation. To
save me to reconcile me unto God the father, to make me enheritour of
everlasting glory, he came down from heaven, was incarnate by the holy ghost,
and borne of the virgin Mary. Yea he ^uffred, was crucified, died, went down to
hell, rose again the third day from the dead, ascended unto heaven, and shall
come again unto judgment for me, for my sake, for my glory, and salvation.
Thus have ye heard my faith concerning God the father, and God the son,
which also is man, receuing his humain nature of the glorious virgin Mary.
Romans ^



Eus. Whosoever this believes and confesses of God the father, and of his
son Christ: John. xvii
the same can never perish. For as our savior Christ said unto God the
father in his prayer: This is everlasting life, even to know thee ye alone true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.


Chr. The wise man also says: Sap. xv.
To know the (O god) as perfect righteousness.

God says by the Prophet, yea to know thy rightousnes and power, is the root
of immortality.


Theo. By the knowledge of him, Esdr. iiiii
which is my righteous servant, he shall justify the multitude.


Phi. God grant us the true knowledge of his son Christ, so may we be sure
to be justified, saved and gloryfyed.


Epa. Amen.

But now hear also my faith concerning the third parson in the deity, which
is the holy ghost,


Chr. We hear you gladly.


Epa. Of God the holy Ghost. Genesis. i Psalm. ii. Math. iii.
I unfeignedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my mouth, that the
holy ghost is one and equal God in glory, majesty, power and might with the
father and the son, proceading from the father and the son after an unknown
and vnexpresseable manner. John. i.
This spirit of God and God him self is he, Mat. xxviii
by whom God the father through his son Christ and in Christ works and
quickneth all things. John. xv and. xvi.
All the benefits and graces which God the father bestows upon us for
Christ's sake, i. Ihon. v. John. iii
this holy ghost brings the^ unto us, and makes us new vessels to receive
them, which otherwise even of nature are so fleshly minded, i. Cor ii.
that we perceive nothing at all of those things, ii. Cor. iii
which pertayne unto the spirit of God, Gala. v
neither are we able to think a good thought of our selves. Phill. ii
For this godly spirit works in us new motions and new affectes, John.
xiiii xv. and. xv^
and gives us grace both to will and to do good. He is a teacher of all the
faithful, and leads them into al truth. He is a confortour of weak and
sorrowful minds.

He keeps the true christians vnmoneable in one faith, i. Cor. xii
and opens their senses to understand ye mysteries of God aright. Act. x.
He does clothe them with his gifts, and gives to every one a several gift
even as he will. He is the ruler of the Christen congregation. He is the
anoyntment, i. John. ii Psalm. ciiii. Ephe. i.
wherewith all the faithful are anointed, and thereof are called the anointed
of the Lord. He is given unto the faithful to be the earnest of their
enheritaunce for the recovering of the purchased possession unto ye praise of
his glory. He with his godly breath quickens, makes alive, and conserueth
all things. He of carnal makes us spiritual, of worldly godly, of wicked
blessed, of the bond slaves of Satan, the dearly beloved sons of God, of
sinful sinckes, his own most pleasant and holy temple, of cruel meke, of
proud: humble, of malicious: charitable, of contentious: quiet, of covetous,
liberal, of hard hearted: meke spirited, of froward: gentle, of stubburne:
obedient, of dissolute: temperat and sober, of false: true, of folish: wise, of
idle: godly occupied, of unchaste: pure and clean, of the haters of God: the
friends of God, of the lovers of pleasures: the lovers of godliness, to end, he
makes us of earthy: heavenly. Whatsoever goodness we have, he is the alone
author, worker and geuer of the same. Therefore I believe and confess that this
holy spirit is one and equal God with God the father and God the son,
proceading from them both with like majesty, glory, might and power. I believe
that this holy ghost is my comforter, and that he prays for me, renueth me,
dwells in me, and has sealed me up unto everlasting glory. Now have ye
hard my faith and my beilefe in the father, and in the son, and in the holy
ghost, which.iii. I believe and confess to be one God, whose seat the heaven
is, and whose fotestole is the earth. Esaias. ^xvi Acts. vii. Psalm. cxlv.
Deuter. vi. John. iiii. Esa. xliiii.
He is an everlasting and almighty God, which alone is to be honored and
served in spirit and truth. For he alone can help us forasmuch as he is
almighty, and will help us because he his merciful true and faithful, yea and
that not for our rightousnes, but for his names sake. i. Timo. i.
To this one, true, living, everlasting immortal, invisible, and alone wise
God, king of kings and Lord of Lords, be all honor and glory, worlds
without end. Apoca. iiii



Thy. Amen.


Epa. Thou art worthy (O Lord) to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou
haste created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and were created.
Blessing and glory and wisdom, Apoca. vii.
and thanks and honor and might, be unto our God for evermore.


Chr. So be it.


Epa. Simply and plainly have I here before you all rehearsed my faith and
belief in God and in the three parsons of the Godhead, as I have here tofore
learned it of gods most holy word.

I confess that many things mo might be spoken of the wonderful mysteries
of this most blessed and holy Trinity, but they far exceade my
understanding, and therefore I dare not meddle with them. Pro. xxv.
For it is written, he that is a searcher of the Majesty, (of God) shall be
oppressed of the glory (thereof. Eccle. i^^
) Again: Seek not out the things that are above thy capacity, and search
not the ground of such things as ar to mighty for thee, but look what God
has commanded thee: think upon that always, and be not curious in many of his
works. For it is not neadeful for thee, to se with thine eyes the things that
are secreat.


The. The holy Apostle also counsels us to be modest, Romans xii.
and sober, and that we be not curious to search after the knowledge of
things, which pass our capacity.


Eu. The holy psalmograph seems to have followed this counsel well, which
says on this manner of him self: Psalm. cxxxi.
Lord I am not hie minded, I have no proud lokes, I do not exercise my self in
great matters, which are to hie for me. But I refrain my soul, and keep it
low, like as a child that is weaned from his mother, yea, my soul is even as
a wened child, O Israel trust in the Lord from this time forth for evermore.


Phil. Neighbor Epaphroditus, there remain yet behind mo articles of the
Christen faith, Have you forgotten them?


Epap. No good brother Philemo^, God forbid I should forget them. For in them
(next unto God) lies now my chief consolation and comfort. Should I being in
this case forget the holy congregation of God, which is the company and
fellowship of the saints and chosen people of God, of whom Christ ye Lord is
the head, ruler and governor? Should I in this my sickness forget the hie and
singular benefits of God, which of his own fre mercy and mere goodness he
liberally gives to al faithful penitent sinners, namely remission of sins,
the Resurrection of the body, and life everlasting? God forbid. God forbid. For
the remembrance of these things comfort me greatly. I will therefore
(although my wind begins to wax short, and it is painful unto me much
for to speak) declare my faith concerning these Articles.


Eusebi. God strengthen you.


Chri. Amen.


Epa. As I unfeignedly believe with my heart, Of Christ's Church or congregation.
and freely confess with my mouth, that there is but one God, in whom alone I
put al my confidence, trust and hope of salvation, and at whose hand only I
look for all good things, pertaining either unto the body or unto the soul:
Canti. vi.
so likewise I both believe and confess, that there is but one holy universal
church or congregation of the faithefull, all be it they be despersed and
scattered abroad through out the world in diverse and sundry places, i. Corin. i
which are gathered and knit together through the operation of the holy ghost
in the unity of the spirit, Roma. xii.
and joined together in one faith, as members of one body, Collos. ^.
whereof Jesus Christ is the head. This holy Church or congregation lynked
together in the fellowship of the holy Ghost is a spiritual house, i. Peter.
ii.
builded of living stones, a chosen generation, a royal Priesthod to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, an holy nation, a
people which are won that they should show forth the virtues of him, which
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light, this Church is the
congregation of the living god, the pillar and ground of truth. i. Tim. iii.
This holy company are Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God,
Ephes^. ii.
and are builte upon ^he foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
him self being the head corner stone.

This Church is the spouse of Christ, and knows none other husband and head
but Christ alone. John. x.
This blessed company are these sheep which gladly hear ye voice of their
shepehard Christ, but they fly from the voices of strangers.

Ephe. iiii.
And as they are one body and one spirit, so confess they on^ Lord, one
faith, one Baptisme^ one God and father of all.

i. Cor. i.
There is among them no dissen^tion, but they maintain one truth preach one
doctrine, speak on^ thing, are of one mind and of on^ meaning. This holy
Catholik^ church or universal congregation is that holy city, Apoc. xii.
that new Hieru^salem, which came down from God out of heaven, prepared as ^
bride garnished for her husband And because no man shall doub^ of what Church
I speak, What the church is.
I con^fesse that to be the holy Catholik^ and Apostolic Church, which is
the company and fellowship of the saints, that is to say of the faithful,
which are sanctified and made holy by the spirit of God, and by the blood of
Christ our savior, i. Cor. vi.
which have the pure word of God truly and sincerely preached, Math. xviii.
and the Sacraments duly and faithfully ministered among them, i. Cor. v.
which excommunicate all disobedient notable sinners, ii. Cor. ^^
and receive into their fellowship such as unfeignedly repent and turn from
their wickedness, i. Tim. i^^
which study in all things to please the Lord God, and to live in all
godliness and honesty. This church and company Christ loved so dearly, Ephe.
v.
that he gave him self for it to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain
of water through ye word to make it unto him self a glorious congregation
without spot or wrincle, Cant. iiii.
or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. Whosoever
is in this church and congregation: he may be sure to besaued. But whosoever is
not in it, he is without all dout damned. Gene. vii.
For like as in ye time of Nohe no man escaped with his life, ii. Peter. ii,
but was drowned in the flood, except he entered into the Arcke of Nohe: John.
xv
Even so whosoever is not found in this fellowship or Catholic Church,
agreing with it in one faith, doctrine, hope, love, and sacraments, he shall
pearish and be lost. For without the Church of Christ there is no salvation,
no forgeuenes of sins, no favor of God, no quyetnes of conscience no true
Gospel, or glad tidinges of eternal health.

Therefore in this holy Church and blessed fellowship of the saints and
faithful, I unfeignedly believe with my heart and freely confess with my mouth
that there is remission and forgeuenes of sins, Of the forgeuenes of sins.
and that without it, no sin is forgeuen, nether is there any hope of
salvation. For as it is impossible that a member can live which is not in the
body, so it is impossible that any man may live in his soul, and be released
out of death by remission of sin, which is not a member of the body of
Christ. Ephesi. ^
For Christ has reconciled us al unto God his father in one body. Ephesi. i.
And therefore must all they stand at variance with God, Ep^^^. ^
that are no members of this body of the which Christ is the head, to the
which also he gives salvation. This therefore is a great conforte to the
faithful congregation, that allthough through infirmity of nature or
otherwise they do fall, of^end God and break the Lords commandments: yet in
this company there is remission and forgeuenes of sins, so sone as ever they
repent, be sorry for their sin, and believe to have remission of all their sins
for Christ's precious bloudes sake. Sin we never so often and never so
grievously, yet being members of this holy company, we are straight ways
forgeuen and delivered a paena and culpa, from the pain and the fault, Math. ix
Mark* ii Luke. v.
so sone as we turn unto the Lord our God. And these our sins be not
forgiven of men, but of God alone, neither forgeueth he part and reserueth
part, but he forgeueth all or else none at all. Again he forgeueth not the
fault, and reserueth the pain, but with the fault he also forgeueth the pain
due for the fault, that he may be an whole and perfect savior, as s. John
says: If we say we have no sin, ^. John. i.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But if we confess our
sins. God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to make us
clean from all iniquity. And God himself says by the Prophet: Iere. xx^
I will forgive their misdedes, and will never remember their sins any more.
Esaias. xliii.
Again, I am he, yea I am he alone, which put away thy iniquities, yea, and
that for mine own sake, and I will remember thy sins no more. And king
Ezechias in his prayer unto God said: it is thou (O Lord) that cast all my
sins behind thy back. Esaias. xxxviii
The Prophet Miche also says: Miche, vii
Where is there such a God as thou art? that pardonest wickedness, and forgeuest
the offenses of the remnaunt of thine heritage? He keeps not his wrath for
ever. And why? his delight is to have compassion. He shall turn again and be
merciful to us. He shall put down our wickedness, and cast all our sins into
the bottom of the sea.

I faithfully believe that I am a member of Christ's church, and I am also fully
persuaded, that al my sins be forgeuen me of God the Father, John. i
not for my merits, which are none, but for Jesus Christ's sake, Iere. xxxi
Esaias. xliii
for Christ's merits passion, death, and bludshedding. For grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ says the holy Evangelist. Mich. vii
And I believe, Psalm. xxxii.
that God for his sons sake has so freely and wholly forgeuen me all my
sins, that he will never remember them more, never impute the^ unto me, nor
lay them to my charge, but so receive me into his favor, as though I had
never offended him and make me his son, and heyer of everlasting glory. Roma.
vi.
For everlasting life is the gift of god through Jesus Christ our Lord
says the Apostle. This is the stay and quientes of my conscience at this
present. This makes me not to fear death, Philem. i
but joyfully to look for it, Psalm. xlii.
and lovingly to embrace it, when soever it comes. For I wish to be losoned
from this mortal body, and to be with Christ. Psalm. cxix.
My soul has a fervent desire to God even unto the Lord my god. Deliver my
soul, O Lord, out of prison, that I may come unto the, and glorify thy holy
name.

For albeit this my weak, feeble, sick and mortal body shall give over to
nature, and die, yet I vnfamedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my
mouth, that at the last day it shall rise again, as the bodies of all other, Of
the resurrection of the body.
both me^ and women, that have died, shall likewise do. There shall be a general
resurrection of the flesh. Esdr. xxvi.
All that are dead, shall rise again, some to everlasting life, Eze. ^xxvii
Dan. xii
and some to everlasting pain and damnation, as our savior Christ says:
John. v
The hour shall come, in the which all yt are in the graves, shall hear the
voice of the son of God, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto
the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection
of damnation. ii. Cor. xv
Yea they that shall live and remain until the coming of our Lord and
savior Christ Jesus, shall all be changed, yea and that in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye by the last trompe. For the trompe shall blow, and the
dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed, for this corruptible
body must put on vncorruptibilitie, and this mortal body must put on
immortality. Therefore I fear nothing at all the putting of of this body: for
although it slepeth in the earth for a time and according to the ordinance of
god be turned into dust, yet shall it awake and rise again out of the earth:
so that I shall receive it in a far better state, then ever I had in it this
world, even like unto the glorious body of our Lord and savior Christ Jesus.
Phil. iii.
Wherefore I say with the holy man Job, Job. ix.
I believe that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the
^atter day, and that I shall be clo^hed again with this skin, and se God my
savior in my flesh. Yea, I my self shall behold him, not with other eyes,
but with these ^ame eyes. This hope is steadfastly ^et in my heart.

To end, Of everlasting life.
I unfeignedly believe with my heart, and freely confess with my mouth, that
after my body and soul be united and knit together, I with all the faithful
that have lived from the beginning unto the very end of ye world shall through
the benefit of Christ Jesus, enjoy everlasting life.

Sapien. iii
So many as have truly believed on Christ Jesus, Dani. xii Mat. xxii
shall enjoy continual and blessed peace, glister as the shining of heaven, ^e
as the stars world without end, ^poca. iiii
yea they shall be clad with white garments, and have golden crowns upon their
heads. Psalm. lxxxiiii
They shall glorify God and do service day and night before the glorious
throne of his majesty. They shall se God face to face, Apo. iiii.v.
and for ever and ever enjoy the presence of Gods most excellent Majesty, ^.
Cor. xiii.
and the compa^ny of all the heavenly Angels and blessed saints.

Of the joys of everlasting life, which God has in store for all faithful
beleuers, can no man either write, speak, or think at ^he full, Esai. lxiiii.
as it is written: the eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, nether
have entered into the heart of man, i. Cor. ii
the things which God has prepared for the^ that love him. Roma. v^
And this everlasting life is the gift of god through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be all honor and glory for ever and ever.


Theo. Amen.


Epa. Thus have I declared before you my faith concerning God and his holy
mysteries, grounded, I trust, on the true and vndeceyueable word of God. And I
faithfully believe, that God my heavenly Father will be merciful unto me, and
forgive me all my sins for Christ's sake, and receive me into his heavenly
kingdom, and give me everlasting life, which I now most entirely desire, wish
and long for, counting my self then most happy, which through death I shall
take my passage toward that most glorious and heavenly kingdom. ii. Cor. v
For I know and am fully persuaded, that if my earthy mansion of this dwellinge
were once destroyed, I should have a building of God, an habitation not made
with hands, but everlasting in heaven.


Chri. God give us all that heavenly mansion.


Euse. Amen.


Epa. Well, come thou hither mine own dear wife, Wife.
let me kiss thee, and bid thee farwell. God keep thee and defend the. Children.
Come ye hither also my most sweet children, that I may kiss you also before I
die. God bless you, and send you prosperous days on thearth. God give you
his spirit, that ye may live in his faith, fear, and love, Luke i.
and serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of your life. Servants
Ye my servant, draw nere, give me your hands. Far ye well. God make you his
servants, and send you obedient hearts unto his holy and blessed law. Weep
not for me, but pray for me, that the will of God may be done in me, and that I
may both patiently and thankefully abide the good pleasure of God. I trust we
shall have a joyful meting again together in the kingdom of our heavenly
father, where we shall reign one with an other in joy and glory worlds
without end, i. Cor. xii^
and se the glorious majesty of God face to face, i. John. iii.
unto our exceeding consolation and comfort. Well, depart in the name of God: The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of god and the fellowship of the holy
ghost be with you all. i. Cor. xi^



Phile. Amen. Now good brother Epaphrodi^us how do you. Math. xxv Mark. xiiii



Epaph. The spirit is willing and ready, but the flesh is weak.


Chr. I pray you sir be on good confort.


Epa. The Lord is my confort. He full graciously deals with me.


Eu. Do you lack any^thing sir?


Epa. Nothing but strenth from above that I may patiently abide and suffer the
good pleasure of God. Thy will be don, o heauen^ly father in earth, Math. vi.
as it is in heaven Let me lie somewhat hier with my head. It is well: a little
thing, god knows, disquieteth this my sick and weak body. I trust, that
within few hours it shall be paste al^ sickness and misery, and shall bothe^
quietly and swetely sleep in the harte^ of the earth, until the great day of
the general resurrection. In ye mean season shall my soul be in glory with
Christ, Luke. xxiii. John. xvii. Philip. i i. Cor. xiii. i. John. iii
and joyfully be^hold the glorious majesty of God. I will cease talking for a
little while with you, and fall to communication with my lord God in my heart. I
pray you pray for me, that I may continue faithful unto the end. For it is
written: Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
Apoca. ^^



Phi. Neighbors ^^om aside a little while, and let us fall to prayer.


Chri. Most gladly


Phi. Lord hear our prayers.


Euse. And let our cry com unto thee.


Ph. Save this thy servant O Lord, Prayers for the sick.
thou father of mercies and God of all consolation. ii. Cor. i.



Chr. And so work in him by thy blessed spirit that he may put his whole trust
in the. Psalm, xi^



Ph Se^d him present help from thy holy place.


Th. And evermore mighte^y defend him against satan, sin, desperation, death
and hell.


ph. Let his enemy the devil have none a^uantage of him. Psalm, lxxxi.



Eu. Nor ye wicked aproche to hurt him.


Phi. Be unto him o lord, Psalm. lxi
a strong toure, a mighty castle and sure fortres.


Chr. To defend him from the face of his enemy.


Phi. O Lord hear our prayers.


Eu And let our cry come unto thee.


Phi. O Lord look down from hea^uen, A prayer.
behold, visit, and relieve thi^ thy servant. Look upon him with thy eyes of
thy mercy, give him comfort and sure confidence in the^ defend him from the
danger o^ the ennemy, and keep him in per^petuall peace and safety through
Jesus Christ our Lord.


The. Ame^*


Phi. Hear us almighty and mos^ merciful God and savior, A prayer.
exte^d thy accustomed goodness to this thy servant, which is grieved with
sickness, visit him (O lord,) as thou did visit Peter's wives mother, Math.
viii
and the Capitaines servant. Restore unto this sick parson his former health
(if it b^ thy will) or else give him grace so to take thy visitation, that after
this painful life ended, he may dwell with the in life everlasting.


Chr. Amen.


Phi. Arise and let us go again, unto our sick brother. Now neighbor
Epaphroditus, how do you? Rejoice I pray you in the Lord, and bear this cross
which God has now laid upon you, Phi. iii.
both patiently and thanckefully.


Epap. If I have heretofore been glad to receive health at the Lords hand,
Job. ii.
why should not I also now take in good worth this his most gentle and loving
visitation? The Lord gave me health, Job. i.
and the Lord has taken it away again. It has chanced unto me as the Lords
pleasure is, blessed be the name of the Lord.


The. This comforts us greatly to hear so good and godly words proceed out
of your mouth. Mat. xii.
For of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, says our savior
Christ. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good
things. Math. xix



Ep. No man is good but God alone. We are al unclean and unprofitable
servant. Esaias. lxiiii
If any goodness we have, it is of God, as blessed James says: Every good gift
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from yt father of
lyghtes, that he which reioyseth, Luke. xvii. i. Cor. iiii. James. i Iere. ix.
i. Corin. i
should rejoice in the Lord.


Chr. Now good neighbor how feel you your self?


Epa. O brother Christopher. I perceive there is none other way with me but
one, even to depart from this life.


Phi. Let it never grieve you most genle neighbor to give over unto nature, An
exhortation to the sick to die willingly.
and to depart from this world, at the calling of God. There is a time to be
borne, Eccle. iii.
and a time to die. We must be as well content to die, as we were to live, and
as well pleased to leave the world, as we were to come into it.

We are mortal, we therefore must needs die. Let us not bear heauely, that
necessity imports. God crea^^d us, that we should once die let us not
therefore repugne and strive against the good pleasure of God. There shall none
other thing chance unto us by death, than that has heretofore chanced unto
our predecessors, Psalm. lxxxix.
and shall likewise chance unto our posterity. Who has lived, that has not
died? Who does now or shall live, that shall not also taste death? One and the
same way must needs be trodden of all Adams posterity. There is no mean to
escape. Adam sinned and became mortal. Roma. v
All we have sinned also in Adam, therefore all we are made in him mortal and
subject unto death. As by one man (says S. Paul) sin entered into the
world, and death by the means of sin? Eue^ so death also went over al men,
in so much as all we have sinned. Roma. vi.
The reward of sin is death. (...). ii
God in deed created man at the beginning to be immortal and not to be
destroyed by death, yea after the Image of his own likeness made he him.
Nevertheless through envy of the devil came death into the world. The history
of Adams fall is known, Gene. iii
in who^ we also fell. Sense that time he and all his posterity have been
mortal, John. iii
have died and shall die. We al ar now flesh earth, Eccle. x
dust and ashes. So sone as we be borne, so sone begin we to die. This our life
is nothing else then a very passage unto death. Noble and base, pore and rich,
fair and foul, well favored and il favored, mighty and weak, wise and
folish, fortunate and wretched, ruler and subject, faithful and unfaithful,
Christian and Painim, old and young, man, woman and child, every bodily
creature that lives on the face of the earth shall die. Whether the life be
short or long, the end of it is death. All the holy Patriarchs, Judges, kings,
Priests, Prophets, and all other which lived before the coming of Christ,
died. Iho^ Baptist, Christ's mother, and all the disciples of Christ died. Yea,
Christ him self although most innocent and without all sin, after he was
once clad with our flesh, and had taken on him our nature, became mortal, and
to pay our ransom unto God the father, Phil. ii.
and to set us again at liberty, he suffered death, even the death of the
cross. Math. ^.
Is ye servant greater then his Lord? Or the disciple above his master? Our
Lord has trodden the way a fore us, and shall we his servants refuse to follow
him? Our master has given us an example to die, and shall we his disciples
disdain to practice the like* If death had been cast only upon our backs,
which live in this age, so might ye burden have been thought unrighteous and
intolerable, but forasmuch as our ancestors have already tasted of death and
are gone, why should we that now live bear so impaciently this common chance?
On this condition came we al into the world, yt we should leave it again. i.
Par. xxix.
For we be hear but strangers and soiourners, as were al our fathers. Psalm.
xc.
Our days on thearth also are but as a shadow, and there is none abiding. Our
days pass away swiftly, and we are gone. Ioh. vii.
The days of man are ye days of an hirelyng, yea wind and nothing. Psalm.
cxliiii
Man is like unto vanit^e, and his days pass away like a shadow. Psalm. lxxxix
Where is there any man that lives, and shall not se^ death? Ioh. xiiii.
man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and yet the time
that he lives, he is full of mysery. He comes up and is cut down like a
flower. He flies as it were a shadow, and never continues in one state. Hebr.
xiii.
Here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. It is appointed of
God, that all men shall once die. For what is our life? It is even a vapor,
Hebr. ix.
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jacob. iiii. Job.
ix.
as Job says, my days are more swift then a runner, yea they pass away as
the ships that be good under sail, and as the Egle that flies to the pray.
Seeing it is Gods will, pleasure and ordinance that we should dye: why do we,
which daily pray on this manner. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven,
show our selves unwilling to have yt thing chance unto us, Math. vi.
for the which we have so often times prayed? It is natural to die, why then
labor we to degenerate and grow out of kind? Our au^cestours the most holy
and most perfect have died, why disdain we then to follow their steps? It is
highly for our profit to die, why are we than ennemies to our selves? We can
not cease to sin, except we die, why do we than not have to fle from so great
an evil? We shall never come unto the true life where felicity both joyful
and eternal is, except we die, why than make we so little speed to have
thither, where so many good things shall be given us? We shall never have ye
fruition of Gods majesty, and the blessed company of the heavenly spirits,
except we die: why the^ do we not pray daily unto yt lord our god to deliver us
from this stinking sinck of evils (I mean this world) that we may come and
enjoy his most glorious presence? The very Heathen, which knew not God a
right, but only dreamed of the immortality of the soul, and looked for a
better life after this, they knew not why they should fear death, but wyshed
death and died both valeantly and joyfully, and shall we being christians
which know God and his holy word, and unto whom so much comfort, hope, and
everlasting life is promised, refuse gladly and willingly to die? What a saying
of an Ethnicke is this? Lib. ^. ^^^tuseul.
O immortal God, how is that pleasant and joyful journey to be wished for,
which being once done and past, Lib. de sense
there remains no sorrow, no care, no pensiuenes. Again, O that goodly and
pleasant day, when it shall be my chance ^o leave this filthy and troublesome
world, and come to their company that inhabit the heavens. I^ God would suffer
me, that I being of this age, might become an infant and sucking child again,
I would utterly refuse it, neither would I by any means call the raze that I
have run back again, that I might again be young. For what pleasure and
commodity has this life? yea rather what displeasure, incommoditie, pain,
travel and trouble has it not? But let it be granted that it has pleasure,
certes: yet has it either satietie or mesure. And nature in this world has
given us a place to tarry in for a while, but not to dwell and to continue in
it. The Heathen writers in their momuments call death a changing for a better
life, a quiet sleep: a removing from mortality unto immortality, from
trouble: unto quietness, from ye shadow of a life: unto a very and vncounterfet
life, from sorrow: unto joy, from evil: unto good, an haue^ of rest, a solace
of the mind, an end of all evil and wickedness, and a beginning of all true
joy, felicity and pleasure. Of these things may we easly learn, what opinion
the very Heathen conceived of death, and shall we that profess Christ, know
God, Romans ^.
believe his word and call our selves dead unto ye world, recou^t death an evil
thing, Collos. ii^
and be loathe to go unto it, when God calls us, as though there were no
resurrection of the body, no immortality of the soul, no life after this, no
fellowship with god, and with the heavenly spirits? The Jews also being
persuaded of the resurrection of the body, and of thimmortalitie of the soul,
die joyfully and with a lusty courage, which notwithstanding for their
unbelief in Christ are damned: and shall we which are christians tremble and
shake at ye name of death, as though after our death we should be in worse case
then we be now, when to say the truth, the faithful christians do than
chiefly begin to live, when they depart from this world. All good men have ever
desired to depart from this vile and wretched life, and to go unto that joyful
and blessed state of immortality. (...).
David that Prince-like Prophet cries out and says. Woe is me, and sorry am I
for it, yt I must yet longer abide in this world. Again. Like as the heart
desires the water brokes, ^salm. lxii
so lo^geth my soul after thee, O God. My soul is a thurst for God, yea even
for the living God: when shall I come to appear before the presence of God?
^sal. lxxxiiii.
Also in an other place he says. O how amiable are thy dwellinges thou Lord
of hosts? My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of ye
Lord my heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they that
dwell in thy house, they shall be always praising thee. One day in thy courts is
better then a thousand. I had rather be a dorekeper in ye house of my God, then
to dwell in the tents of ungodliness. In another Psalm he prays on this
ma^^er. Psalm. ^x^^
Deliver my soul out of pry^on, that it may come and praise ^hy name. Tobi.
i^^.
The holy man Tobias made his prayer unto God and said: O Lord deal with me
according ^o thy will, and command my spirit to be received in peace. For
more expedient were it for me to ^ie, then to live. How desirous the ^oly
Apostle S. Paul was to go from this vale of misery, unto the ^eauenly kingdom,
these his wor^es declare manifestly: Phillip.
Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. Again, Philip. i
I desire to be losed and to be with Christ. What shall I speak of that
ancient and godly father Simeon, which so sone as he had seen Christ, knowing
him to be the savior of the world: was very desirous to die, and brast out
into these words and said* Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
Luke. ii.
according to thy promise. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou
haste prepared before the face of al people. A light to lighten the gentiles,
Esry. xlix.
and the glory of thy people Israel. Acts. xiii.
Of the like affection with these tofore rehearsed, were without doubt all
godly parsons from the beginning, then being most joyful, when they saw the
time of their departure from this wretched world to be come: so likewise
brother Epaphroditus ought both you and we to rejoice and be glad when death
approaches and comes upon us. For then begins our felicity, wealth,
quietness, safety, joy, pleasure, comfort and glory, as the voice from heaven
said: Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord. Apoca. xiiii.
For from henceforth the spirit says, that they shall be at reast from their
labors, pains and travails. Precious and right dear in the sight of the
Lord, is the death of his saints, Psalm. cxix.
says ye Psalmograph. The souls of the righteous, says the wiseman, Sapi.
iii.
are in the hand of God, and the pain of death shall not touch them. In ye
sight of the unwise they appear to die, but they are in peace. Let us not
therefore fear death. To the infidele and unfaithful man, death is both
fearful and terrible, but to a faithful man, it is both pleasant and
amiable. Therefore neighbor Epaphroditus, as you have hitherto in all your
words showed your self a faithful man, and well contented to obey the will of
God: so likewise practice ye same now in your works. If the good pleasure of
God be through this sickness to call you out of this val^ of misery, strive not
against the will of God, but submit your self to Gods holy working, and dout
nothing, but it shall be to your great commodity and singular profit. For all
things work for the best unto them yt love God. Romans viii.
God has appointed the bounds of your life, Job. xiiii.
and beyond that ye can not go. John. xi.
When the twelfth hour comes, then shall ye make an end. Labor therefore to
make such an end, as God therewith may be plea^sed, seeing you know and are
fully persuaded, Math. ^.
yt not an here does fal^ from your head without the good will of god, Luke. xii.
much les shall your life be taken away from you, til the very hour comes,
which God has appointed, Apoc. i. Psalm. xxxi.
in whose hands only are the keys both of life and death. Eccle. x^^



Epa. Death is terrible and fearful.


Ph. The wise man says, Remedies against ye fear of death.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance and riches, unto the man that has nothing to vex
him, and yt has prosperity in all things, yea unto him, that sets all his
mind on belly cheer? O death, how acceptable and good is thy judgment unto
the needful, and unto him whose strength fails, and that is now in his last
age? etc. Be not thou afraid of death, remember them that have been before
thee, and that come after thee. This is the judgment of the Lord ^uer al
flesh. And why would yt be against this pleasure of the hiest. etc. To the
unfaithful death in deed is terrible and fearful. For then begin their sorrows
and miseries, their plages and torments, as we may se in the history of the
richman, Luke. xvi.
but to the faithful and true beleuers death is pleasant and amiable, as it is
written, Psalm. cxvi.
precious in the sight of the Lord is ye death of his saints. Apoca. xiiii
For then cease all their miseries and trauayles, and begin their joys and
pleasures. Whosoever is a true Christian and fixes ye eyes of his mind
through true faith on the death of Christ, Sap. iii.
he shall not greatly be afraid o^ death, but he shall rather triumph over
death and with a lusty courage say thus unto death: Ose. xii.
O death I will be thy death. For death is swalowed up into victory through
Jesus Christ our Lorde^ i. Cor. xv
The sting of death can now no more hurt the faithful, as our savior Christ
testifies, verily, verily I say unto you: he that hears my word and
believes on him that sent me, John. v.
has everlasting life, and shall not come into damnation, but is escaped from
death unto life. Again, verily, verily I say unto you: John. vi.
he that puts his trust in me, has everlasting life. I am that living
bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever. John. viii.
Item, verily, verily I say unto you: If a man keep my saying he shall never
taste death: al so in an other place, I am the resurrection and life, he that
believes in me, although he be dead, yet shall he live. John. xi.
And every one that lives and believes in me, shall never die.


Epa. Death is painful.


Phi. Who will not be content to suffer a little and short pain, that he may
for ever after enjoy continual quietness and everlasting rest? Remedies against
the pains of death. ii. Tim. ii Roma. viii
Nothing is gotten without pain and travail. No man is crowned except he
strive lawfully The afflictions of this life are not worthy of ye glory, which
shall be showed upon us. ii. Tim. ii.
Notwithstanding if we die with Christ: we shall also live with him. If we
suffer, we shall reign with him. Therefore be on good comfort, God is
faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able to
bear. ii. Cor. i.
The Lord our God is a father of mercies, and God of all consolation, which
will without all doubt be present with you and comfort you in all your
sicknesses and pains. For as the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in us:
eue^ so is our consolation plenteous by Christ. As you are partaker of the
afflictions: so shall ye be partaker also of the consolation. ii. Cor. iiii.
For this short and light trouble, sickness and pain prepares an exceading and
an eternal weight of glory unto you, while you look not on the things which
are seen, but on ye things which are not seen. For ye things which are not
seen, are eternal. If you consider the great and intolerable pains, that
many good and godly men have suffered on their bodies for Christ's sake, it shall
the les grieve you to bear this your sickness, yea death and the pains thereof.
The Prophet Esaye for the hope of everlasting life, suffered his body to be cut
a sonder with the saw of wood. Jeremy was stoned unto death. Amos after many
grievous torments was thrust into the temples of the head with a great nail of
iron, and so shortly after died. John Baptist was cast into prison Math. xiiii.
and beheaded. James the brother of John was slain with the sword. Act. xii.
Act. vii. Math. xxvii.
Stephen was stoned unto death Christ our Lord and savor suffered most bitter
pains and died the death of the cross. I pass over many other both of the old
and new Testament, which refused no kind of pains, so that they might obtain
ye reward of everlasting life, some (as ye blessed apostle says) were tried with
mockings and scourginges, Hebr. xl
with bonds and prisonme^t, ii. Par. xxiiii.
some were stoned, some were hewn a sunder, some were slain with swerd, iii.
Reg. i.
al were trobled and vexed. How glad joyful and ready the holy Apostle S. Paul
was to suffer al kind of pains, and torments for ye glory of God, these his
words do abundantly show. Act. xx.
The holy ghost does testify in every city, saying, that bonds and troubles
do abide me but I care not for them, nether is my life dear unto me, so that I
may finish my course with joy. Act. xxi.
etc. Again, I am ready not only to be bound but al so to die at Jerusalem
for ye name of the Lord Jesus. What shall I speak of the other blessed
Martirs, where of some were devoured with wild beasts, some burnt with fire
unto ashes, some broyled unto the death upon whot coals some slain with the
sweard, some hanged upon Iebbets, some pearsed to death with arrows, some
beaten to death with stones, some boiled, some rent a peaces with whot burning
iron cromes, some racked, some drowned, some cruelly murdered in prysons. etc.
Who is hable to declare the most bitter pains and grievous torments which they
gladly suffered on their bodies for the glory of God, and the fruition of his
Majesty? If ye consider these things well, you shall easly find, yt the
pains which you now suffer, are nothing to be compared unto the most bitter
and intolerable torments, which the men of God suffered. And not withstanding
if you abide these light pains joyfully, patiently and thankefully, you shall
most certainly enjoy and possess that heavenly kingdom, which they have
already obtained. Faynte not therefore good neyghbor Epaphroditus, but abide the
good pleasure of God, and his blessed workyng, so shall he without fail bring
all thing to such pass, as shall be most unto his glory and unto your comfort.


Epa. Death takes me away from my gorgious and pleasant houses, Remedies
against thought taking, for departing from worldly goods. Genesis xlvii. Psalm.
xxxix.
and from all the temporal things that I have.


Phi. In this world we all are but strangers and Pilgrims, we have here no
dwelling City, but look for an other that is to come. i. Pet. ii.
The houses that you leave behind you here, Hebr. xiii.
be they never so gorgious and pleasant, are but earthy made of clay, and
wether beaten stones, and shall in process of time decay and return unto dust
and become things of naught. But after your departure from this vale of
wretchedness you shall have a building of God, ii. Cor. v
an habitatio^ not made with hands, but everlasting in heaven. You shall dwell
in a city, that is of pure gold, like unto clear glass, and the foundations of
the walls of this city are garnished withal manner of precious stones, Apoc.
xxi.
the gates are of fine pearl. Yea the streates of this heavenly city are pure
gold. It has no need of the sun, nether of the Moon to lighten it, for ye
brightness of God does lighte^, and the lamb is the light of it. And as
touching your other te^porall things, from the which, as you say, death
takes you away, you have no cause to be sorry for yt. For as concerning your
galant aparel, which if they be not worn will sone be motheaten, if they be
worn, Apoc. iii.
they will shortly fall to rags in ye stead of them you being once placed in the
heavenly city, shall be clothed of God with white garments, which shall never wax
old, but always abide glorious and incorruptible. You shall also have a golden
crown upon your head, and you shall sit with Christ upon his seat. And in the
stead of your deinty fare, which how vile it is after the digestion you know,
ye shall eat in the kingdom of God Manna yt is hid, Apoc. iii.
yea ye shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of the Paradise of
God. And this meat shall abide for ever most pleasant and incorruptible. As
touching your gold and silver and such other worldly treasures, wherewith God
blessed you in this world for a season, never remember the^ any more, but bid
them farewell. For what other thing are they (seem they never so precious,
pleasant and goodly) then red and white earth, and hereafter shall return
unto vile dust. In the stead of them God in his kingdom shall give you such
treasures, as never man with mortal eyes saw ye like. You also shall have such
joys and plesurs, Esaias. lxiiii. i. Cor. ii.
as nether eye has seen the like, nor ear hard the like, nether is any man
able to conceive them in his heart, so great are the treasures, so infinite are
the pleasures, which God has prepared for the^ that love him. Who will not be
glad to change lead for silver, and copper for gold, corruptible and earthly
things for immortal and heavenly treasures. Here se you that you lose nothing
by death, but get very much, so yt you may now say with the holy Apostle,
Christ is to me life, Phil. i.
and death is to me advantage. Remedies against thought taking for departing
from frende^.



Epa. Death takes me away from my dear fre^des, in whose company I greatly
delight.


Phi. In worldly friendship there is no certainty nor assurance. He which this
day is a friend, is tomorow an enemy. This is proved true among men almost by
daily experience. Eccle. vi.
There are diverse kinds of friends, as the wise man teaches. Some be friends
but for a time, such will not abide in yt day of trouble. Of worldly friendship,
Some be friends for the table sake, and when a man falls into poverty, they
continue not. Some be friends only in countenance, and in heart hate most
extremely. Some be earnest and hearty friends, which will abide by man, when
fortune is most froward. But of these there are very few. And they which now
such be, may suddenly through some occasion be made a man's utter enemy. Therefore
says David: Psalm. cxl^.
put not your confidence in Princes nor in the children of men, in whom there is
no health. Also the Prophet: Cursed be he that trusts in man, Iere. xvii
and makes flesh his strength. Ye ^e in the Gospel, that they which ^o dearly
loved Christ, John. v^
that they would have made him a king, shortly after for no occasion fell away
from him, and followed him no more. Again those people which very joyfully
received Christ when he came ryding into Jerusalem, Math. ^xi.
cut down bows, strowed them in the ways, yea and spread their garments in
the ways and cried with a loud voice, saying: Good luck unto the son of
David. Luke. ix. John. xii.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, within few^ dais after
cried with a stout voic^ and said: To the cross with him to the cross with
him. Mat. xxvii. John. xix. John. xviii
If ye lettes^ him go thou art not Cesars friend if he were not a noughty pack,
w^ would never have delivered him unto thee. Behold the friendship o^ this
world. Nether let any man promise him self better things o^ his now most dear
friend. Men a^ vain and liers, fliting and unstable. But when you come into the
kingdom of God, Psalm. lxii Psalm. cxvi.
you shall have such friends as shall for ever continue faithful, loving and
constant. God the father, Psalm. cii. Malac. i.
God the son, and God the holy ghost shall be your friends, which do never
change but always abide one. All the glorious angels and blessed spirits of
heaven shall be your friends also. Who will not gladly change uncertain
friends for such as are most certain, most faithful? Have you now lost any
thing by departing from worldly unto heavenly friends.


Ep. But I shall never more se the^, nor have ye company of the^, yt we may
rejoice and be glad again together. Of knowing one another after this life.



Phi. If your friends live in the fear of God, and depart in the christian
faith, they may be sure to come thither, where you shall be, eue^ unto ye glorious
kingdom of God, where you shall both see them, know them, talcke with them, and
be much more merry with the^ than ever you were in this world.


Chr. Many doubt of that.


ph. Why so? Shall ye knowledge of Gods elect and chosen people be less in
the kingdom of God, then it is in this world? We being in this corruptible
body know one another, when we see not God but with the eyes of our faith, ii.
Cor. xii. i. John. iii.
and shall we not know one another after that we have put of this sinful body,
and se God fac^ to face in the sight of whom is the knowledge of al things? We
shall be like the glorious Angels of heaven, Math. xxii.
which know one another, can it than come to pass that one of us may not
know an other? Shall we be equal with ye angels in other things, i. John. iii.
Hebr. i
and inferior unto them in knowing one an other? We shall know and se Christ as
he is, Roma. xii.
which is the wisdom, image and brightness of the heavenly father, and shall
the knowledge of one another be hyd from us? i. Cor. xii. Collos. i. Ephe. ii.
Apoc. xxi
We are members all of one body, and shall we not know one another? we know
our head which is christ and shall we not know our selves? we shall be citezins
of one heavenly city, where continual light shall be, and shall we be
overwhelmed with such darkness, that we shall not see and know one another?
Psalm. lxxxiii. Apoc. iiii.v
They that in this world be synging men continuing together in a place but for
a season know one an other, Apoc. iiii.v.vii.xi.xii.
and shall we, which for ever shall continue together synging praising and
magnifying ye Lord our God, not know one another? They that are in household and
serve one Lord or master, know one another in this world, and shall not we
know one another, which in the kingdom of heaven, shall continually serve the
Lord our God together with one spirit, and with one mind? There is a certain
knowledge one of an other here in the earth, even among the unreasonable and
brute beasts, and shall our senses be so darkened in the life to come, that we
being immortal, incorruptible, and like unto the angels of God, yea seeing God
face to face, shall not know ^ne another? We shall know God as he is, (...).
ii*
and shall we not know one another? Adam before he sinned, being in the state
of innocence, knew Eua, so sone as god brought her unto him, and called her by
her name, and shall not we being in heaven, where we shall be in a^ much more
blessed and perfect state then ever Adam was in P^^radise, know one another?
Shall our knowledge be inferior to Adams knowledge in Paradise^ When Christ was
transfigured i^ mount Thabor, his disciples, Pe^ter, James, and John, did not
only know Christ, but also Moses and Helias, Math. xvii.
which talked there with Christ, whom notwithstanding they had never seen
nor known in ye flesh. Mark. ix. Luke. ix.
Whereof we may learne^ that when we come to behold the glorious majesty of ye
great God we shall not only know our sau^our Christ, and such as with wh^^ we
were acquainted in this world, but also all the elect and chosen people of God,
which have been from the beginning of the world, as the holy Apostle says: Ye
are come to the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, Hebr. xii
the celestial Jerusalem, and to an innumerable sight of angels, and unto
the congregation of the first borne sons, which are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus
the mediator of the new testament. etc. When we are once come unto that
heavenly Jerusalem, we shall without al doubt both se and know Adam, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Josias, Ihon Baptist, Mary
the Mother of Christ, Peter, John, James, Paul, and all the most blessed
company of the Patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martirs, with all other the
faithful. As we are al members of one body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head: so
shall we know one another, rejoice together and be glad one with another.
Moreover the history which we read of the rich unmerciful man and of Lazarus,
Luke. xvi.
declares evidently, yt in the life to come we shall know one an other. In
that we se that the rich glotton being in hell did know both Abraham, and
Lazarus, being in joy, and that Abraham also knew that unmerciful rich man,
although the one was in glory, the other in pain. If that they which are in
hell, does both se and know them that are in heaven, and they which are in
heaven, know the^ also that are in hell, the one place being so far distant
from the other: much more do they know one another that be Citezins in one
City, fellow heirs of one kingdom, members of one body, and fellow servants
in one household serving one lord and God. If there be mutual knowledge, after
this life between good and evil, much more shall ye saints and the holy ones
of God know one another in the kingdom of our heavenly father. Math. xix.
Our savior Christ said to his disciples: when the son of man shall sit in
the seat of his majesty, you also shall sit upon the.xii. seats, judging
the.xii. tribes of Israel. If after the general resurrection* and at the
judgment one should not know another, how shall the^ the apostles judge the^
unto whom they preached? They can not judge nor be witnesses of the
condemnation of them, whom they know not. Hereof also it manifestlye
appears, John. xxi.
that after this life one of us shall know another. After ye Christ was risen
again and had a glorified body, thapostles knew him, yea, and that so
perfectly, yt none of the^ neded to say unto him: what art y^? For they knew
well yt he was the Lord. Hereof also may it truly be gathered, yt the
faithful shall as perfectly know one an other in ye life to come, as the
apostles knew Christ after his resurrection* or as Peter, Iho^, and James, knew
Moses and Helias in the mount Thabo^, when Christ was tra^sfigured. Math. xvii.
Many other things might be alleged out of the holy scripture to declare yt
we shall know one another after this life, but these for this present may seem
to any indifferent person abundantly to suffice. If I should rehearse to you all
the sayings both of thancient and late writers concerning this matter, I should
spend a great part of this day and to much t^ouble you, notwtstanding I will
rehearse one saying of s. Gregory in his Dialoges, and bid all the other farwell.
Lib. 4. cap. ^^
There is a certain thing (says he) in gods elect and chosen people, which is
to be marueled at, for they (being in heaven) do not only know the^, whom they
knew in this world, but they know also the good people, who^ they never saw,
even as perfectlye as though they had before both seen and known the^. For when
they in yt ever lasting enheritance shall se thancient fathers, they shall not
be unknown to the^ in sight, who^ they always knew in work. For when al there,
with one clearnes do behold God, what is it, that they should not there know:
where they know him that know all things?


Epa. This is a comfortable hering.


Phi. No les true then comfortable.


Epa. I trust then within few hours to se all the faithful, which before me
have departed in the Lord, my children also and all my other acquaintance.


Phi. You shall both se them, know them, rejoice and be meary with them.


Eu. I marvel yt any man should doubt of this doctrine, being so clearlye set
forth both by the authority of the holy scriptures, and by the testimonies of
the godly writers: seeing that the very heathen, which knew not God a right,
being parswaded (...) the immortality of the soul, never doubted of it, but
were thorowlye resolved that such as lived in this world justly and uprightly,
and deserved well of the common wealth. when so ever they departed from this
life, should go unto the blessed company of the immortal Gods, and there not
only se and know the gods, but also all those noble, good and virtuous parsons,
that ever lived in this world, as well such as they never knew, as also those,
whom in this world they did most perfectly know. And they being thus
persuaded, desired death, at the least when the time of their departure came,
they took their death the more joyfully and patiently, I will rehearse unto you
ye wor^es of ^ne or two of them. I have (...) desire (said Cato the elder) ^o
se your fathers, Lib. de sense.
whom I honou^^d and loved. But I wish not on^y to talk with them, whom I
have known in this world, but with such also, as of whom I have ^eard and
red, yea and I my self ^aue written. If I were once go^ng thitherward, I
would never ^aue mind to return hither a^ain. Again he says, O that no^le
and pleasant day, when it shall ^e my chance to come unto that ^eauenly
company and blessed fe^owship, and depart from this troublous and stinking
world. For the^ shall I go not only unto those me^^ of whom I spoke unto you
before but also unto my Cato, which was as worthy a man as ever lived, and as
noble. And it is written of Socrates, yt when he wen^ unto his death among many
other things he said, yt it is a most blessed and goodly thing for the^ to come
together, which have lived justly and faithfully: o says he what a great
pleasure think you it to be, fre^dl^ to talk with Orpheus, Lib. 1. ^us. quest.
Musaeus Home^rus, Hesiodus, and such like? verily I would die full often, if it
were possibl^ to get those things yt I speak of Thus se we yt many among yt
very Heathen, which were perswade^ of thinmortality of ye soul, beleue^ yt they
which in this world liue^ godly, justly, uprightly and honestly should al go
unto a joyful place o^ rest, and there having ye blessed comp^^ny of ye immortal
gods, they shul^ know one another, talk and rejoice one with an other.


The. As touching ye Ethnickes, which in this world led a just and upright life
in the sight of me^. I pronounce nothing, but leave the^ unto gods judgment, but
as concerning the faithful christians which believe in God, fear and love God,
are persuaded of their salvation in Christ's blud, and frame their life unto
the uttermost of their power, according to the commandments of God, as they
shall al obtain one glorious kingdom and be Citezins of one City: so likewise
shall they se and know one an other, talk, rejoice, and be merry one with
another. This is my belief.


Ph. I agree with you in opinion concerning this matter. Therefore good neighbor
Epaphrodit. be of good ^here, take a good heart unto you, faint not, nether
fear you death. For ye time is at hand, that you leaving this wretched world
and the inhabitants thereof, shall come unto that most glorious and heavenly
kingdom, where you shall have the sight and knowledge not only of God and of
his holy angels, but also of al Gods elect and chosen people. Al your dear
friends, which are gone before you, shall glo^riously come and mete you, joyfully
receive you, gladly present you unto the majesty of God, and so shall you
altogether remain in all glory and joy for ever and ever.


Epa. Amen. God grant.


Chr. Sir how do you?


Epa. As God will.


Chri. I trust you do remember, what my neighbor Philemon has said unto you.


Epa. Yea right well, I thank God.


Chr. Then sir I pray you be of good comfort.


Epa. I am well content to forsake the world and all that is in the world, and
to go unto the lord my God.


Eu. I trust yt there is none other thing that troubles you.


Epa. Yes, not outwardly but inwardly.


Eu. Inward trouble is ye greatest grief in the world. Declare I pray you
what it is, and we will do the best we can to quiet your mind.


Epaph. Let me alone a little, and pray for me.


Euse. Well content. Neighbors, let us commend this our sick brother unto God
with our prayers. For he desires it.


Phi. God commands us by his holy Apostle, Jacob. ^
saying: If any be diseased among you, let him call for the elders of the
congregation, and let the^ pray over him, and anoint him with oil in the name
of the Lord. And ye prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgeuen him.
Knowledge your fautes one to another, and pray one for an other, that ye may
be healed The prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. Let
us therefore knele down and pray. A prayer.
O Lord hear our prayer.


Eu. And let our cry come unto the^


Phi. O almighty and everlasting God, which lightnest al men that come into
this world: we besethe thee lighte^ the heart of this sick, weak and diseased
person, with the beams of thy divine grace and mercy, yt al his thoughts,
words and works may so be directed, that he may be acceptable to thy godly
majesty in true faith and perfect love, through thy only son Jesus Christ our
Lord and savior.


Chr. A^men.


Phi. O eternal and merciful God, A prayer.
look down from heaven, and visit this thy weak servant, as thou did
visit Toby and Sara, Peter's wives mother and the Captains servant. Bless him
as thou did bless Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Behold him, O Lord, with the
eyes of thy mercy. Replenish his heart with all joy, and keep from him al
sinful thoughts and wicked imaginations. And send down thy angel of peace,
that he may keep and defend him in everlasting peace through Jesus christ thy
dear son our Lord and savior. A prayer.



Eu. Amen.


Phi. O Lord Jesus Christ, thalone savior of ye world and the true phisitio^
both of body and soul, we most humbly beseech thee, mercifully to behold this
our sick brother, Collo. ^.
which is a member of ye mistical body, whereof thou art ye head and a branch
of the which y^ art the true vine. John. xv.
Be thou unto him that most loving Samaritane. Luke. x.
Pour wine and oil into his wounds, bind them up, la^e him upon thy beast,
and never leave him until thou have brought him into that Inn, which is the
glo^rious kingdom of thy heavenly father Remove from him all unfaithfulness and
mistrust, and grave in his heart true and earnest faith in the and in thy most
precious blood. Suffer him not to despair, nor to doubt of thy godly grace.
Let ye remembrance of thy most merciful promises, setforth in thy holy gospel
never be out of his heart. Suffer not Satan to prevail against him. Let not his
conscience be co^bred with the terrors either of sin or death. Be thou his
strong castle and mighty fortress. Assist him now in this his grievous
affliction, let not his soul be a pray unto his ennemies, neither give thou
him over into the cruel hands of his terrible adversaries* but show upon him
presently thy bountiful goodness, that he through thy help having the
ouerhand of Satan, may finishe his course with joy, and so after his departure
from this troublous world, come unto the blessed haven of quietness, where thou
with the father and the holy ghost live and raignest one true and everlasting
God, worlds without end.


The. Amen.


Epa. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, nether chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure. Have mercy on me, Psalm. ^^.
O Lord, for I am weak, heal me, O Lord, for all my bones are sore troubled,
yea my soul is grievously vexed, but Lord, how long? O how long wilt y^ defer
thy help? Turn the (O Lord) and deliver my soul, (oh save me for thy mercies
sake.


Phi. O neighbor, how is it with you? Remedies against desperation.



Epa. Now that I had through your godly exhortations well digested my departure
from this world, and was well content to go hence, whensoever the Lord my god
calls me: now am I so troubled in my conscience, that I begin almost to
despair of Gods mercy toward me, yea and wish yt there were no God, nor no
life after this.


Phi. Gentle brother faint not in your faith, neither despair you of the great
mercies of God, but call on the lord your God with strong faith, and he full
graciously will send present remedy for you from his holy temple.


Epa. O my conscience is grievously vexed, troubled, and disquieted, while I
behold the fearce wrath of God against sin, and consider how wicked a life I
have led, and how often I have broken Gods holy commaundeme^ts.


Phi. Fear not dear brother, for though you be never so sinful: God is
merciful. Though your sins be great: yet are the mercies of God much
greater. God saves not us because we are righteous and without sin: Tit. ii.
but for his mercy and promise sake, when he sees us repent, believe and
seek for remedy at his hand for Christ's precious blood sake.


Epaphrod. Satan now in this my sickness does so moleste and trouble me,
that me think I feel a very hell within my breast.


Phile. The manner of Satan, Remedies against the te^tatio^s of Satan.
which is the common adversary of all men, is, Note.
when any man is grievously sick and like to die, straightways to com upon him
at the beginning very fearcely, and to show him self terrible unto him, and to
cast before his eyes such a mist: that except he takes head, he shall see
nothing but the fearce wrath, and terrible judgment of God against sinners,
again, sin, desperatio^, death and ^el, and whatsoever makes unto utter
confusion of the sickmans conscience.


Epa. So is it now with me.


Phi. Fear not. It is his old property. If you had led as holy and as
perfect a life, as ever did man in this world, yet would he deal on this
manner with you. He knows right well, yt the time of your departure is at
hand, and that God will shortly call you from this sorrowful and mortal life,
unto a blessed and immortal life: therefore labors he unto the vttermoste o^
his power, to pluck you from so joyful a state, and to make you his pray. But
be you not afraid. For whom of Gods elect has he let pas vnassailed,
vntempted, or unproven? Math. iiii.
He feared not to assay the son of God, after he had put on our nature: and
think you to escape fre? His nature, disposition and desire, is to destroy:
maruel^ you therefore, if he go about to seek your destruction? His
proper^tie is to disquiet: wonder you therefore if he trouble you? John. viii.
He is a lier: what truth therefore can come out of his mouth? If he say unto
you that God is angry with you, and will destroy you, know him to be a lier, and
whatsoever he says against your salvation, believe it not: but know it to be a
lie. He is a murderer: what life then can come from him? John. viii.
He is an accuser of the brethren, how than can he speak any good or
comfortable thing unto you? Apoca. xii.
He is your utter enemy: how the^ is it possible, that he may be your friend,
and seek your quietness? Fear him not therefore, i. Pet. v.
He is but a cowarde and a very slave. They be but brags, whatsoever he
threatens. He may well hiss at you, but he can not styng you. He may look
upon you with a terrible and fearful countenance, but he ca^ do you no harm.
He may go about to te^pt you, but to overcome you, it lies not in his power.
Jacob. iiii.
Hear what s. James says Resist the devil, and he shall fli^ from you. Draw
nie unto God, and he shall draw nie to you.


Epa. Yea, but how shall I resist ye deuel.


Phi* Not as the supersticious papists were wont to do, How to resist the
deuell.
with casting o^ holy water about your chamber^ with laying holy bread in your
window, with pinning a Cross mad^ of hallowed Palms at your beds head, nor
with ringing of the hallowed bell, or such other beggarly superstitious,
Popish, and deuelish ceremonies. Of Faith.



Epa. How then?


Phil^ With faith, with prayer, and with the word of God.


Epa. How with faith.


Phile. Cast the eyes of your^ mind with strong faith on the sed^ of the woman,
which has trode^ down the serpents head, and destroyed his power, as he
says by the Prophet: Osc. xiii.
O hell, I will be thy destruction, Hebr. ii.
which by death has put him to flight that had Lordeshippe over death, even
the Devil, that he might deliver them, which through fear of death were all
their life time subdued unto bondage, which also (as the Apostle says) has
spoiled rule and power, Collo^. i.
and has made a show of the^ openly, and has triumphed over them in his own
person. i. John. iii.
So shall you be sure to escape his grievous assaults. For the son of God
apeared for this purpose, even to destroy the works of the Devil. Christ was
figured by that brazen serpent, which God commanded Moses to set up in the
wilderness, adding this promise unto it, Number. xxi.
that whosoever being stricken of the fiery Serpents did look on that, he
should be healed. After this manner, is it between Christ and us. If that fiery
serpent the devil has stricken and wounded us, let us look upon Christ with
strong faith, and we shall surely for Gods promise sake be made whole, as
Christ him self testifies, saying: As Moses lyfted up the serpent in the
wilderness: John. iii.
so must the son of man be lyfted up, that all that believe on him should not
peryshe, but have everlasting life. For god sent not his son into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world should be saved through him. If
Satan therefore has either wounded you already, or else goes about so to do,
fear not, repare unto Christ, look on him with the eyes of your faith, so
shall you be fre from his venomus chause. For as you are now tempted, Hebr. xi.
so were al godly men, but they overcame ye te^pter through strong faith in
Christ. Therefore says s. Peter. Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary the
devil goes about like a roaring Lion, i. Pet. v.
seeing whom he may devour, whom resist ye strong in faith. i. John. v
Saint John also says, this is the victory, which overcomes the world even
our faith. Not only all godly and faithful men were tempted, but also our
savior Christ. Math. iiii.
And this is a great comfort for us. For in that it fortuned him self to be
tempted, Hebr. ii.
he is hable to succor them, also that are tempted. Christ being tempted,
overcame his temptations to get us the victory over the tempter. Note.
His triumph is our victory, and his victory is our triumph. Whatsoever he
did and got in his humanity, he did and got it not for him self, but for us.
And God is faithful (says the apostle) which will not suffer you to be
tempted above your strength, i. Cor x.
but will in the mids of the temptation make away, that ye may be able t^ bear
it. Believe therefore in Christ and you are without al danger. Mark. ix.



Epa. I believe, O Lord, help thou min^ unbelief. Luke. xiii.
O Lord increase my faith.


Phi. Fear you not, but God both will and does hear your prayers, Psalm. cxiv.
for ye Lord is nie unto all the^ that call on him in truth. Of prayer.



Epa. You made mention also of prayer, saying that yt is also a mean to resist^
Satan.


Phi. I rejoice greatly and I give God most hearty thanks yt in this your
sickness your memory continues still steadfast and perfect.


Epa. I praise God for it.


Phi. That prayer is a necessary remedy for the avoiding of Satan's
temptations, the holy scriptures teach manifestly in diverse places. Our savior
Christ says, Math. xxvi.
watch and pray, that ye fall not into temptation. Again. This kind of devils
is not cast out, but by prayer and fasting. Mark. ix.
To repress yt temtatio^s of Satan all godly men even from the beginning fled
unto faithful prayer, as a mighty and sure defense against satan and al his
crafty assaults. And God has commanded us to pray, whenever we are
troubled, and does also promise us, yt he will both hear and help us. Call
on me, Psalm. ^.
says he in the time of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
honor me. The Lord is nie unto them that are of a troubled heart, Psalm.
xxxiii.
and he will help the^ that be broken in spirit.


Ep. Now good neighbors pray for me.


Ph. Uery gladly. Let us knele down together and pray.


Chr. Lo here are we. A prayer.



Phi. O heavenly and most merciful father, we most humbly beseech thee for
thy sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, have pity upon this thy creature, and
succoure him in these horrible assaults and temptations of the de^uill.
Deliver his soul in these extreme necessities from all the internal army.
Send him down strength from above, that he may be able to resist his ennemy,
and to stand steadfast in the time of this his temptation. Be thou his strong
rock, castle, shield, tower, and defense, that he in this great trouble
being preserved from the tyranny of his ennemies* through thy godly grace
assistence and help: may continue in the true and christen faith unto his
lives end, and afterward be received into thy heavenly kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


Euse. Amen.


Epa. Now will I pore and wratched sinner offer my prayers also unto the Lord
my God in Jesus Christ's name, trusting and believing undoubtedly, that he
graciously will hear me, and defend me against mine enemies. Mark. xi.



Phi. These are the words of Christ: What things so ever ye desire when ye
pray: believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.


Epaph. Out of the depth do I cry unto thee, Psalm. cxxx.
O Lord O Lord hear my prayer. Save me O God, Psalm. lxix.
for the waters of trouble are come in even unto my soul. A prayer.
I stick fast in the deep mire, where no ground is: I am come into deep waters,
so that the ^loudes run over me. Take me out of the mire that I sinck not. Oh
let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters. Let not
the water flood drown me, nether let the deep swalowe me up, and let not the
pit shut her mouth upon me. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is
comfortable: turn me unto thee according unto the multitude of thy mercies,
and hyde not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, O have thee, and
hear me. Draw nie unto my soul, and save it, oh deliver me because of mine
ennemies. For yt know my reprofe, my shame, and my dishonor. Mine
adversaries are full in thy sight. So shall I, being delivered from these great
miseries through thy gracious benefit praise and magnify the name of thee my
Lord God for ever and ever.


Chr. So be it.


Epa. Neighbor Philemon. Of Gods word.



Phi. Here sir.


Epa. As I remember, you told me, that besides faith and prayer, the word of
God also is a goodly help and a strong fortress against the cruel assanites
of the Devil.


Phile. It is truth. Luke. xiii.
For so are we taught in the holy scripture. Our savior Christ, when the time
of his Passion began to drawnie, knowing that his Disciples should for his
^ake be grievously tempted both of the devil, the world, and the flesh:
commanded the^ to bie a sword. This was no material but spiritual sword,
Ephe. ^^*
as S. Paul declares unto ye Ephesia^s, saying: above all things, take to you
the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which ^s the
word of God. And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the spirit. Math. iiii.
With ^he word of God Christ drove away Satan and resisted all his wicked
temptacions. Romans i.
For it is the power of God to save so many as believe. In the word of God
ple^teous and present remedies are found against Satan, and al his subtle
suggestions. Therefore said ye psalmograph. I have hyd thy spea^hes, O Lord in
my heart, Psalm. cxix.
that I might not sin against thee. John. xv.
Now are ye clean said Christ, for the word, which I spoke unto you. Hereto
parteineth the saying o^ the wyseman. Sap. xvi.
Nether herb, no emplasture has healed them, O lord, but thy word which
healet^ all things. Like unto this is (...) sentence in a certain Psalm,
Psalm. cvii.
h^ sent his word, and delivered the^ from destruction.


Epa. God deliue^ me from destruction.


phi. Enar^ your self with faith, prayer and wit^ the word of God, and doubt ye
not For these kinds of armoures o^ weapons, satan can by no mea^nes abide.


Ep. The Lord preseru^ and defend me. Neighbors, I will pray once again unto
ye Lord my God, while I have time.


Chr. It is a godly exercise.


Epa. I per^ceiue Satan to be still busy, and to seek my damnation.


Phi. Striu^^fully, and you shall have the crown of glory*


Epa. How long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? A prayer.
How long will thou hide thy face from me? Psalm. xiii.
O how long shall I seek council in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? How
long shall mine enemy triumph over me? Consider and here me (O Lord, my God)
lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death, least mine ennemy say, I have
prevailed against him. If I be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoice at
it. But my trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy salvation. I
again for this thy loving kyndnesse, will praise thy holy name.


Euse. So be it.


Ep. Unto the will I cry, O Lord my strength, Psalm. xxviii
thinck no scorn of me, ^east if thou make thee, A prayer.
as though thou heardest not, I become like them, that go down into the pit.
Here the voice of my humble pe^icions when I cry unto the, when I cry unto the,
when I hold up my hands toward the mercy seat of thy holy temple. Psalm. xxvii
O hyde not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in thy
displeasure. The sorrows of death have compassed me round about, Psalm. xviii.
and the ouerflowings of ungodliness made me afraid, The pains of hell came about
me, yt snares of death have overtaken me. Be not thou far from me* Psalm. xxii
O Lord, thou art my succor, have thee to help me. Deliver my soul from the
swearde, my dearling from the power of ye dog. Save me from the Lions mouth. So
shall I declare thy name unto my brethren, and in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee^


Euse. I doubt not brother Epaphroditus, but yt God has heard these your
most humble prayers and lamentable supplications, and will, (when he sees
conuenient^ time,) send you remedy, and give you a joyful and merry heart, so
that you shall leap upon Satan, and say: The Lord is my light and my
salvation, Psalm. xxvii
whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then
shall I be afraid? Though an hoaste of men were laid against me, yet shall
not my heart be afraid. And though there rose up war against me, yet will I put
my trust in him. i. Cor. xv.
Again, death is swalowed up into victory. Ose. xiii.
Death where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God, which
has given us the victory. through our Lord Jesus Christ, A prayer.



Epa. O when will the Lord have mercy on me, and deliver me from the grievous
assaults of mine enemies, O Lord, why have thou forgotten me? Psalm. xlii.
Why go I thus heauely, while the enemy oppresses me? Up Lord, why sleapest
thou? Awake, Psalm. xliiii.
and be not absent from me for ever. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest my misery and trouble? My soul is brought low even unto the dust,
my belly cleaves unto the ground. Psalm. xxvii
Arise and help me O Lord, and deliver me for thy mercies sake.


Chri. Fainte not, nether despair you of Gods mercy, but take a good heart
unto you and abide the Lords pleasure. Be of like mind with him, which praid
on this manner unto God, saying: Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, Psalm. cxxii.
thou that dwell in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servant look unto
ye hand of their masters: and as the eyes of a maiden, unto the hand of her
mistres: even so our eyes wait upon the Lord our god, until he have mercy upon
us. Thren. iii.
It is good to be quiet says the Prophet, and patiently to abide the saving
health of the Lord* For ye Lord will not forsake for ever, but though he
punyshe you now, and suffer satan to trouble you a little while, for the trial
of your faith, yet according to the multitude of his mercies will he receive
you to grace again, and not cast you out of his heart for ever. He is a father
of mercies and God of all consolation. ii. Cor. i. Psalm. cxliii.
He will not be always chiding, neither will he for ever be angry with us. For
like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful unto
the^ yt fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are
but duste.


Epa. Lord be thou merciful unto me. A prayer.
Hide not thy self in a cloud, but show me thy loving and gentle
countenance, that I may be saved. Send me present help from above, Ephe. vi.
or else I perysh. For I wrestle not against blood and flesh, but against rule,
against power, against worldly rulers, even governors of the darcknes of this
world, Math. iiii.
against spiritual craftines in heavenly things. This grievous conflict, O
Lord, is with such an ennemy, as feared not to assail thee, whom thou thy self
call the Prince of this world, John. xiiii.
and the holy Apostle terms him, the God of this world. Arise therefore O
Lord, i. Cor. iiii.
and take my part. Be thou, O God, my defender, my house of defense and my
Castle. Deliver me out of ye snare, which mine ennemy has laid for me, that
I being set at liberty, may sing praises to thy blessed name, and magnify
thee my Lord God for ever and ever.


Theo. Amen.


Phi. Neighbor, take a good heart unto you, and you shall shortly see the
wonderful working of God. Psalm. cxvi.
For behold, he that keeps Israel, does nether slomber nor sleep. The Lord
him self is your keeper, the Lord is your defense, the lord shall preserve you
from all evil: yea, the Lord shall keep your soul. For as he casts down, so
lifts he up again. As he kills: so he quickens. ii. Cor. i.
As he now for a little time suffers Satan to disquiet you, for the
exercise, probation, and trial of your faith: so likewise will he deliver you
out of this agony, and give you again a joyful, merry, and quiet conscience.
For the nature and property of God is to wou^d: The property of God in his
elect.
before he heals, to throw down: before he lifts up, to kill: before he
quickneth, to condemn: before he saves. Therefore fear not. For the lord
deals none otherwise with you, than he does with his other saints. This
your trouble he will turn to ease, and this your sorrow will he turn to joy, as
he says in the Gospel, John. xvi.
verily verily I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament: but contrariwise the
world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. A woman when she traueleth has sorrow, because her hour is come, but
as soon as she is delivered of ye child, she remembers no more ye anguishe for
joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I
will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice and your joy shall no man
take away from you. In this your heavy conflict God seems to have withdrawn
the glorious beams of his fatherly grace from you, but he will straightways
lighten his godly countenance upon you, and work such joys in your heart,
through his holy spirit, as heretofore you felt never the like. And this your
joy, shall never be taken from you. Therefore whatsoever satan that old
canckred ennemy of mankind goes about to persuade you, i. Pet. v.
believe him not, but resist him with strong faith, ever remembering that he is
both a lier and a murderer. You are a member of that congregation, John. viii.
which is built upon the rock Christ, Math. xvi.
against whom the gates of hell, shall not prevail. You are a living stone
of the blessed building and spiritual house, Math. vii.
whereof Christ is the head corner stone, though ye winds blow, the shours of
rain descend, and the cruel tempests ^eate on the house, yet it falls not,
for it is grounded not upon ye and, Luke. xxii.
but upon the rock. Satan ^n this temtation has desired to sifte you, as it
were wheat, but Christ has prayed for you, yt your faith failed not. You are
one of the sheep, John. x.
which God the father has given to his son Christ, therefore can you not
peryshe, neither shall any creature pluck you out of his hand, but he shall
give you everlasting life.


Epa. Now per^ceiue I most gentle neighbor Philemon, that to be true, which I
have many times heard the godly preachers rehearse in their most comfortable
Sermons.


Phile. What is that I pray you?


Epaph. That one faithful Preacher, which is able with the sweet promises of
the holy scriptures to comfort the weak and desperate conscience: is better
then ten thousand mumbling Massemongers which promise with their Massinge
mountains of gold, but perform molhilles of glass. I have also many times
heard it said, that though the company of a learned man be good and
profitable at all times, yet chiefly in the time of syckenesse, and when the
weak creature is ready to depart from this wicked world, for as much as than
Satan is most busy and without ceasing labors to disquiet the conscience of
^he sickman, that by this means he may drive him to desperation, and finally
to damnation.


Phile. What mean you by that?


Epa. I thank God most hartelye, that such a learned man as you are, have
now vouchedsafe to visit me in this my sickness.


Phil. No learned man, but a lover of learning, and such one, as has a good
will well to do, and enuieth no man that can do better.


Epa. In the time of this your godly communication had with me, the Lord my
God be thancked for it I felt the heaviness, trouble, and disquietnes of my
conscience, by little and little to go away, and certain sweet mocions of
true and inward joy to arise in my heart* so yt now Satan with his wicked
temtations seems to have taken his flight, and the holy ghost^ with his most
godly and comfortable inspirations to have entered into my breast. Whereas before
m^ thought, I was in hell, now m^ thinck I am in heaven so great^ quietness,
rest, joy, and confort do I find in my conscience. Sainc^ Paul wysheth not in
vain to the Philippia^s this tranquillity and quietness of conscience, Phil.
iiii.
saying: the peace of God which passes al understanding keep your hearts and
minds in Christ Jesus. Again t^ the Collossians. Colloss. iii.
The peace of god might rule in your hearts, t^ the which peace ye are
called in one body. For no man knows what a precious Jewel and heavenly
treasure this peace of con^cience is, but such as feel it. Ne^her can any man
feel it a right, except he has felt before the grief, ^ain, and disquietnesse
of conscience. I may now right well say with ^he Psalmograph: Psalm. xxxi.
O how great and plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee, and that thou have ^repared for them that put their ^rust
in thee? Psalm. ^xxi.
O what great trou^les and adversities haste thou ^hewed me? And yet thou
did ^urne and refresh me, yea, and brough^est me from the deep of the earth
^gaine? Thou have brought me ^o great honor, and comforted me ^n every side.
Therefore will I ^raise thee and thy faithfulness, O God.


Phi. Here see you that fulfilled in your self, which you ha^^ full often red
in the holy Scripture The Lord kills and make^ alive, i. Reg. ii.
brings down to hell, an^ fetches up again. Great are t^^ troubles of the
righteous, Psalm. xxxiii
but t^^ Lord delivers them out of the^ all.


Chr. The holy man Toby (...) his prayer unto God, Toby. iii.
says: Wh^^soeuer loves thee and serves thee ^ right: is sure of this, that
if his li^ be tempted and proved, it sta^de^^ in the trying, and if he endure
in pa^^cience, he shall have a reward, an^ be highly crowned, and if he be i^
trouble that God (no doubt) sha^ deliver him, and if his life be i^ chastning,
that he shall have le^^ to come unto thy mercy. For tho^ have no pleasure in
our damnat^^on. And why? After a storm tho^ make the weather fair and stil^
after weping and heaviness tho^ geuest great joy. Thy name O go^ of Israel be
praised for ever.


Ep. Ame^.


Chr. The Psalmograph also says: Psalm. cxxv.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that now goes on his way
weping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless come again with joy, and
bring his sheues with him. Psalm. cxxiii^.



Epa. If the Lord him self had not been of my side, when Satan rose up against
me, he had swalowed me up quik. But praised be the Lord, which has not given
me over for a pray unto his teeth. My soul is escaped, even as a bird out of
the snare of the fouler: the snare is broken and I am delivered. My help
stands in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth. But
neighbor Philemon, it is good in the time of calm to provide for tempest. We
are taught of Job, Job. vii*
that a man's ^ife in this world, is a warfare or knighthode, and that we
therefore ought to watch and pray, Math. xxvi.
tha^ we fail not into temptation. The scripture declares, that after Sa^than
had tempted Christ, and was confounded by the word of God^ the devil departed
from Christ for a season. Luke. iiii.
Whereof we may learn* that he returned afterward unto Christ, and tempted him.
I fear also, least that Satan will shortly return unto me, and assail m^
with new temptations.


Phi. In^dede the property of Satan is^ when he can not get his purpose one
way, to attempt some other means. Of the law.
But whereof are ye afraid?


Epa. Christ says in the Gospel: Math. ix.
If thou will enter into lyfe^ keep the commandments. Again, do this, Luke.
x.
and thou shall live. He speaks of fulfilling the law. And s. Paul says.
Romans ii.
Not the hearers but the doers of the law, sha^ be justified before God. Deuteronomy.
xxv^.
Moses also pronounces the^ cursed, which abides not in all things that are
written in the law. What if Satan should lay the law against me, and prove
evidently that I have not fulfilled the law of God, and therefore I can not
enter into eternal life, but must neades be dampened? Remedies against ye curse
of the law*



Phi. The holy scriptur of God consists of two parts, of the law and of the
Gospel. If satan object ye law against you: lay you against him
straightewaies the Gospel. John. i.
For the law was given by Moses, but ye Gospel, that is, grace, favor,
remission of sins, truth, faithfulness, and everlasting life, came by Jesus
Christ. Of the law and the Gospel.
The law makes afraid: but the Gospel comfort. The law troubles: but the
Gospel quieteth. The law vttreth sin, but the Gospel pardons, and forgeueth
sin. Romans iii.
The law declares the fearse wrath of God against sinners: Gala. iii.
but the Gospel^ preaches the great and exceeding mercies of God toward
peniten^ sinners. The law wounds, bu^ the gospel heals. The law makes
sick: ii. Cor. ii.
but the gospel makes whole and strong. The law drives to desperation: but
the gospel ministers consolation and comfort. The law kills: but the gospel
quikneth. The law throws down to hell: but ye gospel lifts up to heaven.
Therefore if Satan be busy and lay the law against you, and that unto you
death^ and dampnation, answer him with the Gospel, which brings life and
everlasting salvation. For the law was not given us o^ God to justify and save
us, why the law was given.
but to be a doctrine unto us what w^ should either do or leave undone and to
be a scholemaister to lead us unto Christ, Gala. iii.
that of him we might obtain that, which by no means may be gotten of ye
law, I mean, the grace, favor, and mercy of God, remission and forgeuenes
of sins, the quietness of conscience, a new life, the gift of the holy ghost,
and everlasting life. Fly you therefore from the heavy burden of the law,
which depresseth and wayeth down the conscience, and take on you the sweet
and comfortable yoke of the gospel, and so shall you find reast unto your
soul. Math. xi.
For the yoke thereof is easy, and the burden light. After this manner even from
the beginning have all the godly in the conflicte of conscience fled from the
doctrine of the law unto the merciful promises of the Gospel, Act. xv.
as blessed Peter testifies saying: Now, why tempt ye God, to put on the
disciples necks, the yoke, which neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear. But we believe, that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved, John. vii.
as they were. Our savior Christ said unto the Jews, has not Moses given
you a law, and yet none of you keeps the law? The doctrine of the law is such
a burden, that the holiest that ever lived (Christ alone except) was never
hable to bear it. Romans vii.
No marvel, for the law is spiritual, but we are carnal. Prou. xx
Who among us all is able to say, my heart is clean, and I am free from sin?
The holy scripture pronounces us all sinners, and our own consciences bear
witness of ye same. Roma. iii.
And how comes it to pass? but only that we do not observe the law of the
Lord our God, Psalm. xi.
but rather ar tra^sgressours and breakers of that same, in so much yt if our
savior Christ had not come in the flesh and fulfilled the law for us* even to
the vttermoste, and so pacified the fathers wrath, we had been dampened for ever
and ever. Romans viii.
But Christ is come and has fulfilled the law with such perfection as the
law requires, Roma. x.
even at the full, and his fulfilling is our fulfilling. Gala. iii.iiii. i.
Cor. i.
Whosoever believes this, and takes Christ to be his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctifying and redemption, he cannot pearyshe but have everlasting life.


Epa. I pray you declare unto me some comfortable sentenses out of the holy
scripture, that my conscience may be ascertained of Christ's fulfillyng of the
law for me.


Phile. Christ says in the Gospel. Math. v.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or ye Prophets, no. I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill. All we are destroyers and breakers of the law,
but Christ is a perfect fulfiller of the same, not for him self, but for us,
and his fulfilling, is our fulfilling. The holy Apostle in his epistle to the
Romans, says. There is no damnation to them, Romans viii.
which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. For the law of the spirit of life through Jesus Christ has made me
fre from the law of sin and death. For what the law could not do (inasmuch as
it was weak because of the flesh) that parformed God, and sent his son in
the similitude of synnefull flesh, and by sin damned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. Here see you, that where as none of us
was able to fulfill the law, Christ the son of God has fulfilled it for us,
and by this means delivered us from the law of sin and death. Romans x.
Again in the same Epistle, Christ is the perfect fulfilling of ye law to
justify all that believe. So many therefore as believe, are justified, and for
them Christ has fulfilled the law to the vttermoste. To the Galathians he
also says, Galat. iii.
Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, in as much as he was
made accursed for our sake. Deuteronomy. xxi.
For it is written. Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. etc. It Christ
by his death and passion has delivered us from the curse of the law, how than
can the law condemn us? Item, in the same Epistle, when the time was full
come, Galat. iiii.
God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond unto the law, to redeem
them, which were bond unto the law, that we through election might receive
thinheritaunce that belongs unto the natural sons. If Christ became man
and was made bond unto the law, to redeem and deliver us from the law: what
power than has the law over us, that it may conde^pn us? If we be through ye
fre choice of God admitted to be the sons of God: the^ are we no more slaves
unto the law, nor any more bound to the subjection thereof, that it may cast us
away as wicked tra^sgressours and heirs of eternal damnation. For it is
fulfilled for us in Christ. Ephe. ii.
To the Ephesians he writes on this manner. Christ is our peace, which has
made of both one (he speaks of ye Jews and Gentiles) and has broken down
the wall that was a stop between us, and has also put away through his flesh
the cause of hatred even the law of commandments contained in the law
written. etc. Here have we the cause why god was angry with us. Uerely because
we fulfilled not the law. Now is Christ come, and has put away the cause of
this anger and hatred, that is to say, he has fulfilled the law for us, and
reconciled us unto God, so that now the father for his sake hates us no more,
but loves us, is no more angry, but well pleased with us, and accepts his
fulfilling of the law, as our own fulfulling. Collo. ii.
Also to the Collossians, Christ says he, has put out the hand writing yt
was against us contained in the law written, and that has he taken out of the
way, and has fastened it to his cross, and has spoiled rule and power, and
has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in his own
person. If Christ hanging on the Cross, has by the virtue of his passion and
death put out the hand wryghting that was against us contained in the law
than is our bond made frustrate and void, and we set at liberty, forasmuch
as Christ by his blood has both paid our debt unto God ye father, and also
subdued and brought under foot al our ennemies. Hebr. vii.
The author of the Epistle to ye Hebrews, has these words. The commandment
that went before, is disanulled, because of weakness and unprofitableness. For
the law brought nothing to perfection, but was an introduction to a better
hope, by the which we drawenie unto God. Here ar we taught also, that
forasmuch as by ye law no man can be made perfect (for who among us
fulfilleth the law?) we have our perfection in Christ^ ^y whom for our sake
the law is fulfilled, and remission of sins and everlasting life is freely
given unto us. This is the hope, profit and liberty, which so many as believe,
receive in Christ. Let therefore the terrors and curse of the law never
trouble you, though Satan do never so much lay it unto your charge: but
remember what the Apostle says: ye are no more under the law, Romans vi.
but under grace. Again. Now are we delivered from the law, Roma. vii.
and dead unto it, whereunto we were in bondage, that we should serve in a
new conversation of the spirit, and not in old conversation of the letter. For
if righteousness comes by the law, then died Christ in vain. Galat. ii.
But we know, says the Apostle, that a man is not justified by the deeds of
the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. And we have believed on Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ: and not by the
deeds of the law, because by the deeds of the law, no flesh sha^ be
justified. Again: as many o^ you as are justified by the law, a^ fallen from
grace. We look for and hope in the spirit to be iustifed through faith. Gala.
v.
For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision any thing worth, nether yet
uncircumcision but faith, which works by love* Comfort your self, neighbor
E^^paphroditus, against the assaults of Satan with these sweet sayings of the
holy scripture, and s^ shall nether the fear nor the curss^ of the law hurt
you. Remedies against sin.



Epa. God b^ thanked, I trust, I am now we^ enarmed against Satan for this
matter. But what, if he lay my sinful life unto my charge, and so burden my
conscience with that, that I know not what to do, but am like to fall unto
desperation? What shall I aunwere? How shall I escape? For I confess unto you
that I have been all my life time a very grievous sinner, and have greatly
offended the Lord my God.


Phi. Discomfort not your self, but take a good heart unto you. You are in
this behalf in none other case then all the saints and faithful people of
God have been before you, Roma. iii.
and are at this day. For all have sinned, and want the glory of God. Esaias.
liii.
All have gone astraye like lost sheep. We are unprofitable servants. Luke.
xvii. Esaias. lxiiii.
All our righteousnesses are as a clothe defiled with menstrue. 1. John. i.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness.


Epa. What (...) I do than, that sin may be (...) clog unto my conscience?


Phile. Repentance.
Let it repent you, that ever you of^fended so loving a father, and s^ gentle a
Lord. Be heartily sorry for your misdoings. Lament and in^wardly bewail your
wretchednes^ses, which so wickedly have trans^gressed and broken the holy
co^maun^dements of the Lord. For this ha^ty and unfeigned repentance is a
goodly preparatiue to salvation* and without it none can be ^aued Therefore John
Baptist, Math. iii.
Christ and his Apostles began their preaching of repentance. Mark. i. Act.
iii. Math. ix. Esaias. lxvi.
For whosoever is not brought into the knowledge of him self, he shall never
have delyghte to come unto Christ* For such as think them selves whole, have
no pleasure in a physician, but they that are sick.


Epaphr. And will God accept this my repentance?


Phi. Hear what God says by the Prophet Whom shall I regard? Even him that is
pore and of a lowly troubled spirit, and stands in awe of my words. The
Psalmograph also says: Psalm. li.
A sacrifice unto god is a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart: O
God, shall thou not despise. Again: Psalm. xxxiii.
the Lord is nie unto them that are of a troubled heart, and he will save them
that are of a broken spirit. A prayer.



Epa. O Lord take away from me that stony heart, which can not repent, and
give me that fleshly heart, which gladlye and willingly lamenteth her sins
and miseries, Ezech. xi.
and unfeignedly delyghteth in a new life. But what? is repentance enough?


Phi. As you ernestly and from the very heart do repent you of your former
sinful life: Confession of sins unto God.
so likewise humble your self in ye sight of God, and confess your self unto
him a most wicked and miserable sinner Cry in your heart with David, and say:
have mercy upon me, O God after thy great goodness. Accor^dinge unto the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses Wash me thoroughly from my
wic^kednes, Psalm. li.
and cleanse me from my syn For I knowledge my fautes, and my sin is ever before
me. Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. O turn thy
fac^ from my sins, and put out al^ my misdeeds. Make me a clean^ heart, O
God, and renew a righ^ spirit within me. Cast me not a^way from thy presence,
and tak^ not thy holy spirit from me. Cry^ with that lost son and say: Luke.
xv.
O fa^ther I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son* Cry with the Publicane and say: Luke. xviii
O God be merciful to me a sinner. Cry with the Leper and say: Math. vii.
O Lord, if thou will thou art hable to make me clean. Cry with the blind man
and say: Mark. x.
O Jesus the son of David, have mercy on me. Math. xv.
Cry with the woman of Canane and say^: have mercy on me O Lord thou^^ne of
David: My daughter is grievously vexed of ye devil. Math. v^^^.
Cry with the Centurion and say: I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my rofe, but speak the word only, and my son shall be heled. But unto
this your hearty repentance and humble confession of your sins, you must put
mighty and strong faith, believing yt God ye father for his promise sake made
unto all penitent sinners in Christ's blood, Faith.
will freely and merci^ully forgive you all your sins, be ^hey never so many or
grievous. for without this faith all yt ever you do, is nothing worth, as
thapostle says. Roma. xiiii.
Whatsoever is not of faith, Gene. iiii.
is sin. Cain repented and confessed his fault, saying: my sin is greater,
then I may deserve to be forgeuen. But because he wanted faith, he fell into
desperation and was dampened: Math. xxvii.
Judas repented and confessed his sin, saying: I have sinned, betraying the
innocent blood, yea he also made satisfaction: such as it was, but not
with^standinge because he added no^ faith unto his repentance, con^fession and
satisfaction, all was in vain. Peter his fellow disciple^ sinned also
grievously, Math. xxvi.
but because he earnestlye repented, and als^ faithfully believed to have
remis^sion of his sins by the precious blood of his master, whom he ^ fore
had both denied and forsworn he was forgeuen, and received i^ to favor
again. Ephe. i.
For by faith ar^ we made of the children of wrath, the sons of God. John. i.
By faith are we married unto Christ. Galat, iii.
By faith are our hearts purified. By faith satan is overcome. By faith the
world is vanquished. Ose. ii.
By faith we are preserved from dampnation. By faith we are justified and made
righteous. Act. xiii. i. Pet. v.
By faith the wrath of God is assuaged. By faith we work the will of God. i.
John. v.
By faith our prayers are heard, and our requests granted. By faith we
please God. Romans v.
By faith we be made the children of light. By faith we are borne a new of God.
John. vi.
By faith we are made the temples of the holy ghost. Mark. xi. Roma. xi.
By faith we understand the mysteries of God.

By faith we prevail against the gates of hell. John. xii i. John. iii^ i.
Cor. iii. Math. xxvi Romans viii.
By faith we are made the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with our Lord and
savior Christ Jesus, of everlasting glory. Lib. de fide ad Petrum.
Faith, as S. Austen says* is the beginning of man's salvation. Without faith
no man can reach or come unto the number of the sons of God. Without faith
all the labor of man is frustrate and void. Faith, says S* Ambrose, Lib. de
Cain and Abel.
is ye rote of all virtues* and whatsoever thou buyldest o^ this foundation,
that alone profits unto the reward of thy work^ fruit and virtue. Faith,
says he* is ritcher then all treasures: stronger then all corporal power: and
more healthful then all Physicians. Therefore look that you hau^ this true
faith in you, and tha^ you cleue both toth and nail (as they use to say) to
the merciful and comfortable promises of god: So may you be sure to have
remission and forgeuenes of your sins.


Epa. I believe, O Lord, help tho^ my unbelief. The sick ma^s confession of his
sins. Mark. ix. Luke. xvii.
O Lord increase my says, O heavenly father my God and my Lord, I with an
assured persuasion of thy goodness toward me, most humbly beseech the for Jesus
Christ's sake, mercifully to behold me a most miserable sinner, and clearly to
forgive all those sins and wickdnesses, which I wretched creature have
committed against thee my Lord God from the hour of my birth unto this present
time. Forgive me all my sins for thy names sake, Psalm. xxv
they ^e both many and great. Oh remember not the sins and offen^es of my
yougth, but according unto thy mercy think upon me, O Lord, Psalm. lxxx^.
for thy goodness. Oh remember not mine old sins, but ^aue mercy on me, yea
and that ^^ghtsone, for I am come to great ^iserie. Help me, O God of my
^^luation, for ye glory of thy name. O deliver me, and be merciful unto my
sins for thy names sake. So shall I give thee thanks for ever, and magnify
thy blessed name worlds without end.


EU. Amen*


Phi. Doubt not neighbor Epaphroditus, but that god has graciouslye heard
this your humble suit, and also granted your request* He has forgiven you al
your sins He will never lay them to your^ charge. He has cast them away^
behynd his back, so that he will n^^uer remember them more, as h^ says by ye
Prophet, Iere. xxxi.
I will forgive their misdedes, and will never remember their sins any more*
Again. Ezech. x^iii.
If the ungodly will tur^ away from all his sins that h^ has done, and keep
all my com^maundementes, and do the thin^ that is equal and right: doubtle^ he
shall live and not die. As for (...) his sins that he did before, the shall
not be thought upon, but in his righteousness yt he has done, he shall live.
For have I any pleasure in the death of a sinner, says ye Lord God, and not
rather that he convert and live? Item. Repent, and turn you from al your
wickednesses: so shall there no sin do you harm. Cast away from you al your
ungodliness that ye have done. Make you new hearts, and a new spirit. Wherefore
will ye die, O ye house of Israel? seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the Lord God. Turn you then: and ye shall live. Therefore
fear not good brother: but continue faithful and repentant unto thend, and ye
shall surely be saved.


Epa. Sin is an heavy burden, Of sin. Psalm. vi.
and very displeasa^t unto the lord our God, and makes sinners to ^le from the
face of God, forasmuch as they know that God hates sin and al the^ that do
commit it.


Phi. Esaias. iii.
I confess sin to be an heavy burden and displeasant unto God yet as heavy
as it is, Math. viii
Christ has taken it on him and born it away as the Prophet says, he has
taken on him our infirmities, and borne our sycknesses. i. Pet. ii.
This witnesses. S. Peter, saying. Christ him self bare our sins in his
body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live unto
righteousness. And where as ye say that sin makes sinners to fly from the
face of God, I answer. It drives in deed the obstinat and desperate sinners
from God, but not the penitent which repent in faith, and turn unfeignedly
unto the Lord their God, being persuaded that he is a father of mercies and
God of al consolation, ^^. Cor. i.
and that he for Christ's sake will forgive them. Do they which feel them
self sick and diseased, fly and run away from the physician? They rather make
have unto the Physician, being nothing afraid of him, because they are sick and
diseased, but rather somuche the more do they desire to come unto him, to show
him their wounds and to disclose their diseases, that they may be made whole.
Now is Christ a phisitio^, Math. ix.
and all we through sin are diseased, shall we therefore run away from
Christ, and not rather make have unto him? what Physician is so ready to heal
the body, as Christ our Physician is to heal the soul? Who ever came unto
him with a faithful and penitent heart, and was refused? Who ever sought
remedy at his hand, and was not helped? Who ever opened unto him his disea^es,
and was not cured? he calls all without exception, be they never so diseased
and laden with the burden of sin unto him, and pro^miseth that he will ease
them of their burdens, and make the^ whole, and is it to be thought, that he
wyl^ refuse sinners, when they come vn^to him? Math xi
Come unto me, says he, al ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe
you. Take my yoke upon you, and ye shall find rest for your souls. For I came
not to ca^ ye righteous, but sinners unto repentance. Math. ix
The son of man came to seek and to save that was lost. How frequented he the
company of sinners, Luk, xix
when he was in this world, and that to this end only, tha^ he might call them
through his godly sermons unto repentance, Math. ix
unto the favor of God, and unto the fellowship of the saints, in so much
that he was called a friend of open sinners and whores? Mrth. xi.x
How defended he always the humble and penitent sinners against the proud and
stifnecked Pharisees and Iusticiaries? Luke. vii
When Zache being a sinner and the Prince of the Publicans sought to see
Christ, Luke. xix.
how lovingly did Christ speak unto him and friendly came into his house, eat
and dranck with him? Luke, vii
When Mary Magdale^ being a grievous sinner came unto Christ, he refused not
her company, but talked most gently with her, comforted her, received her into
his favor, quieted her conscience, healed her diseases, and gave her
everlasting life. Luke, xvii
When the poor Publicane, which had both often and grievously offended the Lord
his God, came into the temple to pray, and in his prayers humbled him self
before the majesty of God, and confessed him self a sinner, was he not
joyfully received into the favor of God, and pronounced more righteous even by
the mouth of Christ then ye proud* Pharesy for all his glistring works? How
joyfully was that unthrifty, Luke. xv.
prodigal and wastfull son received home again? Luke. xxii.
What friendship found that theif, which was crucified with Christ, at the
hand of Christ, when he said, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom? Did not Christ straightways answer him and say: This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise? And yet was he both a thief, a seditious person and a
murderer. Christ refuses none although never so grievous a sinner, if we come
unto him. Turn ye unto me, ^acha. i.
and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of hosts. Thou disobedient Israel.
Iere. iii.
Turn again (says the Lord) and I will not let my wrath fall upon you I am
merciful (says the Lord) and I will not always bear displeasur against thee:
but this I will ye thou know thy great blasphemy, namely that thou have
unfaithfully forsaken the Lord thy God, and have made thy self partaker of
strange Gods under all green trees, but have had no will to hear my voice,
says the Lord. O ye disobedient children, turn again says the Lord, and
I will be married with you. etc. O ye disobedient children, turn again,
saying: Lo, we are thine: for thou art the Lord our God, and so shall I heal
your back turninges. Who will not boldly come unto so merciful a Lord and
most loving father, seeing he so ge^tely calls all men unto him, be they never
so grievous sinners, and promises that he will not refuse them, but lovingly
receive them, never lay their offenses unto their charge: but to forget them
and cast them behind his back, that he will never either remember the or look
upon them more.


Theo. Joel. ii
The Lord is merciful, gentle and loving, pacient, long suffering, and o^ much
kindness, and ready at all times to forgive, yea even wha^ he is at the point to
punyshe. The Lord is loving unto every man, Psalm. cliiii
and his mercy is over all his works* The lord is good and gracious, and of
great mercy unto all them that call upon him. Psalm. lxxxvi
The Lord is full of tender compassion and great mer^cy, long sufferyng and of
much goodness. Psalm. ciii.
He will not always be chi^ding, neither keeps he his anger for ever. He deals
not with us after our sins, neither rewards he us according to our
wickednesses. For look how hie ye heaven is in comparison of the earth: so
great is his mercy also toward them that fear him. Look how wide also the
East is from ye west: so far has he set our sins from us. Yea like as a
father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful unto the^ that
fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers yt we are but dust.
Psalm. cxxx
With the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. And he
shall redeem Israel from al his sins.


Phi. The great kindness and dear hearty love of God toward us, appears not
only in this, yt he both willingly and gladly admits and receives sinners,
whenever they repent and turn unto him, but ^n that he also most diligently
seeks them up, fetches them home again, and gives them grace to repent and
turn, that they may ^e saved. Luke. xv
This thing is very ^yuelye described and set forth in ^he parables of the
straid sheep, Luke. x.
of the lost groat, and of the wounded man. Herein is love, says S* John, i.
John. iii.
not that we loved God, bu^ that he loved us, and sent his sonn^ to be the
agreement for our sins Saint Paul says: Roma. v.
God settet^ out his love toward us, seeing tha^ while we were yet sinners.
Christ died for us. Much more the^ now^ we that are justified by his blud^
shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enne^mies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his son: much^ more seeing we are
reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life.


Epa. I believe yt God is a merciful father for Christ's sake to all them tha^
do truly repent, believe and con^uert unto him, but is it not to be^ feared,
that my repentance and conversion is to late? Remedies against late
repentance and conversion unto God.



Phi. Be on good comfort neighbor Epaphroditus, there is no repentance and
conversion to late in this world* so that it be true and proceadeth from a
contrite heart and humble spirit. For at whatsoever hour a sinner does mourn
and lamente for his sins, Iere. xxx^*
God promyseth, that he will so forgive him his iniquities that he will never
remember the^ more. Ezech. xv^^^*
And Christ says. Math. v.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. In the holy
scriptures God does very often call us unto repentance, but he appoynteth not
either this or ye time, day and hour, but he wills us to repent, and promises
that whenever we return unto him, we shall be safe and escape from death
unto life. Math. ^^^
Our savior Christ also bids all that are diseased, come unto him, and
promises that he will ease the^, but he assigns no time, but at all hours he
promyseth grace, mercy, favor, help, and co^^ort. Christ is a savior for all
ages, and refuses no conversion, although never so late. If we come in
childhode, in yougth, in middle age, or in old age, whenever we come, we
shall be received. Only let us come. It is better late then never. God is a
like merciful, in all ages. Christ is a savior able enough to save at all
times. Math. i.
He cease not to be called Jesus, that is to say, a savior: niether cease
he at any time to save, as ye Apostle says, Jesus Christ yesterday and to
day, Hebr. xiii.
and the same continues for ever. If Christ were appointed of God the father a
savior for certain times, and not for all times: so should he be no perfect
savior. ^ Note.
If he could not as effectually save at the hour of death as at the hour of the
birth: he were unworthy ye name of a savior. But he abides a savior for all
ages and for all kind of people, so that they unfeignedly repent, believe, and
turn. Set before your eyes the parable, Math. xx.
which we read in the gospel, of them that were hired to work in the
vineyard. Some came early in ye morning, some about the third hour, some about
the.vi. and.ix. hour, and some about the.xi. hour. And when night once came,
that they should receive their wages, all had like reward. When they that came
first saw that they that came last and wrought but one hour, were equal unto
the^, which had borne ye burden and heat of the day, and received like
reward: one of the^ murmured and grudged at ye matter: but it was answered.
Friend I do the no wrong. Take that is thine and go thy way. I will give unto
this last even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as me lists with
mine own goods? Thus se you that they, which came at the latter end of ye
day and wrought in the vinyard but an hour, were not refused but received the
like reward with the^ that came first. Only let us be laborers and no
loiterers, only let us come into the Lords vineyarde, and not run away
backward, and at whatsoever hour we come, we shall be welcome, and receive our
reward with the first. Luke. xxii.
Again the history of the thief, that hanged on the righthand of Christ,
which thief was full of wicked deeds, and never turned unto God until the very
hour of his death, declares manifestly that there is no conversion in this
life to late, if it be accompanied with true repentance and unfeigned faith.
The thief hangyng on the cross, and at the point of death only said unto
Christ: Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom. And Christ well
accepting his conversion, said unto him: Truly I say unto thee: this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Who will now despair of the good will and
favorable mercy of God, seeing that this thief co^uerting at the very last
hour of his death, was not of Christ rejected: but received, and made a
fellow citizin with Christ of joyful Paradise?


Epa. But I have many times grievously offended the Lord my God, and broken his
holy commandments.


Phile. This is no let unto your salvation, so that your conversion be
unfeigned. Prou. xxiii
The righteous man sins.vii. times in the day. Eccle. vii. Psalm. xiii. Math.
xix
Who lives and sins not. All go astray. There is none good but God alone.
All our righteousnesses ar as a cloth polluted with me^strue. Esaias. lxiiii,
If God should deal with the most holy and most per^ect according to their
deserts, they should find nothing in them selves but worthy dampnation* David
with other very many of the old Testament oftentimes sinned and offended God
with their wicked acts, ii. Reg. i. Genesis 2.9.19 20.27.36.31 34.37. Exodus ii
iii. Reg. xi Mat. xx.xxvi
yet forasmuch as they repented and unfeignedly turned unto God, they were
received into favor and saved. The Disciples of Christ, Peter and his fellows
were sinners also, and many times did that, which is not righteous in the
sight of God, yet they be wayling their miseries, and truly returning unto God,
were admitted into the number of gods elect. Math. xviii.
God is that Lord, which forgeueth not only one talent but the whole debt of.x.
M. talentes, if we come truly unto him and knowledge our beggary, yea our
nothing. If God would yt we should forgive one an other, so often as we offend,
doubtless God will also forgive us whansoeuer we offend, if we unfeignedly turn
unto him, be our sins never so many and grievous. Mary Magdale^ sinned full
often, yet was she forgeuen, as it is written of her: Luke. vii.
Many sins are forgeuen her, because she has loved much. Luke, xviii
The Publican was with out doubt a very grievous sinner, and had many times broken
the co^maundeme^ts of god, yet so sone as he humbled him self before the throne
of gods majesty, and apealed unto his mercy: he was received unto favor and
pronounced of christ's ^wn mouth more righteous then ^he Pharisy for all his
glistring works and outward holiness of life. ^ing Manasses in his prayer
con^essed unto God, that he had syn^ed above the number of ye sands ^f the
sea, and that his iniquities ^ere innumerable, yet after he returned unto the
Lord, they were all forgeuen and he received into favor. If there be not daily
remission of daily sins at the hand of God for Christ's sake, Math. vi.
why are we commanded daily to pray for the forgeuenes of our sins? Luke. xi.
If the favor of God be promised at all hours to such as unfeignedly turn
unto their Lord God, Iere. xviii. Ezech. xviii. and.xxxiiii.
and seek him in singlenes of heart, the^ follows it, that sin we never so
often and never so grievously: yet if hearty repentance come, there is hope of
remission of sins through the blood of Christ. Psalm. cix.
If Christ be an everlasting Bishop, than is he able at all times to save even
at the full those, which come unto God through him. Hebr. vii
If Christ go forth to be called Jesus, Math. i.
that is to say: a savior, then cease he not to save sinners. Romans viii.
If Christ be our intercessour, mediator and advocate unto God the father even
unto the worlds end, i. Tim. ii.
then may we be sure through him to have remission and forgeuenes of all our
sins eue^ unto thend of ye world, i. John. ii.
yea and that at all times, sin we never so often and grievously, if we repent,
believe and amend. Therefore though you have many times grievously offended ye
Lord your God and broken his holy commandments, yet despair not but turn
again unto the Lord your God, and he will turn unto you* deliver you and save
you. ii. Cor. i.
For he is the father of mercies and God of all consolation. He is rich enough
for all the^ that call upon him. Rom^. x.
If you do thus, though your sins be as read as scarlet, yet shall they be
as white as snow. And though they were like purple, yet shall they be as
white as woll. Hear what God says by the Prophet: Commonly when a man puts
away his wife and she goes from him, Iere. iii.
and marieth with an other, then the question is: should he resort any more
unto her after that? Is not this field then defiled and unclean? But as for
thee: thou have plaide ye harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says
ye Lord. etc. and I will not let my wrath fall upon you. I am merciful,
(says the Lord) and I will not always bear displeasure against thee. O tourn
again and I will be married with you. Who^ would not these words encourage to
come again unto the Lord his God, and thoroughly to be persuaded of gods loving
favor toward him, and of the forgeuenes of his sins, be they never so many
and grievous, if he repent, believe and amend?


Epa. These things comfort well my weak conscience. But one thing does
^reatly discourage me.


Phi. What ^s that? Remedies against ye want of merits.



Epa. I have no merits, nor plenty of good works, wherewith I may make God
favorable ^o me, but I am a barren fig tree ^oyd of all good fruit.


Phile. The want of merits ought not to pluck you from coming unto god. Tit.
iii.
For God saves not us for the righteous works, which we have done, but for his
mercies sake. If our salvation came of works and merits: then were grace no
more grace. Romans xi.
If everlasting life were gotten by deseruinges: Romans vi
than were it not the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ephe. ii
But the Apostle says.

By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of our selves. It is the
gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should boast him self.
If rightousnesse come of the law: Galat. ii.
then Christ is dead in vain. Christ came not to call the righteous: but
sinne^ to repentance. Math. ix.
And we are taug^ in the Gospel, that joy shall be (...) heaven over one
sinner that rep^^teth, Luke. xv
more then over ninety an^ nine just persons, which need (...) repentance.
Luke. x.
What had the wou^^ded man deserved, that he should be healed? Luke. xv.
What had ye strayshep^ merited, that the shephard should so lovingly fetch her
home again^ What good works brought Mar^ Magdalen, Luke. v^^.
when Christ receiue^ her unto grace and forgave her, he^ sins? And so
likewise of diverse other. If God should save us because of our merits and
good works, so should we choose god by our works and merits, and not God us by
his favor, grace and mercy. But Christ says, John. xv.
ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. John. iii.
And S. John wondering at this great mercy of God, brasteth out ^^to these
words* and says: Be^olde, what love the father has ^hewed on us, yt we
should be called ^he sons of God. i. John. ^^^.
Again herein ^s love, not that we loved God, ^ut that he loved us, and sent
his ^onne to be the agreement for our ^^nnes. And S Paul says, God ye ^ather
has chosen us in Christ, Ephe. i.
before the foundatio^s of the world ^ere laid. God therefore did choose ^s by
his grace, and not we him ^y our works and merits: Exodus xxxiii.
I will ^aue mercy, said God to Moses, ^n whom it pleases me to have mercy,
Roma. ix.
and I will have compassion, ^n who^ it is my pleasure to have compassion. It
lies not therefore ^n a man's will or running, but in ^he mercy of God. And the
Psal^ograph says, Psalm. xvi^
speaking of God, (...) of him self: he has saved me, because it was his
pleasure to have ^e. Psalm. lvi.
Again he says: Thou shall save them for nothing: what (...) to say, De
verb. Apo. sermon. 15.
says S. Austen, thou sh^^ save them for nothing? but ye th^^ find nothing
in them wherf^^ they should be saved, and yet sau^^ thou them. Lib. 2. contra
Pela.
Freely do thou ge^^ freely do thou save. And s. Iero^^ alleging ye same
sentence agai^^ the Pelagians, says, that ye rig^^teous are not saved by their
ow^^ merits, but by the tender merc^^ of God. If we shall consider ou^^
merits, In Joan. cap. 3 Home. 25.
says Chrisostom, we a^^ not only worthy no reward, b^^ we are also worthy
punishemen^ Let all men's merits, which per^^shed by Adam be still and keep
s^^lence, says Saint Austen, De predest. Sanctorum.
and l^^ the grace of God reign, which reigns through our Lord I^^sus
Christ. De vocat. Gene. lib. 1. Cap. 5.
The redemption (...) Christ's blood should wax vi^^ and become of no price,
says S^ Ambrose, if ye justification, which comes by grace were due unto
merits going before. Psalm. ci^^
David sath in a certain Psalm, praise* the Lord. O my soul, and all that is
within me, praise his holy name. Praise the Lord, O my soul and forget not his
benefits. Which forgeueth all thy sins, and heals al thine iniquities.
Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns the with mercy and lo^ing
kindness. ^ Note.
All good men from the beginning have attributed and given the whole glory of
their justification and salvation, not to their own merits and good wor^es: i.
Cor. xv.
but to the free grace and undeserved mercy of God, i, Cor. i
that God may be all in all, and that he, which reioyseth, should rejoice in
^he Lord. For the contentation and quietness of your conscience ^n this behalf,
remember yt Christ ^ame not to call ye iusticiaries, but sinners unto
repentance. Reme^^ber that the son of man, Luke. xix.
came t^ seek and to save that, that wa^ lost. Remember that Christ is (...)
Physician, Math. ix
and that the who^ has no need of a Physician, bu^ such as are sick. Math. xi.
Remember tha^ Christ calls unto him al such a^ are diseased and laden with
the bu^^den of sin. Math. i.
He requires no m^^rites, only come, remember tha^ Christ is called a savior
to ye end that he should save them, which otherwise should perish. Luke. ii
Hear al^so what God says by ye Prophet Come to the waters al ye that b^
thirsty and ye that have no money Come, Esaias. lv.
bie, yt ye may have to ea^^ Come bie wine and milk without any money, or money
worth. Wher^^fore do ye lay out your money for the thing that fedeth not, and
spen^ your labor about the thing tha^ satisfies you not? But harke^ harken
rather unto me, and ye shall eat of the best, and your soul shall have her
pleasure in plenteousnesses. Incline your ears, and come unto me, take heed (I
say) and your soul shall live. Our savior Christ also says. John. vii.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Again in an other place,
I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life. Apoca.
xxi
He that overcomes shall enherite all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son. Apoca. xxi^
Ite^. Let him that is a thirst, com. And let whosoever will, take of the water
of life, fre. Here is the favor of God, remission of sins, the gift of the
holy ghost, quietness of conscience, and everlasting life promised freely without
merits or deserts to so many as will come unto Christ with a repenta^t heart and
faithful mind. Esaias. ixi.
For Christ was sent of God the father to preach good tidings unto the pore,
Luke. iiii.
that he might bind up the wounded hearts, that he might preach deliverance
to the captive, and open the prison to them that are bound, declare the
acceptable year of the Lord, and comfort al them that are in heaviness. He came
into this world to save sinners. i. Tim. i.
Therefore let it not dismay you, though you find in your self plenty of sins
and good works very few. Cast rather ye eyes of your mind with strong faith on
Christ and on his righteousness, on his merits, passion, and death, on his
blessed body breking, and his precious blud shedding. Cor. i. Iere. ix.
Believe him to be ordained of God the father to be your wisdom, and
righteousness, your sa^ctification and redemption, that as it is written, he yt
reioyseth, should rejoice in the Lord. Phil. iii.
Count all your merits, good works, and righteousnesses, vile and of no price,
for the excellency of ye knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. Labor to win
Christ, and to be found in him, not having your own righteousness, which
comes of the law, but yt that, which is through ye faith of Christ even ye
rightousnes which comes of God through faith, yt you may know him and the
virtue of his resurrection and fellowship of his passions. He yt through true
faith has gotten Christ, put him on his back withal his righteousness and
holiness, he is not altogether without merits, neither walks he naked in ye
sight of God. Romans xiii.
Unto this exhorts S. Paul, when he says. Put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, that is to say. Clothe your self through says with all the merits
and works of Christ. Take his righteousness, holiness, perfection, praying,
fasting, watching, law fulfilling, miracles working, preching passion, death,
resurrection, assention, and all that ever he has to be yours. Believe him to be
given you of God, withal that ever he has. Christ is yours, all therefore that
ever Christ merited in his flesh is yours also, as the Apostle says. God
spared not his own son, Romans viii.
but gave him for us al, how can it be than, that with him he should not give
us all things also? If you on this manner put on Christ his merits and good
works through true faith, Math. xxi
you shall not appear before God an unfruitful fig tree, neither shall the
curse of God fall upon you. Hear what S. Austen says: In mantali. Cap. xxii.
All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit and my refuge,
my health life and resurrection. The tender mercy of the Lord is my merit. I am
not without merits, so long as that Lord of mercies fails not. And if the
mercies of the Lord be plenteous, then am I also ple^teous in merits. The
mightier that he is to save, the better is my state and condition, and the more
fre am I from all danger. Here se you that this godly man. Saint Austen
knows none other merits that may do him good, but the merits of Christ's
death and passion. He counts Christ's merits his merits, and says that he
is not without merits, so long as that Lord of mercies fails not. Lib.
medit. Cap. 14.
In an other place he also says, all my hope, and assurance of my whole
trust is in the precious blood of Christ, which was shed for us and for our
salvation. In that is all my comfort, and reposing the whole affiance of my
salvation. In that I desire to come unto thee (O heavenly father) not having
mine own righteousness, but that righteousness, which comes by thy son Jesus
Christ our Lord. Item. Brethren, that we may be healed from sin, let us
behold Christ crucified. For as they that did behold the brazen Serpent in
the wyldernsse, did not die through the stinging of the serpents: so likewise
they yt do look upon the death of Christ with faith, are healed from the
bitinges of sins. Here to agrees the saying of saint Barnarde, In cantica.
what is of so mighty force and great strength to heal the wounds of the
conscience, as the diligent remembrance of Christ's wounds? Again, when I am
troubled and put in fear of my sins, than do I hide me in the bloody wounds
of Jesus Christ. Look yt you therefore likewise fly unto the merits of
Christ's death and passion, and so shall neither sin, death, hell,
desperation, law, or any other thing hurt you.


Ep. I believe that whatsoever Christ did in his humanity, he did it for me and
for my salvation. And in thee, O Lord God, is my whole trust, let me never be
confounded. But neighbor Philemon.


Phile. What is your mind sir. Of predestination.



Epa. What if I be not of the number of those, whom God has predestinat to be
saved?


Phi. Fear you not. God without all doubt has sealed you by his holy spirit
unto everlasting life. Your name is written in the book of life. You are a
citizin of the new glorious and heavenly Jerusalem. You shall remain with God
in glory after your departure for ever and ever. Of repentance



Epa. It sore repents me, yt I have at any time offended the lord my God.


Phi. This repentance is an evident testimonye of your salvation, and that god
has predestinat and tofore appointed you unto everlasting life. Math. ii
For it is written, repent you of your former life, Eze. xviii
for the kingdom of God is at hand. Again: If the ungodly shall repent him of
al his sins yt he has done. etc. Doubtless he shall live and not die. As for all his sins that he did before, Of Faith.
they shall not once be thought upon.


Epa. I have an earnest faith in the blood of Christ, that God the father will
forgive me al my sins for Christ's sake.


Phi. You thus believing can not perish, but this your faith is an undoubted
assurance unto your conscience, that you are predestinate to be saved. For it
is written, God has so derely loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
son, that all that believe on him, should not pearishe, but ^aue everlasting
life. John. iii.
For God ^ent not his son into the world ^o condemn the world, but that
^he world should be saved by him. He that believes on him, is not ^ondempned.
He that believes on ^he son, has everlasting life. Uerely, verily I say unto
you, he that hears my word, John. v.
and bele^eth on him that sent me, has e^erlasting life, and shall not come
unto dampnation, but is escaped from death unto life. This is the ^athers will,
that sent me, that of ^l which he has given me, I shall ^ose nothing, but raise
them up again at the last day. John. vii.
And this is ye will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the son
and believes on him, have everlasting life. And I will raise him up at ye last
day. I am the resurrection and life, John. xi
he yt believes in me, though he be dead, yet shall he live and every one that
lives and believes i^ me, John. xi.
shall never die. To him (christ^ give all the Prophets witness says S. Peter,
Act. x.
that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of
sins If thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, Romans x.
and believe in thine heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be
saved. For to believe with the heart justifies, and to knowledge with the
mouth, makes a man safe. Esaias. xxviii
For the scripture says: Whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded.
Thus se you, that faith does assure your conscience of ye favor of God and of
everlasting life. Doubt you not therefore, but that you are counted in the
number of Gods elect and chosen people, and shall enherit the glorious kingdom
of God: Of baptism



Epa. I was baptized in the name of God ye father, and of god the son, and of
god the ^oly ghost. Math. xxviii



Phi. This is also a sure ^^ke^ of the favor of God toward ^ou, and that you
are predestinate unto everlasting life, seeing that according to your
profession, you do believe, and unto the uttermost of your power frame your
life. For it is written, Mark. xvi.
he that believes and is baptized, Act. ii.
shall be saved. And s. Peter said unto the Jews: Repent you of your sins, and
be baptized every one of you in ye name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost* And Saint Paul
says: Gala. ii.
All ye that are baptized, have put on Christ. And you know, there is no
dampnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans viii
For as when you were baptized, ye forsook the devil, the world, and the flesh,
withal their works, po^pes, and vanity, and gave your self only unto the
service of God, taking him for your Lord and master even so has God likewise
taken you to be his servant, loves and favors you, and will defend you
against al your ennemies, and never forsake you, until he has brought you
unto everlasting life. By baptism is he your lord God, therefore will not he
suffer you to pearishe. By baptism, is he your father, and you are born of
him, and so become his son, therefore can he none otherwise, then love, tender
and favor you, and give you the enheritaunce of his heavenly kingdom. By
baptism are you made the brother of Christ, heir of God, and fellow heir with
Christ of everlasting glory, the^ may you be certain to be of that number, that
shall enherit eternal life. By baptism is the holy ghost given you, then are
you the son of God and ^an not pearysh. For it is written. They that are led
with the spirit ^f God, Roma. viii.
are the sons of God. Baptism is a continual sign of ^he favor of God
toward us, of ^he fre remission of sins, of our ^econciliatio^ unto God for
Chri^tes sake, and that we be by adop^ion the sons of God, and heirs of
^uerlasting glory. Of ye Lords supper.



Epa. In times ^ast I have also many times re^eiued the mysteries of the Lords
^ody and blood in the temples of ^he Christians, with the congre^ation of God,
wherein I confess, I have found great comfort, and ^erye much quietness unto
my ^eake and synnefull conscience.


Phi. The often coming with a ^eruent de sire unto the Lords ta^le by true
faith to feed upon the ^isteries of the Lords body and ^loud: is a manifest
argument, yt God has chosen you to be his, has written your name in ye bok^
of life, and predestinate you vnt^ everlasting glory. For in so doin^ you have
not only called unto re^membraunce the most healthfu^ death of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and so been thanke^ful for it, but you have also shew^ed
your self a lively member (...) that holy body, whereof Christ i^ the head.
You have professed ope^^ly in the face of the Christen con^gregation, that God
the father i^ your father, yt Christ is your Lord and savior, that by the one
onl^ oblation of his blessed body on the altar of the Cross, all your syn^nes
are put away and forgiven and you made the enheritour (...) everlasting glory.
When you thu^ came unto the Lords Table, a^ the fruits, benefits and merit^
of Christ's passion were given yo^ namely, the favor of God, remi^^sion of
sins, the holy ghost, quietness of conscience, new affectes, victory over
Satan, death and hell, and finally everlasting life, so that now ye are
incorporated in Christ, and become a true and lively member of that mystical
body, whereof he is the head, Ephe. ^:
yea, you ar flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, as the Apostle says.

Is not the cup of blessing, i. Cor. ^
which we bles, partaking of the blood of Christ? Is not the bread, which we
break, partaking of ye body of Christ? etc.


Epa. As I have had many times an earnest and fervent mind to come reuerentlye
unto the Lords table, and to be partaker of the holy mysteries of Chri^tes
body and blood with the congregation: Of hearing Gods word.
so likewise have I at all times been glad to repare unto those places, where
the word of God has been preached, and the doctrine yt has there been taugh^
I marked diligently, kept it in me^mory, and to the uttermost of m^ power I
labored to frame m^ life according unto the same, Jacob. i.
tha^ I might be no forgetful heare^ but a diligent doer of those wor^kes,
which I learned of the hol^ scriptures to be acceptable vnt^ the Lord my
Lord, Luke. i.
that I might serve him in holiness and righte^ousnes all the days of my life


Phi. As there is not a more euide^^ testimony and a surer argument^ that that
man is in the state of e^uerlasting dampnation, which has no mind to hear the
word o^ God, nor to train his life according unto the doctrine thereof: s^
likewise is there not a more cer^taine sign, that any man is pre^destinate to
be saved, then when h^ has a mind to hear the word o^ God, as our savior
Christ testi^fieth, saying: He that is of god, hears gods words, John. viii.
ye therefore hear the^ not, because ye are not of God. Here se you, how Christ
puts a difference between them that are of God, and them that are of the
devil. They that are the children of ye devil have no mind to hear the word
of God. But they that are the sons of God, have a fervent delight and
singular great pleasure to hear gods word, yea, and as the Prophet says,
Psalm. i.
to exercise them selves in it day and night. In an other place our Savior
Christ says also. My sheep hear my voice and I know them, John. x.
and they follow me, and I give unto them everlasting life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. In this
sentence ye se, that they which hear the voice of their shepherd Christ, are
the sheep of Christ, and that they shall never pearishe, but have everlasting
life. John. xviii.
Christ also said unto Pilate: Every one that is of the truth, hears my
voice. You having a mind to hear the word of God and to hear the voice of
Christ that hie shepherd: have showed your self to be of ye truth. So being,
you cannot perish, but obtain everlasting life. Luke. xi
For Christ him self pronounces them blessed which hear the word of God, and
keeps it, that is to say: believe it and study to frame their life according
unto ye same. Of Prayer.



Epa. Moreover I have ever had a desire (I thank ye Lord my God for it) to
pray unto the Lord my God, and to call on his holy name, although, I confess,
not so fervently as I ought.


Phil. This thing also does fully certify your conscience, yt you are of the
number of Gods elect, and to fore appointed unto everlasting salvation. Joel.
ii.
For it is written. Whosoever does call on the name of the Lord, Psalm. ix*
shall be safe. Again, he has cried unto me, and I will graciously hear him,
yea I am with him in trouble, and I will deliver him, and glorify him. With
long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.


Ep. God be thanked, I am now well quieted in my conscience, and fear Satan
nothing at all. I think my self at this present so strong and so thoroughly
enarmed against the devil and all his wicked army: that I am nothing afraid to
enter battaill with him, but am fully persuaded that by the help and power of
my graund captain Jesus Christ, I shall over throw him. One doubt remains and
that once dispatched, I trust I shall be in some redines for ye Lord my God,
whensoever he sends for ^e, and calls me out of this wretched world.


Phi. What is that?


Epa. Of the certe^tie of Gods favor toward us and of our salvation.
I have heard many times at the mouth of diverse men, which have a good opinion
of the^ selves of their own wit, doctrine and learning, that no man in this
world is certain of his salvation, niether can any man say with a safe
conscience and undoubted faith, I am of the number of Gods elect, I am a vessel
of mercy, I shall be saved. My name is registered in the book of life. etc. but
all men even ye most godly and faithful, must doubt of their salvation, of the
remission of their sins, of the favor of God toward them, and of
everlasting life.


Phi. This is the doctrine of ye Papists both wicked and dampnable. The
Papists in teaching this doctrine does not only trouble, disquiet, make
afraid, wound* kill, and slay the consciences of the simple people, and of
such as credit their deuelish doctrine: but as much as in them lies, they
make God a lier, his holy word false, and our faith frustrate, void and vain.
Take away the certentie of salvation from any man: and to what point serves
the mercyful promise of God, and the faith which apprehends and lays hand
on the most loving promises of God? This doctrine opens a very path unto
hell, and brings unto desperation.


Chr. Yet ye Papists allege the Scripture for them. The manner of the papists
in alleging the scripturs



Phile. I think that: for so is their accustomed property. They allege many
times ye scriptures of God to defend and to stablish their errors and
heresies, and ^o blear the simple peoples eyes, which are not able to discern
A. from B. nor to judge between truth and falshode, but are easly led that
way, whereunto the subtle and wily papist persuades. If I had leisure to
declare unto you, what Iugli^g ye ungodly Papists have used and yet do use in
writing and wrestting, incorrupting and abusing that holy word of God, ye
would not a little marvel at the matter: But I would gladly hear, what the
papists can allege ou^ of the word of God for the confirmation of their
wicked opinion in this behalf. Eccle. ix.



Chr. The sentence whereunto they stick and cleue as unto an invincible
bulwark is this: A man knows not whether he be worthy love or hatred, bu^
althinges are kept uncertain unto the time to come.


Phi. The kingdom of the Papists is not without a cause called the kingdom o^
lies, and the Papists them selves may rightwel be resembled to the beast which
rose out of the sea, Apoca. xiii
unto whom was given a mouth to speak great things and blasphemies, yea to
speak blasphemy against god, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and
the^ that dwell in heaven. etc. But as concerning the text which they allege
(although the learned in the Hebrew tongue know right well how greatly this text
after the common Latin translation differs from the truth of the Hebrew) it
is abused of them, and wrasted contrary to the mind both of the authoure and
of the translatour as the words that immediately follow, do manifestly
declare. When Solomon says, a man knows not whether he be worthy love or
hatred, he speaks not of the knowledge and judgment of the conscience toward
God, for who knows not, that he is worthy hatred which sins against the
Lord his god, contrariwise, that he pleareth god, and god loves him, which
does that thing, that is pleasant in his godly sight, but he speaks of the
outward and carnal judgment and knowlede which men have of them selves, of
their own strengthes, wisdom or free will concerning things which chance to
them outwardly. As though he should say. If a man should only behold and
consider the outward face of things, and judge the favor or the disfavor of
God toward any man of the things that outwardly chance unto any man, he were
not able to affirm and to parswade his conscience, whether God loves him or
not. For God indifferently without any respect had to either of the parties,
gives as abundantly to the ungodly, as to the godly, to the unfaithful, as
to the faithful, to the saints as unto the wicked his temporal and outward
gifts, as beauty, strength, rytches, health of body, reason, wisdom,
eloquence, honor, nobility, wealth, glory. etc. yea many times the ennemies of
God have more plenteously given unto them of God the riches and pleasures of
this life, then the friends of God. Therefore if a natural man not being
regenerat nor borne a new of the spirit of God, considreth the outward face
of things, and judges of them ye favor or disfavor of God, verily so
knows he not, who is worthy Gods love or hatred, so is he not certain whom
God loves, or whom he hates. This is thaforsaid text of Solomon (as it is
translated) to be understand. And that this is the meaning of the author, ye
words that follow do manifestly declare. It happens, says he, unto one as
unto an other: it goes with the righteous as with ungodly, Luke. ix.
with the good and clean as with the unclean: with him that offreth, as with
him that offreth not, like as it goes with the virtuous, so goes it also with
the sinner. As it happens unto the pe^iured, so happens it also unto him that
is afraid to be forsworn. Among all things that come to pass under the
Sun, this is a misery, that it happens unto all alike. Of these words it
evidently appears, that Solomon speaks of the knowledge which a natural
man has by the outward gifts of god, whereof, because they be indifferently
given as well to ye good as to the bad, he is not able to judge, who^ God
loves, and who^ he hates. Now where as the Papists wrest this text unto ye
knowledge or judgment of the conscience, which comes of the spirit of God
and of his holy word, and would that Christen men in their conscience should
dout whether God love the^ or not, whether they be in the favor of God or not,
whether their sins be forgeuen the^ or not whether they shall be saved or
notthei teach a deuelishe error, and lead ye receivers of their doctrine, the
right way to hell fire. For he yt douteth of the merciful good will and
favorable grace of God toward him, and believes not that God for christ's sake
is loving unto him and forgeueth him al his syns, verily he is no true
christian, but dying in this his doubtfulnes and unbelief he shall surely be
dampened acording to this saying: he that does not believe on the son, shall
not se life, John. ^^^
but the wrath of God a bideth on him. This erroneous doctrine of the Papists
makes God false of his promise, quenches faith, blotteth out hope, destroieth
love, disquieteth the conscience, fills ye heart with whole seas of
vnreastfull and wicked imaginations, and so drives the doubtful parson unto
desperation and finally unto dampnation. O murderers. O soul s^ears. If no
man can be certain in his conscience, whether he be in the favor of god or
no, whether god for christ's sake will forgive him his sins or not, and give him
everlasting life, to what point serve all the promises of Gods tender mercies
made to all faithful penitent sinners in Christ's blood? unto what end does
faith serve? If faith certifieth not our conscience of Gods good will toward us,
and so brings peace and quietness unto it: what is then the office of faith?
If a man, whose credit is approved, promises us any thing, we surely look for
it, and nothing doubt of the performance thereof, Psalm. cxlv
and shall we doubt of the accomplishment of the promises of God, Titus. i
which is faithful in all his words, John. xiiii.
which can not lie, which is not only true but also the self truth? Roma. iii.
Let al men be liers, Ezech. xxxiii
and let God abide true. God has promised, that at whatsoever hour we turn
unto him, he will forgive us al our sins, and never remember them more, but
so freely favor us, and so tenderly love us, as though we had never offended
him. This is the promise of him, which can nether deceive nor be deceived, and
shall we doubt of the performance thereof? Shall we doubt, whether ye Lord our
God will be as good as his word? whether our sins be forgeuen and we received
again into favor or not? God has promised, that in Christ all nations of ye
earth shall be blessed. And shall we, which look for our whole salvation in the
blood of Christ, doubt whether we shall be blessed in Christ, Galat. iii.
yt is to say, favored of god the father for Christ's sake or not? Christ our
Lord and savior, Math. xi.
calls all that labor and be laden unto him, and promises yt he will ease,
remedy, comfort and help them. And shall we doubt of this his promise? What
other thing is it to doubt of the promises of god* then to doubt whether God
be true or no, just and faithful or no, ye same in his deed that he is in his
word or no? O the to much unfaithfulness of the wicked Papists. John. iii.
The scripture says, he that believes on the son of god, has everlasting
life. The faithful christians believe on Christ the son of God, embrase him
with strong faith as their alone savior, redemer, atonement maker,
intercessour, mediator and advocate, and shall they doubt of ye ^nheritaunce of
everlasting life? Either they that do believe and so continue unto the^d, have
everlasting life at their departure out of this life, or else God is not true of
his promise. Psalm. cx^v
But God is faithful in all his words, therefore do the faithful christians
receive according to gods promises and their faith. If all things be possible
to him y^ believes, if al things chance to a faithful man according to his
faith, Mar^^ ^^
with what whorish and shameless forheds dare the proud and ungodly Papists
teach us to doubt of the grace and favor of God, of the ^emission of sins,
and of the enheritaunce of everlasting life? Where doutfulnes is, there is no
^rue faith but rather misbeliefe, ^ to such a doubting faith, yea rather no
faith, nothing is promised, but the fearce wrath and vengeance of God and
euerlasting^ dampnation. Se to what poyn^ the wicked Papists bring they^
whelps with their deuelysh doc^trin. Saint James says: Jacob. ^.
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask i^ of him, that gives it: eue^ God. and
But let him ask in faith and wa^uer not. For he that doubts, i^ like a wave
of ye sea, which is to ^ of the wyndes, and carried wit^ violence. Nether let ye
man think^ that he shall receive any thing o^ the Lord. A wavering minde^ man
is unstable in all his ways Are not they that profess Christ much bound to
the papists, The scholing of the Papists.
which teach their scholars to doubt of the mercy of God, and not to be
through^ly persuaded in their conscience^ that God loves them, pardonet^ them
for Christ's sake, and maket^ them enheritours of everlasting glory? Is this
any other thing then to say, despair, die, be dampened? O devils incarnat. God
lighten the eyes of the simple, that they may once see the iugling castes of
these wily wicked Papists, and come unto the unfeigned truth of gods word,
which is able to save their souls, which also is the mighty power of God to
save every one that believes. Jacob. i. Roma. i.



The. Amen.


Phi. All the godly eue^ from the beginning have believed the promises of God,
and nothing doubted of them, whether they concerned temporal or spiritual
things, and according to their faith, so recey^ed they. Yea when God seamed
most to be angry with them and vt^erly to cast them from his favor: ^uen then
did they nothing doubt ^f his merciful goodness, but with ^rong faith cleaves
to the promi^es of God, as a certain man says: Though he kill me, Job. xiii.
yet will I put my trust in him. The Psalmograph also says: Psalm. xxvii.
Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid.
And though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him. If either
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or any other saints of the old testament had doubted
of the promises which God made unto them, so had they never found favor at ye
majesty of god, nor obtained those things, which God had promised them. Hebr.
xi.
For without faith it is impossible to please God. He yt doubts of the
promises of God, shall obtain no good thing at the hand of God. To what end ar
we so often in the holy scripture exhorted to believe God and his promises, if
it were lawful for us to doub^ of them? If to believe and to doub^ be one
thing, why is everlasting salvation promised to the one, and eternal
dampnation to the other? Whosoever therefore will be saved, let him cast away al
unbelief and doubtfulnes, and with tothe and ^ayle (as they use to say) clean
to ye promises of God, nothing doubting, but according as God has promised, so
shall it chance unto him. If we do repent and believe his word, God has
promised us for christ's sake to favor us, to forgive us all our sins, and
to bring us unto everlasting life, let us not therefore doubt of this his
promise, but with strong and unshaken faith believe it, and look for boldly
that is promised, so we may be sure to have the grace and ^auour of God, to
have remission and forgiveness of our sins, and finally to have everlasting
^ife. Let us therefore approach with ^oldnes, and not with doubting and wavering,
Hebre. iiii*
unto the throne of Gods Majesty, as thapostle warns that we may obtain
mercy and find grace to help in ye time of need.


Chri. If a man after the Papists should doubt of the grace and favor of God
toward him, with what conscience could he be bold to say the Lords prayer,
Math. v.
and to desire the forgeuenes of his trespasses? Or how could he say with a
true faith, I believe the forgeuenes of sins and everlasting life? To believe,
What it is to believe.
is it to doubt of the promises of God? or rather to be thoroughly persuaded of
the promises of God, that as God has promised, so shall it undoubtedly chance
unto us.


Euse. When a man believes the gospel he is certain of ye remission of his
sins, he is certain of the favor and good will o^ God, and he is certain
also of everlasting life. And he that lettet^ go this faith, and falls to
doub^ting, he shall never enjoy thaforesaid benefits, but be cast into
everlasting dampnatio^.


The. This considred the holy Apostle rightwel, when he without any doubting
being thoroughly persuaded and assured of Gods good will toward him, ii. Tim. ^
(set forth in his holy promises,) said on this manner, I know and am sure,
that he (in whom I have put my trust) is hable to keep that, which I have
committed to his keeping against that dai. Again, ii. Tim. i^^i*
I have fought a good fight, I have fulfilled my course. I have kept the faith.
From he^ceforthe there is laid up for me a ^rowne of righteousness, which ye
Lord (that is a righteous judge) shall give at that day, not to me only, but
unto all them also ye love ^is coming. Psalm. xx^^.



Phile. When that David said these words: I be^eue verily to see the
pleasures of the Lord in the land of the living* doubted he of the enheritaunce
of the heavenly kingdom, or was he rather thorowlye persuaded by strong faith
in the promises of god, ye he should without all doubt reign with God in glory?
Phi. i.
If the godly Apostle S. Paul had not been sure of the favor of God, and of a
better life after this, would^ he have wyshed to be delivered from this
world, and to be with Christ? Acts. vii
With what cou^tenaunc^ durst the blessed martyr S. Stephen have commended his
spirit^ unto Christ, if he had not ben^ persuaded of gods favor towar^ him,
and of the joyful enheritanc^ of the everlasting kingdom? An^ so likewise of all the other saints The spirit of God certifieth our spirit, Romans viii.
says the Apostle, that w^ are the sons of God. If we be sons, then are we
also heirs. I mean of God and fellow heirs with Christ. i. John. iii.
Hereto agrees the saying of S. John. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons
of God, and yet it does not appear, what we shall be. But we know, that when it
shall appear, we shall be like him. For we shall see him as he is. Again: We
know, that we are translated and carried from death unto life.

Here you se that the holy scriptures teach us to be certain of our salvation
through faith in Christ's blood, and not to be doutfull of it, as the Papists
trifle. Away therefore without al doutfulnes, and lay hand by strong faith on
the promises of God, lokynge with assured hope for all those heavenly and
blessed things, that God has promised us in his holy word. So may we be
sure to receive according to our faith.


Epa. Without wavering or doubting I faithfully believe and am assuredly
persuaded, that God ye father is a merciful father unto me, that he has
forgeuen me all my sins, received me into his favor and made me heir of his
everlasting glory. And all this has he done unto me not for my merits and
deserts (which are utterly none) but for Christ's sake, in whom I believe, whom
also I confess to be my alone savior and redeamer.


Ph. Neighbor Epaphroditus, you thus believing cannot pearishe. Therefore be on
good comfort, quiet your conscience, John. iii.
and sattle your mind. For it is written. He that believes on ye son of God
has everlasting life.


Epa. Brother Philemon I thank you and my other neighbors here for the great
comfort, which I have received by this your godly communication. I feel my
self now in much better case, then I was, when you came first unto me. I
feel much quietness and ease in my conscience. The Lord has driven away mine
enemies, and given me rest in my mind. If I had not had your company, God
knows to what point my ghostly enemy the devil would have brought me. But I
praise God for you. For by your godly and christian talk. God has wrought in
me a good and glad will to die. I have in my heart bidden the world and all
worldly things adue. My mind is all together fixed, on the lord my God, and on
the joys which he has prepared in his glorious kingdom for all them that
love him, I feel such inward joy in my heart, and such a fervent desire to see
ye Lord my God face to face, yt the pains, which I now suffer on my body,
although they be very grievous in deed, seem little or nothing to disquiet me.
Roma. viii.
For I am fully persuaded, that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of
the glory which shall be showed upon us: Again, ii. Cyr. iiii
that though the outward man perish, yet thinward man is renewed day by day,
and that this our tribulation which is short and light prepares an exceeding,
and an everlasting weight of glory unto us, while we look not on the things
which are seen, but on ye things which are not seen. For the things which
are seen, are temporal, but things, which are not seen, are eternal.


Chr. God keep you in this mind, even unto thend. A Prayer.



Eu. Ame^.


Epa. Confirm and make that perfect (o lord) which y^ have begone to work in
me unto the glory of thy blessed name, and unto the salvation of my soul.


The. Ame^.


Epa. Neighbors I pray you turn me that I may lie on my right side.


Chr. The Lord our God grant, that ye may sit in his kingdom on the right
hand of his glory.


Ep. Yea and that shortly:


Euse. So be it.


Phile. Sir how do you now?


Epaphro. Well, God be thanked, but I trust to do better even anon.


Phile. Lack you any thing sir?


Epa. My pain approaches nearer unto my heart, whereby I perceive the end of my
life, not to be far of: I beseech you pray for me, that I may continue
faithful, constaunt and steadfast in the faith of the Lord my God, even unto
the very end of my life.


Phi. We will do it gladly. Neighbors let us knele down and pray.

Lord, A Pray^^ for the sick man.
we most humbly beseech thee hear our prayer.


Chri. And let our cry come unto thee.


Ph. O lord Jesus Christ thou only son of the heavenly father, our alone
redemer and omnisufficicie^t savior, we most humbly beseech thee, deliver
this sick and weak parson now being in great pains and at the point to
depart out of this world from all vgsome and terrible assaults and
temptations of the devil, sin and hell. Gene. vii.
Deliver him (O Lord) as thou deliueredst Noe from the raging waves of the sea.
Gene. xix.
Lot from the destruction of Sodom. Abraham from the fear of the Chaldees.
Gene. xx. Exodus xxiii.xxiiii.xxv. i. Reg. xvii. Dan. iii.
The children of Israel from the tyranny of Pharao. David from the hand of
Goliath, The three men from the violence of the fiery furnace in Babylon. Dani. vi.
Daniel from the mouth of the Lions. Jonas. ii. ^et. xii.
Jonas from the belly of the whalefishe, and Peter from the prison of Herod:
even so, O gracious Lord God, deliver the soul of this person, both now and
whenever he shall depart hence from all pearill and danger. Open unto him
at ye hour of death the door of Paradise, the gates of heaven, and the entry of
everlasting life. O Lord Jesus Christ forgive him all his sins, and lead him
with joy into the kingdom of thy heavenly father eue^ unto the bosom of
Abraham, and appoint him unto everlasting rest, that he may rejoice with thee,
and with all the elect children of God in everlasting life.


Eu. Amen.


Epa. Neighbors I thank you. Now will I also pray unto the Lord my god,
while I may speak, and I trust, he will for Christ's sake graciously hear me.


Th. Doubt you not neighbor, God has so promised. The sick man's prayer*



Epa. Lord harken unto my prayer, and give ear to my most humble requests, O
most merciful God, O father of all mercies, the father of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, be merciful to me a sinner. Have pity on me, and
quickly healpe me poor wretch, for the most bitter passion and most
precious death of Jesus Christ, thy only begotten son, and our alone redemer
and Savior.

Psalm. cxiiii.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord. Handle me not according to
my deserts and merits, neither reward me after mine iniquities, but for
thine infinite and unmeasurable bounty, and exceading great merci, receive me
and take me into thy favor, I miserable and weak creature, am in thy hand.
Math. xviii.
I am thy bond servant and thy depter. O most gentle God, o most favorable
father, forsake me not, cast me not away pore wretch that I am. For I am thine
withal that ever I ca^ make. No man is able to strengthen me, no man is able to
deliver me, no man is able to help me, but thou alone. Thou art the true helper
in aduersite. Thou art ye most sure and present comfort in all necessity. Thou
alone art our helper, our bulwark, our fortres and our most mighty and
strongly defenced tour. Thou o god, art our refuge. Thou art our strength.
Thou art our helper in all our tribulations. In the (O Lord) do I trust, let me
not be co^fou^ded. Let me never be put to shame, let me not be deceived of my
hope, but preserve me for thy rightousnes sake. Bow down thine ear unto me,
make haste to deliver me. Be my defe^der O god and my strong hold, yt thou
may save me, For you art my strength, and my refuge. Yea thou art my God, and
my destinies are in thy hands. Lighten thy countenance upon thy servant,
Psalm. xxxi.
and save me for thy mercies sake, O Lord. And foras^much (O sweet father) as
it is thy godly pleasure to call me now from this miserable life and wretched
world, I most entirely beseech the^ so to defend me in this agony o^ death,
that neither satan nor his ministers preuaill against me, but that I continue
faithful and constant unto thend, in the confession of thy holy name, loking
for full remission of all my sins in the precious blood of thy well-beloved
son and my only savior Jesus Christ, and that I departing in this faith and
perfect trust, may be placed among thy blessed saints and heavenly spirits,
and so for ever and ever remain with ye in glory. Grant this, O most
merciful father, for thy dear sons sake. Jesus Christ our alone mediator and
advocate.


Chr. Ame^.


Epa. Me think good neighbors I begin to wax very could and numme in my
limbs.


Euse. Sir discomfort not your self. Be content with the good workynge of God.
This cold is a present toke^, that the death of your body is not far of.


Epa. My flesh is consumed and wasted away.


Eu. That is ye end of all flesh. Genesis iii^
Earth thou art, says God, and unto earth shall you return.


Epa. My feling is gone, and my tasting decaieth. All my senses grow out of
course.


Eu. To that end were they given you, that you should lose them again. With the
body, al bodily things decay.


Phi. Brother Epaphroditus, let ye care of the body and of bodily things pass.
You do believe the resurrection of the body? Of the resurrection of the body.



Epa. I believe that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth
in the latter day, John. xix.
and that I shall be clo^hed, again with this skin, and see God my savior in my
flesh. Yea I my sef shall behold him, not with other eyes, but with these same
eyes. This hope is steadfastly set in my heart.


Ph. Believe this earnestly, and it shall not grieve you to depart from your body.
For where as it is now mortal, incorruptible, sick, weak, vile, and loathsome,
it shall at ye general resurrection, be immortal, incorruptible, whole, strong,
precious, and in all points like to the glorious body of our Lord, and savior
Christ Jesus. Phil. iii.
Hear wha^ the Apostle says: our conuersati^on is in heaven, from whence we
look for a savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall chaung^ our vile
body, that he may mak^ it like unto his glorious body, according to the
working, whereby he is able also to subdue al things unto him self. ii. Cor. v
Again: We know that if our earthy mansion of this dwellinge were destroyed,
we have a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but everlasting
in heaven. For therefore sighe we, desiring to be clothed with our mansion,
which is from heaven, so yet, if that we be found clothed and not naked. For
we that are in this tabernacle, sighe, and are grieved because we would not be
unclothed but would be clothed upon, that immortality might be swallowed up
of life. He that has ordained us for this thing, is God, which very same,
has given unto us the earnest of the spirit. Therefore we are always of good
cheer and know, that as long as we are at home in the body, we are ab^ent
from God. For we walk in ^ayth, not after outward apperaunce. Nevertheless
we are of ^ood comfort, and had rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with God


Epa. This is comfortable doctrine. I can be content with all my heart to make
such a change, whenever the Lords good pleasure shall be. Sentences
concerning ye resurrection of the body.
But I pray you rehearse some wholesome sayings out of the holy scriptures
concerning the resurrection of the body for stre^gthning of my faith, and for
the comfort and quietness of my conscience.


Phi. In the prophet Esaias we read on this manner: Esaias. xxvi.
Thy dead men shall live, even with my body shall they rise again. Awake and
sing ye that dwell in dust. For thy dew is even as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall cast out them, that be under her. Again, Esaias. lxvi.
your bones shall floryshe like an herb. Ezec. xxxvii.
The Prophet Ezechiell, has these words: The hand of the lord came unto me and
carried me out in the spirit of ye Lord and let me down in a plain field, that
lay full of bones, and he led me round about by them, and behold the bones
that lay upon the field, were very many, and marvelous dry also. Then said he
unto me. Thou son of man, think thou these bones may live again? I
answered: O Lord God thou know. And he said unto me: prophecy thou upon
these bones, and speak unto them. Ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.
Thus says the Lord God unto these bones: Behold, I will put breath unto you,
that ye may live, I will give you sinowes and make flesh grow upon you, and
cover you over with skin: and so give you breath, that ye may live, and know
that I am the Lord. So I Prophesied as he had commanded me. And as I was
prophesying, there came a noise, and a great motion, so that the bones ran every
one to an other. Now when I had looked, behold, they had sinnowes, and flesh
grew upon them, and above they were covered with skin, but there was no breath
in the^. Then said he unto me. Thou son of man, prophecy thou toward the
wind: prophecy and speak unto the wind. Thus says the Lord God: Come (O thou
air) from the four winds, and blow upon these slain that they may be
restored to life. So I prophesied, as he had commanded me: then came the
breath into them, and they received life, and stood up upon their fete a
marvelous great number. Again: Thus says the Lord god: behold, I will open
your graves (O my people) and take you out of your sepulchers. The words of
the Prophet Daniel are these: Daniel. xii.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. God says by Esdras:
iiii. Esdr. ii.
those that be dead will I raise up again from their places, and bring them
out of their graves. Moreover Christ said to the Saduces, which denied the
resurrection of the body: Math. xxii
As touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not red, what is said unto
you of God, which says: I am Abraham's God, and Isaacks God, and Jacobs God.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Also in an other place: The
hour shall come, John. v*
in the which all that are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of dampnation.
John. xi.
Martha said unto Christ of her brother Lazarus, when he was dead: I know yt
my brother shall rise again at the latter day. The holy Apostit s. Paul is
plenteous in the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. I will rehearse one
or two of his sentences, ^. Cor. xv.
and bid the other farewell. The trompe, says he, shall blow, and the dead
shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. (...)
Again the Lord Jesus shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body. Also in an other place: I would not
brethren have you ignorant concerning them, which are fallen aslepe, ^. These.
iiii.
that ye sorrow not as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe, yt Jesus
Christ died and rose again, even so they also, which sleep by Jesus, will God
bring again with him. Diverse examples of the resurrection of our bodies have
we both in the old and new testament. Helias the Prophet raised up from death
unto life the son of ye widow of Sarepta. iii. Reg. xvii
The like thing read we of Heliseus the Prophet. iiii. Reg. iiii.
Christ raised from death the daughter of a certain ruler, Math. ix.
the son of a certain widow, Luke. vii.
and Lazarus with many other. John. xi.
Christ rose again, and the bodies of many saints which slept, arose also,
and came out of their graves after their resurrection and came into Jerusalem
and appeared unto many. Peter raised up Tabitha from death. Mat. xxviii. Mark.
xxvii^ Act. ix.xx.
S. Paul restored unto life a certain young man named Eutichus. Al these are
evident examples of our resurrection. Therefore good brother Epaphroditus,
fear not to give over this your body and freely to commend it unto the earth.
At the great day of the general resurrection, you shall receive it in a far
better case, then ever you had it in this world.


Ep. I leave this my vile body willingly, yea and that with this hope, that at
the last day, I shall take it again immortal and incorruptible. Philip. i.
I believe the resurrection of the flesh. I wish to be losoned from this body,
and to be with Christ.


Eu. Of ye immortality of the soul and of the blessed state of the faithful
after this life.
You doubt nothing of the blessed state of ye godly departed, and of the
immortality of the soul?


Epa. I believe everlasting life.


The. You are not of the opinion of the Papists, which say that ye souls of
the faithful go not strait unto heaven, but unto purgatory, there to be boiled
in the fyry furnace of the B. of Rome, til they have made satisfaction for
their sins, either by them selves in suffringe, say they, the most bitter
pains of purgatory, or else by their friends in this world through Masses,
Pardons, Pilgrimages. i. John. ii.
etc.


Ep. I believe that there is none other purgatory for my soul health, but only
the precious blood of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

And I believe yt Christ through his innocence of life, Hebr. ix.
and the most grievous pains, that he suffered on the cross, has aboundauntly
satisfied for all my sins, and has unto the uttermost paid all the det that I
ought unto god the father, so that now through faith in the blood of Christ,
Roma. viii.
I walk with a clear conscience before God, forasmuch as there is no
dampnacion to them that are in Christ Jesus, and that they also are blessed,
whose sins are remitted, whose iniquities are covered, Psalm. xxii.
and unto whose charge God lays no wickedness.


Chr. Ye agree not with such in opinion, as affirm, yt the souls of both the
faithful and unfaithful sleep until the day of judgment, and then shall
awake out of sleep, so that then the faithful shall go unto everlasting glory,
and the unfaithful unto eternal da^pnation?


Epa. I believe that the soul slepeth no more, then this my bed sted waketh and
talks with us. I am fully persuaded, yt so sone as the souls of the faithful
are departed from the bodies, wherein they were as in a prison enclosed, they
are straightwaies placed in the glorious kingdom of God. And contrariwyse the
souls of ye unfaithful, go straight unto the devil, Apoc. xxi,
even unto hell fire, unto that lake that burns with fire, and brimstone,
where weping and gnashing of teeth is, where the worm that gnaweth their
conscience, Math. xiii.
never dies, and the most grievous fire, wherewith they are without ceasing
intollerably tormented, Esaias. lxvi.
is never quenched. Is it not thus neighbor Philemon?


Phi. Yes verily sir. For so ar we taught in the holy scriptures, as the
history of the ritche glotton, Luke. xvi.
and of pore Lazarus, with diverse other, do manifestly declare.


Epa. I faithfully believe, that immediately after my departure out of this
world, I shall have a place in the kingdom of God, and se the glorious
majesty of god face to face. And I pray you good neighbor Philemon, rehearse
unto me some comfortable places out of the holy scripture concerning ye joyful
and blessed state of the faithful souls after this life, that I may be
confirmed in my faith, and be the more willing to depart.


Phi. I will do it gladly. Balaam said: Number. xxiii.
I pray god that my soul may die the death of the righteous, and that my last
end may be like unto theirs. The Psalmograph says: O how amiable are thy
dwellings, Psalm. lxxxiiii.
thou lord of hosts? My soul has a desire and lo^ging to enter into the courts
of ye lord: my heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy house, they will be always praising thee. One day in thy
courts, is better then a thousand. I had rather be a dorekeper in the house of
my God, then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly. The Prophet Esaias says: Esaias.
ii.
The redeemed of the lord shall turn again and come with joy unto Sion, there to
endure for ever, that mirth and gladness might be with the^, that sorrow and woe
might fly from them. My people, Esaias. xxxii
says God, shall dwell in pleasant peace, and in safe holds, and shall have
continual rest with out disturbaunce. Esaias. xlix.
They shall nether hunger nor thurst, heat, nor Sun shall not hurt them. For
he that favors them, shall lead them and give them drink of the spring
wels. Esaias. xlv.
They shall eat, drink, be merry and rejoice for very quietness of heart. Yea
their gladness and their joy shall continue for ever and ever. Dan. xii.
Daniell says: The wise (such as have taught other) shall glister as the
shining of heaven, and those that have instruct the multitude unto godliness,
shall be as the stars, world without end. iiii. Esdr. ii.
Esdras says: Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting light
shall shine upon you for evermore. Fle the shadow of this world, receive the
ioyfulnes of your glory. O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad,
geuyng thanks unto him that has called you to the heavenly kingdom. The
author of the book of wisdom says. The souls of the righteous are in the hand
of God, Sapi. iii
and the pain of death shall not touch them: In the sight of the unwise they
appear to die, and their end is taken for very destruction: the way of the
righteous is judged to be utter destruction, but they are in reast. And though
they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full of immortality. They are
punished but in few things, nevertheless in many things shall they be well
rewarded. For god proves them, and finds them mete for him self: yea as the
gold in the furnace does he try them, and receives them as a brent offering,
and when the time comes, they shall be looked upon. The rightous shall shine
as the sparckes, that run through the read bush. They shall judge the
nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for
ever. Again: The faithful are counted among the children of God, Sap. v.
and their portion is among the saints. The righteous shall live for
evermore: their reward also is with the lord, and their remembrance with the
hiest. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, Toby. iii.
and a beautiful crown of the Lords hand. The holy father Toby, prayed on
this manner to God: O Lord, dele with me according to thy will, and command my
spirit to be received in peace. For more expedient were it for me, Eccle. vii.
to die the^ to live. The preacher says. The day of death is better then the
day of birth. Psalm. cxvi.
For precious and right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his
saints. Math. xiii.
Our savior Christ says: The righteous shall shine as the sun in the
kingdom of their father. Math. xix.
They shall have the enheritaunce of everlasting life. Math. xxv
They shall have a kingdom, which was prepared for them from the beginning of
the world. Mark. xii Luke. xvi. John. xvi.
They shall be as the angels of God. They shall be in the bosom of Abraham.
They shall have such joy, as no man shall be able to pluck it from the^. They
shall eat and drink in the kingdom of God the father. Luke. xxii.
They shall be where Christ is, and see his glory. The holy Apostle S. Paul
says. ^. Cor. ii.v
The eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.
He^ says also, Phil. ii.
that if our earthy mansion of this dwelling were destroy^ed (he means the
body) we have a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but
everlasting in heaven. We shall be with Christ. These. iiii.
We shall be with the Lord for ever. We shall be vessels unto honor. ii. Ti.
ii.iiii* Hebr. xii
We shall have the crown of righteousness. We shall come to the city of the
living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to an innumerable sight of Angels,
and to the Congregation of the first borne sons which are written in heaven;
and to God the judge of al, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to
Jesus the mediator of the new testament.

We shall receive the crown of life, Jacob. i.
says S. James, which the Lord has promised to the^ yt love him. When Christ
ye chief shepherd shall apere (says S. Peter) ye shall receive, i. Pet. ^.
an incorruptible crown of glory. We are now the Sons of God (says saint
John,) and it has not yet appeared, i. John. lii.
what we shall be. We know that if it once appear, we shall be like unto him,
for we shall se him as he is. In the Revelation of S. John, we find these
Sentences, concerning the blessed state of the faithful after this life.
Apoca. ii.
To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the mids of the Paradise of God. Be faithful unto the death, and I shall give
thee the crown of life. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, Apoca. iii.
and he shall go no more out. etc. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my seat. The.xxiiii. Elders that sat upon the seats, were clothed
in white raiment, Apoca. iiii.
and had on their heads, crowns of gold. Apoca. vii.
They are in the presence of the seat of God, and serve him day and night in
his Temple, and he that sits on the seat, will dwell among them. They shall
ho^ger no m^re, nether thirst, nether shall ye son light on them, neither
any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the mids of the seat, shall feed the^,
and shall led the^ unto fountains of living water, and God shall wine away all
tears from their eyes. They follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. Apoc.
xiiii.
They are without spot before the throne of God. I heard a voice from heaven,
saying unto me: Wryght. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Even so
says the spirit, that they reast from their labors, but their works follow
them. Blessed are they, which are called unto the supper of the Lambs
marriage. Apo. xix.xxi.
I saw a new heaven and a new earth. For the first heaven, and the first earth
were banished away* and there was no more sea. And I Iho^ saw the holy City,
new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride garnished
for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying: Behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. And they shall be his
people, and God him self shall be with them, Esaias. xxv.
and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, ^^ther ^^ying, neither shall there
be any more pain, for thold things are gone. And he that sat upon ye seat,
said* Behold, I make all things now* Esaias. lxii^.
And he said unto me: write, for these words are faith full and true. The
descrip^ion of ye new and heavenly Jerusalem.
And the Angel carried (...) way in the spirit, ^o a great (...) hie
mountain, and he ^^e wed^^e the great City holy^ Hierusa^^^ descendinge out
of heaven (...) God, having y^ brightness of God. And her shining wa^ like unto
(...) stone most precious, eue^ like a Jasper, clear as Crystal, and had walls
great and hie, and had xii. gates, and at the gates.xii. angels, and names
written, which are the names of the.xii. Tribes of Israel. On the ^ast
side.iii. gates, Appo. xxi.
and on ye north side.iii. gates, and toward the south.iii. gates, and from
the weast iii. gates, and the wall of the City had.xii. foundations, and in
the^ the xii. names of the La^bes.xii. Apostles and he that talked with me, had
a go^den read to measure the city withal and the gates thereof, and the wall
thereof. And ye city was built iiii* square, and the length was as large as the
breadth, and he measured the city with the (golden) read.xii M. furlonges, and
the length, and ye breadth, and the height of it, were equal. And he measured
the wall thereof, an. C. xliiii. the measure yt the angel had, was after the
measure that man uses. And the building of the wall of it, was of Jasper: And
the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass, and the foundations of the
wall of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones* The first
foundation was a Jasper, the second a Saphir, the third a Calcedony, ye.iiii.
an Emerald, the.v. a Sardonix, the.vi. a Sardius, the.vii. a Chrisolite,
the.viii. a Berall, the.ix. a Topas, the.x. a Crusoprases, the xi a Iacint,
the.xii. an Amathist. The.xii. gates, were.xii. pearls, every gate was of one
pearl, and the streate of the City was pure gold, as through shining glass..
And I saw no temple therein. For the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb, Esaias. lx.
are the temple of it. And the city has no need of the sun nether of the
moon to lighten it. For ye brightness of God did light (...), and the Lamb was
the light of it. And the people which are sa^ed, shall walk in the light of
it. And the kings of the earth shall bring their glory (and honor) unto it.
And ye gates of it, are not shut by day. For there shall be no night there. And
there shall enter into it, none unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or makes lies, but they only, which are written in the Lambs
book of life.

And he showed me a pure river of water of life, Apoc. xx^^*
clear as Crystal, proceading out of the seat of God, and of the Lamb. In
the mids of the streat of it, and of either side of the river, was there wood of
life, which bare.xii. manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month, and the
leaves of the wood, served to heal the people withal. And there shall be no more
curse, but the seat of God and the Lamb shall be i^ it, and his servants
shall seru^ him. And they shall se his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheds* And there shall be no night ther^^ and they need no candle ^ neythe^
light of the Sun: for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign
for evermore. And he said unto me, these things are faithful and true.


Ep^ God be praised for that true joy and singular comfort, which the
faithful find in his holy word. It is not without a cause said of the holy
Apostle: The eye has not sens, i. Cor. ii.
and the ear has not heard; neither have entered into the heart of man ^ the
things, which God has prepared for them that love him. My heart is now so
enflamed with ye desire of those heavenly and blessed treasures, which you have
named to me out of the infallible and true word of God, yt I most entirely wysh
to be losoned from this life, and to enjoy these joyful pleasures. Oh, who
would not be glad to change lead for silver, copper for gold, transitory,
mortal and corruptible things for certain, immortal and incorruptible
things, earth for heaven, sin for godliness, darkness for light, fear for
security, travel for quietness, sickness for health death for life, the company
of men, for ye company of the most hie God, his heavenly Angels and blessed
spirits, the vile pleasures of this world, for the inestimable joys of the
glorious kingdom of God. Psalm. xlii.
Oh, like as the heart desires the waterbrokes, so longs my soul after the,
O God. My soul is a thurst for God, yea even for the living God. Psalm. lxiii.
Oh, when shall I come to appear before ye presence of my God, O God, thou art
my god, early will I seek thee. My soul thursteth for thee, my flesh also
longs after thee, in a barren and dry la^d, where no water is. Thus have I
looked for thee in thy holy place, yt I might behold thy power and glory. For
thy loving kindness is better then life it self: my lips shall praise thee. As
long as I ^^ue will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up my hands in thy
name.


Euse. We rejoice (good brother Epaphroditus) and give god most hearty thanks,
that he has by his holy Spirit, wroughte so good and glad will in you to die,
and to leave this wretched world.


Epa. Philip. 1.
I most heartily wyshe to be losed from this life, and to be with Christ. Job.
x.
It greueth my soul longer to live in this mortal body. ^ob. iii.
And now, O Lord, dele with me according to thy will, and command my spirit
to be received in peace. For more expedient were it for me to die then to live.


Chri. Sir how do you feel your self?


Epa. In my body weaker and weaker, but I trust, in my soul stronger and
stronger. I pray you, lay me up hier in my bed. For I begin to wax very faint,
and my wind decreaseth and waxes shorter. I thank you, it is well. Neighbors
I am troblesome unto you, but I trust, I shall not be so long.


The. It is unto us great joy and comfort, to be with you being so godly
minded. For in you as in a clear mirror we behold our selves, and see what
shall become of us hereafter. Of you as of a lively scholemaister do we learn,
how we shall behave our selves, when God lays the cross on us. And we most
humbli^ beseech God to give us the like patience and thankfulness. Mat. xxvi.



Epa. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. For in as much as I feel
in my self present tokens of death, and am not certain how long ye* Lord will
suffer me to live, or to enjoy ye use of speech, I think it convenient to pray
again unto the lord my God, and to commend my sinful soul into his merciful
hands.


Phi. Godly forsooth.


Ep^. Lord vouchsafe I most humbly beseech the, The sick man's prayer. Psalm.
xiiii.
to hear me sinful creature.


Chri. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call on him, yea that call on him in
truth.


Epa. O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the only health of all men living: and
the everlasting life of them, which die in thy faith: I wretched sinner give
and submit my self wholly to thy most blessed will. And I being sure that the
thing can not perish, which is committed unto thy mercy, most humbly beseech
thee, o Lord, to give me grace, that I may now willingly leave this frail
and wicked flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which in better wise shall
restore it to me again, I beseech thee (O most merciful Jesus Christ) yt thou will by thy grace make strong my soul against all temtations, and that thou will cover and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against al thassaults
of the devil. I see and knowledge, that there is in my self no help of life
and salvation, but all my confidence, hope and trust is in thy most merciful
goodness. I have no merits nor good works, which I may allege before thee.
Of sins and evil works (alas) I se a great heap, but through thy mercy I
trust to be in the number of them, to whom thou will not impute their sins,
but take and accept me for righteous and just, and to be the enheritoure of
everlasting glory* Tho^ O most merciful Lord, wast borne for my sake. Thou
diddes^ suffer both hunger and thirste for my sake. Thou did preach and
teach, thou did pray, and fast for my sake. Thou did all good works
and deeds for my sake. Thou suffredst most grievous pai^nes and torments for
my sake. And finally, thou gave thy most precious body to die, and thy most
blessed blood to be shed on ye cross for my sake. Now most merciful savior,
let all these things profit me, which thou freely have given me, which have
given thy self for me. Let thy blood cle^se and wash away the spots and
foulnes of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide and cover my unrighteousness.
Let the merits of thy passion and blood, be the satisfaction for my sins.
Give me Lord thy grace, that my faith and persuasion in thy blood waver not in
me, but ever be firm and constant, that the hope of thy mercy and life
everlasting never decay in me, that charity wax not cold in me, finally that
the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of death. Grant me
also (O most merciful savior) that when death has shut up the eyes of my
body: yet that the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee, and
that when death has taken away the use of my tongue and speech: yet that my
heart may cry and say unto thee: O Lord, into thy hands I give and commit my
soul. Lord Jesus, take my spirit.


The. Amen.


Eu. Sir how is it with you now?


Epa. Even as with a ship, which is tossed with the waves of the sea. I trust
shortly to come unto the heaven, and then shall I be quiet, and without all
danger. I pray you, pray for me.


Phi. Most gladly. Let us knele down neighbors and beseech the Lord our God for
his tender mercies, to preserve this our sick brother from the assaults of
Satan, and to keep him constant and steadfast in his faith unto his lives
end, that he may give up a good and a faithful soul into the merciful
hands of God. Give me hither the flower of godly Prayers, The Flower of godly
prayers.
that I in the name of us al may read that prayer, which is to be said for
them, that lie at ye point of death.


The. Here is it.


Philemon. O Most loving Savior, and gentle redemer, which came into this
world to call sinners unto repentance, and to seek up yt was lost, Math. ix.
Luke. ix.
thou see in what case this our brother lies here: visited with thy
merciful hand al weak, feeble, sick, and ready to yealde up his soul into thy
holy hands. O look upon him (most gentle savior) with thy merciful eye, pity
him and be favorable unto him. He is thy workmanship, despise not therefore the
work of thine own hands. Thou suffredst thy blessed body, and thy precious
blood to be shed for his sins, and to bring him unto the glory of thy
heavenly father, let it not therefore come to pass, that thou should
suffer so great pains for him in vain. He was baptized in thy name, and gave
him self wholly to be thy servant, forsakynge the devil, the world, and the
flesh, confess him therefore before thy heavenly father and his blessed
Angels to be thy servant. Prou. xvi.
His sins, we confess are great (for who is hable to say, my heart is clean
and I am fre from sin) but thy mercies, Math. ix.
O Lord, are much greater. And thou came not to call the righteous, but
sinners unto repentance. To them that are diseased and ouerladen with the
burden of sin, do thou promise ease. Thou art that God, Math. x
which willest not ye death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn and
live. Thou art the savior, which wishest all me^ to be saved, i. These. ii.
and to come to the knowledge of thy truth. Withdraw not therefore thy mercy
from him because of his sins, but rather lay upon him thy saui^g health that
thou may show thy self toward him to be a savior. What greater praise ca^
there be to a physician then to heal the sick? Neither can there be a greater
glory, to thee being a savior, then to save sinners, save him therefore, O Lord
for thy names sake. Again, let the law be no corsiue to his conscience but
rather give him grace, eue^in this extreme agony and conflicte of death, Roma.
x.
to be fully persuaded yt thou by thy death have taken away all his sins,
fulfilled the law for him, and by this means, delivered him from the curse
of the law, Gala. iii.
and paid his ransom, that he thus being fully persuaded may have a quiet
heart, a fre conscience, and a glad will to forsake this wretched world: and to
go unto his lord God. Moreover thou have conquered him that had rule of death,
Hebr. vii.
even satan, suffer him not therefore to exercise his tira^ny upon this our
sick brother, Ose. xiii.
nor to disquiet his conscience with the terrors of sin and pains of hell.
Let not Satan nor his infernal army tempte him further, i. Cpr. xv.
then he is hable to bear, but evermore give him grace even unto his last
breath, valeantly to fight against the devil with strong faith in thy precious
blood, that he may fight a good fight, and finish his course with joy unto ye
glory of thy name and the health of his soul. O Lord, so work in him by thy
holy spirit, that he with all his heart may contempne, and despise all
worldly things, and set his mind wholly upon heavenly things, hopyng for them
with a strong and undoubted faith. Again: let it not grieve him, O sweet
savior to be losoned from this vile and wretched ^arca^e, which is now so full
of sorrow, trouble, anguishe, fickenes and pain, but rather let him have a bent
and ready will, through thy goodness, to put it of, yea and that with this
faith, that he at the last day, shall receive it again in a much better state
then it is now, Phil. iii.
or ever was from the day of his birthe, even a body incorruptible, immortal,
and like to thy glorious body. Let his hole heart and mind be set only upon
thee. Let the remembrance of ye joys of heaven be so fervent in his breast:
ii. Cor. xv.
that he may both patientlye and thanckfully take his death, and ever wish to
be with the in glory. And when the time comes, that he shall give over to
nature, and depart from this miserable world: vouchafe we most humbly beseech
the, o Lord Jesus, to take his soul into thy hands, and to place it among the
glorious company of thy holy angels and blessed saints. and to keep it unto
that most joyful day of the general resurrection that both his body and soul
through thine almighty power being knit again together at yt day, he may for
ever and ever enjoy thy glorious kingdom, and sing perpetual praises to thy
blessed name.


Chri. Amen. Psalm. lxvii.



Epa. O God be merciful unto me and bless me, show me the light of thy
countenance, and deal favorably with me. Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not
in death, least mine ennemy say: I have prevailed against him. For if I be cast
down, Psalm. xii.
they that trouble me will rejoice at it. But my trust is in thy mercy, and my
heart is joyful in thy salvation.


Phile. Sir how do you?


Epa. My bodily sight is gone. Job. i.



Phi. The Lord gave it you, and the Lord has taken it away again. As it has
pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord. Now
that God has taken away the sight of your corporal eyes, behold the Lord your
God with the eyes of your faith, and doubt you not, but that shortly you shall
see the glorious majesty of god with the eyes of your soul, even as he is,
face to face, which shall be unto you such joy, and so great comfort, that no
tongue is able to express, nor no heart able to think it.


Epa. I believe and am assuredlye persuaded that I shall see the plesures of the
Lord in the land of the living. Psalm. xxvii.



Phile. Continue in this faith unto the end, and you shall surely be saved.


Ep. As God has taken away my sight, so do al my other senses decay.


Phi. Though by the appointment of God, you lose your bodily speech, yet shall
your soul in the heavenly kingdom sing, praise and magnify the Lord your God,
worlds without end. And all be it the bodily hearing be taken away from you,
yet shall your soul in the kingdom of God hear such sweet, pleasant, and
delectable things, as never mortal man heard, nor may hear the like. Again,
although your going, and the use of your whole body be taken away from you, and
your body return unto the earth from whence it came, yet doubt you not, but
your soul being once delivered out of the prison of your body, shall serve the
lord your god perfectly, Apoc. xiii.
and joyfully follow the Lamb Christ. whither so ever he goes. Psa. cxix.



Epa. O Lord, deliver my soul out of the prison of the body, that I may come
unto thee, and glorify thy holy name. Toby. iii.
Command my spirit to be received in peace, for more expedient were it for me
to die the^ to live.


Phi. Be on good comfort sir, God in this your troble and bitter agony of death
is present with you, and when he sees convenient time, he will deliver you out
of all your pains, take you unto him, Psa. xxii.
and place you in his glorious kingdom.


Epa. O Lord, deliver my soul from the sweard, Psalm. lxxi.
my dearling from the power of the dog. Save me from ye Lions mouth. Bow
down thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Be thou my Protectoure, O
God, and house of defense, that ye may save me. Be thou my strong rock and
my castle. Be thou my guide, and lead me for thy names sake. Draw me out of
the net, thot they have laid preuely for me, for thou art my strength. Into
thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God of
truth.


Phile. Fear not brother Epaphroditus, God is your loving father and most
gentle savior.

He has heard your humble requests, and granted your peticions. He has
and will defend you from all evil even unto the end. He will not suffer you to
be devoured of that hellish Lion and cruel dog ye devil. He has sent his holy
Angels hither unto you, even into this your chamber. They are here present for
your great comfort. Psalm. xxxiiii.
They have pitched their tents round about you, that they may keep you harmles
and safe from the devouring tethe of Satan. Psalm. xci.
They wait upon you diligently for your defense, and will never depart from you,
Hebr. i.
till they receive your soul, and carry it up lovingly as a most precious
relic into the kingdom of heaven: and most joyfully present it unto the
glorious throne of gods majesty. Fix ye eyes of your faith on Christ and
Christ's merits, on Christ's passion and death, on Christ's blessed body
breakyng, and his most precious blood sheddinge, on his triumph and victory
over satan and his hellish army, believe Christ to be your alone savior, and
all his works to be your good works and so shall ye not perish, but have
everlasting life. The sick man's prayer.



Epaphro. Have the O Lord to deliver me, for it is hie time. In thee O Lord
Christ my most merciful savior, and only redemer, in thee, in the alone is al
my trust, let me never be confounded. O Jesus. Mercy Jesus mercy* O Christ. Mercy
Christ mercy. O God the Father, O God the son, O God the holy Ghost. O most
blessed Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy on me. Receive my soul
into thy hands. Place it for thy mercies sake in thy heavenly kingdom among
thy holy angels and blessed saints. O my good God. O father, O my most
merciful father. Mercy, mercy.


Phile. God the father, which made you: bless you. God ye son which redeemed
you: preserve you. God the holy ghost, which sanctifies you, confirm and
strengthen you. The blessing* defense and saving health of the allmighty god:
the father, the son, and the holy ghost preserve you from al evil and bring
you unto everlasting life.


Chr. Amen.


Eu. Me thinck he has given up the ghost.


The. No, he is yet a live. God comfort him. Lord, show him the light of thy
loving countenance.


Epa. When shall I come to appear before the presence of my God? An exortatio^
to the sick man.



Phi. God be thancked, he yet speaks, yea he godly speaks. Brother
Epaphroditus, take a good heart unto you, shrincke not. Fight a good fight. Be
not discouraged, nether with the terroures of satan, nor with ye pains of
death. God is on your side. God is your grau^d captain. You fight under the
banner of that most mighty and victorious Emperor Jesus Christ.

Only continue, as you have begone, and the day is yours. Satan with all his
army, like miserable cowardes shall be put to flight and vanquished. You shall
have a joyful victory over the^. The pain of the battle, is short and light,
but the glory of your triu^phe shall abide for ever and ever. Mat. xxiiii.
Hear what your graunde captain says: he that continues unto the end shall
be saved. Apoca. ii.
To him yt overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
mids of the Paradise of God. Apoca. iii.
Be faithful unto the death, and I shall give the the crown of life. Apoca.
iiii.
Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out. Yea to him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me
in my seat. Here see you, what precious and most noble rewards are set
forth unto you, if you go forth valeauntly to fight against your ennemies,
which seek your destruction. Only believe, only fix ye eyes of your faith on
Christ crucified. Only engraue in your heart depely a sure and undoubted
confidence in the merciful promises of God the father, which he has made
unto you in the precious blood of his dearly beloved son, and our alone
savior Jesus Christ, and you shall most certainly have the victory, and
obtain the reward of joyful immortality. Here what your graund captain Christ
says: God has so dearly loved ye world that he gave his only begotten
son, that every one that believes on him, should not pearyshe, but have
everlasting life. For god sent not his son into the world to condemn the
world, but that the world should be saved by him. He yt believes on him, is not
damned John Baptist says. He that believes on ye son of God, has
everlasting life. John. ^
My sheep says Christ hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I give them everlasting life, nether shall they perish for ever, nor yet
shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My father which gave them to me, is
greater then all, and no man can pluck them out of my fathers hand. I and my
father, am one. John. xi.
Again, I am the resurrection and life. He that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And every one that lives and believes in me, shall
never die. John. xiiii.
I am the way, ye truth and the life. Follow Christ, and you ca^ not err, nor
go out of the way, for he is the way. Believe Christ, and you can not be
deceived, for he is the truth. Abide and remain in Christ, and you can not
die the death everlasting, for he is the life. Wherefore (O most dear brother)
clean with strong faith to these most sweet and comfortable promyses of
Christ your Savior. Believe to obtain, whatsoever is promised. So may you be
sure to be Gods son, and heir of his everlasting kingdom, never to perish,
but to have eternal life.


Epa. I believe to have remission of all my sins through faith in Christ's
blood. Lord Jesus take my spirit. Act. vii.
O heavenly father. I commend my spirit into thy hands.


Ph. This faith (dear brother) makes you the Son of God, Luke. xxiii.
and heir of his glorious kingdom, yea it makes you Christ's brother and
fellow heyr with him of everlasting glory. It purchases for you favor at the
hand of God, and forgeuenes of al your sins. It brings unto you peace and
quietness of conscience. It makes a perfect reconciliation and an everlasting
agremente between God and you. It delivers you from death, and brings you
unto eternal glory. It makes you a Citezin of the new and heavenly
Jerusalem, where (if you continue steadfast in this faith) you shall remain
for ever and ever in a most blessed and joyful state, having the fruition of
Gods glorious majesty in perfect glory, worlds without end unto your
exceading joy and unspeakable comfort.


Euse. Sir, Behold, the life of this our brother begins, to draw unto an
end.


Phi. Yea rather, he now begi^neth to change a mortal life, for an immortal
life. The life that is led in this world, is rather a shadow of a life, then a
very life indede. Now brother be strong in the faith of Christ. Remember
Christ crucified. An exhortation to the sick man.
Remember Christ to be your alone savior. Remember God ye father to be your
merciful father. Forget not yt all your sins are washed away in Christ's
precious blud, and that by ye virtue of his death and passion, you are made
heir of everlasting salvation. Brother, if you can speak answer. If you can
not speak, show some outward sign and token that it may be a testimonye unto
us of your faith and godly departur.


Chr. Lo, he holds up his hand.


Eu. God be thanked.


Phi. He seems yet to hear. Persuade your self (most dear brother) yt God
even now calls you out of this vale of wretchedness, unto the joyful
enheritance of his everlasting kingdom, where you shall not live miserably with
sinful men (as you have done in this world) but you shall gloriously reign
with that most mighty God, and with his holy angels and blessed saints. Now
begins your joy, your solace, your comfort. Now begi^neth your true life, which
shall be everlasting. Now is the end of al your sorrows come, and now begins
your unfeigned joy and true felicity. Now shall ye se ye glorious majesty of
God face to face. Now shall you behold and perfectly know al ye godly yt have been from the beginning of the world, and be merry and rejoice with the^. Now
shall you se your savior and elder brother Christ as he is. Now shall you be
clothed with the white garments of immortality: Now shall you have a crown of
gold, set upon your head. Now shall ye eat of the tree of life, which is in
the mids of the Paradise of God, and drink of the fountains of living water.
Now shall you be a pillare in the temple of your God, and sit with him on his
seat. And these your joys shall be everlasting, and never have end. Unto these
joys shall you straight ways go, and for evermore enjoy them.


Th. Our brother is eue^ now departed from this world, unto the Lord our God,
as you spoke these words: unto these joys shall you straightways go, and for
evermore enjoy them: he gave up the ghost, The commendation of the man departed
and now reasteth in the Lord.


Phi. The Lord our God be praised. Our brother has made a godly end. He has
given up a good spirit, into the hands of the living God. He is, I doubt not,
of the number of them, Psalm. cxvi.
of whose death it is written: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his saints. Appo. xiiii.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord. His life before men was unrebukable
and blameles. He lived justly, and uprightly with his neighbors. He was
friendly to al godly men, and ennemy to no man. He was both a sincere favorer,
and a diligent follower of Gods most holy word. He abhorred all sects, Papists
Anabaptists, Libertins. etc. Not withstanding always praying for their
ame^dment, that they knowledging their errors, might with us confess one God,
and one truth in the unity of the spirit. He was a dear friend to such as
were studious of good letters, to widows, to fatherles: children, to pore
young maids marriages, to young me^ that had not wherewith to set up their
occupations, to the prisonners, to those poor people which were not hable to
get their living, to pore householders, to the reparing of hie ways and such
like. What a will he made ye know. His end also ye know.


Chr. A christen and godly end made he. God give us al grace to make the like.


Phile. Of a good life comes a good death, if the departure of the godly may
be called a death, and not rather a passage unto a better life. Well, his body
now slepeth in the Lord, and his soul reigns in glory with God.


Euse. God grant him and us al a joyful resurrection.


The. Amen.


Phi. Neighbors, before we depart, let us all kneel down and give God the
father thanks for ye godly departure of this our christen brother.


Chri. It is convenient so to do.


Phi. Give me hither the Flower of Godly prayers. The Flower of godly prayers.
I will rehearse the thanks giving unto God for ye departure of the faithful
out of this world.


Eu. Lo here is the book.


Phil. The name of the Lord our God be glorified.


Chr. Both now and ever. Amen.


Phi. O how can we (most loving father) render unto the sufficient thanckes,
for thine inestimable goodness toward thy faithful servants, whom thou calling
out of this wretched world, Psalm. cxv.
vouchestsafe to place in thy heavenly kingdom among the glorious company of
thy holy angels and blessed saints. Dan. xiii.
O full precious is the death of thy faithful in thy sight. Blessed are ye
dead that die in thee O Lord: For they are at rest from their painful trauails
and labors. The souls of the righteous ar in thy hand. O God: and the pain of
death shall not touch the^. Sap. ii.
In the sight of the unwise they appear to die, Apoc. xxiii
but they are in peace. They shine as the sparckes that run through ye read
bush. They glister as the shining of heaven. They are as ye stars world
without end. They are as the angels of God. They are clad with white garments,
and have golden crowns upon their heds. They do service day and night before
the glorious throne of thy divine majesty. They neither ho^ger nor thirst any
more, neither does the sun or any heat fall upon them, for the lamb which is in
ye mids of ye throne governs the^, and ledeth them unto the living fou^tains
of waters. They follow the la^be whithersoeuer he goes, They have such joys,
Esaias. lxiii. i. Cor. iii
as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nether is there any heart hable to
think them. Infinite and unspeakable are the treasures, O Lord, which thou
haste laid up for them, that depart in thy faith For these thy fatherly
benefits toward the souls of the faithful, and for that it has pleased the
to call this our Christen brother from this vale of misery unto thy heavenly
kingdom, we give unto the most hearty thanks, humbly beseching thee, that
thou will take like care for us, and so govern us with thy holy spirit, both
in sickness and in health, that we may live a good and godly life in this
present world, and when soever it shall be thy good pleasure to call us hence, we
may with strong faith in thee, and in thy son Christ Jesus our Lord, commend
both our bodies and souls into thy merciful hands, and through thy gooddes be
placed in thy glorious kingdom, among thy faithful chosen people, and so for
ever and ever praise and magnify thee our heavenly father, to whom with thy
derely beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord and savior, and the holy ghost that
most sweet co^fortour, be all glory and honor, worlds without end.


Th. Amen.


Ph. Rise let us go and comfort our friends, that they do not to much sorrow
for the departure of this our most dear brother, which now rests in joyful
peace. That done, neighbor Christopher, repare you unto some godly learned
man, and desire him to prepare a Sermon for the burial of this our brother
against to morrow about ye ninth hour.


Chr. It shall be done.


Phile. Neighbor Theophile, and neighbor Eusebius, go ye your way, and
provide all things necessary for the comely furniture of the burial that
nothing be wanting, when the time comes. i. Tess* v.



Euse. We will do it gladly.


Phi. The very god of peace sanctify us through out, and so wholly preserve us
both spirit, and soul and body, that we may be blamed in nothing at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. i. These. ii.



The. Amen.


Phi. Our Lord Jesus Christ him self, and God our father. (which has loved us,
and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace) comfort
our hearts, and stablish us in all good saying and doing.


Eus. Ame^.


Phi. Peace be unto the brethren and love with faith from God the father and
from the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be with al them, which love our Lord Jesus
Christ unfeignedly.


Chri. Amen.


Ph. Blessing and glory, and wisdom and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might. be unto our God for evermore.


Theo. Ame^. Amen.


Give the glory to God alone.



Although death, does daily draw nere:
Yet (his sting past) virtue shinth clean.
Imprinted at London, by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae
Maiestatis per Septennium.
These books are to be sold at his shop under the Gate.


