THE ARCHCONFRATERNITY of the holy ROSARY of our Blessed Lady

publisher's device consisting of a Christogram with a cross and heart pierced
by three nails

M.DC.XXXVI.

THE ARCHCONFRATERNITY of the holy Rosary of our Blessed Lady.
The Origin of the holy Rosary
THis holy Company was begun by S. Dominick, founder of the renowned Religious
order of the Friar Preachers, about the year 1216. to extirpate the Heresy of
the Albigenses, as it did; and afterward, brought such fruit to the Church of
God, that Popes, the more to recommend and make it famous, have endowed it with
many privileges and indulgences, as you shall here see.

At their first entrance or admittance.
Entering into this noble Confraternity, they gain a plenary Indulgence,
granted by the Popes, Pius V. and Clement VIII.

The first Sundays of the month.
Every first Sunday of the Month, (principally of October-having confessed and
communicated, thy gain a plenary Indulgence. Also visiting the Church or being
present at the Processions of the Rosary, a plenary indulgence. Greg. XIII Paul
V.

Upon the seven feasts of our Lady.
On the Purification, Annunciation, Visitation, Assumption, Nativity,
Presentation, and Conception of the Blessed Virgin, being confessed and
communicated, or having a will to do it in due time, a plenary indulgence.
Also, visiting the Church, or being present at the Processions of the Rosary, a
plenary indulgence. Pius IV.

To every Mystery of the holy Rosary.
They are fifteen, divided into three parts. Five, are c^lled joyful, whereon
they are to meditate in saying the first Chapler (or Beads of five Decads of
our Lady, the Annunciation, Visitation of S. Elizabeth, Nativity of our
Savior, his Presentation, and the Finding of him in the Temple; Five, called
dolorous, in saying the second Chaplet, the sweat of Blood, Whipping at the
pillar, crowning with thorns, larrying of his Cross and Crucifixion; and,
Five glorious, in saying the third Chaplet, the Resurrection, Ascension, coming
of the Holy Ghost, Assumption of our blessed Lady, and her Coronation: Upon
all, and every the feasts of which Mysteries, as also on the celebrity of the
crown of our Savior, the Invention and Exaltation of the holy Cross, and the
day of all Saints, visiting the Alter of the Rosary, may be gained, a plenary
Indulgence. Greg. 9.

Of the Mass of the holy Rosary.
Every time that one says it, causes it to be said, or is present at it, a
plenary Indulgence. Alex. VI. Paul. III.

For saying and carrying the Rosary about one.
Saying the whole Rosary, they gain three hundred sixty thousand and fifteen
years, five quarantaines, and a hundred forty days pardon. Innoc. 8. Alex.
8. Clem. 5. Adrian. 6. Sixth. 4. Clem. 8. Alex. and Raimond Legates. And, which
is more, a plenary indulgence. Paul. 3.

Carrying publicly, and for to give good example, the Rosary or Chaplet
blessed by a Dominican Friar, they gain every day two hundred quarantaines of
indulgence. Inno. 8. Alex. 6.

Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, which every day are plenary, in one part
or other of the City, with delivery also of souls out of Purgatory.
THey are gained by visiting five Altars, and saying before every one of them
five Pater nosters, and five Ave Marias, or else, five and twenty Paters and
Ave, before one only Altar, if there be no more. Paul 3. Clement 8. Yea, it
suffiseth to say only five Paters and Aves, but before an Altar of the Rosary.
Pius. 5.

At the discretion of the Brothers of the Confraternity.
Twice in their life, on the days they please to make choice of, being
confessed and communicated, they may gain a plenary indulgence. Innoc. 8.
Clement 8.

The Salve Regina.
Hearing the Salve Regina after Complet in the Churches of S. Dominick, a
hundred years and forty days of Indulgence. Paul. 5. Alex. Legate.

Doing of good works.
Every time they visit the Chapel of the holy Rosary, or go to see the sick
exhorting them to receive the Sacraments, a hundred and sixty days of
Indulgence. Greg. 13. Clement 8.

Being present at the divine Offices, public or private assemblies of the
Rosary, making peace between those who are at discord, and, whatsoever other
good work, sixty days of pardon. Clement 8.

For those who are sick or hindered.
The sick, or such as for other lawful impediments, cannot be present at the
meeting of the Confraternity, communicating, and saying the Rosary, or seven
Psalms, before some devout picture, gain all the same indulgences, which they
get who are assistant. Pius 5. Greg. 13. Sixth. 5.

At the hour of death.
At the hour of death, being confessed and communicated, a plenary Indulgence.
Having the blessed candle of the Confraternity, a plenary Indulgence. Saying
with mouth or heart JESUS MARIA, a plenary Indulgence; and, such an absolution
as one is thereby restored, to the purity and innocence which he had by
baptism. Innoc. 8. Adrian 6. Greg. 13. Pius 5.

For the Dead.
Accompaning the Dead to their burial, a hundred sixty days of Indulgence.
Greg. 13. Clement 8. Being present at the Masses and Offices of the Dead, they
gain five thousand four hundred years, and a hundred and forty days pardon.
Sixth. 4. Alex. 6. Greg. 13. Clem. 8, Every time they say the whole Rosary, they
gain the delivery of a soul out of Purgatory. Paul 3. Whosoever of the
forenamed on fraternity, says, causes to be said, or is present when one
says Mass of the Rosary, to that intention, delivers a soul out of
Purgatory. Paul 5. All the pardons granted to the living, may be applied to the
Dead, by communicating, saying the Rosary, Mass, or making the stations for
them. Leo 10.

For all Faithful people.
At the sound of the Ave Maria at night, saying:

Angelus Domini nunciavit Mariae, and concepit de Spiritu Sancto: Ave Maria.
Ecce ancilla Domini: fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, Ave Maria. Et verbum caro
factum est, and habitavit in nobis: Deo gratias, Ave Maria; They gain a plenary
Indulgence. Paul 3. When the hour strikes, by saying an Ave Maria, a thousand
days pardon. Leo 10. Saying the Office of our blessed Lady, at every
Canonical hour, they gain forty days of Indulgence. John. 22. and other
fifty granted by Pius 5. Invoking the holy names of JESUS and MARIA, ninety
five days of pardon. Urban. 4. John 22. Pius 5. Bending reverently at the
hearing or pronouncing of the said holy names of JESUS and MARIA, two hundred
years, In the Ave maria, after Jesus adding Christus, sixty days pardon,
saying withal the rest of the same, Sancta Maria, and the Salve Regina. As
also standing up at Magnificat, forty days of pardon. John 22. Reciting the
prayer Ave Sanctissima Maria, eleven thousand years of Indulgences, granted by
Sixtus 4. Saying: Blessed and praised be the most holy Virgin Marie, a hundred
years of Indulgences. Paul 3.

Triviledges of the Confraters.
THey are as Religious of the holy Order S. Dominick, and (besides their own)
are partakers of all the good works of that renowned Religion, the whole world
through both before and after Death. A rare privilege. Innoc. 8. At Easter,
Nativity, Annunciation, Visitation, Purification, and Assumption of our Lady,
and three days before, the Dominican Fathers may absolve them from all cases
reserved, even to the Pope, (so they be not comprehended In Bulla Coenae) and
release them of all oaths, and change their vows, except the five ordinary.
Leo 10. Being Dead, they have at least four Masses a year said for them in the
Convents of S. Dominick, and places where there is a Confraternity; And who
shall be there present the days after the Purification, Annunciation,
Assumption, and Nativity of our Lady, shall gain a thousand nine hundred days
of pardon. Granted by nineteen Cardinals of the said Confraternity, in the year
1479.

Conditions requisite for Admittance.
They must make their names be writ in a book kept for that end, confess and
communicate, and say at least a Chaplet or pair of Beads of five decads. Pius
5. If one should cause Children to be admitted, of such as were absent, or
dead, (a thing very frequent) he were not at all obliged, either for them, or
for himself, under pain of sin, nor bound to pay ought, without he freely of
h^^ own accord should please to bestow it. They are to say three pair of Beads
the week of five Decads, or their Chaplet, at one or more times. Paul 3. And
that in such a place, and posture of body, as they themselves please, and when
they omit to say them, though there be no offense, yet gain they not the
pardons for that time. Yet, in case, they have said, or shall say them double,
(that is, twice so many Chaplets, or Beads of five Decads,) the week before,
or after, or should cause any other of the Confraternity to say them for them,
they should not loose the pardons. An easy matter to do.

All the aforesaid matters are gathered out of authentic books and bulls
confirmed by Paulus V. 1608. bulla cumolim foelic. record.

A prayer against the plague taken out of the chronicle of the Seraphical order
of the friars Minors written by the Reverend Father Francis Genzaga of the same
Order.
THe whole City of Conimbris, being visited with a most grievous plague this
place also (that is to say the Monastery of those sisters of S. Clare who are
termed the urbanist nuns) began to be infected; and whilst the Abbess stood
very solicitous at the grace. for the disposal of the sisters subjected un to
her, to some place, for the safety of their lives; then suddenly appeared a
beggar, demanding the cause of her so great sorrow and solicitude? and being
thereof certified, he delivered, her a small scroul of parchment, saying, If
you will cause, the Anthemne and the prayer contained in that small scroul, to
be often and daily repeated; this place shall not be touched with any plague at
all, and having thus spoken, he vanished away; the nuns took this beggar to be
S. Bartholomew; but whosoever that was; without all doubt it is; that the
monastery from that time, stood free from any pestiferous contagion; when the
City of Conimbris it self stood infected.

The Prayer.
STella Coeli extirpavit, quae lactavit Dominum, mortis pestem quam plantavit
primus parens hominum. Ipsa stella nunc dignetur sydera compescere, quorum
bella plebem caedunt dirae mortis ulcere, O piissima stella Maris, a peste
sucurre nobis. Audi nos domina; nam filius tuus nihil negans te honorat. Salva
nos Jesu, pro quibus virgo matter te orat.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genitrix.

Resp. Ut digni efficiamur promissonibus Christi.

Oremus. DEus misericordiae, Deus pietatis, Deus indulgentiae, qui misertus es
super afflictionem populi tui, and dixisti Angelo percutienti populum tuum;
contine manum tuam: ob amorem illius stellae gloriosae, cujusubera pretiosa
contra venenum nostrorum, delictorum quam dulciter suxisti, praesta auxilium
gratiae tuae: Et ab omnipeste and improvisa morte secure liberemur, and a
totius perditionis incursu misericorditer salvemur. Per te Jesu Christ Rex
gloriae, qui vivis and regnas in saecula saeculorum.

Resp. Amen.

The starr of heaven (that gave suck to our Lord) extirped the plague of death,
which the first parent of men planted; let that starr now be pleased to appease
the skies, whose distemperature, Kills the people with an ulcer of dreadful
death.

O most holy star of the sea preserve us from the plague, hear us OB. Lady,
for thy son, denying thee not any thing, honors thee, save us O Jesu for
whom the Virgin Mother prays thee.

Verse. Pray for us O holy Mother of God.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us Pray. O God of mercy, God of pity, God of pardon, which have mercy upon
the affliction of thy people, and said to the Angel wounding the people, hold
thy hand, even for the love of that glorious starr, whose precious breasts,
against the venime of our sins, thou did most sweetly suck, vouchsafe us, the
help of thy grace, that we may be safely delivered, from all plague and
unprovided death, and that we may be mercifully saved from the assault of all
perdition; through thee JESUS CHRIST, King of Glory, who live and Reignest
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to S. Francis.
HAyl O holy Father S. Francis, the light of the Country, the form of the
minors, the mirour of virtues, the way of right, the rule of manners; bring us
from the exile of flesh, to the Kingdom of heaven.

Verse. Pray for us holy S. Francis.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us Pray. O God which do by the merits of S. Francis enlarge thy Church,
with the fruit of a new issue, grant us, by his imitation to despise worldly
matters, and continually to enjoy the participation of heavenly gifts: through
Christ our Lord. Amen.

LITANIES of our B. Lady.
Kyrie eleison. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ eleison. Christ have mercy
upon us. Kyrie eleison. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ audi nos. Christ hear
us. Christ exaudi nos. Christ graciously hear us. Pater de coelis Deus.
Miserere nobis. God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us. Fili Redemptor
mundi Deus miserere nobis. God the Son Redeemer of the world have mercy upon
us. Spiritus sancte Deus miserere nobis. God the holy Ghost have mercy upon us.
Sancta Trinitas unus Deus Miserere nobis. Holy Trinity one God, have mercy upon
us. Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis. Holy Mary, pray for us. Sancta Dei Genitrix
ora. Holy Mother of God, pray. Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora. Holy Virgin of
Virgins, pray. for us. Matter Christi, ora. Mother of Christ, pray. Matter
Divinae gratiae, ora. Mother of Divine grace, pray. Matter purissima, ora. Most
pure Mother, pray. Matter Castissima, ora. Most chaste Mother, pray. Matter
inviolata, ora. Undefiled Mother, pray. Matter intemerata, ora. Untouched
Mother, pray, Matter Amabilis, ora. Amiable Mother, pray. Matter Admirabilis,
ora. Admirable Mother, pray. Matter Creatoris, ora. Mother of our Creator,
pray. Matter Salvatoris, ora. Mother of our Savior, pray. Virgo prudentissima,
ora. Most prudent Virgin, pray. Virgo veneranda, ora. Venerable Virgin, pray.
Virgo praedicanda, ora. Renowned Virgin pray. Virgo potens, ora. Potent Virgin,
pray. Virgo clemens, ora. Clement Virgin, pray. Virgo fidelis, ora. Faithful
Virgin, pray. Speculum justitiae, ora. Mirour of Justice, pray. Seeds
sapientiae, ora. Seat of Wisdom, pray. Causa nostrae laetitiae, ora. Cause of
our gladness, pray. Vas Spirituale, ora. Spiritual vessel, pray. Vas insigne
devotionis, ora. Vessel of Singular devotion, pray. Rosa Mistica, ora.
Mystical Rose, pray. Turris Davidica, ora. Tower of David, pray. Turris
Eburnea, ora. Tower of Ivory, pray. Domus Aurea, ora. House of Gold, pray.
Foederis Arca, ora. Ark of the Covenant, pray. Janua Coeli, ora. Gate of
Heaven, pray. Stella Matutina, ora. Morning starr, pray. Salus infirmorum, ora.
Health of the weak, pray. Refugium peccatorum, ora. Refuge of Sinners, pray.
Consolatrix Afflictorum, ora. Comfort of the afflicted, pray. for us. Auxilium
Christianorum, ora. pro nobis. Help of Christians, pray. Regina Angelorum, ora.
Queen of Angels, pray. Regina Patriarcharum, ora. Queen of Patriarchs, pray.
Regina Prophetarum, ora. Queen of Prophets, pray. Regina Apostolorum, ora.
Queen of Apostles, pray. Regina Martyrum, ora. Queen of Martyrs, pray. Regina
Confessorum, ora. Queen of Confessors, pray. Regina Virginum, ora. Queen of
Virgins, pray. Regina Sanctorum omnium ora pro nobis. Queen of all Saints,
pray. Regina Sanctissimi Rosarii, ora pro nobis. Queen of the most Blessed
Rosary, pray. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Lamb of
God, who takes away the sins of the world, Spare us O Lord, Agnus Dei qui
tollis peccata mundi, Exaudi nos Domine Lamb of God who takes away the sins af
the world, Hear us O Lord. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.
Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, Have mercy upon us. Christ
audi nos. Christ hear us. Christ exaudi nos. Christ graciously hear us. Kyrie
eleison. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ eleison. Christ have mercy upon us.
Kyrie eleison. Lord have mercy upon us.
We fly unto thy protection O holy Mother of God, despise not our prayers in
our necessities, but deliver us continually from all dangers; O glorious and
Blessed Virgin.

Verse. Pray for us O holy Mother of God.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us pray. O God who under the mystical Rosary of the Mother of God, do
represent unto us all the mysteries of thy life, death and glory; grant that
whomsoever we do get to be of this plantation, may be crowned with a triumphant
garland of the heavenly Garden; who live and reignest for ever and ever Amen.

FINIS.

