TWO SERMONS, PREACHED at the Kings Court, this January, 1620.

Concerning David's Adultery, and his politic Practices.

By Francis Mason, Archdeacon of Norfolk, and Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary.

Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. Psa.
119. 1. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Nathanael Newbery; and are to be sold at
his Shop, under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill and in Pope's Head Alley. 1621.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, whereas heretofore my slender writings published to the
world, and my Sermons in that Royal Auditory have been in part polemical,
incountring with some controversies of these times; it pleased God this last
year so to inflict upon me that tormenting pain which is incident to students,
and does commonly accompany a sedentary life, that I did interpret is as an
Angel sent from God to put me in mind of my mortality. Whereupon I resolved to
divert my course from disputation to devotion, from controversies to
conscience, and from henceforth to labor to work in my self and others true
mortification, and sanctified affections; and accordingly to temper both my
study and my style.

Wherefore, being called by my ordinary course of attendance to preach in that
eminent place; first of all, I considered what sins are likely to be found in
Princes Courts. And among sundry other, two especially did offer themselves to
my cogitation; carnal Concupiscence, and politic Practices. For, where there
is pomp in apparel, delicacie in diet, and beautiful objects, all concurring
many times with idleness and ease* there a man walks in the midst of snares,
and is in danger to be set in combustion with the fiery darts of the Devil.
Again, Kings houses being not only places of pleasure, but also ever-flowing
fountains of profit and preferment: no marvel if nimble wits do there set
themselves aworke, to attain their own ends, and politickly to supplant all
those that stand in their way, or hinder their proiects. For, that they do so,
will be evident, as I suppose, by the Chronicles of all Kingdoms and Countries.

Now, though the English Court, guided by so godly and gracious a Sovereign,
be of all other most remarkable for learned preaching, religious prayers, and
angelical lauding and praising of God with spiritual Hymns, and ravishing
strains of melodious music: though it be beautified and adorned with a most
worthy garland of sage Senators, Nobles and Gentlemen: Yet I dare not
altogether exempt it from such sins as have always been incident, more or
less, to the Palaces of Princes. Therefore in the second place, I sought such
a Text as might lead me by the hand to reproove those vices: and immediately I
laid hold upon the story of King David.

But though David were a King, yet I did not therefore single him out because
he was a King: neither intended I, preaching before a King, to take occasion
by King David to glanse in any wise at the sacred persons of Princes: God
forbid. For our King (God be thanked) though in the highest pitch of worldly
prosperity, is for chastity another Joseph. And though he be for wisdom
like an Angel of God, and can dive into the depth of humane policies: yet he
loves and practices sincerity in all his dealings; like to Nathanael the true
Israelite, in who^ was no guile. But, I proposed David, as a general glass of
humane frailty, wherein all men may behold their own imbecility.

Neither had I any purpose when I preached these Sermons to publish them to the
world: but it pleased the Almighty to vouchsafe a blessing beyond expectation.
For he that caused the hearts of the Disciples to burn within Luke 24 32
them while he opened the Scriptures unto the^ as they went to Emmaus, did in
the riches of his mercy kindle some such sparkles in the hearts of my hearers.
Which I perceiving by the multitude of those which desired copies, did at last
yield to let them pass to the Press; being mindful of that of the Apostle,
Gal. 6. 10
As we have opportunity let us do good to all men, especially to those who are
of the household of faith.

Moreover: whereas thou, gentle Reader, have long expected my book of the
co^secratio^ of Bishops, which by command of authority was to be translated
into Latin; I certify thee, that I have already finished the translation; and,
by occasion of the opposition of my many Antagonists who have written against
me, much enlarged the Work, and prepared it for the Press, under this title;
De ministerio Anglicano. But, the child being brought to the birth, as yet
there wants strength to be delivered. Yet I hope, that our good God in his
due time will give it a comfortable issue. In the mean while, enjoy these my
poor labors, and give them leave to work upon thine affections. And so I
commend both thee and them to the blessing of God.

Thine in the Lord, Francis Mason.

Faults escaped.
Page 16. line 20. day is wanting. Page 45. l. 4 vanquished for vanished. Page
48. l. 8. race for name. Page 54. l. 6. Ammon for Amnon. p. 78. l. 23.
disseised for defeated.

THE FIRST SERMON, Preached at White Hall before Prince CHARLES, upon Tuesday,
the ninth of January, 1620.
2. Sam. 12, 13. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord:
And Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not
dye.
Here are three things David to be considered, his sin, his repentance, and
his absolution. The first thing is his sin, which is engraven in my Text (as
it were) with the point of a Diamond; and that with such great and Capital
Letters that a man may run and read it, in these words: AND DAVID SAID UNTO
NATHAN, PECCAVI DOMINO, I HAVE SINNED AGAINST THE LORD.

The second thing is his repentance, presented unto us in the self same words,
being uttered by way of lamentation, as though he should say: It is true
Nathan, it is true that thou have said, for I confess I have sinned: alas! I
have sinned most grievously, and that against the Lord.

The third thing is his absolution, pronounced in these words: And Nathan said
unto David, the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. So first
he sinned, secondly he repented, and thirdly he was absolved. He sinned, there
was the corruption of nature; he repented, there was the operation of the
Spirit; he was absolved, there was the unspeakable goodness of God. In his
sin let us behold our own frailety; in his repentance, let us learn our own
duty; in his absolution, let us magnify Gods mercy.

The sin of David reproved Nathan, and here confessed by himself, was first
of all that heinous sin of adultery, and secondly those other sins which
he committed, while he went about to hide and cloak his adultery. Of the
former, at this time, by the grace of Christ; of the residue hereafter, when
it shall please the Lord. Now, that we may rightly understand the haynousnesse
of his adultery, let us briefly ponder these four points. 1. The quality of
the person, or what manner of man this David was which committed adultery. 2.
With whom. 3. When. 4. How he was plunged into this gulf of sin.

David was the most eminent and remarkable man that was then living upon the
face of the earth; for it was famously known both to Jews and Gentiles, that
the God of heaven had been his continual Buckler and Defense, even from his
youth up. He had defended him from a raging 1. Sam. 17. 34
Bear, from a roaring Ibid.
Lion, from a huge and terrible 1. Sam. 17. 4. 50
Giant, from the fury of the 1. Sam. 18. 27. and 23. 5
Philistines, from the cruel persecution of bloodthirsty 1. Sam. 18. 11. and
23. 20. and 24. 16. and 26. 2.
Saul, and in a word, from a thousand dangers. And as the Lord had compassed
him about with gracious deliverances, so he had crowned him with blessings upon
blessings, temporal, spiritual, ordinary, extraordinary. First, when he was a
poor Shepherd following the Ewes, the Lord sent Samuel to anoint him 1. Sam.
16. 1
King over Israel. Secondly, the Lord gave him a glorious victory over 1. Sam.
17. 51
Golias, all Israel did see it, and reioiced. Thirdly, the Lord gave him honor
in the hearts of the people, so that the women did sing in their dances: 1.
Sam. 18. 7
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. Fourthly, the
heart of 1. Sam. 18. 1
Jonathan the Kings son was knit unto him: for he loved him, even as his own
soul. Fifthly, 1. Sam. 18. 20.
Michal the Kings daughter loved him, so David became the Kings son in law.
And after the death of Saul and Jonathan, the Lord advanced him to the royal
throne, the glittering Diadem was set upon his head, he reigned over 2. Sam.
5. 5
Judah seven years and six months, and then over all Israel even from Dan to
Bersheba. Besides all this, the Lord gave him plenty of 1. chr. 28
gold and silver, and victory over all his 2. Sam. 7. 1
enemies, so that his victorious banner was displayed, even from Jerusalem to
the River Euphrates. Moreover, he was a Act. 2. 30
Prophet of the Lord, a type of Christ, a Secretary of the holy Ghost in
penning those sacred and mellifluous Psalms, he was also the sweet Singer of
Israel, and a Composer of those melodious harmonies that were used in the
Tabernacle of God: he was likewise one of the act. 2. 29
Patriarks, for so Saint Peter styles him; and God had act. 2. 30
sworn unto him that he should be one of the Progenitors of Jesus Christ. Now
for inward gifts and graces, he was a Child of God, a member of Christ, a
Temple of the Holy Ghost, a vessel of grace, a sanctified Soul, a sweet and
well tuned Cymbal, a heavenly Organ of angelical sound; in all his works he
praised the Lord with words of glory, every Psalm breathing religion and
devotion; in so much that God himself gave him this testimony, that he was a
man according to Gods own act. 13. 22
heart. O what eminency of grace, what sublimitie of honor, what pre-eminence
of prerogatives was here! and yet for all this, David, even this David,
committed adultery.

Now, that we may make use of this example: first let us observe the frailty
and infirmity of man. Behold, he that was supposed to be strong as a Lion, and
tall as a Peter: o what a confidence and hye conceit had he of himself! and
yet for all his boasting, he did not only deny, but also forswear his
Master. Wherefore, lay away all presumption, let no arogancy proceed out of your
mouth, but let every man consider his own infirmity, and thereby learn a holy
and a gracious humility.

Secondly, let us observe the danger David, a man according to Gods own heart,
were tempted, what man upon the face of the earth can be free from temptation?
I confess, that all men are not tempted alike to the same sin of adultery.
For as our Savior says; There are some Eunuchs which were so borne from
their mothers womb: Mat. 19. 12
but all men are tempted to one sin or other. Now, where the bank is lowest,
there the water will over; where the wall is weakest, there the enemy will
batter; and where man is weakest, there the devil will soonest assault him:
for our adversary is like to a cunning fisherman, he co^siders the natures and
inclinations of the fishes, and accordingly baiteth his hook. If Judas be
covetous, the devil will bait his hook for him with thirty pieces of
silver. If Achan love pride in apparel, the devil will angle for him with a
goodly Babylonish garment. If Absolon be ambitious, the devil will seek to
catch him with the hope of a kingdom. Thus he observes all, and accordingly
he tempts all, and therefore look for temptation whosoever thou art. Alas,
my brother, thou carriest sinful flesh and blood about thee, and do thou
think thou shall not be tempted? The world is full of alluring provocations,
and do thou think thou shall not be tempted? The devil goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, and do thou think thou shall not
be tempted? We have an enemy, says Saint Epist. 1.
Hierome, Cui nomina mill, mill nocendi arts, atque ego infoelix victorem me
putabo dum capior? He has a thousand names, and a thousand subtle devices to
entrap and entangle the souls of men, and I poor wretch, shall I think my
self a Conqueror, even then when I am taken captive? Believe me, believe me,
haec tranquillitas tempestas est, this calm will prove a storm: for even
then thou art tempted, when thou think thou art not tempted; nay therefore
thou art tempted, because thou think thy self free from temptation. Our
blessed Savior, when he taught his disciples to say; Forgive us our
trespasses, he taught them likewise to say, And lead us not into temptation;
thereby teaching us, that even those children of God, whose trespasses are
forgiven, are still notwithstanding subject to temptation. Wherefore, my son,
when thou entrest into the service of God, prepare thy self for temptation.

1. Cor. 10. 12
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. But how shall we
take heed? that we may learn of our blessed Savior, when he says, Mat. 26. 41
Watch and Pray. If the watch be neglected but one night, the City may be
taken: David had kept watch and ward over his senses all his life time, and now
neglecting it but one Evening, he is not only incountred, but carried away
captive to the law of sin. Wherefore we had all need to use vigilance and
circumspection. Watch therefore and pray, that ye fall not into temptation. The
Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. And because it is weak,
therefore neglect no good means that the Lord has appointed. And when thou
have done all that thou can, put no confidence in thy self, but rely upon
thy God, saying; O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name. And thus
much of the first point, viz. the quality of the person which committed
adultery: now I come to the second, that is, the party with whom.

The understanding whereof will in verbis de praesenti, it is adultery. Whereby
also it appears that there are sundry degrees in adultery; but when a married
man pollutes a married woman, that is adultery in the highest degree. Now, with
whom did David commit this folly? was it with a single woman? No, but with one
alias Bathshua 1. Chr. 3. 5
Bathsheba, an other man's wife. Then it was more then single fornication: it
was adultery. But was not David himself also a married man? Yes undoubtedly.
Then both parties were married, and therefore it was adultery in the highest
degree. Yea, and peradventure he had more wives then one. Very true, he had
many wives when he dwelt at 1. chr. 3. 5
Hebron, and yet he took him more when he came to 2. Sam. 5. 13
Jerusalem. And had he so ample a remedy against concupiscence, and yet would
transgress Gods holy ordinance, to eat of the forbidden tree? Had he so many
wives of his own, and yet would defile the one only wife of an other man? O
most horrible and execrable adultery, and that in the very height of the
highest degree! But whose wife was she? She was the wife of one Vrias, by
Nation a Hittite, and stranger from the commonwealth of Israel; but by grace a
Proselyte, and an imbracer of the true Religion, indeed a very holy and devout
man. He was by profession a Soldier, a valiant Captain, and reckoned among
the 2. Sam. 23. ver. vlt. 1. chr. 11. 41.
Worthies of David. But where was he now? he was in the field at the siege of
Rabba of the Ammonites, fighting for the glory of God, for the Arc of the
Covenant, for the honor of his Prince, and for the good of his Country. And
would such a man as David offer such a wrong, to such a man, at such a time? o
what a blemish and scandal was this for the Church of God? o tell it not in
Gath, and publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the Daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. And thus
much of the second point.

remain in darkness, wherein was committed such a work of darkness.

Notwithstanding, though we David incurred this sin in his declining age,
during the time of the wars with the Ammonites, he him self then lying at
home in Jerusalem in plenty and prosperity, idleness and ease. First, it
happened in his declining age: for David was thirty 2 Samuel 5. 4. 5
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Hebron seven years and
six months; and then he reigned in Jerusalem. After which time, first, he
won the fort of 2 Samuel 5. 7
Sion and expelled the Iebusites. Secondly, he overcame the 2 Samuel 5 20. and 5
25. and 8. 1
Philistines in three sundry battles. Thirdly, he smote 2 Samuel 8 2
the Moabites and measured them with lines. Fourthly, he spoiled the children
both of 2 Samuel 8 12
Ammon and ibid.
Amalec. Fitftly, he fought a great battle with 2 Samuel 8 3
Hadadezer King of Zobah in Armenia, upon the river Euphrates; and he took
from him a thousand Chariots, seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand
footmen. And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succor Hadadezer, David slew
of them two and twenty thousand, and put garrisons in Syria Damascena. Sixthly,
he vanquished Idumaea and put garrisons in 2 Sa. 8 14
Edom. Seaventhly, the King of 2 Samuel 10. 6
Ammon, assisted with thirty three thousand Syrians, made war against
Israel; but Ioab forced them into their City. After a while they issue out
again, and 2 Samuel 10 16
Hadadezer brought forth the Syrians beyond the river Euphrates; which David
hearing, assembled all Israel, and went to battle and subdued the Syrians, who
became his servants; and after that time assisted the Ammonites no more. The 2 Samuel 11. 1
next spring following David sent out Ioab and all Israel with him against the
Ammonites. And in the mean while he lying at home in Jerusalem, defiled
himself with fleshly lusts. Now, so many great and sundry battles, and some of
them so far distant, with diverse passages of peace between them, must needs
require a long time and many years: which being added to the former thirty
seven years and six months, I may safely say that David was then in his
declining age. And yet he was not now exceeding old. For he lived in all but
seaventie 2 Samuel 5. 4
years, and it is evident that this happened before the birth of Solomon, who
is reckoned the 1 Chr. 3 5
fourth son that Bathsheba bore to David. But whether the holy Ghost in that
place use the order of nature, or some other order I will not determine.
Moreover, in what year of David's reign Solomon was borne, or how old he was
when David died and he began to reign, is not revealed in holy Scripture: and
therefore upon this we can ground no certainty. Some conjecture upon the
premises, that David was now forty six years old, some that he was forty
eight, others imagine that he was above fifty: But what the holy Ghost has
concealed, that I will not take upon me curiously to define; and therefore I
content my self with this generality, that David was now in his declining age.

O what a shameful thing was legs: but at night he has three legs, because
then he borrows the help of his staff. And after a while he is bedridden,
and then he has no legs, but is ready to drop into his grave. Joseph of
Arimathia was not very old, and yet he made a toombe in his Ioh. 19 41
garden. A garden is a place of pleasure, a toomb is a monument of mortality:
he made his toomb in a garden, that in the midst of pleasures he might think
of morralitie. For though walking one way he saw nothing but odoriferous
flowers richly imbroidred and enameled by nature, yet when he turned him self
the other way, the grave presented it self unto him. And surely it had been
fit for David, his sun now beginning to draw toward the west, to have
thought upon his mortality and not upon fleshly lusts.

When I reprove incontinencie Tit. 2. 6
Titus were necessary, then it is most necessary in these days, To exhort
young men to be sober minded. For commonly they are like to the Prodigal
child, who thought himself wiser then his old father; he supposed that the
old Gentleman knew not what belonged unto gallant behavior, but if he
himself could once finger his portion, he would not be curbed nor kept in,
but follow the fashion, and live like a Gentleman. And therefore he said to
his father, Luke 15 12
Father give me that portion of goods that falls to me. Well (such was the
indulgency of the old man) he has gotten it, and now being from under the
wing of his fathers authority, he flourishes and flanteth it out in brave
apparel, and keeps company with the best like a gallant, till all is spent
with riotous living. If a cisterne let out water at many cocks, and take it in
at none, though now it be full, it will soon be empty: and even so it is with
this gallant, his purse was full, but it is soon empty, and all is gone with
vain delights and sinful pleasures. Oh that young men would take heed by this
example, and remember their Creator in the days of their youth, and learn to
be sober minded. Peradventure some will say, that we must not be such rigid
censurers of young men, their age requires delights, and they may repent when
they are old. Well then, go to, thou young man, follow thy pleasures, and
walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the light of thine eyes, crown thy
self with roses, and let no delight be wanting which thy heart desires; but
know that for all these things, God will bring thee unto judgment. And
therefore let the young man repent while he has time: for what does he know
whether ever he shall live till he be old? A Carpenter goes to the wood to
cut down an aged oak: but before he do that, he cuts down many a little
wand. One walking in a garden pulls peradventure a ripe rose, and yet before
he do so, he breaks off many a tender bud. Wherefore let the young man
serve God even while he is young; for otherwise who knows, if he provoke the
Lord, whether the God of heaven, the just Judge, may not take him suddenly, and
dash him against the wall like an earthen vessel and break him in a thousand
pieces.

David: As Eccles. 10. 1
dead flies corrupt the ointment of the Apothecarie, so does a little folly him
that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. David till this time had kept his
honor unstained, his good name was like a pleasant perfume poured out, which
filled all Israel with the sweetness of the odor. Now he commits a folly, and
he shall be reproved therewithal till the end of the world. Wherefore all you
which hitherto have kept your vessels in honor, whether in single life or in
holy matrimony, take heed that you do not fall as David fell: but as you have
made a blessed beginning, so in the name of God proceed to keep your selves
undefiled members of Jesus Christ. Many virtues are commended, but one only
bestows crowns and garlands upon all the rest; the image of happy eternity,
happy Continuance. And therefore continue, or rather as you grow in years so
grow in grace, and bring forth more fruit in your age. So shall your silver
hairs be truly honorable, and your persons shall be reverenced in the hearts
of all men. For Pro. 16 31
the hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness: yea Eccles. 25. 6
experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is their glory.
Wherefore proceed from grace to grace, even till you come with honor to the
grave. The sun is always amiable, but never more then at the setting: and
therefore seeing you have shined with virtue in the fore-noone of your life,
God forbid you should be clowded or overcast in the afternoon: wherefore
shine forth more and more, that your setting may be with glory and
immortality. All the strains of music are sweet and delectable, but none
may compare with an excellent Cloze. A life continued in the fear God is
delicious music, and a virtuous old age is the excellent cloze. And thus much
of the first circumstance of the time; his declining age.

David had sent Ioab thither and all Israel with him, who destroyed the
country of the Ammonites and besieged their City. And it seems the City
was very manfully defended, so that the siege went hard on both sides. For it
is very probable by the words of Vrias the Hittite, that the Arc of the
Covenant was fetched into the host of Israel: which used not to be done but
only in time of extreme danger. And was this a time for David to have
wandering and wanton eyes? was this a time for vain delights and sinful
dalliance? was this a time to give the raines to his affections, and to
satisfy the lusts of the flesh? No, no: but rather at such a time let even
lawful pleasures be abandoned. Joel 2. 16
Let the bridegroom go out of his chamber; and the bride out of her
bridechamber. For what is to be done in such a case we may learn of Exodus 17
Moses; who while Joshua fought with Amalec stood upon the top of an hill to
hold up his hands, and Aaron and Hur were with him; Aaron the Priest of the
Lord, and Hur one of the Princes of the tribe of Judah grandfather to Bezaleel,
the cunning workman. Now it came to pass that when Moses held up his hands
Israel prevailed, but when his hands fell down Amalec prevailed: And when his
hands were heavy, Aaron and Hur rolled a stone and he sat thereon, and they
stayed up his hands on the one side and on the other, so his hands were steady
till the going down of the sun. And even so should David have done, he
should have holden up his hands for the host of Israel: and in so doing both
Aaron and Hur, that is, both Priest and People should have assisted and
supported him. Yea this may teach us all our duty in the like case. When Joshua
fights against Amalec, when the Ark of God is in danger, when Judah and
Israel, when our brethren that are pillars in the Church of God are up in
arms, though we our selves be safe at home, though we be far from dint and
danger, though we fear not the roaring of the Cannon, nor the push of the
Pike, yet we may not follow sinful pleasures with David, but hold up our
hands with Moses. Yea in such a case it behooveth Moses, Aaron, and Hur,
Prince, Priest, and People, to hold up their hands, and to pray to the Lord:
For Iam. 5. 16
much avails the prayer of a righteous man if it be fervent.

The third circumstance is, that David lay then at home in peace, rendered.
First, because he lay at home in the time of the wars: but we must consider
that the life of a King is worth ten thousand of ours, and therefore not to be
endangered without great necessity. Secondly, because he lay upon his pallat
in the afternoon; but we must consider that a King is troubled with cares for
the Commonwealth, which make him wake when other men sleep, and therefore
such rest and repose may sometimes be requisite for him. Thirdly, because he
had leisure to walk upon the top of his house, and to view the City: but it
were hard to deny that honest recreation to a King which is permitted to every
common person. How then? was he idle or no? Truly, these three points do not
of necessity convince him of sinful idleness: yet because all these three
things now concurred, and there followed such foul events, as commonly proceed
from idleness; therefore both ancient and late Writers, comparing the
antecedents with the consequents, do commonly impute his adultery to sinful
idleness: and this we may embrace as a most probable opinion. Then mark, I
pray you, when David fell. Not when he was a poor Shepherd following the Ewes,
not when he fought the Lords battles against the Philistines, not when he
fled before the face of Saul: but when he reigned peaceably at home from Dan to
Bersheba, when he had achieved many and great victories abroad, and had almost
conquered all his enemies, when he had enlarged his Dominions and was enriched
with abundance of gold and silver; then and not before he gave himself to
chambering and wantonness. And here let us observe the unthankfulness of
David, who when he should have been praising God, for so many and so great
blessings, neglected his duty, and dishonored his Maker. Wherefore all you
Courtiers which live in wealth and ease, in pomp and braverie: you that dip
your foot in oil, and swim in streams of gold: you that enjoy all
pleasures, which Sea or land may afford, or the wit of man can possibly devise;
you that keep the key of natures closet, and have the sun always shining
upon your Tabernacle, take heed, in the name of God, take heed lest Satan tempt
you. For you may see by this example of David, that whom adversity cannot
bend, prosperity can break. And thus much of the time.

To come to the fourth point: David thus inveigled and entangled with the
subtilty of sin? Truly by little and little. Consider, therefore, I pray you,
how sin steals upon a man by degrees. First, he was idle. Secondly, in his
idleness he had a wandering eye, which glancing upon a woman as she bathed
her self, delighted to behold that beautiful object. Thirdly, he did not
only look, but lust after her. Fourthly, in his lust he made a curious
inquiry to know what she was. Fifthly, when he knew, he sent for her. Sixthly,
when she came he tempted her: and finally, he committed folly with her. These
are the steps which lead to the den of death.

The first step was idleness, and resist the beginnings. A burning torch
when it begins to languish, if it stand still is quickly quenched; but if it be
shaken it will recover, and receive new inflammation: even so the torch of
Grace is extinguished by idleness, but honest employments do kindle and
increase it. A running water will keep sweet, when a standing poole will
putrefie: even so laborious industry will keep the soul pure, but idleness
fills it with iniquity. Now though idleness be the mother of much mischief,
yet especially of fleshly lusts.

Quaeritur Aegystus quare sit factus adulter.
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
That is, it is demanded how Egystus became an adulterer: and the cause is
soon rendered; he was idle. And if the question be how David became an
adulterer, the fathers will give you the like answer, that it flowed from the
fountain of idleness. Therefore take heed of idleness, it was one of the
sins of Ez. 16 49
Sodom.

The second step to his fall, was Bathsheba the bright, as she was bathing her
self, and was suddenly rapt with the admiration of her beauty: neither was
he satisfied with a glance; but as it is most likely he fixed his eye and
gazed upon her again and again. Well, it is too plain what David did: Now let
us consider what he should have done, and what is all our duties to do in the
like case. As Ioachim the Priest charged the inhabitants of Bethulia to keep
the passages of the mountains, for by them there was an entrance into Judea:
Iudeth c. 4. 6. 7
so I exhort all men to look to their hearing and seeing (for those are the
passages of the mountains) lest by them the devil, like Holofernes, get
entrance into the heart. Secondly, seeing so little a sparkle can kindle so
great a flame, seeing so much mischief may arise from the glance of an ey, and
such glances are hardly avoidable by the wit of man; therefore let us all pray
to God, that he will be in our eyes and in our looking. Lord turn thou away mine
eyes that they do not behold vanity. Thirdly, if thy eye glancing, thou
feel thy self ravished with admiration, or surprised with affectuous
delectation, then go out of the place, or remove thine eye to an other object.
Gaze not upon the beauty of a woman, lest thou be taken by that which is
precious in her. If being removed from the object, thou can not put her out
of thy cogitation; then strive to raise up thy thoghts from the creature to the
Creator, and consider that all the beauty of the creature is from the Creator,
and nothing else but a spark of that fire, a beam of that Sun, a drop of
that vnemptiable Ocean; and say with thy self: If there be such beauty in a
creature, o how incomprehensible is the beauty of the Creator? o my God, when
shall I behold thy glorious face, in whose presence is all fullness of joy, and
at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore? If still thou feel the fire to
kindle upon thee, then consider the subtlety of the Serpent that lies lurking
even in the fairest creatures, to kill and destroy thee: and take unto thee the
whole Armor of God; the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the word of God. Draw this sword, shake and brandish it
against thy carnal corruptions, in this or the like manner: Thou shall not
commit adultery; no fornicatour shall enter into the kingdom of heaven:
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge: and if thus thou use this fiery and
flaming sword, then by the grace of God thou may behead the temptation.
Fifthly, if for all this the flame increase, then fall upon thy knees, pray unto
thy God, imitate Saint Peter, who, when the winds began to blow, and he
began to sink, Mat. 14 30
cried, Lord, save me; and Christ reached out his hand and saved him: even so,
when thou feel thy self begin to sink in a temptation, cry, Help Master, I
perish: And he that reached out his hand to help Peter, will reach out his
hand to help thee.

The third step was concupiscence; Nathan in the parable of the rich man who
had many sheep, and yet when a travailing stranger came unto him, he would
not give him intertainement with his own sheep, but he took the poor man's
one and only lamb. This poor man was Vrias the Hittite, his one and only
lamb was his young and beautiful wife. The rich man was David, his many
sheep his many wives, and the travailer was Concupiscence; indeed a great
travailer which has travailed far and near* thorough the wide world. Go to
the East or West Indies, to the Pole Artick or Antartick, to what Coast or
Climate you will, you shall be sure everywhere to find the footsteps of
Concupiscence. This travailer does visit both the Kings Court and the Country
Cottage, yea and I can tell you he is well acquainted in the Popes Palace. Let
a Monk betake him to his Cloister, concupiscence will go with him: Let the
Hermit fly to the forsaken Wilderness, concupiscence will follow after him:
Let the Recluse be mued or mured up in a wall, yet concupiscence will find
him out. Wherefore concupiscence may justly be termed a travailer, an
exceeding great travailer. And because this travailer came now to David as a
stranger, thereby it appears that hitherto he had kept his vessel in
sanctification and honor. I fear me there are many with whom concupiscence
is not so great a stranger. I pray God keep us all from entertaining
acquaintance with such a stranger. For concupiscence is like a Serpent; if once
he get in his head, he will wriggle-in his whole body. First he comes in with
flattering blandiments: but if once he get an entrance, then look to thy
self, he will seek to be thy Master.

2 Samuel 11. 3
Is it not Bathsheba the daughter of Alias Ammiel, 1 Chro. 3. 5
Eliam, the wife of Vrias the Hittite? To what end was this curious enquiry?
Paradventure some will say, he did it with an intention to marry her also, if
she had bin without an husband. It may be so; But when he understood that
she was another man's wife, he should have surceased, and have labored to put
such idle cogitations out of his mind, he should then have taken no further
notice of her, but have let the memory of her beauty have passed away like a
blaze of fire which is suddenly extinguished, like a flash of lightning which
is presently vanquished, or like when one beholds his face in a glass, and
remembers the fashion of it no more.

But David proceeded from evil David did: but pray unto thy God, read the
Scriptures, resort to grave and godly company, and use all good means to
quench such fiery darts of the Devil, and say with holy Job, Job 31. 1
I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid?
If not upon a maid, then surely much less upon another man's wife.

David felt a great battle in him self between the flesh and the spirit. Oh
she is fair and beautiful says the flesh, yea but she is another man's wife,
says the spirit; Heb. 13. 4
Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. O thou art a King, and may command her, says
the flesh: yea, but there is a King of Kings (says the spirit) to whom all
earthly Kings must give an account of all their actions: 2 Cor. 5 10
We all (both Kings and Subjects) must appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, to give an account of every thing that we have done in the flesh,
whether it be good or evil. Oh there are many examples of it, says the flesh:
yea, says the spirit, but we must not live by examples, but by precepts. Gal.
6. 4 5
Let every man therefore examine his own work, for every man shall bear his
own burden. O but it is pleasant to enjoy her, says the flesh: O but the
comfort of conscience is more pleasant, says the spirit; But oh how pleasant
are the joys of heaven? And what a madness is it, for a little pleasure of
sin that lasts but a season, and brings nothing but repentance, to
endanger the loss of those eternal joys which never eye has seen, nor ever
ear has heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man: And not so only, but
also to be cast into hellfire, there to burn everlastingly with the Devil
and his Angels? Besides all this, what a blemish and scandal would this be to
the Church of God? How would it grieve the godly, rejoice the wicked, and cause
the holy race of God to be blasphemed? O but the matter shall be carried in
secret, says the flesh. Alas, there is nothing so secret (says the spirit)
which shall not be revealed; if not in this world, yet in the world to come,
before men and Angels. And in the mean time, he that formed the eye, shall
not he see? He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? His eyes are ten
thousand times brighter then the sun; all things are open and naked in his
sight; he is about thy bed and about thy path, and spyeth out all thy ways.
While thus the flesh and the spirit were contending together, in comes the
woman, and David beholding her was inflamed with her beauty. So while he
looked, lust kindled, and the flesh prevailed against the spirit.

And now he is come even to the subtle Serpent.

can tell what womanish cogitations might bewitch her? Martyr.
Peter Martyr is of opinion, that peradventure she thought a bill of divorce
might be procured from her husband Vrias, 2 Samuel 1^
and then she by this means might become a Queen. So dangerous a thing is it
when great personages provoke unto sin. Their words are bewitching, their
persuasions are potent, they fill unsettled heads with flattring hopes, which
blind the understanding, and make bold to offend. Wherefore, all you to whom
the Lord has given honor and riches, power and authority, see that you
persuade to that which is good; but do not tempt to that which is evil. Or if
men should tempt, yet women should esteem their chastity above all earthly
treasure. Ecclus. 26 14
A shamefast and a faithful woman is a double grace, and her continent mind
cannot be valued. But Bethsheba at this time wanted this grace; So, David
tempted, she consented, and then followed the last step, that is,
perpetration; so folly was committed in Israel.

David a man of such sanctity committed adultery, why may not I? What do I
hear? why may not I? O wicked and profane wretch, if a man of sanctity commit
a sin, will thou neglect his sanctity, and imitate his sin? Thou should
imitate his sanctity, and bewail his sin. But what a thing is this? Will thou
first observe in Gods Saints their falls of infirmity, and then encourage thy
self to sin by example of their frailty; and lastly, shroud thy sin under
the veil of their sanctity? So did not David. He sinned indeed: but it was as
Saint in Ps. 50
Austin truly says, Lapsucupiditatis, non patrocinio sanctitatis; that is, He
was drawn away by his own concupiscence and enticed, but he did not provoke
himself to sin by other men's example. He did not propose to imitate their
frailty, and then hide his wickedness under the veil of their holiness.
Wherefore if thou commit adultery by the example of David, thy adultery is
far worse then was the adultery of David. He sinned of infirmity, thou
sinnest upon presumption. He was surprised on a sudden, thou sinnest upon
premeditation. He was carried away captive by a violent passion, but thou
pullest sin unto thee, as it were with cart-ropes. But tell me, did David
escape unpunished for his sin? Thou know he did not. But as he defiled
another man's daughter, so his own 2 Sa. 13
daughter was defiled; even his daughter Thamar, and that by her own brother
Ammon. As he defiled another man's wife, so his own wife was defiled, and that
by his own son 2 Sa^. 16. 22
Absalon, upon the top of the house, in the face of all Israel, in the sight of
the sun. Now if judgment begin at the sanctuary of God, where shall the
wicked and ungodly man appear? If the Lord deal so with the trees of Paradise,
what will he do to the bramble of the wilderness? If he thus punished David,
do thou think he will spare thee? If he dealt thus with David, do thou
think he will dally with thee? No, no: but rather, if he corrected him with
rods, he will scourge thee with scorpio^s. Wherefore as thou David, so cast thy
other eye upon the punishment of David: and then if there be any grace in thee,
thou will not imitate his sin, but tremble at his punishment.

Now seeing these things were wrongs his own child, and brands it with a
perpetual reproach. Finally, he that commits fornication, he violateth the
fiery law of the most High, and the royal commandment of his God, and
pulls down wrath and vengeance upon his own head. For no 1 Cor. 6 9. 10
fornicator (unless he repent) shall ever inherit the kingdom of heaven. And
if fornication be so execrable, what shall we say of adultery? When a couple
are married or betrothed, they make a solemn Mal. 2 14
promise or vow one to another in the name of the al-seeing God. Now the
adulterer besides all his other offenses, he transgresses the covenant of his
God. Besides this, he wrongs his own wife with whom he is linked in wedlocks
golden band; his wife I say, whom he should love as his own soul. O how he
wrongs her in that he prefers a strumpet before her! Again, the adulterer
wrongeth the husband of the woman which he defiles; who, if it come to his
knowledge, is thereby enraged; his jealousy burns like fire, and he will not
spare in the day of vengeance. And this undoubtedly is a marvailous wrong. For
first, he is robbed of the love of his wife, an inestimable jewel. 2. His estate
by this means may be translated to another man's child: and is it then any
marvel if States and Commonwealths have been severe in punishing of
adultery? I will only touch this point briefly, because the time passes away.

In the Leviticall Law, the adulterer Le. 20. 10
I confess, that the Judicials of Moses were molded upon the Jewish
Commonwealth, and do not simply bind Christians, yet there is a perpetual
equity to be observed, to wit, that sin be so punished that men may fear to
offend. This was practiced of the Gentiles even by the light of nature; for the
Arabians did punish adultery with loss of life, as witnesses Geogr. li. 16
Strabo. Among the heathen Romans, Lex Iulia was renowned, and terrified many.
Others, though they made it not Capital, yet they laid heavy punishment upon
it, and filled the faces of adulterers with shame and infamy. Some write, that
the Egyptians did use to cut off the woman's nose, and beat the man with battes
almost to death. Valerius Max.
Zaleuchus king of the Locrenses made a law that adulterers should lose both
their eyes. In later ages the Church of Rome has been too much indulgent unto
this sin, and thereby gotten mines of silver and gold. Yea the Pope has been
so shameless as to take a tribute of See Espencaeus de contin. l. 3. c 4
Courtizans; this was Demon meridianus, the Devil reigning at noone day. This
was not only a sin in the State, but the sin of the State, because it had
approbation by public authority. With us, though this sin too much abound,
yet it is punishable by our laws, and has no countenance from authority. And
therefore, though it be a sin in our State, it is not the sin of our State.
Yet it were to be wished that those grave and judicious Sages and Senators of
the kingdom, which hear me this day, would in their godly wisdom consider
whether it were not fit that the corporal punishment of adulterers should be
augmented among us that men may stand in awe and sin not.

And when good laws are enacted, let them not be like spiders webs, where
great flies break through, and little flies are entangled. Let it not be said
among us, as it was sometime amongst the Romans, Iuven. sat. 2
Vbi nunc lex Iulia! Dormis! How great regard is to be had of the execution of
wholesome laws, we may see in Zaleuchus: who having made the law before
mentioned, That adulteterers should lose both their eyes, it came to pass that
his own son committed adultery. What was here to be done? should he execute
the law, and put out his eyes? Alas, it was his own and ononly son, and by
this means the people should have had a blind King. Should he not execute
it? Who then would regard his laws, when he himself did first break them?
Therefore he took a middle course. Because the law required the putting out of
two eyes; therefore he put out one of his sons eyes, for he had offended:
and another of his own, that his people might see how much he abhorred the
sin of adultery, and withal how much he respected the execution of laws.

But howsoever man do neglect 1 Cor. 10. 8
and there fell in one day four and twenty thousand. Reuben the son of Jacob
ascended into his fathers bed, and thereby he lost three prerogatives
belonging to the first borne.

The first was the office of the Ex. 28. 1
Priesthood, which was given to the sons of Aaron, which were of the tribe of
Levi. The second was the sovereignty, which was translated to Genesis 49 10
Judah. The third was the double portion, which befell unto Genesis 48 22
Joseph. Concerning all these, it was said to Reuben, thou wast unstable as
water, thou shall not excel. I know there is great difference between incest
and adultery; neither dare I enter into Gods secret judgments: yet thus much
is certain, that as incest, so likewise adultery is a Job 31 12
fire that consumes to destruction; and will root out all a man's increase. And
therefore if a man would have a blessed seed, let him keep his body undefiled.
Joseph refused to stain his vessel, Genesis 49. 4
and the Lord so blessed him in his marriage, that his two sons Genesis 48. 5
Ephraim and Manasses were reckoned among the tribes of Israel: yea Israel did
bless in them, and say, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasses. Ver. 20
On the contrary, if men shall defile another man's bed, it shall be the just
judgment of God, if they find a cross in their own marriage bed, and if
their own wives and daughters be defiled. Yea, if they shall be hardened in
this filthiness, let them take heed lest this fire so burn to destruction,
that it root out all their increase, and cause their houses to decay, and
their lands to be translated to another name.

And yet I would exhort all men, that they would refrain this sin, not so
much for fear of punishment, as for conscience sake. Not your souls only,
but your bodies also were created according to Gods image, and therefore defile
them not. Not your souls only, but your bodies also are bought with a price,
even with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and therefore defile them not.
Not your souls only, but your bodies also are temples of the holy Ghost; and
therefore defile them not: but so preserve these vessels of grace in this
world, that they may be vessels of glory in the world to come. Which the Lord
grant, etc.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON upon the former Text; preached at Theobalds before the Kings
Majesty, upon Sunday the 21. of January. 1620.
WHen of late I entered upon the explication of this Text in a Princely
presence, I proposed 3 things in David to be considered; his sin, his
repentance, and his absolution. The sin of David, reproved by Nathan, and
here confessed and lamented by himself, was first of all, that great and
grievous sin of adultery; and secondly those other enormous sins wherewith
he entangled himself, while he went about to hide and conceal his adultery.

To show the haynousnesse of his adultery, I unfoulded four points. The first
was the quality of his person; where it was proved that David was the most
eminent and remarkable man that was then living upon the face of the earth.
The second, was the condition of the woman; and it was declared that she was a
married woman, the wife of one Vrias, who was by nation an Hittite, by religion
a Proselyte, by profession a Soldier, a Captain, a worthy Captain, and
reckoned among the Worthies of David. The 3 point was the time, described by
three circumstances. For this iniquity was committed, first in his declining
age, when it had bin fitter for him to have been thinking of his grave, then
of fleshly lusts. Secondly, in the time of the wars with the Ammonites, when
he should have been holding up his hands for the Host of Israel. Thirdly,
when he enjoyed peace at home, with plenty and prosperity; for which he should
have praised God with a thankful mind. The fourth point, was the manner how
he was thus ensnared; which was by seven steps or degrees. For, first, he was
idle. Secondly, in his idleness he had a wandering eye. Thirdly, he did not
only look but lust after her. Fourthly, he was curious in enquiring who she
was. Fifthly, he was vain in sending for her. Sixthly, he was lewd in tempting
her. And lastly, he was wicked in co^miting folly. Hitherto of his sin of
adultery. Now I proceed to the sins he committed while he went about to hide
and conceal his adultery.

Joshua: When Achan had committed sacrilege, by stealing the gold, and the
silver, and the goodly Babylonish garment, behold the wrath of the Lord was
kindled, and Israel fled before their enemies. Then all Israel was brought
forth tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was taken. Now though Achan were
of the tribe of Judah, yet he would not confess his sin, but still concealed
it. Secondly, the tribe of Judah was brought forth family by family, and the
family of the Zarhites was taken: but though Achan were of the family of the
Zarhites, yet he would not confess this sin, but still concealed it.
Thirdly, the family of the Zarhites was brought forth house by house, and the
house of Zabdi was taken: and though Achan were of the house of Zabdi, yet he
would not confess his sin, but still concealed it. Fourthly, the house of
Zabdi was brought forth man by man, and Achan was taken; who, then, and not
before confessed it, when he could no longer conceal it. And even so did
David: He bent all his wits and study to hide and cloak his adultery: neither
do we find that ever he did confess it to God or man, before such time as
the God of heaven had so revealed it by the Prophet Nathan; that now it could
be no longer concealed. Nay, the concealing of David was far worse then the
concealing of Achan. For Achan concealed his sacrilege only by secrecy and
silence; but David concealed his adultery by most ungodly practices.

he used to accomplish the same. Of which in order, by Gods gracious
assistance, and your royal patience.

The causes which moved David Eclus. 4 21
double shame, an honorable shame, and a dishonorable. The honorable shame
is that which brings glory and grace, either by preve^ting, or by repenting:
by preventing a sin that it be not committed, or by repenting for a sin
when it is committed. The preventing shame is composed of two passions, fear
and love; fear of infamy, and love of honesty. An example of this we have in
Joseph, when he was tempted of his Mistress. And here consider with me how
great provocations he had to yield unto her. First, he was a fair and
beautiful young man, in the prime and flower of his age. Secondly, he was a
poor servant, yea and a stranger, far from his country, his kindred, and his
fathers house; and therefore had need of friends. Now if he had yielded unto
her, he should not have wanted gold, nor silver, nor rich apparel, nor any
honor or preferment that she could possibly procure unto him. But in rejecting
her, he was sure to be turned out a doors, and to endure all disgrace that
the wit of a woman sharpened with malice could possibly devise. And yet this
gracious young man would not yield to her allurements. He considered first, the
goodness of God, and what a great wickedness it were to sin against him.
Secondly, he considered how beneficial his Master had been unto him, and what
a shame it were to requite him evil for good. 3. He consired how precious a
thing is is for a man to keep his body unstained, and what a dishonor it were
to defile his vessel. Upon these considerations, he answered the woman, Genesis
39 9
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? How can I? As
though he should say, With what face can I do it? It is a most shameful
thing, and therefore I cannot do it. Here was fear and love; a gracious fear
of infamy, and a zealous love of honesty. This was an honorable shame, so to be
ashamed of sin even because it is sin, as to shun and avoid it. An example
of the other we have in the prodigal child: who though he had not a
preventing shame (for he fell into many enormities) yet yet he had a repenting
shame; for when he came to himself, he looked into his former actions, and was
ashamed of that he had done. This also was an honorable shame, because it
wrought repentance in him: and that brought unto him glory and grace.

from the eyes of the world: and such a shame was in David and Bathsheba.

To begin with the woman. After Bathsheba the beautiful. She that of late gave
her co^se^t to lascivious dalliance; now she se'eth her own folly, now she
is clothed with shame as with a garment. Those radiant and sparkling eyes
which so darted love into the eyes of David, are now all bebleared and
beblubbered with weeping; the tears run down her blushing cheeks, she wrings
her hands, she rents her goulden hair, and with all possible speed she sends
unto David, 2 Sa. 11. 5
saying, I am with child: as though she should say; o wretch that I am, now my
sin can be concealed no longer; the matter is plain, my very body will shortly
bewray it, I carry my accusation about me; on the one side, I fear the shame
of the world; on the other, the danger of the Law: but o, how shall I look my
poor Husband in the face? You, you were the cause of all this, and therefore
to you I make my moan: alas, alas! what shall I do? So she that of late had
no regard of conscience, is now tormented with an accusing conscience; and she
that before was not ashamed to sin, now she is ashamed lest her sin should
be known. But what said David to all this? for now he is put to his shifts.

Truly he shows himself a

His second motive was, the danger 3. Le. 20. 10
death; and therefore lest she whom he loved so tenderly should lose her
life, and that by his means, he bends all the strength of his wits to
conceal the matter. Hitherto of the motives: now I come to the means, that
is, his politic practices.

Vrias, the husband, was to be called home from the camp; to the end, that he
co^versing with his wife, might be supposed and reputed the father of the
child. Wherein David did not only sin against God, and his own soul; but
moreover he intended three notorious injuries: the first against the poor
babe, the child begotten of his own body, which by this means he would have
disclaimed and renounced, even before it was born: the second against Vrias to
whom he would have obtruded a child by fraud and imposture: the third, against
the heirs of Vrias, which by this plot might have been disseised and defrauded
of their inheritance.

but it was the wisdom of the serpent, there wanted the simplicity of the Dove,
Such was the wisdom of Pharaoh, who said; Ex. 1. 10
Com, let us work wisely, when he intended to oppress the children of God.
Such was the wisdom of 1. Reg. 12 28.
Jeroboam; who, to establish his Kingdom, erected a standard to Idolatry, by
setting up two goulden Calves in Dan and Bethel. This was wisdom, but not
according unto godliness. Wisdom did I say, or rather folly? for, how can
that be called wisdom, when men are wise to do evil; but to do good, they
have no understanding? And I dare be bold to say, that the wisdom of
Achitophel, the wisdom of Matchiavel, and all wicked wisdom, howsoever it seem
angelical, howsoever it shine and glister in the eyes of the world, yet in
true judgment it is nothing else but mere folly: Psa. 111 10
for, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and therefore where
there is not the fear of God, there cannot possibly be any true wisdom. David
himself could sometimes say, Psa. 119 110
I understand more then the ancients, because I keep thy precepts. Wherefore if
a man would be truly wise, Let him fear God and walk in his precepts. This is
wisdom according to godliness, which will make a man wise to salvation. And as
this is the wisdom of every private man, so herein likewise consists the
true wisdom of Kings and Kingdoms, of States and Commonwealths. For Deuteronomy. 4
5. 6
as Moses said to Israel, Keep (the statutes and judgments of the Lord) and
do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the
nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great
nation is a wise and an understanding people. Even so I say to you, Let all
your wisdom be according to godliness, let all your policy be joined with
piety, in all your consultations ask counsel of the Lord, let the God of
Jacob be present and chief President in all your parliaments, and then surely
he will bless this Land, and the nations shall see it, and say, Surely this
nation of Great Britain is a wise and an understanding people.

But to proceed in the story. Vrias is sent for, he is come to the Court, and
brought to the King; who asks 2 Samuel 11. 7
him how Ioab did, and how the people did, and how the wars prospered: and
after kind communication, he gave him a courteous dismission, Go home to thy
house and wash thy feet: and there followed after him a favor from the King, a
mess of meat (no doubt dainty and delicate) that he and his wife might make
merry together. But for all this courtly and cunning invitation, Vrias went not
home to his wife, but slept at the gate of the Kings palace.

David understanding, sends for him again, and thus expostulates the matter
with him in friendly manner. Ver. 10
(d) Camst thou not from thy journey? why then did thou not go down unto
thy house? Thus David pretended great love and friendship unto Vrias, whereas
in truth he intended only to make him a cloak for their iniquity. And is not
this the fashion of the world at this day? Many will pretend great love and
friendship unto a man, when if the truth were known, it is only to serve their
own turns, and in relation to their own private ends and purposes.

Hitherto we have seen David's Vrias. He said unto David: The Arc, and Judah
and Israel abideinaents, Sa. 11. 11
and my Lord Ioab and his servants are encamped in the open fields; shall I
then go home to my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As thou
live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do it. First, let us consider what
is meant by this, that the Arc aboade in tents. And it seems to import (as
many both ancient and modern writers do take it) that the Arc of the
Covenant was now fetched into the Host of Israel, which 1 Samuel 4
used to be done in time of danger, and that for four reasons. 1. To encourage
the soldiers: because the Arc (wherein was the Heb. 9. 4
pot of Manna, the rod of Aaron, and the tables of the Covenant) was a visible
token of Gods presence. Secondly, to testify that they trusted not in their
swords, but in the Lord, whose strength was figured and represented in the
Arc, which therefore was called Psa. 132 8
the Arc of his strength. Thirdly, to terrify their enemies: and therefore
when the Arc removed, these words were used, Let God Number. 10 35
arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him fly
before him. Fourthly, that they might ask counsel of the Lord in case of
necessity. Thus the Jews in their dangers and extreamities had recourse to
the Arc. Now we Christians have not (as they had) the golden Cherubins, the
Mercy Seat, and the Arc of the Covenant overlaid with gold: but our Arc is
Christ and his true Religion. And happy shall we be both in Peace and in War,
if this Arc be still among us. Our Land indeed is a goodly Land, our gardens
like Eden, our rivers like Jordan: yea, our Land is blessed, for the sweet
increase of the sun, and for the sweet increase of the moon, and for the
treasures hid in the sand; yea, the whole Island is walled about with the Ocean.
Yet, our chief comfort consists in this, that this true Ark of God is
amongst us, and that our defense is the Lord Iehavah. Lord let this Arc still
abide in our tents, that our enemies may be scattered, and that we may always
rejoice in thee the God of our salvation. This point thus touched and explained
by the way, let us now ponder the words of Vrias: for they are very memorable,
and deserve to be written in letters of gold.

Ioab and his servants are encamped in the open fields, Sub dio, sub Jove
frigido: and shall I be chambred up like a carpet Knight, or a white-livered
soldier? Here was a dutiful respect and conformity to his Governors. The
second reason is drawn from the consideration of his own estate and
condition. Shall I go home? I that am a professed soldier? I that am a
Captain and Co^mander of others? Nay, rather, my house shall be the vault of
heaven, the ground shall be my bed, a stone shall be my pillow, the sable
curtains of darkness shall be drawn about me, and my canopie shall be the
azure canopie of heaven, whether enveloped with clouds, or bespangled with
stars. But why should I go home unto my house? To eat and to drink? Alas,
this is not a time for feasting; but rather, for fasting and prayer. Or shall I
go solace my self with my wife? No, no: at such a time as this, let even
lawful pleasures be abandoned, let the bridegroom go out of his chamber, and
the bride out of her bride-cha^ber. A noble resolution for a soldier, and
worthy one of the Worthies of David. Is this a Hittite? or rather a true
Israelite, in whom is no guile? O happy were a King which had an army
consisting of such soldiers.

David to the quick, to see a soldier have more care of the common good then
himself. But here we may note how adultery takes away the heart of a man: it
makes him so dull, that he does not rejoice at the zeal of Vrias, but is
sorry for it, because it crossed his own wicked designs. Yet Vrias still
continued constant, so that neither the weariness of his journey, nor the love
of his young and beautiful wife, nor the Kings courteous exhortation, nor his
cunning invitation, nor his friendly expostulation could prevail with him, or
persuade him to go home unto his wife. Wherefore David was hitherto
disappointed of his purpose.

Yet behold, another train to David both hated drunkenness in his heart, and
punished it in others: and yet to hide his own shame, he is not ashamed to
make a man drunk. There was a good law enacted by King Est. 1. 8
Ahasuerus, that though they might drink the royal wine in abundance, yet no
man might urge or compel. But David as it seems did urge and compel Vrias:
for the 2 Samuel 11. 13
text says, that he made him drunk. And are there not many at this day also,
which will urge and compel a man to drink till he be drunk? Some, because
they use to be drunk themselves, wish all other men to be branded with the
like infamy. Others, which are strong to bear drink themselves, are so
ungracious that they rejoice to discover the weakness of another, and to
triumph in his fall. Others do it of policy: when they cannot bring a man to
their own bent while he is sober, they hope to prevail with him when he is
drunk. And so did David. Now, who, I beseech you would ever have suspected such
a thing by David? Here I note, that a man is soonest inveigled when he
suspecteth least harm, and never sooner then under the color of friendship.
Wherefore take heed of thy foes: and as the world goes now adays, thou had
need to take heed of thy friends also. For, howsoever men pretend kindenes,
yet if they urge thee to drink, look to thy self, they are not friends but
foes; not kind, but cruel.

And here, O that mine eyes Animalculum, which some reckon among Peucr. in Genesis
serpents or creeping creatures, others resemble to a Fitzh. rel. and pol.
spider, the name of it is Tarantula, so called of Tarentum, a City of Apulia,
the effects whereof are in strange variety. For some, being bitten by the
Tarantula, fall presently a-weeping; others break out suddenly into a loud
laughing. Some when they are stung by it, become lazy and sluggish; others are
all in motion, leaping and dancing. Some, being wounded by it, are made dumpish
and silent; others never cease prating and babbling. And is not this the plain
picture of drunkenness? It is a lamentable case to consider how many in this
kingdom are daily bitten by this Tarantula. And is there no charm for the
stinging of this serpent? Alex. ab Alex. genesis die l. 2. c. 17
Alexander ab Alexandro writes, that the Tarantula is cured with music, and
that he himself saw the experience of it. But what strains of music shall
we use to cure this drunken Tarantula? Sound we the trumpet of the Law, or
tune we the sweet timbrell of the Gospel, they will not hearken unto the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely? What then remains? but that they be
charmed by the severity of wholesome laws. And yet I cannot say, that there is
any defect of laws, but rather a defect in the execution. Many good and godly
laws have been made in this kingdom against drunkenness, and yet this sin
every where abounds. O that this high and honorable Court of Parliament now
to be assembled, could yet in their godly wisdom devise some further course for
the utter extinguishing of this Tarantula. Surely, it would redownd much to the
glory of God, to the honor of this kingdom, to the good of this Church and
Commonweal.

Vrias: he drank the royal wine, and was made drunk, though not as our
Tarentati, which lie tumbling in the streets, blaspheming God and all good men:
but drunk in some degree; yet not so as to be deprived of his senses: he still
remembers the danger of the Host of Israel, and will not go home unto his
wife. Wherefore they could not impute the child to him, nor make a cloak for
their iniquity: they have no color to cast that color. So David was clean
disappointed of his first policy.

Vrias, and to marry his wife; that so, the child might seem to be gotten in
marriage. What? to kill him? had he not received wrong enough already, that his
wife was defiled, but (alas poor man) must he lose his life also? It is as I
tell you, the matter is determined, Vrias must die to save their credit, there
is no remedy. And here let us consider what the best man is, if God withdraw
his grace and leave him to himself. He is like to an iron ball, which, a man
standing upon the top of an hill, lets go out of his hand, and behold it
runs down headlong, and the further the faster till it come in Profundum,
even to the bottom of the valley. Even so, if God let us go out of his hands,
and leave us to our selves, we run headlong from sin to sin, even till we
come in Profundu^, that is, into the depth of all iniquity. As here we see
in David, who to his former sins, adds the horrible sin of murder; by
killing Vrias, who now was the only man did stand in their way. And has not
this always been a practice among Politicians? If a man stand in their way
and hinder their profit, or pleasure, or preferment, either they will lay a
snare for him, as the Nobles of Darius, for Dan. 6
Daniel, to cast him into the Lions den: or if they cannot so entrap him, they
will have one device or other to cut him off, as David did Vrias: and rather
then fail, they will give him a fig, and so make him away. That these things
should be done, among Matchiavilians, I would not marvel: but that holy David
should do it to holy Vrias, this is a matter that deserves to be lamented with
many tears.

But how shall it be done? David is now grown a Politician, he will take him
away so cunningly, that there shall not appear so much as the least suspicion
of murder. And how so? Forsooth he will write to Iaob, the General of the
Camp, to place Vrias in the forefront of the hottest battle, and suddenly to
retire from him. O what a dishonor was this, that Israel should flee before
their enemies? What an encouragement was this to the uncircumcised? and what a
discouragement to the people of God? Yet at this time David will have it so, to
the end that Vrias being left in the danger, might be smitten, and die by the
sword of the children of Ammon. Here was notorious treachery: and poor Vrias,
like Bellerophon in the fable, did carry the letters of his own death. This
was cunning indeed: but have patience a while; and you shall see, that there is
a God which sees all things, and will not suffer sin unpunished.

What? would Ioab yield to Saul command to kill the holy Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22. 18
Doeg will be his instrument to do it. If Iezabel command to suborne false
witnesses, and to condemn the innocent, the 1 Reg. 21 11
Nobles and Elders of Iezrael will be her instruments to put it in practice. O
happy therefore and thrice happy we, whose King delights in the law of the
Lord, and meditateth therein day and night. Pray we that the God of Jacob will
for ever so direct him, that all his commandments may always be correspondent
to the commandments of the most High. For there is no question, but if Princes
should command even that which is simply evil, a great number would be ready
to be bad instruments, to perform it.

And here let us mark what Doeg the Edomite against the Priests of the Lord.
Secondly, those that hunt after the favor of great ones, and such were the
Nobles and Elders of Iezrael, desirous to curry favor with Iezabel. Thirdly,
those that are guilty of some notorious crime, and such an one was Ioab, who
long before this was obnoxious to the sentence of death, for killing of Abner 2 Samuel 3. 27
. So now his life stood at the Kings pleasure; and therefore David knew he had
him at command. Wherefore let all men labor to carry themselves in innocence,
with a good conscience in the fear of God. Job 11 14
If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far from thee, and let no wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacle: then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, then
shall thou be steadfast and shall not fear: pro. 10. 9
for he that walks uprightly, walks surely. Such a man may be bold as a
Lion, and refuse to be made an evil instrument. But here you see how David's
wicked invention, and Ioabs cruel execution brought good Vrias to his grave,
in a bloody coffin.

Neither Vrias alone was taken 2 Samuel 11. 17
Text says plainly, that There fell some of the people of the servants of
David; such of them, no doubt, as were most courageous and valiant. Ioabs
commission extended no further then to the 2 Samuel 11. 15
smiting and killing of Vrias, but it seems he perceived that this could
hardly be done without the loss of more. Neither did he write to David
concerning this point: but understanding that it was the Kings pleasure that
Vrias should die, he was resolute to perform it, though the exployt should cost
him an hundred men's lives. Here it may seem by Ioab, that Captains are
sometimes too prodigal of the lives of their soldiers. We read that Abner
said to Ioab, Sam. 2 14
Let the young men arise and play before us. So he accounted fighting but a
play and a sport. Now, though Captains should be courageous in a good cause,
yet they must love and tender the lives of their soldiers.

David and Ioab which killed Vrias, but the sword of the children of Ammon: Let
him consider the frame of a clock, and he shall see how one wheel mooves
another wheel, and that another wheel, and that the hammer, and so the
stroke is stricken: but the cause of all this motion is a certain secret
weight or poyse, which hangs in a corner, and is not seen. As for example,
in the story of Naboth, Naboth was condemned to death, there the stroke was
stricken: the hammer that gave the stroke, was the judge which gave the
sentence: the wheels that moved this hammer, were the false witnesses: the
wheels that moved these wheels, were the Nobles and Elders of Iezrael: but
the secret waights that set all these wheels a going, were Achab and Iezabel.
So Achab and Iezabel were the principal agents which moved the men of
Iezrael, and they the false witnesses, and they the Judge: and thus poor
Naboth was put to death. So, in this present story, Vrias was slain; there the
stroke was stricken: the hammer that gave the stroke, was the sword of the
children of Ammon: the wheels that moved this hammer, were the soldiers,
which first made an hot assault, and then suddenly retyring, left Vrias to the
sword of the enemies. The great wheel which moved these lesser wheels, was
Ioab, who so ordered the battle. And the secret weight that moved this
wheel, was David; the first moover and cause of all the motion.

O, David, David! What have and what does it cry but vengeance, vengeance? Let
all men take heed of this crying sin: if it be done never so secretly, the
Lord will find it out. If it be in the forest, the tree of the forest shall
cry vengeance, vengeance; and the leaves of the tree shall answer it. If in
the field, the beast of the field shall cry vengeance, vengeance; and the bird
of the air shall answer it. If in the house, the stone out of the wall shall
cry vengeance, vengeance; and the joint out of the timber shall answer it.
Where ever it be, the whole frame of heaven and earth shall cry vengeance,
vengeance; and hell shall open her mouth and answer it.

needs tax a vice, which formerly (in this kingdom) has much reigned amongst
Nobles and gentlemen. If they received any word of disgrace, they would
presently challenge one another to the field, revenge their own quarrels, and
try it out with the point of the sword, not without great injury to the King
and his Law, whom the Lord has made To. 13. 4
revenger of wrongs; yea, to the King of kings: for To. 12. 19
vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. Should Subjects thus go
to single Combats for private quarrels? Is this courage? Is this valor? No,
no, it is nothing else but rashness and folly. If you would be truly valorous,
then reserve your selves for your Prince and your Country, for Christ, and for
his true Religion. This indeed would argue a noble courage and a generous
spirit. But these private quarrels are most lamentable. O how many fathers by
these ungodly means have bin made childlesse? how many children fatherless?
how many wives have lost their husbands? how many Gentlemen whose ancestors
have been principal studs and pillars in their Country, have by those
desperate combats ruinated themselves and their posterity? O miserable
incounters, wherein the very Conquerours gain no other garland, but shame and
confusion, either to lose their lives by order of Law, or to forsake their
own Country, and so to live in perpetual exile, with anguish and vexation of
spirit. O happy therefore, and thrice happy be the Lords Anointed, who set out
that gracious proclamation against Duels, so much tending to the glory of God,
and the good of this kingdom.

Here I exhort all such as desire Pluta. de ijs qui sero a numme pumuntur.
Bessus who had killed his own father, and of a time hearing but a Swallow
chatter, he caught the truncheon of a iaveling, and did fling at it with
wonderful violence. And being demanded why he did so, he answered, Did you
not hear this wicked bird accuse me, as though I had killed mine own father.
Whereupon he was examined, and confessed the fact. So Genesis 4. 14
Cain, when he had killed his brother, thought that every one that met him
would kill him. Such is the nature of an accusing conscience. He that has shed
innocent blood, he will think that the very ground he goes on is embrued
with blood, that his garments are besprinkled with blood, that his fingers
distill with blood. If he hear two talk, he will think they whisper of blood.
If he wake, he will think of blood. And if he sleep, he will dream of
blood.

David's conscience had not been benumbed, he would have thought that every
bird had chattered Vrias, that every wind had whistled Vrias, that woods and
mountains had sounded Vrias, and that the Echo had redoubled Vrias, Vrias.
But, now David, to his other sins adds dullness, and hardness of heart.

Thus poor Vrias is taken away,

When news came to Jerusalem Vrias was slain, the woman she 2 Samuel 11. 26
mourned: with what mind I know not; but the Text testifies that she mourned.
Which we may conceive to have been in this, or the like manner. O Vrias, my
husband, my sweet husband Vrias!

How long this mourning lasted, Ecc. 22. 12
Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead. If Bathshebah mourned no
longer, it was very fitting for David's purpose. In the book of Deutronomy the
captive woman is commanded to bewail her father and her mother a full month.
Deuteronomy. 21 13
And so long (says Peter Martyr) is Bathsheba supposed to have bewailed her
husband: Upon 2 Sa. c. 11
and longer in all probability it could not be. So, after a while, the clouds
of sorrow were dispelled, and the sun did shine upon her with his golden
beams. For David sent for her: so she became his wife, and bare him a son;
which was borne in marriage: and considering the ordinary accidents which
usually happen to women in that case, and cause them to come before their time,
it might also be charitably and probably supposed, even to be gotten in
marriage also. Thus the adultery is covered, the eyes of the world are bleared,
Bathsheba becomes a Queen, David enioyes his Darling; and now he might say
with him in the Poet, in the like case, Vicimus exclamat, mecum mea vota
feruntur.

Hitherto of his hiding it from Psalm, Psa. 32. 3
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old; that is, while I did not confess it
unto the Lord, as appears by that which follows; I said I will confess my
transgression unto the Lord, Ver. 5
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. What was this else, but so much
as in him lay, to hide and conceal it from the everlasting God?

O David, What do thou thou can not hide it from the alseeing eye of God.
psa. 139
Whither will thou fly from his spirit, or whither will thou go from his
presence? If thou ascend into heaven, he is there; if thou make thy bed in
hell, he is there; if thou take the vvings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall his hand lead thee, and his
right hand hold thee; if thou shall say, the darkness shall cover me, even the
night shall be light about thee, etc. Therefore thou can not hide thy self
from him; He is about thy bed, and about thy path, and spieth out all thy
ways. He spyed thee when thou walkedst so idly upon the top of thy house;
he spyed all thy wandering and thy wanton looks; he saw thy very heart, by
what degrees it was inflamed with carnal concupiscence. There is not a word in
thy tongue, but he knows it altogether. He heard thee when thou enquiredst
so vainly after the woman; he heard thee when thou wast so foolish, as to send
for her; he heard thee when thou wast so lewd as to tempt her unto sin; yea,
he both heard thee, and saw thee, and looked upon thee with fiery and flaming
eyes, when thou wast not ashamed to commit that filthy abomination. Wherefore
let no man go about to hide him self from the eyes of the Almighty. For thus
says the Lord, Though they dig into hell, Amos. 9. 2
thence shall my hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I
bring them down; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I
will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in
the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite
them. Wherefore let all men stand in awe, and sin not. But if they have
sinned, the best counsel that I can give them, is to humble their souls, and
to confess their sins to God, with speedy repentance. For pro. 28 13
he that covers his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and for
saketh them shall find mercy.

David would conceal it to avoid shame: but God will reveal it and fill his face
with shame, that so by shame he may bring him to glory. For so long as it was
concealed, he repented not; but so soon as it was revealed, he repented all the
days of his life. And that which is more, God will not only have it revealed,
but also recorded in holy Scripture, for all succeeding ages. Yea David him
self, after he repented, left the 51. Psalm, as a pillar of brass, Psa. 51.
14
wherein his bloodguiltinesse is engraven; and so transmitted to all posterity.

And as the Lord did detect it, Thou shall not die; yet because he slew Vrias
with the sword, therefore the Lord, the righteous Judge, did punish him in the
like kind. Wherefore let all men take heed by this example. Man. 7. 2
What measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. Pharaoh drowned the
Infants in the Ex. 1. 22
river: and in succeeding ages, Pharaoh and his Host were drowned in the Exodus
14 27
Red Sea. It was I grant another Pharaoh; yet one that did still continue the
cruelty of the former. Adonibezec cut off the Iud. 1. 7
thumbs and toes of threescore and ten Kings, and made them gather their meat
under his table; and as he did to others, even so the Lord did unto him. 1 Samuel
15. 33
Agags sword made many a mother childlesse; and Samuels sword did the like to
the mother of Agag. By the means of Achab and Iezabel, the 1 Reg. 21 19
dogs did lick the blood of Naboth: and in the very same place did they lick
the blood of Achab. Yea and the dogs did eat 1 Reg. 21 23 2 Reg 9 36
Iezabel under the walls of Iezreel. But this present example of David is most
memorable. For, as he slew Vrias with the sword; even so the sword did hang
over his own house. First, 2 Sa. 13 28
Amnon the son of David was slain with the sword, by the command of his own
brother Absalon. Secondly, Absalon the son of David, did draw his sword
against his own father. Thirdly, Absalon himself was not only hanged by the
hair of the head, and stricken through with darts, but he was likewise smitten
2 Samuel 18. 15
by ten men. Fourthly, Solomon drew the sword of justice against his own
brother 2 Samuel 2. 25
Adoniah, who perished with the sword. Wherefore, let all men fear and tremble,
to plot (be it never so cunningly) against the life of a man; the Lord does see
it, and will punish it. And let all men pray to God to preserve them from being
instruments of evil; by the example of Ioab, whose blood also was afterward
shed, even while he took hold upon the 1 Reg. 2 31
horns of the Altar. Thus much concerning the first general part; that is, the
sin of David. Now it remains that I should proceed unto the second; that
is, to his repentance. But that must be handled some other time, if so it shall
please the Lord, In cuius manu and nos and opera nostra.

Cham; who delighted to display the nakedness of his father; nor yet to those
foul flies which love to spot the fairest flower. For, for mine own part, I
had rather bewail mine own infirmities, then blaze the imperfections of
another: especially, of such as David and Bathsheba, who (this excepted) were
holy servants of God; and both of them, 1 Chro. 3. 5
progenitors of Jesus Christ, whether we respect the legal line by Solomon or
the natural by Nathan. Yet I have laid open the sin of David somewhat
largely; in two several Sermons. First, that man seeing the great nesse of his
sin, may the better consider the greatness of his repentance. Secondly, that
considering the haynousness of his sin, we may the more magnify the mercy of
God, in pardoning the same. Thirdly, that we beholding in him our own
infirmity, may stand in awe and not sin. Lastly, that those which have
already sinned, in the like manner as David, may not despair: but as they have
sinned with David, so they may repent with David; that their souls may be
saved, and God glorified: which the Lord grant, etc.

FINIS.

