The first book of Cattle: Wherein is showed the government of Oxen, Kine,
Calves, and how to use Bulls and other cattle to the yoke, and fell. With
diverse approved remedies, to help most diseases among cattle: most necessary
for all, especially for husband men, having the government of any such cattle.

Gathered and set forth by Leonard Mascall.

Thou Heardman, keeper of thy beasts,
when any beast is sickly:
Search herein, and thou shall find,
of proved remedies quickly,
LONDON Printed by John Wolf, 1587.

To the right worshipful Sir Edward Montegue Knight, Leonard Mascall wishes
increase of worship, to the honor of God, and the benefit of the common wealth.
IT is written in histories (Right Worshipful) that the sons of Seth and
Seneca, or some other zealous Philosophers, being desirous to leave some thing
worth memory unto their posterities. Did make two pillars, one of brass, and
another of earth, wherein were graven the principles of the seven sciences, to
the end their successors should understand the good wills of their
predecessors: whereby they did set forth and show all such good knowledge and
learning, as they had found out in their time, to the furtherance of their
common wealth. So likewise now, things necessary for the same, ought not to
be deferd, nor lightly regarded, or forgotten. And whereas the delights of
people are of diverse kinds, the same is perceived by their doings: But as
touching their delights, those ought chiefly to be regarded which profit most
the common wealth. As (among the rest) the government and preservation of
cattle, and such like: wherein (for lack of knowledge) often times the poor
man loses his beast. Also I have known that the diseased cattle, of
wealthy yeomen, and other poor men sometimes have all perished, whereby the
whole parisheshaue been impouerished thereby: which thing has been a great
loss unto such towns, and also hindrances unto the common wealth. Marcus
Tullius Cicero, was ever desirous to further his country and common wealth,
and said, that day was evil spent, that he did not therein do good, to his
common wealth: I would it were so now. Even so likewise our predecessors,
Aristotle, Virgill, Plato, and many other in giving us examples therein, have
left immortal fame behind them in writing, through the good zeal and love
they had to their country and common wealth. Which thing likewise (Right
worshipful) has moved me of long time to gather and put in writing the doings
of diverse and sundry persons, as well strangers as of our own country men, to
show the helps for most diseases in cattle. And for as much as I am informed
your worship is desirous to know and understand of the government of cattle,
and of the fatting of Oxen, to the intent to show the good will I bear to
further therein, I thought good to set forth the practices of many men, how to
help cattle diseased: which thing ought not to be kept secret for the lucar
of a few, but rather I do communicate this my labor to him that has delight
therein. If any think not well hereof, or despise this my travel, I will
friendly desire them with these words: Quod meliora nosti, candidus imparti si
non, his vtere mecum. Which is: If you know any better how to mend it, of
your courtesy impart it, if not, take part of this with me. Thus I leave to
trouble your worship any further, desiring you to bear with this my plain
and rude style, and to be the defender thereof in print, and in so doing, I
shall think my travel well bestowed, my pains much lightened, and my good will
well recompensed.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
WHen I had gathered and collctted (gentle Reader) certain medicines how for
to help cattle and to govern them. I considered what benefit, and profit it
might be to my country and common wealth, specially unto the husband men, and
such as have the government of Oxen, Horses, Sheep, and such other cattle. For
often times for want of knowledge, many cattle being sick, do perish and die:
Where as sickness and hurts are accident unto man diverse ways, even so it
chances unto cattle. Whereupon I thought it good to take occasion for the
love of my country and common wealth, to write somewhat, partly of the
government for our most used cattle, as oxen, kine, calves, horses, sheep,
hogs, and such: with diverse approved remedies for them. Plainly and perfectly
set forth, as well to be understood of the unlearned husband man, as of the
learned gentle man: showing somewhat moreover for the bones setting in a beast:
Declaring likewise the order and nature of hogs, with the use of dogs, and the
cause of their madness, with certain helps against the bitten cattle, and
also to help mangie dogs, with diverse approved ways to take moules in any kind
of ground. Which thing ye shall find out in the tables of the same by alphabet
and number, divided into three books. Trusting (gentle Reader) thou will take
all in good part, as is meant of the author hereof.

L. M.

To the Husband man.
THou husband man, that feign would know,
Some remedies to find:
How for to help thy sickly beast,
To satisfy thy mind.
Here may thou learn plenty thereof,
Thou needs not farther go:
But therein search, and thou shall find
Such helps to help their woe.
And when thou would feign cattle keep,
For to maintain thy stock:
Thou must then learn as well the helps
As to increase the flock.
For if thou seek first the beast,
And know not how to use him:
When he fal'th sick, always thou art,
In danger for to loose him.
For want of knowledge and good skill,
Often times it may so fall:
A man that is full rich in beasts,
He may soon loose them all.
Therefore in this I council thee,
Seek first to help disease:
As great a praife to him that saues,
As he that can increase.
L. M.

FINIS.
What knowledge a man ought to have that uses to buy and sell oxen.
I May not easily, nor will say all that a man ought to follow or to avoid
in buying of Oxen. But ye shall this understand, oxen are according to the
region and country where they are bred, for as there is diversity of grounds
and countries, so likewise there is diversities of bodies, and diversities of
natural courage. And likewise diversity in hair and horn of them. For those
Oxen in Asia, be of one sort, and those in France of another sort: so likewise
here in England of another sort. And yet not so many diversities of
Provinces, but as many diversities in the beasts, as in Italy, in Capam,
there they have white Oxen, and small of body, yet very good to labor in the
plough and till the ground. Also in the Duchy of Vrben there are great oxen
both white and red, mighty of body and of a great courage. In Tuscane and about
Rome, the oxen are well set and thick and strong made to labor. Likewise in
the Alps, and hills of Burgony they be strong and can; well endure all
labor, and fair like wise withal. But never the less although they do thus
differ so in diverse parts, yet the buyer shall mark and understand here in
certain general rules of oxen, the which Mago of Carthage has given us, and
says, he that Buying oxen and his properties.
will buy oxen must buy young oxen, well quartered, having large and big
members, with long horns somewhat black, strong and big, his foorehead
broad, and his brows wrinckled: his ears rough within, and hayrie like
velvet, his eyes great and large, his monzell black, his nostrilles croofted,
wrythen and very open and wide, the chinne of his neck long, thick, and
fleshie, the dewlappe or skin that hangs under his throat, to be great in
hanging almost down to his knees, his breast round and big, his shoulders
large and deep. His belly big compass in falling deep, his ribs to be
wide and open, his raines large, his back straight and flat, with a little
bending toward the rumpe, his thighs round, his legs straight and well
trust, rather somewhat short than long: his knees full and round trust, his
hoofes or claws on his feet to be large and broad under foot, his tail
long, and well hayred, and to be brief, his body to be thick and short, his
color to be read or black is best, also to be gentle and ease to handle and
touch, to lead or to occupy. These are the chiefest properties (if a man would
buy,) to know a good ox by, and here shall follow the best way how for to
tame them.

The manner and way best for a man to tame his oxen.
FIrst to use it best is this, ye shall use to handle your Oxen, and touch
them when they are young bullockes and calves, and also use to tie them and to
binds them to the stall, so that hereafter it shall not be paynfull unto you to
tame them, nor yet so dangerous to bruise them as when they wexe old, and yet
I would not have them to be tamed, not before three years, nor after five
years: for the one is too weak and tender, and the other is too hard and
strong, to tame those which shall be taken wild and fierce: for ye shall then
soon hurt them. Therefore in housing them first, ye shall make your doors
large for them to go in and out, and make a right coming in to the house, for
crushing one another. And also let your stals be bourded under their feet, and
likewise before them, and let the cross beam over their heads be of seven
foot high, to tie up their heads if need be. Ye shall also fasten them first
thereunto, and within a while after, ye shall use to handle them by the head
and horns: and use to water them in the stall, for by coming abroad, they
will seek to break away and will not yield so soon to the keeper. Some do
yoke them together (...) two days abroad: ye shall likewise take good heed
that one ox touch not another with their horns, so within two or three days
that ye see them wax more tame, toward the Evening ye may prove to lead
them forth and to walk them half a mile space or more, and so return
again. But first ye must see to tie them so straight, that they may not well
move their heads, then approthe gently, and go before them, not behind them,
nor on their sides, and speak to them fair, and so accustom them to see and
behold the keeper, then rub their heads, and touch their nostrilles and
mouzelles: so that they may know and feel the sent of the keeper, and thus ye
may use them all. Ye shall also wash and sprinckle them with wine to make them
more tame and familiar with you, and then put your hand under their bellies,
and betwixt their thighs: to the end that when ye do touch them there,
they fly not away Flies. worms and tykes, to take away.
or strike. And use them thus, that ye may at any time take from them flies,
worms, or tykes. Then use to be more near their sides, but not behind for
fear a blow with their feet. and then use to open their jaws and take forth
their tongue, and rub the pallet of his mouth with salt, and use once or
twice a year to give them a drink, myxte with one pound of salt grease
melted, with three pintes of ale or wine, and by trayning and using them this,
ye may soon make them tame, so that ye may soon after use them to the yoke,
in coupling them with some other gentle ox, and so use to tie them to some
tree, or other thing, and then ye may use them to the plough. But first use
them to some light earth, for the other may soon tire, and so dull them,
because their necks being yet but soft and tender, may soon be bruised and
gaulded with the bow and yoke, if the earth be very hard, and they as then
are but tender and rude. And above all take heed in taming a Bull, that he
Taming a bull.
hurt you not with his horns or feet. For if ye do not use him orderly at
the first, ye shall hardely tame him after: but he will have one ill touch or
other, and likewise an old ox, is more harder to tame and doubtfuller than
the young ox. For I have proved (says he) and had experience thereof at my
house. and to frame a young ox to the plough or carte, ye shall match him
best with an old ox that is tame, very strong and gentle, which To yoke a
young ox.
will hold the young ox back if he be too hasty, or pluck him forward, if
he be too slow, or if ye will ye may make a yoke for three oxen, and put the
young ox in the mids, and by that means ye shall make the most hardiest ox
to be tame, and refuse no labor at the length. For the young ox (being never
so stubborn) in remaining between the two old oxen, they will if he be too
flacke, constrayne him to draw, or if he would shoot forward, they will
hold him back and stay him, or if he would draw back, they will hold him
forward. Also if he would lie down, the other will hold him up. Thus by
policy he may be let of his stubborn frowardnes. Also yoke him to wild
bullockes that have not labored before, and so let them gee yoked lose
together for two or three days, and so they will wax tame. And a little
chastening after willmake him endure to labor well, and some young oxen after
they be made tame and gentle, they will wax weary and lie down in the furrowe,
and when any do so, he ought not suddenly to be corrected and raised again by
violence, but by some gentle Weary oxen.
means after a little rest, for be may lie down by some other occasion, as
sickness or faintness either want of meat and water, which will trouble him
more than blows. Whe^anie lie so down by slothfulness, ye shall bind fast
his feet that he cannot rise to feed, and let him so lie, and so he shall be
constrained through hunger and thirst to leave his weary slothfulness, which
do seldom hap. Also ye shall not yoke together two beasts of unequal
strength and stature, ^oking unequal.
for the weaker shall still have the worse. Again, those beasts are best to
labor that pass on the way without fear of shadows, dogs, waters, or any
other thing they see or hear, and those beasts also that eat much, and slow
in chewing: for they digest better, and do keep their force and virtue
without waxing lean or feeble, more than those which are hasty feeders. Also
this is counted a great fault in some keepers of oxen, which will have his ox
rather fat than lean: wherefore to labor, the body of a travailing ox or
other ought to be in a mean or good state, rather than fat, having his
muskels or nerfes strongly made, not charged with fat: which will but grieve
them to labor when they are so. Thus I will leave off their government and
speak hereafter of diseases, as if an ox have water in Water in the belly.
his belly, ye shall give him the juice of hemp leaves, mixed with water to
drink, or the leaves of Elder stamped with ale or beer do purge by seege, or
the root sodde in old wine or ale, and given, is good to void water out of
the maw and belly.

The remedies for certain diseases in oxen, kine, and other ca^tell,
IT shall be small profitto the husbandman to give his beast Columella.
meat, and know not how to belie and keep them in health and strength
Therefore, our ancients did use, to give them quarterly of Lupin peason, with
the seeds of Cypres, by even portion, beaten together, and then steeped all
one night in water, and set in the open air, which did use them so, to keep
them safe from sickness. Also often times cattle will have a sickness which
will make them desire to vomit, and caught with poverty, the which ye shall
help by Vomit to help.
throwing into his throat fasting, a raw hen egg shell and all whole. Then
on the morrow, take bruised Ramsons with the stalks and mix it with wine or
ale, and give it: or of common garlike put into his ears. This is not one
thing alone to help them, but there is diverse others: as to mix salt with
their meat. And some do give them of mugwoort with oil or wine to drink.
Others do give them the roots of leekes beaten with wine, or the seeds of
fur tree, or frankincense tree, and also the seeds of sauin, or rewe, to
make them drink it with wine or ale: and some do give them the herb called
in English, white Colleuer, in Latin Drostis, mixed with bitter fitches.
So(...) do give them a little of a serpents skin beaten with wine. They do
use also to beat wild time, or sauorie in sweet wine, and so gives it, which
is counted very good for them. Likewise the sea Onion called Squilla in Latin,
to be cut small and soaked in water, and given to swallowe it. All these or
every of them when they are ministered, ought to be given and ministered three
days together, a pint or more at once to a beast, which will purge their belly,
and take away the diseases, and also does renew them unto strength and health
again. And among all medicines the lees of olives to be given, is a singular
good medicine, mixed with as much water as lees. Wherefore, it shall not be ill to
accustom your cattle thus, ye shall first sprinckle therewith gently their
meat, and then put a little thereof into their water, and at length ye may
mix in their water a more portion thereof: and so give it unto them, and
likewise among their meat, so thus ye may use to keep the continually in
health as they did use them in time past.

The causes of pestilence in Cattle.
THe causes of pestilence, one thing is, the chafing of cattle: wherefore ye
must not chafe your cattle much in labor, specially in the summer, for that
does besides, bring unto them the flux of the belly, or else an ague. Also ye
shall neither let hogs, or hens to enter into their stawles, for their doung
being mixed with your cattelles meat, will breed a pestilence at length, and kill
them. And specially the dou^g of hogs does breed a murren among cattle (the
sooner) in eating thereof: if remedy be not soon had, they will grow to a
murren, and die thereof. The remedies are these, ye must by and by change
their laier, and to divide them into many parts: and far of from thence.
And also to separate the whole from the sick, for one beast infected will
poison all the rest in short time. Now when ye have changed them into other
parts, ye must put them where no other beasts do feed with them, to the end
they do not infect others therein, and to overcome this pestilent evil, is
Medicine against the pestilence.
to give them medicines therefore, thus ye must use them: Ye shall take of
wild carret called in Latin Daucus, or wild Parsenepe, or of groundstll, or
of Angelica roots, or the root of the sea holly named Eringion, in Latin,
with fennel seed, and sprinckle it with sodde wine, and fine wheaten meal,
with hot water, mix them so together, and give your sick cattle drink
thereof: then soon after ye shall make a drink of Cacia, mirre, and
Franckincense, in like portion, mixed with as much blood of the sea Tortu, if ye
can, then put all together in a quart of old wine, and then squirt it into
their nostrilles. Ye must minister this medicine three days together, every
day a third part.

We have (says he,) found also a meet short medicine and a good, which is,
the root called in Latin Consiligo, in French Pomele, or Patedelion, in
English I take it to be black Elleborie, which is very good for all cattle
Which root ought to be taken after this manner. Ye must di(...)e him out of
the earth with your left hand, before the sun do rise, for as they say, he
is so taken, and thereby he has the more virtue: which ye must use in this
sort. First, ye must bore through a circle of holes, with an awle or a bodkin
of brass, or latin in the flappe or broadest part of the beasts ear. But
first chip away the hair on both sides thereof: and then bore your holes, so
done, then when ye see the blood issue forth like a round circle, ye shall
then put into the said holes of the foresaid root, cut in small pieces. And
when it is within the flesh holes, that beast shall incontinently recover and
were fresh and lusty again, and shall not fall into the danger of the said
venomous disease. For the root will draw forth all the venom at the said
holes in his ear. Whereby that part of the care will rotte and fall away, and
by the loss thereof, the beast shall escape and be saved. Cornelius Celsus,
his counsel is this, ye shall put into their nostrelles, of Mistleto leaves
stamped with wine, but this must be done, ass(...) as your beasts begin to ware
ficke, and then to use every beast that is infected as is aforesaid.

For a beast that does not like nor well digest his meat.
When a beast does not digest his meat, the signs is of rawnesse in the
stomach, and want of digestion is when he belcheth often, and his guts makes
a crowling, his (...) will be charged with drops, his nerfes and sinews will be
hard and stiff, which cause is: he do not use to rub nor (...) himself.
The remedies are these, ye shall take 9. pintes of warm water; and 30.
colewoort leaves a little boiled, and mixed with some vinegre, and so make him
to swallow it down, and all day after ye shall let him eat nothing but that.
Some do lie him in the stal, and lays meat before him, so that he cannot eat
thereof, and then they take 4. pound of the tops of lentiles, and the tops
of wild olives, and beats them together with a pound of honey, and put thereto
4. pintes of water, and then sets it a night in the open air, and on the
morrow give it him, and within an hour after they give him of wild tares, or
fetches soked in water, but no drink: and this ye must do three days
together, till all the cause be taken away. Then if this do not help his
digestion or crowling of his guts and belly, which thing does trouble him so,
that he cannot eat his meat, and it makes him to weep and to complain and
mourn: then let him not rest long in a place, and also if he lie on the earth,
ye shall re(...) his head often where his tail was. Also this is a manifest
remedy for them: ye shall bind hard the upper part of his tail next his bulcke,
so done, ye shall give him then a pint and a half of wine, mixed with a quarter
of a pint of oil olive, and make him to swallow it; and then lead him apace,
the space of a mile and a half. Then if the disease go not away; ye shall then
anoint your hands with grease, butter, or oil olive, and draw forth his
doung at his fundament, and make him like wise to run a good space after, if
this profit not, ye shall take wild figs dried, and all to bruise them,
then mix them with nine times so much warm water, and so give it unto him.
If this yet help not, ye shall then take two pound of the leaves of myrtes,
then stamp them and mix them with three pintes of warm water, and so give it
with a horn, but first let him blood under the tail, and chase him well before
ye let him blood to bleed the better: and when he has bledde sufficiently,
then stop it in binding it about with the bark of some tree, for closeness.
Also they use this remedy among the rest, that is, to give unto the beast three
ounces of beaten garlic, in a pint of wine or more, and then to drive and
make him to run a good while after. Another, they use also to beat two
ounces of salt with ten onions, and then puts thereto a little melted honey,
and so puts it into the tewel or arsegut of the beast: and after they chase him
awhile and make him to run. Al these aforesaid have been assaied against
lack of digestion.

Against the crowling (called of some) the crying of the guts, and fretting
thereof in cattle.
AS concerning the crowling and crying of the guts and pain thereof in
cattle, which are often times troubled therewith, which grief is appeased and
helped by this means, as when the beast shall suddenly see any thing swim,
specially a drake on the water, shall suddenly be healed thereof, and also the
drake in sudden beholding the beast, the said beast shall be healed thereof.
Likewise, if any drake behold the horse, the said horse shall be suddenly whole
thereby. And yet as some times they can find no medicine that can help. Also
the signs of the trenches, with fretting of the guts are these, The flux of
the belly, with great abundance of fleame: the remedies are: take five Cipres
Trenches,
apples, with so many gall nuttes, with old wheat the weight of both the
other two, then beat them well altogether, and put it into three pintes of
red wine, and give the beast by even portions thereof four morninges, and ye
shall not forget to put there unto (if ye can) of lentile pease, of mirtes,
and the croppes of wild olive tre^s. All these have been said to help the
frenches and fretting of the guts. The flux of the belly does increase by
little and Flux of the ^elli^.
little, and so at length goes through the whole body of the beast: which will
sore diminish his strength, and cause him to labor very ^^owe and faintly.
When this shall happen, ye must keep your ox or other beast three days from
drink and the first day to give him nothing to eat. Then after give him the
croppes of wild olives, or of Reed, or such like, or the seeds of lentile
pease, or mirtes, but ge^e him as little water as ye ^an: For the flux of the
bellys sometimes continues unto blood, and then it weakeneth a beast very
much, and he will thereof die if there be not some remedy found. Wh^rfore the
best is (as aforesaid) to giu^ him no drink for the space of four ^r five
days, but to giu^ him the br^ised kirnelle^ of raysons, steeped all one night
in red wine, or to give him of gall nu^^es, and of Cipres, mixed and beaten
together in red wine, and so given in a morning. Likewise also against the
pain o^ the guts and flux thereof, some do take the shutes and tops of
the tender bay tree, and steepes it wi^h so much Sothernwood all a night in
three pin^es of warm water, and so gives it to the beast fasting. Another:
also other do take and bruise a quantity of the dried kirnelles of grapes, and
gives it mixed with three pintes of red wine, and to let him drink no other
thing, but (as aforesaid) ^he tops of bays, and sothern wood steeped in warm
water, so long as the said ^^uxe do continue, or as ye shall see cause.

If the flux do not soon cease, or the pain of the gut^ and belly. ye shall
give him but little meat for the space of three or four days. For his head
being then charged with a watrish humor, he shall (by eating little) avoid
more easier the water out by his e^es, and at his nose, then otherwise he
should do, and for an extreme and speedy remedy thereof, ye must burn him in
the mids of his forhead, with a hot iron unto the bone: and also flitte or
race his ears, and after rub the place twice a day with some ox piss
warmed on the fire, and use this medicine until he be whole, and also ye shall
anoint the burnt place in his forehead, with tar and oil olive mixed
together, which thing is counted a very good and perfect remedy*

If your beast have the flux of blood, some do use to take Flux of blood.
a quantite of new hogs doung, with a handful of the moss that grows
about the foot of an Ash tree, and chops it very small, with the hogs doung,
and then they mix it with a quart of good strong ale, or beer, and so gives
it the beast in the morning with a horn. Another, some takes a quick loche
fish and puts it in his throat and makes him to swallow it. Another: take also
of the herb called bloodwoorte, with the herb called shepherds purse of each
a ha^d^ul: and then ^hoppe them together small, and so mix them with a quart of
the milk of one colored Cow, and stirr^ them well together, with some leaven
of brown bread, then (...) you strain it with the runnet of milk, and so
giu^ it to the beast milk warm first and last 8. or 9. days together:
Another, Take three ounces of Facioli, called in Latin Smilax, in English
kidney bean or long bean, take those which are red, with 6. drag(...)es of
Peper, with a quantity of the seed of broom made in fine powder, and so give
him thereof, twice or thrice a day: in putting three ounces of the said powder
in two quartes of milk. Another, some do make the beast to swallow a live
frogge, in cutting of one of his legs, and so puts it down his throat.
Another, some other do take of new hogs doung, mixed with a quart of strong
ale or beer, and so gives thereof to the beast, morning, at noone, and at
night, the space of three days together: often proved. Another, some takes 5.
or 6. small thin slices the leanest of martlemas beef, and let them be laid
awhile to soake in a quart of strong ale or beer, and put thereto one handful
of hogs deung newly made, then stir it all well together, and so make the
beast t^ drink it evening and morning the space of two or 3. days, and keep
him still in the house: use this and it will help him often proved. Another:
take a good handful or more of kno^gresse, choppe it small, then bruise it a
little, and mix it with a pint or more of good ale or beer. And i^ ye can get
the shel stone w^ic^ is found on tylde lands, (and is much like unto the
scallop shel,) which ye shall burn in the fire, and then make fine powder
thereof: then put some of that powder unto your foresaid drink, and so give it
your beast, which have bin proved a good remedy. Another: make a posset of the
milk of one colored cow, and give it unto your sick beast luke warm.
Another, take a quantity of the fine powder of Bolearmeniacke, and mix it with
ale or beer and give it your beast with a horn. Another: take a quantity of
the powder of the roots of gallingale, finely beaten, and the^ mix it with a
pint or more of good ale or beer, and so give it: another, also the roots of
the wild^ mallows boiled in wine, or strong beer, and given to the beast, is
good to stop the flux of blood, and so are all those before mentioned, good
against the bloody flux in cattle, being ministered in fit and convenient time,
will take the more effect to stop the said disease.

Against superfluous flesh growing on the tongue of some cattle, which is
called of some persons, the barbes.
SUch superfluous flesh on the tongue of cattle will hinder the beast
oftentimes in eating his meat, being called of some husbands, the barbes, or
teates, which does grow long like teates nigh the root of his tongue.
Wherefore they do cast him, and take forth his tongue and clippe them away
with a pair of sheares, or cut them with a sharp knife, and some do burn
them with a hot iron: which way is counted more painful to the beast. Then
they rub it with salt and garlic beaten together, till all the ^egme be
clean gone, and then they wash all his mouth, with s^lt and wine, or salt and
vinegre, and within an hour after, ye may give him some grass, or green
herbs, or the tender leaves of trees, so long till they be all whole.

Also if a beast have the barbes, which (as some do say) will grow and hang
like flethe pimples under his tongue, which must be clipped off, and then rubbed
and chafed with garlic and salt beaten together, as aforesaid: and wash and
rub his mouth gently with soft linen dipped in warm wine, and bathe well
these sores under his tongu^ and then use him as aforesaid, and he shall do
well.

If ye beast have neither barbes nor yet flux, and do not eat his meat well,
it shall be then good to beat garlic with Sallet oil, and squirt thereof a
morninges into his nostrils, if ye mix therewith the juice of an onion, it shall
make him the more desirous to eat.

Against pissing of blood or bloody flux.
IF this disease be newly begun of your beast, ye shall take but a frogge, and
cut off his left leg, and so put him alive into the beasts mouth: but then
ye must have ready a handful of salt mixed with a pint of good stale ale, and
so soon as ye can after the frogge, give the beast the drink, and make him to
swallow al down together, for this is counted very good, and also well
approved. But if your beast have continued long, then shall y^ take of sharp
Tanners owze, with the powder made of old martlemas Biefe, mixed and well
stirred altogether, and then given to the beast: this is also good and well
proved, and the juice of madder given with honied water is called good.

If your cattle have dropping nostrilles.
IF the nostrilles of your beasts do drop, or water run forth thereat, ye
shall rub his throat with salt and sau^rie mixed together, and also his jaws,
and to rub and chafe the said parts with brine and garlic mixed together,
or to squirt into his nostrils the juice of pimpernel, mixed with a little white
wine, and this is good both for the dropping nostrils, and the watery eyes of
cattle.

For an Ox or a Cow that swells through the abundance of blood.
IF any Ox or Cow do sometimes swel through abundance of blood, whereby it
will swel in their tongue that it will stop their wind, and soon perish
thereof, if there be not remedy with speed. The remedy is, ye shall first
chafe him a little, up and down, then cast him and take forth his tongue, and
prick with an awle through the great and middle vain thereof under, and there
at let him bleed well, and he shall amend soon again: but look then that the
sign be not in the head, for then it is ill to stop. And sometimes a beasts
tongue will swel so big, that he can hardly take his breath, and ye shall see
him lyll and hold out his tongue, then if there be not speedy remedy he dies:
which remedy is, ye must prick the vain under his tongue as is before
mentioned and he shall do well

Against the venomed tongue of a beast, and also his body.
THe tongue of an ox or bullock sometimes shall be swollen and venomed by
eating of some venomous grass, or such like, and then he will commonly gape,
and eat no meat, but stand holding down his head and mourn. The remedy is,
ye shall bruise a white onyon, and mix it with a little good vinegre, then give
it him and make him to swallowe it down: But first rub his mouth and tongue
with all well, and then give it him. So done, ye shall pashe a whole egg into
his mouth shell and all, and make him so to swallow it down, and then he will
recover and do well again.

Sometimes a beast will be swollen all his body, by eating some evil thing and
venomous among their grass, as the ^eld spider, frogs, snailes, eftes, or
cold herbs, as poppie, dwale, hemlocke, and such which will make them swel.
The remedies are. Take of the juice of plantaine, with the juice of wild
carrets by even portion, and give the beast thereof, with a little vinegar. Also
the juice of inugwort mixed with ale or beer, and give it. Likewise, the juice
of cleuers, or goose grease, stamped and straind, and given, is a special remedy
against venom of the field spider, and others also. Again, the garden tanzy,
stamped and straind, and given with wine. Also the seed of the great Cowthistle
dried and made into powder, and given with wine: or the root thereof boilde in
wine and given. Likewise the leaves of annisestedes boild in water and given.
Again, the seed of rocket beaten and given wish ale: or a handful of betony
leaves, stamped and straind with ale and beer, and given. Likewise does
garlic, being stamped together with Ale or Dear, and given with ale. Any of
these are good alone to be given to a beast, when he is swollen, by eating of
any venomous thing. And if ye do take of some herbs 2. parts together, it will
then be the stronger and take more effect: but my counsel is, use them with
discretion even as ye shall see cause.

Against the swelling in a beast by eating of a Tyne worm.
IF any Ox or other beast, have eaten any tineworme, which is a small red worm, round and full of legs, much like a hog lowse. Which worm in Summer
will be creeping among the grass. If any beast have eaten such, it will poison
him, and he will suddenly swel thereof, so that within four and twenty hours
(if he be not remedied) he will die thereof. One remedy is, ye shall take a
quantity of stale, and put there in a quantity of falfe, (...)e them well
together and so give it him and so soon as ye can chafe him after till he do
stowar for when they do stowar, they lightly shall do well. Another. Take a
good handful of herb Robart, (which smells like a fox:) Choppe it small and
bruise it well, and then mix it with good ale, or beer, and so give it your
beast. Another, Take of the earth of Ant hills, and mix it with vinegar, and so
give it to your beast. Those are all good against the foresaid venom of the
tine worm.

Against Costiuenes in cattle.
THere is also another kind of swelling in oxen and kine, both through
costinenes which is, when they are so hard bound in their bodies through heat,
that they cannot dung, which will cause them to swell. The remedy is to chafe
and drive him well up and down a good space, if then he do not dung, ye must
then anoint your hand with oil or grease, then rake him and take forth his
dung. Some do give him of the (...) in drink, and so does well. Yet others do
but rake him, and he does well also.

Against the worm in a beasts tail.
THere will breed in the tail of cattle a certain worm, like to a eating
canker, which will breed in the end of his tail, which will cause the beast
to become lean and of il liking. Which place ye shall feel to be somewhat
soft, and a little above that place on the inside of his tail, ye shall slitte
the skin (with a sharp knife) two inches long downeright: so done, then take
a quantity of (...)uised garlike, and safe mixed together, and then hind it
fast to that place, and let it so remain till it do fall away of it self,
and so the beast shall recover and be well again.

For an Ox or Cow having the fever.
OXen and kyne both will sometime have the Fever or Ague, which is gotten by
some cold or other sickness. The signs are, when his eyes wax hollow, and
are dropping, his head lumpishe and heavy, his mouth foaming and lathering,
and drawing long his breath with pain, and sometimes he will sigh. So when yet
shall see such tokens, ye may judge it to be the fever. The remedy: ye
shall then keep him a day and a night without meat or drink. Then on the
next morning fasting, ye shall draw a little blood under his tail. Then about
one hour after, ye shall give him thirty small trunchions of Colewoortes,
sodde in salet oil, and salt fish water or bryne, and make him to swallowe
it: thus ye must use him for five morninges together fasting, and ye shall
cast before him the tender branches of lentile pease, or the tender croppes of
the Olive trees or such, or else the tender buddes of the Uine: and ye must
rub or cleanse his lips, and thrice a day ye must give him cold water
for to drink, and so ye shall keep him in the stal till he be whole and
sound.

Also the fever is gotten of laboring oxe^, by great travel in hoate times,
and when he has that, ye shall see him hang down his head, his eyes will
inflame and bounce, and his body will be hot out of al order, which ye shall
feel by touching his skin. Wherefore they use to let him blood on the vain
of his forehead, or on the vain of his ear, and then they give him of green
herbs, as lettice, and such other cold herbs, and they bathe also his body
with white, wine and so they give him cold water to drink, and so he will
amend.

Against the Cough in Cattle.
Cattle sometimes will have the cough by taking of cold, or by great travel or
by, eating some evil thing. If the cough in an Ox be newly taken, he may be
well and soon remedied thereof, by a drink made of water mixed with barley
meal. Sometimes they use to give unto the beast, of stitchwoort smally chopped,
with husked beans bruised altogether, and so given. They take also of lentile
pease out of their husks, and then bruise them small, and mix them with three
pyntes of warm water, and give it with a horn. They heal also an old cough
with two pound of Isope steeped in a quarte or more of water, with eight pound
of lentyle pease, smally beaten and mixed altogether, and so given to the beast
with a horn. Another: take the juice thereof, with sallet oil, or the small
roots thereof beaten with barley meal, and so given and make him to swallow
it. Another: take the roots of leekes clean washed, and then beaten with pure
wheat, and so given fasting. This does heal any old cough. Another: take of
wild tares out of their husks, then beat them with as much of husked barley,
and make him for to swallowe it. Another: Isope also stamped with ale or beer,
and given is good likewise, and to give him no other drink for the space of
eight days but mugwoort boiled in water and so given. Another: take five
leaves of Asarabacca, and stamp it, and then strain it with wine, or good
ale, and so give it with a horn to the beast. Another, mix the powder of
light woort, (which grows among stones, or on Oaks like a dried turfe nigh the
ground) with ale or beer, and give it warm, and it will help. Also take
butter, new ale, stamped garlic, with dragon water, and so give it the beast
warm. Well proved.

Impostumes in beasts to help.
IF any beast be troubled with an impostume or such like sore, the best shall
be to open the place with an iron, and when it is cut, then shall ye crush
forth all the ill humor and matter therein. Then stir and wash it clean
with the warm urine of an Ox. So done, then use such things as does cleanse
and heal. And take Cherpi, (so called in French) mixed with tar and oil
olive: and plaster wise close the sore therewith. If ye cannot within wash the
sore clean, ye shall melt of the tallowe of an Ox, or goat, and so power it
into the wound, and let it run down al about the bottom thereof. Some sores
after they have applied this medicine, they will gather a fiery heat and a
distilling of humor which will descend unto that place. Therefore to avoid the
same, ye shall wash it with old urine of men, and then to anoint it, with tar
and old grease mixed.

Against the impostumation of byles, they do use to kill them by laying to of
leven, mixed with the sea onyon Squilla, Byles.
and some vinegar, and they also do open the sore and wash it with his own
piss made warm: then they tent it with lynt dipped in tar, and in the end,
ye shall heal it with tents dipped in moulten tallowe, either of Ox or
goat.

To heal the closhe or founder in the feet of Cattle.
THE closhe or foundering in the feet of cattle, is taken by some cold after
a great heat, or by some vehement travail which have stirred the blood so,
that it goes down to the feet, like the founder of a horse. When this do
happen in cattle, it will sudden visit the hoof of the beast, and ye shall
feel it hot, and payneth the beast so, that he will not suffer you for to
crushe the place. But when the blood rests in the legs above the hoof, ye
shall but chafe him often, and rub him hard to make the blood retire again.
If that profit not, ye must lance his feet gently round on the edge of
his hoofes, with small rases not deep. But if the blood be gone down into the
hoof, ye must open then a little (with a sharp knife) in the mids under
both the claws. Then lay a tent thereto of lynt, mixed with salt, nettles and
vinegar, and make him a buskin of broom if ye can, for that is more wholesome,
and let not his feet come in any water till he be whole, but keep him dry
in the stall.

And look also that the blood do issue when ye do cut him, for if then he
do not bleed, it will grow to some putrefaction, and so to impostumation,
and then it will be long in healing. Therefore ye must open and cleanse it
well, and bind thereto clothes st^eped in vinegar, salt, and oil, and in the
end, take of old grease and Dear suet melted together in like portion, and
heal it therewith. If the blood do fall to the outmost parts of the clees,
ye must then pare the ends thereof to the quick, and so let them bleed. But
see that ye open the clees in the mids of the ends, so that no
impostumation be there, and they will do well.

For sinews stiff and shrinking.
IF an Ox or other beast do closh or hault through the stiffness of the
sinews and nerfes, ye shall chafe his legs, knees, and hammes, with salt and
oil mixed til they be well. If the sinews be stiff about the knees, ye must
then bathe him with hoate vinegar, or with mistleto sodde in running water, or
with millet (which is a grain like tares) and linseed, and in all issues, ye
must scarifie and race the greened place, and then to put thereon of fresh
butter washed in water and vinegar, and in the end annoint it with salt butter
mixed with Goats suet.

Also to boil southernwood in sallet oil, or neats feet oil, and so do
annoint therewith. Another: the juice of Stiffenesse of sinews.
priuet mixed with oil and therewith annoint. Another: mustard seed boyld in
oil, and anoint the sinews therewith. Another: take of barlie meal, sallet
oil, rue, salt, and coria^der, sta^p al these together, and so plaistred on:
will comfort both sinews, and nerfes. Another: take water ye cabbage or
colewortts have been sodde in, to bathe therewith is very good. Another: take
lyneseede, and barley meal, and mix them well together; and then playstred to,
is good to molifie and make soft all hardness of the sinews, nerfes, and
iointes. Another: take the roots of Saturian, stamp them and mix them with
sheep milk, and then plaistred, will supple the sinews pretily. Also
horehound beaten with oil and vinegar, and then plaistred to, does the like
supple the sinews and nerfes. Some do say, take yarrow and barrow hogs
grease, and beat them well together, and then laid too, will knit sinews
together To knit sinews
being cut asonder.

Against the swelling of the knees of cattle.
IF the knees of Ox or Cow or other beast be swollen, ye shall first bath him
in white vinegar. Then take vinegar, lineseed, and millet, and sprinckle it
with honyed water, so mix them and bind that to his knees: or else take a
sponge kept in water that mistleto is sod in, and lay that unto his knee. If
there be any inflammation of humor, ye shall then lay too leuain, and barley
meal steept in warm wine, or in honied water boild, to ripe it, and when it
is ripe, ye shall lance it with a razor, and then hele it with lint, salt,
and oil, as before is said. Cornelius Celsus says, the roots of flowerdeluce,
or the sea onyon squilla, with salt, or the iuce of knotgres put into the
wound, will heal it. Also, all diseases comenly in the body without wound
being new, are healed by rubbings and chafings of the flesh and skin: but if
they be old, ye must then cut or burn, and to heal them in melting butter
or goats suet, and powered thereon.

To heal scabbes or galls in cattle.
IF your cattle be scabby, ye shall take of garlic and bruise it, and
therewith rub and chafe all the sores. Also against scabbe or gall: They take
garlic, sauory, brimstone powder, vinegar, and gall nuts beaten, with the
juice of callamint, neppe, or horehound mixed with soote of the chimney, and so
anoint therewith. And if it grow to some vicer or great sore, then to use and
rub the place, with bruised mallows mixed with white wine, and bind thereof to
the place. Also the great burre leaves beaten with oil and laid too, all
these before mentioned are good.

And for the galling of the neck with the yoke, and if it swell but one side,
ye shall let him blood in the ear of that side: But if he be chaft in the
midst of the neck, then let him blood in both his ears, and lay thereto a
plaster made with the marrow of an ox, mixed with the suet a buck, and then
melte it all together with some oil and tar: and therewith ye shall heal
it: And it will do very well.

Also if an ox be gald and bruised on his neck, a sufficient medicine is this.
Ye shall first draw blood at one of his ears. If not: Take of the hear be
called in latin Auia, in french, Aus oiseauls, beat it with salt, and so lay
it too, aus if it do then aswage the chyne of his neck, look then on which
side he hangs or leans his head, and let him blood on the contrary side
he leans, on the ear. But before ye do this, ye shall beat his ear well
with a twigge, and ye shall see it swell and rise on the vain. Then lance the
said vain and let him bleed well thereat: and on the next morning draw some
more blood thereon, and so let him not travail of two days after. On the
third day ye may travail him a little, and so by little and little ye
may use him to his task and former journey.

But if he be of neither side galde, and yet his neck swollen in the midst
thereof. Then ye must let him blood on both his ears: and if ye let him not
blood within two days after the disease have taken his neck, it will so
inflame, that the nerfes and sinews will wax stiff, and then it will grow
to a sore of engendered blood: for which I have found a singular good medicine,
that is, ye shall take tar, and the marow in an Ox bone, with the suet of a
bucke, with old oil olive, of each a like portion. Then boil al together and
so use for to annoint him when he leaves his yoke. But first ye shall always
wash him with the water where he commonly drinks of, and then let it dyre,
and then anoint him with the said medicine. But if all his neck be so
inflamed that he cannot bear his yoke, the next remedy is to let him rest,
and use to wash his neck with cold water, and so rub and chafe it with the
foam of silver or litarge. Celsus wills to put on the rest of his neck that
is so inflamed, the before said herb called Auia.

For a beast being hide bound.
THere is a disease in beasts called in Latin Coriago, in English, hide bound,
which does sore torment and grieve a beast. This grief happens to a
laboring Ox when he has been sore traueiled in labor, or sore traueling in
traueiling in rayny weather, and thereby come to be hide bound through
poverty. Wherefore ye must take heed when they return from labor being sore
chaft of body and short of breath. Some do use therefore to sprinckle them with
wine, and do cast a piece of the fat of a beast down his throat: but if he
have this disease already, it shall be good to sees bay leaves in ale, and to
bath him therewith as hot as he can suffer. And suddenly thereupon for to
chafe and rub him with oil, and wine mixed together, and to pluck and draw
his skin on both his sides, and loose it from his ribs: and it is good to
be done in a hot sunny day, that it may dry and sink therein. Another.
Some do put too the lees of olives, wine, and grease, and annoint therewith,
which medycyne they do use, after they have done rubbing, and chafyng the
beast. Also if a beast like not, and his skin do cleave to his bones, ye
shall bathe him all over with wine, and oil olyue, myxt together. Some do take
mallows boyld in wine, or ale, or worte mixed with oil, and so bath him
therewith. Also, some do sees whot grains in ale, and so bath and rub him
therewith once a day for 3. or 4. days together, and to give him the water of
boylde barley.

For the itch in cattle.
TThe itch often times in cattle may come for lack of good dressing. Also it
may be taken of his fellows, and it may come by ill water and choler in the
veins. If a beast have an itch, ye shall wash and chafe him with his own vrin
made warm, and mixed with old salt butter: or ye shall annoint him with oil,
rosin, and white wine melted together, Some do wash it with piss, salt, and
the juice of marigoldes, mixed all together. Use this and it will help.

Against the lunges of cattle infected.
IF the lights or lunges of a beast be infected which is a grievous disease: For
thereby he will wax, lean and pine away, and at length he dries so in his
body by a common cough, whereby at the length it will kill him, if he have no
remedy. The remedies are, ye shall pearce one of his ears with a little
bodkin, (as is before said for the murren or pestilence) and being so perst, ye
shall put into the said holes, the burnt root of some hazel tree. Then take a
quantity of the juice of leekes, with so much sallet oil, and mix it with a
pint and half of wine, and give it him fasting, use this 9. mornings together,
and he shall do well. Also if the sickness of the lights be not sore, they do
give him but the juice of leekes mixed with sweet wine, and they put of the
burnt root of hazel into his ear, as before said.

But ye shall understand, if the beast have continued long therewith, he will
then stand much, and eat but little, and therefore he will wax hollow and
thin of body: and some times he will cough 20. times in one hour. Then he is
sore taken and far gone therewith, and very few do recover, if he be not
looked unto. Wherefore the best way is, ye shall divide your cattle asunder,
so many as he has companied with, and then let them blood a little, as
aforesaid. Also there be many men that can setter them, which is to cut the
dewlappe before on the brisket: and therefore also there is grass, which some
husbands do call setter woort, or fetter grass, which ye shall take and bruise
it a little in a mortar or dish. Then make the dewlap hollow betwixt the skin
and the flesh, and put thereof so much as a hens egg, into the said dewlap,
and then look unto it that it fall not forth again, and he shall amend. This
some have proved and it has done well.

Also again, some cattle will have their lunges grown to their sides, which is
gotten (as some husbands say) by some great drought, or lack of water in
convenient times. And when he is thus grieved therewith, ye shall hear him
house, or have (as it were) a hollow cough, and will forsake his meat, and his
hair on his back will stare up right. Then the help is hard to recover, but
to kill him is best. Yet some do give him of the lungwort, which lies all the
year, (save in the spring) in the ground, and they give a handful of the said
roots bruised in ale or beer, four or five mornings together, and no meat
after of two hours space. Others do take a quantity of figs, with a
handful of I^ope, bruised together, then boil them a little in a quart of ale
or beer, then strains it and gives it cold to the beast 3. or 4. mornings,
and let him not eat the space of two hours after. Also to take a good
handful of pensis, or hearts ease, and stamp it with a quart of ale or beer,
and then strain it and gives it so to the beast 3. or 4. mornings, and then
use him as before is said. All these are counted special good against the said
grief.

Also some husbands say, this disease grows in a beast by surfeiting and sore
chafyng and then suddenly take cold thereon: to show if he be lungrowne, he
will then lather sometimes at his mouth, in holding it commonly open, with a
running water at his mouth and nose. The cure therefore, they cut away a round
piece of skin in the gullet or brisket place, and then with their finger and
a little salt make a hole downward two inches or more, and then fills the
said hole with red garlic stamped, and plaistred thereon with nettles stamped
with salt, or with yarrow and salt mixed with vinegar. Then shall ye give him
this following. Take of fenecreke, or turmericke, of lungwoort herb, stamp
all these together in a mortar, and then mix it with a pint or more of strong
ale, or beer, and so give it. Use this twice or thrice or more as ye shall
see cause, and it will help, if he be not too far gone. Often proved.

Likewise some do put into the foresaid cut place, of lungwoort bruised with
salt a little, and thereof make it like a tent, and then wrappes it all over
with fresh hogs grease, and binds it round with a thread, and then role it in
salt, and so put it down the said hole as far as it will go, and so stich
up the said hole again, and they give him of lungwoort mixed in ale to drink.
And so he shall recover God willing.

Against the biting of a mad Dog.
IF a beast be bitten with any mad dog, ye shall take garlic and bruise it, and
then put it into a thin linen cloth, and then al to rub and chafe the bitten
place therewith, and it will do well. Some do squirt into the holes or wash the
wound with water and salt long mixed before together, which is also a good
remedy. Another: ye shall wash and rub the bitten place, with the waybrode
leaves stamped, and also to give unto the beast the juice thereof mixed with ale
or beer. Another. Take the root of the great bur and bruise that with some
salt, and so lay it to the bitten place, and this will help either man or
beast. Well proved.

Against the pallet of a beasts mouth inflamed.
THere will sometimes both ox and cow have the pallet of their mouth inflamed
so, that he cannot well eat his meat, which beast often times will give a sigh,
in standing and weighing more on the one side then on the other. The remedy is,
ye must cast him, and then race him in the pallet of his mouth, and make him
there bleed well. Then ye shall give him of red fetches without husks, mixed
with green leaves, or some other green herbs, but give him no dry meat
till he be through whole thereof.

To help the clowse.
THe clowse is a kind of grief which do commonly happen on the neck of
laboring cattle, which does not so much molest them, as does the inflammation,
because they do not thereby leave their work. For which thing it shall be
sufficient to put and disolue thereon of lamp oil, and soap mixed together,
and so anoint. This is good. But the best shall be, if ye can to let him rest
til he be whole: and ye must look also that his neck then do not loose his
hair, which is soon lost when they labor in the rain, or else sweat: For
when his neck begins once to pil (then fear the other,) ye shall then rub it
with the powder of old tiles finely made: and before ye do vnyoake, cast of
that powder on their necks, and when it is well dried on, then chafe thereon
all over with the foresaid oil, and so ye shall always keep your oxen in
good order from time to time.

Remedies for the hoof of a beast that is hurt.
IF the hoof of your beast be hurt at any time either with culter or share, or
any part of her clees hurt, ye shall make a salve of pitch, old grease, mixed
with the powder of brimstone, melted al together, and with a hot iron melt of
that on the sore hoof or clet. This medicine is good also, when the beast has
been hurt either with stubbe or spell of wood, and if there be any little gone
in, it will draw it forth, but if his foot be hurt far within the flesh, by
some sharp stone or other thing, then ye must open the wound, and then sear
it with some hot iron, and then bathe it three days together morning and
evening with warm vinegar, and wrap it with a buskin of broom if ye can: Also
if the beasts leg be hurt with the share, then ye shall lay too of the
herb called sea lettis, or sea spurge, mixed with salt, called in greek
Tithimalus, for that is good to heal it, and is also good to heal the hurt in
the foot, as well as on the leg: But first ye shall always wash it with
hot piss of men, and then burn ready a faggot of some wood abroad, and
as soon as the flame is out, make the beast tread on the hot embers with his
sore foot: Then annoyut it with tar, and old grease mixed together. It were
good also to wash your beast feet often with cold water when yo vnyoake them,
for that shall keep them from foundering, and then after to anoint and chafe
their pasturns, and betwixt their clees, with old grease, and they shall do
well.

Also if an ox do halte of his foot through taking of some great cold, ye
must then wash it with warm vrin, but if it come through the cause of blood or
an impostume in the foot then ye shall chafe and rub it first well to stir
the blood, and then raze the skin with a sharp razor, above the clees, and
make it bleed, and wash it with piss and salt, and if it will not so heal but
descend into the foot, ye must then open the top of the hoof under, to the
quick: and make the blood there to come forth, then lap his foot as before is
said, or make a buskin that no water or other thing get in to hurt it, till it
be whole.

Likewise, if an Ox be cut or grauelled in the foot, the help is, ye shall
bathe him with warm urine, and then anoint him with tar, and old grease,
melted together, and there is nothing better to use before ye do unyoke, then
to rub and chafe their feet with old fresh grease.

If the feet of an Ox do open and chappe, so that y^ horn do crack and
cleave, ye shall bath it well first with warm Hoof cho(...)
vinegar and and salt, and oil mixed altogether. Then lap it well for a day or
more, and put thereon a plaster of old grease, and pitch, melted together.
And so it will heel again and do well, and when his hoofes are broken, ye shall
cover and wrappe them with linen steeped in vinegar, oil, and salt, for three
days still renew it in laying to the said medicine. Then on the fourth day,
melt pitch and old grease together, and put it thereon with the bark of a
pyne apple tree, clean pullished: and when it begins to heal, ye shall
rub it al over with the soote of a chimney, and let it heal. But if ye make
small account thereof, there will woorms engender soon in the sore, and make it
fall to a coldness, if ye wash it not on morninges with cold water: so if this
will not heel it, ye shall then bruise of horehound, leeks, and salt together,
and so lay it there too, and this will soon kill the worms, and when the sore
is well cleansed, ye shall lay thereon a plaster of tow, mixed with pitch, oil,
and old grease, and so anoint it al over with the same, to keep off the fly
away and it will do well.

To help the bruise on the shoulder of a beast.
SOmetimes by long travel a laboring Ox in treading on the hard ground, or by
some crushe against posts or gates, will be lame in their shoulders, and
oftentimes sore bruised: if this happen in any beast, ye shall then let him
blood on the fore legs. If he be hurt in the hinder hippes, ye shall then let
him blood on the hinder legs, and then wash and bathe it with warm vinegar,
salt and oil mixed together, or bathe his shoulder with piss and mallows
boiled together. If these do not help, then ye shall lance it a little, and
then lay a plaster of pitch thereon and it will heal it.

Against stinging with Adder or Snake.
WHen any beast is stung with Adder or bitten with a snake, it will so ranckle;
that the beast may soon die thereof, if there be not remedy soon had. Against
any biting thereof ye shall bruise the root of the great burre with salt, and
so lay it too, and it will take away the venom. Another better, which is, cake
of the roots of the sharp pointed threeleaued grass, which bears long
sweet leaves and rough, mix the juice thereof with wine, and give it ye
beast, or cast it into his mouth: and beat the leaves with salt and lay it to
the sore, if ye cannot have the green herb bruise the seed with wine and give
it him, or bruise ye stalks and roots, and then mix it with meal, and salt,
and honyed water, plaster wise laid thereon. Another: ye shall take v. pound of
ye tender crops of an Ash tree well beaten, and then mixed with three pynts of
sallet oil, in so much wine, the^ strain it and give it to the beast. Also
take of the said Ashtree croppes, and beat them with salt, and lay it to the
venoumed place. If a beast be stung, ye shall rub the place with the oil of
a scorpion, (which ye shall have at the Apothecaries,) or give him soap mixed with
vinegar, and wash the place with bur leaves, sodde in water, or green stamped
with salt and laid too.

The stinging of the fieldspider.
IF a beast be stung with the field spider, it will soon cause nflammation, and
grow to an impostume, if there be not speedy remedy. A beast being stung with
y^ field spyder, or bitten with antes, al they be but small worms, yet their
venom is great, and will put the beast to great danger, and therefore some do
hold, in pricking the place with a latten naule, and then mix soap and
vinegar, and chafe the place therewith. Also some say, if the field spider be
taken and put in oil olive, and so die therein and ^ot, if a beast be stung
of him, anoint with ye oil and it will help, and so like of other venomous
worms put in oil,) but if ye have none thereof, so that the wound show fair
and without danger, ye shall but take of bruised Cummin, mixed with tar, and
so anoint therewith: and plaster it thereon also: and it will take away the
danger thereof. But if it do grow inward to an impostume, then it shall be best
to burn it with a hot iron, so much as is corrupted, and then annoint it with
tar, and oil, and so it heales. Some lappes a live spider in claye earth,
and when it is dry, hanges it about the beasts neck, and by that (they say)
it preserues the beast from being stung therewith. Again, some do stamp of
wormwood, or Southernewood with Vinegar, and clappes it on the venomed place
and it helps. Also to take beaten cammamile, with honey, and lay it too, does
the like. Also take of house leeke, stamp it with ale, and give it to drink,
or the water of a Lilly root, bruised and strained in water and vinegar, and
so given to the beast.

Remedies against diseases of the eyes.
THe eye of a beast is tender and is a principal member, and soon may be hurt
diverse ways. The griefs thereof are commonly healed with honey, but when they do
inflame and swel, the^ they mix of the meal of pure wheat, with honied water
and lay it too. Also if an ox have y^ haw in the eye, ye shall heal it with
the salt of the montain, or spanish salt, or Sal armeniacke, Haw in the eye.
or sal Capadoce, any of these beaten into a fine powder, and blown (with a
quill three morninges) into his eye. Likewise the powder of the root called in
Greek Silphion, (in English pelliter of Spain,) mix with ten times so much
Salarmeniack, well beaten together, and then blow thereof into his eye, and it
destroys the haw. Also the said root beaten with the oil of masticktree, and
there with annoint y^ eye. Likewise for the haw or sore eye, some makes a round
collar of Sal armeniack, mixed with some honey, and lays it round about his eye,
and annoynts thereon al round about with tar resolved with oil olive, for fear
of bees coming to his eye, or to anoint his eye with the juice of Cammamell.
Also the leaves and stalks of Crow foot to be bruised and laid to the eye,
does take away the haw or web, and is good against a lashe on the eye.

Again, if a beast be stricken on the eye, ye shall take of the juice of
centory herb, and mixed with a little honey, and Stroke in the eye.
therewith annoint his eye, and lay it also plaster wise thereon. Do this
against night, for fear of Bees troubling the beast: also if the eye of your
beast chance to be stricken, ye shall take the croomes of wheaten bread, or
other, and then soake it a little in rose water, or vinegar, and so lay it to
his eye, and it will help. But if it swell or inflame, then the best is to
take southernwood, and bruise it with a little vinegar Eyes inflamed.
and lay it too. Also the juice of Pimpernell, is good against all griefs of
the eyes, or to be mixed with other things.

Also against the watering of beasts eyes, as sometimes Watery eyes.
they will run of water. The remedy therefore, they use to lay on the brows
or eye liddes, the meal of dried barley, tempered with water, and honey. Also
the feeds of wild parsenepes, or the juice of wild dayfies mixed with honey
and so annoint: which is also good against any pain of the eyes, then anoint
it all over with tar and oil mixed as aforesaid for fear of bees coming to
the honey, and troubling the beast. And also for the web in the eye, ye shall
take of white salt, and wrappe it in a linen cloth, and then rake it under the
embars, and burn it, and then take and beat it to a small powder, and with a
goose quil blow thereof into Web in the eye.
his eye, and then hold your hand thereon a while, and ye shall see it water,
and thereupon amend. Also the juice of Drago^s to annoint the eye is good
against the web in the eye, and the juice of the wild lettice does the like.
Also, for a sore eye in a beast, ye shall spurt beer therein, or chewe the
leaves of ground Iuie, and drop it in his eye, or the juice thereof in like
manner, mixed with a little powder of Gynger.

If a beast chance to swallow a horseleech worm in his water.
IF any beast, do swallow down a horsleech with his drink, which will molest
and trouble him greatly. For ye said horseleech will commonly stay in his throat
and there suck blood, and so will inflame the place in causing his throatebowle
to swell, whereby he will sore trouble the beast in letting the passage of his
meat, so that he cannot swallowe, nor take his wind. If she lie so far
within, that one cannot take her forth with his hand, ye must then put a
quill or some kane into the beasts throat, filled with hoate oil and let it
go down, or squirt oil and so soon as the oil do but touch the worm, she
will fall off. Ye may also get her off by letting the fume of the punaise unto
her, (which is in Italy, a stinking worm like a tycke,) which as soon as she
feels the fume, she will fall off, But if she do hold and stay in the
stomach and entrales, then ye must give the beast hoate vinegar which will kill
her: and this will serve as well for other cattle.

For the Dewbolne in cattle.
THe dewbolne in Ox, Cow, or other beast, is swelling in his body as much as
the skin may hold, which swelling is very dangerous to some for bursting,
it is gotten by eating of the trifoly grass in a dewy morning (as some say)
which grass makes him so to swell as though he would burst. The remedy is,
some do chase and drive him softly up and down to make him to doung. If that
do not help, then ye must rake him and take forth his doung. If that will not
serve, then they strike a hole with a knife or bodkin into the hollow part of
his back above his flank, and so thereat lets out the wind by a fether or
quil, and so he will recover again. But beware ye strike him not so deep that
ye pearce his guts. Also to give him rue, or garden tanzey stamped with wine
and ale to drink is very good for ye same, or give him a quart of veriuyce.

This disease comes to a beast that is greedy and is put into a Pastor of
such rank grass in eating so greedily thereof that his sides will swell as
high as his back bone, and sometimes the one side will swell more than the
other, and yet few die thereof, and when a beast is so, he may not be hastily
driven nor labored til he be swaged, for it is but a substance of wind
within his body. Therefore it is good to drive him softly and suffer him not to
lie, some do strike him as aforesaid so deep till the wind do come forth,
for wind do remain betwixt the body and the great panche, and his bowels.

Wherefore it is evil to put a hungry beast into such pasture after a deawe or
rain, for the said grass is then so sweet and windy withal, that it
fills them full of wind, and when they be so swollen, some beast will stand
still, some will lie down, but if ye can raise him, stir him up and down to
make him doung. For if he do once doung, he is past danger for that time, but
if he lie and will not rise, ye shall strike him in with a sharp knyfe or
bodkin, three ynch deep or more, if that will not serve, thrust him so deep
till ye see the wind come forth. Then some do put a quill into the hole, or
a fether, that the wind may come forth thereat the better, and when ye shall
see him well slaked, ye may then lay a little tar thereon to keep off the
fly, and he shall do well again in a short space.

Against the stinging of hornet, waspe, or breese fly.
IF your ox or Cow be stung with waspe or hornet, ye remedy is, ye shall
temper Ceruse or read lead in water, and then rub the stung place
therewith, it is good also to sprinckle the place where the beast do feed,
with the decoction of bay leaves sod in water. Also how to make that the breese
fly shall not annoy and bite cattle when they labor, which is, ye shall rub
the beast with the decoction before mentioned. Also if any be stung or bit
therewith, ye shall rub and wet that place al over with the froth or spittle of
ye said beast, and that will help. Likewise take the juice of mallows and
rub or annoint the place therewith, and it will help, or to annoint the beast
with sallet oil, which will make that the fly will not touch the beast, where
he is so anointed.

How to kill lyce or tykes on cattle.
IF your oxen or kine, or other cattle be lousy, which comes sometime by
some sickness or surfeit in taking cold after a great wet or rain. Sometimes by
great poverty, whereby so long as they are vexed with lice, so long they will not
prosper. The remedies are, ye shall take the decoction of wild olives mixed with
salt, then rub and chafe the beast all over therewith. Another: take of
quicksiluer killed in oil olive and mixed well together, and therewith annoint.
Another: take the roots of white ellebory, otherwise called neesing powder, and
mix of that powder with oil, and therewith anoint, or boil it with good
vinegar, and so wash therewith. Another: take of bearefoote herb, stamp it
and then strayn it with vinegar, then mix therewith the powder of brimstone,
and wash the beast therewith. Another: take garlic and stamp it, and mix it
with peniriall, and then give it to the beast with ale or beer, and let him be
chafed a while after. Another: take the seed of stauesacre, dried and beaten
into a fine powder, then mix it with oil or fresh grease, and annoint ye
beast therewith. Al these before mentioned are good to kill both lice and tickes,
for so long as your cattle are troubled therewith, they will prosper smally
although ye feed the^ well, yet a good pastor may do much hereunto, but it will
be long ere they recover. And some do sift ashes on their backs and then rain
kills them.

Against any swelling in Ox or Cow by eating of some venomous herbs.
A Beast by chance sometime will have a swelling in all his body, which may come
by eating of some venomous herb or such like, as of the ground thistle called
in Latin Camaelion, or of he^bane, hemlock, or toadstools. If he have eaten
any of these, they will make him so to swel that he will leave his meat. The
remedy is, ye shall chop very small, a good handful of wormwood, and then
stir it with a good quart of ale or beer, and so give it unto the beast, if
once given do small profit, give it him again twice or thrice, and some do
stir him the^ up and down a good while after. Others do keep him in the house
an hour or two after, and so he has done well again. Also yough is evil for
cattle to eat.

Against swelling of Cattle by eating of green corn.
IF your cattle do chance through negligent kepers to break into your corn and
eat thereof when it is nigh ripe (as in the time of harvest,) of barley, ry,
or wheat, it will make the^ mightily to swell by lying and sprouting in their
mawes, which thing will put them in danger of death, if they have not soon
remedy. The help is, some do use to drive them up and down till they see them
assuage thereof, and so they recover, and some do throw a new laid egg shel
and al into the beasts mouth, and breaks it in his mouth, and makes him to
swallow it with ale. Again, some other do take a handful of the tops of
nettles, beaten well and then strayned with wine, or honyed water, and so given.
Also to take of Anniseseeds bruised and given in wine or strong ale, or to take
a handful of ye leaves of Aron or cuckoespit, mixed with salt and vinegar and
given. In likewise take of juniper leaves or green berries, stamp and strain
them with wine, and then give it the beast. All these aforesaid have bin
proved good remedies against such swellings, or take soote, and the hard row
of a red hearing, beat them and give the beast in ale or beer.

To help the garget in the throat of a beast.
IF the garget be in the throat of a beast, it will trouble him sore, which is
commonly taken by some great drought for want of water, and it will cause a
swelling under the ioules or the sides thereof. The remedy is, ye shall cast
him, then cut and flee the skin on both sides, so far as any swelling does
appear. So done, then take of the whitest sifted ashes that ye can, and mix
them with the grounds of stale old piss, and stur them well both together,
then also wash the fleshy sore therewith. Some do boil it first, and then wash
therewith, both the ways are good. Then ye shall close up the skin again,
and anoint it with tar and oil mixed. Also ye may lay thereon a plaster of
nettles bruised and myxt with salt, and so it will heal it. Or a plaster of
pitch likewise.

To help the garget on the tongue.
THe garget in the tongue of the beast, ox or cow, is a certain swelling
under the root of his tongue, which will cause his head and face to swell, and
to froth also at the mouth, he will then forsake his meat in often gulping in
his throat. The remedy is, ye must cast him on some straw for brusing, and then
take forth his tongue, and with the point of a sharp knife, slit along the
middle vain under an inch, right from the root of his tongue, and there will
come forth black blood and water, which comes from the gall: Then ye shall
rub the place with salt and vinegar mixed, and so he will recover and do well
again. Often proved.

To help the blayne of the Tongue.
THe blaine of the tongue which will come to some cattle, is a certain
bladder growing above on the root of his tongue, against the pipe, which
grief at length in swelling will stop his wind, which comes at the first by
some great chasing and heat of the stomach: whereby (as some do judge) it does
still grow and increase by more heat. For commonly it comes in summer and not
in winter: For when the beast is hot and has been chaste, then (if there be
any) it will rise, and swel full of wind and water, so when it is full, and
big withal, it will stop the beasts wind, which ye shall perceive by his
gaping and holding forth his tongue, and foming at his mouth. If then there be
not speedy remedy, he will suddenly fall and dye. The remedy is, to cast him
and take forth his tongue, and slit the bladder or break^ it thereon: then
softly wash it with vinegar, and a little salt. So he shall do well again.

This blaine on the root of the tongue, comes by great chasing, and fast
driving, and for want of water, they take a heat and so rises the blaine:
which cattle will suddenly dye thereof, specially fat cattle, for they will
soonest have the blaine. Some beast will have many under the tongue. Therefore ye
must prick them with an awle, if ye have no other tool, and then chafe them
so with your hand that ye break them all, for the breaking does help as
aforesaid. Then piss thereon if ye have no other thing, and so he shall do
well. Often proved.

Against the garget coming by any push or other stroke.
Whereas the garget breeds in cattle upon some bruise or some push, ye shall
cut a hole where the bruise is, and make it hollow to the bottom thereof. Some
do but cut and raise the skin so far as the bruise goes, and then make and
have ready of beaten garlic, and the tops of the sharp nettles, with some
resty bacon of the outside, beat all well together, then put it into the said
hole: then shall ye bath it twice a day as follows. Take the grounds of ale
or beer, and the soote of a chimney, of white sifted ashes, of black soap if
ye can, mix all these well together, and stur it well over the fire, and make
it warm: Then has and wash the sore place therewith, use this morning and
evening till it be through whole. Well proved. Another way. Some do cut a hole
on the upper side of the bruise or sore, and then make it hollow: Then they take
of goose grease, and black soap, with a little tar, and then boyles them
altogether in a pan, and poures it boiling hot into the hole. Use this once a
day, and this will heal it. Often proved.

Against the garget in the maw.
THe garget in the maw of cattle is an evil thing, which is gotten when they
covet to eat of crabbes or acornes lying under the trees: Which thing
sometimes they will swallow some whole without breaking or chewing, which fruit
lies whole in their maw, and will not digest. But in continuance of time they
will sprout and grow in their mawes (as some say) which thing will cause the
beast to swell, and seem as though some thing did stick and trouble his
gullet and throat. And those beasts that have eaten many thereof, and lies in
their mawes undigested, are like to die thereof, if remedy be not soon found:
the remedy is, ye shall take a good quantity of whole mustard seed, and the^
mix it with wine, or strong ale and give it to the beast. Another. Chop, and
then bruise small a good handful of camamile, and then mix it with wine, and
give it the beast. Another. Take a handful of ginniper crops or beries, cut
them, and then al to bruise them small: Then mix it with wine, and give it.

Another. Take peniryall, rocket, garden mint, of each in like quantity, stamp
them together, then put a pint of wine or ale, and let it stand close covered
all night: on the morrow strain it and then give it the beast. Another. Take a
good handful of the the roots and leaves of Auens, wash them, and then lay
them to soke all a night in wine, or strong ale, then on the morrow stamp
them, and then strain them, and so give it the beast. All these remedies are
found good to digest, and also for the clensing of the maw.

To help an ox or other beast that have lost their Quide.
IF an ox or other beast by chance do leese his quide, as sometimes a beast
by some occasion his quide will fall from him out of his mouth, and then he will
mourn and have no stomach to eat, because the meat which he has already
eaten will not digest. The remedy is: some do use to take part of the quide
out of another beasts mouth, which is of like nature, as if it be a cow that do
want her quide, to take some of the quide of another cow, and give it her to
swallow down, and by that means she will do well again: and so the like of
other beasts. Also again some do take a handful of the herb called Cudwoort,
which they bruise small, and puts a quantity of fat thereunto, and so conueigh
it into the beasts mouth to swallow that have lost his quide, and so he will
amend. Again, some other take a piece of leven, and put that into the beasts
mouth, as before said, and so he will thereby recover again. Also when a beast
has lost his quide clean, ye may give him lome of a wall mixed with piss, and
make him swallow it. Or ye shall take the crum of bread, and mix it with a
little salt, and there withal, to rub and chafe the tongue of the beast: but
if he have so remained long, whereby he is far spent and wasted, then ye
shall take forth his tongue and prick the vain there under with an awle in 2.
or 3. places, and so it will bleed, and thereby he will recover again and do
well. Often proved.

To help calves that have the worms.
Calves will oftimes have worms in their bellies, which will annoy them much,
and at length kill them: and when they are so troubled therewith, ye shall see
some ru^ up and down, not to stand or abide long in a place, and some will lie
down, shake, and quiver, and straight way up again and about, and some will
hold their heads often toward their sides: and those worms in calves do breed of
an il digestiug of their meat. Wherefore ye must then see often unto them, that
they come not into the foresaid danger: but when any calves have the^, to help
him thereof, ye shall take lupin pease half raw, and bruise them, and then make
them into small pieces, and cast of those into his throat, and make him to
swallow them: so many as ye shall seem good. Do this a mornings and it will
kill the^. Another. Take sothernwood, or wormwood, and bruise thereof with dry
figs, and with fetches, and make the like paste thereof, and cast them into his
throat. Another. Take one part of old grease, with 3. parts of Isope, then
mix and beat them al well together, and then give it as the other aforesaid.
Another. Take of the juice of horehound, beaten and stamped with a quantity of
leekblades, and so made in pellets and given. Another. Take of wormeseed, and
bruise it well, and give it in wine. and so give the powder of sauin mixed with
wine or ale: if those worms be in the maw of calves, then ye shall give them a
little of the oil of Sauin, mixed with a little new milk, and that will kill
them being in the mawe of any beast. Also weaning of calves sometimes will
breed worms, when they come to grass soon after they be weaned. Which thing
ye shall perceive when they are troubled therewith, for they will then tremble
and shake, and sometimes ly and sprawle on the ground. The remedy is, ye shall
then take a quantity of the soot of a chimnn, with the like quantity of sower
leven, and a little tar, then stur and mix all these together well, in a
pint of new milk from the come, and so give to each calfe a portion thereof.
Use this for four mornings together. A pint of milk will serve four calves
at a time. Also some do give them of tanners owse to drink, and so thereby
they recover and do well.

Worms in cattle.
IF your cattle be troubled with worms, ye shall stamp a good handful of
wormewoode, then strain it with ale or beer, and give it to the beast with a
horn. Another. Take a handful of box leaves, cut them, and stamp them, and
give them with ale or wine, or take the powder thereof and mix it with new
milk and so give it. Another. Take of the herb calde prickmadam, which
grows on houses or walls) a handful: then beat the leaves and tops thereof,
and so mix it with all or beer, and so give it with a horn. Another. Stamp a
good handful of mugwoort, then strain it with ale, and give it. Or take a
handful of the red nettle, which carries the red flower, called archangell,
stamp and strain thereof into als or beer and then give it. Another. Take a
handful of wood sage, or wild sage, bruise it, then strain it with ale, and so
give it. Another. Take and stamp of garden cresse, and then strain it with
ale and so give. Another. Take and stamp garlic, and mix it with milk or
ale and so give it. Al these are special good against worms in cattle.

Against pain in the feet of cattle, called of some husbands, the foul,
SOmetimes cattle will have a disease betwixt their cleases, called y^ foul:
Which grief sometimes will be in y^ fore feet, and sometimes on y^ hinder feet.
Which grief will commonly swel and make y^ beast to halt. The remedy is; ye
must cast him, and then bind his four feet together. Then take a rope of
hair, or some other hard twisted rope, and draw it up and down betwixt his
clease, till ye make it bleed well. Then take some tar and mix it with
some honey, and fresh grease, and lay to thereof. Then put a buskin, or such
like thing on his foot, to keep it from dirt, and then ye may put him into
some clean pasture till he be whole: or to keep in the house and he will
soon be whole, in two or three days again.

There will breed also (as some husbands say) a like grief and swelling
betwixt the clees of cattle, called the worm, which will grow to a bunch and
so to a ripenes, and at length it will break, and it will be in the midst of
his clees, and and so it will make him halt, so much that he cannot well go.
When that ye shall see it swell so big, ye shall then lance it, and so let
forth the corrupt matter. Then anoint it with tar, and fresh grease mixed,
and then keep his foot clean for two or three days, and it shall do well
again.

To help a beast that pisseth blood.
Some do take a loch fish quick and put it down the beasts throat. If that
help not, ye shall take of bloudwoort herb, of shepherds purse, of
knotgrasse, of each a like quantity, stamp them altogether: then strain them
with a quart of the milk of one colored cow, and put thereto also a little
runnet, made of the said milk, and mix therewith the leven of brown bread,
then strain them all together, and so give it with a horn. Use this morning
and evening eight or nine days, and it will help. Or give him of the powder
of the rinds of pomgarnets, or the powder of the husks of acornes, with red
wine, and it will also help him. Likewise the shell stones (that lie in erable
lands, as a fore said) first burnt, and then beat into fine powder, and put
into the runnet of milk and so sturde well together, and so given the beast.
Use this 3. or 4. days morning and evening and be shall do well.

To help the shewt of blood in cattle.
THe shewt of blood commonly is, to those beasts which have been evil kept,
and then to be put to feed in good pasture, those will so feed that they will
soon wax fat, and so increase of blood, that they will cast their blood at
their mouths. The remedy is, when ye shall see any so, ye shall cut of the tops
of both his ears, and then with a small stick ye shall all to beat them, and
that will cause them bleed the more, and thereupon he will amend. Some lets
blood on the neck, which is very good if he can find well the vain. And
some let blood on the vain under the eye. All these are very good against the
said shewt of blood. Also some do take of the herb turmentil, stamped and
straind with ale or beer, and so given, which have been proved also very good
against the same.

The warnell worms in cattle.
SOme cattle will have certain worms sticking within their skin on their
backs, called (of some husbandmen) warnell worms: which worms comes commonly
unto beasts which are poor and lean by great poverty, which worms will stick
as on their backs along on both sides thereof, a foot deep or more, which are
evil for the sale of the skin if it be then taken. Also ye shall perceive them
within y^ skin of the beast, like small knots or knobs, and they will show and
appear over the skin like black spots. The remedy is: some do pick them forth
with the point of an awle, yet some husbands do say: as the beast does grow in
fatnes, those warnell worms will wear away, and his skin will be again as
sound as any others.

Also some cattle will have a disease run in diverse parts of their bodies and
legs, called (of some husbands) y^ waribreede. The remedy is this, ye must
cast him and bind his four feet together, and with a hoate iron (if the
waribrede be long,) sear them off hard by the body, but if it be but
beginning, and is yet but flat and low, then ye shall but lay the hoate iron
thereon: and sear it but to the skin, then annoint it with tar and fresh
grease mixed, and so it will heal for ever.

Against the gout in Cattle.
Certain cattle will have (as some husbands say) a grief in their feet
sometimes, which they call the gout, and commonly it will be on their hinder
feet, which thing will cause the beast to go very stiff behind. For which
grief I could never find any person that could help it, but the best is, for
to bathe his feet in cold water, and then to put him into good pasture and
make him fat and so sell him.

Against looseness of teeth in Cattle.
YE shall understand when the teeth of any beast is loose, so long he cannot
well eat his meat, which sometimes comes through the feeble and weakness of
the beast, and sometime by a cold reume, gotten by lying in some cold and wet
place, or by eating of much watery grass. The remedy is, ye shall cast him, and
draw blood on his gummes: and so he will amend, some do rub and anoint his
gums: (after his blood letting,) with strong sack, and so he will amend. Also
some do slitte his tail under, nigh his rumpe, and byndes thereto a little
bruised garlic, and so he will recover and do well again.

Against mylting of a beast.
THe mylting of Ox, Cow, or other beast is called of husbandmen, when he will
sodeyne lie down if ye shall stay never so little, being at plough or cart.
Which grief is gotten by some blow or sore strype (with good or such like)
on the beasts side: which makes him to faint and fall down. When any shall so
lie down ye shall not raise him up sudden again, but ye shall then turn him,
and lay him on the other side, and so let him rest a while, and so he will
recover again: then if ye can, bruise of the bark of an Ash, and strain it
with ale, and so give him to drink, and he shall do well.

To help any beast that cannot piss.
THey use to give unto an Ox that cannot piss, of warm water mixed with bra^,
which is good to make him piss: also take and stamp of sowthistle, and then
heat it with ale or beer, and so give it to y^ beast. Another: take and bruise
a ha^dful of anniseedes, and then mix it with ale or beer and give it.
Another: take and bruise of Carduus benedictus, the^ strain it with white wine,
and so give it to the beast. Any one of these aforesaid, is good to be given
a beast, when he cannot piss, and to provoke him there unto.

Against the flowing of the gall in cattle.
THe flowing of the gall in Ox or other beast, the chief occasion thereof,
some husbands cannot well tell, except it should be the abundance of choler,
increasing by great travel in hot times, and so there by filling the gall with
choler, and thereupon it flows al over the body, and so increases y^ yelows or
iaundise. The remedies are, some takes of gal woort herb, which is bitter, and
then stamps a handful thereof, and so strains it with a quart of ale, and so
gives it to the beast 2. or 3. mornings. Another: ye may also give the juice of
wormwood or southernwood stamped and straind with ale, and so given as y^ other.
Another: take y^ inner green bark of elder a handful, and soke it al one night
in beer or ale in a vessel, close covered: then strain it in y^ morning, and
so give it to the beast. Another: some do give the juice of mugwoort mixed with
honied water, with a little saffron, and so given. All these aforesaid are
very good against the flowing of the gall, and also for the iaundice, Another
for the same: take the yelke of an egg, and mix it with some hard soot,
powder of Peper, and honey, and put the egg shel and al down his throat, Quod
Willis,
then give him a little chamberlye, and he shall dowel.

To help a beast that is gored.
IF any beast chance to be stricken and gored with some of his fellows, for
fear of some gargel come thereof, or some impostume to grow and breed
thereof. The remedy, ye shall take of ashes finely sifted, and mix them with
the grounds of ale or beer, and make it thick like a batter, and so lay it
thereon, use this and it will heal it. Another: some do take unto the said
grounds or dregs of ale, of unquenched lime finely beaten, and so mixed well
together, and so lay it theretoo. Another: some puts in steed of ashes, red earth, or oaker, mixed like wise together as aforesaid, and so lays it too
plaisterwise. Another: likewise a plaster of pitch, is also good to be laid
thereon. And all the other aforesaid are very good to heal a beast that is
gorde or hurt.

Against the turning disease in cattle.
THere is a certain disease comes to some cattle, called (of husband me^) y^
turning disease. Which disease in eating their meat will cause the^ to turn
about and let their feeding sore and also those cattle which are troubled with
this disease, are always in danger of falling into pits and ditches and such
like. The cause is, there lies a bledder under the skul in the forehead of the
beast, which is between the brain and the brayn pan, which bladder must be
taken forth, or he will never amend, but in y^ end he will die thereof. The
remedy is, ye must cast him and bind his 4. feet together, and there ye shall
feel al over softly with your thumb thrusting thereon, and whereas ye find
the softest place, a little there above ye shall cut the skin overthwart,
four inches, and so likewise beneath the soft place. Then also in the mids
ye shall cut the skin downward between the two overthwart cuts, and flea those
skins on both sides, then turn them up, and pynne them with pyns. Then take a
sharp knife and cut the brain pan there under two inches broad, and
three inches long: but beware your knife go no deeper then the thickness of
the brain pan for pearcing the brain, (For if ye do so the beast will dye,)
Then ye shall take away that cut boane, and ye shall see a bledder there under
two inches or more long full of water. Which bledder ye shall softly take clean
away, and see that ye hurt not his brain. So done, then ye shall lay down
again the cut skin as before, and sow them fast together: then bind a lynnen
cloth three or four fold, dipped in fresh grease and tar, and laid thereon,
which will keep it from wind and cold for the space of ten or twelve days,
which skin will so grow again, and he shall do well. And hereupon I have
seen (says mine Author) many recover and do well. But for the more surety
(when a beast is troubled with this disease being flat, or having any
reasonable flesh on him) is to kyl him, and so there is but small loss. The
like disease ye shall have in young sheep, which is spoken of in his place.

Things good for sinews and to knit bones.
When as there shall chance any bones of your cattle to be broken, ye shall
take of the herb called in Latin Aron, in English, Cuckospit, stamp thereof
with barley meal and a little honey, and so playsterwise lay it to. Another:
take of the herb called in Latin symphitum, in English cumphory, bruise of
the leaves and root, with a little honey, and lay it to playsterwise. Another:
take of yarrow and stamp it with swines grease, and playsterwise lay it to,
which will knyt not bones only, but sinews also. Another: take the tender
buddes of the Ash tree, stamp them with shell snailes or black snayles, and
so lay it too, or take the powder made of the bark of an Ash tree, mingle and
beat it with the leaves of cumphory, and then lay it too. Another, sees the
bark of an Elm tree, in running water, then bruise it and lay it to. All
these aforesaid are good to comfort sinews, and for the knitting of bones.

To breed calves and to gelde them
IF ye will breed calves to make young bulls, take no calf that is calued
within the prime, which is counted the five days after the change, for those
will not prove well, as some husbands say. Nor likewise also any calfe (or
other) then calued, is not good for to keep, but to eat or sell, and among a
hundred calves, two shall be sufficient for to make bulls: as for all the rest; it
shall be best to geld them soon after they are calued, or at 2. years of age,
and then to lay upon the sores y^ ashes of vine twigges, burnt and mixed with
litarge. And on the 3. day after, ye may melt of tar, and mingle of the said
ashes therewith, and anoint therewith for fear of swelling. Also the manner
of gelding of Calves, Mago does counsel and say, y^ calves would be gelded when
they are are young and tender, not with any iron? But with a cloven hazel
stick and so pressed together, and then race the codde by little and little
til it be consumed. This he takes to be the bestway of gelding, when they are
young and tender, for this kind of way is done with owten wound.

For when a calfe is somewhat big, he would better tarry unto two years, then
to geld him at one year, which to geld them is best in Autumn, when the moon
is in decreasing, and the sign from that place, ye shall then cast him and
traues his feet together, and before ye touch him with iron, ye must take up
his stones, then take two straight lathes like rulers of wood, made like a
pair of barnicles or tongues. Then take up the stones with the nerfes and
stringes that the stones do hang by, then close your tongs under betwixt his
body and his stones, close them hard together (leaving the stones on the
outside thereof,) some gelders make them of iron for the more strength. Then
slit the purse first of one codde, and put forth the stone thereat, and cut
him off within hard by the said tongs and close by the nerfs, and so likewise
take forth the other stone, and then some do sear it for bleeding too much,
and annoyntes it with fresh grease and lets him go, but see to cut them in
such sort, that ye leave the ends of the stringes joining to the said
nerfes: for thereby he shall not loose much of his blood, nor shall not be
all feminate, nor yet very stout of his members, in leaving still the form of
the male, although the force of engendering be taken away, the which Horse gelt
or Bull.
he will not suddenly loose by and by after he is gelt, for when a horse or bull
is gelt, they will (if ye will suffer them,) cover incontinent, and certainly
enge^der, which ye shall not suffer none so to do, for fear least they die of
the bloody flux, but after ye have so dressed him, ye shall anoint him with
fresh grease. Some do annoint after he is cut, with the ashes of the tender
vine branches, mixed with the skin of silver, the^ ye shall give them no
drink for the space of three or four days, but to eat of green herbs, and
give him but little thereof, for ye shall nourishe him as though he were
sick, in giving him the croppes of trees and green herbs. The least danger
in gelding an old beast, is a Boar, all other beasts are more, dangerous
being gelded when they are old.

Some do use a kind of gelding young calves or fools (as I have heard) under
nine days, or as soon as the stones descended A kind of gelding.
down into the codde, they will by and by take him and knitte softly the purse
of the codde betwixt the stones and his body with a shoemakers thread, and as
the foale does grow and increase, the stones will consume and wear away,
which kind of gelding (as I have learned) they do use in the North parts.

Aristotle says, it is ieopardy in gelding al kind of cattle being old,
except ^ara be: and likewise it is best gelding in the increase of the moon,
for it will make them grow fair, large, and bigger than those which are
gelded in the wayne of the moon, so that ye gelde or spay in a good sign.
Also in cutting or letting blood, these signs are counted most dangerous, if
the Moon have power over them. As Taurus, Leo, Gemini, Virgo, and the latter
part of Libra, and Scorpio, and also the two signs governed under Saturn, as
Capricorn and Aquarius. The rest are all good, as Aries, Cancer, Sagittarius
and Pisces, so that the Moon be not in them.

Also ye shall note, that if the sign be coming within a day of the cut
place, it shall not then be so good to cut with out a more danger, as when
the sign is once past the place. For a green wound being newly cut, the
sign coming nigh unto it, will cause it to bleed afreshe, being but a
little moved, or else to grow and breed to some impostumation of blood or
other humors, which has been often seen among cattle, whereby they have died
thereof, but to gelde your calves when they are but young is counted best. As
when they are of six or eight weeks old, for else (as some husbands say)
they will not commonly prove so fair nor so good to weane. If any calfe do
swel after he is new glded, some do use to burn one of his stones to powder,
and so beat it small, and cast it thereon, and some do mix it with neates
foot oil, and so annoints the sore place therewith.

The charge to the keeper and governor of cattle.
THe keeper and governor of cattle must always be diligent to foresee that
his cattle have meat in due season, and that his stalles be cleanely kept, and
that no poultrie, hens, or duckes, or hogs do use at any time the said
stalles. For the feathers of poultrie is unwholesome for cattle, and also their
doung breed the murraine in cattle as some do judge, and the doung also of
hogs does them no good, and likewise the lice of hogs will make them
unquiet and scabby. Also the keeper ought to rub them daily that labor and
to kembe them with a card, which will make them the lustier, and to wash
their feet with cold water when they labor not, will do well, Ye shall
also know the force and age of an ox in visiting his mouth, for he will cast
his two foremost teeth within ten months of his first year, and within six
weeks after that, he will cast the two next teeth unto them, and about the
end of three years, he will change and cast them all. And when they are
grown all full up again, they will then be all equal, white and long. But
when the Ox begins to wax old, they will return and wax crooked and
black and likewise unequal. Also for Oxen to labor, the black The laboring
Ox.
Ox and the red ox are the best, and the brown or greeseled Ox are next,
the white Ox is worst of al colors. An Ox will serve well to labor til he be
of ten years, not after so good, for he will then wax dull, weak and feeble.
Wherefore then it were best to feed him and so to sell him: an ox will live
well 15, or 16. years. Also wild oxen are better to bear a burden than to
labor, for they are never so free nor so strong to draw and labor, as the
tame Oxen are. Likewise it is not good to labor with any bull among your oxen,
Bull te labor.
for he will be stubborn and sullen, and loves to be a master over the rest,
whereby he will but trouble them. Therefore it shall be always best to keep the
bulls lusty and fat, to cover always your kine, so shall ye still have fair
calves and large withal: one good and lusty bull is sufficient for threescore
kine.

Likewise kine to be put to ye bull, ye best and chiefest times is in May, June,
and July, then ye kine should be put to ye bull before Kine put to the bull.
they have bin in any good pasture: for some husbands says: a lean cow will
take, and sooner be with calfe then a fat cow. If a cow with make desire the
bull, if she be milked incontinent before, she will not then take nor desire
the bull, if then she have no bull, and leese her make, she will desire the bull
about a month after again, thus some husbands have proved, and the bull the
contrary. For he must be fat and lusty when he shall cover the kine, or else
those calves will be weak. A cow will live well 15. years, but after she will
wax feeble and wear. Also ye shall not let a cow take the bull before she be
three year old. For when young kine go to the bull, they bring forth commonly
small and weak calves: therefore some husbands will never weane the first
calfe of a cow. And also ye shall not put your kine unto the bull before the
third or fourth day of June, to the end that she may (by the virtue in eating
of herbs and grass) be the more hot and lusty as to take the bull when she
shall be put unto him. Wherefore some husbands (to make a cow take the bull the
sooner) do give her of the herb called cowmake, which grows like a white
gilloflower among corn. Then to keep her a little hungry, and to give her
thereof, two hours before she shall take the bull, and that will put her in
more heat, and ye shall then rub her natural cundit with nettles, which is also
good, if she will refuse the bull. Some husbands do counsel not to suffer your
kine to be conered under four years, and likewise not after twelve years,
because the one is too young, and the other is too old.

And also they say, the best time to put the bull with the kine is, all the
month of July. For then the kine will bring their calves in ver, in the
beginning and spring of herbs and grass: ye need not constrain her then to
take the bull, for the abundance of herbs will provoke and put her in heat,
so that ye shall not then constrain her. A cow will go with calfe ten
months. If a cow refuse, or the bull will not cover her, ye shall make them
have appetite, as it is spoken of among the horses and mares, and as it is
before rehearsed: and then ye shall diminish her pasture, to the end that the
abundance of grass do not make her barren, for a cow being fat, will smally
desire the bull, and when she has taken, ye may judge by refusing the bull,
and also to know whether she shall have a cow calfe or bull calfe, ye shall
understand, if the bull descend from her on the right side of her, more then
the least, is to judge a bull calfe: and likewise the contrary if he descend
on the least side. Or if the com in descending and lying down on the right
side, is to judge she has a bull calfe. And if she lie down on the left
side, is to judge a cow calfe. And when ye shall judge she has taken by
refusing the bull, which thing does not always happen true, for although she
have taken, yet many kine be not satisfied, for some brute beasts will have a
voluptuous desire above nature, as well as other creatures.

Also to nourish your kine and calves, in countries where there is great store
of pasture, they may nourish their calves all the year. But where there is
small store of pasture, it will scant suffice them from two year to two year:
And ye may nourish your calves of their dammes for one years space. But that
year those kine must not be charged with any kind of labor. Also when a cow
has calued, some husbands will after the calfe has sucked iii. weeks, take
away a tet, and milk it clean: the next week another tette, and so the
third. Thus they will have milk plenty, and yet many kine will keep milk
enough to serve for her calfe. If a cow pass x. years, she is not then so
good to bring calves as before. If a young cow calue before three years, ye
shall take away the calf, and milk her first three days together, because she
shall not then be charged with to much milk. Then milk her no more but let the
calfe have all the rest: If ye will dry up her milk, ye shall anoint her vdderne
all over with tar. Kine desire not so much to drink of the river water as of
ponde water, because the water of the river is more colder then the ponde
water: Which river water being so cold, will chyll her within, and make her in
danger to cast her calfe, if God work not the contrary. Notwithstanding among
all great cattle, the cow will lightly abide the most coldest air. Wherefore
they commonly let them lie without the doors all the winter in most places and
countries.

The government of cattle, and the ordering of kine with their calves.
STephanus says, to order cattle, and to nourish kine orderly and well, the
husband man must see himself, or else have some trusty and skilful man, to
look and often resort unto his cattle, as oxen or kine in the stall, or
without, and to feed or see that they have sufficient meat and water daily at
convenient times, morning and evening, and to see when any beast is sickly to
help him with medicine, and to make their stawles for cattle to lie in, to
set it east and west, with windows and doors toward the south, and close
toward the north, for that is very sharp and cold in winter for cattle: And
to strew of beaten salt all over on the boordes or stones under them, because
(they say) it is a manifest thing to keep their bodies in health: And they do
use to straw some sand or gravel, under their cattle, on the plankes for
sliding whereby they may stand the better, without sliding, and likewise to
see them have litter at euenings after their labor.

And when ye shall put them forth in the spring with your kine, ye shall
separate the young sucking calves as soon as they have sucked their dammes, ye
shall put them into some several house or other place, where they shall
remain all the day, and when ye will have them suck, ye shall let them
forth to their dammes, and let them suck but evening and morning, and so shut
them up again in the house, for by this order the calves shall wax more fayrer
and also sooner fat, then roming still with their dammes. Also when a cow has
calued, if she be not then well kept (although she be a good nourse) she shall
not be able to nourish well her calfe: therefore they do use to give kine with
calfe, of ye green herb called melilot, they stamp it with some honey, and lay
it al a night to soke in milk, and so give it her like a medicine: for that is
counted marvelous good for a cow with calfe or other beast. Likewise again,
they do stamp pease with wine, and so gives it them: and let the farmers wife,
as soon as your calves be take up, to put the milk apart, that butter and
cheese may be made thereof without any mast, and see to always that your
cheese be well and close gathered, in pressing forth clean all the whay (for
whay remaining in the curdes, will make the cheese wax sower, and air will
make it full of holes.) And likewise that your pots be well scalded and clean
washed, with other your vessels thereunto belonging, or else vessels with cheese
fats and such, will make your cheese wax sower also. And likewise that your
women servants touch no butter nor cheese having their months terms on them,
for that is very unwholesome.

Moreover when as ye shall see a laboring ox that laboreth daily, bate no
part of his flesh, but remains still fat and in good lyking, which is no good
sign: for he is full of phlegm.

Therefore ye shall every viij. day, open his mouth and wash it with his own
piss, and thereby ye shall draw forth much phlegm thereat, which otherwise he
would still swallow down. Which phlegm oftimes will molest and grieve him to
eat his meat: for by the abundance of phlegm does cause him to have the
catar of reume, which ye shall perceius when he is troubled therewith, by
watering of his eyne, for they will seem very watery: and when they drop water,
he will then hang down his ears. Then ye shall take him and wash his mouth
with time bruised in white wine, and thereupon rub his mouth with garlic, and
fine salt mixed together: so done, then wash his mouth again with wine as
before.

Some do cleanse the said phlegm with bay leaves beaten with the bark of
pomgarnets, and so mixed with wine and wash therewith. And other some do squirt
wine mixed with mirre, into their nostrels: but for the reume or catarre, if his
eyes do inflame, ye shall but let him blood on the vain under his tongue, and
so ye shall remedy it.

To help a cow of the whetherd.
TO help a cow that is whetherd, that is, when she has newly calued and has
not cast her cleaning, she will dye of it shortly after. To make her void and
cast the same, ye shall take a good quantity of the juice of mallows, and mix
it with ale or wine and give it, which is good to repulse the latter birth
after the cow have calued. Another. Take mugwoort, stamp and strain it with
ale and so give it, which will both cleanse the latter birth, and also bring
forth the dead calfe within her. Another. Take of Aristolochia, do bruise and
mix it with myrre and pepper, and then give it with white wine or strong ale,
which does cast forth the latter burden. Another. Stamp a good handful of
penirial, and strain it with ale and so give it, which will put forth the
latter burden. Another. Bruise a good handful of betonie leaves, strain it
with honied water and then given: which does drive forth the second birth. Also
take of syler montaine, stamp it and then strain it with wine and so give it:
which is good to cleanse and drive forth the latter burden. Also they do use to
give when a cow is whetherd, of smoaked barley, which barley is but singed in the
straw and so given, and she will eat thereof: any one of these before said, is
good against the said disease, if ye shall see knots in the mouth then judge
she has not cleand of her birth: then must ye take them from her, or she will
dye.

To help a beast pricked with a thorn.
YE shall take a bettle fly, called of some a shumbarbe, which crepeth commenly on
horse dung, or other dung, slit his belly but kill him not, and lay to the cut
place, where ye thorn went in. If any thing will help this will do it, but
some what painful a while. Another. Take the black snaile that bears no
shel, bruise it and lay it to. Another. Shave ye roots of red roses, and put
thereto of black soap, and so lay it to. Another. Take agrimony, rue,
marigoldes, of each a like quantity, stamp them all together mixed with a little
salt, and so lay it to. Another. Take of the root of barbery tree, bruise it and
lay it to, which will draw forth either thorn or iron out of the bone.

How to visit and ouersee your cattle from time to time.
YE must often ouersee and visit your troops of cattle, a -- against any
infirmity, that may daily hap, and to choose and take forth the old cattle
from the young, so must ye likewise take your kine which are barren from the
other, because they will bear no more, and yet occupy the place of the
bearing kine. Which barren kine ye may rather fat them, or occupy them to the
plough, for they may as well endure labor and travail, as the young ox,
because being barre^ they are as light. They delight to be in sunnie places in
winter ny^ sea, and in summer to be in thick shadie woods, and they love more
the pasture on mountains, then on the plains, and also their hoofes will
better endure in forests and gras woods or in places of clay or marris
grounds, then in hard and stony places.

Things good to purge cattle.
THe powder of ix. or xv. leaves of laurel, or the green leaves thereof
beaten, and straind with a pint of honied water, mixed with a little salt, then
straind and given to the beast in the morning: this will purge somewhat strong.

Also the leaves of the elder, bruised and sod in water, then straind and so
given, does purge both choler and phlegm downward: And also it does cleanse
water out of the stomach. Also the beries of elder stamped and straind with ale
or beer does ye like. Or the inner rind which is green, taken and stamped with
wine, and so let it stand cold all a night, and then strain it in the morning
and give it warm. Or likewise the low elder, called danewoort, which will do the
like, and in all points it will purge both choler and phlegm, as well as the
other elder: and (as some do judge) it is good to be given cattle in the time
of plague or morren among beasts.

Likewise ye may take of spurge which gives like milk, take a good handful
thereof, stamp it, and then strain it, with a pint or more of water and
vinegar in like portion, and so give it: this will purge both choler and
phlegm. Also xx. or xxx. of the seeds thereof sed in honied water mixed with a
little salt, then bruise them, and so give it, which does purge more stronger.

Another. Ye may take a good handful of Centory, of the tops, leaves and
flowers, boil it in a quart of ale or beer, til a quarter be wasted, then
strain it and give it warm: this ye may minister at al times (if the sign do
serve) and it will gently purge both choler and phlegm, but chiefly choler,
and keep him in the house (if it be cold) vi. hours after,

Another. Ye shall take a handful of the roots of polypodium (which is the
fern that grows on the oak.) choppe it small, and then bruise it, and mix it
with a quart of honied water, and so give it warm. In summer ye may take
likewise a good handful of the branches, and use it as the other before said:
this does purge both choler and phlegm, but chiefelye phlegm. Another. Ye shall
take a good handful of the crops of broom being green, then bruise it, and put
unto it a pint or more of honied water, or strong ale, and let it rest so al
night, then on the morrow strain it and give it warm. If ye will make it more
stronger, ye may put into it, two drams of the seed made into powder, and then
it will work more stronger.

Another. Take of Seen of Alexandria, with a peniworth of anniseseedes, then
boil them in a quart or more of ale, till a quarter thereof be wasted, then
strain it, and so give it warm, this does purge very ge^tly. Also the seen
romana, y^ is here growing in diverse gardens (as at Lambeth house) take iii.
drams of the seed made into powder, with the powder of anniseseede, and the^ mixed
with a pint of strong ale, and so given warm, and this will purge more
stronger. Another. Take vi. drams of the root of flourdeluce made into powder,
and mix it with a pint or more of honied water, and so give it warm. The
more proportion ye give, of al these aforesaid, the stronger they will be to
work. Wherefore ye must use them with discretion, and as ye shall see cause,
for ye may as well give too much as to little: and as y^ best is, when ye do
give them any drink to purge, to keep them in winter warm after, a day and a
night and so they shall do well, God willing. The best signs to give them
drink is, Scorpio, and pisces.

To make a stawle or frame to give your cattle drinks when ye shall see any
cause.
COlumella says, it shall be very necessary of good husbands to make a staule
or frame, to give your beasts drink in when ye shall see need: Which ye shall
make like unto those that the ferrours or smithes do use for shooing of their
ungracious horses. Which fashion ye shall make thus, ye shall first pitch your
4. corner posts fast in the ground, and then planke it in the bottom: then
shall ye planke the sides with four strong bars of a side, well and fast
made to the four corner posts, which posts must be at least vii. foot hye,
then cross those bars on the out sides with iii. cross bars, and let the
entrance be four foot wide, so that the beast may easily enter in, and there
set with vi. bar res behind. So when the beast is in, he cannot retire nor
return on neither side thereof, nor yet stir backward nor forward. Also ye
must have two bars before, and a strong cross bar thereon, and as they tie
their horses with their halters, so must ye tie up their horns, that ye may
give them drink more easier: thus being tied his head fast unto the bar
within, his feet shall not then strain without the stall but rest within on
the plankes: And to order him that he shall not ascend with his body, ye
must bind his body down to the bars, to make that ye shall not stir no
way to hurt him, but shall be at commandment to receive the medicine, and
this order ye may use for all your great cattle, and thereby to keep them in
health from time to time.

How to fat an Ox.
STephanus says, ye may fat an ox soon with fetches, pease, boiled barley, or
beans husked and bruised, and ye may also fat an ox well with hay, but not to
give him as ye give unto a horse, if ye give him in summer of the tender
branches of trees, it will refresh him, if ye give an ox only akornes, it
will make him scabbie, except the akornes be dried and mixed with branne, or
such like. Also an Ox that ye intend to make fat, and so to bargain and sell,
ye may labor him in fair times once or twice a week in gentle grounds, and
to labor him now and then a little for exercise; it will make him have a better
stomach to his meat, and let him eat nothing but barley, and hay, and
sometimes a little herbs or vine branches, or other tender branches, that he
loves, so shall he be in good order. Also to fat an ox ye shall give him
ground beans, dried barley, or Elm leaves, but specially going in the son
does make him like well, and to wash him twice or thrice a week with warm
water. Also colewoortes to boil with branne, does make them have soluble
bellies, and it does nourish as much as does barley. Likewise chafe mixed with
ground beans, is good sometimes, your oxen are less subject to diseases the^
your horse: yet to preserve and keep them in health, our elders did use to
purge them every quarter three days together, one with lupin pease, another
with the grain of Cipres, beaten in like quantity, steeped al one night
before, in a pint or a pint and a half of water and so given. Others do give
other things according to the use of the country.

Again, if any Ox do wax weak and feeble in labor, they do use to give
him once a month, of fetches beaten and steeped in water, and mixed with beaten
branne, and to keep an ox from being weary, they do use now and then to rub
his horns with turpentine, mixed with oil olive. But see that ye touch no
other part of his head, but his horns, for if ye so do, it will at length
hurt his sight. Also there will be sometimes arising come over the heart of an
Ox. showing thereby as though he would vomit, to help the same, ye shall
rub and chafe his mouzell and mouth with bruised garlic, or else with beaten
leekes, and then force him to swallow it down.

Against the Collicke in cattle
YE shall give chiefly for the same unto your ox of bruised garlic with
wine, or bruised leekes mixed with a pint of wine, and also against the gurling
or rumbling in the belly, and noise of his guts, which ye shall understand
when he complains thereof, ye shall often see him lie down, and suddenly to
rise up again, because ye cannot for pain rest long in a place, to help the
same, some do use to put unto his drink the oil of nuttes. Others do give
him of onions boiled in sweet wine, and some do give of mirre, with the powder
of baies steeped in wine, and also they do prick his skin all about the
clees of his feet, or to prick under his tail, so long till it begin to
bleed, and so he shall amend.

Times best to stop laxes.
THe chiefest times to stop flux or laxe is, when the moon or sign is in
Taurus, Virgo or Capricorn, the^ to give your beast drinks to stop it shall
do best, but to purge by drinks as before is mentioned, y^ is, when the sign
is chiefly in Scorpio and Pisces. Also it is not good to purge or let blood
(without great need) in ye change of the moon, neither when there is any evil
aspect of one planet unto another, nor in the signs of Capricorn and
Aquarius, for they are ye two houses of Saturn, neither when the moon is
afflicted with Saturn and Mars. Thus if al these rules aforesaid be observed
and kept, things will work the better, and your cattle thereby the better be
presarued.

The form and quality of a Bull.
For So Much as I have somewhat spoken before of Oxen, I will here take
opportunity to speak somewhat of the Bull and of his form, which is, those
Bulls which ought to be praised, they ought to have long and great members, and
also to be gentle and of a mean age, the black and the red Bulls are the
best. The rest ye must consider to have all things in him as in the ox, for
there is no difference betwixt a good Bull and a good Ox, save that the Bull
ought to have a quicker look, and his horns to be more shorter, likewise his
neck more fleshy, insomuch as it is the greatest part of his body and the
strongest to the proportion of the rest, his belly long, slender and straight,
whereby he may the more easier cover the kine, thus much for the Bull and his
proportion.

The form and quality of a fair Cow.
COlumella says, a Cow of estimation ought to be large and long bodyed, and
also to be gentle, having a large and deep belly, a broad forehead, and
black open eyne, with fair and black pullished horns: her ears rough and
hayrie, her jaws well shut, the fan of her tail great, the claws and
horns of her feet small, her legs short and thick, her breast deep, all the
rest like unto the male, and specially to be young: for when a Cow shall
pass ten years, she may not so well bear calves.

Also Stephanus says, the farmer having good understanding, shall always
esteem the Cow of a mean stature, and being but four or five years old, the
brown color mirte with white spots is good, with the red and the black,
also to have a large deep belly, broad for head, black eyne and great, clean
horns and black, her ears rough, her jaws narrow set, her mouzell great,
her hair somewhat crumpled, her hoofes little and smally cloue^, her legs
short, her thighs thick and round, her vdderne large and deep, having but
four tettes, her neck long and thick, her breast large and deep hanging, her
feet broad and thick. These are the chiefest points belonging to a fair
cow.

How to keep a Cow that is great bellied with calfe.
STephanus since, ye must keep your kine with calfe from dangers, from the
tenth month, for then she waxes great bellied, and also in winter if she be
then with calfe, ye shall nourish her in the stal from the eight month, because
of extreme cold, and then to give her of good meat, it shall do well. But in
Summer ye shall give her the branches of tender bruise of trees, such as ye
can get, and use her not after two months to fast, but let her feed on
mornings in the fields, and so to milk her, and give her also in the evening
fresh forage when she comes to the house. And likewise in the morning before
she goes to the field, and when she have calued, ye shall keep back the
calfe, when she goes to field, and so use her still as ye shall see cause. And
when to gelde as aforee is mentioned. Some do use to geld To gelde calves.
when the calves are young, and some lets them run a year or more before they
geld, which is counted more dangerous. Therefore, as most do use, to geld under
the damme is best: then after their gelding, ye must keep them well in good
pastures, that they may be the more readier and stronger to labor at 2.
years. They do use also to labor their barren Kine to labor.
kyne after nine years, when as they bring no more calves. Therefore they are
put unto the use of drawing in the yoke as the oxen are. Also if calves be not
gelded Gelt of calves
within one year, they will not be great, if there grow an impostume after
gelding, burn his stones to ashes, and cast that powder thereon, and it will
help.

How to buy lean kine or cattle.
FItz harbart says, and if a man by lean kine or oxen to feed, ye must see
they be young, for the younger they be the sooner they will feed, and look
well that their hair stare not, but that they do use to lick themselves, and
see also they be whole mouthed in wanting none of their teeth. For although
he have the gout, and broken both of tail and pizell, yet will he feed, but
an Ox having the gout will not be driven far, ye shall choose him with a
broad ribbe, and a thick hide, and not to be loose skinned, nor yet stick
hard to the ribs or sides. For then he will not feed so well. Also those
husbands that mean to thrine, must have both Kine and Oxen, Horse, mares, and
young cattle, and to rear every year some calves and foales, or else he
shall be constrained to buy. If ye buy Oxen for the plough, see they be young
and not gowtie, nor yet broken hair of tail nor pizell. Again if ye buy
kine to the payle, ye must see they be young and (having such properties as
before is mentioned.) Also gentle to milk and likewise to nourishe up their
calves.

How to buy fat or lean cattle.
ALso in buying other oxen or kine to fat, ye shall first handle them and
see if they be soft on the cropp^ behind the shoulder, and also upon the
hindermost ryb, and upon the huckle bone, and on the nathe by his tail, and
to see likewise if your Ox have a great codde, and a Cow, to have a big
nauill, for that is a good sign she should be well tallowed, ye must take
heed also where ye buy any lean cattle or fat, and of whom and where
they were bredde: for if ye buy from a better ground then ye have your self,
those cattle will not so well like with you, ye shall also look if there be
no manner of sickness among those cattle in the quarter or parish where ye
intend to buy, For if there be other murre^ or long saugh, or other infectiue
disease, it is great ieopardie buying any beast coming from thence. For one
beast will soon take sickness of another, which sickness will perhaps continue
ten or twelve years or more, ere it will appear on him. If any beast chance
to be sick, ye shall avoid him soon from the rest of his company. These and
such like rules, the buyer ought always to have respect, and take good heed
thereof.

Against the murren or plague among Cattle.
AS for the murren or plague among cattle, there be me^ enough (says he)
that can help the same, being taken betimes. Which disease comes of an
infection of blood, and it appears commonly first in the head, for then his
head will swell, and his eyne wax great, and they will run of water. And when
he do once froth at the mouth, he is then past remedy, but shortly after he
will dye, and yet when they are thus sick they will eat. The remedies are,
ye shall flea the beast that is so dead, and bury him in a deep pit, and
cover him well with earth, that no dogs can come to the carrion. For so many
beasts as do smell thereof, are like to be infected with the same disease, and
therewith ye shall have the skin straight to the tanner, carry it not home
for fear of more peril may fall thereof, there is a common use and done of a
great charity, which is, they will put the beast skin on a pole, and then
set it in a hedge fast bound to a stake by the high way side, that every
man ryding by, may perceive thereby where the sickness of cattle is, and
also in what towneshippe, and they hold an opinion it will thereby cease the
rather, which I do scarcely believe. But a beast having the murren, being
flead, it will appear between the flesh and the skin, for it will be as
though it were full of froth bubbles like bliffers, some blackish, some blewe,
and some yellow, which will commonly be in a fat B(...), an ynch^ thick and
more deep in the flesh.

There have been some Beasts that have dyed of the murren (as I have been
credibly told) he that fleade him died soon after, and he that went with it
to the tanner, and the horse that carried it, and the tanner that tanned it,
all these died soon therevppon, which was thought it was by the infection of
the stinking skin, but being true, it was a marvelous infection. Wherefore
it is thought good of some to bury them whole, for fear of a further
inconvenience, this is thought good of some to take a small cord and bind it
hard about his neck, then on the far side, ye shall feel a great vain,
and with a launcet. ye shall strike thereon and let him blood, a pint or
more, and so likewise on the other side of his neck. Then take away the cord,
and it will sudden stanche, but if the sign be there, he is in more danger
of bleeding still. If he so do, ye shall clappe to bruised nettles and salt,
or wild tansie bruised and laid too, and some therefore do give them
drinks. Thus must ye serve al your cattle that are infected or being
together in one pasture, so doing, ye shall avoid the greater danger in this
disease. For the murren is taken by venoumed grass, by company, and poisoned
water, and by hunger.

The rearing of Calves for increase.
IT shall be good for husbandmen, to rear yearly so many calves as they
conveniently can keep to maintain his stock, and chiefly those calves that do
fall betwixt candlemas and May, for in that season their milk may best be
spared, and by that time, there will be sufficient grass to weane them, and
in Winter following, they will be strong enough to save themselves among other
cattle, having now and then some small helps, and also the Dams by June
shall be the readier again to take the bull, and to bring other calves in the
time aforesaid, and if a Cow tarry til after May ere she calue, The calfe
will be too weak in ye winter, following: and the dam will not be so ready to take
the Bull again, but thereby often time go barren. Also to rear a calfe after
Michaelmas, and to keep the dam at hard meat as they do in some countries,
it would be too costly all the Winter, and a cow abroad will give more milk
with a little grass, then much fodder lying in the close house, or fed with
hay and straw remaining in the stall: for the dry and hard meat does
diminish more milk a great deal than grass. As for those husbands that have
but small pasture or none at all, must do as they may, and in my mind, it
were far better for them to sell their calves, than to rear them, whereby
they may save the milk to a more profit for the keeping of his house, and the
Cow then will the rather go to the Bull again.

Also if the husband go with an Ox plough, it shall be then meet to rear two
Ox calves, and two Cow calves yearly, to hold up his stock if he can so
do, and it will be the more profit. Also it is better to weane calves at
grass, than at hard meat if they were at grass before. And those that can
have several pastures for their kine and calves shall do well and rear with
less cost then others. The weaning of Calves with hay and water will make
them have great bellies, because they stir not so well therewith as with
grass, and they will the rather rotte when they come to grass. And again in
Winter they would be put in houses, rather than to remain abroad, and to
give them but hay on nights, and to pasture them in the day time. And thus
being used, they shall be much better to handle when they shall be kine or
oxen to serve to any other purpose.

The loss of calfe, lamb, or fool, which is the least loss.
YE shall understand, the least hurt for the husbandman is, his cow to cast her
calfe, then his eawe to cast her lamb, or mare her colte, because the calfe
will suck so much milk as he is worth, before he shall be able to kill. And
of the yowes milk, there comes no profit but the lamb: yet in some countries
they weane their lambs and milk their yowes, which is a hinderance for them
to take the ram in dry season. But thereby oftimes goes many yowes barren,
because they are brought so low with milking. Also if the the mare cast her
fool, that is thrice so great a loss as the other two, for if that fool come
of a good breed, which is a most necessary thing for every man to provide for
himself, and as much charge will a bad mare cost in keeping, as a good mare, and
with good keeping the fool will be in short time ready to sell, for double so
much money as the lamb, and calfe is worth.

What cattle are most meet to go in one pasture together.
YE shall understand, it is not so good nor so profitable, to have cattle all
of one sort in a pasture together, as to have all oxen, or all horses in a
pasture together, nor yet sheep alone except they pasture on high grounds,
for they will not feed even, but ouerrunne, and leave many tufts of grass here
and there untouched in diverse places of the pasture: except it be greatly laid
with cattle. Therefore ye shall perceive that horses will agree well with other
cattle in one pasture together, for there is some grass that horses will eat,
and beasts will not, and lightly a horse will covet to feed after other
cattle. Also a horse loves to feed on low grounds, as plashes and hollow
places. But horses and sheep will not so well agree together, except it be for
the sheep to feed on the upper grounds. For a sheep will feed on a bare
passure, and eat the sweetest grass, and so will a horse likewise, but he
must have it longer. Yet (as some do say) a horse will eat as nigh the ground
as a sheep, but he cannot therewith fill his belly so soon. To one hundredth
of cattle in a pasture, ye may have xx. horses, if it be a low ground. But if
there be plenty of grass, then ye may put therein an hundredth sheep mo: and
so likewise to the rate of the goodness of the Pasture, more or less in
cattle: and after this order ye may eat your pastures even with cattle,
and leave but few tuftes of grass uneaten.

Also if it be a high ground, ye may then put in more sheep, and less of other
cattle. For many kine and draught oxen, will eat a ground much barer then
the fatting oxen or kine. And ye may also give a mylch Cow as well to much
meat as to little: For to much meat will make her soon fat, and then she
will the rather take the Bull: and she being fat will give lesser milk then
a leanner cow: For the fatnes stops the poares of the raines which should
conueigh the milk unto the vdderne. Wherefore a mean pasture is always best
to keep your mylch kyne in, and to have them in a good mean estate, neither
to fat nor to lean. Also if a Cow be fat when she shall calue, she is
in more danger then being lean, and the calfe (she being fat) shall be the
less of stature. As for your draught oxen ye cannot give them to much meat,
except it be the after grass of a low mowed meddowe. For that will cause
them to have the gyrrie, and then he may not away so well with labor.
Likewise if there be very much grass in a close, the cattle will feed the
worse thereof, for better is a good sweet bitte from the earth, then a large
and deep grass. For where as it is long, the beasts will byte of the tops
thereof and no more, for that is the sweetest. And the other grass shall
remain still on the ground and so rotte, for no beast will eat thereof, but
horses only in winter. For they will feed on foggie grass and such like.
Also ye shall understand that horses and cattle may not well be foddered in
winter all together, but put apart, for the beasts with their horns will gore
both horses and sheep. Wherefore it is the more danger so to feed them
together: it is best therefore to make standing rackes and cratches, and to
cast their meat therein: Which staves ought to be set somewhat nigh together,
for pulling and spoiling their fodder to much at once under their feet. It
were rather better to change their places every day where ye feed them, which
should make them to gather up more clean, and not for to trample so much under
their feet. Thus much as concerning the pasturing of cattle together in
pastures, and also the fothering of them together in winter.

A very good order for the fatting of oxen in the stawle.
When soever you intend to fat any oxen in the stawle, being in somer or
winter to set them up, if ye take them from grass in the summer, they will
hardly fall to the eating of hay of a good while after, but when ye then take
them up, keep them so without meat and water one day and a night, and so they
will by extreme hunger forget the grass the rather, and then at the first give
them a little hay at once, whereby they may eat it up clean, and thereby
wax still hungry. Ye must also take them up into the stawle on a dry day, for
if ye stawle them wette, they will have (as some grasiers say) warnell worms
on their backs, which will commonly come unto them by famine and poverty, and
will hurt the skin. And also it will make them be lousy. Ye shall therefore use
to kembe them with wool cards or horse comb, as some do, and say it does make
the^ more lustier. But indeed that is good for the laboring oxen, so to be
used, but not for the fatting ox as some judge: nor ye shall not let them go
forth of the stawle at any time, not so much as to drink. For then they will
desire the more to be abroad, and the licking of them will hinder (as they say)
their fatting. But ye shall so provide that they may have water brought them in
cowles, or else to come through their stawles, as some do use, which is to set a
wooden troffe along through their stawles, and with a pipe of lead and a cock
at the end thereof, coming from a conduit or cesterne, and thereby fills the
said troffe twice a day with fresh water, morning and evening, and at every
time before, to cleanse the troffe of all the old water, and so to give them
fresh, for after they have once drunk their fills of the fresh water, they will
lightly have no more thereof, for they will blow thereon, and after loath to
drink any more thereof until they have fresh. For an ox or cow is a beast
that does love to feed sweet and clenly. Also ye shall lay your troffes end
somewhat a slope so that the water may run forth al at the one end thereof, in
taking forth a pin to let out the said water: and then wash the troffe clean,
and so give them fresh. Thus ye must use them daily morning and evening so long
as ye fat them.

And first in the morning ye shall take away all their old hay, and so cleanse
their water troffe, and then give them fresh water, and then a little fresh hay
again, and so at noone, and likewise at night: and thus to use them to be
fed from time to time. Also it shall be best to place and set their troffe on
the farther side their crib nigh unto the wall, and to set it two foot hie and
more, and their racks likewise would stand of a good height, as of iiii. foot
or more, and to be made almost as broad beneath as above, for fear of tangling
their horns therein, and the rack staves set not passing iiii. inches a
sunder: yet some do use to feed them on the ground without a rack, but that
is thought to be more dustye and more wastfull of hay. They do also give them
sometimes for change, of wheat or barley chafe, with the gurgins thereof, for
that after it (they say) will make them to drink well. But the hay is only the
chiefest fodder and will make the hard flesh.

Likewise their standarts and posts to fasten the^ by would be made round and
smooth, of the bigness of xvi. inches about and vii. foot long, and set iiii.
foot wide one post from another. Ye must see likewise they be set fast and
strong both above and beneath: and ye shall also hardle your oxen in the
stawle, all of the one side of your standartes or posts, for fear of their
horns the one ox to hurt the other, and ye shall fasten them unto the posts,
with a bow-with made shacle wise, sliding above and beneath his neck on the
standart, so that the one side of his neck shall be always close unto the
said standart or post. By which order of tying so, they shall not at any time
bow their heads so well to lick them. For in licking them (as is said) it does
hinder their feeding in the fatting. And also if ye ty them as plowe oxen be,
with a sole and a with, which is made like a yoke bow, which would be to long
a tie from the standart, and they will then both lick them selves, and strike
each other with their horns: therefore the other way of hardeling and tying is
best. Some do make a light cradle of wood, and put it about their necks, which
will keep their heads from furning back to lick themselves in any part of
their bodies, but it is not so easy to ly down. Other do al to smeere them
with their own dung, and then cast ashes thereon, which will save them from
licking. Also for the clensing and farming of them, they do use morning and
evening to shoouell down their dung, and to see from time to time that they
be clean kept, for that is a furtherance unto their fatting and liking. And
as for the littering of them, they do not litter at all, but let them lie on
fair dry plankes, and in their own dung. Yet some are of this opinion, that
to litter them somewhat under the forepart of their bodies, shall not be
hurtful unto them: and further their keeper must from time to time look unto
them, and mark how they eat and drink orderly as they should do. For
sometimes there will grow diseases among the^ in their mouths, as the barbes
and such like: Which will much hinder their feeding, and so pair if they be
not looked unto in time, and have help.

Some do also use to make holes behind them, and set there in earthen pots even
with the ground, to keep their piss in, and so couers them with square
boordes or plankes, which piss they do use to wash the bodies of those apple
trees which are given to be worm eaten, or canker eaten: for they say, that
will save them. They do also use to cast the said piss among their roots in
the garden, for that will also kill or cause the worms to void, and save the
roots from being eaten. Thus much for the ordering and fatting of the oxen in
the stawle.

Ye shall take the roots of great sedge, which sedge bears long leaves with
white strekes therein, much like a white and green lace, and grows in some
gardens, like a quitch grass, and the roots are much like unto the quitch
grass, but they are more greater, and will run in the ground like the quitch
calde garum, in latin, and it is thought to be a kind thereof. Take a handful
of the said roots, bruise them, and boil them in a quart of good ale, then
strain it, so give it luke warm three or four mornings, and they shall amend.
But let them not eat nor drink the space of two or three hours after.

The nature of the shroue mouse.
THe shroue mouse is an ill beast and does trouble and hurt men's cattle in
many places: for her teeth are venomous, for where as she biteth any beast, it
will soon ranckle and swel, that if they have not some help they will dye
thereof. The remedies are, those medicines which are used against venoming of
other cattle, be also good for this.

There is also a common saying among husbandmen, that if any beast be mouse
crope, that is, when she runs over the back of any beast, he shall suddenly
wax lame, and commonly in the hinder parts, so that he shall not be able to
rise nor go, but draw his legs after him. Wherein I have hard no remeady but
these: one is, ye shall have him to a bryer growing at both the ends, and draw
that beast under it through, and so he will recover: some beat him with the said
bryer. Also among husbandmen this is counted most chief and often proved. That
is, ye shall often toss and turn the lame beast, and turn him over and over:
Now of one side and then of another, every way up and down, which (as they
say) is a present help.

Another. Some do teach to bore a hole in any tree, elm or other, and put
therein a live shroue mouse, and pin it close, and let it so dry therein. Then
when any beast is mouse crope, ye shall beat the beast with a twigge of the
same tree, and he shall recover again. Another. If your beast be bitten with
the said mouse, it will swell and inflame, and then they do help it in pricking
the place with a bodkin, or nawle of latin, and then all to chafe it thereon,
with soap and vinegar mixed together, and that will help it. Another. Sum do
take a shroue meuse alive, and put her into a glass of sallet oil, and
therein let her die, and when any beast is bitten with her, they anoint the
bitten place with the said oil, and so he will amend, but touch no other place
with the oil.

To heal the tetter on cattle.
THe tetter is an unseemly scuruines or scabbe growing on the skin or
outward part of a beast. Some are broad, and some will grow long, and hang
like a cluster of grapes, or like a wenne with curnels, and knobs somewhat
hard. It is supposed they do increase by wette and poverty: and some think it
does increase of some venomed humor, or by some prick or bruise or such like.
It is not grievous unto the beast, but unseemly. The remedies are, they do
help the running or broad Tetter, by searing it round about with a hot
iron, and then to lay Tar thereon. Some do but lay Tar only thereon:
and for the long tetter, that hangs down like a cluster of grapes, or bunch:
They do sear it of with a hot iron, and then do tar it thereon, and so it
goes away. Also they say, when the beast does wax fat and lusty by grass,
it will so wear away by little and little again: for they have it commonly in
winter, and not in summer.

Another for the same.
YE shall mix orpement with tar, and put thereto of gray soap, al in like
quantity, and do heat it, and then anoint therewith, so often as ye shall see
cause, and this will heal it. If the tetters hang long, some do knit them
about with hair, and by such means they will so consume and fall away.

Against faintnes in laboring oxen.
THose oxen that are labored all the winter at plough, toward the spring they
will wax faint and poor, and full of lice, and with small labor they will
lie down. Therefore to keep them still in good plight, and lustye, ye shall
give them before their watering, to every Ox a good handful of barley in the
straw, and then after let them drink: which will always keep them lusty and
strong. And also kembe your oxen with a horse comb or card, it will delight
them the more, being fat oxen. Yet some will say, a fatting ox, must not be
touched or rubbed on the back.

For a cow lacking milk, having new calued.
WHen ye have a cow that has newely calued, and lacking milk through
poverty, to cause her milk to increase, ye shall boil of anniseseedes in
good ale, or wine, then strain it and give it milk warm. Another: take a
handful of the leaves of the hedge vine, (called Briony) then bail it in ale
or wine and strain it, and so give it her. Another: also the leaves of
colewoorts boiled in water, or to give her them raw, will do the like, and it is
also good against the weathering of a Cow. Another: ye shall give her of
sodde barley and Fennel seed sodde together and let her eat the same, or
green Fennel chopped and mixed with sodde barley, and so given. Also the herb
Nigilromana, stamped and strained with ale or wine, and so given three or four
mornings. All these are very good approved to increase milk in a Cow.

To help the love.
THe love is a disease which breeds in the claws of a Beast, and comes (as
some husbands says,) by treading in the doung of Christian folk, which burns
them so betwixt their claws, that it will make them to halt. To cure, ye shall
take a roapes end, and rub and chafe him betwixt the claws therewith, so
that ye make it bleed. Then anoint it with some tar, and fresh grease, and
it will heal soon again.

Against goring of a beast.
IF any beast be gored, ye shall take of rosen, fresh grease, and wax each
alike, then boil them altogether in a pot of earth, and then keep it, and
when as ye shall have any need to occupy thereof, make a tent of linen, or
flax, well anointed with the said ointment, and so put it down to the
bottom of the wound, and so use the same and it will soon heal him: or
power in the wound boiling butter.

For the neck of an Ox that is swollen.
TO heal the neck of any Ox y^ is swollen with yoke or other ways, ye shall
take tallow, and melt it in a pot, and as hot as ye may suffer, power it on
the swollen place, use this once a day, and it will heal him in short space
without other thing.

For a spraine or stroke.
AGainst a spraine or stroke, ye shall take of butter, black soap, and hemlocke
herb, with a quantity of bay salt, then bail them altogether, and al to
bathe the spraine, or stroke therewith, as hot as ye may well suffer, and it
will help. If it be in the legs, ye shall put unto (the things
aforesaid:) the grounds of beer, or ale, and wash it therewith: and then
wrappe it about with a hair rope dipped in chamberlye, and he shall do well.

To help the shoulder bone of any beast out of joint.
IF the shoulder bone of any beast be out of joint, ye shall well perceive it,
by feeling if lie down and inward toward his body: so that ye may easily
put your two fingers betwixt those bones, and also he will still trippe on the
same foot. To help the same, ye shall first cast him, and bind his other
three legs together, then make one to draw forth that leg straight, then
put one of your hands on the point of his shoulder where the bone went out,
and put your other hand on the inside next his body, and thrust up the bone
that is fallen out, into his right place again, just to the other bone, if ye
shall see then it be not come home just and close, ye must thrust up your fist
betwixt the said shoulder and his body, and put it up more close, or else with
some trunchion of wood, and therewith put it up more closer. Then being right,
and put up straight and close together, ye shall make two wodde^ pricks of one
length, and make two holes cross, under the skin, just over the mids of
the said joint, an ynche and a half asunder from both sides of the said
joint, and put your two pricks cross there under the skin. Then take of
whippe cord, or strong packthreed, and wrap it under the said ends of your
pricks round, and therewith draw up the skin on a lump together: so done,
fasten your thread, and let it so remain till it fall away of it self, and
he shall do well again, if it be an Ox, ye may labor him again within
two days after. And if the fly be then buste, ye may annoint the place
with some tar.

For the neck being out of joint.
IF the neck of any beast be out of joint, he will still hold and bow his
head on the contrary side that the bone is out: to help the same. First ye
shall feel the bone if ye can that is out, so done, then ye shall make one to
hold straight his head with a halter, and let another set his hand on the
place, where the bone went out, and then do you on the other side thrust in the
joint that is out, into his place again. And so let the beasts head be
tied to a surcingle, to bend on the same side that the bone went out, and so
let his head be kept for the space of nine days after, till the flesh have
grown, and is fast settled on the joint again.

For any other joint of a beast that is out.
WHere as any other joint of a beast is out: First ye shall search and feel
for the bone y^ is out, so done mark on what side he is, or went out, so done,
let one pluck and hold out that lim strait, then set one of your hands on
the place or bone where it went out, and with your other hand, thrust in the
bone that is out, the same way he went out, and so keep it still nine days
after, and ye shall do well.

For any bone that is broken, or limme out of joint.
TO help any bone of a beast that is broken, ye must cast and bind his
legs, and then feel softly how the bones do lie, then shall ye cause that
limme to be holden out straight, and with your two hands, ye shall stroke
softly up and down, and then softly put each bone into his right place again.
Then in holding the limme straight, feel if all the said bones be well
bolstered round about, and then splinted thereon and well lapped, and let it so
remain for the space of nine days, and give him to drink, of Cumphorie
herb, stamped with milk or ale, for that will help to knit the bones the
sooner. The bark of ash beaten with wine, and so plaistred, will close and
knitte bones together. Also the Elm inner bark, laid in a running water, and
to bathe the place therewith does knit the broken bones.

Also Pliny says, the roots of Rocket boiled in water, and plaistered to,
will draw and knitte broken bones. And Dioscoride says, wild Betony newly
stamped and playstered to, will likewise draw and knit broken bones. Thus much
for a beasts shoulder out of joint, and for the setting of broken bones. Also
hazell tails and the seeds of read dockes, made in powder and given to
drink will knit broken bones.

Against swelling in a beast in any outward part.
TAke a good quantity of the juice of cleuers, and put there unto the grounds
of ale or beer, and a quantity of fresh grease or neats feet oil, then
boil al together: For a horse, take tallow in steed of grease, for Ox, or
Cow, take grease, and if ye put thereunto of an Ox gall, it will be the better,
and being warm, bind it to the place.

To know if a beast be sound or not,
YE^shal go unto your beasts in the morning, which are in the house, before
they have meat or drink, and behold the tops of their nose, if there be
standing pearls like drops of deaw water, he is then sound of body, but if
he be dry on the top of his nose, that beast is not then in health.

Against the rotting of a beast by drinking evil water, or often for lack of
water.
IF any beast be rotten of his body, ye shall slitte the skin in the upper
part of his deawlappe, two fingers straight downward, then open the sides of a
finger breadth, and a finger length straight down. Then take 9. green leaves
of lungwort, and bind them with a threede together, and put it down in the
wound, and let another thread hang down without, that ye may thereby draw it up
and down the wound, every two or three days once or twice, use this ye space
of 15. or 16. days, and within a while ye shall see it swell, and at length it
will putrify and stink, run, and rotte away skin and all. Some will
swell before they run of matter, which in avoiding so much corruption
cleanses the beast and makes him whole again, and give him the juice of
saxifrage in drink.

For a beast that has the hawe.
ANy beast that has an haw in his eye, ye shall soon perceive it by holding
his head aside, and winking with his eye and it will run of water, the cure is,
ye must hold him fast by ye head, and with a strong double thread put therewith
a needle in the midst of the upper eye lid, and tie it unto his horn, then take
your needle again with a long thread, and put it through the gristle of the
haw, and with a sharp knife cut the skin finely round, and so pluck out the
haw, then lay a fine cloth about the top of your fore finger, and put your
finger round about his eye within, and take out the blood, the^ wash it with
beer or ale, and cast in a good deal of salt, and wash it then again, and
stroke it down with your hand, and so let him go, and he will amend again.

A drink for Cattle.
Whensoever ye shall see a beast not like of his body, and dry in the morning
on his nose, it should seem he is not in health, therefore when ye house them,
or pasture them, ye shall to help them, give them a drink: as follows. Take
of long peper, anniseedes, Cummenseeed, licoras, of bay beries, of each a
quantity, then beat them to a fine powder, and boil them in strong ale, and
put there unto butter to make it more soluble, or the herb Mercury, and some
treacle, and being milk warm give unto each beast the quantity of a wine
pynte, and they shall amend. Ye may boil with your ale other herkes both to
comfort and purge, as ye shall see cause in any-beast, as before is rehearsed
in purging of cattle.

Teeth of a beast to fasten.
FIrst ye shall prick his gummes beneath on both sides within and without,
and the gummes above, with the point of a knife, then take a whetstone or rough
peeble, or slate stone, and rub the gummes therewith, and make them bleed,
so done, chafe them well with salt, and so they will fasten again, or rub them
with sage and salt.

For the garget under the ear.
THe swelling or garget in a be ast comes commonly with cold in winter, or by
eating evil meat, which will breed a garget under their jaws, or cheeks: the
remedy, ye shall take blew hard clay, and boil so much as a bowl in
chamberlie til it be consumed and molten, then all scalding hot, bathe the
swollen place therewith, and always stroke it downward, use this three or four
times a day till it swage, and this will help it.

Or take blew clay with a pint or more of milk, of barrow hogs grease, then
boil them together til all the clay be consumed, then as hot as ye may
scalde the garget, or sore therewith, use this twice of thrice, and it will
help.

Leannes of kine or other to help.
When as ye shall see any beast not like, but seem lean, ye shall make a
drink, and give it your beast fasting. Which is: Take of long pepper, of
madder, of the bark of a walnutte tree, and turmericke, with some bays, of
each a like portion: beat them into fine pouders, and put it into a pint of
ale luke warm, and so give it, and your beast shall do well, God willing.

A good way to geld or cut a calfe.
Ye shall make one hold down his fore part or legs, then bind his hinder
feet with some cord, half a yard asunder, let his feet be bound, and let
the said holder set both his knees on the cord, nigh unto his legs, and so
cut him gently, and annoint his flanks with some fresh grease, then rub his
raines with cold water mixed with salt, and he shall do well.

Against hide bound in Ox or Cow.
TAke a penniewoorth of good treacle, a penniewoorth of long pepper, as much
of grains, beat them into a fine powder, and mix them with the treakle, then
take a handful of horehound, chopped small with the powder of lycoras, the^ mix
altogether, and boil them in a pynt of good veriuyce, and so warm it and give
on morninges unto your beasts, and this will help. Another: take and stamp
the leaves of flouredeluce, then strain it with good ale, and so give it warm.

A medicine for all manner of griefs in cattle.
TAke a pennieworth of treakle, a handful of hemp seed, a portion of yuie
leaves and of ealder leaves, of fetherfew, as much as a tenniceball of lome,
and so much bay salt. Put thereto of chamberlye, and a little soote, then
stir these all well together, and make it warm, and so give to each beast
three good spoonefull thereof, and last before they go from your hand, ye
shall give to each beast a little tar, some do give them in drink the dried
flowers of woorme wood mixed with some salt. Thus they use their sheep, and
other cattle against all diseases, it is commended to assuage any pain in
cattle, or to drive away any hurtful disease in the^, either head or body.

Against any beast bitten or venomed.
IF any beast be venomed or bitten in any outward place, as the legs,
vdderne, or pappes, or many other outward place, ye shall take a rotten egg,
and mix it with foot, and some bay salt, then beat them well together, and
plaster or annoint the venoumed place, with a cloute and a stricke, and it
will help. Well proved.

A proved drink for a beast, ox or cow, that has the rotte in his body, or
do not like.
TAke a handful of sage, another of mercury, another of tansie, and half so
much of carduus benedictus, choppe them all small together, and then sees them
in a quarte of ale, with a pint of veriuice, and some licoris, sees it till
the half be wasted: Then take it of the fire, and put therein a quantity of
the powder of long pepper, and powder of baies, and a piece of butter, and
being luke warm, so give it with a dish to the beast, but first pluck forth
his tongue, and so your it into his mouth, in holding still up his head, till
al be given: then rub his mouth above, and tongue with some bay salt, and rub
his back with salt likewise, and he shall do well, but let him not eat or
drink the night before this drink is given, nor let him not eat nor drink of
three hours after this drink is given.

Signs when a beast often belcheth
THe cause when a beast does belch, or break wind often upward, is a sign of
crudity, or raw humors in his stomach undigested: with a noise in his guts,
no stomach or taste, shrinking finewes, his eyes heavy, not chewing his quide,
nor lick him with his tongue. These remedies are: take ix. pintes of warm
water, and boil a little therein xxx. branches or stalks of colewoorts, with
some vinegar, so give it to the beast, and all that day let him receive nothing
but the same. Some do keep him in the stall, and not to pasture abroad, till
he have taken the buds or branches of lentiscus, and wild olive trees, four
pound mixed and beat with a pound of honey, putting thereto iiii. pints of water:
then set it a night in the air, then with a horn put it down his throat, and
aabout one hour after, give him to eat, iiii. pound of orobe orobe or steped
tine tares, give him no drink, use this three days, till the grease be taken
away. If this help him not, his belly is inflamed, and great pain in his
entrails, and guts, that he scautly may feed, but groan and complain, nor
tarry long in a place but ly down, often wagging his tail, and his head. This
is a present remedy. Bind his tail next his rumpe: and give him a quart of
strong wine, or ale, with a quantity of oil, and then druie him a thousand or
five hundred paces. If then the pain depart not, pare all about the horns of
his feet, and anoint your hands and so rake him, and so chafe him after. If
it profit not, give him dry figs of a wild fig tree, with ix. times so
much warm water. If this yet help not, take ii. pound of the leaves of wild
myntes, mixed with iii. quarts of warm water, and so give it him with a horn,
and let him blood under the tail, and after well bleeding, stop it with the
bark of some tree: then make him run till his tongue hang out, but before ye
let him blood, give him this medicine, take iii. ounces of beaten garlic,
mixed with a pint of wine or strong ale, or somewhat more, and on this drink,
chafe him and make him run. Some do take ii. ounces of salt, with x. onions,
and mix all with some sod honey, and so they put it into his belly, so they
chafe and make him run after and he shall do well.

To help cattle that be sick, and will not eat in pasture.
TAke horehound, camamile, betony, cinkefoile, and peniryall, and agrimonie, of
each a like, bruise them, and boil them in a quart of good ale, till the half,
with a bruised stick of licoras, then strain and put to iii. peniwoorth of good
treacle, stir it well together, and give it fasting, and walk your beasts a
good while after, and they shall do well. Often proved.

To know if ox, or cow, be sound or whole of body.
YE shall gripe or pinch him with your hand, on the back or wythers, behind
the fore shoulder, if he be sound, he will not shrink, but if he be not sound,
he will then shrink with his back, and be ready to fall. Often proved.

Against the blood in beasts.
SOme cattle are troubled with the blood in their backs, which will make him
to go as he drew his head aside, or after him: the cure. Ye shall slit the
length of two iointes under his tail, and so let him bleed well, if he do
bleed to much, ye shall knit his tail next the body, and then bind unto it
salt, and nettles bruised, and it will do well.

If an ox piss blood.
Against pissing of blood, ye shall keep him from water 24. hours, and they
give him a dish fullof the curdes of rennet, in a quart of milk, and let him
not drink of iiii. hours after.

Against the sickness of the lunges.
THe sickness of the lunges is perceived by rising up, and shaking of the
dewloppe. Ye shall help him by fettering, after this sort. Take bearefoote,
and beaten garlic, and wrap it in butter, then cut his dewlop ii, inches
beneath the sticking place, then open it round with your finger, or with a
stick on both sides and beneath, then put in your stuff ye shall cut your
dewlop, 4. fingers above the bottom thereof. Then must ye tie a strong threede
unto your stuff, to pluck it up and down as ye shall see cause in every third
day, and it will rot the sooner. If the humor do not rot, then change your
stuff, and put in new. And he shall do well.

Against the pantase in a beast.
IF Ox, or other beast, have the pantase, he will shake much, and quiver in
the flanks, and pant. The cure: Ye shall give him some runnet, soote, and
chamberlye, mixed together

Against swelling by eating the tine worm.
YE shall give him wine, salt, and treacle. For a stroke in eye, lay thereunto
the juice of sma(...)h, fennel, and the white of an egg.

The garget or swelling in a beast comes sometimes on the bone of the eyelid,
which will be like a botch, or bile. The cure. Cut the skin round about the
eye, and again about that, cut another skin betwixt that and his lips, if
it come to his lips, it is incurable. The cure: Take wine, and salt sod
together, and wash the place evening and morning, till the swelling go away.
Then scrape of all the scales and filth: then anoint the place with narueil
andhony boild together, and that will both heal, and skin it.

A practice against the murren in cattle.
TAke the roots of Angelica, the sea thistle, mixed with fennel seed, take of
new wine, of wheat flower, boil them and so give it: sprinckle the beast also
with hot water, and he shall recover.

When horse, bullock, or other beast is sick. Then take bearefoot herb, for
a bullock, they put it in his dewlop, for a horse, in his breast, for swine,
or sheep, through the ear, wherein ye shall make a hole with a lattin bodkin,
and the said root of bearefoot put through the hole of the ear: and to make a
perfume, take powder of brimstone, vnslet lyme, garlic, wild margerum, and
coriander, laid on coals, so they may receive the fume thereof, which will
heal them.

Ye shall always have ready for your cattle, fenegreke, one Husbandmen to have
always ready,
pound, licoras half a pound, of grains one pound, of turmericke half a
pound, of bay beries a quarter of a pound, of long pepper one pound, of treacle
of Iene one pound, of anniseseedes one pound, of cummin half a pound, of
madder half a pound, of orpemint half a pound, which grows in many woods.

Against belching, or evil liking in cattle. Take pelitor of Spain, herb
grace, fethersue, sage, horehound, of each like, of bay salt three pintes, of
strong new ale to the value of the rest, let all boil together three or four
walmes, then strain it, and give to each beast a good part thereof a mornings
fasting warm, and then let them not drink till the after noone. If it help
not, he will groan, and remove from place to place. Then shall ye bind his
tail close or nigh the rumpe, and give him a quart of wine, mixed with a pint of
good sallet oil: Then drive him apace, a mile and half. Then rake him,
anointing your hands with oil, or grease. Wherein some let him blood under
the tail nie the rumpe.

There is a disease in beasts, which some husbands call the tail. To help
it, ye shall feel softly the softest place under his tail, and make a slitte
thereon, two inches long, open it and lay thereto saite, and garlic, stamp
and bind it fast thereto with a cloth, and it will help it.

For the collicke in the belly of beasts, is soon put away, in beholding a
goose, or ducke on the water swimming. Against the laske.
Against the laske in beasts, ye shall help him in giving him the powder of
sloes, with cold veriuice, or water.

Against the bloody flixe. The cure: some do not use to let them drink in
three days and three nights, and then they Against the bloody flux.
give him the stones of grapes and raisons beat in powder two pound, with a
quart of sower wine fasting, and so use the^. If the^ they mend not, they use
to burn their forhead through the skin to the bone, and cut their ears, and
wash the wound with ox piss, till it be whole. The cuts are to be heald with
oil and pitch het and plaistered. If calves have a laske, take sweet milk,
and put r^nnet therein, so that the calfe may well drink thereof luke warm,
and it will stay it: el(...)e leaves be ill.

If a bullock have the cough, ye shall give him a pint of harly meal, with
the yelke of an egg, and raisings boilde, with a pint of white wine, then
strain it, and give it fasting to the beast. Also take grains in powder, and
mix it with flower, and fride beans, and meal of tares, stir all together
and give it like a mash to the beast.

Against an old cough, take ii. pound of Isope, steept in iii. pints of water,
then bruised and mixed with flower, and so For an old cough.
make him to swallow it, and after pour the water (that the Isope was steept
and sod in) into his throat.

If calves have the cough, ye shall beat centory to powder and so give it with
ale. If they have the ag^^, ye shall perceive it by the watering of their eyes,
and heaviness in their head which they will hang down. And also driueling at
their mouth, their veins beating, with a great heat over all their bodies. The
cure. Let them fast a day and a night, the next day be times let them blood
under the tail: Then within one hour after to give to them xxx. cole woort
leaves and stalks sod with oil, water, and salt.

To heal the kibes, ye shall cut them forth as nigh as ye can, and let them
bleed well Then take verdigrease, and the For the kibe in the heels.
yelke of a new laid egg well beaten and stamped, so bind it to the grief, and
it will help and heal it.

Ye shall bath them with stale beer, or old, sod with iuie leaves, and so make
it with the combs of honey, and dride camemile mixed together.

If ox or bullockes feet he near worn, ye shall wash the^ with warm ox
piss, then burn a few small brushes, and Ox feet near worn.
when the flame is done, ye shall let the beast stand and walk on the embers a
pretty while: then anoint his horns with tar, and oil, mixed with hogs grease.
In so doing, they will never lightly halt after.

If ye wash their feet, and then their pasturns, and also rub between their
clees with swines grease, it will avoid Scabbes in the feet.
scabbes and such. Also scabbes and such like, is healed and gotten away in
rubbing and chasing them with stamped garlic.

If any vain be ent, and so bleed, lay his own dung thereon, or else clap to
bruised nettels, and salt, and it will stop.

A common medicine for all diseases in cattle. Take the A common medicine for
all cattle.
root of the sea onion, the poplar root, and common salt, of each a like, then
lay it a while in water, then stamp them, and so give it unto your cattle
till they be well. Give it to them in the spring, for the space of forty days,
which will preserve them from the plague, or all other sickness for that year.

And if beasts be sick, ye shall give them madder, long pepper, the bark of a
walnut tree, with fetherfew, stamp these and strain it, and give it with some
triacle to drink fasting: and they shall do well.

For sick beasts that will not feed in pasture, or drink.
TTake liuerwoort, night shade, cinckfoyle, veruaine, egrimony, and centory, of
each a like, boil all these in a quart of good ale, then stamp and strain it,
and put to iii. peniworth of triacle of Iene, and milk warm give thereon to
your sick beasts fasting, and drive them up and down after a good space, and
they shall do well.

To heal a beast cut with a bill.
TAke turpentine, barrow hogs grease, honey, and tar, but the tar mustly next
the cloth, and boil the other a little, and lay it on the cloth, then strike
it al about with pitch the ^des of the cloth, to make it cleave fast: ye may
shift it once in two days, and this will heal it. For a sheep ye may lay on
a plaster of pitch, and it will heal it.

FINIS.
The Table of the principal things in this Book, by Alphabet as follows.
A
AGue in Calves.
B
Barbes under the tongue of cattle to help. 12 Beasts sick to help.
Belching signs thereof. 85 Byles on cattle to heal. Biting with a mad
dog. 26 Blaine on the tongue to help. 38 Blood in Beast. 44. 87 Blood pissing
to help. 13 Bloody flux. 13 Bones loose, things good to knit. Broken bones,
things good to knit. 80 Bruise on the shoulder to help. 29 Bulls how to make
tame. 3 Bulls put unto labor. Bull, of his form and quality. 63
C
Calves having the laske. Calves having woormes to help. 41 Cattle sick.
Calves how to breed. 49 Calves how to nourish. Calves how to rear. Cattle to
be looked unto. 58 Cattle in pasturing together. 69 Cattle how to fodder.
Charge to the keeper of cattle. 51 Closh in the feet to help. Closh on the
neck to heal. 27 Collicke in Cattle to help. 62 Common medicine for cattle.
Crowling in the guts to help. (...) Costiuenesse in cattle to help. 16 Cough
in a beast to help. 17 Cut with weapon on a beast. 92 Cowes vdder swelled.
Cow in make. Cow to help of the weather. Cow with her form and quality. 63
Cow with calfe how to be kept. 64 Cow new calued, scant of milk to help. 76
D
DRopping nostrels in Cattle to help. 13 Drink for cattle. 82 Deawbolne in
cattle for to help. 33 Diseases of all sorts to help.
E
EDder stinging to help. Eyes grieved to heal. 31 Eye having the haw. Eyes
stricken to help. Eyes inflamed to help. Eyes watery to help. Eyes having
the web.
F
FAintnes of Oxen that labor. 76 Farming of Oxen. Fatting of an Ox. 61
Fatting in the stall. 71 Fever in cattle to help. 17 Field spider stinging to
help. Flesh superfluous under the tongue. Flowing of the gall to help. 46
Flux of the belly to stay. Flux of blood to help. Foddering of cattle.
Founder in the feet of cattle. 19 Foul a disease in the foot. 42
G
GAlling of Cattle to help. Gall flowing, to help. Garget to help. 37
Garget on the tongue to help. 37 Garget by some stroke given. 38. 33 Garget in
the maw. 39 Gelding of Calves. 83 Gelding another way. Goring of a beast to
help. 77 Goring another. Green corn hurtful to Cattle. Government of Cattle.
55 Gout in the feet to help. 45
H
Haw in the eye to help. 81 Herbs venomous for Cattle to eat. Hide bound to
help. 84. 83 Hoof hurt to heal. 27 Hoof chopped to help. Hornet or other fly
stinging. Horseleech worm drunk, to help.
I
IMpostumes to help. 18 Inflammations in the mouth. Joint being out, to help.
79 Joint being out, another. 79 Itch on cattle to help. 24.
K
Keeper of Cattle, his charge. Kine diseased to help. Kibes to help. Kine put
to the Bull. Kine put to labor. Kine how to nourish and feed. Knees of beasts
swollen to help. 21 Kow with Calfe how to use.
L.
LAxes in beasts to stop. 62 Lean Cattle how to buy. 40. 65 Lean or fat
Cattle to buy. 65 Lean kine or beasts to help. 83 Lice on cattle to kill. 35
Looking often unto cattle is good. Loss of Cattle least hurt. 69 Lungs of
Cattle infected to help. 87 Longroune in Cattle to help.
M
MAw of beasts grieved to help. Milting of a beast to help. 45 Milch kine to
feed. Medicines to have ready. Milk scant in a Cow to help. Murren among
Cattle to help. 88. 66 Mouth of a beast inflamed. 27
N
Neck galde to help. Neck bruised to heal. Neck swollen to help. 78 Neck
swollen to help. Neck having the clowse. Neck out of joint to help. 79
Nostrils of Cattle dropping to help
O
OXen how to buy and sell. Oxen how to buy. Oxen how for to tame. Oxen diseased
to help. Oxen for to labor. Ox or Cow be sound to know. Ox feet worm to
help. Oxen laboring and yet fat. Oxen how to fat. Oxen being faint to help.
Oxen stalfed.
P
PAstoring against tillage. Panting in Ox or Cow. Pestilence and the cause.
Pissing of blood to help. 43 Pissing of blood another. 43 Pissing good things
to provoke. 56 Pots to keep Ox piss. Purging things for Cattle. 58 Pricking
with a thorn. 57
Q
QVide of a beast lost to help. 40
R
REaring of Calves for increase. Rotting in a beast to help. 81. 85
S
SCabbes on Cattle to help. 21 Sinews shrunk or broken to help. Sinews
stiff to help. 20 Sick beasts to help. Sinews good things to knit them. 48
Sinews, another to knit. Shroue mouce and her nature. 74 Shoulder bruised to
help. Shoulder out of joint to help. 78 Spraine or stroke to help. 78 Stroke
in the eye. Stall fed Oxen. Stall, to give Cattle drinks in. 60 Stinging of
Adder or Snake. 30 Stinging of the field spider. 30 Stinging with hornet or
waspe. 34 Sound beasts to know. 81 Swelling through blood to help. 14 Swelling
by eating a tine worm. 15. 88 Swelling by drinking a horsleech. 33 Swelling in
any out part. 80 Swelling in Cattle by venomous herbs. 36 Swelling by eating
green corn. 36
T
TEtter on Cattle to help. 75 Another for the same. 76 The tail a grief.
Teeth loose in cattle to help. 45. 82 Tine worm eaten to help. Tine blaine on
the tongue to help. Trenches in the guts to help. Turning disease to help. 47
V
VEnomed tongue to help. 14 Vain cut to help. Vometing of a beast to help.
W
WArrenall worm in the back of Cattle. 44 Water in the belly of cattle to
help. Water meet for cattle to drink. Weary bread a disease. Weathering in a
Cow to help. 57 Worm in the tail to help. 16 Worms in Calves to help.
Worms in other Cattle to help. 42 Worm betwixt the clees to help.
FINIS.
THE Second book entreating of the government of Horses, with the approved
remedies against most diseases.

Very profitable for all men, having a charge and government thereof, and
chiefly for husbandmen: with diverse other remedies practiced in this land.

Gathered by L. M.

Although the Learned have reuealde the helps for horse great store, Yet
practisers therein again: have found for them much more.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1587.

An instruction for the ferrar and horseleech.
THe duty of Ferrars and Horseleeches which desire the knowledge to help
soreness and diseases in horses. They must well and perfectly understand of
the present disease in the horse before they minister. Also to look on him
well, how many other griefs are growing on him, and whether the cause be
hot or cold. To know also the operation of all such herbs, and drugges, as
he does minister unto them. With what quantity and portion of each thing
thereof, and in what time and hour of the dale and year is best. Also what
force and strength the horse is of which he does minister unto. And whether he
be old or young, and which disease to cure first.

These things well considered, so when ye have ministered unto the horse, and
given them drinks in declaring how they should after be kept. He ought
also to look well unto them (after their drinks) for a time: to see how his
medicines does work, not to give a horse drink (as most horseleeches do)
and then to let them go, and takes no care thereof after. Whereby many horses
falls worse sick, and so perishes soon after for lack of attendance and
good government, which is a great discredit to that ferrour, or horseleech.
For like as the wise learned Physician, when he have ministered unto his
patient. He will not then upon the sudden depart, but first he will know the
working of his medicine: and thereby he gets the more knowledge. Even so
the horseleech should after giving drinks, mark the woorking thereof in each
horse. So likewise for his salues and playsters he should look unto them
from time to time, and see the working thereof, whereby so doing, he should
increase still more and more in knowledge and fame. Thus much for instruction
to the ferrar and horseleech.

The judgment of Laurence Ruce of a beautiful horse.
THe parts of a beautiful horse are these, he ought to have a small lean
head, with the skin joining to the same, broad forhead, short ears and
sharp, great eyes not hollow, his nostrils large and open, his lips thin
and slender, a large mouth and close, a long neck and slender toward the
head, his mane crested somewhat bowing up, and broad breast, a short back and
straight, his reins full on both sides with flanks like an Ox, his hanches
long stretchingout, a round rumpe, his tail with slender long hair, large
thighs fleshy withinside as without, his legs straight, lean and plain, large
hips, great legs, lean and full of hair, the joints of his legs big, not
fleshie by the hoofes, round hoofes, short pastornes, strong and well set,
with the rest of his universal members of his body in length as in breadth,
his neck rising greater toward his shoulders and breast, and to be higher
behind then before, like to the stagge or heart.

Also the nature of the horse.
THe horse is of a hot temperat nature, his heat is showed by his highness, he
is hold and of long life, for he is of a longer life than all other laboring
beasts, his te^perature is therein found, for he is easy to be taught, and
gentle toward his master and feeder. Thus much here touching the beauty
and nature of a horse.

To the Horsemaister and breeder of coltes.
1
RIde not thy horse too young I say,
nor labor him too sore:
Where gristles is as yet but weak,
strive not with him therefore.
2
A young horse soon does catch a crushe,
and wilful often they be:
Whereby their sorrows does increase,
as daily ye may see.
3
Therefore to use and tame thy coltes,
from year to year take pain:
And when thou make them ready sale,
the more shall be thy gain.
4
Thy horse once sick, defer not time,
his grief for to appease:
For soreness often so dangerous be,
thou may thy horse soon leese.
5
If thou do mark of sorenes most,
whereof they do proceed:
Thou shall find out that most do come,
For lack of taking heed.
6
Therefore let this book be thy glass,
wherein thou may have sight:
How for to help and save thy horse,
wherein thou have delight.
7
Here may thou find, both learn and see,
no kind of helps to want:
Of secret knowledge in thy horse,
which skill has bin full scant.
A Proverb.
To trust all current horsecoursers,
I vise thee to beware,
For truth among the most of them
is found to be full rare.
Breeding of coltes.
ALl those which has a desire for to breed coltes and horse, they must first
make provision for the good government thereof, and to have large pastures,
and to be measured in their meat as well as other cattle. For a horse does
ask a greater diligence to be meated and kept in the stable more then other
cattle. There is three sorts of horses, the first are to be nourished young,
which are noble and excellent: for the field and tourney. The second is, for
carriage of burdens, as moyles and pack horse, which are bought and sold for
that purpose according to their goodness. The third is, another sort of horses
and mares of easy prices, common for most men, the which is of a meaner and
smaller stature, and for the common sort are most necessary to travel with,
and also are better to feed and bring up for to till the earth, which must
have also keepers continually to see unto the^ in fields and pastures, as well as
in woods or other grounds, and to keep them from dangerous places of myres
and bogges, and where as they may have soft grass and sweet, as well as to be
rank, high and great. They do suffer these horses to be with the mares in
pastures or other grounds, and pass not when they do cover the mares, not
for these sort of horses: but for your large and great mares, they ought to be
covered about April or May, and some do cover in mid March, to the end the
mares may foale about the same time they were covered, in having ready the same
time the tender grass and herb to feed on, and to have the hot and fair
season unto harvest: for about the end of xii. months after she foaleth: and
therefore ye must with good aduiseme^t, put the horse unto the mare. For he that
keeps these sort of beasts, must serve them at the same hour, when they are
desirous, or when they do enter into the fierce and hot desire of the horse,
which is (as Hippomanes says) a venom) because it inflameth both men and
beasts, and to have the like rage in love as the horses and mares. For mares
may conceive of themselves, without the company of the horse, as without doubt
it is most true, that in some countries, the mares be so great heat, and
desires so to be covered, that although they have not the horse, nevertheless
in thinking and desiring so much the horse, they burn so within themselves,
that in thinking thereof, they become with foale. Like as the birds of houses,
as Cocks to lay eggs, and hens to lay eggs without the Cock. And as the
Poet Virgill in his third book of Georgiques says thus:

Above all all beasts great love there was,
in these hot sort of mares,
As was often times in Venus love,
by fleshly mindful cares.
When Glaucus punished was,
for his audacitie,
By carrying of such mares,
into the isle Pontie.
Which love did cause them range,
the mountains of Gargare,
Also Ascanie, and
the mountains of Gargare.
Through springs and mighty rivers,
themselves did often torment,
By eating of the herb in spring,
that heat did still augment.
They turning on the mountains high,
all right against the wind,
Says (my Author) Sephorus,
in their hot burning mind.
They so became with foale,
without having the horse,
Which fire to quench is marvelous,
that so will have his course.
They running in all parts fiercely,
through ragged rocks and stones,
Over mountains and low valleys,
with cries, sighs and groans.
Except the Orient parts,
and in the North and West:
Whereas the wind is boisterous cold,
with shades often times oppressed.
Which beasts with pearcing air,
often times are turned and tossed:
Whereas small heat of sun does come,
are punished with the frost.
Which causes their hot nature
more milder for to be,
In countries cold also they are,
as ye may daily see.
Also it is most true in ye holy mountains of Spain, which lies toward y^
occident seas. Many genets and young mares Covering mares.
have colts, without the covering of the horse, which coltes they do nourish
and bring up, and yet they are unprofitable, for within 3 years when they
should be at perfect grouth, they die. But as touching the covering of ye
mares, ye meetest time is about the month of March or April, then let the
young mares be satisfied of their natural desire, and the rest of y^ year to
keep the horse from them, and to separat y^ great stalions apart, it shall be
best, because they shall not cover when they would: but to keep them to cover,
when the best time is, and so it shall be better, so that ye have pasture for
them, and let them be far from the mares, or else to keep them still in the
stable, until the time of covering your mares, against which time they ought to
be well nourished, and fed with barley, and dried pease, to make them more
lustier. For whereas a horse is weak in covering, so much weaker shall the colt
be in growing and might. Some do make the horse therefore as lusty as he may
be, whereby he may the better endure to cover many mares within a short time,
and yet not to cover above xv. or xx. mares, nor to begin before he is of
three years old: for then he will better continue till twenty years, and
most commonly they are found good, if the horse be then strong, and have rest.
But if he be feeble and weak, ye must then rub the nature of the mare with a
spounge, and put it into the horse nostrels, and if the mare will not suffer
the horse to cover her, ye shall bruise the sea onion, called squilla, and with
that all to rub the secrets of the mare, and that shall put her in more heat.
And sometimes they let an other horse leap on the mare, to bring her in more
heat, and takes him of again by and by, and then put the other horse unto her
and so he couers her. Now after she have taken and is with fool, ye must have a
great care for hurting of her, and not to labor her soon after her covering,
Government of the mare with fool.
or when she is nie foling. But to nourish her well specially in both the said
times. If ye have not grass in winter, ye must stable her, for she feed
twain. Let her not run, or travail sore, nor suffer any great cold, nor
yet to keep her in any strait or narrow place, or close shut up, that one
hurt not an others belly. For all these before said do oftentimes make them bring
forth dead coltes. Also the snuff of of a candle hold it at her nose, will
make her cast her colt, or when she longs not to give her desire. Also if the
mare fool in traueiling, or have a dead colt, ye shall stamp polipodium
roots, or oak fern, and mix it with warm water, and give it her with a
horn. But if she have fold well and the colt fair, touch not the colt with
your hands, for by touching it never so little (being yet but tender) ye may
soon hurt it. Ye must also have a care to see it laid warm, and to order the
damme so as she may have space enough about her, for the tender colt may soon
be hurt by the dam if she should chance to lie on it. So by little and little
ye may bring it abroad with the mare, and take heed that dung hurt not his
hoofes: and when he is of more strength, ye may then let him feed continually
with the dam, because she shall not have anger to see her colt, for commonly a
mare will become sick for love of her colt, if she see it not. Good and lusty
mares do bring coltes yearly, and the great and fair mares, ought not to have
coltes but from two year to two year, to the end (by long sucking) the coltes
may wax and grow more stronger, and thereby they will be the better to travel,
when any shall be put to serve in the field.

Also the stallen must not be younger then three years when he covers a
mare, and so he may continue unto xx. years well: and the ma^e may bear well
at two years, so that when she is of iii. years she shall nourish well her
colt, but after she is x. years, she is not so good. For commonly an old mares
colt will be heavy in labor, weak, and soon weary. If ye will she shall
bring a male colt, or female, for the male, when the horse does cover her, ye
must bind back with a cord or pluck back his left stone, and for the female
Mares, for male and female
bind back the right stone of the horse, and thus ye may do unto all other
kind of cattle.

After the colt is fold incontinent ye may judge what he will be: if he be well
fold, then tractable and sure of foot, and moving Tokens of a good colt.
at the noise of any thing, full of play and swift, having a short rumpe, more
proper then other are of his age. If he will leap out of a hole without
reculing back. If he will by the way pass boldly over bridges and rivers. Also
these are the signs in a good colt, having also the beauty and good
disposition of the body, as to have a lean small head, black eyes, wide
nostrels, short ears, and straight, the chyne of his back large and soft, and
not long, his main thick hanging on the right side, a large breast and open,
with strong muscles and sinews, his shoulders large and right with round
sides, his back bone even, his belly gant, his stones and codde close and
small, his raines large descending, his knees round and small, not turning
inward, his legs right and straight, his buttocks round, his thighs thick and
strong, his tail long with big crumpled hair, his hoofes hard and high smooth
and round, and his fore top above very small, and al his body big, hie, and
straight, and well in lifting his feet, fair to see in length, and round
according to his body. Also to be pleasant and soon chaft, and sudden gentle
and meek again, for these coltes of such nature do soon obey the man, and will
patiently endure labor and traueile. If a colt when he is fold do not cast his
milt, husbandmen say he will not live long, but die suddenly in few years
after, and some colt will cast two miltes, no horse that lives xii. years has
any milt within him. Also for the taming or breaking of a horse colt when he is
of two years he may well be tamed and broken for the use of the house, but for
the field or journey, he must be of iii. years old. and then after iiii. hes
may be taken to travel, and look also from time to time how the marks do
change in his body. The age of a horse is known by his hoofes, and tail, and
bars in the ruff of his mouth, but chiefly by his teeth, for a horse of two
years old and half, will cast his two foremost teeth above, and also under, and
when he is iiii. years, the teeth which we call dogs teeth fall, and so
comes other: and before the sixth year, the great teeth or chewing teeth above
do fall, and on the said year, the first teeth that fell, are returned whole
again, and on the seventh year all are filde up again without having any
hollownes in the teeth, and from the seventh a man may not well know of his age,
yet about x. years his temples will begin to be hollow, crooked, and withered.
therefore some do take up the skin to hide the same, and being old, his brows
will wax long, and gray haired, and his teeth grow long and black. Also when
as your horses are in health, and yet wax lean, ye shall fat them soon with
dryde wheat or barley, but ye must give this like a mash in wine or ale, and by
little and little to make them have continual appetite, mix therewith the
branne of barley, until ye shall accustom them to eat beans, and pure barley.

Also ye must each day, chafe his body as ye do to some men, Chafing his body.
in rubbing them up and down with a cloth, and often so covered and rubbed,
does profit them much, and also to be lead and rubd with ones hand on the back
is better then to give them much meat, for rubbing does profit, preserve, and
keep both strength of body and legs, for fault of rubbing many soarnes grows
on the legs of horses in traueile, and this I will counsel you, if one lead
his horse in a raynye time from his labor into the stable, he must see that
the place be dry, and that their hoofes be not wette, or stand in cold
wette places, for that both will cause them being hot, to founder, or to have
an ague. If the stable be well planked with oak, or if the earth be often
cleansed, and laid clean straw thereon, for horses oftimes being hot, they
catch diseases, in being weary and standing on the cold ground, specially when
they are not strong, then see the more unto them: for when they sweat, to give
them meat or drink, does hurt them, but when they are cold ye may then
without danger give them meat or drink, but after Drink or meat.
his drink, stir him a little, and he shall do the better, and then ye may
give him prouender or other meat: and when they have rested long they chafe
them suddenly which is not good, and for your weary beasts ye must let them
rest, and put of sallet oil into their throats with a horn, or fresh grease
with wine: and against cold, ye must give them things to vomit, and frote
their heads, and ridge bone with wine or strong ale, or grease melted and warm
rubbed thereon. If your horse cannot piss, give him oil mixte with wine, and
chafe him in the flanks, and on the raines. If that serve not, put or give him
garlic with ale: also they say, to bruise garlic and rub his yard, is good
against let of vrin. A piece made of honey and salt put into his yard, or live
flies, or a little frankincense, or squirt the juice of betony into his yard.
Or give him warm water, or wash his yard with warm vinegar. All these are
good remedies when he cannot stale, or when his vrin burns in the inner part
of the bladder, or when he has a hot water.

Also when a horse has pain in his head, ye may know it by dropping of his
urine, and in falling and flagging of his ears. His neck, and head, heavy
hanging downward, and pain in the head.
then ye must let him blood on the vain under the eye, and squirt into his
nostrels warm water, and that day give him no meat, on the morrow fasting ye
shall give him warm water, and then some grass, and litter him well with old
hay, or soft straw, at night again give him warm water, and some barley mixed
with two pound of fetches, and so by little and little let him come to his
ordinary feeding, Also against pain of the eye teeth, or grinding teeth, ye
shall fume them with hot vinegar, and some do hold it to the teeth with a cloth
on a sticks end, and so rub them therewith. This is good also when there is
any inflammation or swelling in them. Also if his shoulder be hurt, or that he
have lost blood, then shall ye open the vain in the middle, betwixt his two
fore legs, and rub his shoulder with the said blood, mixte with the fine
powder of frankincense, but let not to much blood for weakening him, and lay on
the place his own dung, and bind it fast with some thing, and ye shall on the
next day again draw some more blood in the same place, and use it as before,
and then give him no barley, but a little hay, and on the third day unto the
sixth ye shall give him in the morning vi. ounces of the juice of leekes, mixed
with a pound of sallet oil, and after the sixth day then walk him a little,
and lead him forth to some place to make him swim. Then do nourish him well
after for a time, and he shall do well.

If your horse is troubled with choler, his belly will swell and will be hot,
nor he cannot then vent beneath, and then ye must rake him with your hand, and
cleanse the natural conduits which are stopped, and take forth his dung, and ye
shall give him sauin, stauesaker, and salt boild and mixed together, in putting
to a little honey, and minister it in at his tuel like a glister or
suppositorie: which will move and purge forth all the choler. Some do beat iii.
ownces of mirre, with iii. pintes of wine and gives it with a horn: and to
chafe and rub his tuell with tar and old grease. Other do wash his belly
with falte water of the sea, or water and salt. As for other purgations, they
do commonly give in powders, and pills, which must be given with good
discretion, according to each disease, his medicine. Which ye shall understand
more thereof at large, in M. Blundeuils book for horses, how and when to
purge them, therefore I here pass it over.

Against the bots or worms in the guts, when the horse is troubled therewith,
the signs are: he will often wallow and lie down for pain, and rise suddenly
again. Also he will bow his head toward his side or belly, and stamp with
his feet, and friske with his tail often, the next remedy is, put your hand
into his tuell and draw forth his dung, and wash his belly with sea water, or
strong salted water, and cast in his throat three ownces of the roots of
capers beaten with half so much vinegar, and that will kill all worms and
bottes. Some take hot embers and put it in running water, then strain it and
give it warm with a horn, and walks him after half an hour, and ties him up
with the bridle: and others take fenegreke, and baies, licoras, and turmericke,
Drinks for horses.
of each a halfepeny worth, of anniseseeds a penyworth, with a quantity of
brimstone in powder, and beat all these small together, and put them in a quart
of ale, and give it fasting warm, and walk and use him as before, and keep
him warm all that day after: or a pint of milk, with a sponful of soap. Some
give sauin chopped among prouender, or a ry shelfe: or the fine powder of
brimstone in warm milk: some other do let them blood fasting in the ruff of
his mouth, and that is the best for a mare that is with fool, and to let her
Mare with sole
blood often and to give her a little prouender after, for if ye should give
her stronger things, it were dangerous for the colt, except it were strong,
and nigh her time: and some do give Cough.
them man's dung hot, and annoints the bridle therewith, and chafes him thereon,
and maluesy also is good fasting: for the cough newly taken, they take lentile
pease, clean made, dride and beat to powder, and put thereof in warm water,
and so given a pint, Use him thus three days, and give him grass, and tender
branches of herbs. For an old cough, they heal with vi. ounces of the juice
of leekes, mixed with a pound of oil olive, and so give it with a horn, and
give him grass to eat after, and to anoint his grief with vinegar and oil
mixed together. If it help not, then chafe him sometimes with sal niter and
alum mixed together with a fether, of each (...) like, with some vinegar. If
there be pushes or blisters on his Pushes and blisters.
body, ye shall frote them so hard in the sun that they bleed, they mix of
the root of iuie with so much brimstone, of tar and alum, put al together,
and therewith heal it. For the cough some say, take a hedgehog, and cast him
into an oven, and dry him to powder, and always mix of that powder with his
prouender, which will help at length any cough. Or to take a handful of box
leaves small chopped, and mix it with a peck of ground malt, and sees it in a
gallo^ or two of fair water, and let the horse drink thereof milk warm, and
give him white water for two or three days after, or a handful of groundsell,
small shred with the powder of licoras, and anniseseedes, of each a quantity,
and so give it warm in a quart of ale: then ride him softly after and keep
him warm for two or three days after.

To heal al sores or other chasinges on horses in any part All sores chafes.
of his body, they do use to wash them with warm water, and then to rub and
chafe them with grease, and salt melted together, so long till the matter ripe
and issue out: such sores oftimes do kill horses, if there be not (in the
beginning) some remedy found. Some do annoint them with oil of Cedar, or of
Lentyles, or with nettle seeds, mixed with sallet oil, or the oil of a whale,
or the dropping of salt tunny: and chiefly the grease of a seal fish. But if
the sores be old, ye must have stronger things, as to boil of betony herb,
and brimstone powder, of ellebory, of pitch, with as much old grease, and with
this they do heal all old sores, in racing them first with a sharp iron, and
then to wash them with piss, and so to anoint. And sometime if it be
festred, to cut it to the quick, and then to draw it with medicines, as
shall be made with tar and oil, or such like which will clenes and fill
again the place, and when the hair shall be full again and closed full with
hair, then it shall be good to chafe the place with soote of a cawdrone, and
butter. and to heal a nauelgall, or sore back, take soote of a chimney, and
yest mixed together, and plaster it therewith, which will heal without any other
thing, in shifting it once a day. For rising of the skin or raising thereof.
Take two great onyons, and boil them in water, with hounds tongue herb, then
being hot, take a pound of salt, and mix it with strong vinegar, putting
therein the yeolke of an egg, then mix all together, and rub the place
therewith, and ye shall see the experience. And for his back that is chopped and
swollen, ye shall first wash him with piss hot, then anoint him with fresh
butter, and lay thereon a little hay wet in cold water, and so clap your saddle
thereon, and let him rest so all that night, or anoint it with butter, then put
on the wette hay, and your saddle. Some clap these to hot, horse dung, and then
the saddle, but take the grounds of ale or beer, and boil it well with
mallows, and clap it hot: but if the skin be through chaft, so that it do
water and is very moist, ye shall have ready in a bag filde with the powder
of bryer leaves finely beaten, and put a little of that thereon, and it will
dry it, by the morning, and it will heal it also, without other thing. Also
for sore eyes which may be heald with the meal of wild tares, called oreb. And
the creuices and chops on the eyes are healed, with fasting spettle, and a
little salt, or the powder of a dry bone, and mixed with burnde salt, or the
seeds of wild parsnips in powder, and put in a cloth, and blosh it in his
eyes: and all the griefs of the eyes are healed by mixing the juice of
plantaine with honied water, or if ye have not that, take honey, and time, mixed
together. Also for a sore eye, take strong nettles, do stamp them and strain
them with beer, and squirt thereof into his eye twice or thrice, then blow in
a little powder of sandiuer, and let him take no cold of his eye, till it be
hole. If ye must needs ride him after, it were good to keep a cloth before
his eye, to defend the wind, and it were good to let him blood under the eye,
and then dress him once or twice, and it shall suffice: for blood in eyes take
the white of au egg, and clap it to, or the juice of Selandine to anoint, and
it is good against any stroke, and also it is good to make a tossed of bread and
dippe it with white wine, and clap it to his eye, and use it often, or to let
blood under his brows: and to keep the flies from his eye, or other sore, ye
shall melt tar and oil, or tar and hogs grease together, and strike thereof
all about.

Sometimes a horse will cast blood at his nose, which does weaken him much, and
is gotten by some strain, or such like, they staunch it by blowing in at their
nostrels the juice of Coriander, or bruise the leaves of peruincle, and put
thereof in his mouth, and let him chewe it in his teeth, and that will stanch
bleeding of the nose.

Sometimes a horse will loose his taste, which comes of sorrow. The remedy is:
Take iiii. ownces of the seeds of nigilromana, beat with vi. ounces of oil
olive, mixed with a pint of wine, and make him to swallow it down. The
dispositition of vomit: they use to take it away, in making them often to
swallowe a beaten head of garlic, with three parts of wine.

Against appostumed or pestilent sores, it shall be good to pearce them with a
hot iron, rather then with a cold, then plaster it with healing medicines.
Pestilence in mares.


Also there is a pestilence, which causes mares suddenly to wax lean, and
so pine away. If any such do happen, ye shall put in their nostrels four
pintes of Fish brine, called garume. If the grief be great, they take six
times so much, and this will make them to purge and cast out al phlegm at their
nostrels.

Sometimes mares will be in a rage, but not often, which is to be noted, how
that sometimes they happen to be in a hot rage, that is: when they see their
image in the water, they Mares in a rage.
are suddenly taken with love, in so much that then they forget to drink or
eat, and in so burning does become dry. The signs are, when she runs over
the pastures as she were chaft or beaten, and looking often about her, as though
she desired something.

They use to heal this folly, in leading her to the water again. For when she
shall see her self in the water as she did before, she does suddenly forget
her first image that she saw: and this is often among mares. Thus will I here
leave a little of them, and speak somewhat of moiles and their natures.

Who so has a desire to nourish asses and moyles, they ought diligently to
search for the fairest and best males, and likewise the females to bear
coltes, for if they be not both well disposed, those which shall come of them
shall nothing prevail. Ye must therefore choose the mare under ten years,
and to be large and fair, and well membred, to abide travail: and let her
bear easy burdens for hurting the seed within her belly, and not to be
one^^e beautiful of body, but good also of spirit and stomach, and when the
seed is long or it take life within her body, or being long ere she fool,
scarsly about the end of xiii. months, is a token of some let.
Notwithstanding the moile colt takes most after the ass that begat him,
rather then after the life and nature of his dam, and yet ye shall not find it
true in all mares, no more then is properly in all horses. For sometimes
experience does deceive a man's judgment in him which he chooses. For
oftentimes stallions of their own nature and race, are marvelous in condition
and form. And whereas the mares are but small and fair, commonly they bring
more males then females. Nevertheless the coltes do increase or diminish after
or according to their dammes. Some stallions are ill to see to, and yet shall
be great coltes of great price. And some do yield a worthiness unto the fruit,
more then other some. But they are more colder and not so hot of desire, and
are not joined in love but very hardly with the mare. And these sort of
stallions must have mares of the like nature: For the like nature is more
familiar to conceive then others. Yet the ass never begets an ass, nor the
moyle never begets moyles: and for this cause they do often suffer the
stallions to mount on the mares, to put them in more heat, and to take them
suddenly away again: Which shall make the horse to be more eager of the mare,
which before he little past of, and this is to be noted by the way, those which
have their kidneys hot, are always more desirous, then those which have
their stones and kidneys cold, which is as well in man, as in beasts.

There is another sort of stallions which are in a rage in their fiery heat,
which are so devilish and froward, that thereby they are soon marde, if they
be not wisely governed and handied. And often they break their halte^rs and
cords in gnawing and eating them a sonder, and leapes on mares with fool, in
biting them by the neck and back.

Now to correct such, ye must put them into a horse myll, and there to make him
sure, and use him a little to labor Hot stallion^
gently, and so ye shall make him to leave his furiousnes. So when he has left
it, yet thereuppon let him not be suffered to cover until he be in
sufficient heat thereunto. For this is of greater importance, that the sprite
of these beasts are naturally heavy and sleepie. But by moderate exercises
they will be the more liuelyer to travail, and then ye may let them cover,
that by the secret efficacy of hidden nature, their fruit may be the more
pleasenter. Also a moyle does not engender with a she ass, or mare, but a she
ass with a horse, or a wild he ass with a mare. Certain authoures which I
will not hide, as Marcus Verro, and before him Democritus, and Mago, have
said, that in Afric there is no marvel, or yet a monstrous thing to see
their moyles to bear, no more then the mares in this country. The most fair
and largest cattle among all moyles, are those which are begotte of asses, and
may well be compared unto those which are gotten of wild asses. If it were
not that they are so troublesome, wild, and hard to govern and rule, like unto
their sires, there were none like them.

Wherefore those stallions that shall come of that race, shall be better, and
so from time to time alter. For if ye rouer a mare with a horse that was
begotte of a wild ass, or tame, he shall keep their bigness and modestye
like their sier, with like strength and age unto their first race. And those
which are gotten betwixt a horse and an ass, shall bear the name of their
parents, as to say horse moyles: For they will resemble like unto their
dammes. Therefore if it better to have moyles of an ass stallion, which by
experiences come of a good and fayrer race, then otherwise. He must be chosen
great of Beauty of moyles.
body, with a strong neck, his sides long and large, with an open and a large
breast, and full of sinews, his thighs fleshye, his legs well trust and black
of color or spotted. The asses are commonly of a mouse dun colored hair. But
that is not a pleasant hair for a moyle: Therefore in general it is good to
take good heed thereof, that ye be not deceived by your eye, for even like as
we shall see the fleece of a Lamb, which comes of a ram with a spotted
tongue, so likewise, the ass has hair of diverse colors on his brows and
ears, and thereby often they make the moyles of diverse colors: Therefore when
ye have diligently considered of your stallion, yet nevertheless ye may be
deceived, for beside these foresaid marks, sometimes they have moyles by other
colored horses which they know not, and yet the same may be as well esteemed
as other, which comes of no other cause but from their first parents, and
generation, which by mixing with others has been almost destroyed, and yet by
the seed of the horse is renewed again to his first estate. And the ass which
I do write of, as soon as she has foled, it ought to be taken away from
her, and privily to be set to the mare which has a colte, so that she know
not thereof, which must be done in the night, and set in a dark place. But
first take away the mares colte, and put to the other, but in ten days she
will not let it suck, therefore ye must help it in the mean time, the one as
well as the other, as ye shall cause. Or else take the urine, or milk of the
one, and rub the coltes therewith contrary, and at length they will love and
use them for their own. And this young stallion colt so nourished of the mare,
shall take a love unto mares herafter. And though often times they be norished
with their Dammes milk, yet being but young, and having the usual company
among mares daily, he will thereby the better love them, and so will he serve
well your mares, but let him not cover them before he be three years
Covering of young mares.
old. And at such convenient times, as grass may feed him well, and
sometimes with sheues of barley, sometimes of good mashes to drink of branne and
wheat: or of wheat sed, or barley sodde, and let him not first cover a young
tender mare, which has never been covered before. For in the mounting on her,
she will often strike him with her feet, and thereby he will take it
scornefully, which shall make him to cast a continual hate to all other
hereafter, and therefore they put some other unto the young mare to put her in a
heat, and not to cover her, but with him. And when ye Place to cover
shall see her desirous to stand, then take him away, and put to the young
stallion and let him cover her. Also it shall be good to have a place made with
boordes descending downewarde before, that she may the better take the horse,
and not fly aside, or turn from the horse when he covers her. Some do
manacle her fore feet to the hinder on both sides. And by this descending
place, a low ass, or horse may cover her the better, and more easier. And
after being thus covered with an Ass, or other Horse, then in the year after
that she have fold, ye shall not by and by cover her again with another,
but in that year let her nourish her fool, which fool shall be the better
hereafter to do any purpose: therefore let her not be covered again so
soon. And when that colte is a year old, take him from his damme, and put
the mare in such pastures as you shall seem good, in woods or in mountains,
to harden her hoofes, whereby she may the better travail hereafter. And
always he moyles are better to bear the packsaddle, then then the she
moyles, yet she moyles are more quicker, and nimble, and most meet to bring
coltes: But they are both good to travail with the burden, and also to labor
the earth, if it were not that these kind of cattle are somewhat to high for
that purpose. Therefore commonly they use a temme of Oxen to break the
grounds before.

And for the burden some do say a mare is weaker then a gelded horse, and a
gelding weaker then a stoned horse, and a horse weaket then a moile. For the
moiles commonly (as they say) will carry v. or vi. hundredth weight, and
therewith they will travail thirty miles a day. For both horse and moiles are
beasts of a great strength, if they had understanding no man should be able to
rule them, and also they say a horse or moyle has no brains, but in the
place thereof, he Horse without brains.
has as it were a bladder filde with wind, and no brains therein, or other
thing, but like a white water. Thus I leave of horse and moiles, and here I
will speak of the ordering of horse in travail.

How the husband or carter should order his horse in travail by the way, or
other wise.
TO show somewhat the duty of carters, which carters must have always
patience, in moderate using of their horses, and at al other times he ought to
bear a love always to his cattle, so that his cattle may love him, not
fearing them to much, let him never use to beat them with the stock of the
whip, but to whip them with the lash, and use them to the sound thereof, and yet
not often for dulling of them: in travail use them sometimes with fierce words
more then with stripes. Your loytering horses touch before the other, and the
free horse touch him least of all, but at a great need. Also a free horse
ought to be haltered short, or else he will soon spoil him self in strayning
continually, he will soon be lame, broken winded, or blind. And use all the
other at times when you shall see cause, and let them not in travail by the
way, draw or labor so much as they may, touch not a horse with the whip over
his back, for fear of his eyes, and also he that is behind him, but touch on
the legs of the near side, and so ye shall avoid danger thereof, nor to draw
to much for thereby ye may soon dull and tyer them, specially in a young
horse, and after traueile trusse them up to the tuell, for taking cold. Ye must
also every morning use to rub and to kembe them, for therein a horse does
delight, and it will make them more lustier, and fresher to labor, and in
summer the like if they be howsed, or if they be at grass also: and water them
not, but at their accustomed hours, and after as they have iourneied in
summer, wash often their feet with cold water, and if ye can, sometimes with
wine, or ale and butter, which will supple and strengthen their sinews, or to
bath them with the lies of wine, which will likewise supple and strengthen
them, and after to rub their legs with butter or neruoileor nets foot oil, and
if they be shod, ye shall bind to their hoofes dung mixed with men's vrin, and if
their feet be hot, or have the gout, ye shall then wash their mouths with
vinegar and salt mixed together, and for that time give them no hay nor other
forage as straw or otes, nor Hot feet or hoof.
yet of litter, but well cleansed, nor let them be shod til they be well. Also the
carter must use daily to see that his harnaise be just and meet for every horse
according to his stature, that he may therein labor the easier. And also those
harnaises may be well looked unto from time to time, and all things belonging
thereunto: as halters, brydles, headstalles, collers, hawmes, traces, pipes,
wanties, packsaddels, backwanties, and belly wanties, with tack, or shoottle
pin, tied to every hawm The horse cart and harnaise to see to.
with a string, to be the readyer at need, and each of the belly wanties to
have a cross pin, or ferrell of wood, to be always ready to fasten and loose,
and to have all things whole and sound, not to be broken or faulty against any
time of occupying, and to be well hanged upon hooks clean from the ground,
that horses tread not thereon, or that dogs gnaw no part thereof, and every
horse harness placed by him self, ready to harnaise at all times. Also the
carter ought to have skill how to mend his harnaise, to stitch and sow it when
any part or parcel thereof decays, and to have his packsaddle, thread and
whitlether always ready, or other great thread wherewith to prepare to help
the same again, and to have always with him his nawle, and pannell needle.
The carter ought also to have knowledge in shooing his horse, that when any
shoe fall loose by the way in travail, he ought to have hammer and nails
ready to fasten it on again, for loosing, or to set on some other, he ought to
have always shoes and nails with him, for by that means he may save his
horse oftimes from danger of surbat, graueling, or prickking with some nail,
or cut with some stone, and such like: for to have experience in shooing is a
thing soon learnd, there is small danger, but in pricking or clowing with a
nail, or to drive it nie or in the quick, whereupon among all skillful
smithes, this proverb is said, which is, before behind, and behind before:
which meaning is, the most dangerous nails to drive in the fore feet, is the
two hindermost nails, and in the Proverb.
hindermost feet, the two foremost nails, the rest not so dangerous so that ye
drive them even. If your shoes be made hollow or rising in the midst, and not
flat to the foot, it will be much better for the horse, to cleanse and void
graueling. For otherwise thou can not cleanse them so well, and they will the
sooner be graueled: therefore see to have shoes always ready against any such
time of need.

Likewise also when thou do take any journey, with the Preparing the cart.
horse and cart, thou must likewise see that all things belonging to the cart
to be substantial and strong, as thy wheels, and carthodie strong and sure
to bear a burden, and the axeltree likewise. Also see the rath staves and
struts be whole and sound and well furnished, with staves of good strong holly,
hasell, or ash, and to have them ready dride, if any want or break, and all the
shamble staves to be made of good dry and tough ash, which are to bear a
burden from the thyller, and thy cartladder, to be made of good dry ash
also, and surely set thereunto. And let your axeltres be so made that they may
fill close the nathes of the wheels, for when they gaggle or shake, they go
uneasy, and hinder nigh the draught of a horse, and that also is uneasy for
the thyll Horse. And see that your axeltree he well clouted and nayld close
thereon, that the nails tear not the nathes of the wheels. And see also in
like manner the areltree pynnes be sure and strong, for if the axeltree go not
close, they are commonly in danger of bowing or breaking: and let your nathes
and axeltree he well greast, with fresh grease and soap, or snayles mixed
together, for that will keep the nathes long cool, and to go more easier.
Which grease ye must always have with you when ye travel by the way, to
occupy when ye shall see cause, and also to have ready roapes ends, or
other small cord, that when any thing do break or cleave asunder: by and by
to mend and piece it again. Thus advisedly traueling on thy way, have an eye
to the fore horse, in lanes specially and streets for fear of children and
beasts, but if thou stay, let thy horse stay also, take heed of the
forehorse in these places. Look well to the body horse, and in routs, holes, and
dangerous ways be always nigh unto the thiller, with thy hand nigh his head:
whereby thou may the better rule him upon a sudden, and alwaie look to the
going of the wheels in thus doing. Thou shall keep thy cart always upright
from overthrowing, and when thou go down a hill, dragge the cart behind,
and up a hill, weigh the cart before. And thus doing in considering all ways
and places, posts, and gates, thou shall avoid often times the dangers thereof,
which otherwise thou may happen often therewith to be troubled.

Also the carter ought to see well to his horse in traveling, for the horse is
a beast of stout courage, and he loves Belles on the horse.
man, and he is delighted with the whistle, drum, or in bells, which belles do
not hang so well at the horse ear, as at his patrell, or on the back wantie,
for the belles hanging so nigh his ears, he cannot so soon hear his driuer,
and the Carter must likewise be careful at all times to see unto his horse, y^
if any do halt or complain by any means, to see by and by unto him, and
search where the pain rests, and to remedy it in time, with such things as
he shall think good. Sometime to lay on their own doung on their pastorns as
before is mentioned, he must also be well advised when the hoof is newly hurt,
and chafed, to make him have a sound hoof again, and in taking cold (after
his labor) or when he has the cough, then ye must cover and keep him warm,
and give him mashes, or if he be more founded by travel in rainy weather, or at
other like times, ye shall clappe the roots of Alexander sodde in wine unto
his feet, and make him to eat Fenegreke, or Anniseeds among his prouender.
But if then he be of full age, it were then best to change him: the carter must
also understand what love one horse bears to another. (For some will not
agree together,) and according thereunto place them in the stable. The which
stable ought to be made clean every morning, for a horse loves to be clean
kept, and at night to be refreshed with some clean litter, and the horsekeeper
ought to sleep in the stable: to be ready if any horse break loose in the
night and fight with his fellow. The keeper ought also to look advisedly and
warily unto his candle, and to place it in the stable out of al danger, and
nightly to hang up his harness for fear of dogs, or rattes, or other
dangers of hurting with horse, and to place them as before is mentioned, and to
have them ready against the morning when he should go forth to labor them:
that he slack not the time in seeking his harness in parts. And when any
horse is sick or seem heavy, then to forbear, and not labor him for that
time, for fear least he wax worse. For in sickness a horse is a very tender
beast and heavy to any labor, therefore whenever ye have labored the^, walk
them after for taking cold til they be in good temper, then trusse them with
straw (as aforesaid) for taking cold. For thereby breeds many diseases in a
horse, which diseases or remedies shall here follow.

Here I will return and speak somewhat of remedies against soreness as comes
often times to horses. For a moyle or horse Fever.
that has the fever, ye shall give him to drink rue or Coleworts, but when he
draws his breath short, and does often sigh withal, then they use to let him
blood on the neck vain, and then take a pynt of wine with half an ounce of
sallet oil, and mix therewith some Frankincense, and with a third part of,
the juice of mugwoort give it, and if they have any frets or galls on the
pastornes, ye shall plaster Pastornes freted.
thereon the paste of Barley meal, and open the impostume if there be any, and
heal it with tents of lynt, and such ointments as before is mentioned, with a
pynt and a half of Garum, which I take to be saltfishe water with a pound of
oil olive mixed together, and put it into his left nostril, and put there unto
the whites of three or four eggs. And sometimes they do lance their eyes,
and sometime sear it with a hot iron, and if the blood be descended down
into the feet. They cut it, as the founder of a horse, and they give him
bearefoote herb to eat, and Hyosciame, called henbane, the seed is good
also to be bruised and given with wine. Against the leanness in a horse, give
him often drinks mixed with half an ounce of brimstone finely beaten, with
Leanness in a horse.
a raw egg, and a penny weight of the powder of mirre, mix al with wine and
give it with a horn. Which is also good against pains of the belly, and for
the cough: also against leanness there is nothing better or so good, as three
leaued grass given, betwixt green and dry, which does also mightily fat him
more than other hay, and ye shall give of this but little at once. For it will
increase too much blood in the horse, and thereby he may son take hurt.
Also when a moyle or horse is weary and sore chafed, ye shall cast a piece of
grease into his mouth and make him to swallow it, and Weary and chafed.
give him soma wine or ale therewith. The rest for the horse or moyle, ye shall
use as before is written, of medicines for Oxen and mares.

The hoof bound or matelong is when a horse is pinched or Hoof bond, or mate
long.
bound in the upper part of the hoof, it will make the skin to stare above
the hoof, and to grow over the same, It will pain the hoof so that he cannot
well suffer to tread full on the ground, and will be hot, it comes by
standing dry in the stable, and by straight shoing, or heat. The remedy is, ye
shall race the hoof above from the top to the sole in four or five places, so
that the water may come forth. Some do raze it round in the top an ynch long
downward, with the point of a shape knife, and then rubs it al well with salt
once or twice and he shall do well. If your horse chance to be stifled as ye may
so do in at a door, or on the hie way in slipping Stiffeling (...) horse.
his hinder foot, or with a blow, he must be helped seen after: for if he
tarry a day or more, ye must then roll him. If the stiffle bone be out ye
shall feel and see it stick out, then put it in, and bathe him with beer,
and bind his other shamme with a girth as hard as ye can all one night, then
shift it in the morning, then rub and chafe the place, and bind it again.
Use him thus three or four days, and let him stand on the sore leg, and
this is good also for any sprain in that place.

If your horse be sprainde of some sinew, ye shall then wash him with the
grounds of ale or beer made warm, Sprainde.
and therewithal to bathe him, in striking it downwarde, then bind him round
with a hay rope sodde therein, and bind him from the fetterlocke up to the
hamme, and let it rest all one night thereon. If once do not help, use it
oftener, or take of smallach, Oxeye herb, fluellin, and some sheep suet,
choppe and bruise altogether, and boil it in men's urine, and all to bathe his
leg therewith, then take a hay rope sodde or dipped therein and wrap his
leg al over therewith and he shall do well.

For a stiffle in the heel of a horse, ye shall take but Stiffle in the heel.
oatmeale and salt, of each like quantity, and temper it with a little running
water, and make it into past in a ball, and then cast it into a hot burning
fire, and let it lie til it be read hot, then take it forth and let it
cool, and then beat it to fine powder, and put thereof on the heel, in
croushing it down to the bottom of the grief. with a linen cloth tied on a
sticks end, and so dress him twice a day, and before your dressing, wash it
with the grounds of stale urine made warm.

If your horse have a farcie or fashion, is an ill disease to cure, but if it
be taken in time it may well be cured. It Farcie or Fashion.
will run by veins through the body, and appear in many places of the body,
like knottes or bunches, as big as half a Wallnutshell, and by following a
vain at length, it will break it self, and run filthy matter, and as many
horses as do touch or gnaw of him, within month shall have the same disease:
or if he do bite any other he will infect him, and if they be not soon
helped, they will die thereof, If any horse have it, avoid him at the first,
if he can: for dangering all the other. This soreness commonly comes of a
corrupt blood and humor engendered in the body, and sometimes it comes of
bruised blood by some stroke, or of some galling or biting with some other
horse, or of tickes, or hog lice (as some do say.) The cure, let him blood
on the vain nigh to the sore, then burn every bunch in plucking them up with
your hand to burn them the better, and leave none unburned. Then annoint them
every day with melted hogs grease, till they fall away, then have ready a
pottle of old stale, and boil it a little with some coperas and salt, and a
handful of strong nettles, and therewith warm, wash all the corrupt sores,
then fill each hole with the powder of flacked lime, do thus once a day til ye
hoales are closed up. If any do ranckle more than others, fill those with
verdegreace. In all this time let him have a small diet of meat, as straw and
water, or sometimes a loaf of bread, for the lower, he is kept the sooner he
is whole, and yoke his neck that he lick not his sores, also the less rest
he has, the better for him. Another remedy, take of mistleto, and stale
piss, honey, black soape, sees these altogether, and once a day warm, wash
your horse all over therewith. Use this fine or six days and ye shall see
experience. Another: let him blood in the neck four fingers from the head,
and also on both the sides, and give him this drink. Take a gallon of fair
water, and put therein a good handefull of rewe, and a spooneful of hempeseed,
and bruise them in a mortar altogether, and sees it til the half be consumed,
and when it is cold, give it him to drink, and this will make him whole.
Another, a very perfect medicine, ye shall cut him two ynche long down in the
forehead, and open it in the mids thereof on both sides two inches, and put
therein a tampin made of the inner rynde of Elder bark, and look it lie
cross the cut, for so it will destroy all the venomed humor in his body,
and it will heal him safe and sound.

For a horse that cannot stale, give him a pint of wine or ale mixed with
garlic, and the whites of ten eggs, and if ye ca^, for a while give him nothing
but green grass. Another: Horse cannot stale.
give him the juice of red colewortes, mixed with white wine, or the root of
Alexander, bruised and sodde in wine or ale and given, or to give him warm
water, or to wash his yard with warm Vinegar. Also wormwood, or southernwood,
or galingale, or mallows, or pimpernel, some of these, or any one of these
stamped with ale, and given, will cause him to make water. For the haw in the eye
comes often times of a humor, or it may breed of some stripe, A singular remedy
is: to make a plaster of the juice of ground Iuie, stamped in a mortar Haw in
the eye.
with the juice of Iuie berries, or of the leaves beat with cold water, but
better with wine, and plaisterwise lay it to, and remove it evening and
morning. Also some do stitch y^ eye lids in ye mids with a needle and double
thread, and taies one down, and the other up, and then with another needle puts
out the haw, so far as ye may stay it on your fingers end: and so cut away al
ye hard matter a penie breadth, but cut not away too much of the wash or fat,
and leave also the black behind, for by cutting away too much fat, ye shall
make thereby the horse bleare eied, and when it is cut away, squirt either
beer or wine into the eye, or blow a little sandiuer into his eye within a
day or two after, or Camamile mixed with a little honey, and plaistred on.

The Uiues is an il sorenes to heal, if they be suffered to The viues in
horses.
come up under ye ears, which is a small difference from an impostume, they do
come by taking cold when he is hot vnwalked. Also they come of a corrupt humor,
and are like kirnels, and will make his throat sore, and stop his wind, they do
ripe them by laying to hot hogs grease, and so cuts them out. Some cuts a slit
on both side, and with a tool of iron breaks the nest of them, and plucketh
out part and puts in the hole of nettles and salt, others lay riping things
thereunto, as some barley meal, mixed with three ounces of raisons sod well
together in strong wine, then plaster it thereunto, and change it not til it be
ripe, the^ lance and so tent it with te^ts which must be steeped in water, and
mixed with sallet oil and salt, and some do burn them downward with a hot
iron in the mids from the ear to the iaw bone, and draws two strokes under
the throat, and then lance it in the mids, and plucks out the kernels with a
pair of (...)ppers, so far as he may cut them off, without touching any vain,
and then fills the hole with salt, and if they be rank, take a croppe or two of
nettles beaten with some bay salt, and put therein two spoonful of ale or
vinegar, the^ strain it, and put in either ear a spoonful thereof, and put
some black wool after, and bind it fast, and he shall do well. The Squina^cy is
an ill soreness, and is a sorenes in ye throat of the horse, and troubles him
to swallow any thing, and comes of some cold humor, which will make his
Quincie,
tongue and throat to swel. The cure: ye shall first fume and wash his mouth
with hot water, and then anoint it with the gal of a bull, then take two pound
of sallet oil, with a portion of old wine, put thereto nine fat figs, and ix.
leeke heads, beat altogether and let it boil awhile, and before ye take it
from the fire, in the end put a little of the powder of niter, finely beaten
therein: or as ye shall seem good. Then strain all out, and give it the horse
half a pint thereof evening and morning warm, and let him eat of barley or
green fetches, either barley meal mixed with niter, but in necessity ye may
let him blood in the pallet of his mouth. The signs to Signs of sic^nesse.
know when a horse is sick, is by his dou^g, his water or piss, or if he make
his doung strong, with whole corn, or if it be too hard or too soft, or have
therein worms, or is of an ill color, or his breath savor, or his piss to
be too thick or too thin, or too read or too white, all these are signs he
is not well in his body, or some surfeit and raw digestion, or some other grief
in his raines, blood or stones. By these signs also it is well known, if he be
slow and heavy in labor, or duller with the spur then he was wont, or in
spreding his litter, or of tumbling in the night, or a short breath, or loud
snufling in his nose, in casting his vapors out thereat, or immediately after
his prouender to lie down, or in drinking taking long draughts, or in the
night sudden down and sudden up, or to be hot on his pastornes, and betwixt
his ears, or his ears to hang down more than they were wont, or his
eiesight dimmer and more hollower in his head, or his hair to stand upright or
staring, or his flanckes hollow and empty. When any of these signs do
appear, the horse is not well, and some do feel his stones if they be hot or
cold, and smell at his nose, and thereby to judge of his grief, and when any is
not well, he would be set apart by himself, til he be whole again.

If any blind unlearned horsleech do chance to let To stanch blood.
blood in any place where as the sign or moon has power thereof, if it
bleed much, it shall be good to bind thereon of nettles all to bruised or
stamped, or new horse doung mixed with chalk and Vinegar, and remove it not for
three days, or else to take of burnt woollen cloth, feathers, or silk, or to
stamp the herb Peruincle and lay it too, or wild tanzie bruised and laid
too. All these will do well to stench blood in time of need. Also the coame
above the Smithes forge, clappe too, and it will stench of the abundance of
blood, there comes many evils. Which is known by these signs, he will often
be rubbing, his doung will savor strong, his vrin Blood to be let in horses.
will be read, thick, and stink, his eyes bloody, casting a watery humor, and
eats more commonly than he was wont, breeding also pushes, knottes, and
knobs in the skin and body, with some inflammatio^s, and often knapping with his
teeth, which ye shall heal thus. If these signs do appear, let him blood on
the middle vain in the neck, so much as ye shall see cause, if he be weak,
take the less: a pound and a half, or two pound. They use to let blood 4.
times a year, to keep their horse in health. At the Spring, in Summer, in
Autumn, and in Winter. But thrice a year, is thought necessary, which is, at
midde April, for then the blood does multiply. And in the beginning of
September, because the blood is hot by unequal vapors, and at Christmas
because the blood is then grown thick, to make it more thiner. And some horse
masters say, let not blood except great need in young horses especial, not an
old horse, but purge, for it does but weaken his strength. But yet herein,
know always the strength of the young horses, or if they have need or not, as
to have red eyes, hot veins, hot skin and ytching, his hair falling
away and loose, his back hot, and il of digestion. Al these before said are
evil, be not then negligent to help by letting blood on the neck vain. Then
if it swel after, ye shall clap to of white vine leaves sodde in water, and it
shall slack and do well.

The Poll evil is an ill soreness to heal, if it grow long, The poll (...)
and it is betwixt the ears in the nape of the neck, it do come of evil
humors grown to that place, and it will grow by beating the horse about the
head, which many rusticall and rude Carters do use, not in regarding nor
considering the danger thereof, for that is the weakest and tenderest part of
the head, and by such strokes many Cart horses have that disease, specially in
Winter. Which ye shall soon perceive by swelling of the place, and hanging
down his head, in eating his meat with great pain, rotting more inward than
outward, and at length will break of it self, which will then be the more
harder to heal, but ye shall do well to ripe it with a plaster of hogs
grease, laid to as hot as ye can, and keep his head as warm as ye can:
shifting the plaster daily til it do break, if it will not soon break, ye
shall lance it in the softest place, or burn it through with a hot iron, in
beginning a little under, and thrust it upward a good depth through the softness
thereof, then keep it open with tents dipped in hogs grease, and let the
matter descend forth, and plaster it with the same shifting it once a day,
which shall be good to kill the heat thereof Use this for four days, then take
half a pound of Turpentine washed clean in water, and then the water dried
off, and put there to yelkes of eggs, with some saffron, and mingle it al well
together, then search the wound with some whole quil, and make a tent of a
piece of a sponge that it may reach to the bottom thereof, and so big as it
may fill the wound, and thrust it home with the finger, and plaster it with
warm hogs grease, changing it once or twice a day til it be whole, If the
swelling do cease, then use but the tent only, and as it do heal, make your
tent lesser and lesser, till it be thorows whole.

A broken wynded horse is hardly healed, and soon gotten, for his wind is
soon broken by hasty running or vehement Broken wind to help.
labor being fat, or after he is watered, or by long standing in the stable
without stirring, or by eating dusty hay, which thing ye shall perceive by the
rising of his nostrils, and his slanks, and at his tuel, then if he be sore
chafed, he will cough and blow thick, it will least appear when he is at grass,
or empty bodyed. The remedies: ye shall take of cloves and nutmegs 3. drams, of
galigal and cardamomu^ together 3. drams, of soot, of bay seeds, of cummen more
then the other. Make al these into fine powder, and put it in white wine
tempered with a little saffron Then put to so many yelkes of eggs as all the other
in quantitye, then temper it al together with the sodden water of lycoras, and
make it so thin that he may easily drink it with a horn, and tie up his
head for an hour space after, that the drink may descend down into his guts:
then take and lead him forth softly that it may work ye better, and not cast it
up again, and let him not drink of four and twenty hours after. The second
day ye shall give him fresh grass to eat, and branches of willow or such
like, that by eating those cold herbs, it may mittigate the heat of y^
potion. The cure is hard, if it have gone-long, then shall ye take of these
herbs following, that is, of Venus or maiden hair, of flouredeluce, of ash
buds and leaves, of lycoras, of cardamomum, of pepper, of biting almo^ds, of
burrach, of each 2. drams, of nettle seeds, of aristolochy of each 2. drams, of
lycor as half a dram, of pitch, of Coloquintida 2. drams, mou^ting in all to the
quantity of two pound, let this portion be given unto him 3. times, or more if
he will, and ye may put unto it the water that lycoras have been sodde in. Then
if this disease do yet remain, ye shall heal him with this medicyne, except
it have long grown: this will heal him. Notwithstanding, there may be diverse
remedies given to help for a tune, as by drinks in helping his guts, also in
slitting his nostryls to take wynd, which perhaps may be a help to continue
long, and to give him a little boiled wheat for three days space. But first ye
shall let him drink of y^ water where in all these herbs have layn a night
before, the^ give it a boil, and let him drink it milk warm, in taking out all the herbs clean with a strayner as of paunces, longwoorte, maidenhayre, y^
crops of nettles, Carduus benedictus, herb fluellin the roots of dragons
bruised, the roots of eleca^pane bruised, of water hemp, of peniryall, of light
wort, herb Angelica, of each of these a good ha^dful, or so many as ye may have
of the^: bruise and lay the^ al night in 2. or 3. gallons of water, and give it
a boil in the morning, and let him drink thereof milk warm, so much as he
will. Then give him of the wheat boiled, use him thus five or six days, and
keep him in a close and cool place, and after let him have grass, this will
help him if there be any recovery, and this is good also for any dry cough.
Also it shall be good to give him water sod with lycoras, and mirt with some
wine, and let y^ be his only drink for nine or ten days after. Thus much for
the broken wynded horse. The gla^ders is an ill disease taken by a heat, and a
sudden cold, and appears at his nostrils, and to have kyrnels under his
Glaunders in Horse.
iowles, which will pain him sore to eat, and at length will run at his
nostryls. The remedy is, take heat horse doung and piss, and clap it under to
his jaws, and so perhaps it may go away again. If not, the remedy is, sees
a handful of pylde garlic in mylk, and put a piece of butter thereto, and
some ale, then stir altogether and give it him fasting, and ride him softly a
while after, and then set him up and keep him warm, the space of nine days
if ye can, and give him warm water, and he shall do well. Another, take an
ounce and a half of the powder of elecampanie, and put it in a quart of ale,
and give it him warm, and use him as before. Another: put 2. or 3. roasted and
peeled onyons into hot seething milk, with a quantity of beaten garlic, and
put it into ye milk, then stir it well, but first put into the milk a little
oatmeale, and then ye other, and make it not thick, and put in too, or three
spoonful of honey, and stir it altogether, and give it blood warm, and keep
him fasting all the night before, and after this drink, walk him awhile, and
set him up warm, and give him meat.

The mourning of the chine is a sorenes doubtful to cure, and is taken by sore
travel, and then a sudden cold: which Mourning of the chine.
disease is incurable. For as a French man says: To heal the moruning of
chine,
Is hard to find any medicine.


It will appear at his nose like the Oak water, black: or as it were soote
and water mixed together, more blacker, than the glaunders. If ye will know
further herein, read Master Blundefield his book of horses, and there ye
shall see it written at large. The strangurion is a grief east to heal,
Strangury in horse.
it comes by chafing, and a hot sweat, and then he takes cold, wherein he
will be very sick: whereupon will arise swellings in diverse places about his head,
with kyrnels on both sides his neck within, near stopping his wind: seantly
able to swallow his meat,, and holding his head outright, which is manifest y^
the infla^mation is within the throat, and sometime therewith the throat is
swollen, so ye he hardly takes his breath, and neither ca^ eat nor drink. Which
comes of cold humors frg ye head. The cure. Let him blood on the neck vayn,
if his age will permit: then make a ryping plaster of mallows, linseed, rue,
smalledge, and ground yuy: boil al these together, and put to oil of bay, with
a quantity of Dia althea, then take it from the fire, and therewith make your
plaster, and lay it to: let him drink warm water mixed with meal, or lay a
plaster of bran steeped in wine, unto his throat to ripe it, and when it is
ripe, lance it and so tent it, and keep him warm, and annoint often that
place of his neck with butter, til he be whole.

The haw in the eye of a horse is a little whit and hard gristle, in ye inner
corner of the eye, and it will grow and cover half his the haw.
eye: it comes by a gross matter from ye head, if it be not cut out in time,
it will at length have out his eyes, and some horse having one, will soon have
another. The cure. Ye shall take up his eye lydde, with a steel needle, as is
aforesaid, and wash or spurt in some drink after.

The Frounce is a disease soon cured, and they are small pymples or wartes in
the mids of the pallet of his mouth above, The Frounce to help.
and they are soft, and they will let him to eat his meat, and they come by
eating of frozen grass, or by drawing frozen dust with the grass in their
mouths. The remedy is, they do but cut them or burn them, and then wash
them with wine and salt, or ale and salt, and so they will go away.

A splint is the least soreness that is, and always does Splint to help.
continue. Many seems to mend it, and they pair it: it is as well on the
outside of the legs, as on the inside, and sometimes they will be as big as
your fingers, which comes by traveling too young, or by too heavy burdens, or
by sudden starting and strayning his sine was. The cure. Some do heal it by
rubbing it with a hazel stick made cross with nicks, and therewith rubs the
splint al over cross. And others do shave of al ye hair, and with a stick cut
checkerwise, and then lays tar thereon, and rubbes therewith twice a day all
on the splint, til it be clean gone. Some do say, to burn is the best, but if
he be not well healed, he may halt continually after. Also some do clippe or
shave the hair clean away, on the splint, and then with an awle, al to
pricks it al over, so far as it goes, and then lays thereon a hot roasted
onyon or two, and use it thus six or seven days, and it will heal him.

Bottes in horse is an ill disease to heal, if they take the maw, the Bottes
are commonly an ynche long, and they Bots in horses,
have read heads, and are as much as your little fingers end. Some are white,
and some are yealwish, being quick in the maw, they will stick fast thereunto:
Also there are 2. other sorts, the one is called lung woortes, and the other is
called trenches. Al these worms breed in the horse by eating of filthy meat,
and some do come of a raw matter, and by eating green pease, eats, or barley:
and when ye horse is troubled therewith ye shall soon perceive, for he will
forsake his meat, in sta^ping with his feet, and sometimes tre^bling, and suddenly
down, and soon up again, and will strike at his belly with his hinder foot,
and will often bow his head toward his belly, and shake his head often. The
cure: Take a quart of milk, and mix it with ten spoonful of honey, and give it
him warm, and walk him a while after, and so let him rest with little meat,
or none till the next morning, and suffer him not to lie down, Another: some
do annoint his bit with hot man's doung, and rides him after an hour or two,
and y^ will kill them. Another: some choppes their hair short, and puts it with
bay salt in their prouuender, and some gives sau(...) among their prouender,
and others put hot embars in water, and the^ incontinent strains and gives it,
and so walks him after an hour. Others take a spoonful of honey, with so much
of scraped chalk fine beaten, and stirs them together, and makes them into
balls, and then mix them with ale, and makes him to swallow them, and so he
shall do well.

The long worm is in the panch of the belly, they shine like the belly of a
snake, and like in color, and are in the mids Long worms.
great fashioned like a spindle, and they are of seven inches long or more, and
sharp at both ends, and soon are killed, which is, take a halfpeniworth of
fenegreke, of Anniseedes a pound and a halfpeniworth of bay beries, as much
lycoras, (...) drinks.
of turmerick a halfpeniworth, of brimstone a quantity, beat them into powder,
and put the^ into a quart of ale, and warm it, give it to the horse fasting,
then ride him an hour after, and keep him warm after 24. hours.

The malender is an ill sore which may be cured for a time, but if he be ill
kept it will soon come again. This does Malender in a horse.
appear in the boute of the fore knees, and are like a seal or scab: some
horse will have 2. of one leg nie together, there will be strokes with hair
which does venom the place, and they will cause him to go stiff, and make him
to stumble and fall, which comes of some corrupt blood, but most special for
lack of rubbing and good keeping. The cure: take a bareld hearing with a soft
row, with two spoonful of black soap, half an ounce of alum: beat in a mortar
together, and then lay it to the malander for three days, and it will heal it:
or wash it with warm water, and shave away all the hair, and the scab also,
then take a spoonful of soap, and another of lime, and mix them together like
a paste, and with a cloth lay it, and bind it fast on, and use this for 3.
days and every day fresh: and after ye take it of, anoint the place with warm
oil of roses, and y^ by means of the plaster shall take away the skurfe, and
when y^ scurf is al gone, ye shall wash it once a day with the horse own water,
or with man's piss, the^ cast on y^ powder of burnt oister shells. Use this once
a day til he be whole.

The wyndgal is a soreness light to heal, it is a bladder windgall.
full of wind and thin humors on the sides of y^ joints above the pastornes or
fetterlock: as well behynd as before, they are like soft bladders under the skin,
and gotten by much travel they will pain the horse so, that in hard ways he
cannot well go but halt. The cure: Some do prick it thereon (with a launcet)
the length of a Bean, where it is highest, and so it will come out, but beware
of hurting the sinowes,) and ye shall see it like the white of an Egg. Then
take the yolke of an Egg and of oil of bay, as much as a Nut, mix them
together, and plaster it on flax, and lay it thereto, and this shall make
him whole in a day. another. Take the roots of Comine, and beat them well with
salt a little, and then lay it too, and he shall be whole, incontinent. Some
do lay them with rubbing there on with the juice of an onyon, or leeke blades,
but if ye ride him soon after, they will come again in 4 days. Some do wash
the^ with warm water, and shave away the hair, and race them with the point
of a knife, and so heales it as the splint, and others do burn them downward,
and some do cut them, and makes the windgall start out, and heels it with
pitch, and rosen, mixed and laid to. Also ground yuie, and wormwood, with the
roots sod in wine, and laid too.

The selander is a soreness much like y^ malander, and is a Selander in a
horse.
scab in the bought of the hough, of the hinder legs, for as the mallander is
in the bought behynd of the forelegges, so the selander is in the bought before
on the hinder legs, and it comes for lack of rubbing, and by evil keeping
without any rubbing or dressing when he has traueled, and as ye heal the
malander, so must ^e cure this selander.

The Spauin is an ill soreness to heal, and there be two kinds of them, the
wet and the dry. The dry is a h^rd The spauin in horses.
knobbe as big a a walnutte, on the inside of the hoghes, under y^ joint, and
some will have two spauins appearing on both sides of the joint, which is a hard
thing to be healed, and it will cause the horse to halt. Some do suppose it
comes by kind by the horse that begot him, but it comes by extreme labor,
and heates, by increasing a humor to the master vain, in feeding the place
with evil humor, and grows to a hard bone wherein the cure is hard. The
cure. Some do wash it, and then shaues away the hair, and opens the skin
upon the vain a handful above the knee, and cuts away the vain between both
the strings, and where the highest of the spauin is, there part the skin the
length of a date, and with a sharp chizel half an ynch broad strike it clean
away the bigness of an almonde, and take two penny weight of Uerdegreace,
with a Smithes nerual, mix them together well, and put it therein and so
healeit, Another: some do after they have washed and shaven it, race the place
with a sharpeknife, and they take half a dram of cantaradice, with an ounce
of Euphorbium made in powder, with as much oil of Bay, and mix them
altogether, and to lay thereof to the sore the space of 2. days, in shifting it
each day once. Then after two days annoint it every day with fresh Butter to
make the hair come again. Some do fire him on both sides without tainting,
and so takes up the master vain, and so annoint it with butter nine days
after, unto the fiered place do begin to scall, and then boil of sage, and of
nettles of either a handful, with four handful of mallows in water, and then
put too a little butter, and there with bathe him every day once for three or
four day still the burning be whole, and let him not wette his feet in this
time.

The wette or soft Spanin grows likewise on both sides of the hough behind,
and is a soft swelling and Soft Spauin.
some do call it a through Spauin, and commonly it is greater on the outside than
on the inside. This will be always soft, and is more easier to be cured, and
cures it, as the hard spauin.

The curb is an il sorenes, appearing on the great sinew, Curb in a horse.
behind under the hough, or camerell place, somewhat beneath the spauin, it
will swell on the sinewe, and after a little labor, he will halte thereon, and
then the more labor, the greater grief. And this is gotten by bearing some
heavy burden when as he is young. Or by some wrynch or some great strain, and
that place will show bigger then the other. The cure is is ill if it remain
long. But take a pint of the lies of wine, with two handful of wheaten flower,
with a handful of cummin, then mix them all together over the coals, and
being warm, plaster wise, lay it to the grief, in changing it for the space
of three or four days, once a day, till the swelling do go away, and then
draw it with a hot iron all over, and then plaster it with pitch and rozen
melted together, and so clappe it to warm. Some lay flocks it on of the horse
color, and so plaster it to. Let it remain till it fall of it self away,
and keep his feet dry for nine days or more after. And he shall do well.

The pains is an il sorenes, and soon healed, it breeds in Pains of feet,
the pasturne under his fetherlock, and will grow to a scabbe full of scalding
and fretting water, which comes for lack of rubbing and clean keeping in
that place, after his travail and labor, by some durty sand remaining in
that place, which breeds a scabbe. Therefore look to your horses that has
long hair in that place, for they will soonest have it. The cure: Some do wash
it with beer and fresh buttes good and warm. And first they clyppe away all
the hair, saving the fetterlocke: Then they take honey, turpentine, and hogs
grease in like quantity, in mixing them together with a little Bolarmeniac,
and two yelkes of eggs, with so much wheat flower as will thicken it, and
then plaster wise lay it to, and lap it thereon with some other cloth to
keep it fast, and shift it once a day, till it leave watering. Then wash it
with piss till it be dride up. Another. Take and chafe his legs with a hay
rope till they bleed, or wax raw: Then take a little sharp mustard, bean
flower, and fresh grease, with a little fenigrick, mix all together in a dish,
and make thereof a salve, and therewith anoint his griefs. And when that
place is dry, take honey, and the white of an egg, and fresh butter, temper it
together, and anoint the said place therewith. Let him stand dry, not
labored nor lead to water till he be whole. Another. If they be green and
new, ye shall take but beef broth, and therewith wash him, and then anoint
it with soap: use this iiii. or v. days and he shall do well. Another. Plunge
his feet in scalding water twice or thrice and bath the sore with hot scalding
water, then have ready a hard roasted egg, cleave it in the midst, and clap it
to as hot as ye can, and let it lie bound all night. Use this once or twice,
and ye may ride him on the next day.

The scratches is a long scuruines right behind the leg. from the fetherlocke
up to the knee or hough: The hair will stare, ye may easily perceive it if
ye take up his leg, and shed the hair, and ye shall see it scuruie all
under. The cure, wash it with men's urine warm, then take black soap, mustard,
and vinegar of each a like quantity, and mix therewith of an ox gall, then
stir them well together, and chafe and rub the place therewith, and bind
thereto a cloth, so use it once a day till it be whole. Then anoint it with
neats foot oil, to supple the the sinews again.

Another. Take the finest hay ye can, and burn it to ashes upon a fair
board, then mix it with neats foot oil. and make a salve thereof, then all
to rub the sores until they bleed almost, and then anoint them with the
said salve, and rope his legs, and keep them dry in the stable, and keep
him so iii. or iiii. days and he shall do well. Another. Take turpentine, honey,
and hogs grease, with two or three yelkes of eggs, with some powder of
bolarmeniac, and bean flower, mix all well together, in shedding the hair,
anoint therewith all over well to the bottom. Use this till he be whole, and
let him come in no wet. This sorenes comes also for lack of rubbing, and
keeping clean after his travel.

The King bone, is also an ill soreness, it will appear above the fore part
of the hoofes, and some will be round above the joint, the hair will stare,
and rise on a bunch, and there will resort a thick and a slimy matter, it
comes by some blow of some other horse treading, or by striking one leg
against another, in process of time it will become hard like unto a bone, and it
will make him to trippe and halte, and ye shall see it higher then the hoof,
if it grow in any other part of the legs, then it is calde a knobbe, and no
ringbone. The cure: wash it well with warm water, and shave that place the
hair clean of, and race it with a sharp razor and make it to bleed. Then
take an ounce of euphorbyum, half an ounce of cantaradice, and beat them in
fine powder, and take oil of baies an ounce. If the grief be but smally
grown, take the half of each, and boil them all together, in sturring it
well. And with a fether lay it boiling hot on on the sore, and stir him not
for half an hour, then let him be in the stable, and use him thus nine days
in ordering him as ye do for the splint. Then when the hair begin to grow
again, ye shall fire it in down strokes with a hot yro^ in iii. or iiii. places
like lines, til the skin look yellow, from the pasturn to the hoof, and then
lay molten pitch, and rozen, on flocks of his color, and so clap it to, and
let it so remain till it fall of it self away. Also some do say the ringbone
comes of a blood in a young horse, which they help thus. They knit fast a
shoo makers thread above his knees, and let it so remain for a space, and that
will stay the course of the blood, if it come of blood, but this must be done
at first before it grow on the horse foot. Of the foundring of a horse, there
is a foundring in the body, by eating suddenly to much prouender before he is
cold, after his travail, which for lack of digestion do breed ill humors,
and takes away his strength, and thereon he will be so feeble, scant able to
stir his iointes, or being down, not able to rise, so troubled with pain
not able to stale. There is a foundring for a horse to stand still in the
stable, and not sturde. There is also a foundring, in letting your horse drink
by the way when he is hot. A saying is: ride him in the water but to the
pasture, and let him drink being hot, he founders, ride him to the knees, he
founders not, ride him to the belly, he founders, which comes by sudden
cooling in his body, which causes a watrish humor to fall down to his legs
and feet, and will make him cast his hoofes. Some do founder but before, and
sometimes on all four feet: and some say a horse may be foundered in
traueiling on hot sandy ways, and suddenly to ride him but through a
shallow water, ye may founder him also, by taking cold after a great heat, or
by standing still on the stones or cold ground, he being hot, or in a cold wind.

The foundring in the body, the signs are these, his hair will stare, he will
seem chylly and shrink together of all four, hanging down his head,
forsaking his meat, with quaking after his drink, and within three or four
days he will fall a coughing. The best remedy is to purge him, by some
glister, or by purging otherwise.

The foundering in the feet, the signs are, he will (within xii. or xxiiii.
hours after) crouch on his hinder legs, and Foundring in the feet.
his fore feet will be so stiff, that he is not able to move them, and go as
though he could not well tread on the ground, and ready always to stumble.
Then shall ye immediately garter each leg a handful above the the knee or
hough hard with a list. Then walk and chafe him to put him in a heat, and when
he is warm, let him blood on both the veins on the breast, and keep the
blood, and take a quart or two of that blood, with two quartes of wheat flower,
half a pound of bole armeniac, half so much of sanguis draconis, with five or
six eggs, and a pint or more of strong vinegar: then mix them well al
together, and chafe al his shoulders, back, loins, breast and fore legs
therewith, and then walk him on some hard ground, and let him not stand still:
and when all the gear is dry, ye shall chafe him with more, and renew it
again, and so walk him three or four hours after, and then set him in the
stable, and give him a little warm water mixed with some malte, and give him
some hay and prouender, and then walk him again either within the house or
abroad if it be not to cold. And thus ye shall use him for four days, and
when all your ointment is spent, then cloth him warm and let him stand and ly
warm, and let him eat but little meat for iiii. days.

If he mend not then, it is a sign the humor is in his feet, then must ye
take of his shoes and search with your buttres and pare his soles before in the
midst of his toes, till the water and blood come forth, and so let him bleed
well thereat. Then stop it with hogs grease, salt, and bruised nettles, or with
turpentine, and hogs grease so melted together, and laid to with flax, and
some do but stop his feet with stamped nettles, salt, and hogs grease, but first
tacke on his shoes, with a lether, and then stop him, and put under the shoe
a thin piece of stiff leather to keep in the stuff, and let him run to
grass, and then shift it once a week till he be whole. If ye let him run a
quarter, he will be the sounder. Also some say, if ye let him blood soon after
he is foundred above his hoofes, that will help him from any further danger.
Another way. Others do cut the skin on the insides, or on the fountain of his
legs, the length of a finger, and filles a hollow straw with quicksiluer, and
make it fly abroad, and so let him remain till he be whole.

Of graueling a horse, is a fretting under the inside and out Graueling a horse.
side of the foot, which will make him to halt, therefore he will covet to go
on his toes. They are small gravely stones coming under the shoo, betwixt the
foot and the calking of the shoo, or chrushes, and by long travail it will eat
into the quick. And whereas the shoe lies flat to the foot, there it will
soon gravel, and will not lightly forth again, and it is soon mended at the
first. The cure: ye shall pare the hoof, and get forth all the grauel clean,
for if ye leave any gravel it will breed to a sorenes called aquitter bone,
and then must ye stop him with turpentine, and hogs grease melted together, and
laid on tow, or flax, then clap on the shoe, and keep it stopped, and shift it
every day till it be whole, and let him come in no wet. If ye stop it not well
to keep down the flesh, it will rise above the hoof, and then shall ye have
more business, and put your horse to more pain.

The enterfering of a horse comes to some by kind, and oftentimes it is for
lack of a skilful smith by il shooing, for he will Enterfering of a horse.
beat one foot against another, against the fetherlockes, on both the inner
sides thereof, both behind and before, and by long beating and chafing one
foot against the other, he will beat of the skin, and make it to bleed, and
when sand goes in it will fret and chafe it, but he that is a skillful smith
may help it in shooing, if there be any help to be had, for by paring and
shooing he may help it. The cure. Take may butter if ye can, or else new fresh
butter, with a quantity of yellow rozen, as much naruoile, then fry them all
together in a pan, and then let it stand till it be cold, and put it in a pot,
and put to a little cow dung, and anoint therewith, and if ye bind it to, this
will heal the prick of a nail also.

The colt evil is an ill disease, and comes commonly (...) young horses, and
is by some rankenes of water and blood, or else the colt evil.
by abundance of seed stopped, and so corrupts in the yard, and some geldings
are troubled therewith as well as stond horses, specially those which have a
string it will swel very big, and cause his belly to swel. The cure: ye shall
wash his sheth with warm vinegar, and draw forth his yard and wash it also.
Then ride him into some water up to the belly, and make him to swim if ye can
in some river, or ride him deep in water, and turn and toss him therein, and
that will lay the heat of his yard. Use him thus once or twice a week, and he
shall do well. Or bath his cods and yard with the juice of housleek, and he
shall do well Or wash his cods with water that kineholme is sod in. If a horse
be gald in the pastorne with shakel or lock, or with some halter, if the place
be fretted sore, ye shall take honey and vardigrease, and boil it together
till it wax red, and therewith anoint the place: (it is very good also for
algallings on the wethers.) and after ye have so anointed it, straw thereon
fine clipped flax or tow, and make it stick the faster on. Use this once a day
till it be whole. Or ye may take that ointment before mentioned against
enterfering, and it will also heal it.

There will be horses and mares oftimes lowsy, which comes Lyce on horses.
either by poverty, cold, or il keeping, and most commonly among young horses,
wherein many make small account thereof, because it may be soon cured, yet they
may soon die thereof. The lice will breed most commonly on the neck: If he
have lice: ye shall find them in his fore top, and about the ears, and on
the tail, and sometimes over all the body, and they make him very poor, and
the skin will cleave to the ribs, and he will be always rubbing and froting,
in breaking all his mane and tail, so he will eat well, and his meat does not
prosper him. The cure: ye shall anoint him with soap and quicksiluer mixed well
together, and to one pound of soap take half a dram of quicksiluer, or the
powder of priuet leaves mixed with oil, and therewithal to chafe him al over.
The taint is a sorenes which comes by over reaching ye hinder Taint in a horse.
feet on the crushes or veins on the fore feet. If they are behind, they
come by the treading of some other horse, and it may be soon cured, it will
swell and be sore.

Some do use to wash the place with warm water, and then shave all the hair,
and race it with a razor, and make it to bleed. Then take cantaradice, and
euphorbium of each an ounce, and put thereto a quantity of soap, and lay it
on the sore, and let him rest in that place half an hour, then lead him to
the stable, and standing without litter, and use him as for the splint before
said. The next day dress him so again: on the third day begin to anoint him
with fresh butter the space of nine days, and make him a bath with three
handful of mallows, a rose cake, and a handful of sage, boil them all well
together, and put thereto a good piece of butter, or a pint of sallet oil, and
wash him therewith every day for three or four days and he shall do well.

A horse when he is frayde, it is an ill sorenes, and it comes by great labor
and fast riding with a continual sweat, suddenly a great cold, which will
make his legs stark, and the skin of his back and sides to cleue to the
bones and flesh, and it comes by standing in the cold after his labor, or in
some cold rain: which willl cause him to be hide bound. The cure, ye shall let
him blood on both sides of his flancks under his belly: then take ii. ounces of
cummin, of anniseseedes, of licoras made in powder, mix them all with a quart
of ale or white wine, and give it him warm: then rub and chafe him all over
with your hand half an hour space, then set him up warm, and litter him up
to the belly, and cover all his back with a wet sack, or such like, so gird
him and stuff him well about the back. Thuse use hima week space, and give
him warm water mixed with some ground malte. It were good also if ye did
annoynte all over his body with sallet oil, and wine, mixed warm, or with
butter and ale warmde, which is very good to loose and supple the skin.

The cloying of a horse is an ill hurt, which comes by evil Cloying a horse.
shooing of an unskillful smith, in-driuing a nail in the quick, which will
soon cause him to halte, to try which nail it is, ye shall perceive by
holding the shoe with the pinsars, and strike on that side of the hoof with
the hammer against each nail, and the hoof will shrink whereas the pain is,
then take out that nail. But if he halt by and by after, then take of the
shoe, and open the hole till it bleed, and pour in scalding hot turpentine,
wax, and sheep suet melted together, and then clap on his shoe again, for
so it will little hurt him to travail thereon: but if it first rancle, then
must ye cut out the hole, and use the said medicine daily till it be whole, and
let him come in no wet. Some do but pour in daily of boiling butter into the
raneled hole, and heales it with that only, and other do burn the hole, by
and by with another nail, and that will help also.

The cords of some cold seruse, is a sinewe that makes a horse to stumble, and
often tryppe, and ready to fall, and it is before on the futher leg, nie the
horse body: and there are few horses but taste somewhat thereof. It is cured in
two places. One is, they slit the top of his nose, and there with a bucks horn
he takes up a gristle and winds it out iiii. fingers, and slits it in the
midst, and lets out blood, then he binds it in two places, three fingers
asonder, and cuts two inches of between, and knits those ends again
together, and then heales him with healing salve, and this shall help him.

Surbat is a disease in the foot, when the hoof is beat against the ground,
and a flat footed hoof being Surbating a horse.
tender is apt unto the grief: Sometime the shoe lying too flat, or the
horse being long unshod, may soons Surbat: Ye shall perceive it, for he will
halt commonly on both his fore feet, and creep as though he could not go,
like the foundrined horse. The cure is easy. If his shoes be not fit make
them fit, and pare his hoof but little, and make them large and easy, and
hollow, and tacke them on with four or five nails. Then shall ye stop his
feet, with branne, and hogs grease boylde together, and laid to hot, and
so with the same cover all his hoof al over, and bind it fast on with a cloth,
in shifting it once a day till it be whole, and give him warm water, and also
let him stand warm and dry likewise till he be whole and sound.

Against the blindness in horses, some horses will wax suddenly blind, which is
gotten diverse ways. He may Blindness in horses.
become blind of a strain, or by great labor in carrying a great burden. He
may wax blind by some stroke in the eye, but taken betimes there is remedies.
The cure. If the sight be gone, and the ball of the eye sound, ye shall take
a quantity of may butter, with a quantity of rosemarie, and a little yellow
rozen, with a quantity of Selandine, then stamp all together, and frye them
with the may butter: Then strain it and keep it in a close box, for it is a
jewel for the eyes that are sore, to have it always ready. And this is good
also for all cuttes being never so evil, and is good for the pin and the
webb in a man's eye.

Against weeping eyes, wash or spurt it with warm white wine twice or thrice a
day: also seth the white of an egg in water, and mix it with cummin, and lay
it to all a night, or more as ye shall see cause. Also ground iuie beaten and
mixed with wax and plaistred to, or wormwood sod in wine, and bath it often
therewith.

And when his eye is stricken with whip or such like. Ye shall open his eye
liddes with two nippers of wood, made for to hold fast the eye liddes, (like a
pair of barnicles for the horse nose) and then to hold them open, and with a
quill, blow in some beaten salt, or sandeuer.

Ye shall blow in the juice of the roots of selandine into his eye: or the
juice of the rotes of rue, called of some, the pin and web in the eye.
herb grace. Also make an hoale in an egg, and put forth all that is within
it, and fill it with pepper, and put it in some pot of earth, that nothing
come unto it, and put it in some pot of earth, that nothing come unto it, and
put it in a burning oven, till it be white hot. Then take it forth, and beat
that pepper to powder, and blow thereof into the horse eye. Another proved.
Take a peble or pauing stone, as the Romans used to paue with: and beat it
unto a fine powder, and bolt it through a fine cloth: and blow of that powder
into the horse eye twice a day, till it be whole. If ye will make it stronger,
put the powder in a new wodden dish, and cleanse out all the greatest with your
finger, and take the finest, and that will heal any pin or web in horse or
man.

If blood appear in the eye, ye shall take the white of an egg, beat it, and
lay it to with tow. Another. The tops of haw thorns boiled in white wine, and
laid to.

For a hurt or stricken eye, ye shall take a small loaf of bread, and pull out
all the crumme, and fill the loaf full of burning coals, until it be well
burnt within. Then take of that crust, and put it in white wine, and put it on
the eye: Use this often. Then take soap water and cold water mixed, and wash the
eye brows therewith. If it go not away open the vain of the head that leads
to the. If his eye be rubbed or chaft, ye shall let blood of the eye vain, and
wash his eye with cold soap water, and put a small splenter on his eye, and he
will do well. And to help the red eyes, ye shall lay a plaster of red
ointment or red lead.

Or take the juice of plantaine, stamped and mixed with white wine and laid to.
For sore eyes, stamp strong nettles and strain that with beer, and thereof
spurt it into the horse eye, twice or thrice together. Then put of the powder
of sandeuer finelye made into his eye: Or blow thereof into his eye. And see
that your horse take no wind or cold of his eye, until he be whole again.
If ye must ride him soon after, put a cloth before his eye of woollen. It were
good to let him blood on the vain under the eye, and then twice dressing will
suffice.

A fistula is an ill sorenes to heal, and often times breeds through
gallings and chafing sores, which for lack of Bistula in horse.
looking to betime, it grows to a fistula. The cure. First search it well
with an instrument of lead, that may bow each way to the bottom of the
wound: then finding once the bottom: If ye can cut it out round to the
bootome with a razor, and take it out, and feel with your finger if there be
any flesh amiss, grystle, or bone perished: If there be, ye must cut it
out. Then mix the powder of verdigrease and honye together, and boil them
till that it look read, and stir it still for burning to: And being luke
warm, dippe a tent of flax therein, and tent him therewith, and lay a
boulster of flax thereuppon: If that will not abide, lay on a plaster of
pitch, and sow it fast cross thereon, with a pack threede or other such
like, which ye may so tie it, that ye may remove and open it at all times,
and see that ye change your tent once a day till it leave mattering, and
always make your tent less and less till it be held up: and in the end
sprinkle a little vnslekt lyme thereon to close it up. But if this will not
heal to the bottom, to dry up the matter, ye must pour in some stronger
water, and so use it twyse a day till it be whole.

Another. Take two quartes of white wine vinegar, of camphere half an ounce,
of mercury precipitate half an ounce, of green treacle iii. ounces; of red
sage a handful, of yarrow and ribwoort of each a handful, of honey half a
pint, of bores grease half a pint, boil al these together til a quart be
wasted, and with this ye shall wash and cleanse the wound. Then to heal the same
ye shall take oil of roses, virgin wax, rozen, of each a quantity, of
turpentine triuenian v. ounces, the gum of iuy, of dear suet, boil these
together, and dress the wound first but with the water, until it gather to a
white matter, and then dress it with your salve til it be whole.

And for a fistula in the head some do say: Take the juice of h^usleeke and
dippe therein a lock of wool, and put Fistula in the head.
it in his ear, and bind it fast. Use this once a day, and ye shall see
experiences.

Another. After ye have cut out all the rotten flesh, bath it well with the
grounds of ale, made warm, and then wipe the blood clean away. Then take
butter, rozen, and frankencense a little, and boil them all together, and
boiling hot pour it into the wound, use him thus once a day and this will
heal it also.

If there be any inflammation behind the ears, or that it grow to any
inpostumation in that place, ye shall boil the roots of mallows in water
till they wax tender, the^ bruise them and strain out the water clean, and
warm give it unto the horse.

The lampas is a light sorenes to heal, it comes by the abundance of blood,
and is before in the ruff of the mouth, Lampas in a horse.
they will swell and be so sore, that he cannot eat his meat. The cure is.
Take a hooked knife made very sharp, and made very hot, and therewith cut the
swollen places in two parts, cross against the teeth, but if they be but
smally swollen, then cut but the third rank from the teeth, and so let them
bleed well, then rub it with a little salt, and let him go.

If a horse do piss blood, it comes by some sore strain, Pissing blood.
or over laden by some heavy burden, or else being too fat, or some vains
broken. The cure: ye shall let him blood, and boil that blood with wheat, and
with powder of dride bark of the pomgarnets, then strain it and give it him
to drink, three or four mornings, and let him not travel thereupon. And some
do but let him blood in the pallet or ruff of the mouth

Also others do give him of husked beans boilde with the husks of acornes
beat small and mixed therewith. Use this as ye shall see cause.

If a horse have received any venom in his hay, or any Horse venomed.
venomous beast have bitten him, ye shall perceive by his eyes: his head, and
his body will swell and much shake. The remedy is to run him till he sweat,
then straight way draw blood in the pallet of his mouth, and so much as he
bleedeth, let him swallow it down hot.

If he bite of adder or snake, ye shall take a live cock and clean him in
the midst, and all hot clappe it to the wound. Some take but a pigin, and
open her and clappe it to, and thereupon give him drink made with a pint of
strong wine and some salt. Or take the root and leaves and fruit of brionie
burnt to ashes, and give unto the horse a good sponefull thereof in a pint of
good wine.

Also if the horse have eaten in his meat any hen or chicking dung, it will
cause him to have the bloudye flux, or the trenches, which is small worms, or
a crowling in his bellye or guts. Therefore keep poultry out of your
stables, if ye love your horses.

Also puddle or dunghill water is unwholesome for a horse Water not good for horse
to drink of. Or where geese, or ducks do use. For it will corrupt their
blood, and breed a plague. Therefore if ye can, let them drink little thereof.
And against the hen dung, and drinking such water, ye shall use to give them
quarterly, of the herb Angelica, and of Smallage, made in powder. And give
anounce thereof in a pint of good wine, mixed with a little honyed water. Then
walk him till his bellyswage, or till he make his dung.

And when soever a horse is in danger of the pestilence called Phibula, they
are preserved by the seperating asunder Pestilence in horses.
from that place. Which disease comes diverse ways, as by heat and overmuch
labor: by hunger. And being hot, to drink cold water: Or sudden chafing
after long rest: which things breed the pestilence. It is a disease hard to
know: but when one dies, there will soon follow another. Then the best is to
separate them. And to make them a drink of bayberies, myrre, aristolochia, and
gentian, with the shauing of iuorie: of each alike, made in powder, and give to
each horse a spoonful thereof in a pint of wine, or ale. Use this as ye
shall see cause. Or ye may give them of Triacle in wine, or ground iuy in his
water and meat.

The yellowes, is an evil sorenes in a horse, and it is a kind of the
iaundise, gotten by cold. His body and eyes will show yelaow. And also his
skin will be yealow. Yellowes in a horse.
In a young horse it is soon had, by taking of cold after a heat. Or it may
come by stopping of the bladder, or gall: or his liver enflamed. And likewise a
horse gets the black iaundise, if black choler abound in his body. And
then he will not lie but stand.

The cure. Ye shall minister unto him a glister, and rake him, and let him
blood on both sides of the neck, and of the nose. Some do take saffron, and
turmericke and mix them with milk, and gives it warm. But first let him
blood on the nose, or in the roof of the mouth. And then put of the juice of
selandine into his ear, and bind it fast and in twelve hours after, then
ride him a little, and then keep him warm for two or three days after, and
let him have white water warm, and this disease does often breed the staggers.

The Staggers is an ill sorenes to heal: It will make the horse to hold down
his head: And also he will reele to and fro, and forsake his meat, and this
proceeds of the yellowes, and of a corrupt humor in the brain. His sight
will be dim, and he will be heavy in going.

The cure. They do let him blood in the temple vain, and also cut the skin
on the fore top, and with a bucks horn does raise it up toward the head
three fingers or more deep. Then to melt turpentine, and hogs grease
together, and dippe a tent of flax therein, and tent it therewith, and use
this once a day till it be whole, and make the like issue on his poll behind,
and give him warm mashe, and walk him softly once a day.

Another. Ye shall put a sponefull of the juice of selandine into one of his
ears, and so bind it fast, and so let him remain and he shall mend.

Another. Put a little of white salt into his ear, and then put in after a
sponefull or two of fair water, and then knit fast his ear that he cannot
cast it out. This is a used medicine for this disease, and a most certain
help.

If any horse chance to be gorde with a stake or otherwise, ye shall take
and cast him, and open the wound as much as ye may. Then take fresh butter,
and boil it over the fire, and boylyng hot pour thereof into the wound, and
make it run to the bottom of the wound if ye can, and let him so lie, that
it may go to the bottom. And then let him rest till the next morning, and
use him so once a day, till he be whole. For this will heal him without any
other thing.

To cast a horse or other beast, ye shall bind first his head with a strong
halter unto some post, or tree, then

(...) English saffron alike. Some of these, or so many as ye shall think
good, made in fine powder, and mixed with ale, and given warm, in using as
before is mentioned.

Coltes are often payned in the gummes and teeth when Coltes pained in the gummes
and teeth. Fever in colts.
they grow, ye shall take of good chalk with strong vinegar mixed together,
and rub the teeth and gummes therewith, and they will mend. The fever is
helped by letting blood on the middle vain on his thigh, four fingers under
his tuell, or else take the vain in the neck, and for his drink ye may mix
the juice of purselaue, gum dragant, frankencense in powder, with a few
damask roses, and give him this in a quantity of honied water.

Against faintness and weakness about the heart Faintness and weakness.
of a Horse, ye shall keep him very warm, take an ounce of myrre, two
ounces of gum dragant, two ounces of saffron, one ounce of the powder of
mellilot, one pound of the herb Mercury, the powder of frankincense
according to the rest, then mix altogether, and make it in fine powder, and
take two spoonful thereof, and give it with a pynt of homed water, and two
spoonefull of oil of roses. Use this once a day till ye see him amend, this
is also good to strengthen the reins and back, and slacknesse of other
members. Against heat in a horse: if it be in Winter, ye shall give him three
ounces of sallet oil, with a pint of read Of too much heat in a horse.
wine: if it be in Summer, give him two ounces of oil, with a quantity of
wine.

The barbes are two tettes under the tongue, if they Barbes in a horse.
grow long, they will hinder the horses feeding, and they do use to clippe
them with a pair of sheares, and then wash it with water and salt, and so
they will heal.

For the ytche in the tail, ye shall annoint it with Itch in the cayle.
soape, and then wash it with strong lie. This will help against the scabbe,
scurfe, and and woormes: and against much wearing of the tail, keep it
always wette, with fair water. The ytche may come of trunchins in the
fundalent, and then ye must rake him, for that is a good help.

Also they say if a Colt do not cast his milt when he is Folling of coltes.
fold; he will not live long after, but die suddenly within few years after,
there is no horse that does live long, which has any milt in him.

Also for the shooyng of a Horse, me thinks it is connenient Shoing of horse.
that the husbandman should understand somewhat thereof, although in many
places, they do know better than some Smithes. For in most places of England
the Smithes have small skill thereof, but after a common sort: how to shoe
every Horse as he ought to be, they know not. Which knowledge does consist
in diverse points, as in good stuff, in making fit, shoes for ouerye horse
foot, in driving the nails right, and also the making thereof in paring, and
leaving the hoof where it ought to be, always having respect thereunto. For
there is as great a respect unto the paring, as in the shooing, because of
the diversity of hoofes, for some be round, some long, some short, some
smooth, some rough, some tender, some tough, tome flat, and some hollow: and
broad hoofes commonly have narrow heels, which will be soon weak to
travel, or to carry his shoe long: and in going low on his pastornes, he
is apt to surbat and gravel. The rugged horse is not so much apt to surbat
or gravel, but it is a sign of intemperate heat, and drought, which makes
the hoofes brittle. A long hoof commonly treades on the heels and pastornes,
which breeds wyndegalles. A broad crooked hoof without, and narrow within,
it makes him splayfooted, and treads more inward than outward: going with his
joints close together, makes him to enterfeere, and so become same. A broad
foot inward, and narrow outward is not so hurtful, but on the outside he
will soon gravel. A flat hoof not hollow within, is like to a imperfect
hoof. A hollow hoof will wax soon dry, and that causes hoof bound. And
the straight, upright, and narrow hoof, will wax soon dry: except he be
stopped, will soon be hoof bound: which will cause him to be so lame, that
he cannot tread sure. And whereas the frushes are broad, the heels are
commonly weak and soft, so that ye may easily crushe them together, and
those horses will never tread well on stones, or hard ground. And also where
the heels are narrow, they are commonly tender and hoof bound.

The hoof ought to be pared even, that the shoe may fit close and just
thereon, not being in one place Faring the hoof.
more higher than another. And because the weight of the body before lies most
on the heels. Therefore to favor them, take as little as ye may, but the
toes being thick and hard, may be taken the thinner, and the paring of the
hinder foot, is clean contrary to the fore feet: as before is showed in
driving the nails, saying: before behind, behind before, which is, beware
the two hindermost natles on the fore feet, and the two foremost nails on
the hinder feet.

In shooing the fore feet, make your shoes, with a broad web, and with
thick spoonges, meet in all places, Shoyng the fore feet.
somewhat appearing on the outside of the shoe: And when ye nail or set on
the shoe, spare not from the mids forewarde, but beware backwarde toward
the heels, and ye shall pearce the heales wider on the outside of the shoe,
then on the inside, and more distant from the toe, then the quarters, because
the hoof is more thicker forewarde then backwarde, and more hold to be taken,
the nails would be made stiff with square heads, and with sharp points,
and meet at the head to fill the holes of the shoes, standing a straw breadth
without the shoe, and so will he stand most sure without shaking, and also
will last longer. But that order most Smithes do little regard, but to
dispatche and away, and when they pearce a shoe, they commonly make the inside
as broad as the outside, and their nails are made with such great
shoulders, they cannot sit well thereon, nor enter close into the hoales,
a^ayle well made should have no shoulder at al, but still lesser and lesser
toward the point. For otherwise he will stand so high, and the neck thereof
being weak, soon does break, or else bend at every light stroke, as I have often
seen the trial, and the shoe thereby soon lost.

The nails also would be made flatter on the one side Nails to be made.
than the other, with a small point, and stiffer still toward the head, and
when ye drive, strike softly first with a light hammer, till it be well
entered. Some do grease the points (for a tender hoof,) to go more easter,
and first ye shall drive the two hoof or side nails of each side one, then
look if the shoe stand right or not, with the spoonges right on the sides. If
not, mende it, and drive your other nails, and set down then his foot, to
see if they be all fit and well placed, and the horse to tread even thereon.
If not, take up his other foot to make him stand more stiffer thereon, and
with your hammer strike where the shoe is scantest, to make it yield that
way. Then drive all the rest of your nails, so that the points on the hoof
may come out even and just, not out of order like the teeth of a saw, and ye
shall clinche, so as the points mayebe hid in the hoof. Some do cut the
hoof a little beneath the nails, and so do clinche. Then shall ye pare and
rape the hoof round, so that it may be even round with the shoe, which
some supposes to be best.

By paring the broad hoof, not yet fully grown flat, it may be helped by
a skillful Smyth, die dyligent Paring and shoing the great hoof.
paring and shoyng, and at the toe, let him take as much as he can, but
touch not the heels, except to make the shoe sit plain: yet let the
hoof continue strong, and make your shoe with a broad web, and strong, with
broad spoonges, and from the tacks nails to the heel, let the shoe appear a
strawes breadth without the hoof, set on with five nails on the outside,
and four within, because he wears more outward then inward.

To pare the rough and brittle hoof, he is commonly weaker on the outside,
than the on the inside: and Paring the rough and brittle hoof.
that is, because they are commonly hoater than others, and their hoofes may
be somewhat more opened, to be the more easier stopped with Cow doung, or to
annoint, to keep them always moist. If a hoof be ragged on the outside, it
would be wrapped and made smoothe, and often to be stopped or anointed with
neates foot oil, or Turpentine, Sheep suet, and sallet eyle boiled
together, which will make it tougher, and to shoe a brittle hoof, ye must
make a mean shoe, not too light, nor too heavy. For a heavy shoe he will
soon: cast and set it on with seven, or nine nails if it be a large
hoof, five without, and four within.

All long hoof may be helped by paring much the To shoe alo^g hoof.
toe. For the shorter the hoof is made, the better it is, and a long hoof
has commonly a weak and slender leg. But a short hoof has commonly a
strong leg, and the long hoof having a weak leg, is forced most to tread
on the heel, and on the pastorne. Ye shall pare the rest like the perfect
hoof, and ye shall shoe him as round as ye can at the toe, whereby the
breadth may take up the length. If his hoof be narrow, let his shoe bear
somewhat without the sides, in making the heels deeper for eight nails, and
set the shoe backward enough, because he treads much on the heel, and it
will be the better.

How to pare a crooked hoof, ye must look where it is least worn, and pare
that even with the other, not To pare a crooked hoof.
touching whereas it is worn, unless it be to make it playner. Ye shall
make his shoe strong with a broad web, not pearcing the hoales, till ye
have made it fit for his foot, and then make them as ye shall see cause,
and pearce the hoales on the inside, more toward the toe, than the outside.
And where the hoof is weakest, there let the shoe be strongest, set on
with nine nails, five on the stronger side, and four on the weaker.

To pare the hoof called a pomest hoof, or flat To pare the flat hoof,
hoof, ye shall pare him plain for the shoe, taking somewhat of the toe,
but touch not the heel or ball of the foot, but leave it strong, and ye
shall shoe him with a very broad web to cover the weak sole the better,
and make the mids of the web more thick than the outsides, and set your
shoe on hollow, that it touch no part of the ball of the foot, and see it
to be large and long in all parts, to be the easier. Pare him round at the
toe, and favor his heels, and make it with ten hoales, five on each side.

The hollow hoof, ye shall pare round, but the hollow hoof,
chiefelie the seat of the shoe, about the edges, that the hollownesse be
not made too deep, the which ye shall keep always moist, for fear of being
hoof bound, and ye shall pare him plain in all parts like unto the perfect
hoof, and ye shall make his shoes light thereunto.

To pare the hoof with broad frushes, he had the broad frushe.
little or nothing there to be touched, but taken at the toe, because of his
weak heel. And ye shall make his shoe to lie even thereon, leaving his
heels as strong as ye can, in making his shoe stronger toward the
heels, then the toe: and the web of the shoe somewhat broader toward the
heels, to save them from the ground, and give him nine nails, because they
have commonly a broad hoof, the rest use in all points like the perfect
hoof. the hoof with narrows heels.


The hoof that has narrow heels, ye shall pare him short, and make the
seat of the shoe plain, and ye shall open it between the frushe and the
heel but a little space, or so much as may be suffered, for the less ye
take of the heel, the better for the Horse, and ye shall shoe him light in a
broad web, and make the spoonges so broad as they may almost touch, and
ye shall pearce the shoe more toward the toe, and spare the heels as much
as ye can, in making it long enough toward the heels, and setting it on
with eight nails, for the perfect hoof.

The hinder foot is clean contrary to the paring of the fore feet, for the
weakest part of the hinder foot is before Shoing the binder feet.
on the toe, which must always be more spared than the heels: and ye shall
pare them in all points according to the perfection and imperfection thereof,
as unto the fore feet. Ye shall also shoe them as is aforesaid: But always
make the shoe strongest toward the toe, because it is the weakest part of
the foot, and ye shall make the outside of the shoe always with a Cawkin,
and not too high, but agreeyng to the spoongye side, not sharp, but rather
turned up somewhat flat thereunto.

If your horse halte, make his shoe with a false quarter, Shoing with a false
quarter.
not touching the sore place. If he halt not, then make his shoe with a button
shouldering on the side next the toe, to defend the same, so it touch not,
and ye shall pare him as before expressed, and with this shoe ye may travel
at pleasure.

The Horse that does enterfeere, he is commonly Shoing for enterfeering.
higher hoofed on the outside, then on the inside, and therefore always the
outside would be taken more, and yet be left somewhat higher than the inside,
in making the shoe fit, and thicker on the inside, then the outside, and
without a Caulkin, for that will make him but tread awry, and the rather to
enterfeere: but let him be ridden before you, and then mark where he touches
most, and in paring him there, ye may ease it much, and also by shoing.

The paring of the hoof bound, ye shall pare the Paring the hoof bound.
hoof bound at the toe, as short as ye can, and some what within on the
sole, but open well his heels. Ye shall make his shoo like the half Moon.
Also it have been often seen by negligent and unskillful Smythes, by paring
and shooing, many horses oftentimes have taken hurt. Also by the unskillful and
negligent keepers, for want of rubbing their legs, and stopping their fore
feet: for the hinder feet are commonly kept moist by means of dunglying at
their heels, and wette by their pissing thereon. Whereas the fore feet stand
commonly dry, which makes them to be hoof bound, and brittle hooued.
Therefore a good keeper will see to stop them from time to time with cow
doong, for that is best. And to wash their hooues with cold water, and
sometimes anoint them with soupling oils, as neates foot oil and such. Or
with turpentine, and kept An ointment for the hoof.
to anoint therewith at all times convenient: and this will make the hoof
tough and strong, and keep them from being hoof bound or brittle hooued. Thus
much have I briefly touched as concerning the paring and shooing of horses,
with the diversity of hoofes. He that is desirous to understand further
herein, let him read master Blundefieldes Book of Horses, and there he
shall find written all things more at large, but this shall be sufficient
for all husband men.

Also husbandmen say, the chiefest time for mares to be Covering the Mare.
covered, is from the end of the first quarter unto the full of moon, or at
the full, for those coltes shall be more stronger and harder of nature. Also if a
mare have take the horse and is knit within her, if then another horse do
cover her, he burns her, and she will dye thereof. Also it is not so good for
mares to be covered after the change, for those coltes commonly will be neshe,
and tender, and soon take surfets, and likewise those mares that are covered
after the full. Also mark in the wane, in what time the mare was covered,
about the same time of the moon she will foale.

Against the scabbe, (...)lling, or strain in the legs. For the scabbe
swelling or strain.
Take two pounds of Narual, two pownds of black soap, a pownde of boores
grease, melt and boil them all well together, then strain it, and so let it
cool: and when ye have any need, anoint and chafe your horse legs
therewith, to make it sink in the better, anoint him first with naruoyle, in
holding a hot frying pan near his leg, and so chafe it in, and then use
the rest. So done, keep his legs cle(...) from dust, wrapped with some linen
cloth.

To heal the cratches or pains on the legs, put a Crackes pains.
hundredth and twelve black snailes in a new canuasse bag, with a pint of baye
salt, and then hang them against the heat of the fire, and set a vessel of
pewter under. Then keep that oil in a glass. Then cleanse your horse legs
dry, and chafe them with this oil, and keep them clean after: dress him
thus three or four days, and he shall be whole. This must be done and made in
May.

To know where these diseases do grow on Horse bodies.
Bags, is in the wekes of the horse mouth.
Barbes, are two teates growing under the tongue.
Bottes do breed in the maw, and guts.
Blister, on his body comes with heat and cold.
Camery, is in his mouth venomed.
Colt evil, is a swelling of the coddes.
Clouing, is in the hoof of the feet.
Cords, is a flacke sinow on the fore legs.
Curb, is a swelling sinow, behind the hough.
Craches, is a rough scuruines above the fetter lock.
Enterfeering, is striking on the joint above the pastorne.
Facion, is a scabbe or knobbes breaking in diverse places of his body.
Fever, is a sickness taken with cold, and will make him shake.
Fistula, is a deep rotten ulcer on his body.
Founding, is taken by cold in the body, and feet also.
Fraying, is a stiffness (taken with cold) in his legs and feet.
Frounce, is pimples in the pallet of his mouth.
Giges or flappes, is pimples or teates in the in side of his mouth.
Glanders, are kirnels under his jaws, and when they be ripe, they will run at
the nose, and there break out.
Gorge, is a swelling of blood in the legs.
Graueling, is taken in the feet.
Haw, is a gristle on the corner of his eyes.
Hide bound, is when the skin cleaves to the flesh and ribs.
Hoof bound, is in pinching of the hoof.
Itch, is first in the tail, by excess of blood.
Lampasse, is hie flesh in the mouth, nigh the upper teeth.
Maunge, is taken by some venomed scabbe or biting.
Malender, is a scabbe in the bought of the knees.
Matelong, is pinching of a strait hoof.
Mourning of the chine, is a wasting from the back.
Nauelgaull, is a sore on the back against the nauel.
Pains, is a sorenes above the hoof.
Pole evil, is on the nape of the neck, bred by stripes.
Pin and web, is a white that covers the corner of the eye sight.
Reume, is taken by cold, and so his teethe will wax lose, and seem long, by
shrinking up of his gummes, and then he can eat no meat, but lie in lumpes
in his jaws.
Ringbone, is a hard rough gristle above the hoofes.
Quinsie, is a sorenes in the throat.
Selander, is a scabbe in the hammes on the hinder legs.
Shakel gall, is on the pastornes.
Spauin, is on the joint in the houghes behind.
Splent, is a sprainde swelling sinowe above the setterlocke.
Staggars, is a disines in the head, bredde of cold, and yealowes.
Strangle, is a swelling in the throat.
Surbatting, is under the soles of his feet.
Taint, is an ouerreaching of the hinderfeete on the farther side.
Uiues, is certain kirnels beneath the horse ears.
Windgalles, are bladders above the fetter lock on both sides of all his four
feet.
Yealowes, is a kind of iaundise, and will cause the eyes to look yealow, and
other parts of his body also.
AGainst blindness or pearl in the eye, or sight lost, if the Sight to
recover.
ball be whole of the eye. First take a new laid egg, and put forth al
within it, and then fill it full of baye salt. Then lay it in the fire til it be
burnt black. Then take of, so much burnt allume as your thombe: then beat
both those together into fine powder. Then melt a spooneful of fresh butter in
a sawser, and then put a little of the said powder therein: and with a fether
wipe his eye full thereof, and so the other eye in like case, and then open the
first eye again, and put in a little more. So done, take two new laid eggs
well beaten, and then take fine flexe and put therein, and let it drink up all
the eggs, and therewith cover both his eyes. Then let him be hoded, and keep
him blindfold, in dressing him thus once a day for a weeks space. Then take
the first medicine again and dress him therewith but once in two days: and
keep him hoded xiiii. or xv. weeks after. And this (if there be any help)
will help him. But first let him blood on both temple veins of the eyes on
both sides.

The malt woorme is an il soreness on the foot, above Malt worms to help.
the hoof, which will break out in knobs and bunches with a watery humor. The
cure. If it be in summer, take black snailes, and burre roots, then beat
them together and lay it thereto. And if it be winter, take scrapings of a
pannes bottom or cawdron, and put thereto a handful of the green or inner
pills of elder, and beat them together, then lay of that to, and it will heal
it.

For the cratches, wash it well first with warm piss of Cratches to heal.
men, then dry it with a cloth, and clip away all the hairs on the scabbes,
then rub and chafe it al over, and make his feet fast, and rub it al over with
tar and butter boiled scalding hot: with a clout tide on a sticks end,
and bathe it well therewith. Use this til it be whole, once or twice a day.

Against the inflaming of the coddes, boil grunsel in Coddes inflamed.
wine and vinegar, and so bathe him therewith, or else ride him into a river.

Against pricking in the foot to the quick, so that he do halt. The remedy,
bruise a handful of red Nettles, then For a prick with a nail.
take black Soap and vinegre of each a spoonefull, and thrice so much of Boores
grease or else of salt Bakon. Then beat them all well together, and stop the
sore therewith, and it will not then rot no further but heal, though ye labor
him there on.

Against a loose hoof, take three spoonefuls of Tar, and Loose hoof.
a quarter of a pound of Rosin. Of Tansey, Rue, Sothernwood, Mynt, of each
half a handful, beat them altogether, and put half a pound of Butter
thereto, with a penny weight of virgin Wax, and fry it thick altogether, and
plaster it on a linen cloth to the hoof, vii. or viii. days, and it will be
fast again.

If any cart Horse or other fall to be blind, and may not ^ies blind.
well see, ye shall do no more but rub two dry tiles together, and take the
finest powder thereof, the finer the better, and blow thereof with a quil into
his eyes, use him so twice or thrice, and this will help. Often proved.

The stand in the foot or pastorne is caught, when a The stone in the
Pastrone.
Horse stumbleth or falls, or to step his foot awry in a hole, and so
wrench it therewith, and stonied in the pastorne. The remedy, seethe a quart of
brine, til the foam rise, and then strain it, and put thereto a handful of
tansey, as much of mallows, with a sawcer full of honey, and a quarter of a
pound of sheep tallow: stir them all well on the fire til the herbs be well
sod, and all hot, lay it to the joint, and sow a cloth all over, and it will be
whole in three days.

The camery is a sickness gotten by eating of moist hay, The Camery to help.
that cats and other vermin have pist on, whereby his mouth will be so sore that
he cannot eat. The remedy, let him blood on two great veins under the tongue,
and then wash it with salt and vinegar, and give him new bread to eat, but let
it not be hot, and he shall do well.

The trenches are small woormes with sharp ends, trenches to help.
somewhat longer then bottes, and breeds in the guts, by eating mouldie
bread or hay, or mustie corn. The remedy, take therefore a quart of cold woort,
and give it him to drink, but let him stand meatles all a night before, and
after his drink, give him no meat two hours after, and he shall do well.

For a Horse back that is swollen, take honey and tallow even portions, and
boil them together. Then plaster Swelling to help.
it on a linen cloth and lay it on the sore place, and let it so stick on
til it be whole, and it will heal it. Also another to assinage a swelling is:
take the urine of men, and boil haie therein, and being well boiled, clap the
hay on the grief, and keep it warm, and it will help. If a Horse back be
swollen and chafte with the saddle and no skin broke, wet a little hay in cold
water and clap it on, and set the saddle thereon again by and by, while he is
hot, and it will be well: and the skin will fall down again.

If a Mare colt be spaide within nine days after it is Spaide Coltes and
Geldings.
fold, she will prove (as some have tried,) fair, gaunt, and well to travel
and labor, and also to journey. As for the gelding of Coltes, I have spoken
sufficient before in the book for ridder bease, therefore I will here let it
pass. He that will understand more hereof, let him resort unto those places
aforesaid, and there shall he perceive more thereof.

In the beginning of this disease it shall be necessary to Mourning of the chine.
let him blood on the brisket veins and pastorne veins, and to feed him with
sundry change of meats, and in any wise to keep him warm clothed and
stabled, and let him drink nothing but warm mashes of ground malt, giving him
these medecines following.

Take of Wormwood, Pensedanum, and Centory, of Another for the chine.
each like quantity, see the them in wine: then strain them, and power
thereof often times into his right nosthril: and ye shall see a strange
experience to cure him.

In some places husband men do use for want of hay, Chafe to feed Horse.
to give them in the winter oftentimes chafe. Of all kinds of chafe the
wheat chafe is the best, and most hartiest: but all other chafe mixed
together, as rye, wheat, barley, oats and pease, being well cleansed and given
with dride beans or pease is good. But before ye mix your beans or pease
therewith, ye must sift out all the dust clean from your chafe. Or else it
will breed in your horse, the stopping of the reins and bladder, and also the
cough, and il blood to increase.

Of stabling a Horse from grass.
WHen ye take him up from grass in winter, ye shall stable him on a dry day,
and see that he be dry taken up into the house. For if he be wet taken up, (as
some horse masters say) it will make him scabby, and breed him full of lice.
Also if your horse be still fed, and standing in the stable without now and
then riding, or stirde once or twice a week abroad a mile or two, if he be not
thus used, he wll wax purcie, and be in danger of perishing his wind. Therefore
to use to ride him a little, it shall be best once a week at least.

To pluck forth of the foot, stub, thorn, or iron, ye shall For nail, iron,
or stubbe.
take the roots of reeds, and mix it with honey, or take snailes called slughes,
without shells, and stamp these al together with some butter, then fry them in a
pan, and so lay that to the place, and it will draw forth any thing before said:
and when it is drawn out, ye shall lay thereon the white of an egg on tow, the
space of xii. hours after. Then take woormewood, marieram, pimpernel,
cainomile, dride olib^num, and beat al into a fine powder: and boil them
softly with some wax and boores grease, til they wax thick, and so make a
plaster thereof and lay it too, and so heal it therewith.

For to help the mangie on horse.
TAke of fresh grease a quantity, and scrape therein of chalk, then mix it well
together. Then put thereto of the pouders of brimstone, and ellecompane root,
and stir it well. Then take a quantity of quick silver, and kill it with your
fasting spittle, or with fallet oil: and mix it with the rest, al very well
together, and so anoint it. And this will kill the scab or maunge in horse or
other beasts.

The properties of a fair Horse.
To choose a good horse and a fair, he ought to be of a good color, having a
short hair, a small lean head, with a broad forehead. Also with a merry look,
and wild of countenance, a stout heart, and hardy withal, a small mouth, and
long rainde, with a white in the forehead, and wide betwixt the jaws; with
open nostrels, a round chin, stiff and small prick ears, great eyes, broad
breasted, low brawnde, broad ribde, with round sides, thin crested, straight
backed, with two good fillets, a short rumpe, fat and broad buttocks, with four
good and sound legs standing up right one against the other, small knees,
little round coddes, thin legs short and black, and round footed hollow and
rough, with a short pastorne, a white foot, and great sinowes, a stiff docke,
with a long tail, a short trotte, well pased, easy to leap on, still chewing
on the bit, soon stird, swift of foot, to turn on a little ground, and
durable in iournying, these are the chiefest properties in a good and a fair
horse.

Also there be colors of horse which are esteemed one above Color of horse of
best proof.
another, to travail. The best color is counted the brown bay with a golden
mouth, and also under his flancks up to his nauel of the same color. Having
riueled lips, which is a sign of fierceness, and likewise to have for his
beauty, a white in his forehead, or a white fether on his nose, either else a
white foot behind, with a small head, short ears, wide nosthrils, great eyes,
broad forehead, long rainde, and thin mane, and the mane hang over the right
side, large breasted, side brawnde, lean and small knees, lathe legged, great
sinowes, short pastorne, deep ribbed, short loins, broad hollow footed, with a
swift and large pace, small coddes, and standing upright, and open of al four
legs, one against another, and of sight to be sound. And these are counted
the chiefest properties of a good and fair horse.

Sad Sorrel.
ANd next him is the sad Sorrel with a flexen mane, and a flexen tail, having
a wall eye on the farther side, with a black hoof, for then is he like to be
good.

Dapple graie.
NExt him is the dapple graie, with dark dapple spots on his limbs, and
having a hairie neck, with a thin tail, and to have on the one side of his
neck or both, hairie feathers like unto crowns, Then is he like also to be
good to travel.

Fleabitten Horse.
ANd next unto him is the ^leabitten, with a thin crest, having black eine,
black hoofes, with the like properties unto the Horse, for then is he like to
labor and also dure long time.

Dunne Horse.
NExt unto him is the Dunne with a black list on the back, and also to have
a thin black mane, and a black tail, and a thick hair, having also rough
coddes and hairie, with other like properties of the brown baye, then is he
like for to do well.

The white Horse.
NExt him is the white Horse, for he commonly is of long life, but he has a
nise and tender body, and also dangerous to keep: for if he be not well
cherished and clean kept, he will soon alter and decaie, yet having the like
properties of the first Horse, he will then labor well and truly.

The mouse dunne.
ANd next unto him is the Mouse dunne, if he have a meal mouth, and rough
coddes, with a thin mane, having the like properties of the first Horse, so is
he then like for to do well.

The black Horse.
THe black Horse is next unto him, with a white in the forehead, or a white
fether on his nose, or else the further foot white behind, then is he likely
to do well.

The cole black Horse.
NExt unto him is the cole black having no white spot on him, which Horse (as
some horse masters say) is perilous to keep: for if he continue long with a
man, it is marvel if he drown him not, or hurt him by some other way, or else
the Horse to come to small profit.

The iron gray Horse
NExt him is the iron gray, which is counted the worst color, for the iron
gray Horses are commonly faint to labor, and il at al assaies, for although he
be fair of body, he may in no wise away with any great labor. As for other
colors skewde or spotted Horse, some chance to be good and some bad, wherefore
there is no certainty in them, but if the sire be good, the other may follow.
Thus much is spoken to be marked of the color of Horses. Also if ye put a
white Horse to cover a colored Mare, she shall have commonly a Colt of a
sandy color, like an iron gray, neither like the sire nor yet the dambe: yet
many Mares will have a Colt like the Horse that gat it.

A Horse without wartes.
THere be some Horse that have no wartes, which is counted a great fault, and
yet that is no manner of soreness, hurt, or disease. But if a Horse want his
wartes on his hinder legs beneath the spauin place, if he then be wild, he
is no chapmans ware, but if he be well broken and tame, and have been ridden
before. Then a saying is, beware the buier: for he has his eyes to see, and
his hands to feel. There is a saying among husband men, for when that horse
have lived so many years, as the Moon was days old, when he was foalde, he
shall suddenly die.

A Horse forspoken a disease.
WHen as your horse eyes does water, and that he do therewith begin to mourn,
it is calde of some husbands, forspoken. The remedy is, ye shall take a lattin
nawle, or bodkin, and dash it through both his nosthrils above, between the
gristle and the bone of his nose, and there will come forth plenty of il water
and blood, which there have been coniealed: when this is done, ye shall stop
both his ears for a day and a night with black wool. So done, then unstop it
again, and let him blood on both his sides, and also on both the veins under
his ears, and so he shall amend and do well again.

The usual places to let blood.
THe chief places for letting blood are these, the two veins under his eyes,
and the veins between his nosthrils, and the gristles of his nose. Also the
veins in the mouth and under the tongue: and the two veins of both sides of
the neck which to be launst a handful from the head. And likewise on the
shalke veins. Also the two great vains on the sides, and the two branched
veins that leads from the coddes. And again, the two veins under his
tail, these are the chief and common places which do serve for to let blood
against most diseases. And this I think here shall be sufficient for letting of
blood.

Against the Glanders.
THere comes oftentimes unto young horse of four or five years old (by
catching cold after his labor) a kind of glanders, and it will on a sodeine
raise aswelling under his jaws and on his iawe bone, which swelling at the
first will beverie hard, without great heat: and there will remain and breed
to some other sore, if ye help it not. The cure. Ye shall take hogs grease,
and make it very hot, and so all hot ye shall rub and chafe the sore and hard
place therewith, twice or thrice a day, use it, and that will mollify it, and
at length it will so break and run, and so heal again.

To heal the mangie on a Horse.
YE shall take of lamp oil, the fine powder of brimstone, of black soap, of
tar, of barrow hogs grease, and the soote of a chimney, of each a like. And
then mix them all well together, and boil them together, and then anoint the
place therewith as hot as he may suffer it, and use this, and it will help.

Against the mourning of the Chine.
TAke a pecke, or half of oats, and boil them in running water til half the
licour be consumed: and then put them into a bag, and lay them all hot
upon the nauel place on his back, and there let it lie thirty hours, and so
dress him therewith three or four times, and ye shall see experience.

For a Horse that is hide bound.
WHen a horse is hide bound, ye shall perceive it by plucking up his skin on
his sides. If his skin be lose, he is not hide bound, but if it stick
close to his sides or ribs, so that ye can scant take hold thereof, then he
is hide bound, which is commonly gotten in winter by lying wet, and having
small store of meat, which makes him very faint. The remedies are, ye shall
let him blood a little, and then give him warm mafhes morning and evening. And
white water, which is water and malt Mixed together, or branne. And give him
also sodde wheat, mixed with branne or sodde barley. Use this as ye shall see
cause, and he shall do well.

To plump or puff up a lean Horse, in short time.
THe best means to puff up a lean horse is, to see the barley in water till
it be soft like firmitie, and thick withal, or to see the wheat likewise.
And give him thereof always before his watering, not after: for then it will do
him no good. For this the husband man says, all dry prouender or corn after
watering to be given, and all sod corn before watering, specially barley, and
wheat being sod.

Against any galling or fretting through the skin of a Horse.
IF your horse chance to be fretted with halter or other cord, clean
through the skin, ye shall take but vinegar and soap, and heat them well
together, and stir it with a stick or cloth, and then all to rub and wash
the said fretting or galling therewith: use this twice or thrice a day, and it
will dry it up within two or three days, and it will heal again. For this is
the husband men's common medicine, and well proved. If there be galling on the
neck, ye shall stamp the leaves of bryony, (called the hedge vine,) and mix
it with wine, and plaster it too, and it will help.

How to take out the haw in the Horse eye.
THe haw breadth commonly (as cunning horse Leches say), by rankenesse of blood,
and gross fleame, which by heates does breed unto a hard white gristle: in
the forecorner of the horse eye, which will at lengh, make him to lose his
sight, if it be not soon remedied. The cure.

The surest and best way to take forth the hawe, and not perishing the horse
eye, is this. First, (for the more safety, tramell his legs on the one side.
Then put a pair of barnacles on his nose, and another on his farthest ear,
and so let one hold them fast. Then the master does put a needle with a
double thread through the top of his ear, on the same side the haw is. And
then from thence, he puts the needle through the edge of his eye lidde, on
the midst thereof, and so draw up the lidde toward the said ear, and then
fastens the thread and cuttes it off. Then knits his thread again, and says
to his man hold fast, (for fear of starting of the horsees, the needle head
may put out his eye.) Therefore to work sure is best. Then the master waits
when the horse turns his eye, and when the said haw is most seen, then he
catches hold thereof with his fore finger and thombe, and pluckes it forth a
little: and puts his needle through the outer end of the gristle, and so draws
it farther out by the threades end: and then wrappes the rest of the said
thread about his little finger of the same hand, he puttes out the inner side
of the gristle which is toward the horse eye, and with a very sharp knife,
he cuttes cross the gristle, and eases finely away the skin and fat
thereof, on the said haw. And also round about it, which is calde the wash
of the eye: for if that be cut away, the horse will be bleare eide.
Therefore ye must leave all the skin and fat about the said gristle, and
take away but the tippe, or out end thereof with the said gristle or haw,)
which the threade has hold of: but take not too much hold with your needle
and thread. Then being taken forth, cut off your thread that holds his eye
lid, and pick out the ends thereof out of his eye lidde and ear, else they
will afterward trouble him, and also pluck away all the long hayres about his
eyes. Then soon after, as the horse eye do gather to some blood and matter:
ye shall take your mouth full of beer, ale, or wine, (and open his eye) and
spirt therein once or twice together, and with the side of your hand strike
down the blood and matter out of his eye. Use him thus three or four times,
until his eye wax clear, and so it is done, ye may give him what meat ye will
after.

For the Trenches and long Worms.
TO kill the trench worm, or long worms, ye shall take the powder of worm
seed finely searst, two spoonefulles, and put it in a pint of malmeste, and
mix it well together, and let it stand to soake all a night, and give it your
horse in the morning, and keep him without meat and drink four hours after,
and he shall do well.

Tongue of Horse to look to.
YOu that use to keep horse, must take often their toongs forth, and see if
there be any thing breeding under his tongue, for a husk of horn, or seed of
haie, which will trouble him, and soon breed to a blaine or other soreness
under the root of his tongue.

Horse eyes often looked unto.
YOu that keep horse, must often look unto their eyes, for commonly when a
horse eye do shine and look with a fiery eye, or fiery color, he has
something that troubles that eye. Also let all beware of putting the powder of
burnt salt, or the powder of ginger, into the horse eye, for those (at length)
will make him blind, because they burn.

To kill the maungie on a Horse.
YE shall take of quick silver a quantity, and kill it in oil of baies, mi^ it
so long til ye have(...)de it like the (...)e, so that ye can see no part of
the quicksiluer, and therewith ye may anoint the places infected, and it will
heal it.

For the Glaunders.
TAke a quantity of Anniseedes, and lycoras, and Eleca^panie roots, long
Pepper, garlic, all alike, with three or four new eggs, and some butter, a
quantity of Aquavitae or Malmesey, and some good stale ale, mix all and make
it warm, and so give it, then walk him, and keep him warm.

For the Scraches.
TAke stale of men and warm it, and wash therewith down to the hoof, then
take a quantity of mustarde, of strong Vinegar, gray soape, of barrowes
grease, and some quicksiluer, mix all together, and therewith annoint.

For the Bottes or Worms.
TAke of black soap a quantity, and make in three balls, and mix with it a
quantity of salt, and wormeseede beaten, and then open the horse mouth and
take forth his tongue, and put those balls one after another into his throat,
and make him to swallowe them: then give him after them a pint of stale ale
warm, then walk him a while after, and he shall do well, or give him of a
tanners fat.

To heal a sore and a galde back, and also to heal the dead flesh.
TAke a handful of Bay salt, a handful of great and small Oatmeale, and put a
quantity of stale thereto, and stir them altogether, and temper it like
pappe or paste, and then make round balls thereof: then throw in a hot cole of
fire, and make them read hot, and then cool them, and beat them to a fine
powder, and then straw of that powder all over thereon, so often as ye shall see
it bare, or shall have any other cause, and this will heal it.

For the yealowes.
YE shall open his mouth, and, and cut (with the point of a knife) the third
barbe in the roof of his mouth, and let him bleed well, then take a
halfpeniworth of English saffro^, a peniworth of Turmerick, and a new laid
egg with y^ shells and al small broken, and mix it in a quart of stale ale or
beer, and so give it to the horse. Then chafe him a while after and set him up
warm, and he shall do well again.

Another way.
TAke a little of Fenegreke, a quantity of Turmericke, a penieworth of English
saffron, two penieworth of long Pepper, a quantity of bay leaves dried, of
Annisedes, and grains of each a quantity, then beat all unto fine powder:
then mix it with stale ale, and so give it unto the horse fasting. Walk him a
little and set him up.

For the Cough.
TAke a gallon of fair water, and make it ready to sees, then put thereto a
pecke of ground malt, with two handful of box leaves stripped and chopped small,
with some groundsell, then do mix them altogether, and let him drink thereof
Evening and morning. So use this as ye shall see cause, or to mix your box
leaves with ^ates and bittony, is likewise very good, and after to be kept
warm.

To kill woormes.
TAke the croppes of young broom, and of Sauin, and Groundsell, of each a
quantity, then choppe them small, and give it with his Prouender evening and
morning, and let him not drink for a good space after, and he shall do well
again.

To kill the Farcie or Fashion.
TAke a sharp knife and cut the bu^ches over, and take the powder of white
Arsenicke, and straw thereon, and use it on each place, where ye shall see
any of the bunches to rise, with letting blood by, it will kill them at length.

For Quartes or chinkes in the hoof.
TAke half a pound of Frankincense, a pound of Rosen, a pound of pitch
greek, half a pound of black pitche, a pound of new wax, a pound of goats
grease, half a pound of varnishe, half a pound of Turpentine, two ounces of
oil olive, and melt them together, and lay it to the hoof playsterwise, and
this will help it, but let him not go into any water or wet, for three or
four days.

For the morefounding or glanders.
TAke lunature scorii, of baccarum laurii, of Aristolochia rotunda, of Gencium,
of nux muscata, of each two ounces, then beat them altogether into a powder,
and then put them into a pint of white wine, and give it warm to the horse,
and he shall amend.

To help wind galls.
TAke Arsenicke, of Solymon, of Rezalgar (which are corsiues) of each a like
quantity, then beat them together into a small powder, and mix that powder
with oil of bays, and sheare the hair off from the windgal, as broad as it
is, and lay of your stuff thereon, so let it lie four and twenty hours.
Then after do annoint them with boats grease, and that will heal it.

For a galde back.
TAke the white of an egg and salt, with some oatemeale beat altogether, and
make it of a lump, and cost it into the fire and make it red hot, and cool it
again, and beat it and it will be a black powder, and straw of that powder
thereon, and it will heal it.

If he be galde and festred on the side, take but yeast, and honey, the white of
an egg, and soote: blend them altogether and make a plaster thereof, and lay
it too to eat away the dead flesh, then straw lightly thereon a little
verdegreace, and so ye may remove it once a day.

A very good way to destroy the Viues.
IF the Uiues be rank in a horse, ye shall bow his ears forward, and grype
him with your fingers under his jaws, and ye shall feel as it were a hard
roll of flesh like a gristle. If that come up or nigh to the root of his
ears, the^ it is perilous, (as before is showed.) The cure. Ye shall cut a small
hole with the point of a knife, on the end next his ear, or in the myds
thereof open a hole, and pick out three or four kyrnels thereof. Then put of
bay salt or other into the hole, and so they will consume and wear away, this
way of doing there will be no scarre to be seen in that place.

To help a horse somewhat foundred.
Pluck of his shoes and pare hollow his feet nigh to the quick, then race him
with a crooked launcet from ye heels to the toe in 2. or 3 places, and raise
the hoof on both sides of your races and let him bleed well, then clap two or
three hard eggs as hot as ye can, and as these do cool take new, and lay
hot horse doung thereon and about his hoof, and so he shall soon recover and
be well again as before.

To know the age of a horse.
YE must feel of his bridle teeth above, at a year old he will shout forth a
tooth, at two years two teeth, at three years four teeth, at five years
five teeth above. A mare yt has bridle teeth above, she will bring few coltes
or none, and when his vain tooth is with an edge toward the fore teeth, he is
eight years.

A drink to comfort a horse.
YE shall boil in ale great raisons the stones taken forth, of licoras and
Anniseeds in like quantity, of cummin, and sallet oil, strain it and give it
with a horn, or take also of turmericke, fenegreke, Anniseeds, lycoras, and
sallet oil, let your powders be searst very fine, and mix them all milk
warm, and so give it with a horn.

To heal an impostumed wound.
TAke and hollow two or three great enyons, and put therein a cursie of bay
salt, and a little hole saffron, and so roast them under the embars, and plaster
wise lay them al hoate on the wounds. If ye would have the skin of, make a
plaster of Cow doung sodde in milk and clappe it too, for 24. hours, which
will take away the skin putrified. But the other will heal al wonndes alone
by it self.

The Horse tongue hurt with the bridle.
YE shall boil in water of woodbind leaves, of black brier leaves, of primrose
leaves, knotgrasse, with some honey sod, and then put to a little alum, and once
or twice a day to make it luke warm, and wash his tongue therewith, with a
clowte tied on a sticks end, and this will soon heal it again.

For a Horse that does tire on the way.
TAke and slyse a piece of fresh beef, and lap it about his bit, and fasten
it with a thread, and then bridle him, and ride him, and he will not lightly
tire.

To help a horses mouth venoumed called of some the Camery.
THe Camery is a disease in the tongue and lips of a horse, which has eaten
some venomed grass or haie, that dogs or cattes have pissed on, which will make
his tongue to have like cliftes and scabbes, and his upper lip under to be
full of black whealkes or pimples, which will let him to eat hardly any
meat. The cure is, ye shall take out his tongue, and prick the veins under
the end in six or eight places, and so under his upper lip, and let him bleed
well, then al to rub it with salt, then the next day wash it with some Vinegar,
and rub it again with salt, and he shall do well again, and give him warm
drink a day or two after: Duoth Sharp.

To help the bags in the mouth of a horse
THe bags, or geakes is an easy soreness to heal, which is hard gristles,
being on the insides of a horses mouth in the weakes of his lips or mouth,
which will often go between his teeth, and trouble him that he cannot eat,
nor chew well his meat. The remedy. Ye shall take forth his tongue, and put a
rolling pin of wood under, so hold it out on ye contrary side, then shall ye
with the point of the sheares clip an ynch long of that inner gristle clean
away, the^ turn his tongue, and do the other side of his mouth likewise, and
then rub them well with salt, and let him go, and they will shrink away, and
the horse shall do well again.

A proved medicine to kill mangie on a horse.
TAke a pound of black soap, a pottle of mustard, four peniworth of brimstone
made in fine powder, three penieworth of quicksiluer well killed with fresh
grease, two peniworth of verdegreace^, a quarter or less of a pint of grease,
stir all these together in a vessel, till the grease and other things be
molten with labor, and without fire, and therewith anoint the mangie sore,
but first let him blood, then after two days, wash it with the water that
young broom or At semanacke herb has been well sodde in, and smally chopped,
and mixed with a little powder of soote, and let those sees well together, and
this will help him with once anointing, and twice washing.

To ripe an impostume in any outward part.
Sees mallow roots, and lilly roots in water, bruise the^ and mix them
with porkes grease, and put to of linseede meal, and plaster wife lay it to,
against the impostume of a cold cause, sees white mints in wine and oil, or
ale and butter, and so lay it too. This will destroy and wast a hard impostume.

Also for a cold impostume stamp cuckospit with old grease, and so plaster it
on, and this will waste it also. Again, against a hot impostume, stamp
liuerwort, and mix it with the grounds of ale, and it will help, or bruised
with mallows at ye beginning, mixed with hogs grease, and all hot laid to,
will ripe an impostume, or the grounds of ale or beer, boiled with mallows,
and bath it therewith hot, and plaisterwise lay it on the swelled place, and it
will disperse and waste it away in 2. or 3. days. Also bawme stamped and mixed
with hogs grease, and so plaistred, will ripe and disperse any cold
impostumatio^. Against a hot rising or swelling, bruise of lettise seed, or
Popie seed, and mix it with oil of ree roses, and so plaster it on, which
will help if it be taken betimes. Thus much for swollen places and impostumes.

For a horse that is pricked in a joint among sinews.
TAke of rosen, pitch, turpentine, and Sanguis draconis, then melt these
together, and clap it somewhat warm on the place or joint: then take of floxe
and put upon it, for that will clean too and defend it, and this will ripe it
and cause it to run, if any thing will dee it, for there is not found a
better way to help a swollen joint.

Against stiffenesse of sinews and joints.
Sees black soap a pound in a quart of strong ale, till it wax thick, like
tar, then reserve it and when ye shall see cause, use to anoint the sinews
and joints therewith, and it will supple them, and bring them again although
they be shrunk. This is as well for man as for beast.

For a horse that has a canker in his mouth or throat.
A Horse that has a canker, or is venomed in his throat and mouth, he cannot
swallow his meat, but it will lie in his jaws on both ^es his mouth, and often
when he have chewed haie, he will put it out again, and his breath will savor
very strongly before meat, and having this grief he will never prosper, but
pyne away at length. The cure. Ye shall cast him, and open his mouth with a pin
of wood, then take a crooked kiffe iron, wrapped with tow on the end, and
therewith rake out all the stinking grass or other meat that lies in his
jaws, and under the root of his tongue. So cleansed clean all about, ye shall
heat strong wine vinegar somewhat warm, and wrappe your yrons end with towe,
and dip it in the vinegar, then al to chafe his jaws on both sides a good
while, and also the roots of his tongue, when ye have so chaft him well. wash
his tongue therewith and so let him rise, because his mouth will be sore for a
week after, ye must give him mashes, and grains hot, or such soft meat, but
no hay, and he will do well again, god willing.

Foundring of a strait shoe.
IF ye let fore shoes remain above a month, if ye so iourny him, ye may
founder him, which ye shall perceive in tauell by the way, for he will often
trippe on those feet or that foot which is most grief unto him, therefore
remove them betimes, or else he will founder and halt down right: then the
shoe must be removed and let blood in the tooe, and some do stop it with
bruised sage, and so set on the shoe again, and let him so rest for iii. or
iiii. days or ye can ride him, the^ may ye ride him softly and he will do will.

A proverb among husbandmen for the breed of a colt.
IF thou have a fool with iiii. white feet, keep him not a day.
If he have three white feet, put him soon away.
If he have two white feet, lend him to thy friend.
If he have one white foot, keep him to his lives end.
To make a horse to scour.
Give him one ounce of the powder of brimstone, finely beaten in a mash, with
some powder of spurge.

Against worms in the coddes.
SOme horse will have worms in their coddes, and when they do abound, if he
be not remedied, he will dye of them. And these are the signs: he will
scratch his belly with his feet, and his hair will stare there, and wax more
grayer then before. If ye help him not before they pearce his bellye and guts,
he shall hardly escape. They are bred by evil meat, and fault of drinking
good water. The cure. Ye shall cast into his mouth fasting, the guts of a young
pullet, and make him to swallow it down in holding up his head: do this
three mornings, and let him not eat nor drink of v. hours after very
little. Also some do use to bruise french broom, and give it among good
prouender, and salt water to drink. Others do also give the horse of green
branches of willow, or Sallow, or reeds, and in digestion of his meat he
shall cast out those worms.

To help sinews troubled with humors.
Boil the meal of lineseed and honey in like portion together, with some white
wine, and make thick as a plaster and so put it on: and ye shall see it come
to good proof.

Against shot impoysoned
WHen a horse is hurt by some poisoned iron, or shot, take the sweat of an
other horse, with tosted or burnt bread, mix them together with men's urine,
and make the horse to swallow it down, and put grease of a hog into the wound
with the like mixture, and he shall mend.

Falling of hair in a horse tail.
THe falling of hair commonly is when he has to much blood, or when he
traueleth to much on the way, or is beaten on the tail, whereof comes
sometimes scabbes with shedding his hair. The cure. If this hap in the
tail, ye shall race the out part unto the midst of the fourth bone or ioynte
of the tail, and take forth that bone called of some bariuole, which ye shall
take out clean, and betwixt the senture and the body be coctures or stringes
some what deep, which ye shall softly touch with a hot iron, and a little
salt, and in each fent ye shall gently put a broach of wood, which must
remaiue ix. days, if they fall not away of themselves.

The canker in the tail of a horse.
THere comes a disease in the tail of a horse, called (in french) Langie: and
will eat the flesh of his tail in manner of a canker, so that the hair will
fall away, for the bones are corrupt. If yet see not unto it betimes, all the
tail will corrupt. The cure. Make a head boulster of cloth very strong for
it, and wette it in vinegar within and without, and so bind it fast on the
sore, and always when it waxes dry, ye must wette it again.

Do this twice or thrice a day, if it be done oftener, it is the better. So
shall ye continue for three or four days, and then ye must heal it as ye
heal a green wound.

For a horse evil disposed and very heavy in travail.
YE shall cut the skin between the fore legs, and then make a ring of a
vine branch, and put it into the cut place betwixt the skin and the flesh,
(like a rowell) and then he shall travel surely again.

For a horse that is to fat to make him lean.
TO make your horse lean, that is very fat, ye shall give him branne mixed
with honye and warm water, and so it shall abate his fatnes without travel.

To know the differences betwne a horse bewitched and other soreness.
YE shall mark this in a horse (as in other cattle) that when they be sick
or diseased naturally, the grief will often times alter again by little and
little, and so to mend. Or else it will increase by leisure, and not to come so
vehemently, as when he is bewitched. For the farcie in a horse will rise in
knobs and bunches, and will so continue a long time or they break out. And yet
the horse (so infected) will eat daily his meat: But if he be bewitched he
will eat no meat, because he is so inflamed with such poison in his body, so
that within xii. hours many die, or like to die. Some are stricken with
knobbes and bunches rising in their bodies, with lamenes of linunes. Some with
running at their nostrels matter and phlegm. Some their eiesswelling and
hanging out of their head: with phlegm and matter roping and running. Some
suddenly fall and so die. Some run about in fields as they were mad, and
drown themselves in pits and ponds of water, with diverse other infinite ways
they use in bewitching men's cattle, which here I will pass over. But when ye
shall doubt of any such thing: the best is to seek remedy betimes: or the
poison go through his body. For if it tarry any space, it will be past remedy.

Sinews and nerfes broken or bruised.
IF Sinews or nerfes be broken or bruised, or hurt by some sore or otherwise,
ye shall lay thereon the flesh of a tortue, well mixed and beaten, with the
powder of mullen herb. But if the nerfes and sinews be bruised and hurt
within, ye shall then burn it round like a circle with a hot iron in xii.
small circles or less, and so he will mend again.

An ointment to repair the flesh in a Wound.
TO repair and to heal flesh in a wound, ye shall make this ointment. Take
wormwood, pimpernell, callamint or ^ep, of bawme, and wax, of each a
quantity, beat them all together well, and then boil it over the fire until
it be mixed well all together: then couch or steep a piece of linen therein,
and lay it on the sore. This ointment heals marvelous well, and repaireth
the flesh again.

To heal the canker on a horse.
TAke the juice of daffadill roots vii drams, the juice of hounds tongue a
like, of vnfleckt lyme iiii, drams, of arsenit powder ii. drams, beat all these
well together, and put them in a new clean vessel of earth close covered, then
boil it till it be all resolved: first wash the canker wound with strong
vinegar warm. Then fill the canker wound twice a day with the said compound,
till it be kilde, and fall away.

Against tyring of a horse on the way.
IF your horse chance to tyer on the way, if spur, and wande will not profit,
ye shall put three or four round peble stones into one of his ears, and so
knit fast his ear that the stones fall not out, and they will so rattle within
his ear, that he will then go faster if he have any sprite or power. Some do
thrust a bodkin through the midst of the flap of his ear, and put therein a
pin of wood, and ever when he flackes his pace, the rider will strike on that
ear with his wand, and so he will mend his pace thereby.

Also if your horse in travail do wax dull on the way, ye shall siice a
piece of fresh beef, and bind it about his bit, and thereon he will che^ on
the way, whereby he will continue and travel well after.

To help the found ring of a horse
IF your horse be hot ryding on the way, and you ryding through a shallow
water, letting your horse stay to take but a sippe of water, it will founder
him. Ye shall perceive it, for he will often trip under you within a quarter of a
mile riding. The remedy. Ye shall let him blood as soon as ye can, on the to
vain under of all four feet, ye may stop the blood with bolearmeniac, or but
pinch it with your thumb and finger, both parts of the vain, the upper and the
nether together, and that will stanch them, so you may ride your horse again on
the morrow as safe as before. Well proved. But if he be foundred by heat of
travel in hot sandy way, and not soon remedied, it will be long to heal: And
perhaps ascend to the joint of the fether lock, and shrink the sinewe, which
will cause him to halt and trip. The remedy: take the roots of nettles, and
hemlocke, with elder pills, of each a handful, boil them tender in bores grease,
or fresh barrowes grease, so let him blood in the mids of his foot on the to
vain, then bath and chafe his joint and leg therwithal about from his knee to
the fetherlock, and then clap it to, and bind a cloth fast to, as hot as ye
can, so use this once a day, til he be well, and this will help: well proved. And
anonint his legs with suppling oiles.

For wolves teeth in some horse.
Also some horses have wolves teeth on the upper jaws, and that horse cannot
grind well his meat, because the flesh will thrust between, when he would griud,
which will let him greatly for feeding. Which teeth some defile the^ smoth with
a rape, and so after they will wear smoth, in doing this they do use to cast
the horse.

But if a horse do over reach his nether grinders with his upper, which ye mine
feelle perceive by sight, or by feeling; for his upper teeth will lie over the
nether like a bunch on his cheeks, and that horse cannot eat haie, or hardly
eat any rough meat, but it will lie in lumps in his cheeks, and under his
tongue, which grief is gotten (as some judge) by feding in watrie and mamish
groandes in winter, and thereon comes loosenes of feeth, and when a horse is
so, there is no help or remedy that I can learn but this cast him, and
prick his gums, and so let them blood, then rub them with sage, and salt, and
so they will ^ast again: so use it viii. or x. days after. For the more surer,
but to feed him with prouender is best, as with bread, and grains, bran, ground
malt, and such, which will be costly to keep: but so he will labor and serve a
long time well. In summer ye may put him to grass, and so he will do well. Thus
much for wolves teeth in some horse, and over reaching teeth, and also for
loose teeth in a horse.

Against the blood, or plurisie of blood.
THe disease of the blood is, some young horses will feed, and being fat, will
increase blood, and so grow to a plurisie, and some die thereof, if he have not
soon help, he will sometimes stand and eat no meat, his eyes will seem
red, his head and body hot, and he will look heavily, and suddenly in eating he
will fall and die. The remedy is, ye shall let him blood on the liver vain, and
so he shall do well again.

For a horse that is swollen with much wind in his body.
SOme horse with eating certain windy meat or such herbs, will be so swollen
therewith as the his belly would burst, and then he will eat no meat, but stand
and hang down his head, ready to fall, and so die, if he have not speedy help.

When ye shall see any horse so, the next remedy as I can learn i^ye shall take
a sharp pointed knife, or bodkin, and arm it so with some stay, that it go
not to deep, for pearcing his guts. Then strike him therewith through the skin
into the body, before the hollow place of his haunch bone, half a foot
beneath the back bone, and the wind will come out thereat. Then if ye put a
hollow evil therein, (or some father to keep it open a while,) the wind will
void the better and so heal again. When a horse is so, some do rake him, and
some do ride him, to make him break and void wind: but this has been proved
the best remedy to save your horse or ox.

Against loose teeth in a horse.
A Horse being grieved with loosenes of teeth, he cannot eat but will fumble,
and slauer his meat in his mouth, and may not swallow it down, but chew it and
solye in lumps (for the most part) on both sides his jaws: The most meat he
can swallow is grass, and prouender. This disease is gotten by feeding in wet
pastures and wet grounds in winter, and thereby his gums will shrink from his
teeth, and so they will be loose and seem long.

For some horse which has been howsed in winter, will soon take this griefs,
as the red sorell, as soon as any other. The remedy. Ye shall let him blood on
the vain under the tail nigh the rumpe, and then rub his gums with sage, tide
on a sticks end. Also ye shall give him for a while, the tender crops of
black briars with his prouender, and so he shall do well again.

For worms in the maw.
IF worms be in the maw of a horse. Take great worms and cleanse them, and
shells of eggs, beat these both togesmall with a hammer, and put to a quauite,
and pepper, and so mix them all together, and being warm, put it down the
horse throat.

For proud flesh in a wound.
FIrst ye shall wash the wound with wine, wherein is sob nettle seed Then
straw thereon a little of the ^ine powder of verdigrease: and this will take it
away. Use this as ye see cause.

To make a horse to scour or laxatiue.
YE shall give him among his prouender one ounce of brimstone beaten to small
powder, and this will maks him to scour. Also some give a rye shefe, some make
a drink with polypodium and spurge sod in ale, and the roots of the water
flagge stamped, and boil them in ale, and strain it, and milk warm give it,
a pint thereof to each horse, fasting, and keep him warm after.

Another way to heal the mange in a horse.
LEt him blood on both sides the neck, if he be a young horse. Then cut the
skin down the mids of his forehead two fingers broad, or long down right,
then open the skin an inch wide on both sides the cut, and put therein thin
slices of the green root of Ellecampane, or Angelica, which is better. So let
them remain under the skin till the matter rot, then crush it forth in two or
three days, and in xii. days the roots will fall as it heals, and this
will help: but ye must anoint the mange with brimstone in fine powder, with
verdigrease, oil olive, het and mixed all together.

A perfect and proved way to heal the farcy or fashion in a horse.
TAke iii. ounces of quicksiluer, half a pound of hogs grease of verdigrease
an ounce, ye shall first kill your quicksiluer in a bladder, with a spone full
or two of the juice of an orringe, or a limon, in rubbing and chafing them in
the bladder till the quicksiluer be clean killed. Then put your hogs grease in a
mortar, or dish, with your verdigrease, so beat them well together. Then put to
your quicksiluer, and beat the^ al well together, and so keep it, and when your
horse has the^ fashion or farcy, in rising on the veins like knobs and
bunches, then anoint them round, and all over those knots or bunches. Use this
once a day, or as ye shall see cause, for they will go no further, but grow to a
matter, and when ye shall feel them soft, lance them, and the matter will run
out, and so day by and heal again. Also in the nointing him, ye shall put
into each of his ears one good sponefull of the juice of ragwart, some call it
slylote, a weed growing in field: and this will help him in few days.

Against the swelling under a horse jaws.
FOr the swelling under or between the horse jaws: take his own dung hot as
soon as he makes it, and with a cloth bind it fast thereto. Use this twice a
day, and it will be (...) (...) husband ^mixe there with hot boiling piss of
men, and so ^ay it to: and it helps.

To heal a horse hurt with harrowtines or such like, on the legs or other
parts.
YE shall first wash the wounds with man's brin, and sall, then take the soft
down of the stalks of herb benedictus, called the holy thistle, and therewith
fill the wounds or holes, and so let them remain, and ye shall need no other
medicine. For that will heal it alone only without changing. Well proved.

To make a horse stale.
Mix wine and oil together, and rub and chafe it on his loins, or put a
louse into his yard, or put soap in his yard, if these help not, squirt of
honied water sod, then cold, into his yard with some salt. Another present
remedy: If a maid strike him on the face with her girdle he shall stale.

If your saddle do chafe your horse. Take an herb calde arsemart, in latin
Parcicaria, stamp it, and lay it to, which is a present remedy.

Teeth changing or falling.
A Horse has forty teeth: in the xxx. month after his foling, he loses two
above, and two beneath. Again in the fourth year he loses iiii. teeth, two
above, and two beneath, on the fifth year he casts the rest both above and
beneath, and those that come first be hollow teeth above. At vi. years his
hollow teeth are filde up, and in the vii. year all the rest are filled up. Of
this age ye can no longer judge by his teeth. But if ye pluck up the skin of
his jaws or cheeks, if they fall soon smoth again, is a sign he is young.
But if they fall wrincled, he is old. And like of other beasts. The horse
grows not after vi or vii. years, the mare grows not after v. years. And
to have them bring fair colts, let them not be horst but every other year.

FINIS.
The Table of all the principal things contained in this Book for horses.
A
AGe of a horse to know. Asses how for to nourish. Age of a horse to know.
B
BAbbes or Gekes to help. 182 Back gald to heal. 177. 163 Barbs in the horse
mouth to help. 154 Blisters on his body to help. 110 Blindness in a horse to
help. 145. 165 Blood how to stanch. 128 Blood a disease how to help 191 Blood
how to let. Blood letting to know where. 128 Bors or worms how to help. 133
Bots another way. 177 Breeding of coltes. Brittle hoofes how to help. 153
Brittle hoofed horse to pare. 158 Broken winded horse to help. 130 Broad
hoofes how to pare.
C
CAnker in the mouth and throat. 184. 189 Camery to help. 166. 182 Canker in
the tail. 187 Cart horse how to use in travel. Cart how to prepare in
travel. 120 Casting of horse or other. Chafings on a horse to help. 107.
Chafing sores to help. 111 Clefts or crackes in the hoof. 179 Chafe for
horse to give. 167 Chafed or weary horse to help. Cloying a horse to heal.
144 Coltes with their good signs. 106 Cold taken in a horse. Coler abou^ding
in a horse to help. Colts to change to other dammes. Colt evil for to help.
142 Cods inflamed. 155 Colts pained in the gums or teeth. 154 Covering mares in
what time best 161. 104 Cords a disease to help. Cough to help. 110 Cough
another way. 178 Covering young mares and how best. 116 Cratches to heal.
Crooked hoofes how best to pare. Curbes a disease to help. 137 Colors of good
horses to know.
D
DIseases where they breed on all horse. Drink or meat when to give. 108
Drink against worms in horses. 134. 110 Drinks against cough or cold. Drink
to comfort a horse. 153. 181
E
Ears inflamed to help Eyes sore to heal Evil travel in a horse. Eyes
bloody to help. Eyes blinded to help. 166 Eyes watery to help. Eyes stricken
to help. Eyes stricken, another. Eyes with the pin and web. 146 Eyes being
chaft to heal. Eyes read to help. Eyes sore how to heal. Eyes of horse
often looked unto. 176 Enterfeere to remedy. 142 Enterfering another.
Experience of hot and cold horse
F
FAlling of teeth in a horse. Falling of hair in a horse tail. 186 Faintnes
in a horse to help. 154 Farcy or fashion in a horse. 179. 124 Fat horse to
make lean. Fever in horse to help. 122 Fever in Colts to help. 154 Foaling
of Coltes. Fistula to heal. 147 Fistula in ye head of a horse. 148 Flat hoof
how to pare. Flies troubling a horse to help. Foundring of a straight shoe.
185 Foundring of a horse to help. 140. 190. 180 Fraying in a horse to help.
Frunce in a horse to help. 133
G
GALling or fretting to help. 174 Glanders in horse to help. 172 Glanders
another. 131. 177 Gorge how to heal. 152 Gelding of horse. Green wounds to
heal. Grinders or wolves teeth. Graueling of a horse 141 Gummes pained to
ease.
H
Haw to take forth best way. 132 Haw in the eye to help. 126 Haw another way.
174 Hair to increase Heat to abate in a horse. 154 Head of a horse pained.
108 Hen dung unwholesome for a horse. Hide bound to help. 173 Hinder feet
shoyng. Hollow feet pared. Ointment for hoofes. Howsing of a horse Hoof bound
to help or loose. 123 Hoofes being hot on his feet. 119 Hoof bound how to shoe.
Hoof loose how to help. 152 Horse without brains. Horse that will tire, to
help. 182 Horse for to skoure. Horse age or growing. Horse harness to be
looked unto. 119 Horse or beast forespoken. 172 Horse bewitched to know.
I
ILl for horse eyes. Itch in the tail to help. 154 Impostumes to help or
ripe. 183 Impostumed wounds to help. 181
L
LAmpas to help. 148 Lamenes in a horse to help. 174 Leannes in a horse to
help. 123 Lice on horse to help. 143 Long worms to help. 134 Long hoof how
to pare. Loose hoof to help. 166 Loose teeth how to fasten. 192
M
MAlender how to help. 134 Malt worm to help. 163 Mares when to be covered.
104 Mares when to cover. 161 Mangie to help. 176 Mangie in horse to help.
173. 193 Mangie another. 168. 183 Mares how for to govern. 105 Mares hard in
foaling to help. Mares old not good for coltes. Mares how to have male, or
female colts. 106 Mares with fool having bottes to help. 110 Mares having rage
of love. 113 Mares having the pestilence. 113 Matelong in the foot. 123 Moyles
how to nourish. Moyles with their beauty. 116 More founding in the foot. 179
Mourning of ye chine. 167. 132. 173 Another for the same. Another for the same.
N
NErfes and sinews broken. 188 Nails for horseshoes to make. 157 Nails in
the flesh to heal. 168 Narrow heeld horse how to pare. Nauelgall to help.
Nauelgall another. Nose bleeding to stanche.
P
Pains a disease in the feet. 137 Pains or Cratches. Paring the hoof bound.
Paring of hoofes. 156 Paring a broad hoof. 157 Pastornes fretted to heal.
122. 126 Pestilence among mares. 113 Pestilence among horse. 150 Pin and
web to help. Pissing blood to help. 149 Pissing not well to help. 126
Another for the same. Place to cover mares best. Plucking out thorn or iron.
Pole evil to help. 129 Pricked in a joint to help. 184 Pricked with a nail
to help. 166 Proud flesh to help. Properties of a good horse. Proverbs.
Purging of horse. Puffing up a lean horse.
Q
QVincie in horse to help. 127 Quertes or chinks in ye hoofs.
R
RAge of mares. Ringbone to help. Rubbing of horses does good. Rugged or
brittle hoof to pare. Repair flesh in a wound. 189
S
Saddle chafe your horse. Scratches to heal. 177. 162. 165 Another for the
same. To make a horse to scour. 185 Scratches another. Sinews troubled.
Selander to help. 135 Shakle gall to help. Shot poisoned. Shoing of a cart
horse. 155 Shoing of other horse. 155 Shoing of diverse hoofes diversely. fol.
158. 159. 160 Shoing the forefeet of horse best. 156 Shoing a broad hoof. 157
Shoes made with whole quarters. Shoulder hurt to heal. Signs to know if a
horse has the bots. Signs to know a sick horse. 127 Sinews broken to heal.
Skin of horse rased to heal. Skin of horse watery to help. Sore chafings to
heal. Soreness when they breed. Sore impostumes to heal. Spauin to help.
136 Spayde coltes. 167 Spraines or strain in horse. 124 Another for strains
Splint to heal. 133 Stabling or houssng of horse. Stalions in his best age.
Stalions some hoter tha^ other. 115 Staggers a disease to help. Strongest
horse or moyle to know. Stound in the pastorne to help. Stifnes of sinews and
joints. Stifle in the heel to help. 124 Strangury to help. 132 Stubbe in the
flesh to help. Surbating to heal. 145 Swelling under the iowles. 193 Swollen
places to heal. 161. 167 Another for the swelling by too much wind. 191
T
TAint in a horse to help. 143 Taming of horse. Taste lost in a horse to
help. Teeth not even to help. Teeth pained to help. 192 Tyring on the horse
by the way to help. 182. 189 Thorn to pluck out. Tongue hurt with bit. 181
Tongues of horse to see to often. 176 Trenches to help. 166. 176 Another for
the same.
V
VEnomed places to help. 149 Viues how to heal. 126. 180 Vometing in horse to
stay.
W
WArtes on horse legs to mark. White feet on a horse. Water unwholesome for
horse. 149 Weakness in a horse to help. Wearines in a horse to help. 123
Wound on horse to heal. 181 Wingalles to help. 179. 135 Wolves teeth in horse
to help. 176 190 Worms in horse to help. Worms in the maw. 192
Y
YEalowes a disease in horse to help. 150. 193
These be the herbs which are called the fiuelaunces which leads unto a
wound. Dittan, Pellute, Meniconfound, Pimpernell, and Spear wort.

The five grasses that draws a wound, Oculus Christi, Madder, Buglosse, Red
coal, Erual. The eight grasses defensive.

Ache, herb Robart, Buglosse, Sanicula, Sauery, Sauin. Mollen, and Crow foot:
these are defensive.



These are the grasses with the fiuelaunces that leads unto a wou^d, and
draws unto a wound, and knowledgeth a fester. But understand that every open
sore is not a fester, for the flesh of a fester is hard and shining being
chafed. There be two kinds of festers, the hot and the cold. The hoate will
have a great hole, and the cold fester will have a straiter hole. Of the one
comes out white matter and fretted flesh. And of the other comes out black
matter which fretteth the sinews and joint, and that is incurable. This take
always for a general rule.

THE Third book entreating of the ordering of sheep and goatees, hogs and
dogs: with such remedies to help most diseases as may chance unto them.

Taken forth of learned Authors, with diverse other approved practices, very
necessary for all men, especially those which have any charge and government
thereof.

Gathered by L. M.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf 1587.

A praise of the sheep.
THese cattle sheep among the rest,
Is counted for man one of the best.
No harmefull beast nor hurt at all.
His fleece of wool does cloth us all:
Which keeps us from the extreme cold:
His flesh does feed both young and old.
His tallow makes the candels white,
To burn and serve us day and night.
His skin does pleasure diverse ways,
To write, to wear at all assaies.
His guts thereof do make whele strings,
They use his bones to other things.
His horns some shepeheards will not loose,
Because therewith they patch their shoes.
His dung is chief I understand,
To help and dung the plowmans land.
Therefore the sheep among the rest,
He is for man a worthy beast.
FINIS.
The government of sheep, and remedies for such diseases as comes unto them.
AS our chief commodity is to have great cattle, so is there a chief
comditie to nourish, keep and feed small cattle, as sheep one of the
chiefest and fruitfullest for the use of man. For of these beasts comes a
yearly fleece, and are kept with small trouble or any other great pain, but
in keeping them from cold in winter, daggin in summer, scabbe, blood, and such
other inconveniences which comes unto them as well as any other catell.

Therefore must ye take some pain to see the^ kept in fields and pastures as
well as in houses. There is no man that loves sheep but will have a chief
care of them, to use and order them as they ought to be, considering all the
commodities ye comes by them, and to keep their houses clean and warm in
winter, with their foldes also well set and ordered in somer. The shepherd
ought to be of a good nature, wise, skillful, countablo, and right in all his
doings, wherein few is to be found at this present. Specially in villages and
towns: that by their idleness and long rest, they grow new to wax stubborn and
are given (for the most part) to frowardnes and evil, more then to good profit
to their masters, and evil manered, whereof breeds many theeuish conditions,
being pickers, liars, and stealers, and runners about from place to place, with
many other infinite evils. Which contrary was in ye first shepherds of Egypt,
and other in their time, for they were ye first inuentours of astrology and
judgment of stars, and finders out of physic, augmenters of music, and
many other liberal sciences.

I cannot tell whether I ought to join the art of knighthood, and the
government of kingdoms, but by their long continuance in the fields, and
many years seeing and viewing out of their cabbins, by experiences observed
the course of the stars, the disposition of times, and by long use in marking
the ordered times and unsteadfastness of days in such sort continuing that the
ancient shepherds became people of great knowledge: As witnesses
Hierogliphiques: and therefore al husbands ought to have a great care in
choosing of good shepherds.

Sheep (as well as others) ought to be the first cattle to be looked unto, if
ye mark the great profit that comes by them: for by these cattle we are
chiefly defended from cold, in serving many ways, in couerings for our
bodies. They do not only nourish the people of the villages, but also to serve
the the table with many sorts of delicate and pleasant weates: In some
countries their milk does serve in steed of furmentie, of which are the
people of Scithia, called Nomades. And also the greeks do name them,
Galactopotes, that is to say, drinkers of milk: and for so much as these
cattle are tender and delicate, as Celsus does affirm. Therefore good heed
must be taken unto them for sickness, yet they are commonly in health, except
at some times they are subject to the murren scabbe, or pestilence, in changing
of grounds. Therefore they must be chosen agreeable to the nature of the place
where they shall remain, which is a rule meet to be observed and kept, not only
in these cattle, but also in all other cattle of husbandry, whereof Virgill
says:

All grounds for all things is not good, nor meet for all beasts to get
their food. For the fat Champion and pasture fields is good to nourish
great sheep: for lean sheep and hoggerslles in closes. And sheep well
flesht, they shall do well in Forests, and mountains, dry places, and plain
commons: and all severed closes are good and commodious to nourish all tender
sheep, and to make them battle, and so to fat well. There is a great respect
to be had unto the differences of nature, not only in the sorts and breed of
sheep, but also of their colors and choosing them, for experience does show,
as the sheep of Milesie in Athens be great, very fair, and well esteemed.
Also those sheep of Calabria and of the Appolitans, and those of Tarent, and
now these in France, be more esteemed and praised, and specially the sheep of
Torcello, and next unto these, those of the lean champains as be beside Parma,
and Medena in Italy.

Also the white color in sheep is very good and profitable, as we use here
most in England: For of this color a man may make many other. And the white
will keep also his color long. The black and the brown be also well
praised, which be much used in Italy at Pollentia, and also in high Spain at
Corube. The yellow sheep be in Asie, the which they call red sasarned sheep.
Truly tha use thereof we have had already by diverse and many experiences of
those kind of sheep. For in Africa, where they are brought (from the town
called Gaditane, and there about) are wild rams of strange and marvelous
colors, with many other kind of beasts, which are often times brought unto the
people to make pastimes. Marcus Collumella says, a man of a singular good wit
and understanding, and very perfect in husbandry, which brought one of those
Rams of Afric with him into France, and did put him in his pastures, and
when he became gentle, he made him to be put unto his yewes, which ram
begat in the beginning all hearie lambs, and like in color. But after that the
said lambs had been covered again once or twice, their wooli began again to
be gentle, soft, and fair. And at length those lambs engendring with their
sheep, made their fleece and wool as soft as gentle as ours. This Collumella
recorded, that from the nature of the ram, by the alteration of the place and
cattle, they became again to their first estate. And by little and little,
by good order and government, their wild natures be clean changed. So
likewise diverse beasts become soon gentle by well using thereof in husbandry,
which afterward they are found always tame and gentle. Thus I leave here, and
and will return to my former purpose.

There be two sorts of sheep cattle, the better sort is those of the soft
wool, and the other the hairy wool, and for to show how to buy these
twain, there is many common rules, nevertheless, there is also particulars for
the better sort, the which ye must take good heed of.

The common rules to buy are these, when his wool is white, fair, and long
staple, and plain. Ye shall never choose a very white ram: and yet oftentimes a
white ram will get a black lamb, but a yellow or black ram, will never get a
white lamb. Ye must not choose a ram by his whitenes only, but when the
palace of his tongue is of the same color of his wool. For when either of
these two do not agree, the lamb is like to be black, or spotted in some
part, as Virgill signifies by these verses. Third book of georgicks


The ram among thy sheep out pull,
Though he be white of skin and wool,
Mark well his tongue and thereto see,
If tongue and fell do both agree:
For if they alter in any case,
Their lambs shall follow the self same race.
Likewise the self same reason is of the yellow and black sheep as is before
declared: Which ought not to have their tongue of a contrary color to their
wool. But in all parts to be like unto the fleece and wool: although the
skin be specky and spotted of diverse colors, it is no matter. And ye must
see that ye buy no ram nor other sheep that has a thin staple, or small store
of wool: And for the better knowledge to see that they be al of one color,
principally is to consider in choosing your rams, for the spotty rams will
commonly be seen in the lambs.

The rams are much esteemed when they are hye and long of body, with a large
belly and covered well with wool, Rams esteemed
his tatle long and thick in wool, his forhead broad, his coddes big, his
horns crooked or writhen: and yet these sort of rams are not the best. For
those which have no horns are more better: and those which have crooked horns
do more hurt, for the one dosh annoye the other: and it is yet better to have
their horns crooked and writhen, then to be straight and open. Nevertheless
in countries moist and windy, they were better to have the rams with great and
larger horns, then other without, because it does keep and defend the
greatest parts of their head from the wind and storms. If the winter be
very stormye in those countries, they choose those Rams: but if it be calm
and gentle, they take those which have no horns. For the horned ram has
this discomoditie, he feels by nature each part of his body so well armed,
that he desires nothing but to fight with other. And he is more hotter after
the yowes at all times, and more importunate then others: So that he will not
suffer any other ram to cover any troop of yowes, and he will have war
without cause against his fellows, and will not permit or suffer them to cover
any you, although he can do no more himself, and yet he will have all at
his commandment.

But he which is without horns knows he is unarmed, whereby he is not so
ready to fight, and is also of less heat: therefore ye may have the more
rams. The good Ram^to correct.
and skillful shepherd in correcting the heat and fury of such an insatiable
ram, may by this subtelty. Take a strong board of a foot broad, and fill it
full of pikes of iron, and tie that board to his horns with the pikes toward
his forhead, and this shall keep him from hurting of others, for in giving his
head a stroke, he shall hurt him self.

Epicarmus de Syracusis in Sicilia, which has diligently written of the
medicines for cattle, he says: one may appease or abate the fury of such a
ram in pearcing his horns by his ears (with a wimble or pearcer) against the
place where as they crook. Also the age of a ram to cover, is best at three
years. And he shall be good unto viii. years, the yowes would be covered
after two years, and then they will be good v. years after, and the seventh
year being once past, then they begin to wax weak and will fail in getting
lambs again, as I have said, ye shall not buy sheep unshorn, nor to make to
great account of them which have gray or spotted wool of diverse colors, for
the uncertainty thereof. Thou shall cast them of as the barren sheep; and
also those which have most teeth, being of three years old. Therefore ye must
choose these of two years, having a great large body, a long neck, and long
deep wool, not rough or stubborn, his belly great and large of body, covered
all with wool, not to be uncovered in any part, nor yet small of stature, his
gums ruddy, his teeth white and even, his skin on the brisket red, and on both
sides ruddie, his eye stringes ruddie, his fell loose, his wool fast, his
breath long, and his feet not hot. These are the chief signs of a sound
sheep. Signs of a rotten sheep are these. His belly full of water, his fat
yellow, his liver shall be knottie and full of blisters, and if ye sees it, it
will break in pieces, his sides pale, his eyes pale and dark, his gums white,
and the wool will soon come of: if ye pluck a little thereof. These are the
signs of a rotten sheep or unsound.

Now for to save and keep them, ye shall understand your sheep houses ought to
be made low (like unto a hog stye) and more in length then in breadth, warm
for winter, and not strait of romes, for fear of hurting the lambs, paued
and boorded on the sides, and within the place (in descending) of their urine
and dung. It shall be also good to hang of rose marye, or other sweet and
strong herbs for to take away or kill the sent of their vrin and dung. It
shall be also good to make and set the house open toward the sun at noone, and
to be well covered, for these kind of cattle are tender and cannot abide any
great cold.

Yet although they are housed, they are oftentimes vexed with cold, as reumes,
glanders, coughes, and such, and so vexed with cold in witer, as well as with
heat in summer, and before or about their houses, it were good to make a close
coa well and hye fensed, so that they may go forth of their howses in safetye
to refresh them. And their Rackes to bes made two foot high from the earth,
with rack staves set nigh together of a good length. And the shepherd must
see, that they be clean kept, and to see that the rackes do stand fast for
hurting any of them.

They must also be kept that they have no water or other moisture, and that
there be prepared of Fearne or dry straw, for those which have lambs to rest
more cleaner and softer, and to see that the rams go not with the Eawes, or
the lambs: nor go with any sick sheep or other beast, and it is better to
let the lambs remain in the house, than to go with their dammes a field. And
good to let your best pasture remain for your yeawes nigh your sheep houses.
The shepherd also shall often cleanse the fodering places of his sheep, and
reserve it to litter his kine and horse, and so to keep their houses clean,
whereby their health may be the better preserved, and so in any wise they be
not hurt or annoyed with filthy moisture, for they are tender and nice, and
do love clean places. Ye must also see that they have good store of meat,
for hunger in them breeds the murren. A small stock well nourished,
increases much more profit unto their master, then others with twice so
great a flock enduring hunger. And also the shepherd must often drive them
over changeable pastures and grounds, whereas there Thorns or scratches.
is scant of feeding, and without thorns or bushes, using after the authority
of Virgill, which says by there verses following.

He that will have good sheep,
Good wool likewise also,
He must provide a sheaphearde
To lead them to and fro,
From places which are rude.
With many ill thorns and bushes,
And from unwholesome weed,
From brambles, pricks and crushes.
For those scrattes ^^e make them to be vnquie^, and to breed scabs, and other
sores, that although they are thorn, yet the thorns will remain in the skin,
and grow to scabbes or other sores, and there commonly the wool does wax
loose and diminishe every day, so much more as it does grow and increase.
These beasts are always in danger of thorns growing where as they are, and
often times therewith they are tied with hooks and snares, thorns and briers,
which does tear both wool and skin, and these Cattle being tender and
delicate, thereby leeseth a great part of their wool, which other ways
would keep it, and for their coupling together of them, all other Authors
does agree, and ioynes together in one consent, that the bearing Putting the
Ram.
or lamming time, is at the Spring, about the twenty or one and twenty of
April. For then the sheep do wax more stronger.

If a yeawe have then a little lamb, it were better if they did tarry unto
June, or longer. Some therefore (without doubt) says, it would profit more
to cover them sooner, to the end that after Harvest and gathering of fruit,
the Lambs feeding all Autumn, shall make them selves strong against Winter
do come, and shall better endure the fasting in Winter. For this cause it is
better to choose Autumn than the Spring, as Celsus reports by the proof
thereof: for he says, it is more meeter for these Cattle to be made strong
before Solstitium, in the midst of Julie, (which is the longest day in
Summer,) than before Solstitium in Winter, (which is in the midst of December.)
And among all cattle, these may be most easiest bred in winter: if the country
be not very cold and wet.

If ye have need to have many male Rams, Aristotle a man of great knowledge of
the works of nature, he commands Male lambs.
to be observed, and to spy out the meetest time to couple and put the Rams
to the yeaws: as in a dry time when the North wind blows. Then (says he,)
make the flock to go and feed against the wind, and put the Rams unto
them, and they shall have male lambs, if ye will have your yeawes bring female
lambs, put the Rams unto them when the wind blows out of the South. And
Female lambs.
for to have males likewise, they do use to bind the left stone down with a
tender band. And to have females, they bind down the right stone of the
Ram. This is done likewise in great Cattle. also when your yeawes have
lambde and are strong lambs, the shepherd that leads them to seek their
pasture, it shall be good to leave behind all the young Lambs. And those
that do suck, are meeter to be sold to the Butcher, than those that have
eaten grass, for they are more sweeter and delicate flesh, and when they are
weaned, there comes more profit by their milk, then when they go with their
Dammes, it is also good and profitable to nourishe them by the sides of good
towns. For the Cattle of the house is more profitable, than strange cattle.
Also if thy flock of sheep do fail at any time through age, or any other
occasion, thou must then To alter thy^ flock.
renew it in keeping the stock, and looking well there unto, for if thy
stock once alter, thou art like to alter tillage.

To breed Sheep, the office of a good shephearde is, to nourishe as many
head of Cattle yearly, as there are to breed.
sick or dead, for ye must understand the Winter, that by vehement and cold
weather, it kills many sheep, the which ye did suppose they would have
outborne the said Winter, which in Autumn they might have been taken well.
And therefore it is dangerous, without ye furnishe your stock (from year to
year) with the strongest Cattle, and those that shall casilie bear out the
after Winter. And he that will follow this: he ought to to nourish sheep.
nourishe no Lamb under four years, nor above eight years. For these two
ages are not so good to nourishe, nor those which come of old Cattle, for
they follow the age of their Parents, or else are always barren, wretched and
weak. The lambing of young yeawes ought to be looked unto, as though they had
midwiues: for these Lambing time
Cattle trauelies in Lambing, as well as the woman in child bearing, and
often for so much as they are ignorant of the time, they travel more in the
deliverance of their Lambs. Wherefore the shepherds ought to have good
knowledge and experience of medicines for these cattle, and to help them that
have need thereof, and to take out the lamb wholly together out of the
matrice. For when he lies cross, he must not be taken out, but if ye see
she cannot well be delivered, ye must help the yeawe, and take and cut it
in pieces, and so take it forth without hurting the birth or the yeawe. The
which the Greeks do call, an imperfect medicine, then after when the lamb is
taken forth alive, ye shall raise her and set her on her feet, And also
the lamb, and then let him approach unto the tettes of the yeawe, and open
his mouth and press and make the milk come forth, that he may be
accustomed thereunto. But before ye do this, ye shall draw the yeawe a
little, which the heardinen do call stroking, this is the gross and thick
milk, which is the first milk after her lambing, for if ye draw not a
little thereof, it will somewhat annoye the lamb. Then let him (if he be
weak) be shut up with his damme the two first days after he is lamed,
to the end he may be kept warm, and to know the tette and his damme, until
that he begin to leap and wax more stronger: and to put him in some
warm close place, then after to put him with other lambs, because in being
alone, he will wax lean by too much leaping and playing in his youth. also
ye must advisedly putto the young lambs by themselves, and not with the
strongest for fear in leaping and tumbling to hurt them, and when they are
big, ye may well suffer the lambs to go a field with their dammes until
night, and when they shall wax more stronger, then give them grass in their
houses, with the herb Mellilot, also of fine hay or branne: if barley be
good cheap ye may give your Lambs of the meal, and of fetches, and when
they shall wax yet more stronger, ye may in the middaie remove them with
their dammes into other Pastures and grounds, and always see that your Lambs
break not forth of your pastures into other grounds, for then they will
alwaie be seeking to have fresh pasture. Although I have spoken of certain
Pastures, never thelesse yet I will here say a little of that I have omitted,
Pasture ground,
which is: the best and most frankest grass is that which grows amongst
errable grounds and furrows, rather than meadows which are wette or moist,
and the grass in marshes, and moist forrestes is not good for sheep, nor so
good Pasture for the feeding of them, and by long use and continuance these
cattle will wax weary and noisome thereof: if their keeper do not remedy it
in giving those sheep of salt with their meat, which shall save them and make
them to have an appetite. And in summer it shall be good to have them under
shadowie places, or trees in woods, to the end that by their resting, they
shall have the better appetite, when they return to their Pasture again, and
Drink,
they may then drink, whereby to feed the better. And also to avoid their
surfets. In Winter, ye must give them haie in their rackes and tares, to
nourishe them withal. They do also feed them with Ealme leaves, and of Ash
leaves and such like, which is gathered in seasons convenient, and in Autumn
to feed them with haie of the latter season. For that is more tender, and more
pleasaunter for them to eat, than other which is dryer, as that which is first
ripe, the grass or herb called Mellilot, is special good for them at all
times, and likewise for all other Cattle. They use also to have Fetches for
them, which is very good, and to give them of Barlie straw smallie beaten and
short, which is in Winter very good for them when they can have no other
meat. Likewise of Pease holme, is good for them, if they be kept near towns
or villages: and when the time is to drive them to pasture, or to lead them to
drink in the hot Summer, as need requires. I will not be of other opinion,
but that which Virgill has written, which is:

In the morning tide, lead forth thy yeawes,
For to refresh them, before the son do rise:
The grass being tender, and shining with dewise,
Soon after comes drought, is the common guise,
That after the sun be once four hours hie,
Then bushes do crack, and plains wax dry:
Then sings the Nightingall, with notes plain,
Drive them to the springs of the high mountain.
Also in the middaie the same Poet says:

In heat now of the day,
To search it is thy charge,
To find thy Sheep some tree,
With branches long and large,
To shadow them withal,
Out of the heat and dust,
As heat and and time do last,
Then let them quench their thurst.
And when the great heat is abated, soon after let the^ be driven softly to
feed. And says:

The sun now being set,
In the Evening tide,
All the day before,
Whereas the ground has dride.
The night now being cold,
The deawe descends plain,
On Pastures dried before,
By them refresht again,
And ye must observe Astrum, which is the star of heat in Summer, when the
Canicular days do begin, to the end that before the midst of the day,
Shepherds ought to conduct and drive his sheep toward the West, and after
the midday is past, toward the East, for it is a thing of great importance,
to have the head of the sheep to feed against the Sun, which often annoyes
those Cattle when the rays of the sun begin to show on the ground. And
also in Winter and spring time, ye ought to keep them close, till the day
have taken the gellie or netty rhyme, from Rimes or gellie.
the earth, for in y^ time the gelly is on the grass, which does engender (as
some say) the scab and a foam at their mouths, and distillations from the
brain, with heaviness of the head, and a looseness of the belly. Wherefore in
cold and moist times, ye need not observe but once a day.

Moreover, the shepherd which does keep them, ought to be wise in governing
them with gentleness, as it is commanded A Shephearde to govern.
to all keepers of cattle whatsoever they be, which ought to show themselves
co^ductors and guiders of cattle, and not as masters, and to make them go or
to call them, they ought either to cry or whistle, and after to show them the
sheepehooke, but to throw nothing at them, for that does fear them, nor yet
to ftraie far of from them, nor to sit or lie down. If he do not go, he
ought to stand, and to sit very seldom. For the office of a shepherd is as a
high watchman for his cattle, to the end that the slow sheep do not slip from
the other. And on the plains and meddowes when they make no haste, then he may
stay. But in hard and empty places of Pasture, the light and young sheep will
outgo the other, and therefore he ought to have an eye always amongst his
sheep, or if any complain by any other means to see them incominent remedied,
and he must see also in their pasturing they range not too fast over the
grounds, for the light and young sheep outgoe the other, and straie abroad
in corners, whereby they are in danger the more to be conveyed away, or lost by
some other means, or by killing with dogs and such like, these rules are
common with all cattle. Therefore he that will seem to thrive by the^, he must
see unto them warily and wisely from time to time.

Ye must not meddle them of a strange kind with other of Strange sheep
your flock, for those being of a strange kind, they will always stand
gazing about, and will rather seek to fly then feed: or else look on others.
Therefore look unto them, for it is a sign they like not the Pasture or layer
whereas they gaze, but will seek anew. Therefore the Shepherd must have a
great care, and use diligence unto the^ more than the other. For all beasts of
wool are more delicate and dainty than others, therefore they ought to have
the less negligence with their keeper or master, for they are of less
coveting than other cattle, and yet they cannot abide the heat in Summer, nor
the cold in Winter. These cattle are seldom nourished abroad without great
danger, but in houses and closed pastures, and are gluttons and greedy, that if
his meat by some occasion is taken away of others, thereby sometime he will be
sick. Therefore ye ought to give to every sheep, which shall be sufficient of
meat in their rackes for them in Winter, and to give them in their troughes,
of barley and beans ground together, and also dried pease, or Akornes ground
and given with bran, and dry Elm leaves Meat for sheep.
or others as aforesaid, or of three leaued grass, green or dry, or of the
herb Mellilot, or haie of the latter season and such like. Also there is but
small profit in selling the lambs being young, and less profit in their milk,
and they kill those which they cannot well nourish within a while after they he
lambde, and those yeawes which have lost their lambs, they make them to give
others suck, for they make a lamb suck to yeawes: and yet cannot draw forth
her milk, because her own lamb have drawn more oftener, and with more
strength, and to that lamb which she have lambd nature in her do show a more
love. But to the other, she is but as a nurse to a child, and less given to
nourish it, then her own. Wherefore ye must observe and see to them all the
time being but young, and to be suckled of their dammes and other yeawes also.
In this kind of Cattle, it were better to nourishe and weane more of males
then females. Although by cutting and gelding of them by unskillful persons,
many do perish and die thereon, for the females commonly are of a more ruder
wool, as some do say. And again before the male lambs be ready to cover
the yeawes, they are gelded, and when they are past two years, they are
killed, and their skins are more deerer sold than any other, for the
beauty of their wool. In Greece, they use to pasture their sheep where as
there is no bushes or briers, for fear (as I have said) that their wool
should not be torn off their bodies: in plain fields a man need not be so
careful. (But here me thinks if I should see my sheep come with torn
fleeses, I may ask my shepherd where they have been, in supposing their il
government, amongst bushes and thorns,) therefore he must be careful when they
be in field, for all the day some do not go with them. And again in the
house he ought to have a more greater care in clensing of them, or any other
occasion not to be foreslewd, in often opening their wool where as any place
seems lose by scratches or other ways, and then to tar it, some do wash
the place with wine and oil, sometimes they wash them all, if the day or time
be not too hot or cold, and do use it so in some countries three times a
year: and often makes clean their houses, and takes away all the moisture of
their urine, which is easy to be done in percing the bordes or plankes with an
aulgar, or clensing the pauements whereas they lie. And not only to have a
care of their doong, but also to keep them beasts and venomous woormes.
Whereupon the Poet Virgil says:

Let burn of Cedar odorant,
To fume the stall or stable:
To cause the serpents fly there fro,
And void if thou be able.
Whereby thou may them follow,
through such perfuming vapor,
Of Galbanum the smell,
Will cause them fly full sure. Wash sheep. In Devonshire, they neaer wash
their sheep when they clip, but after wash the wool (before they spin it) in
warm lie, and dries it on hurdles.

Full often have it been seen,
this thing and often proved:
Of litter lying long (they breed)
If it be not removed.
The outrageous venomous worms,
Be dangerous to touch,
Both Snakes and Adders customed,
Do hide them in their coutch.
But now be they once seen,
And perfectly once bare,
Full soon they fly for fear,
To hide them is their care,
They fly away full soon,
In corners of the house.
They creep in at a little hole,
As swiftly as the mouse.
Take stones or staves and kill them,
Ere they increase and double,
For if they wax and multiply,
Full often they will thee trouble.
If thou can without danger of thy house, oftentimes burn in the house of
women's hair, or hearts horn, for the savor thereof drives away all venomous
worms. As for Shearing.
the time of sheering or clipping, it comes not in all countries alike. For
in some country it comes timely, and in other some later. The best is, to
consider when the sheep cannot endure cold if thou sheere him, nor heat if
thou sheere him not. But at what time ye have shorn, ye ought to anoint them
with this medicine. That is to say, the juice of tares Nointing or greasing.
or pulce, luke warm, or of the lees of old wine, and lees of olives, of each
in like portion well mixed together. And therewithal to rub the shorn sheep.
And within three or four days it will be consumed, then if ye be nigh the
borders of the salt water, they plunge them therein. If not, they do wash them
with rain water kept long and vncouerde, and with salt mixed together and a
little boyld. And this shall keep them all well that year from scratching or
scabbinesse, as Celsus reports, and without doubt the wool shall be more
gentler and longer.

The remedies and medicines for Sheep and other cattle.
FOr so much as I have carefully written of the diligence which they ought to
have for the preserving and keeping their beasts in health, now I will declare
how to help them with medicines, which are grieved with any infirmity or
disease. Howbeit, although I have spoken already of the most part of them, I
will yet here repeat a few medicines for great cattle. For as the body is
of great cattle, so is the bodies of the lesser cattle, almost of like
nature. Even so, there is small difference betwixt their medicines, and betwixt
their diseases, nevertheless, whatsoever they are, I will not here let pass or
omit.

If it chance that all your cattle be sick, ye shall do as I have before
commanded of great cattle. (Which I think to Medicines.
be a thing necessary.) Even so here I command again for a Sickness or
pestilence.
singular remedy to change your pastures, and your watering places, and to
drive your cattle into other pastures far of. If that pestilence or murreine do
come by great heates, ye must have them unto couertes, shades, and cold
places. If it come of cold, ye must have them in open places against the sun.
And ye must lead them by little and little, and not too hastily, to the end by
their soft going they be not grieved: nor yet too slowly but gently in a mean
pace. For even as they must not be tormented by too much haste, which are
already weary, and avoid with this disease. Even so it is profitable to go
meanly, neither too fast, nor yet too slow: having an exercise, and not to let
them rest or lie. And when ye have brought them to the appointed place, ye
must then part them into many troops or bands, and so let them be looked
ever unto, and being so parted, they are then in more safety then ever they
were before when they were together, because the strength and the infection of
the contagious and pestilent air is not so great in a small troop of cattle,
as in a great. And also it is more easy to heal a small number then a great:
therefore ye must do this which I have commanded, to the end that ye do not
repent the more, when as they fall all sick together. Or if there be any one
which has it, then do as before said. Also sheep are more tormented with the
scabbe, then all other cattle, which commonly comes as the Poet Virgil says:

When sheep are greatly beaten with rain,
Then frost and cold increases their pain:
Whereby the scabbe, will then increase,
Which ye may kill, with tar and fresh grease.
Or when they begin to have the itch, ye shall anoint him with goose grease
and tar mixed well together, with the tender crops of broom in may: stamped and
boild with goose grease, and put unto your tar in like portion. Then make but
two sheads on both sides his back bone, from his head to the tail, and anoint
with the foresaid grease, and ye shall need no more nointing if they be well
used after, and kept from scratches. Also after ye have shorn them, if ye do
not remedy them with the remedy and medicine aforesaid: which is, to wash them
with sea, or salt water, or in a salt river, and Scabbe.
then sheere and rub them as aforesaid, which is good against the scratches
with briers and thorns, which will otherwise grow to scabbes. Or if thou
put them in a stable where horse have been, or lacking of meat, whereby
they become lean, which leannes does cause them to have the itche and scab.
The which as soon as it has taken them, they never cease to scratch, bite, or
rub the itching places, either with his mouth, feet, or horns, or to rub
against a tree, or other thing, which lice may cause also. If thou see any
one do this, then take him, and open and shed his wool, and ye shall see there
under the skin red, and scratched, or bitten with his mouth, therefore it must
be sodeinly remedied, to the end yt all the rest be not infected with the same.
For amongst all other cattle, sheep are most therewith tormented: and for ye
same there be many medicines, the which we shall hereafter speak of. Not that
ye can or may use all, because that every country cannot have all, but such
as ye may have shall suffice.

First the composition that I have before expressed, shall Medicines for itch.
serve very well for the most part. Also if ye ca^e the lees of wine, and of
olives, the juice of tares or pulce sod, and mixed with as much white ellsbory
beaten, which is (...) powder. Also the green juice of hemblocke to anoint (is
good to kill the itch) if it be not in seed. Some do take it in the spring
and beats it, and then straineth it into a pot of earth. And unto xviii.
quartes of the said (...) ye, they put in half a bushel of salt, and then to
cover the pot close, and sets it in some doonghill a whole year, there to
be seasoned. And when it is drawn out, they take thereof and warmeth it, and
therewith rubbes the scabby sheep, or any place of their skin so troubled:
but they rub the place before, with some rough thing, or rugged stone for to
make it bleed. Also the lees of olives is good, if it be boiled until the
half be consumed, and then to anoint therewith. Likewise does the piffe of
men, wherein is quenched of hot burning tilestones, some do boil it on the
fire until the first part be consumed, in mixing it, with so much of the juice
of green henbane, with two youndes of the powder of tiles, or of cinamond,
also of tar, and beaten salt, and so mingled together, Likewise it shall be
good to use of brimstone beaten fine, with as much tar, in stirring it
altogether over a small fire: and because tar is very costly for poor men,
they make a salve of broom, which Broom. Salve for the scabbe.
is, ye shall take a great quantity of the croppes of broom, with the leaves
and blossoms, let them be chopped small, and then sod in xviii. gallons of
running water, till it wax as thick like a gelley, then take two pounds of
molten sheep suet, with a pottel of old stale, and so much of brine: put all
into the pan with the broom, and stir it well together. Then strain it, and
keep it in what vessel ye will, and so when ye clippe your sheep, make it
luke warm, and with some soft thing wash your sheep therewith, and at all times
ye may use this in sheading the wool, and anoint therewith warm, which will
both heal the scabbe, and kill tikes, and shall not be hurtful to the wool: and
those which have sufficient meat, will not lightly scabbe after. Others do
take of ellecampant roots and stampes them, then boiles them in running water,
and washes therewith. Some do take oil olive and the powder of brimstone, and
so annoints therewith. But against maggettes, the powder of brimstone and
Magots to kill.
tar, mixed together over a soft fire. To anoint also for hurts, there is no
better medecin. As Virgil in his Georgiques shows, and says:

If any beast be hurt,
Or rutby subtiltis:
With any iron or with staff,
Upon the grief shall see.
For underneath the skin,
The evil is often hi^:
Where plasters does not molliffe,
And skin not opened.
If it be not cut, they cut it, and melts of wax and grease together, and
heales it therewith: which grease is also good against the scab, mixing
therewith brimstone powder. Seabbe.


Also if any sheep have the fever or red water, it is good Fever, or red water.
to let them blood in the claw of the foot, or betwixt the two claws, for
that helps very much, and Virgil says: For to help the fever, open the
vain,
Beneath in the foot, and he shall mend again.


Some sheepheards let them blood under the eye, and on the ears. Others lets
him blood on the vain under the tail, and then binds of herb grace unto it,
beaten with a little salt, and to give the juice of camamile with ale or wine is
good. Sheep are also tormented in the feet or claw two manner The worm in the
claw.
of ways, one is by filth, the other by the worm which breeds therein. And
if the worm do wax big, it will wax so sore that the sheep cannot well go
but halt. This worm breeds commonly before, just between the two foreclawes,
the head thereof is like a tuft of hairs growing together, and will stick out
before, there is no sheep but has a show of them naturally, but when they are
small, they never hurt. So when they begin to grow and wax great, then there is
danger: which worm is a hollow skin and all hair within, which ye shall take
forth thus, as some do teach. Cut it above ye foot round, with a sharp
pointed knife, and so beneath, and put your finger in the hollow underneath the
foot, and your thumb by it on the top before, and then thrust it up, and with
the point of your knife and your thumb gently take it forth whole, for if ye
break it, it is not good, and then anoint the place with tar, and it will
heal again full well. Also others says, it sticks before in the midst of the
foot like doges hair, staring byright, and within is the worm all hair.

For every galling in the foot, they heal it with far Gall in the foot.
only, or with allume and brimstone mixed together, or with an unripe
pomgranet, beaten allume, and putting too a little vinegar, and laid too. Or of
vardegrease in powder and laid on. Also gauls burnt, and made in powder, and
mixed with red wine, and said too is good.

As touching the worm in the claw, is sufficient spoken Worm in the claw.
of before. Yet here I will something speak more thereof, which is, the place
in the foot to be cut round, not touching the worm, for fear ye make not an
ulcer thereof incurable, and in danger of cutting of all the sheep feet.
When this worm shall be diligently cut round as is before said, and so plucked
forth whole without breaking any part thereof, if ye do break her (they say)
she casts such a venomed poison all over the place, (except it be straightway
medicined) all the foot is in danger to be cut off. And therefore look well unto
the taking out thereof. Some, when it is taken out, do no more but drop in the
wound scalding tallow, or of the dropping of a candel, and so lets it heal.
Others do but tar it.

For the disease of the lunges, or purcinesse, like unto Lunges sick.
hogs, they put into their ears that which the heardmen and sheep heardes
call pompelle in French, which is also spoken of among great cattle. Some says
it is good to stamp lungwort, and strain it with a little honied water, and
give it them: and of the juice of Cardus Benedictus, called sowthistle, mixed
with ale warm. This disease comes to them often in summer for default of
water. Wherefore during the heat in summer, they ought to have water plenty.
For Celsus says, that if the lights or lunges be once infected, ye shall give
your sheep of strong vinegar so much as they may bear, or else of old vrme of
men luke warm, each sheep somewhat more then a pint, and put it into his left
nosthrill, and put down two ounces of old grease of a Hog down his
throat.

The wild fire, which the shepherds call the flying fire, is a strange
disease and hard to heal, if it rest not in the Wild fire.
first sheep where it takes, all the rest are like to be infected, so that
there is no medicine nor iron may help it: for the one sheep shall but touch
the other, and he shall be inflamed therewith. They have no other thing but to
keep them warm, and nourish them with Goats milk, the which does cause it
to be more gentle, and does mitigate the violentes of the fire, and the
burning of the whole flock, that they dye not thereof. Where Dolus Mendesius
Egyptian, did very well for to celebrate, which the Greeks called their
monuments and books worthy of memory, the which were falsely named
Democritus books. Wherein was for to remedy this disease, which was, by and
by as one sheep had it, (they took him,) which grief comes first on the
back of the sheep: and incontinent they make a hole at the entering in of the
sheep house, and there they bury the infected sheep alive, with four feet
upward, and so couers him with earth, and all the rest in coming there over,
will piss thereon. And so (says he) the disease will go away, and thereby all
the rest shall escape, other remedy there is none found.

Of the increasing of choler in summer, which is a dangerous disease in sheep.
The which they heal in that time, by Of choler in sheep.
giving them of the old and stale urine of men, which is also very good for
other cattle which has the iaundise. And to Iaundise.
purge choler, some do take the leaves of elder, stamps a few and strains it
with ale, and gives it warm. Others do give them the juice of hoppes with ale
or water. And some do give them of femetory amongst their meat. All these
aforesaid are very good to purge choler.

Fleame also do molest sheep, and therefore they do use for Fleame.
to put of the tender branches or tops of sauery, into their nosthrils: Also to
put basil in their noses, which will make them to neese, but ye must close their
eyes. Some puts of tender bays into their nosthrils, and that will make them
also to neese and purge their heads. Also the juice of briony or hedge vine,
mixed with honied water, and given warm, and likewise polipody or oak fern
roots, stamped small and given with ale, al these will purge fleame.

Against breaking of any bone. Or if the sheeps leg chance Broken bones.
to be broken, ye ought to help them even as ye do to a man, in first bathing
it with oil and wine, or wrapping it in wool dipped in oil and wine, and then
to splint it as ye see cause, and so bind it fast thereon. Also the tender
buds of ash trees bruised and laid too, will knit bones, or the inner rind of
elm bark, stamped and laid a night in water, and then warm, bathe the place
therewith, is good to knit broken bones also. Or the herb cuccospit stamped and
laid too. Or wild bitony, called in latin Tunica, laid thereto, or coumphery
herb, stamped and laid too, is good also for to knit bones.

Of herbs evil for sheep, as knot grass, for if sheep eat Herbs ill for
sheep.
thereof, it will inflame their bellies, and so causing a stinking froth or foam
at their mouths. Therefore ye must with speed let them blood under the tail,
next unto the buttock. Also it profits no less to let them blood on the
vain called Babine, whch is under the upper lip. And likewise green rye or
barley nie ripe, will swel in the maw and kill sheep.

For purcines or short breath in sheep, they use to cut their Short breath or
purcy.
ears, and to change their pasture and laier, which is a thing necessary to be
counseiled against al sickness of the plague. Also to slit their nosthrils, as
well as to cut their ears. And some thinks it good to give them of anniseeds,
licorice, and sugarcandy, all finely beaten together, and mixed with old grese,
and so given them: or the powder of ginnepar beries, given with the juice of
angelica, and given with a horn in wine or water. Also hare wort, in latin
calde Aristolochia, stamp the leaves and strainde, and given with a little
water.

Sheep oftentimes will have the glaunders, and a sneueling at their noses,
which comes from their lunges, that neither Glanders or sneuell.
bloodletting nor drinks can remedy them. Therefore if it continue two days
or more, to separate him and kill him were the best. For the other, as well males
as females, are so nice, that in smelling where he has sneueled, sodeinly
they are taken with the same evil. Yet master shepherds say, it rather
comes of poverty in winter, then otherwise: for it chiefly shows of those
which have been brought low, in winter before. And at the spring time it will
show, when as they begin to mend. And he which have been brought lowest, will
have it most vehement. Some sheep will run at the nose like a thin water, and
those which have it sor^, will have a thick matter or sneuel hang at their
nose, ready to stop their wind, and those are in danger to die, it they be
not soon helped. Some do use to take a stick, and therewith takes out all
that he can get, and so makes them clean when any occasion is, and thereupon
they do amend. Some other do give them the juice of bitony with honied water,
and makes them take it. Also the herb called bucks berde, which grows higher
then that, which is called in latin Picnocomon. This grows in forests and
shades, and has flowers and seeds like a bucks beard, his leaves like great
parsley: this herb stamped and given with wine, is marvelous good against al
cold or fleme in any part of their bodies.

For lambs having the fever or any other grief, and if their Lambs sick.
be sick, the shepherd ought not to let them remain with they dammes, for fear
of giving them the like disease. Therefore it were best to draw some milk of
the young, and put unto it so much of rain water, and make the sick lambs to
swallow it down. Some do give them of goats milk with a horn, and to keep
them warm for that time.

There is also a certain scab which runs on the chin, the Scab on the chin.
which is properly calde of the shepherds the dartars, the which will kill them
if they be not remedied. This kind of scab comes by the negligence of the
shepherds, when as they do suffer them to feed on grass covered with dew
which is evil, and ought not to be permitted or suffered. When this do chance,
ye shall destroy this scab which is on the mousell and lips, like as the
flying fire which was before named: to remedy this, is to take salt, and hysope,
in like portion beaten together, and therewith all to fret and chafe the palet
of the mouth, the tongue, and al over the mousel, or with self heal or (...)
foil: then wash the scab with vinegar, and afterward anoint it with tar and
hogs grease mixed together. Some do mixed a third part of verdegrease, and two
parts of old grease: and to keep it cool, they use this medicine following.
Some do stamp the leaves of cipres in water, and therewith do wash the pallet
of the mouth and the sores. Some shepherds do judge this kind of scabbe, to
be a kind of pocke, which will commonly be as well on the brisket, as on his
chin: and as they do say, it is taken by feeding after hogs, which have the
swine pocks, which they do but anoint them with tar and hogs grease melted
together, and so they recover again, and if they be not helped in time, one
sheep will infect all the rest in short space. And for the common scab, some
takes the powder of brimstone, with the roots of cipres ^ixt and beaten
together by even portions, and mix therewith also of blancht rasis, of
camphire and wax, and mix it all together, and make an ointment thereof, and
therewith rub the scab thrice all together. Then shall ye wash it all over with
lee and salt water mixed together, and then after wash it with common water: but
the common shepheardes do take nothing but tar mixed with some fine grease.

There comes a scabbines also among lambs, being half Lambs scabby.
(...) year old, as toward winter or the next fall of the leaf, ye shall in
some places have al your lambs scabby, or the most thereof, which cause is,
(as shepherds do say) when the rams be scabby that gets them, all those
lambs will be scabby at the next fall. They do heal it in greasing them with
tar mixed, with two parts of fresh grease or neates feet oil, or goose
grease if ye can have it, for that is best. There is also another scabbines
which chance some times ^cabbes on the mousell of sheep.
on the mousels of sheep and young tegges, and that comes as shepherds do
say, (where as there is great plenty of furs and gorse,) that by the eating
of the tops and flowers thereof, they prick their lips and mousel. Whereby
comes these sorts of scabs, the which they heal by nointing it with fresh
butter. Some takes the juice of plantaine and fresh grease boilde together, and
therewith anoint them.

If the wool of sheep after a scabbines do go of, as in some Wool to come
again.
places the wool will go clean off: To make it grow again and fill the foresaid
place. Some shepherds do use to grease them with tar, mixed with some other
thing, as butter, oil, goosegrease, or fresh grease, for far alone is sharp,
a fretter, and whealer, without it be mixed with some of those things before Of
tar and his nature.
said, to make him run the better. Some do use to make the wool come soon
again, to mix with tar and oil, the foot of a cawdrons bottom, and some do
mix with oil and a little tar, the powder of a burnt daffadil root, or the
powder of the water lilly root, or the root of the water clote, which has
abroad leaf on y^ water. Or garden cresse beaten with mustard and laid too, or
the herb crow foot, sta^pt with oil and laid too these do cause both wool or
hair to come again in any pild place.

Seep will commonly have the cough, which comes from the The cough.
lungs, if it be vehement, ye must give him therefore in y^ morning with a
horn, a little oil of sweet almonds, mixed with a little white wine, and give it
warm, and give him new straw, and make him to eat of the clot herb growing on
lands. Some do call it horse hoof: and this cough takes them commonly in the
spring. If they chance to have it at any other time, the^ give them fene greek
bruised which comin. Also all these are good against the cough, as to take three
or four leaves of mallows dride and boilde in milk and given with a horn,
which is excellent: or ginnepar leaves sod in wine, strainde and given. Also
the juice of the great nettle stamped and strainde with wine and given warm.
All these are good against a cough, which makes them lean.

Sheep oftimes are troubled by a blood toward the canicular Blood in sheep.
days, ye which blood increasing, causes sheep to have a turning giddines in
their heads, in tumbling and leaping without cause: and if ye touch their head
or feet, ye shali find them very hot. Then ye must incontinent let them
blood on the vain (a high in the midst of his nose) called Babina: and soon
after he will amend and do well again. Some shepherds do take a prittie
quantity of blood on their temples, whereby they find it very good, and for
those also which have a cough and morfounded, to give them a spoonefull of
Cough or morfound.
mitridate or triacle, in wine. As for the cough in sheep, if they have it not
very sore, they will in short time amend thereof again, and it will by little
and little so go away clean. But in the mean time, that sheep shall not wax
^att^, but still wax leaner and leaner if it continue with them.

For a haw in the eye, to drop therein the juice of camamile, or crowfoote
herb stamped and laid too. Against any Haw in the eye.
hot cause or pain of the eyes, to drop in the juice of dragon herb, or to
drop the juice of lettice, or lay it too plaster wise. For a cold cause, the
juice of clarrie, mixed with honey, and dropped in. Also the juice of the seed of
selendine, warmed in a latten vessel, and put into the eye which is very
good. Garmander mixed and beaten with honey, and so laid too, is good against
any blow on the eye. Also the juice of pimpernel dropped into the eye and laid
too, will break or kill every haw, or other impostume in the eye.

Sometimes a sheep will wax blind for a time, and then Blindness in sheep.
mend again. Some shepherds do put a little tar into his eye, and they find
that he will mend the rather, there are diverse things before recited, yet they
heretofore have used only but this tar: whether it have been for lack of
further knowledge I know not. And some do let blood under the eye. Water in
the belly of sheep will rot him, which water Water in sheep.
some shepherds will cut a hole in his belly and put in a fether, and so let
out all that water, and then stitch it up again, and thereby some do escape
and are well again.

Some sheep will have a turning sickness, which is cause The worm under the
horn.
of a certain small worm (as some shepherds do say) that lies under her
horn, which causes them to turn as it were round. If the worm be under the
right horn, then the sheep will turn on the left side, if the worm be in the
left horn, she will turn on the rigght side, thus (as they say) always
contrary. Therefore when any sheep turns or bows her head on the left side,
ye shall raze all round about the right horn, and then strike it off, then
tar it, and she shall mend again.

Blood on sheep, if it come at any time of the year it is evil, Blood on
sheep.
and that sheep that has it is in danger to die sodeinly: but ere he die, ye
shall see him stand and hang down his head, and therewith sometimes quake. Then
if the shepherd can spy it, let him take him and rub all his head and his
ears well, and under his eyes. Then with a sharp knife cut off both his
ears. And let him blood under both his eyes. If then he bleed well, he is
like to recover again. But if he bleed little or nothing, then it were best
to kill him, and to save his flesh. For if he die himself (which will be soon
after) his flesh is naught, and his skin will be redder then others. This blood
takes most commonly on sheep that are fat and in good liking.

There is in sheep a bladder which will be under the skull Bladder in the head.
in his head commonly behind, and when he is troubled therewith, he will come
heavily dragging behind his felows. The^ shall ye take and search him, and
whereas ye shall find it most softest. There cut the skin a cross, and flea
and turn up the four corners. Then with the point of your knife, raze the
scull finely, but take heed ye touch not the brain, and so take and raise up
parts of the skull, and then ye shall see a thin skin or bladder, and
therein lies the woormes which are white like otemeale grotes, and are alive.
So take all the bladder whole out: so done, lay the skin fair and close all
over thereon again, and bind thereon eight or nine fold of linen, and keep
him warm and close for the space of a fortnight after, and let him take no
cold, nor rain, if he do, he dies thereon, and after xiiii. days ye may turn
him abroad to his fellows. This disease comes most unto young sheep, as of
two years or under, and not unto old sheep.

To tag or belt sheep is, when any sheep by running out To tag or belr sheep.
or neshenes of his doong do ray and defile his tail. The shepherd shall then
take sheeres and clip the tags away, and cast dry mould thereon. If it then be
the hot time of summer, it were good to rub it over with a little tar, to keep
flies away. Also shepherds should have a little board by his fold side, to lay
his sheep clean thereon, when he do dress him, and his tar bottle to hang
ready thereby, fast on a forked stick, he should not go without his dog and
his sheephooke, knife, sheeres, and tar box ever with him, or at his fold.
Also he Dogs for shepherds.
must teach his dog to bark, when he would have him to run. And to run,
and to leave running when he would, or else he is no cunning shepherd. For to
chafe his sheep it is not good: some says, it is a breeder of the scabbe, by
chasing, and then taking sodeine cold thereon. Therefore he must learn his
dog when he is a whelpe, for then is best, for it is hard to make an old
dog to stoop. Wherefore let them all be taught when they are young.

How to perceive sheep when they wax and are scabby, Scabbe to perceive in
sheep.
ye shall best perceive when they be scabby, by the locks of wool on their
backs, hanging loose, therefore let the shepherd view and ouersee his flock
day by day, and so he shall soon perceive if any sheep do break or not.

Sheep will have a scab, which shepherds call the pocks, Pockes of sheep.
and it will appear on the skin, like red pimples or purples, and they will be
broad like spots as broad as farthings, and there dies many sheep thereof,
for lack of looking too betimes. Therefore to handle often all your sheep,
and look all over their bodies, and see if ye find any sheep taken therewith:
ye shall by and by take him from his felows, and put him into some fresh
pasture. And then see and look daily to the rest of the flock, and draw them
as ye shall see them infected therwt, and put them in fresh pastures if they
have it, in somer when there is no frostes, then it shall be good to wash them in
water. Remedies also. Some do take ye juice of nightshade mixed with grease, and
there with anoint, or garlic beaten together with tar, and so anoint. Or the
juice of pelitory of spain, or of arthichoke, mixed with strong vinegar, and
therewith wash it. Other remedies shepherds have the which I know not, but
these I think shall be sufficient.

There is also a sickness amongst sheep, which the shepherds call the wood evil
or cramp, which comes most commonly The wood evil or crampe.
in the spring of the year, and takes them most in their legs and in their
necks, so that it makes them hold their necks awry. And the most part of
sheep that have this sickness, within a day or two, thereof will die, except
they have speedy remedy, which remedy is best, to wash them a little, and to
change their grounds or going, and to bring them to feed in some low pasture.
For this grief comes commonly to sheep, on lay and hilly grounds, and full of
fearny grounds. Other remedies there are, which men do use to let blood on the
vain under the eye. Also some do say, that house leeke stamped with neates feet
oil, and therewith anoint. Or scallions, stamped and bound to their legs.
Other buglosse, the leaves stamped and bound to their legs.

Sheep in the summer will be troubled with maggets, the fly will blow upon small
occasions. To perceive when any Maggots in sheep.
sheep is troubled therewith, ye shall see by her biting, stamping, starting,
and shaking her tail: and there most commonly it is moist and watery. If it be
nigh the hinder parts or tail, it will be defiled and wax oftentimes green
with doonging. Then must the shepherd clip away all the wool in that place,
to the skin: the^ to cast a handful of dry moldy powder thereon, (which he
should have always ready in a bag) to dry up the moisture. Then wipe away
that mould, and whereas the maggots were, lay tar thereon all over. Thus in
the summer ye must every day see well unto them, and mark their feeding and
going.

For a yaewe that will forsake her lamb as soon as it is Yeawes to love their
lambs.
yeand, to make her to love it, shepherds dee take the birth skin, (which is
a thin Call that the Lamb is lapt in) which they take, or part there of, and
lappes it on a lump, and puttes it into her mouth, and make her to swallowe
it. If the You will not eat it: then let her chew it well up and down in
her mouth: and after that, she will love her Lamb and be affraide of it, as
others. And to make her to love another Lamb, if hirs be dead, they use to
take her Lambs skin, and clappe it on the other Lambs body, and then she
will love the other Lamb, and think it is her own. If a Yowes lamb die in
the birth, some Sheepheardes do take the dead lamb, and rubbes another lamb
all over therewith: and by that means the You reserues it as her own, and
will love it as well.

Sheep oftimes will be poisoned by eating some evil herb Poison of sheep.
or other thing, where upon they will swell, and stagger, in in holding
commonly their heads down, and within a while after: they will foame at the
mouth, and then soon after, they will fall down and die. The remedy is,
shepherds do use as soon as they spy any sheep reele or stagger, they take
him and open his mouth and under his tongue at the root, there shall ye see
bladders, which they do rub with the powder of loame, or with croomes of
bread, and and break them, than they piss in the sheep mouth, and so
washes it down, If ye cannot piss, then ye shall take drink, and power
some into his mouth, and soon after he will do well again, or give him the
juice of woormewood, with wine, or vinegar.

Against the time of yeaning as toward the Spring, shepheardes must then take
good heed unto their flock of Yeaning time.
yeawes, or any other having the government of such cattle. Then must the
shepheardes cherish well their yeawes being with lamb, for if the yeawes be not
then strong, they will have no force to deliver their lambs, which causes many
abortiues or dead Lambs, and often times they cannot be delivered without help.
Therefore in that time, good shepheardes ought to give great attendaunce in
some places where great flocks are, they watch in the nights as well as
days, for perhaps three or four yeawes may labor to yeane at one time.
Wherefore, then the shepherd must have help, or else they are like to have
loss of lambs, and where a yeaws cannot deliver her Lamb, the shepherd must
help her in setting his foot on her neck, and with his hands to pluck it
from her gently. If it come with the head forward, then it is more easy to be
taken out. But if the lamb do come with the rumpe forward, then must ye
shepherd put in his fingers, and put a small cord about the houghes of both
the lambs feet, and so fasten it and pluck the lamb forth. If any lamb do
lie ouerwhart or cross, the^ must the shepherd with a sharp knife cut the
lamb in three or four pieces, and so take it forth.

Also if any Lamb be like to die when he is first lambde, ye shall open
his mouth and blow therein, Weak lambs new yeaned.
and thereby many have recovered soon after, and done well. Wherefore in this
time of the year, ye must be painful to see your yeawes and to be with
them late at night, and earelie in the morning, and to see and hearken if any
yeawe do complain or groan, that ye may be ready to help her, Also if
any yeaw have two Lambs and too little milk, thift one lamb as is before
mentioned unto some other yeawe, which has no lamb, thus ye may do and save
in lamming time many Lambs.

Things good for the easier deliverance of the lambs, to be ministered in time
of extremity. Nettles boiled in Malmsey Easy deliverance.
and given, which will open the neck of the matrix. Anniseedes boiled in wine
or ale, and given. The juice of Peniryall, stamped with ale and given.

Also the juice of wild Parsnepes, stamped and strained, and given. The herb
called Hare wort (in Latin Aristolochia) drunk with mirrhe, and pepper, with
wine or ale, and given.

Also the leaves of wild sage stamped and strained with wine or ale, and
given, or to anoint the matrix with the ^uice of Wake robin.

Also Fetches stamped with ale and given is good also. Or mint stamped and
strained with honied water. Mallow leaves stamped and strained with ale and
given: or the root of Laurel stamped and strained with honied water, then
warmed and given. Al these aforesaid are good to be given in order for ye
speedier deliverance of the lambs, when any yeaw is in danger and weak.
Sheep sometimes will have their teeth loose, for Loose teeth.
that some do let them blood under the tail, and some do counsel to chafe
their gumnes with the powder of mallow roots burnt, and made into powder, and
rub them therewith.

Things good to increase milk in a yeaw, or those which to increase milk.
have scant of milk: ye shall use to give them fetches, or the herb Dill to
eat, or make the yeawe take the juice in drink, or anniseed beaten and given,
and to give them colewoortes is very good. And also barley sodde in water, with
Fenell seed, and so given, will increase much milk, and Nigilromana, given to
eat five or six days together on mornings fasting. Also Radish roots stamped
with ale and given, or to give the juice of Sowthistle. All these aforesaid are
very good to increase milk.

Of herbs wholesome for sheep chiefly before others, Mellilot, ye Herbs holsom.
three leaued grass, Selfheale, and cinke foil, broom, and pimpernel, white
henbane they will eat: good in summer, for it cools them. Others there be,
but these shall suffice.

What times are best to weane lambs, in some places Weaning lambs.
they do never separat the lambs from ye yeawes, which (as they say) is for 2.
causes: one thing is, whereas the Rams go with the yeawes it needs not, for
they will wax soon dry, so will their lambs be weaned of themselves. The other
cause is, whereas they have no seueralles to put their lambs in, when they
should be weaned. Wherefore he must either sell them, or let them suck so long
as the dams will give them leave, and some say tho Lambs shall never rotte,
so long as they suck their Dammes, except she want meat. For him that has
several pastures, lambs Lambs weaned.
would be weaned when they are sixteen or eighteen weeks old, and the better
the yeaw shall take the Ram again, when need shall be. The poor husbands in
many places whereas they use to milk their yeawes, do weane their lambs being
twelve weeks old, and they do milk their yeaws v. weeks after and more. But
those lambs shall be never so good as the other that suck long, and have meat
enough besides, which have bin tried, and proves best.

A yeawe having milk and will not love her lamb (as some will not,) ye shall do
thus, put her into some narrow place, To make the yeaw to love her lamb.
so y^ she can scant turn her, and her lamb with her, if she smite the lamb
with her head, bind her head to the side of y^ pen, and give her a little meat,
the^ tie a dog by her that she may look on him, and that will make her to
love her lamb in short space: and otherwise to make the yeawe love her lamb,
I have before expressed.

The best time to divide or draw sheep is, after ye have shorn them, then to
put them in parts, as those to divide or draw sheep.
that ye will feed by themselves, they sheare Hogs by them selves, and the
yeawes by themselves, the Lambs by themselves, and the weathers and the Rams
by them selves, if ye have so many pastures for them, or else the great sheep
will beat the small with their heads, and there may be some of each sort
which like not, and are but weak: all such would be put into fresh pastures
by themselves, and when they are well amended, then sell them. And the often
changing of Pasture shall amend all kinds of Cattle in shorter time than to
remain long in one Pasture. Also the Foldes for sheep.
folding of sheep, which they in some places do set their fold with diverse
partitions, and points the weathers, y^ yeaws, and the lambs each by themselves,
some shepheardes tie dog at the four corners of the fold. Some drailes his
dogs about the fold a pretty way of. Others set up shows of dead Dogs
heads, which is to fear any wild beast in coming to the foldde. In some
places the shephearde has his Cabbine going on wheels, to remove here and
there at his pleasure: shepherds need not greatly care for folding but once in
ye year, which is from July, til after August, except dry countries, for they
are never lightly folded in Autumn nor winter, for in rainie weather they
counsel not to fold, but to stick stakes about on the lands, and thereby the
sheep will sit down by them. Whereby they shall have more room than being
together in the fold, and shepheardes say it is not good folding of sheep in
any rany weather.

And also to make your Pens near the field or Pasture side in some dry
grown, and make also partitions thereinto receive small tropes of forty or
more, with gates unto them, that when ye have drawn them, ye may fasten each
gate by himself, and there the shepherd may turn them, and look if any of
them be faulty in any other cause, and therein to amend them. For if his pen
be made in parts, he may take and divide them at his pleasure, and when he
has taken so many as he shall seem needful, he may turn all the rest to
pasture. And those which are in the Pen, he may use as he shall seem good,
this shall suffice for your penfoldes,

To put the Ram unto the yeawes, if all men do at To put the Rams to yeawes,
one time is not the best, for then there will loss follow. For him that has
the best Winter Pasture, or a timely Spring in the year, he may suffer the
rams to go with the yeawes all the year to cover when they will. But in
common Pastures, the Rams are commonly put to the yeawes about holy Roode time:
for then (they say,) the Ram would go with the bucke, to have them come
more timely, but the common husbandman may not so do, because he has no
pasture but the common fields: for him to put the Ram to the yeawes it
shall be best at Michaelmas. And for such poor husbands as dwell among
mountains and hills, having neither pasture nor common fields, but
mountains and heathes, it were better for them to put the Ramm about Simon
and Iudes day, for because, a yeawe goes with lamb xx. weeks, then if she
lamb too soon or timely in the spring, having no new grass, she may not give
her lamb milk, and for want thereof, many lambs are lost, A yeaw with lamb.
and the yeawes then being poor, and having no milk, they will often forsake
their lambs, that in hard countries often times they die, both the yeaws and
lambs: therefore herein, let every man do as he thinks best.

There is also in the Spring a disease comes to many lambs, which commonly
are of 10. or 14. days old, and is The leaf in lambs.
much in lay pastures, which disease y^ shepherds call, y^ lease because (as
they say) they will feed most commonly on leaves, and chiefly in Oak or the
hauthorne leaf, and soon after they will reele and stagger, and foam at the
mouth, then they will fall down and so die, whereof I have asked many
shepherds, and they know no remedy for it. Wherefore me thinks it should
seem good to try if the disease do come by any poisoned thing. Then to give
the^ such things as will deserve poison, as to give the lamb some Treacle in
warm milk, or southernwood stamped and given with ale, or the juice of Aron,
called cuckospit, stamped and strained in honied water, and given warm, or the
root of the great bur bruised and sod in wine and then given. All these are
good against poisoned causes. But if this disease breed first in the head,
then shall ye minister things chiefly to purge the head, as the tender buds
of Bearefoote beaten, and the juice mixed with wine and given. Also the juice
of Sowbread, (in Latin, Panis porcinus,) the which juice ye shall put into his
nostrils, and let it distill into his head. The which will purge both bis head
and brain. Likewise the juice of garden cresses stamped and strained, and given
with wine do also purge the head. But if the said disease come of the
Hawthorne or Oak leaf only, which leaves be of a hard digestion, and
perhaps may cause this disease, if it should be so. Then boil Southernwood
in wine, and give thereof to the sick Lambs, or wild mallows sodde in wine
and given. Or the herb Cuckospit boiled in wine and given. Also of Juniper
seeds or leaves stamped, then strained and given with wine. Also Penniryall
stamped and strained with wine or Ale and so given. All these above said are
good to make digestion, and other ways wholesome for the Beast. Thus much I
thought meet to write, concerning the remedies for this strange disease in
Lambs. Let Shepheardes thereof try so far as they shall think good.

Against the looseness of teeth, some do let blood as I have before said
under the tail. But whenever any Against loose teeth.
of the sheep have loose teeth, ye shall take the tender croppes of briers,
called Black brier, and put thereof among his meat, and so they will fasten
again in eating thereof. It is good for all men to understand, specially
Shepherds, which things do hurt or rotte sheep, whereby they Rotters of sheep.
may avoid the danger the better, ye shall understand there is a grass or
weed, called Spear woort, the leaves are long and narrow like the point of a
spear, hard and thick, the steals hollow, growing a foot and more high,
with a yealow flower, which is commonly in wet places, and there will it grow
most, or where water have stood in the winter. There is also another weed
called Peniwort or penie grass, it will commonly grow in moist and marrish
grounds, and it grows low by the ground, and has a leaf on both sides the
stalk like unto a penie, thick and round, and without flower, yet some, do
say it bears a yealow flower, which will (as they say) kill sheep if they eat
it. Also all manner of grass that landfloods do ouerr(...) before, a rain is
not good for sheep, because of s^nd and stinking filth lying thereon, and al
manner marrish grounds is evil for sheep, and the grass that grows among
fallows is not very good for sheep, for among it, is much Grass among fallowes.
earth and other ill weed. Also knottegrasse is not good for sheep, (for as
some do say) it will cause them to foam at the mouth and so will be a scab.
Likewise al mildeawd grass is not good, the which ye shall know two manner of
way. The one is by the leaves on trees in ye mornings, and chiefly on ye Oak
tree. If ye lick the leaves, ye shall find a taste thereon like honey, whereby
the mildewde grass will kill many sheep, and rimes on the ground, then if the
shepherd do well, he should not let them go abroad, til the sun have dried
up all those dewes. Evil water is likewise not good, and a hunger rot is the
woorst rotte of all. For therein is neither good flesh nor skin, and being
hunger straued, they eat such as they can come by. But in pastures they seldo^
have ye rot, but hurt with mildeawes, yet then they will have much tallow, and
likewise flesh, and also a good skin. They say little white snailes be ill
for sheep, other in pastures or fields, there is a rot called the pellet rot,
which comes of great wet, specially in wood grounds or fallow fields, where
they cannot well dry them. Al these are the chief things that do rot sheep,
as the shepherds have found commonly by experience from time to time.

Certain precepts taken forth of Aristotle, libro de natura animalis. When
the teeth be all even of a sheep, Aristotle's precepts.
it is a sign that the sheep is old, yet thereto some shepheardes do say,
it is so in a young sheep as well as in the old, and that is according to the
Pasture or grounds they feed in. If they feed in hard ground their teeth
will wear the sooner, than in a soft ground or Pasture

If ye will have your lambs come in the spring time, put the Ram to the yeawes
in the mids of October, if ye will Lambs.
have them come in Winter, ye must put the Rams to the yeawes in July.

The yeawe goes with her lamb flue months, ye shall mark when a yeawe
does commonly bleate being Lamming time.
great with lamb, then judge that her lamming time is near.

Also ye shall note, if a rain come incontinent after that the Ram have
covered the yeawes, those lambs are like to die. Black Lambs.


A Ram that has a black tongue, all the lambs he gettes are like to be black
or else spotted.

Stony and marrish ground is not wholesome for sheep, and wood ground is not
very hurtful.

In Summer, sheep ought to be fed in the morning before the heat of the day,
and to let them drink fair water of the Spring. Also in the Spring time, and
Winter, put not forth your sheep before the deawes and frost be gone, for that
grass which has deawe or frost, breeds a disease or scabbe.

It is good also to put your sheep in the harvest in stubble ground, for they
will dung well the lands. Note also, if a ground be wet with rain, it shall
not be good to let them lie thereon, but stur them to some higher place.

Again in the month of April may, June, and Iulie, not then to eat much,
but in August, Octobre, November, and December, then to eat well after the
dew is gone, the better to withstand the storms in winter.

Note also that the washing of sheep with salted rain water after he is
shorn, will save him from the itch, and breaking of the wool, and from being
scabbie: note that putting the ram to the yowes when the wind is in the north
will cause them bring males, and putting the ram to the yowes when the wind
is in the south, will cause the yowes bring female lambs. And those yowes that
do drink salt water, do desire the ram the sooner, but ye must not salt
the water before the ramming time, but after: some say, two good rams to a
hundredth yowes is sufficient, and some think the more rams the sooner
speed: but they will serve.

Note also, all things will fat sheep which is mingled with salt water, as
fetches, branne, chafe and such like. Much sturring of sheep does make them
lean. There is a disease in sheep which is called the spring, it comes with
a swelling in the belly, and foming at the mouth, and suddenly the sheep will
fall down in the way. The remedy is: Take a quantity of rue, and another of
rosemarie, and boil them in milk, or in new ale, for that is the better, and
when it is a little boilde, then stamp it, and then strain it, and so give it
milk warm unto the sheep: but before ye give it, prick him under the
tongue and make it bleed if ye can, and he shall do well.

There is also oftentimes a giddines in sheep, which does take them in their
heads, (as shepherds do judge,) if it be the bladder ye shall find it soft
under your finger, and there ye must cut it as is before said: or the worm
under the horn which is likewise before declared. For any other pain or
giddines, these are special good. Take the juice of iuie leaves and put thereof
into his ear, and bind it fast for casting out. Or the juice of cackcospit in
like case warm. Or the juice of hegtaper called fox glove, put it into the
ear. The juice of wild time stamped with ale, straind and given. Or the juice
of sowbred, (calde in latin panis porcinus) distild in at ye nose into the
head, does purge both the head and the brain of the sheep. Against water in
the body or belly, ye shall stamp and strain of two penny grass, and give it
with wine Water in the belly.
boild. Against any water in the head, boil purcelin in honted water, straind
and so given. All these aforesaid are good against water in any part of the
body. Also they say, when the teeth of sheep waxelong and even, it is a sign
of age in them.

For the worm in the guts.
SOme sheep will have a long worm in his guts, and also ^lambs of a quarter
old: which breeds of some raw humor, ye signs are, he will forsake his meat,
and sit most commonly bowing his head to his belly, and he will often groan, and
his belly will swel, and shortly will die thereon if he be not help. The remedy:
take a quantity of ye juice of horehound, with some leeke blades albrused, and
so give it. Or to give him the powder of wormeseed in some maluesie. Also the
powder of sauin finely beaten and given in wine or ale.

Sheep sometimes will be lousy, and have lice like hog lice, which breed
sometimes by much wet, sometimes by hunger To kill lice.
and poverty, and sometimes they may have lice in lying among hogs, and then ye
shall see them rubbing and scratching with their horns and so will tear their
wool in many places. The remedy: take quicksiluer kilde in oil olive, or
spettle and therewith anoint your sheep: or ye powder of white ellebory, and
mix it with sallet oil, and therewith anoint. Or boil it in vinegar, and
wash the sheep therewith. Or take ye powder of stauesaker and mix it with oil
olive and anoint therewith: Or ye may take fresh grease, soap, tar, and melt
together, and therewith anoint. Al these before said are good against sheep yt
are lousy.

There is sometime on the end of the yowed tets a certain small mote or scab
with a black head, hanging unto it a hard stopping the tets.
mattry string like phlegm, which is within the tet, and it will slop her milk,
that of some you the lamb can draw no milk. Wherefore the shepherd must see
to al such things in tamming time, or else some lambs are like to starve.

Some shepherds say, yt a horned ram is il to get lambs, for ye yowes are at
lamming time in more danger of deliverance, because ye lambs have long stubbed
horns before they are lambd: whereby in the lambing time they put the yowes in
more danger, therefore the net ram is counted more better.

Some sheep will have a water bladder under their chin, Water bladder in sheep.
which ye shall feel to be soft, which will breed in moist times of winter by
feeding on moist places: shepherds have no other common remedy but to lance
it a little and then to tar it. There be some lambs their pesill is cloven, I
can learn no remedy but keep it clean til he be big, and anoint it with tar,
and then to kill him, for he will die at the length. Clo ueu pefill.


How for to know the age of a sheep, she being of one shere she will have two
broad teethafore, at the second shere, she will have iiii. broad teeth before:
at the third shere, she will have vi. broad teeth before, and at the fourth
shere, she will have viii. broad teeth before, and thus ye may know the age of
all sheep by their teeth.

Sheep are called (ouis in latin) which word comes of sacrificing in the old
time: The sheep is a beast good and profitable for many commodities for the use
of a man, as commonly is known among all men in this country and others. If
the rams be put unto the yowes when the wind is in the north, the yowes will
bring males, and if the wind be in the south, if the yowes he then covered,
they will be female lambs. Also such a color as the vain is under the rams
tongue, of such color shall the lamb be when he is lambde: and when old sheep
are moved to generation in inordinate times (shepherds say) it is a good
sign: And if young sheep be so moved (they say) it is a taken of some general
pestilence among them that year following.

Also Aristotle says, sheep do commonly conceive in drinking-water, and
therefore some shepherds do give them salt, and do force them to take it,
which does cause them to conceive the rather, and salt will keep them longer
safe and sound without sickness. They do also give them in harvest Cucurbitas,
and such herbs with salt, which will increase much milk in their vdderns. If
your sheep be made to fast three days and then give them meat, they will
soon after wax fat: in summer cold water coming out of the north springes is
good for them to drink: and in harvest, warm water coming out of the south
shall be good for them, and then to eat in the later part of the day or night
is also good for sheep. And those sheep which are driven and travel far,
do soon wax lean, and shepherds will perceive those that will best endure
out the next winter following, for some sheep are so feeble they are not able
to shake of the ise from their backs, and some will suffer none thereon but
still shake it off. The sheep which be nourished in watery places their flesh
is not so wholesome as others nourished in dry grounds, and those four footed
beasts nourished in moysts grounds with long tails, may worse away with
winter then those with broad tails.

Also sheep with small and thin short wool on their tails may worst away with
winter: shepherds say, the wool of a sheep that is wirried with the wolf or
eat, thereof, it is infected, and the cloth made of that wool will be lowzy.

Sheep also are of less stoutnes of nature, and wit, then other four footed
beasts. The thunder fears sheep greatly, specially if one be alone. If
thunder happen in the evening, or night, it is dangerous to make yowes to cast
their lambs, or if any be alone. Therefore it shall be a good remedy to bring
them all into one flock. Acornes are ill for sheep, and make yowes to cast
their lambs.

Some shepherds say, to shere sheep not before midsomer, is good to make them
have a long staple, for in hot weather the wool of sheep backs does grow
most.

In folding of sheep, the opinion of some husbands hold, that the piss of
sheep does heat, help, and comfort the land as much or rather more then does
their dung: therefore some do will their servants or shepherds to raise all
the sheep in the fold before they let the^ forth in winter once every night,
and to go about the sides of the fold with a dog, for commonly when as sheep
do see any dog come nie them, they will then dung and piss, and when they
have so done, ye may let them out of the fold, and this order is very good for
your lands.

Against the rot, if you fear your sheep, in wet times, ye shall put them into
a house three days and three nights without meat or drink: then give to every
hundredth one bushel of bran mixed with so much salt laid in troffes, and hunger
will make them to eat it, then drive them to the water, and let them drink
their fill. Then let them be chaste with a curre a good space after, and put
them then into what ground ye will for one quarter, and they shall take no
hurt: then must you take them up the next quarter and serve them so again. Thus
must ye use them iiii. times in the year in doubtful times, if ye will save
your sheep from the rot.

Some shepherds do use when they fear the rot, to take them up and to give
each sheep he suspecteth, a little milk mixed with salt, and to set water by
them, and to keep them so for certain days, which is thought a good way to
preserve them if they be taken in time.

Some shepherds do give his sheep the juice of elder mixed with honied water or
milk given warm a little, which will purge water forth of their bodies, or
iii. drams of the juice of spurge, in a pint of honied water, to give a
quantity thereof. Also plantaine sod in water mixed with some milk and given,
do purge water betwixt the flesh and the skin. Thus much concerning the rot
and water in sheep. Also if sheep be chaste or driven a journey, if then they
will drink salt water, it is a sign they are sound, and will do well.

A good medicine for the stagger in lambs, or young sheep.
TAke of long pepper, of licoras, of annises(...)des, of hempseeds, and of
honey, of each a peniworth. Then beat all these together, then put thereto a
pottell full of new milk, and stir the honey and it with the rest all
together, and thereof give each lamb or sheep two sponefuls or somewhat more
thereof milk warm. And this will save them for that year. This must be
given in the beginning of May.

To help sheep that have the pox.
YE shall prick the vain under the tail nigh the rumpe, and let them bleed,
and likewise prick the vain under the right eye, and let them bleed. Then
take strong vinegar as ye can get, and put to so much salt as ye may make it
like a brine, and milk warm give every sheep three good sponefuls thereof.
Use this twice or thrice between two or three days, and it will help. But as
soon as you shall see any sheep infected put him from the rest, and then give
him this drink aforesaid. The pox will commonly begin under the brisket, and
so on the rumpe, and then it will meet in short time, and so perish.

For the itch or scabbe in sheep.
YE shall boil the herb bearefoot in water, with the roots of camelion noir,
which is the great thistle that has milk, and wash the scabby places
therewith warm, and it will help them: often proved.

Cutting or gelding lambs.
THe age of cutting and gelding of young lambs (as some shepherds say) is best
in the wane of the moon, the sign and the hour being good, young lambs from
three days old till nine days old, for then they are young and tender and
may easily be gelt. Yet some other do hold, it is better cutting of lambs when
they are more stronger, as of three weeks old or more. But then is more
danger in cutting them. For if they be then rank of blood (as some will be
more then other some) then the blood often will fall into the codde, raines and
belly, and there it will lie and cause the lambs soon after they are cut to
die. Therefore put the fine powder of rozen into his codde, and that will dry
up the quarie blood.

Therefore some do choose out those lambs that be lusty and fair, and cuts
their ears, or lets them blood the day before.

Some shuts them in a house the night before without meat, and then to cut
them. Also a good sure way is this: ye shall cause one to hold the lamb
betwixt his legs, or on his lap, and turn the lamb on his back, in holding
his four feet up right together: But if ye shall see black spots in his
(...)ankes then cut him not, for he will die, for he is rank of blood. Then let
the cutter take and hold the tippe of the codde in his left hand, and with a
sharp knife cut the top thereof an inch long clean away.

Then with his thumbes and his two foremost fingers on both hands slip
softely down the codde over the stones to his belly, and then with his teeth
holeyng the left stone whole in his mouth, draw it softlye forth so long as
the string is: So done, then draw forth the other in like manner. Then spytte
in the codde, ano anoint his flanks on both sides of the codde with fresh
grease, and so let him or them go.

But if ye draw the stones rashly (as some will) not holding down his cod with
their hands, as before said, and suffers the lamb to struggle, whereby it may
soon break the string of a vain in drawing the stones, which will then
gather to lumps of blood in his belly and codde, and thereof die within two or
three hours after: And when ye have cut them let them not lie, but stir
them up and down after for two or three hours. For the lambs to rest
suddenly after cutting, is not good, nor yet to be put forth suddenly in
cold winds or wet weather. Thus much for the cutting and gelding of lambs.

For a sheep that has lost her quide.
IF a sheep have lost her quide, notwithstanding, sheep will eat all the day,
and cast it up at night again, (which casting will be like to the panch of a
beast:) for he cannot digest it, and thereby they never prosper, but pine away
at length by little and little. The cure. Ye shall take quide woort, (which
grows among corn, like grounsell,) and bruise thereof a quantitite, then
mark when ye see another sheep chew her quide, take her, and take part of he
quide out of her mouth, and mix it with the bruised quidewoort, and role it in
a little ball, and so give it, and make her to swallow it, and he shall do well.

The red water.
Sheep oftentimes will have the red water, which as shepherds say, is a
certain bladder with water under the tip of his heart, which water scaldes and
consumes the heart, so at length he will die: a good way to help is, every
night before they rest, do ye chase them a little with a dog which will
preserve them from the said water.

Against the gall.
A Sheep when he is troubled with flowing of the gall, ye shall see him stand
shrinking with his four feet nigh together. Then give him half a sponefull of
aquauite mixed mith so much vinegar, and let him blood under the tail, and he
shall mend: and it is good against the red water also.

Herbs evil for sheep.
Herbs, if sheep eat thereof, as spear woort, which grows commonly in
moist places, and bears a yellow flower, and has leaves like spear points,
thick and hard to digest. Also black elleborie, will kill sheep or other
cattle if they eat any quantity thereof. There is an other herb called two
penny grass, which grows in meadows, which is as evil for sheep as spear
wort. Again oak leaves, if sheep eat thereof green, it is evil for them,
specially for young lambs, which will kill them: and also yeugh leaves, if they
eat thereof, it will go nigh to kill them: and likewise of other cattle. And dead
grass or rotten fog in low commons and pastures, is evil for sheep, and will
breed a rot in them: and hemlocke, and mushromps is il for sheep, and white
snailes. Thus much here, of evil herbs for sheep, whereof I have recited part
before.

To help hoggerels if they mislike.
IF young tegges or hoggerels under a year old, do not like, ye shall make tar
warm, give unto each a sponefull thereof, and it will help: but if they be
with lamb it is not good for them.

The turning disease in sheep.
THere is a turning disease in sheep, which causes the^ to hold their heads on
the one side: some shepherds do counsel. If she hold her head on the right
side, ye shall strike of the horn on the left side of. For under ye horn
there lies a worm, which ye shall anoint with tar, and that will kill it: then
bind a cloth thereon, and so it will do well again.

The tyne worm.
THe tine worm is a sinal red worm, with many legs, much like a hog louse,
and they will creep in grass: if sheep or other cattle do eat one, they
will ^well, and within a day die, if he be not remedied. To remedy him ye
shall take stale and salt a quantity, and stur them together, and give it so,
and chafe him a while after: or give him the juice of herb Robart with ale,
and he will mend.

To help the wethering in a you.
Stamp the leaves of mallows with strong ale and give it: or take and stamp
herb grace and strain it with good ale and give the you iii. or iiii.
sponefull thereof, and she shall do well. And the juice of mugwoort will do the
like.

Goats with their nature and feeding.
FOr so much as I have written sufficiently of sheep, I will now here speak
somewhat of goats, which are cattle much desired of in many places.

These kind of cattle desire to have bushes and briars, and alio thorns, and
other trees, rather the^ to have plain pasture grounds or fields. For they
feed as well in rough and rude grounds as plain places. For they fear
neither bryer, rock nor thorn, bush or other wood, and they love very well
low and small trees, shrubbes, as also wild trees, crabtrees and such like, or
the wild grass mellilot: also of willowes and young oaks, or elmes being not
hie.

The buckes have under their jaws two wattles or tufts like a beard, which is
the better to be esteemed of, his body also being large withal, and his legs
great, his neck plain and short, with great hanging ears: his head small,
his hair black and thick, clean and long withal. In many places they dod
shere them to make mantils for soldiers. Also the bucke goat when he is of
seven months old, he is sufficient to couple and to cover the females.

For he is of so great a heat, and so knauish withal, that Goat bucke wax
soon old.
he will not spare to cover his own damme, though she be yet milch. Through
the which heat he waxes soon old, and before he be vi. years he is nie
spent. For his youthful years being so hot: has consumed his strength.
Wherefore after v years he is not sufficient to cover the females. The she
goat which does resemble the bucke before mentioned, is greatly to be praised,
if she have great tets with large vddurns and full of milk. In temperate
countries they choose the goats which are without horns. But in countries
windy and stormy which is subject often unto great winds, they take those
which have horns: but in most places ye shall see that the buckes have no
horns, because they are most unhappy in pushing and goring with their horns,
which thing is often dangerous.

These cattle ought not to be above one hundredth in a heard: although that
sheep with wool may be a thousand together in a flock. And also when ye buy
goats, it is better to buy all together out of one company or heard, then to
choose in diverse parts or companyes, to the end that when ye would lead
them to pasture, they do not separate them selves into diverse parts: and also
it will be the better for them to agree in their houses. And too great a heat
in summer does annoye these cattle very much, yet more does the cold in
winter: for these female goats which do bring forth a kidde in winter, through
the cold and veheme^cie thereof, it often makes them bring forth abortiues and
dead kids.

Also abortiues comes when they give the^ in some place nothing but acorns for
their meat. Wherefore ye must not give them but a quantity at once thereof.

The chiefest time to have them coupled or covered with the bucke, is in
Autumn, before the month of December, to the end that against the grass and
leaf do spring fresh and tender, then she shall kidde and bring forth their
young the better, whereby to have more grass, and thereby to give the more
milk.

Also their houses ought to be paued with stone, or else naturally to be of
gravel of it self all under, for these kind of cattle be so hot they must
have no litter under them. But their keeper to look always diligently unto
them, in clensing them daily in their houses, and in their said houses not to
suffer any filthy dung, or other moisture to remain, or any other dunghill:
For it is clean contrary against the nature of goats. If the yowes be of a
good kind, they will bring two kiddes a piece, and some times three at once:
Which is not good nor yet commended when a goat so does. And also being of two
years, to bring at once three kiddes. If so then ye must nourish the kiddes as
ye do the lambs, having but small succor. But the young buckes must be a
little more corrected and kept low, to abate their heat and lasciniousnes in
them. But the other ye must give them abundance of milk, and also to give
them Elm leaves and seeds, and of mellylot herb, and of iuie, or the tender
croppes of lentil pease, or other tender branches and crops. Also when a goat
has kydded, ye shall reserve the most fairest and strongest of the two: (If
that she have two at a birth.) For to replenish always your heard, the other
ye may sell if ye will, or other ways dispose him. Ye shall not give any
kidde to a goat of a year, or two years to nourish, for those kiddes which
they bring within those said times, ought not to be nourished or kept, except
they be of three years, and those which be but a year having a kidde, it
ought suddenly to be taken away from the damme.

But those goats which have kiddes being of two years, ye shall let them
remain till they be ready to sell. And ye must not keep your doaes no longer
then viii. years, because they being sore weakened in so often bearing, they
will become barren. Also their keeper ought to be rough unto them, in giving
them sharp words, and to be diligent, patient, not angry, and yet bold: For to
go with them through valleis, on rocks, and desert places, through bushes,
shrubbes, and such like, and yet not always to follow his heard, as the
keepers of other cattle. But he ought to be always before this cattle. And
to be more careful of them then of any other cattle. For these in feeding
and brousing or pastoring do always obey the buckes, in descending and giving
them place, and therefore they must be looked unto when some do sit, look
the other run not here and there: But see that they rest peaceably and gently
all at their own ease, to the end the yowes having the greatest tettes and
vddurns, do not thereby wax lean or other ways become evil or sick.

The goats are nourished almost of nothing chargeable. Yet they brouse and
feed wholly together as the sheep, and do clime up on mountains against the
heat of the sun, with greater force then the sheep, and they be of more
greater travel and exercise, and are more in strength and stouter of nature.
Wherefore our ancestors did use them as they do yet in mountains, and wild
places, which is counted most meetest for them: And to have their houses and
government as the sheep have, in putting the buckes apart, as they do the
rams: For they are in all things governed as the sheep, and are much
conversant with sheep, in howsing and pasturing alike.

But these kind of beasts are not so meet to be about houses as sheep, for
they are more hurtful unto all manner of herbs and bees: therefore they are
more meeter to be in rougher and barren grounds, as bushes, rocks,
mountains, and such. And some think it good not to have in a troop or head
above fifty goats, because they will be ranging here and there, and are
foolish cattle and without care, soon hanged here and there, which are in
more danger then the sheep: therefore it is more painfuller unto their keeper,
and not to let them go in cold places, for cold is most hurtful unto them.

Of their diseases.
AS it does happen to other kinds of cattle to have the pestilence Of
diseases in goats, as pestilence and such like.
or murren and such: and sometimes sick of other diseases, in waxing lean
through pain thereof: also the goats, although they be fat and in good
liking, so much the sooner will they have the pestilence, and be cast down all
at once, and die throughout all the heard except ye divide them, and when it so
happens unto them, it is chiefly by the abundance of pasture or feeding.
Now when soever ye shall see one or two so taken with this disease, ye must
let all the rest blood incontinent, and ye shall not let them feed all the day,
but four hours, and keep them shut close in a pen, or such like thing: To see
if any other do become sick of the same or any other grief, the which shall
be meet to give the^ of rushes, and reeds, and also the roots of white
thorn, the which ye shall beat well with a pestell of iron, and then mix it
with rain water, without giving them any other thing to drink. If this do
not help, ye must sell them, and if ye cannot sell them, then it were best
to kill them, and salt them. And after a certain time, ye must recover
another heard. But ye must not do this before the dangerous time of this
pestilence be spent, or that year past, as if this should be in winter, ye
must abide until the summer next following after. Or if it be in Autumn, then
tarry until the spring time. And when some of them shall chance to fall sick
in the house, ye must give them the like remedy, as it is before said of the
sheep.

And when their skin shall swell or inflame, and that the goat is full of
water, which the Greeks call Hydropisis, a disease which comes by drinking
too much water. Ye must cut them a little with a sharp knife under the
shoulder, and thereby draw forth all the superfluous moisture, and then heal
the wound with tar, and after that the she goat has borne kids, if her matrix
be swollen, or that the secondine (which is the skin that the kids are lapt in)
is not well borne, ye shall make her take a pint and a half of sod wine, or if
ye have not that, ye shall give her as much of other good wine, and to fill and
strengthen their nature with cerot liquide. Now to the end I will not again
recite that which I have already spoken (if any other disease do come unto
them) ye shall help them with such medicines as I have already showed
heretofore in the remedies for sheep.

For goats have the like diseases as the sheep and other cattle, and as they
say, the goats are never without agues, for it is a common disease among them,
and other diseases they catch in their bringing forth of their young kiddes, as
before is expressed. This I think shall be sufficient here at this time.

There is also in the tefs of goats, as in yowes, a certain The stopping of
the tets.
stopping in some of their tets, which is a hard matter like a straw of
phlegm, which will be in the cundit of the teat, with a little black head,
some will stick so fast that the kid or lamb cannot draw it forth, and so
long they can have no milk. Therefore must the shepherds see to all such
things, at the lamming or kidding time, or else the lambs and kids are like to
starve.

Let the keeper also look unto his goats, that the females be not chaste or
hunted when they be great with kids, for if they be, they will be in danger of
the misturning the kids in their bellies, which causes the kids oftentimes to
die, and put the goats in great ieopardy: and so likewise with yowes great with
lamb, if they be chaste being great, it turns their lambs in their bellies, and
makes many miscary in lambing time.

Thus much for the keeping and ordering of goats.

If a sheep be bitten with any dog, ye shall clip away all the wool thereabout
nigh unto the place, and then clap on a plaster of pitch and it will heal it.

To heal a tetter which is a dry scabbe.
YE shall take the roots of sorrel wild or tame, slice them and bruise them a
little, and soke them in good vinegar two days and two nights, and then rub the
sore therewith iiii. or v. times a day, and then let the roots so remain in the
vinegar still. Use this and it will help. Or take the gum of chery trees, and
resolve it in strong vinegar, and rub the sore therewith, and this will help.
Also Acerabacca bruised and laid in vinegar to anoint, does the same. Again,
the herb called pricmadam, growing commonly on walls, stamped with barrowes
grease, and so remain two days, and then anoint therewith, does like help.
Or bolearmeniac mixed with soap, and then to anoint therewith. All these are
good against tetters, either for sheep or goats.

Lambs cutting, coming late in the year, or kids.
IF ye have any lambs that come in the end of may, or in June, the fly will be
busy if ye then cut them to defend the fly, ye shall mix fresh grease and
soote together. (For the soot being sharp, will keep away the fly) and so
anoint the cod therewith, and he shall do well.

To help goats or sheep that have an itch.
YE shall take of young broom the tendrest ye can get, and put a good
quantity thereof into a pot with chambe^ lie, then stop it close, and so let
it remain: And when as ye shall have any cause to occupy thereof, shed over
the wool on the sheepe^ back, and annoint therewith, so that it may go down
to the skin. This is soon made and of small charge, and is more better than
tar and fresh grease. For it will fasten the wool, kill the scab, and also
destroy the tikes. Often proved quoth Balgroue.

To feed a lamb from the Dam.
A Lamb taken from the Dam, and so nourished by hand, he may soon perish,
although ye feed it very well, except ye look unto his dunging. For I have
known some being stopped, die thereof for lack of looking to. Ye shall open and
anoint his tuell with butter or oil, and so rake him, or else give him spurge
with milk, or centory in milk.

A proved medicine against the staggers in sheep.
TAke of house leke called Singreene, the root of Dragon, a like quantity,
Some grounds of strong ale, with some new milk, stamp the herbs, and then
boil them well altogether. Then put thereto a few grains, grossly beaten, and
so let it have a boil or two after, so let it cool, and give each sheep
two or three spoonful thereof milk warm, and this will help.

The Table for sheep, and Goats, by Alphabet, as follows.
A
AGe in sheep how to know. Age of sheep by number of teeth. Altering thy
stock to help. 211 Aristotle's precepts for sheep. 240 Other sayings of
Aristotle.
B
BElting of sheep. 231 Bying of sheep to know Biting sheep with a dog to
help. Bledder in the head of sheep to help. 230 Blindness in sheep to
help. 229 Blood in sheep to help. 229 Blood in the codde of lambs to help.
Blood in sheep another. 230 Breeding of sheep. 211 Brething strait in
sheep. 225 Broom salve to anoint sheep with. 221 Bones broken to help. 225
C
Choosing of rams. Choosing good sheep. Collar troubling sheep. 224 Cough in
sheep to help. 228 Cough another way to help. 229 Cloven pesyll. 243 Crampe
in a sheep to help. 19 Couller of sheep best. Cutting or gelding of lamb.
256
D
Dividing of sheep. 236 Dogs meet for some sheepeherds. 231 Drink in summer
for sheep. Dropsy in goats to help.
E
EAning of yeaues to ease. Eawes chaste great with lamb not good. Eawes to make
them love their lambs. 232 Eawes that love not their lambs. 236 Eaning time to
take good heed of. Eawes going with lamb. 237 Eawes great not to be chasts
F
FAtting of sheep. Female lambs to have. 210 Fever in sheep to help. 222
Fleame in sheep to help. 225 Folding of sheep. 236 folding of sheep
another.
G
GAll in sheep to help. 249 Gald in the foot to help. 223 Glanders in
sheep to help. 226 Goats and their nature and feeding. Goat buckes having
beards. Gelding lambs. Goat buckes soon wax old. Goats with kidde not to be
chaste. Goats when best to be covered. Goats how for to nourish. Goats having
the dropsy to help. Goats being diseased to help. Government of sheep.
Grass for sheep among fallows. 239 Goats inflamed in the skin. Goats that
have the pestilence to help.
H
HAw in the eye of sheep to help. Head pained to help. Herbs evil for
sheep. 225 Herbs wholesome for sheep. 249 Horned rams and their nature.
Houses meet for sheep. Hoggerels and young sheep do not like.
I
IAundis in sheep to help. 224 Itch in sheep to help. 246
L
Lambs being sick to help. 226 Lambs scabby to help. 227 Lambs weak to
help. 234 Lambs what time best to wean. 225 Lambs eating the leaf to help.
Lambs which come in the spring. Laming time how to know. 240 Lambs to have
black or spotted. 240 Lambing time to take heed of. 233 Lice on sheep to
kill. 242 Long sick, in sheep to help. 223 Lambs coming late to cut. Lambs
stopped to look unto.
M
MAle lambs to have. 216 Maggots on sheep to help. 232 Another for the same.
Medicines good for sheep. 219 Medicines against an itch. 221 Meat sufficient
for sheep. 212 Meat or pasture for Goats. Milk to increase in sheep. 235
N
NOrishing of sheep. 207
O
Ointment or greasing of sheep.
P
PAsture ground for sheep. 215 Pens made to divide sheep. Pestilence in
sheep to help. 219 Pox a disease in sheep to help. 231 Poison among sheep to
help. 233 Purcines in sheep to help. Proverb of pastures for sheep. For
sheep that have lost their quide, to help. 248
R
RAcks meet for sheep. Rams how to choose. Rams of estimation. 210 Rams how
to correct. 214 Rams of what age to cover. Rams when to be put to the yowes
Rams to the yowes another. Rams to the yowes 260. Rayny weather not good to
lie. Red water to help. 248 Rotting of sheep to know, Rotting of sheep to
help. Remedies with medicines to help. Rymy grass evil for sheep. 211
Rotting of sheep. 239
S
SCabbe on sheep to help. 220 Scab on the chine of sheep. 226 Scab on the
lips. 228 Scabbed sheep how to preserve. Scratches of sheep among bushes
Shepherd how to govern his sheep. Shearing of sheep. 217 Sound sheep to
choose. Spring a disease in sheep to help. Staggers in lambs or sheep. 240
Strange sheep to order. Stopping of nipples of yowes to help. 243
T
TAgging of sheep to see to. 231 Tar and of his nature. 228 Teeth lose in
sheep to help. 239 Another for the same.
Tets stopped to help. Thunder. Tetters in sheep to heal. 256 Teeth many in
a sheep to mark. The tine worm. 250 Thorns or scratches on sheep. Tokens
good in a sheep. Turning disease in sheep. 249
W
WEthering of yowes to help. Water in the belly of a sheep. 229 Water in the
belly another. Water bladder under the chin-243 Washing sheep with salt water
is good. 217 Washing sheep often. Wildfier in sheep to help. 224 Wood evil
in sheep to help. 232 Wool to come soon again. 228 Worm in the i will to
help. 222 Worms in the guts of sheep. Worm under the horn to help. 230
FINIS.
The nature and qualities of hogs, and also the government thereof.
THe hog is a hurtful and spoiling beast, stout and hardy, and troublesome
to rule: he is a great rauener for his meat, because he is hot of nature.
Hogs are commonly known to most men: therefore I will here let pass to speak
in every point thereof, but such as shall be most meet and necessary to be
known.

There be of all sorts to be had, but the meetest having and choosing of them,
is the males, and boore pigges, for Choosing of hogs.
they do more resemble the nature of the boore, then the sow. And those that
are large and big of body are most expected, rather then those of long and
round of body. And they ought to have a deep belly, with thick and large
thighs: not having his claws very hye, nor yet very long legs, but thick
and short, with a great thick neck. His groyne and snout short and bending
backwarde, with a broad thick chine and yet those are most knauishly given,
when they are a year old: for they will engender and desire to cover or to be
covered within every ten months: and so will continue till they be four
years of age: and one Boore is sufficient for ten sowes. Also the sowes A Bore
is sufficient for ten sowes
ought to have a long body, and all the rest of her body like the other
aforesaid of the Bore. Whereas the countries are cold, and subject to frosts,
it is best there, to choose and have hogs which have hye and hard bristles,
thick and black. if it be in temperate countries and warm against the sun:
there ye may well nourish those hogs which have thin, small and low bristles,
because they are commonly more tender then others. Also those hogs which are
norished in houses and towns, are most commonly whiter then others. A sow will
commonly bring pigs until she be seven years old, and those sowes tha^
brings pigges, most often in the year, do sooner waxeolde then others: for
some young Sow, well fed, being one year old, will have pigges. The Sowes are
best to be covered in the month of February: and when she has Covering
(...)es. Sowes go with pig 16. weeks.
gone with pigge four months or fifteen weeks, then in the sixtenth week,
or beginning of the fifth month, she will farro. Some (as they say) will have
pigges twice, some thrice a year. And when the grass is strong and wette, it
causes them to bring abundance of milk to norish their pigs the better: for
when she waxes dry, and has no milk to nourish them with, then must ye take
them from her, and see to weane them, and so by little and little they will fall
to eat grass and corn, and such as falls on the ground. And thus in
continuance they will wax more stronger, to eat of all other kind of meat.
This order they chiefly use in villages where great troops of hogs are used
and kept together, bred and brought up in towns, whereby at length there comes
a great profit by them unto the husband. As in places and villages, nigh unto
great towns, or gentill men's houses, in selling the young sucking pigs which
are always ready money unto them: and by this means the Sow is discharged of
her pigs the sooner. Whereby she shall be the readier to bring pigs twice or
thrice a year: and the boore pigs ought to be gelded when they are about six
months old: for then they begin to wax strong in heat, and being vngelt
till then they will grow to be more stouter hogs: and yet they commonly geld
them when they are young under the damme, as being Gelding pigs. spaied Sowes.
three weeks or a month old, and some say they will have the sweeter flesh:
but the truth is contrary, (as many do judge,) because they are too soon
weakened in their nature: and therefore they will not be so large hogs. Some
do counsel to geld or spay the sowes when they have been often covered, as
of three or four years: and to spay the sowes is counted then best. Some
think in spaying them of shots is best, in cutting them in the mid flank with
a sharp knife, two fingers broad, in taking out the bag of birth, and cutting
it off, and so they do stitch up the wound again, and then annoint it, and
keep her warm in the stie two or three days after, and those that be spayde
can bring no more pigges, nor the bores will not seek after them, and they will
wax the fatter.

Notwithstanding, I cannot say why they spay them except it should be to fat
them, or where there is want of meat to feed them. For where as plenty of
meat is, better it is there to have them bring up pigges than otherwise. Of
these kind of Beasts ye shall find in all countries christened, and some
are in mountains as well as in plain countries. But the plain and moist
grounds, are far better for them, then the hot and dry grounds. For the
forests and Commons are most convenient for them to feed on. And where there
is great plenty of Oak trees, Beech, Ash, and thorn, of Briars, Hazels, and
crabtrees, wild pear, or Plumtrees, Fearne roots, and suchlike, to feed them
withal, from time to time. For these sorts of trees do not ripe al at one
time, but in diverse and sundry times of the summer, which are almost sufficient
to nourish them all the year long, with help of grass and roots, and some
helps now and then in Winter of other meat.

And where there is want of such trees, ye must have them to other feeding
ground, and the best is to have of dirtie, slymie and soft ground, then to
have dry and hard ground. For in the in the soft ground, they may the easier
dig and seek for worms and roots in the earth, and to toss and tumble in
the durty water, which does them much good in hot time. Wherein they much
delight to tumble them, because ofttimes they would have water to cool them
in, which cooling does profit them much and eases them of their great heat,
which is a breeder of the meazels. They Roots good for hogs.
do feed in moist and marrish grounds, where they have many small and sweet
roots, as flagge roots, and the roots of galingale, of rushes, reeds, and
also the roots of Daffadill, which is very good for hogs, knotgrasse and
such like. And likewise in fallow fields they do find store of roots, and
worms which does make them fat. And as for other grounds covered with grass,
they find diverse sorts of herbs and fruits, so that in diverse parts
thereof, they may have besides, of wild plums, of pears, or hawes, sloes and
nuts, and such like: and whereas ye shall see them have scante of meat, ye
must not then spare your Garners: for then ye must needs help them a mornings
with some meat, and likewise at night with some: for all the day before perhaps
in feeding abroad they have had little or nothing. And therefore all good
husbands should keep plenty of acorns after Michaelmas, to serve them all the
year if they can. Acorns may be kept in Cestorns with water, Akornes kept.
or to be dried and kept in fats, for so ye may keep them from rats and mice:
or to dry them and lay them on dry boardes, and give thereof in their wash, or
dry with some beans or other grain when it is good cheap, and what ye
spend one way, ye may so profit an other way.

Unto sowes that give suck, to eat of green herbs, sometimes it does them
hurt. Therefore in the morning before ye put them forth to feed, ye ought to
give them somewhat to keep them in heart: for much eating of green grass in
the spring, will cause them to be lose bellied, which will make them lean. And
ye should not put hogs together Stying your hogs.
like other cattle, in their styes: but make them partitions therein. And to
put the sowes asunder by them selves, and the young pigs by them selves. For
when they are shut up altogether, they tumble, toss, and lie out of order one
upon another, and thereby oftentimes makes the sowes to cast their pigs.

Also those husbands that dwell by forests or commons, it were good for them
to have styes in the said forests, and commons, whereby they may at all times
feed such hogs as they shall seem most meet. And there likewise use to
give them their meat, whereby they may within a while forget the coming to his
house, and thereby he shall the less be troubled with them, from time to
time. And it were good to make the walls or hedges of your styes of four
foot hye: for then your hogs or sowes can not get over, nor yet others come
unto them. And so open at all times, that the keeper may look into the stye,
and to take account of them at his pleasure, to see if he have all or not, and
to seee if any sow do ouerlay, or lie on her pigs, then to remove her, and
see unto the pigs, so long as they be young and tender.

The hoghearde or keeper ought also in keeping of them Hogheard watchful.
to be watchful, diligent, painful, serviceable with wisdom, and of a good
nature: Being very careful to nourish them, from time to time: who ought also
to have in mind the number of all his hogs, sowes and pigges, both old and
young: and to have regard and consider the profit and increase of every one,
from time to time. And likewise to take heed of his sowes that they take no
hurt, with dogs, or otherways when they are ready to farro: Sowes with
pigge.
but to shut them up in the styes, that they may farro there, for fear of
casting her pigges. For in farroing abroad, often times and many ways they
perish, as with the Fox, or other like chances: which is for lack of looking
to in time. Which to a poor man is a great loss, if he consider all things.
Also when a sow does farro, the keeper ought to see how many pigges she has,
(for some sowes will eat of them, as soon as she has farroed them,) and
therefore to look well unto them, and see what they be: and let them not suck
of any other sow, but of their own damme. For if the pigges resort out of the
stye, and go among others, when she lies down to give them s(...)e, they
will suck with others, which may thereby soon be bitten of the strange sow.
Therefore the best is, to see each sow shut up by them selves, that one hinder
not the other: for at length ye shall not know the higges of the one sow from
the other, except ye mark them.

And among a heard of many pigges, ye must have of diverse marks, to know
which is which. For else it Marking your^ pigges.
will trouble his wits, to know one from an other. And among a great number
it will be a hard and a painful thing to do. Therefore it shall be good to tell
them in going forth and coming in, as before is declared: or to tell them in
entering in at a door, no bigger then one hog or sow may pass alone, in
going in or coming forth. And look that every sow have with her but her own
pigs, and so many as she shall best continue with, to nourish well, which is
not above eight pigs, if she have any more, it were best to sell the rest being
young, without ye perfectly see, that the sow is well able to nourish them:
for if she be not, ye shall soon perceive by decaying of the pigs, for they
will soon wax lean, and every pigge will but suck his drene or tette.

To weans pigs, whereas husbandmen have no styes. They wene their pigs in tying
a woollen cloth list about the upper snowte, with a knot in the midst of the
roof of his mouth, so remaining under the pallet of his mouth, he can not draw
any store of milk: whereby the sow will soon wax dry.

And those sowes which are good breeders of pigs, they should be rather chosen
that suck of the hinder tets, and sowes and good breeders.
ought to be nourished often with dry and sod barley, for fear least they
being young, should wax lean, or fall into some sickness. Also the
hogheard or keeper ought often to cleanse their styes: for although these kind
of beasts be foul and filthy feeders, yet they do desire to lie clean and
dry in their styes. Thus much here for the nourishing and good keeping of
hogs.

The manner and gelding of hogs, there is two times in the year to geld these
kind of cattle best. One is in Gelding of hogs.
the spring, and the other in Autumn after Michaelmas. The order how they do
geld: one way is thus. They make two cross slits or incisions on the midst
of the stones, upon each stone one, and then put them forth, and so anoint
them with tar. There is an other manner of gelding, which is more gentle, and
more fair: but somewhat more dangerous, if it be not well done. Nevertheless
I will therein show somewhat, and not so leave it, which is: to slit on stone on
the top, and after ye have drawn forth that, ye shall put in your fingers
at the same slit, and with your launcet slit the skin between the two stones,
and by that slit ye shall crush forth the other stone, and so draw him forth
gently as the other aforesaid: and and then to cleanse out the blood, and so
anoint him with fresh grease. And thus ye shall make but one incision or slit on
the codde. But this way is best for other cattle. For of all sorts of catel, a
boar may best be gelded being old. Also against certain sickness, they give
some remedies as hereafter shall follow.

The signs to know best when that your hogs have Fever in hogs.
the fever, is this. When they hang down their heads or hear it aside; or
when they in feeding and pastoring, do sodeinly run, and sodeinly rest
again, and so fall on the ground as they were astonished and giddie. Ye must
therefore mark which side he holds up or hangs his head, so that ye let
him blood on the ear on the other side: and ye shall also open the greatest
vain under his tail, two fingers from his rumpe or buttockes. But first ye
must chafe and beat it with some wande or twigge, that it may bleed the
better. Then if the infusion (after ye have drawn blood) do begin to
swell, ye shall close it together in binding about the tail, the bark of a
willow or of elm. And after this, ye shall keep him in the house the space
of a day or two, and ye shall give him as much warm water as he will
drinks, mixed with a pound of barley meal.

And also for those hogs which have impostumes or curnels Impostume under the
throat.
under their throats. They ought to be let blood under the tongue: and when ye
have drawn blood sufficient, ye must rub and chafe all his throat and
groine with salt, and pure wheat meal, beaten together. Some do say, there
is not a better medicine then to make them to take with a horn) six ounces of
garum, which ye shall lightly have at the Apothicaries. Then with a small
flaxen cord bind thereunto with ferules of wood, and let them so hang about
his neck, as they may touch the impostume and curnels, and they shall do well
again.

Also when as your hogs do cast or vomit, is a sign Against vomit.
their stomach is not well. Therefore ye shall give them gratings or shauings
of iuory, with a little of dride beaten salt. And ye shall beat their beans
small, and put them into the trough with their other meat before they go to
the field, and they will then remain the more in quiet there.

Also there comes sometimes a sickness amongst these Of a leanness in hogs.
beasts, so that many will be sick together, insomuch ye shall see them wax
lean therewith, and they will not then scantly eat any thing at all: and if ye
drive them to the pasture or field, they will reele and fall down by the way.
And if it take them in summer, they will lie and sleep in the sun all day,
and it takes them as they had litargie, (which is a sleepie Litargie in hogs.
and forgetful sickness) if this disease then happen, they shut up all their
hogs together in one house, and lets them there remain a day and a night,
without any meat or drink. On the next day after, to those that will drink,
they give them water, in the which is stamped the roots of wild cucumbers. And
so many as have drunk thereof, they will To vomit.
begin to vomit, and by so vomiting, they are purged clean thereof, and when
they have cast and cleansed all the choler and filth within their stomach, then
ye may give unto them, pease, fetches or beans, mixed with salt water, or to
cast of bay salt amongst it, and then they make them to drink luke warm
water. And as it is very evil and pernicious for all beasts (in summer) to be
dry, so is it most chiefly in hogs. Yet I would not have ye should give your
hogs water twice a day, as ye do other cattle, as goats, sheep, and others:
but if ye can in the canicular days, let them feed nigh some river, pondes,
or low marshes. For their heat is then so great, they cannot suffice them to
drink water only, but they must also turn and toss therein, specially in
myery and durtie water, the which does greatly refresh and cool them,
specially those which have fat and great bellies. And herein nature does
show them what is good for them.

But if the situation of the place will not suffer and permit, ye must then give
them largely drink from the well, or in such a like place, or else to put
plenty of water into their troughes. For if they have not then all sufficient
thereof to drink, they will have the disease of the lights, which is, to be
pursy, and ptisicke. But this disease is easily remedied by putting in their
ears the juice of pomeile, so calde in French. In Latin Consiligo, the which I
take to be the herb calde, light woort, or comphere.

Likewise your hogs oftentimes will have the pain of Milt pained.
the milt, which does often trouble them: and then they will go aside and crooked
with their bodies, which comes by a great drought as some do judge, but most
by fruit, for when fruits do fall from the trees, and lies on the ground
untaken up. These beasts are so insatiable in following the sweetness thereof,
that thereby they engender this disease in the spleen: The which ye shall
remedy it, by making them troughes to feed out of, of the wood in Latin calde
Tamarix, which as I think is calde in English quickbeme wood. And ye shall
therein use to give them their meat and drink, and that wood will remedy it.
For out of that wood, will come a water or moisture, which will heal the
inflammation of that disease. Sometimes there comes inflammations in the milt, so
that it breeds a pestilence among hogs, which comes by unwholesome times. And
also the rather by their filthy bodies and feeding, or else by some infection
through evil nourishment. Therefore it will be good sometime to keep them fasting
all a night in some dark place, to consume the superfluous humors in them,
which they do increase by their ravening and greedines. Which I will not here
leave, but to speak somewhat thereof hereafter.

Now as touching the unnatural kind of some of the sows, Sowes vnnat(...) rall.
there be in some kinds of the^ which are so rauining, they will not pass to
devour their own pigs, which comes clean against the nature of most cattle:
and those are not to be suffered to live, for they be always dangerous to
keep. Sowes may endure least hunger, and some of them although they have
sufficient meat, yet they will devour their young pigs, not only their own,
but likewise others. Therefore some does think it not good to nourish any hog
or sow, with the garbedge and inwardes of beasts, as they do in many places
feed them with guts and inwardes of beasts, as in butchers houses and such
like. Nor yet a man should not make any estimation of that hog or sow, that is,
desirous to feed on carrion or flesh. For the usual custom thereof, will make
them mankind: and by eating of dead carrion and other flesh, will at length
make them fall to catching quick cattle, and from thence to fall unto lively
creatures, as I have heard of credible persons, say, that sowes have taken
young children without the doors, as in barnes, being left alone. Some out of
their cradelles being no body in the house. Therefore let every husbandman
beware of the keeping of any such ravening kind of beast. For they are very
tender of nose, and will smell far off.

A hog is very hurtful after two or three years old, therefore kill him,
and if they fall once to eating flesh which To feed a hog fat.
is dead, they will soon fall to other alive, that whatsoever they do once
lay hold off, be it capon, chikin, ducke, lamb, or pigge, ye shall rather
kill them, or ye make them to leave, or to let it go. And this shall be
sufficient in this place for such ravening cattle.

A way how to feed a hog fat in short time, is, ye shall take him up, and put
him in the stye, and give him neither Measeld hogs to help.
meat nor drink, the space of three days and three nights, and then give
him continually, and let it be changed once or twice a week. And he shall be
so greedy after his great hunger, that he will always be hungry in eating so,
that he will be fat in short time.

A proved way to help your measeld hog, or boar is, ye shall put him up in
the stie, and keep him there three days and three nights without meat or
water, or any other thing. Then take flue or six apples, and in the tops
make a hole, and pick out the cores, and fill each apple in those holes with
the powder of brimstone very finely beaten: and stop the said holes with
pieces of apples, and cast them unto the measeld hog, first one or two, and so
the rest, and being so hungry he will eat them all, then let him so remain
two or three hours after, and then give him a little meat, and no more til the
next morning, and the next morning serve him so again, and give him five or
six apples as before mentioned. Thus use your hog the space of five or six
days, and ye shall see him wax as clean as ever he was before. Also they
do use for the same, to take the lees of soap, mixed with some strong lee of a
bucke, and gives of that, and use him as the other aforesaid, and give him no
meat of an hour or two after. And this (as some do say) is counted very
good to help the foresaid disease.

How to keep and save your hogs from being measeld, is this, ye shall use in
the summer, specially in the time of the To save them from measeld.
canicular days, or days of heat, which is from the midst of July, to the
midst of August. And in these times to give them chopped, (amongst their wash or
other meat) of cold herbs, as of lettis, endive, succory, violet leaves, of
daundelion, or sowthistle, fumitory, and such like, which are all cold helps,
and will keep them cool: or to chop amongst their meat the leaves of dwale,
which is very cold in operation. Therefore use thereof the less portion
amongst their meat. All these herbs aforesaid, are very good to keep them
cool. For the cause of measelly in a hog comes Cause of measelry.
through the great and vehement heat of his blood, or lying in horse dung, and
fleam together mixed with his blood, through heat is dride in his body, and so
lies in the outward parts of his body in curnels. And first they will appear
in the liver (through the heat of his stomach) at the roots of his tongue,
and in his throat: that when he do cry, he will rattle in his voice and cry
hoarse. By this ye shall first perceive his infection: and if ye do take forth
his tongue, ye shall perceive the curnels there under, and by this order ye may
perceive any measeld hog. Also (some do say) if you put mustard Mustard is ill
for hogs.
amongst your washings and give that unto your hogs, it will (to use much
thereof) cause them to be measeld at length, or such like which does much
heat their blood. Also to keep them from being measeld ye may use to put
amongst their wash, of men's urine, and mix with their wash also of red oker,
called red earth, beaten small to powder. This will likewise keep them from
being measeld. Soap water, and fish water is ill.

Whenever ye do entend to fat any hog, to give him dry meat is counted
chiefest, and give him to drink beer, Fatting a hog.
or ale and water: and ye must not let him go forth of the stye, not so much
as to see forth thereof, but to open the stye door and to make it clean: for a
hog when he may see forth, he will have so much desire to go abroad, that he
will have no care to feed. There is not so much care to be had in them, as in
other cattle, yet to keep them clean, they love to have it. And so to be fed
and not removed or changed into any other place, or by any other means
troubled: yet sometimes they are (in the stye) a little troubled with Mice in
the fly.
myce, in running on their backs, and so disquiets them in the stye: which ye
may soon help by setting of trappes, to take them always as they come. Thus
ye may feed them to be a foot and a half thick of fat in small time.

If your hogs have eaten any evil herb, as of henbane or hemblocks. To
remedy the same, ye shall give them to Hogs sick by ill herbs cating.
drink the juice of cucumbers, made warm, the which being drunk, will cause
them to vomit, and thereby they will cleanse their stomachs and so recover
health again. Some do use to give them aquauitie, and puts thereof into his
nosthrils, or in one of his ears, or to give him water and honey mixed together
with a good quantity, and that will cause him also to vomitte. For if it can
make them vomit, they will soon recover again. For by eating either of
henba^e or hemblocke, they are so cold in operation, they will cause the hog to
lie as though he were dead for a time, for they are very nigh unto a cold
venom. And the camelion thistle will kill them, to eat thereof. The herb
called goose foot, will also kill hogs.

Also if any of your hogs have the laske or runs out, to Laske to stop.
heal the same, ye shall give them of dride beans, and beaten small, and then
mixed with branne. Some do take and mixed therewith the powder of red earth, or
the powder of dride knot grass, or the powder of the hulles of acornes, or
acorne cups, and mix any of these aforesaid with these dride beans, and let
him eat thereof dride, and give him no drink of an hour after, and he shall
do well again.

These herbs are good and wholesome for hogs, daffadil Herbs good for hogs.
roots which are good to cleanse the lights of hogs. And knot grass the which
a hog loves marvelous well, and it binds the belly, and causes urine, and the
juice thereof put into his ear, will help the pain of the head. And all the
herbs before mentioned, are wholesome for hogs.

The garget is an ill grief and many dye thereof, which The garget in a hog.
is a swelling and inflammation in the throat behind the jaws of the hog, I
can learn no other remedy but this. They do use to slit it in the midst, as
long as the inflammation or sore is, and then flea up the skin on both sides
the slits, so far as the sore is, and then all to rub it with salt within,
and lays tar without, and so he recouers. Some rubbes it with nettles and
salt. Some with plantaine, with some burnt allume mixed. Other with the juice of
cuckospit, and salt and stubwort mixed, and rub it therewith.

There is a sickness in summer amongst hogs, which ye Sick hogs to know.
shall soonest know, by plucking a handful of his bristles on his back, and ye
shall pluck them against the hair. If (when ye have plucked them) they be
clean and white at the root, then he is well and sound: but if they seem at
the root bloody or spottie, it is to be noted, he is not then well within his
body.

Likewise hogs are subject often to the disease of the mylt, Disease of the
milt.
and likewise unto the pestilence, which increases by eating of unwholesome
meats and drinks, and by unwholesome times, for their bodies are apt to receive
ill aires, and soon corrupt, and most of all by their filthy feeding. They
are also subject unto fevers and agues, for the which thing, they let them
Pestilent fever.
blood on the tail. And for the catarre, or inflammation in the neck, growing
with certain curnels, which is thought to be a kind of lepre or measelry. For
the which thing, they let them blood under the tongue: if that will not help,
then ye must slit it and use it as ye do for the garget, which is before
mentioned.

Hogs will have the catarre or reume, it will make their eyes to water, and a
moisture ascending up into their heads, Catar in hogs.
and it comes to them commonly by eating of fruit when they fall off from the
trees, or when there is great store thereof, and by easing of rotten fruit,
which breeds a corrupt matter, nigh unto the plague. And likewise it does
increase catarres, and inflammations in the body. The remedy is, they do use
to give them of old capars, with their wash, or other meat, and they use also
to put amongst their meat, of colewortes, both read and white. And likewise
they put of Thamarix, which I take to be the quick beam tree, or the herb
called Amaranthus, which some do call flowers of love. And for the same, to
take of marsh mallows, and mix them among their meat, or for to take
liuerwoort boiled in honied water and given. All the other aforesaid are very
good to stay the reume or catarre.

Hogs will have also a disease in the gall, which is called the flowing of the
gall, and is when the gall is so full of choler, Flowing of the gall.
that it flows in all parts of the body. And besides, will cause a swelling
under the jaws of the swine. The remedy is, to stamp the inner bark of
elder, and strain it with ale or beer, and give it warm. Also some takes a
handful of gall woort, stamp it and strain it, and give it with honied
water. And for the swilling, they do rub and chafe it with beaten salt, and
pure wheat meal mixed together. And some do first cut the skin as before is
mentioned, in fleaing it on both sides, and then to rub it all over on both
sides with salt, and so lets it go, and it will heal so again.

Another way to help any hog, if he be not far gone Measell to help.
with the measels, to recover him again. Ye shall take your hog and put him
in the stye for a day and a night without any meat or drink. Then take a
quart of stale or old piss, or men's urine that has been kept long, and
therein put a good handful of red earth, or read oker, made in fine powder,
with a quarter of a pound of black soap: then stir and mix it with the piss
all well together, and then set it unto the hog, if he make dainty to drink
thereof, ye shall then put thereto a quantity of whay, if he will not yet take
it, then put in more whay, for so he will take it the sooner, if not, force him
to take it: and when he have all drunk it, let him so rest two or three
hours after, and then give him some other meat, not much: and so let him rest
without any more meat til the next morning, and then use him so again, and let
him have so every morning for a weeks space or more, as ye shall have cause
therein, and ye shall see experience good.

How best to feed a boore in the stall. Some do use to To feed a bore best.
give him of beans and pease, and sometimes for change, to give him dry
barley, with such like.

But if ye will have that your brawne shall feed well and be fair, white and
tender, ye shall give him no other thing, but fair branne and whay mixed
together somewhat thick: which will both feed your bore very well, and keep
him cool also from being measeld.

How best to ring your hogs in times convenient, and because hogs are commonly
ravening for their meat, more Ringing of hogs.
then other cattle, it is meet therefore to have them ringed, or else they will
do much hurt in digging and turning up corn fields, spoiling of meadows,
defacing of commons, moyling in parkes, turning up closes, disordering orchards
and gardens: and distroying all fine pasture for all other cattle. And in most
places for lack of good order and government. One neighbor, being negligent
and careless, spoils three or four of his neighbors grounds with his hogs,
more in a day, then can be repairde again in half a year. And the cause is
chiefly, for lack of ringing in time convenient, and they spoil and turn up
much fair commons and pasture grounds, in seeking for worms and roots,
having grass and feeding enough besides. One hog (as some do say) will turn up
and spoil as much pasture ground in a day, as will pasture ten beasts in ten
days, which is a great loss among poor men, that has the most feeding for
their cattle on the commons, to have so much pasture ground destroyed.
Wherefore the common saying is, the hog is never good, but when he is in the
dish. Proverb.


Therefore me thinks it shall not be here unmeet, to speak something more of
the ringing of them: wherein some men do use to peg them with pegs of holly,
or such like hard wood and horn, but this kind of pegging will not long
endure, for they will soon wear or break asunder. And some do ring them with
red wire, because they will not stand to any further cost, and that is also
soon worn asunder, for red wire is too soft. Others do put ringes of iron,
some with horse nails or strong white wire, in the groin of their snoutes, and
those are counted much better to endure, and yet for all those ringes they will
break the ground, if it be any whit soft: therefore it grieueth them smally as
it should seem.

And some others do slit their groine under, but when that is grown whole
again, they will also dig notwithstanding, for all these ways do smally
prevail, if they be not looked to from day to day. To cut the gristle asunder
is better.

Some do use (in the spring) to ring and also yoke their hog, at such time
as when they may feed or have bitte of grass, and so lettes them remain all
the summer, for tearing of hedges, which is thought not unmeet for the
sauegard of corn. Some others, do use to ring them at Michaelmas, and so lets
them remain, (if it be a year of mast) unto November or December, or killing
time, but they do fear hanging in hedges: they do unyoke them soon after
Michelmas. They do also in some places in Germany (as I have seen) ring them
from the spring all the summer unto December or killing time. So that all the
summer long, ye shall see no meadow ground broken or dug with hogs, except
some rings break or wear asunder: ye may there go a hundredth miles compass
ere ye shall see so much ground dug, and turned up with hogs, as ye shall do
here in one common or parish, and yet their hogs are as fat and as fair as
ours, and they have no other feed but grass, roots, and herbs in the fallow
fields. And I was there taught how to ring a hog yt The double ring.
he should lightly never dig or break any meadow ground, though it be light
and soft. Which is, ye shall take a good big white wier, and stiff withal,
being two or three inches long or more, according to the bigness of the hogs
snout, and make it sharp at both ends, and bow it staple wise with two
corners nigh an inch wide, then make two holes through his snout of the same
widenes, and put it up through the gristle of his snout, hard unto the bent of
the staple: then with a pair of plyers, bow and turn the points of the wire
into the holes of his nosthrils, like a ramines horn. So that when soever he
do offer to dig or turn up any thing, the sharp ends of the wire in
turning, will prick him always in the tender holes of his nosthrils: and so
they shall never dig, but still gaze on the ground continually from time to
time, and shall never offer to dig in any kind of ground, but seek still to
gaze. And yet to be at all times as fair as ours here in England, with now
and then giving them some meat at home, in their houses or sties, and somewhat
at putting forth in the morning, and also at coming home at night. Thus ye
may keep your common pasturing grounds always whole vnspoyld or turned up, and
your hogs to be in as good liking, with a little more pain and charge, as the
other vnringde. This kind of ringing hogs, shall be set in figure here under,
for the more perfect and further knowledge thereof. And this shall be
sufficient for the ringing of hogs in this sort. Also to ring hogs they
shall not dig, some does put a red paste wire under the skin of his snout,
an inche from the groine, and an inche broad, then wrethe it together on the
midst of his snout, and it is done. Some do use to cut asunder the sinowes
on both fides of his snout, a ninche from the groine: and when he would dig,
the groine of his nose will fall down.

The figure of ringing, like the Rams horn.


Here follows a very good way how to feed a Hog for larde.
FIrst, ye shall provide two plankes or thick bordes for him To feed a hog for
larde.
to lie on, or else to lie on pauing stones or pauement: and ye shall feed him
with barley and pease, and no beans, and give him no other water but the
tappings and washings of hogs heads. And sometimes ye shall change his meat,
and give him sodde barley, and so change his meat often, and when ye see he
begins to glut, which will be within ten days, Then to change his diet,
give him a handful of crabbes, and use him so once in ten days. But if ye
think it will be a loss or spoil of meat to give him much, ye may give it
him in a smaller vessel, and a little at once. If ye can make him drunk now and
then, that will make him to be a notable fat hog, within three months feeding.
But after one month some do feed him with pease, or dowe made of barley
meal, and feeds him therewith the space of five or six weeks and nothing
else, without any drink or other moisture, which is counted the chiefest way of
feeding. Thus much for the feeding of him.

How to kill him is thus, ye shall stick him and scalde him as ye do another
hog, and then cut off his head and his feet, and open him in the back, in
making a narrow chine, then open him and take forth his inwards, and then with
a cloth dry away clean all his blood within, and take forth the ribs as ye do
a balribbe, and cut off the gammons, and salt the fillets in a close vessel,
then close and cover it, that no air enter: and in nine days after, ye may
not touch or open it. Then cut all the rest in pieces as ye shall think best,
and salt them in a barrel with fair and dry white salt. Then when ye shall
need to take forth any piece to occupy or sell, put not the rest ye take forth
into the barrel again, for that will fester and hurt the rest. Therefore take
forth no more then ye occupy: and that piece ye take forth to occupy, will
serve and endure well three weeks, being lapte and covered with dry salt, and
ye may keep this larde so in barrel sweet and good, five or six years to
occupy.

Also the hogheards say, to help a measeld hog, give him Measeld to help.
dride pease and beans in the stie, and no drink but men's urine, and there by
using, it will make him clean.

Also hogs will covet to eat of men's dung, pigins dung, Ill for measels.
and hens or poultry dung, which also is ill for hogs, and will increase a
measell among them, and likewise other diseases, and to lie in horse dung, is
ill for them.

For the staggars in a hog, give him of the herb called Staggars.
stare woort, or gall woort in milk, and he shall amend.

Pigges that are farroed with teeth, the males of them Aristotle's sayings.
passing three years, do not well engender. A hog dies and pineth away, if
he leese one eye. A hog will live xvi. or xx. years. Hogs have many sicknesses
in their heads and sides, and being ficke, they will commonly lie in dirtie
puddles, and commonly they will lie more on the right side, then on the left. If
ye keep them without meat three days at the first, they will be fat within
forty days. They love each other, and know each others voice, and if one cry,
they will cry all, and will help one another. They grunt sleeping and waking, if
they be fat. And they sleep faster in May, then at other times: and that
comes of mourning or stopping of the brains in that time, more then in other
times. They resolve in summer many humors, in wasting it by too much heat. And
hogs change not their teeth, neither male, nor female. A boar will gender
within the first year, or being of eight months old: and the sow at a year
old. But those pigs will be but weak and feeble, and the first pigs of a sow
will be slender of body. And if she be fat, her milk will be more scarce. The
winter pigs are better the^ the somer pigs: and those of young sowes, worse
then those of old sowes. A lusty Winter pigs.
and fat boar may engender many times, both in the day and night, and best
time is in the morning. When a sow farroeth, she gives to the first pig the
farmost teate. And a sow in going to the boar again, she will not suffer him
to cover her, until her ears hang downward. To make them go to brimme or
take the boar, it shall be good to give them of barley, which will make them take
the boar, and to give them of sod barley, the better for her. Hogs commonly
has three evils, one is Brancos,

The other is impostumes in their ears, and iowles. And the third is in the
feet: and the flesh about those places Diseases in hogs.
is most corrupt, and that corruption passes by some and some, into the flesh
near unto it, and so to his lunges, and stops them: and then the hog will
die. This evil increases sodeinly. And therefore hogheards do cut away the
place first infected, which otherwise will not be helped or held but by cutting.

They have also another sickness, which is, great ache and heaviness in their
heads, and thereby commonly dies. Ache in their heales.
Another sickness they have, which is, the flux of the belly, (which I have
partly showed before) and is a disease hard to remedy. For often it kills
them within three days, Great swine do delight to eat berries, as floes and
blackberries, which does them good. They also ye delight to bathe them in warm
waters. They are commonly let blood to help them, on the vain under the tongue,
and they are made fat with diverse kinds of meats, but some do make them fwel.
Some engenders flesh, and some grease and fatnes. And hogs delighte in acorns,
which makes them to have good flesh. If a sow being with pig eat much thereof, it
makes them cast their pigs.

For disines in their heads, chop mowseare, and nightshade, Mistrisse Risley.
and put it among their wash, and they shall mend.

To put and choppe of cold herbs all the summer into Cold herbs in summer.
their wash, and give it them amongst their meat, as lettise, endive,
succorie, daundelion, cinckfoile, sowthistle, and such like. Elm leaves in the
spring, are good to give unto hogs Elm leaves for hogs.
when there is scant of grass or other meat. But to give them much thereof,
may bring them into a ^^ix. Therefore to use all their meats discreetly, it
shall do best, and so shall ye keep them long in health. Helion recites in
his history, Henbane.
that hogs and wild boares eating of henbane, will sodoinly fall in a sound,
and are in danger to die, if incontinent they be not washed all over with
water, and to drink water also. Whereupon they will seek water and so
recouereth again: against which, woormwood is good to give them with wine or
strong ale.

To feed or fat hogs (as some husbands says) with such Hogs grease.
things which will alter their grease, as to feed them with barley, it will fat
and soon puff them up, but their grease will be soft and wastfull. To feed
hogs also with acorns, or beech mast, oaks, and fetches does the like, and all
other grain, except beans and pease, which will make them to have a hard and
a fast grease, to be fed only therewith.

Another proved way to help a measeld bore or hog is: Ye shall first search
them before ye put them up to be fed, and Measeld to help.
then see, if they be not clean, Take and warm a pint or more of cow milk,
and mixed therewith so much gray soap as a great tenise ball, and stir it then
well altogether til it be all alike. And being milk warm, give it to your
boar or hog, with a horn, and make him of force to take it, in striking it
down his throat til he have received all. Then chafe and stir him an hours
space after, for fear of casting it up again, use him thus three or four
days or more, until ye shall see him clean, and then ye may put him up to fat,
and they shall do well.

And also to make a hog to scour, they do use to give Hogs to scour.
him of smoaked barley in the straw, as it is also showed for the whethering of
a cow to help.

Also if your hogs be lousie, which will come unto them through poverty, and
lack of good keeping in winter. And Lice to kill.
so long as they be lousie, they will not prosper. The remedy is, ye shall take
of quicksiluer, and kill it with sallet oil and fasting spittell, then mixed
therewith of fresh grease, or neats foot oil, and so anoint them all over.
Some meltes soap and tar together, with the powder of stauesacre, and
therewith anoints them. And other some do take but quicksiluer and soap mixed
well together, and so anointes therewith: for lyce will keep them lean.

Moreover, if a hog chance to be sore bitten of dogs in Hog bitten.
any part of his body or legs, and thereon do swell, and like to come to an
impostume, to avoid the danger thereof, ye shall all to wash the wound
betimes, with stale, salt, and nettles bruised, or vinegar and mallows, boilde
together, with some hogs grease put thereto: and therewith all to bathe the
sore, then anoint it with tar and fresh grease mixed well together, and he
shall do well. Use this as ye shall see cause.

A bathe for Swine that have the swine pockes.
THe swine pockes in hogs is an ill sore, for it will run abroad, and is a
scabbe very grievous. They come to hogs sometimes by poverty, sometimes by
lise in the skin, and when hogs have them, they will never prosper so long as
they have them. And one will infect another of them. The remedies. Some do use
to give them the powder of brimstone with stale. A bathe to wash them is this.
Take yarrow, plaintaine, primrose leaves, bryar leaves, old oken leaves of a
year, of water bittonis, of each two handfuls, boil them in two gallons of
runnning water, till they are all tender: and then all to wash your hogs or
pigs therewith, and use this once or more, and it will dry them up: for it is
but a corrupt water, being between the flesh and the skin, and so grows to
a scabbe.

How to spaye a Sow.
YE shall first lay her upon some form or boarde, then bind her mouth close
with some cord, then lay her on her right side, so that her left side be
upward: and then take your launcet and streepe away the hair two inches long,
three fingers from the hinder leg, and likewise from the edge of her flank:
then with the point of your launcet cut a flope her belly through the skin
two inches long, and a half, so that you may put in your fore finger toward
her back: and there you shall feel two curnels as big as acornes, on both
sides the birth, and with the top of your finger, hook or draw the one to
the slitte: then cut the string with your knife, and so take forth the other
likewise. If then ye can not easily find them, ye shall with your finger draw
softly forth some of the small trailes, and so ye shall find them, and then cut
them off, and put in the trayles with your finger again: then strike away the
blood, and stitch up the slit again with a strong threede, but beware her
guts, and then anoint thereon with tar, and so let her go.

And they do use to geld young Boares, in holding Gelding (...) Bore.
them betwixt their knees, the Boares rump upward, and resting upon his fore
feet, and then puts out the right stone, and cuts it cross over the stone on
the midst, and so pushes it forth, and cuts of the string at the right end: and
so do likewise with the left stone, and then anoint them with tar thereon,
and let him go: and they shall do well.

The manner of spaying of Coltes, Sheep, and Sowes, whereof I will briefly
speak somewhat more.
YE shall understand that Mare coltes are commonly spayed within nine days
after they are fold, if they be older it is not so good, for they say in
spaying it will be the harder to reach with his finger and to do that thing
well: for in taking forth the birth, if it perish, the colt will die soon after.

Also in spaying a yeawe is dangerous, if ye hurt the bag of birth, or
perish any part of her tallow, she is like to die soon after. The spaying of
a Sow, is not so dangerous as the other, but may eastlie be done in taking
good heed. Also in the spaying of these cattle, when ye have cut the flank
toward the hinder ribs two fingers long slopewise, ye shall put and feels
with your forefinger, on both sides the bag or birth certain knots like
kyrnels or clusters like grapes, which do cleave to both the sids of the bag
or birth under the raines or rumpe, which ye shall touch them with your
forefinger, and lay them down softly to the wound, and so pluck them out
and cut it off, and cast it away, which is but a small string they hang by.

Thus shall ye do in likewise to the other side of the bag, or birth, when
they be out, cut of the string and it is done. If ye perish the bag or birth,
she will soon die after, what beast so ever it be. Ye shall note also in the
stitching up the wound, if ye stitch the guts withal, she will die soon after
(as I have seen) except she be soon ripped and stitched again, which is done
by rash spayers of beasts in stitching ye guts and the skin together, and so
the beasts will pine away, and die within few days after. Thus much here I
have seen and learned for the spaying of these cattle.

Also the nature and ordering of Hogs.
ASow will have pigges at a year old, and she will continue good six years,
and when she is with pig, ye shall put the bore from her, for he will hurt the
pigs in her belly, and make her to cast them. The bore will brim, at six
months old, at eight months, and after three or feure years ye may gelde
him. A Sow should not bring up above six or eight pigs, to bring up more: it
will make her soon fail. A Sow great with pig ought to have sties by
themselves. For if a sow do eat her pigs it is no wonder, for swine can least
away with hunger, for they are hoate beasts, a sow should not go abroad in
nine or ten days after her farrowing, ye wrinckled tails of hogs, is sign of
sound hogs. Also after ye cut or geld, give them no drink, and but a little
meat. In spaying, look that the skin be sound, just, and close up, and then
anoint it with a little fresh grease, or fresh butter, note also, if ye pluck
bristles on the back of a hog, if there be blood in the ends thereof, he is
not then in health.

If a hog be sick of a fever, he will hang his head on the one side, and
sudden stay, be giddy and fall, Mark which side he holds his head, then cut
his contrary ear, and let him bleed. Likewise two inches from the rumpe,
let him blood under the tail, but first with a small wande beat his tail,
and then he will bleed the better. Which blood ye shall stop with the bark of
willow bound about it, so keep him in the stie a day or two after, and give
him warm water mixed with Barley flower. When a Hog is not well, give him
Polypody or Oak fern roots boiled in beer or ale, for that will purge him of
phlegm, and some choler, which commonly swine are most troubled withal. Against
sickness of the lungs, put the root of Fetterwoort through their ears, and it
will help them against the mezell. Some husbands say, if ye nail plates of
led in the bottom within their troughes, it will preserve and keep them from
being meazell. Also the common medicine, is alum brimstone, red oaker, and Bay
beries, of each like, and put thereto a handful of hare foot, beaten
altogether with some madder, and put al into a bag, and cast it into their
water or wash which they drink, and so renew it twice a year.

Moreover, some husbands hold opinion that the mezelry to hogs comes not only
through heat in Summer, but chiefly by poverty in Winter: also they say, if a
clean bore do brimme a meazell sow, he shall become meazell, so like wise a
clean sow being brimde with a mexell Bore, she shall likewise become meazel,
and all those piggs. The best time to kill a mezel bore, or hog, is after the
changes of the moon. For then the curnils will show smallest.

Also they do feed hogs in some part of this Realm very Feeding of hogs in
styes.
fat, only with fig dust of Dates, which will feed them in short space,
some do mix it with warm water, some with whay, and some do sees it with
water, and make it thick like a groute, and in other places husbands do
fat their hogs, whereas scant of feeding is, with pease, and they reserve in
leasing their corn after harvest all the charse, darnell, and cockell, which
they sees in water, and make it thick, and so feed them therewith. Thus ye
may make in 14. days good bako^, of two inches and more thick of fat.

Also there is to be noted, (as some good husbands say,) if ye do fat your
hogs in a closure abroad without housing, it will be long ear they wax
fat, for when a rain does come, it does greatly annoye them and hinder
their fatting, for if a hog lie not dry, and warm, and also quiet: he will
not be fat, in a long season.

Therefore when ye do intend for to fat hogs, put not past two or three
at once together in the stye, for when ye put many together, one fights with
another, both at meat and in lying, which will hinder their fatting. And also
to keep them as dark in the stie as ye can. For when a hog may see abroad, he
will remember and long for pasture, and is desirous to seek for worms and
roots, which will also hinder their feding. Thus much here for the feeding, and
ordering or fatting hogs in the sties.

A good way to fat hogs after the manner of Duchland.
YE shall put your hogs into the house, and keep them hungry at the first.
Then take the roots of turnepes, and boil them in whay, if ye can. If not,
in water: and boil therewith of barley, and give them the roots a few at
once, with sodde barley among. And when your hogs are used to them, they will
eat them as fast as other meat, and they will be as soon fat with them, as
any other grain.

To help the garget in a hog.
THe garget is a disease commonly among hogs, and as some husbands do say,
it comes of ranknes of blood and they commonly have it in winter as well as in
summer. The best remedy is as aforesaid, but some do counsel it best to slit
him two inches long on both sides of his jaws, and then open the skin a
little on both sides the cuttes, and then all to rub it with bay salt within
under the skin, and he will do well again.

If then the flies be busy, ye shall lay a little of tar all over thereon,
and he shall do well.

All some husbands do teach to save hogs from the Let blood.
said garget, they use to let them blood at Michaelmas, and in April, on the
baine under the upper lip. For that is the chosen place to help hogs, if
they droupe, or wax sick.

To preserve hogs and save them from being meazell.
YE shall mix with their wash, or whay (in the month of June) Of chamberlye
and madder, and so give thereof unto your hogs, and use it now and then once
or twice a week, and it will preserve them all that Summer, from being mezel,
which cause I have showed before.

If a hog be bitten of a mad dog.
YE shall take of strong chamberlie, and mix it with bay salt, and soote of
the chimney, and put therein an addle egg or two, then beat them with a stick
altogether, and make it boil a little, then rub the place that is bit, as
hoate as ye may well suffer for scalding with a stick, and a cloute tide on
the end thereof. Use this twice or thrice and he shall do well.

And this will help likewise, for other beasts that are bit with any mad dogs.

The whole footed hogs.
THere is also a kind of hogs in diverse places which has whole claws, not
cloven as other hogs be. Which kind is commonly very large of body and bigger
commonly than other hogs, and the husbandman says, they are more fruitfuller
than the hogs with cloven feet, and will not lightly be mezeld. Therefore they
are in many places much desired of, rather than the other sort. There is of
them about Winsor.

Brimming of Sowes.
IT is not so good (as some hogheards say) for any bore, to brim or cover a
sow in the night time, as in the day, for they will not be so large pigs nor yet
like so well, as those which are gotten in the day.

The cause of some Rammish pigs.
YE shall note, if that ye put and stall a bore in any stie, if ye put in young
pigs into the same sty: soon after, all those pigs will taste rammish, like a
Bore pigge to be eaten.

To kill Magots.
IF Magots do breed in the ears of hogs after the biting of dogs, or by any
other occasion of their bodies, or likewise any other beast, ye shall take but
honye, and put it in that place, and all the magots there will dye, or else avoid
incontinent, if they live. Well proved.

Another for the same.
IF magots breed in the ear of a hog, or other beast, or in any hollow place
under the skin, ye shall take the juice of hemlocke, and pour it into the
hole, and they will die or avoid, and a rotten egg, mixed with the said
juice, will do the like, or the egg alone beaten and powered in, and the egg
addle, is good for the ranckline, or venom of some dogs tooth, after he has
bitten a beast, to anoint with the said egg.

The stagger or staring disease.
HOgs will have a disease called the stare or Stagger, he will reele and fall
with his hinder legs often, and will put his head sometimes over his trough, in
eating his meat if he have not soon help: he will pine and die thereof. The
remedy, ye shall see a hard knobbe in the roof of his mouth like a blister,
cut it, and let it bleed, then take the powder of lome and salt, and rub it
therewith, then give him a little piss and so he will amend.

To show some order for the taking of Moules.
For So Much as I have heretofore showed the order and government of hogs, I
will not here let pass, but somewhat I will show of the taking of moules, which
is a beast that annoyeth the grounds of husbandmen very much, and having ye
property to dig and cast within the ground, as the other hogs on the ground,
and thereby they may be called a kind of hogs, which may be eaten also. These
kind be so hurtful to grounds, that they will in short space deface and spoil
any fair medowe or other ground, if they be let alone, in casting up hills
both in medes and all pasture grounds. And likewise in your corn fields, in
raising the errable and sowed grounds, that your corn can take no root in
those places, and in feeding also of the said roots of corn, and making
therewith their nestes in the spring time, as I have seen. There is no ground
void but they will soon find it out, although it be compassed with water,
for they wilswim as well as other hogs over the water. And come into Gardens,
Orchardes, and houses: and because that husbands with many other have the
government of such grounds, and do not well know the order and taking of
them, whereby many are hurt in then grounds and greatly hindered by them, in
lacking ye knowledge thereof how to take them. Therefore I have here taken upon
me to show somewhat of that order and taking of them, so far as I have known
and understand by others, as shall appear in their places.

To take moules casting in plains.
WHereas moules do cast commonly in plains, medes and such like, if ye should
there take them in trenches, ye should spill much ground in breaking the upper
part thereof. Therefore as some do say, the better way is, where ye see them
cast^, go thereunto lightly and very softly, but go not on the wind side
between them and the wind: For they will soon vent, and hear if ye stamp on
the ground, in coming softly be ready with your mole staff to strike at the
first or second putting up the earth, and strike it with your tines down
right, and mark which way the earth falls mast, if she cast toward you,
then strike somewhat over. If she cast up toward your right hand, then strike
somewhat on the left, and so of the other contrary to her casting up. And by
this means ye shall be always the more likely to strike her. In plain ground
strike down right, and when ye have so stricken down with your tines of your
staff, ye shall so let them remain in the earth. Then pluck out the thong
in the staff that holds the grains, and then take of your staff, and with
the spittle or flat end thereof, dig round about your grains unto the ends
thereof, and there ye shall see if ye have stricken her or not: But if ye have
mist her, leave the hole open and go a little aside, and possibly she will
soon come again to stop the said hole, and then strike at her again. For a
mole loves not greatly to have the air. Or else as soon as ye have stricken and
mist her, if her hole go downward, ye shall pour into the hole a gallon of
water by and by, and thereby sometimes she will come out against the water, for
fear of drawning, and so ye may take them alive or kill them. By this means
ye may take many the sooner, and save your grounds from spoiling, in taking a
little pains, in watching the times of their going forth in the morning to
feed, and also at other times coming home, when they have fed.

How to take moules after the plough.
TO take moules after the plough: Some husbands do teach us thus, ye must
prepare a sledde or dray, with a great vessel full of water thereon, and have
it at your lands ends where ye plow, and then let one go ever after the
plow, and where ye see any moule holes newly cast, being opened with a plow, ye
shall pour therein your pitchards of water, and by and by ye shall see the
moule (if she cannot fly) come out against the water, and so ye may then kill
them. And thus ye may also destroy many moules in your crable lands: which
being let alone they will do you much harm, both in eating the roots, and
stalks of your tender corn, and to make their nests there within the spring
time. Also when as the moules do cast in your corn lands, in the spring time,
or at other times: the best way is the^ to make your trenches, and so to take
them, as after shall be showed more plainly.

How to take moules that run shallow in the ground.
TO take them when they run shallow is commonly in the spring time, and at
other times of the year after a rain when the ground is soft, but in the
spring time specially, as in March, and April. Then the moules will run most
above and dig very shallow in the ground: and will work so a long space, by
bank sides and in the wrodtes of carts: and where ye shall see any such
newly wrought, ye shall but tread it down all along softly, and then watch at
her accustomed hours when she comes abroad, and ye shall see her work and
stir up the earth in the said trench. Thus ye may go from trench to trench.
They will commonly work early in the morning, and in the spring between six
a clock and eight, and at a leaven, and in the after noone, about three or
four, and some time at seven a clock.

Then must ye watch diligently, and hearken, and ye shall either hear her work
in the ground, or else ye shall see her move the earth in the trench where she
goes and comes. Then shall ye choppe down your broad end of your staff
cross the hole behind her, and with your foot before her, so stop the way
behind with your staff, and before with your foot, and so to take her up with
your spittle. For if ye stop not first her way behind, she will suddenly
run as fast backward as she will forward, and so will pass out at the end
she came in, if it be open she will bolte out thereat, and in at another, and
so ye may soon come to loose her.

Therefore some do think it better to do this, that when ye shall see her in
any such shallowe trench being trodden down, then she must make still her way
forward: Then look where ye see her, suffer her to come forward well in the
trench, before ye stop her way: then do no more but chop your moule spade,
cross behind your staff, with your foot, and then take and cast her up.

How to take moules in bush grounds, and also other grounds, as forest,
parkes, and such.
THe best taking of moules in rough grounds and most surest way is, to make
trenches and take them therein, as thus: whereas ye do see any moule has
newlye cast, ye shall there make a trench four inches broad, and so long as
ye think good, and there open the earth on both sides, and cast it up, so
deep as she has gone. Then make it fine and choppe it small and put thereof
in again and tread it down softly with your foot in the trench, but not to
hard upon it, for so ye may cause her to forsake the said trench, when it is
trodden down to hard, and she will then take some other way. Thus ye must use
your trenches, in making so many as ye shall think good in what ground ye
will: ye may make your trenches of what length ye list, from a foot to four
foot long. So done. Then must ye take some pains (as before said) in watching
their hours when they come abroad, which (as I have said) is commonly in the
morning by sun rising or soon upon. And in March, and April, they will be
coming home by 8. or 9. a clock, and sometimes about a 11. a clock, and they
will come abroad again about 3. or 4. a clock at after noone. Thus ye must
watch and mark in each ground, what time they do use to come and go.

Also in dry and hot weather a mole will seldom come abroad, but in the
morning, and so remain til the next morning. But against moist wether, or
after a rain, they will come most abroad twice a day, before and after noone:
and they will work very much, if the ground be not to moist: and in frostie
weather then they cannot work abroad, but they work under the roots of trees,
and in thick hedges and bushes.

How to know their succors.
IN winter and wet times, they will lie most in dry banks of hedges, in hills,
and under roots of trees, and will come from thence every morning to feed, and
go abroad (if it be dry) x. or xii. score of from their holds, and when they
have fed an hour or two, they will return home again. Then must ye mark
where they have been, and there make your trenches, or chop the earth down
(with your spittle or broad end of your mole staff) which she has raised
before and past through: there tread it down with your foot in your trenches
so long as they be, or so far as she has raised the earth, and the longer ye
make your trenches, the longer she will be in passing through when she comes
into it. Ye may make and place your trenches where ye shall think best in
the grounds. If ye make your trench nie their holds, it shall do best to take
them in going out, or coming home, For there you shall be most sure to have
them. If a field be viii. or x. acres, ye may make therein so many trenches as
ye shall seem good: along by the hedges side or nie the banks and roots of
trees shall be best: For there shall ye soonest take them.

Also where as you make your trenches far asunder, while perhaps ye go to one,
they will pass through an other, and so for that time escape, if ye have no
help but your self, ye shall so loose many. The best way therefore is, when
ye have trodden down your trenches with your foot softly, then ye shall
prick white small twigs at the ends of your said tre^ches, and prick them so
shallow, that they may fall by a little moving of the earth when the mole is
in the trench: and by those falling ye shall see being a good way of when she
is in the trench. Then ye may come softly (on the lie side) and chop down
your mole spade cross behind her, and thrust down the earth with your foot
there behind your spade, and then take your mole spade and cast her up: For
sometimes she will lie still, when she sees she cannot go away. If your
trenches be short, ye may prick a wand in the mids thereof, which will show
when she is half through, which wandes are called watches, for they will tell
you when she is in the trench. This way ye may take them most surest in
trenches in all places where ye shall think good. Then tread down your trench
again, and so ye may take diverse one after an other in one trench.

How to know in the spring, the nestes, where moules do breed.
YE shall understand (as some farmers do say) moles do breed but once a year,
and that is in the spring: about March, and April, they go to bucke, and
commonly about S. Marks day they do kindle, and will have young.

Therefore from mid March, ye shall view your grounds, where ye may see any
great and high hills, for commonly there they will breed, which hills ye shall
see, both of old and new cast, and commonly they which are new cast, they make
their nests in the mids thereof very low, much like the field mouse, and some
will make them in the hedge sides, and in bushes: some in plain fields viii.
score from any bush or hedge, casting a great hill as big as two barrow
stils. And if ye then let them alone till the end of April, soon after S.
Marks day, ye may then possibly take all the young in the nest, and then after
ye may watch the trench for their dam, for she will come unto them to seek them.

Also ye may trench for the female about her nest, a pretty way of, and so ye
may possibly take her, in coming and going to her nest, before she do kindle:
For if ye spoil her nest, before he have kindled, she will then go far of and
breed in some other place, which ye shall hardly find, or come to take her,
and then when she has young, she will be very subtle for to take, and she will
beat her young from place to place, and will not suffer them to bolte nor yet
work shallow: Therefore, it will be the more harder to take them, and she will
commonly have at a time vi. or vii. young.

Likewise all the winter, they will cast against moist weather very much: both
in November, and December being wet and warm withal: and because the days are
short, and the nights long, they will be sturring very early in the morning
sometimes before day light, and late toward night. Therefore ye must watch
their times accordingly when they go out and come home again.

Moules to be driven from place to place.
THere be some which have said, ye may drive moules out of one ground into
another, and there to take them, which is, ye shall open their holes whereas
they have newly cast, and then ye shall have stamped garlic ready wrapped in
cloutes of linen, and so put into their holes, made of the bigness of a walnut,
and put so into the holes at both the open ends thereof, and cover the holes
again, and the strong savor thereof will cause the moules to void from those
places: and by such means (in using the holes as before said) ye may drive them
from one ground to another, and from place to place. Some do use tar, some
laurel, some galwoort or elder stamped, some gabanum fumed in holes, or any
such strong thing of sa^^or, which will cause them to fly from thence or those
places so fumed, and ever where ye see her work, still fume that place, and so
ye shall soon drive them away.

How to take moules in pots, set in the earth.
THey do teach also how to take moules in pots of earth, which pots ye shall
set within the ground in their traces or holles where they have gone before, so
that your pots brinke must so be set, that it be even with the nether part of
the trench or trace of the moule. Some do cover the pots with turfes of earth:
but let there be no more of the pots brim uncovered, but the breadth of her
trace in the tre^ch or two inches. Some do use to put a live moule into those
pots, or into each pot one: For when they do gender (in the spring) the buckes
will hunt after the doaes, and the doaes will seek the buckes, and then they
will run about on the ground one after the other. And those moules which are
in pots and cannot come out will cry, and the rest will hear and wind them, and
so fall unto them in the pots, and there they will cry and fight together.

Again some do counsel in the gendring time to lead or draw a bich moule with
a string about the ground where the pots are set, and so put her into one of
your pots, and the bucke moules will find her out by the trace, and so take in
the said pots, but ye must not tread nie her trare, for the^ they will not
follow her: And by this means ye may take many in the spring time with pots.
And to know which way a mole has gone, ye shall open her trench a foot or more,
and then tread it light down with your foot, and in the ^^ds of her trench ye
shall set down a small stick to the bottom of her trench, and let your stick
be three inches without the earth or more. If she come in, the top of ye stick
will fall backware, and if she go out, the stick will fall inward. Thus may ye
know which way she is gone. Again I have hard, in a garden where as the earth
is soft, yt when the mole does east, at the second putting up he will thrust in
his bare hand and so take them up. Also, where as you shall see moles to make
their passage under the earth in woods, and rough grounds, in crossing foot
paths, or between bushes, banks, and such: where ye shall see any such earth
cast up: there commonly they haunt to go and come daily, wherein ye shall do no
more but tread that earth softly down with your foot, or chop it down with
your mole staff and so tread with your foot down softly again, and make your
trenchso long as ye may feel easily her passage. For the longer it is trod
down, the longer they will be in passing through: so there ye need make no other
trenches to take them in, but those, For this order shall do as well as need, if
ye watch their times.

Thus ye may distroy them in woods, and rough grounds in a small time with
taking some pain. And when a mole is in the trench, and does work, if it be
hard trod down, she will go back and come again once or twice, and perhaps
forsake it. But let her come a good way in the trench, then clappe your staff,
or chop your heel behind her quickly, and the^ cast her up: for they will
lightly turn back, if they wind you, or hear you stamp. Moreover if ye can
bring up a curre, to go with you when ye take them, and so to nosill him
therewith, he will then take pleasure in killing them, and he will find in any
ground three moles against your one. For he will smell and show you where the
mole is, which thing I have seen going by the way side. There is also a trap
to take moles in coming or going at all times: Which engine, ye may see in my
books of traps and engines. Thus much for the taking of moles in all grounds.

FINIS.
For so much as the dog is a very necessary beast for the husbandman, as well
as others, some to profit him, and some to disprofit him, as mad dogs, and
other, whereof I will somewhat speak briefly, and so make an end.
I In hounds and dogs which fall mad, the cause is, the burnt choler has
the mastrie in his body: which choler being once roasted in them through
vehement heat, it ouercometh the body, and makes him to run mad. For the
black choler which is so strong, it fumeth up in his head, infecteth the
brain, and so from thence goes to all the other members and makes them
venomous.

Therefore if any person be bit with a mad dog, it is the venomous spittle
of the dogs heat that does infect: And the venom of him which does bite, is
drawn to the like place wherewith he biteth, which is the brain, and there it
works and makes the dog run mad, and if he bite any other person, it
makes him mad also: and such venom is perilous. For in some persons it is a
year hid or it be known, and lightly about the same day it was bitten, the
same day twelve month it comes unto his head; and therewith he goes mad,
and commonly hounds will bark at a mad dog, for they perceive, and will
rather fly him, then to come to him: and this madness among dogs, chances
and falls most in harvest, and canicular days, and days of heat.

His tongue is so venomous that it makes him to reele and stagger, and to
run about gaping and driueling in holding down his tail always, and
hanging out his tongue. If his driueling fall into any water, it infecteth the
same, and who so drinks thereof, is in great danger of being mad.

And the signs after the biting of a mad dog in a man is: They shall have in
their sleep fearful dreams and sights, and anger without cause, and they
will seem to bark like a dog, and fears to be seen of others: And they
fear water most, and be very dainty in all things, which are doubtful
signs to cure. For of him that is bitten, the venom goes from the bitten
place to the heart, and from thence to the head, and so to all members as
aforesaid: and the humor is more moist and perilous. And it is also dangerous
to touch those bodies infected, because the vaporation and vehemency of the
venom, and they will corrupt all things near unto them.

Note also, that if venom be taken by meats or drinks, these signs do
follow, the crampe follows very strongly, with swelling in the fingers and
nails, which is a deadlye sign. Or if he also gape, and driuell, his lips
do smart and tingle, or feel a heat in his tongue, without any swelling and
being vexed straightly about the heart, his eyes wax dim and dark. When these
signs are, it is time to make have, or death comes soon after.

The general remedy and medicine is to vomit, or to take a glister to bring it
down. Then take of triacle, and wine that Sowthistle is sodde in: Then must he
be purged, and bathed, and let blood at the last. And his diet shall be fat
meats, with fulbards er small nuts, with dry figs, which is also good to
draw, consume and wast venom. Balsamum with woman's milk helps against the
burning and sore ach thereof. Triacle forti^eth the body, and wastes venom.
If triacle cannot be gotten, then take garlic sod in broth with a fat
hen, and drink thereof, for garlic is contrary to venom, and does aswage
the inner burning thereof, and therefore it is called, the husbandmans triacle.

Also if one be bitten with a mad dog, take a cock or a hen, and kill him, and
slit him straight, and all hot clappe it to the place, and it will suck and
draw out the venom. The drawers of venowe are these, the flesh of a snake, or
adder, cut and laid to straight. Also calamint, the seed of wild tares, called
orobancke. Sea onions, water cresses, herb grace, salt, Aristolochia nuts
eat with rue, the roots of a sperage and the seed also. Balsamum, dinegar, and
the milk of an ass, a childs piss, the stones of a hedgehog, the stones of
a stagge, or an ass, dride and drunk. Also castoreum, garlic, gencian, mint,
dittan. All these before said are good against venom, and others without
number: and although the danger of venom comes many and sundry ways:
therefore God of his goodness has provided sundry helps and remedies. A good
way to help the biting of any beast, sheep or other, with a mad dog, or other
venomous beast, Which is, ye shall cut the wound and make it to bleed, that the
venom with the blood may thereby come forth. Some do use to put to lech
worms, to suck out the blood, and to cup or box it, and to give them
triacle, and lay to the wounds plasters, as nuts mixed with garlic, rue and
salt all together, and also nuts alone chewed and laid to the place, and also
triacle with water, of creues of the river made in powder, and drunk: or the
ashes of the said creuis with gentian, is a singular remedy against the biting
of a mad dog. Likewise the juice of caprisolium, called woodbind. Also the
leaves of the wild fig tree: onions and salt, or mint stamped like wise with
salt, and laid to, every one of these aforesaid laid to, and mixed with
vinegar or honey, are sufficient to help against the biting of a Mad dog, or
stinging of other venomous worms: but a perfect remedy is, the oil wherein a
Scorpion has been drowned, and therein also is sod, and thereof a piece laid
to the place infected, does help.

Other remedies against the biting of a mad dog. A singular remedy, which
is, to burn the flowers of hany suckles, or three leaued grass, mix it with
elde grease, and lay it to: Or to beat the said flowers with old white
wine, and give it him. Also the roots of eglintine made in powder and laid
thereon: or to make him a drink it with good old white wine. Another: the
horses of elder, or the juice of the leaves to be given with wine luke warm.
Also the juice of plantaine given to drink, or stamped with salt and laid to.
Or the root of the great burre bruised with a little salt and laid to, does
destroy venom incontinent. Again, the strong nettle bruised with salt, and
laid thereon. Or selandine, drunk with wine, and stamped with salt and laid to.
Or the leaves of horehound stamped and laid to with salt. All these are
special good against the biting of a mad dog. If a mad dog do bite other
hounds or hogs, ye shall give them the juice of plantaine, and let them
blood, and it will help them, but mix it with a little milk, and so give it.

Remedies and medicines to help mangy dogs, as well in their ears, as also
other parts of their bodies.
IN summer commonly the ears of dogs are sore troubled with ulcers, scabbes,
and flease, that many are marde thereby. The remedy is against the scabbines in
the ear, anoint it with oil of bitter almands, and it will heal it: or to
rub his ear with bitter almands smally beaten, but if his ears are sore
within, ye shall then mix therewith tar, and hogs grease, and with the same
do anoint, and ye shall make the ticks and lice to fall, if ye touch them
therewith: ye must not scratch them with your hand, for fear ye make an ulcer
rise thereof.

If a dog have flease, the remedy is: take of beaten cummin, with as much
ellebory, and mix them together with water, and wash him therewith: or with
the juice of wild cowcumbers, if ye have none thereof, then anoint all over
his body with the lies and old dregs of oil olive.

But if he be mangie and broken forth, ye must beat y^ teaues of mellilot, and
sestamine, in like portion mingled with tar, and so anoint: and this they
say is good for men also that are scabbed, and if the scabs be yet more
vehement, ye may heal it with the juice of the Cedar. Also rue with a corn or
two of salt, and beat them together, then take butter or oil and put
thereunto, and stir them well altogether, then strain it all out, and annoint
therewith, or sees the green roots of Elecampane in running water, and make
it strong of the roots in see thing long, and put some soap and salt
thereunto, and wash your dog therewith warm 3. or 4. dares together, and it
will heal very well.

Also another, some take green grass and beats it into fine powder, and mix
it with the powder of brimstone, finely beaten together, and then al well hurt
with fresh grease, and then made hot, and therewith anoint. Also another very
perfect and good medicine is, ye shall take an oate sheafe as it come from the
field with his afles thereon, and burn him to ashes, and with those ashes make
lie, and therewith wash your mangie dog twice or thrice a day, and it will
help, often proved: and to let him blood on the gamarel vain behind.

Also another very excellent medicine to kill any itch, either in man or dog,
which is, ye shall take a portion of oil of flower deluce, with a good
quantity of brimstone beaten to a fine powder, and the like quantity of
Elecampane roots dried in an oven, and beat into a fine powder, with a
quantity of bay salt, dried and beaten to a fine powder, then mix all these
foresaid powders with the said oil, and then warm it over the fire, and
annoint therewith. But if ye scratte or make the skin first to bleed or water,
and then to anoint, it will do the better. Well and often proved. Another, for a
magie dog. Take quicksiluer, Uerdegreace, Wooloyle, brimstone powder, then
mix all well together, and therewith annoint the dog twice a day. Thus much
for the biting of mad dogs in helping the same. And also helps for mangie dogs.

A bitch goes with whelpe fourscore days, and her whelps are seven days
blind, not perfect sight till 21. days, and a grayhound bitch goes 6. weeks
with whelpe, her whelps are blind twelve days.

The Table following to find out any thing in this book as touching moules,
and hogs: and to find out likewise remedies against the biting of maddogs, and
help for mangie dogs.
ACh in hogs heads to help. 278 A corns to feed hogs. 262 Aristotle's saying.
277
B
BIting of a mad dog to help Biting of hogs. Biting another. 280 Bores, one
sufficient forx, sowes. Blood letting in hogs Brimming of Sowes.
C
Catarre to help. 272 Choosing of hogs. Covering Sowes. 260.
D
Dogs are necessary, and also hurtful. Dissines in hogs. Of mad dogs
Dogs mange to help.
E
Elm leaves are good for hogs. 279
F
FAtting with what meat. 270 Fever in hogs to help. 265 Feeding a hog fat. 268
Feeding a bore best. 273 Feeding a hog for larde. Figure how best to (...) a
hog. Flowing of the gall.
G
GAll flowing to heal. Garget in hogs to help. 271 Gelding of pigs Gelding of
hogs. 264 Government of hogs.
H
Herbs ill for hogs. Herbs good for hogs. 271 Herbs to cool them in
summer. 279 Hole footed hogs. Hogs being sick to know. 278 Hogs sick to
help. 270 Hogheard to be watchful 263 Henbane. 279 Hogs grease to harden.
Hogs to stower. 280
I
IMpostumations under the throat to heal. 265
L
LAske in hogs to stop. 271 Leannes by sickness in hogs to help. 266 Littargie
in hogs to help. 266 Lice to kill in hogs. 280
M
MAggots to kill. Mangie in dogs to help. Marking your pigs. 293 Mezell in
hogs to help. Mezell to save them from it. 273 Mezell to help another. 267
Mezell to preserve hogs. 279 Mezell to help another way. 268 Mezell to help
another. 269 Mezell things evil for it. 277 Mezell and causes thereof. 269
Milt pained to help. 271 Mustard ill for hogs. 270 Milt pained to help. 267
Mice in hogsties to kill. 270 Moules to take.
P
PEstilent fever to help. 272 Pigs weaning. Pigs how to mark. Proverb of the
hogs goodness. Pigs winter pigs. 278 Pox in hogs to helge.
R
RAmmish pigs. Remedies against the bitting of mad dogs. Ringing of hogs. 273
Ringing double. 275 Roots good for hogs. 261
S
Sick hogs to help. 271 Signs after the biting of a mad dog. Sowes good
breeders. 264 Sowes going with pig. 264 Sowes when to brim. Sowes unnatural.
267 Spaied Sowes. 260 The spaing of a Sow. Sowes great with pig how to keep.
263 Staggers in hogs for to help. 277 Styes for your hogs. Stying your hogs.
262
T
TOunges of mad dogs are venomous.
V
Venom taken by meats. Vomit to stay in hogs. 266 Vomit to provoke in hogs.
266
FINIS.
L. M.


