A DEFENSE OF THE HONORAble sentence and execution of the Queen of Scots:
EXEMPLED WITH Analogies, and diverse presidents of Emperors, Kings, and Popes:
With the opinions of learned men in the point, and diverse reasons gathered
forth out of both Laws Civil and Canon, Together with the answer to
certain objections made by the favorites of the late Scottish Queen.

Vlpians Maxim. Juris executio nullam habet iniuriam.

The execution of Law, is injurious to no man.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Windet.

The contents of the book.
1 The first Chapter containing an Analogy or Resemblance between Ione Queen
of Naples, and Marie late Queen of Scotland. 2 The second chapter containing
an other Analogy or Resemblance between the Emperor Licinius and the said
queen Mary. 3 The third chapter containing certain presidents of sundry
Emperors and kings, that have in some case put other princes unto death. 4 The
fourth chapter containing the acts and judgments of sundry Popes, which
have approved the death of some Princes. 5 The fifth Chapter containing a
confirmation of the honorable sentence and execution past against the late
Scottish Queen, by sundry reasons and authorities gathered forth of the
Civil and Canon law. 6 The sixth chapter containing several aunsweres to
several objections lately made against the said sentence. 7 The seventh
chapter, wherein is proved that in two especial cases, the drawing of the
sword of one Prince against another, is not only lawful, but most
necessary. 8 The conclusion upon the sum of the said Chapters.
AN ANALOGY OR resemblance between Ione queen of Naples and Marie queen of
Scotland.
IOne queen of Naples being in love with the duke of Tarent, Collmitius lib.
5. in historia Neapolitana. Petrus Mexia in vita ve^celai. Historia blondi
Epitome pij secundi.
caused her husband Andrasius (or as some term him) Andreas king of Naples,
(whom she little favored) to be strangled in the year of our Lord God 1348.

Marie Queen of Scotland being (as appears by the Chronicles of Scotland
and her own letters) in love with the Earl Bothwell, Author. de nuptijs
Mariae. Bucchanan. in historia rerum Sco^icarum. Her casket of letters were
delivered to the Lords out of Edingburg castle by lames Balford one of the
conspiracy against the king. See the detection of the doings of Mary Queen of
Scots etc. and the indictment of Bothwell and other like printed in Scottish.
caused her husband Henry Lord Darley king of Scotland, (whom she made
small account of long time before) to be strangled, and the house where he
lodged called Kirk of field to be blovven up with gun powder, the tenth of
February in the year of our Lord God 1567.

2 Jone queen of Naples did presently after the shameful slaughter of her
husband, Colinutius lib. 5. page 216.
Petrus Mexia.
marry with the said Duke of Tarent, notvvithsta^ding that they were joined
in kindred near together.

Marie Queen of Scotland shortly after the villainous death of her said
husband, Author de nuptijs Mariae. Buconan fol. 190 191. lib. rerum scoticarum
18.
was publicly married at Sterling by the Bishop of Orkney to the said Earl
Bothwell, notvvithstanding that he had then two vviues alive, Also the
detection aforesaid and the scottish monuments.
and was divorced from the third (called dame Jane Gorden) upon a likely
adultery by himself committed.

3 Ione Queen of Naples had no long fruition of her inordinate lust and
infamous marriage with the said Duke of Tarent, Colin^tius lib. 5. page 216.
and 218
for he being therefore detested of all the country, pined away shortly after
vvithimmoderate venery and thought,

Marie queen of Scotland after that adulterous marriage had with Bothwell,
Buconan fol. 199. and ^95. lib. 18. and 19.
did but a small time enjoy him, for the Nobility and the commons, rising in
arms against them, put the^ both to their several shifts, first Bothwell to
flee into Denmark, and not long after that, the said Marie into England, the
which Bothwell living or rather languishing in prison and like a banished and
consumed man, had there nothing so comfortable to his guilty conscience, as
present death, which there also afterward ensued.

4 Ione Queen of Naples raised a detestable scisme and division in Italy and
France, Colinutius lib. 5. Mexia in vita Vencelai. Platina in vitae Clementis
v. and vita vrbani. 6.
by reason of two Popes at one time, Urban pope at Rome, and Clement pope at
Auinion.

Marie the Scottish queen did sovv the seed of scisme and sedition, B. rose
at his examinution 26. octobris, 1571.
both in the church of England and of Scotland, by the means of three Popes,
Pius most impious to her Majesty, Gregory the xiij. and Sextus the fifth now
Pope, His book called the discovery of the Scottishe Queens affairs in
England. fo 20. Her letters to the B. of Glosco written in Cipher dated, 6.
November. 1577. Her letters to French and Spanish Ambassadors.
which what with the brutish bull, what with sundry thu^derbolts of
excommunication purchased by her means and her ministers, what with
dispensations given to all those that would in her favor rebel against the
Queen our Sovereign Lady, have not only sought to withdraw the hearts of
her Majesty's evil disposed subjects from their natural love and due
obedience, but also have been the impulsive and principal cause of all Scismes
and other unnatural dissensions within her Majesty's kingdoms and dominions.

Ione Queen of Naples, Petrus Mexia, in vita Vencelai.
sent to the Pope of Auinion called by many historiographers Antipope Clement,
a Pope of her own facture and fashion, to uphold and defend her quarrel
against Charles forces, who by reason that he was Nephevve of Jews king of
Hungary, son (according to some vvriters) or (as some say) next of kin to
Andreas or Andrasius her first husband king of Naples by her murdered, was
Competitor with her in the said kingdom, Collinuti us lib. 8. page 215. and
224.
and that by the title of Robert king of Naples her grandfathers testament, and
also by kindred.

Marie of Scotland sent many times to the Popes of Rome not so much for the
defense of her self and her son in the kingdom of Scotland, Rud^lph an
Italian mercha^t her messenger in this behalf. B. Ros and his letters
confession 26 October. 1571 Her letters to B. of Glasco. Her letters to every of
the Ambassadors French and Spanish. Her letters to Morgan her agent in France,
and his letters to her. Her most spiteful letter to the English and Scottish
banished men, beginning, If ever Prince. John Hameltons letters to her 6.
Iulij. 1571. and the Duke of Aluas message sent by him. B. Rose. letters
emploiment by her in Germani^. Father Henr^e^ message from her to the princes
combined, for the contribution toward the invasion of the Realm, and putting
her in actual possession of the same.
as (which is far worse) to the bereauing of her Majesty of her rightful
crown and dignity royal, partly in that with her priuitie ten hundred
thousand crowns were employed by the Pope upon any that would set up in
England the Roman Catholic religion, and advance her to the Crown in
possession, partly in that she gave maintenance to her Majesty's known
Rebels both in Flaunders and Scotland, partly in that she practiced invasion
by foreign forces, and actual Rebellion by unnatural Subjects in these her
Majesty's Realms of England and Ireland.

6 Ione Queen of Naples sent also at that time, Pe^rus exi^, Collinutiu^.
Blondi historia. Paulus Aemilius.
and to the same end and purpose, to Charles the french king, and to Jews Duke
of Aniew the said french kings uncle: requesting them to bring all the forces
they possibly could to the subduing of Charles her competitor in the kingdom
of Naples.

Mary of Scotland sent many times to king Phillip, At one of those times Osmond
Wilkinson the messenger, B. Rose the procurer, the Spanishe Ambassad^ur the
performer of men and money for the rebellion. At one time thentrie was
appointed at Harwich in Suffolk invasion confessed by Throgmorton. Her letters
to Babington. Her letters to the Spanish Ambassador, and the confession of
Babington and his confederates, and the confession of her own Secretaries.
Father Henry's message between her and the Pope and the combined Princes.
and to her uncle the Duke of Cuise, and other princes combined to bring their
forces, not to preserve her in her possession of the kingdom of Scotland, but
to the invasion of this Realm of England, and subduing of her Majesty the
most lavvefull and undoubted Queen of the same.

Ione the Neapolitan Queen in regard that the said Jews Duke of Aniow,
Collinutius.
would defend and protect her against the said Charles, offered to make him
her son by adoption, and that he immediately after her death should succeed
her, both in the kingdom of Naples, and also of Sicelie.

Marie the Scottish Queen in consideration that king Phillip should take her
wholy in his protection, Proved by her letters to the said Spanish Ambassador
Barnard de Me^doza, and confessed by her Secretaries, Naw and Curle.
and likewise the state and affairs of this Country, promised to give and
grant to him by her last will and testament the right (which she pretended
to have) both to the succession of the crown of England, and also of Scotland.

Ione Queen of Naples had great and mighty Princes to take her part both out
of France and from Province, but both she and all that held on her side, had
so strange a fortune and desaster, as it is vvonderfull, for the Pope by her
means exalted was deposed, the said Duke of Aniew General of the field that
came into Ialie (as Pandulphus Collinut us vvriteth) with fifty thousand men
and (as Peter Mexia affirms) thirty thousand of them hors-men, Collmitius
lib. 5. so. 228. Mexia in vita Ven^elai.
died by the way, and xvi. Barons, and most of his gallant company with him,
and the re^nant that suruiued returned home with more shame than with pride
they came forth, begging all the way as they went by two or three in a
company (as Platina witnesses) and the Queen her her self was taken
prisoner by him, Platina in vita V^bani. 6.
vvho^ she firmly hoped to have conquered and slain.

Marie the Scottish Queen which had in Rome at seurall times three Popes, in
Spain king Phillip, in France the Duke of Guise, in England and Scotland,
Dukes, Earls, Lords, The proof of these is publik and most notorious.
Gentlemen, and others too too many bent to accomplish her unquiet humor and
seditious desseinesse, yet neither had she nor any that took her part any
prosperous succes, for 2 of her best friends of the three Popes died, king
Phillip has never been without civil vvarres and his hands full of vprores
and dangerous tumults, the Duke of Guise so megre and so crossed in all his
desseinements, that he could not at any time help her, nor well relieve
himself, the Dukes, Earls, and Lords, for the most part that took her part
either have lost their goods, liuelodes, lands, liberties, and countries, or
have been slain of others, or have slain themselves, many Gentlemen hanged
for her sake to the perpetual infamy of them and their race, and utter
undoing of all their posterity, and as touching her self neither her own land
could abide her, nor the Ocean Sea (to whose mercy in extreme refuge she
committed herself) could brook her, nor the land of England (where she has
remained above xvi. years in our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth's
protection) could for the more part from her first coming like her, Parrie his
confession of her trusty man Morgans dealing with him for murdering of the
Queen. The consessio^ of Naw, Curle, and all the co^spirators.
or be liked of her, and she became all that while prisoner unto her, whose
Royal person she continually hoped and often practiced to have murdered.

Last of al, Leonardus Aretinus in historia Florentina, Collinutiut. Mexia.
Paulus Aemilius.
Jone Queen of Naples being taken by Charles nephew to Jews king of Hungary,
and the first King of Naples of that name, was by the said Charles upon the advice taken and had of the said King Jews, strangled in prison and so (by
Gods providence) paid the death (as the history witnesses) that she gave to
her first husband An reas King of Naples. Mexia in vita Vencelai.


Marie Queen of Scotland although by fleeing out of her own Realm of Scotland
into England, Vide Buconaenu^ fol. 199. and 200.
and by coming under the Queen of Englands protection, she escaped hitherto
the due reuengement of her said husbands death, This appears by the
commission directed to the duke of Norfolk and others, which met the Scottish
Lords at york that came thither, requiring justice in that behalf.
when and where the chiefest of the Nobility of Scotland pursued her by
justice: yet because she has sundry times since that time conspired to
destroy the sacred person of her Majesty, and being once or twice pardoned,
has fallen into a relapse or recination, there has been upon due hearing and
examination of the whole matter, together with her personal ansvveares taken
by the chiefest Lords of the Realm, The Parliament 27. regni Elizabethae.
assisted with the principal Judges of the same, sentence pronounced by them
against her According to the Statute of association by Herself subsigned and
allowed. Her own letters to her Majesty.


And thus she to the joy of all good Christians and well affected English,
has had Gods judgment in her accomplished and performed, that did not only
kill her first husband, King of Scotland, but compassed also sundry times the
death of her Majesty Queen of England, and consequently was like to bring
the whole Realm in danger of a general massacre and present destruction, had
not the eternal and Almighty Lord of his unspeakable and accustomed
goodness by a myraculous discovery preserved the same.

The second Chapter containing a second Analogy or Resemblance betvveene the
Emperor Licinius and the said Marie Queen of Scotland.
A second president much resembling the case in question, is offered unto us
from our countrieman and most Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, who
commanded the death of Licinius the Emperor, and yet this act was never
controlled by any writer.

The History.
AFter that Constantine had taken in open hostility, Licinius consort with him
in the Empire, Eusebius. Socrates. Sozomenus. Sigonius de imperio occidentali.
Mexia in vitis Constantini, Marentii, and Licinii.
who favored the Heathen, persecuted the Christians, and came in arms to
violate his person, yet at the request of Constantia his sister, wife to the
said Licinius, he spared his life, and bound him to remain at Nicomedia, in
the Province of Bithinia. But when afterward Constantine was informed that the
said Licinius attempted a new insurrection and was to that purpose confedered
with other Princes, Constantine the Emperor put to death his College Emperor
Licinius and never controuled therefore.
and sought to flee away from the place appointed, than did he forthwith
command the said Licinius to be put to death in the xv: year of the said
Constantines reign when he was lx. years of age, and in the year of our
Lord God 377.

The comparison and resemblance between these two cases, is very like.
First Constantine and Licinius were both chosen Lords and Princes of the
Empire.

So Elizabeth Queen of England and Marie Queen of Scotland were both called
to the state of kings in the isle of Britanie, The Empire of Britanie divided
into two kingdoms, as the Empire in Constantines time was into two Empires.
although in diverse distinct kingdoms: and therefore the doings of Licinius
might seem to have more color of right to the Empire, than Mary of Scotland
to entitule herself in this Realm, Marie queen of Scotland but a titularie
queen. Kings of Scotland have been feudaturies, and done homage to the kings
of England.
being also but a titularie Queen in her own land: and as it appears by the
Chronicles and by ancient records, her Progenitors have done homage for their
kingdoms to the crown of England.

Licinius notvvithstanding many princely benefits received at the Emperor
Constantins hands, Eusebius.
Socrates.
insomuch that he was advanced by him to the marriage of his own sister
Constantia, which descended from a princely progeny of kings: yet, contrary
to his oath and promise like an ungrateful man he became a professed enemy to
Constantine.

Marie of Scotland, albeit she received many great favors at the hands of
Queen Elizabeth in saving both her honor and life, Scotland in an. 1568.
England. 1^. reg. Eliz.
when she was so earnestly pursued by the Lords and the commons both of
Scotland and England, yet like an unthankful person she did shevve her self
contrary to her vowed promise an apparent enemy to the Queen of England.
Her letters to the B. of Glascon, and to B. Rose Morgan, and Mendoza.


Licinius would alone have bin Lord and prince of the Empire by the remove of
Constantine.

So Marie vvoulde be the only Queen of Britanie, Diverse books and pedegrees
published by her agents and favorites to that effect. Resignatio facta 1567.
Vide Buconanum fol. 196. And Holingsheds Chronicle, fol. 388.
and not only abandon her own son from the kingdom of Scotland (after
that she had resigned the same unto him) but also expel her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth from her proper and undoubted kingdom of England.

Licinius usurped an unjust title, calling himself the universal Emperor.

So did Marie of Scotland give long since, In the book called Expositio
cansarum. And she did it at her entry into Poitiers in France, and would not
be reduced from the allowing of the same in all her proceedings over since.
both the title and arms of England, usurping therein the royal state of her
Majesty and crown of England.

Licinius came not willingly unto Constantine, but by force of arms was
taken at Chrysopolis a City within the province of Bithinia, and brought to
Constantine.

Marie of Scotland came not willingly into the land and dominion of our
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, Hollingsheds Chronicle. fol. 392.
but being encountered with her nobility, and enforced to leave the field,
came by boat into Werkington Haven in the west marches of England.

Licinius had his life once pardoned for open hostility against the Emperor
Constantine. Mexia in vita Co^stantini. ca. 1. Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomenus.


Marie of Scotland has had her life spared for murdring her husband and also
for hostility and treason practiced against Elizabeth Queen of England. 13.
regni Reginae Elizabethae published in Parliament.


Licinius although pardoned, Mexia. cap. 10. Socrates lib. 1. cap. 2. Sozomenus
lib. 1 cap. 2.
yet was not too far trusted by Constantine, but first co^fined to Nicomedia,
and afterward to Thessalonica, and there had a noble guard about his palace
and person.

Marie of Scotland, Justly mistrusted for giving the arms and title of
England, and refusing to ratify the treaty of Edingburg and afterward for
procuring the rebellion in the North, and many other treasons since she had
for her abode Carlisle castle, Bolton Castle, Sheffeld castle, all at the Queen
of Englands great charges and expenses.
and great favors, was upon most just cause mistrusted, and therefore
confined to certain stately houses in England, and there had princely
maintenance and an honorable guard attending her person.

Licinius did seek to flee away from the place whereunto he was enjoined.

Marie of Scotland did many times practice the like in England. Confessed by
her before the Lords at Fodringa castle.


Licinius did treat with diverse princes and captains to make new vvarres
against Constantine.

Marie of Scotland did not only practice with diverse princes, The practice of
bringing in of forces confessed by her before the Lords.
Noblemen and others, to bring in foreign forces into the Realm of England,
The rest confessed by Babington, Ballard and other of that conspiracy and most
horrible treason.
but also did conspire and contriue with evil disposed subjects to England
the change of the state, the overthrow of religion, the death of her
Majesty's sacred person, the massacre of the nobility, and an universal
desolation of the whole Realm.

To conclude, Mexia in vita Constantini. ca. 1 Socrates and Sozomenus in the
foresaid places.
Licinius for endangering again Constantines person and seeking by new
troubles to aspire to the Empire like as Maximinianus before had done, was by
the appointment of Constantine adjudged to die,

Marie of Scotland has given far greater cause to our Constantine Elizabeth
Queen of England to fear new conspiracies both against her Majesty and the
state of the whole realm, like as the said Marie and other her confederates
have many times done before, In the Parliament holden 13. Elizabeth.
and therefore she had been in the high court of Parliament condemned to die
many years past, but that her Majesty of her singular and great clemency
spared to give her assent thereunto, and of late again upon an other horrible
conspiracy there is by the chiefest Lords and Judges of this Realm sentence
given against her, Proclamation thereupon and due execution respectively made
according to an act of Parliament in the xxvii. year of her Majesty's reign.

The third Chapter containing certain presidentes of sundry Emperors and
Kings which have put other Princes unto death.
HOwbeit we need not farther by ensample to show that one Prince has put
another unto death, yet for the farther warrant, and quiet of princes minds,
and to stop the evil speeches of such, whose heads are wholly busied in
Princes matters: it is not amiss unto the former examples to add, first
certain presidentes of Emperors, then of Kings, and lastly for those evil
affected sort (unto whom the actions of the Pope are their best instructions)
the doings and judgments of sundry Popes.

COnstantin so much renowned in the church of God, and that amongst other his
princely virtues, for his singular clemency, and care in religion, did cause
to be put to death, not only the Emperor Licinius as before, but also
Maximinianus, The love of the country knows no kinted.
the elect Emperor being detected by his daughter, wife of the said
Constantine, for an horrible conspiracy against her husband, and yet
consider, Constantine shevved unto him all duties of humanity and courtesy,
in so much that he married his daughter, and received him under his protection
giving unto him all princely entertainment, at what time he was pursued by
his wicked son Maxentius to death. yet consider, when so many benefits of
this Emperor could not stay him, Ambition no less ungrateful than bloody.
but in the desire of a kingdom, he thought to bereave his protector of life,
then Constantine loath to nourish in his bosom any such serpent, commanded
his death, and saved himself.

An other like example is that of Rhescuporis, A second president of an
Emperor.
as Tacitus calls him, or as Suetonius and Liuie, Thrasipolis, king of
Thrasia, who by Tiberius the Emperor was put to death. Cornelius Tacitus
lib. 2. annalium.
For vvhe ras the said Rhescuporis had compassed the death of king Cotys, for
that he could not abide to have him confort with him in the kingdom of
Thrasia, which in Augustus days was divided betvveene them, the said
Rhescuporis was accused by queen Cotys to the Emperor and Senate of Rome,
for this his villainous fact in destroying her husband, where he received
judgment both of deprivation of his kingdom, and also of banishment: but
as soon as he went about to flee from Alexandria (where he was confined and
with a strong guard honored against his will) the Emperor Tiberius
presently gave in commandment to behead him: Blood thirsts after blood.
and yet the said king, did never practice the death of the Emperor, as Marie
of Scotland has practiced the death of the Queen of England, Holling sheds
chronicle.
and that since the said Marie came to be a titulary Queen and had given over
to her son King Iemie to be the only and absolute king of Scotland.

An other president I find in the Emperor Henry the seventh of that name, The
third president of an Emperor.
who conuincing Robert king of Naples and Province of open rebellion and
conspiracy with his subjects against his person and Empire, Peter Mexia in
the life of Henry the Emperor.
summoned him to appear, and finally by process of justice gave sentence of
death against him depriving him of his kingdom of Naples, A king for treason
deposed and sentenced to death.
and discharging all his vassals of their homage and fidelity that they ovved
him, and farther gave license to Frederick king of Sicelie, the said king
Roberts enemy, to make a conquest of the said kingdom in the behalf of his
son.

Thus far goes the History, Clementin de re iudicata. c. pastoralis.
howbeit Pope Clement the seventh in his Clementine calls the said Robert
king of Sicely according to the old error of Popes, Fazellus de rebus Siculis.
and not of Naples, according to all old vvriters, and found fault in
themperours sentence about the manner of proceeding and not the matter in
question, for he does not call in question the said judgment as though it had
bin vnlavvefull for him to have put the said king to death for treason, if he
had bin found within any of his dominions, where he had committed any such
horrible crime against him, but in that he did cite him out of that district
and limits of the Empire, to wit out of Naples (which the Pope calls
Sicely, where had been ever his continual and notorious residence) to the
city of Pisa, a place justly feared most dangerous to his person: but if the
said king Robert had contrived the death of the Emperor within the
jurisdiction of the Empire, and there had been found or (as it is wont to
be used in criminal causes) had been sent thither to aunsvvere the contempt
done against his Majesty, then and in that case, Pope Clement did agnize and
insert in express words in his Clementine published in the Council of
Vienna, that the Emperor might have sentenced the said king lavvfullie to
death, Popes censure in what case a Prince may lentence an other lawfully to
death.
his words are these: Quod si punitio criminis intra districtum imperialem
commissi ad imperatorem forsan pertinuisse asseratur, d c pasteralis.
verum est quidem, si ineodem districtu fuisset inventus delinquens, vel ad
illum de more remissus, Wherein he does agree very well with the civil
law, which is that, sortitur quis forum, tam ratione delicti, quam ratione
domicilij, that is, a man may be within the compass of an other Princes
jurisdiction and prerogative, asvvell in regard of his offense committed, as
of his place of dwelling: the discourse whereof, more at large hereafter.

In like manner Barnard king of Italy, Barnard king of Italy put to death, by
Jews the French king.
being persuaded by the Clergy of his right and title that he had to the
crown of France, levied an army intending to recover his right, and to
destroy them that than possessed in the kingdom: but in the first encounter
he was taken, Belleforest in his French history
had his eyes put out, a while was kept in prison, and after by Jews
Debonaire king of France and Emperor for the better assurance of his state
commanded to be put to death.

So likewise Conradine king of Sicelie was by Manfredus prisoned: Collmitius
lib. 4
he bequeathed his kingdom to Conradine his son, Conradine put to death by
king Charles.
the which being young and not able to make resistaunce left his country unto
Manfrede, the which Charles Earl of Aniew and Prouence, the French kings
brother at the request of the Clergy of Italy many years after, subdued and
conquered, and there being chosen and crowned king of Naples in his days,
Conradine being grown to years, and desirous of his fathers kingdom by his
father given him, much helped and furthered by the personal presence of many
great princes, he entered the country in warlike manner: where he was taken
prisoner, and after twelve months imprisonment, by the opinion of the best
learned in the law, in open judgment he was condemned, and publikelie
with many his confederates he was commanded by the same Charles to be
executed. So when Jews king of Hungary was consulted by his nephevve
Charles King of Naples, Collinutius li. 5.
what he were best to do with Ione Neapolitan Queen, than his prisoner,
An advise of a king for a queen to be put to death.
he sent two noble men unto the said Charles with this determinate answer
and advise that she should be brought to the same place vvher she stra^gled her
husband, and there to be strangled in like manner her self.

The iiij. Chapter containing the Acts and judgments of sundry Popes, which
have approved the death of some princes.
BUT to leave the examples of kings, and to come to Popes, whose acts will
better serve to satisfy some men's humors, than all the Presidentes of Kings
and Emperors, be they never so godly: Themselves say a Pope may err in
manners but not in judgment.
if Popes cannot err (as Popes do affirm) than Pope Clement the fourth his
example were able to persuade in this case even Pope Sextus Quintus himself,
now Pope of Rome, although he be one of the chief pillars and patrones of the
Scottishe Queen, A judgment of Clement of putting a king to death Colimutius
in historia Neapolitana. lib. 4. page 186. Henricus Gildifingensit in historia
Austriaca.
for that the said Clement delivered for law in Conradine the king of Sicelie
his case, that because he had compassed to take away the life of Charles the
king of Naples, it was both lavvfull and expedient for the said Charles to
put him to death. An other example of a Pope.


And taking with us the said Popes ground and maxim, that Popes cannot err:
a second example will serve of an other Pope called Boniface, who put to
death the Pope Celestine, whom he had in prison for a lesser cause a great
deal then that of Conradine, Collinutius li. 5. Vide Cornelium Agrippa^ de
vanitate scientiaru^ c. de eccles. magigistratibus; de tribus mirabilibus
Bonifacii.
Metuens (as the history sets down in express terms) ne ob singularem
pietatem ad pontificatu^ denuo reuocaretur: that is, because he feared that
Celestine the old Pope would for his singular virtue be called to his
Popedom again: thus did Boniface not for any treason practiced against
himself, but for fear of loosing his living put Celestine a good Pope to
death.

And because the Pope in creating of Cardinals, Cardinals in their creation
Popes fellows. Gigas de crimine laesae maiestatis. Julius clarus receptarum
sententiarum. lib. 5.
calls them the Princes of this world, and his brethren part of his body,
making therefore the crime of treason, called crimen laesae maiestatis to lie in
offense done to their persons asvvell as to himself, as is by Gigas and Julius
Clarus affirmed: I think the judgment of Pope Urban the sixth, may be
conjoined with that former president of Boniface the viii. who, having gotten
viii. Cardinals in prison, did for the preservation of his own person (as he
did pretend) cause five of them to be put in sacks and being therein fast
bound to be cast into the sea: Pope Urban put to death 8. Cardinals for
preservation of his own person. Collinutius li. 5.
the other iii. being convicted at Genua in open judgment he caused to be
beheaded, and their bodies to be dried in an oven, and to be carried with
their three purple Hats borne up before him, A strange cruelty of a pope upon
dead bodies of his own fellows.
when he went any ways forth, to the intent that this might be a terror
unto all other that should contriue any thing against his holiness.

And least any Roman Catholic should think that it is an unchristian part
to put a christian Queen to death, I give him the same Pope Vrbans action for
his instruction, who when the svvord was brought al blooddy unto him,
Collinutius. li. 5.
with the which Charles king of Naples nephevve to Jews king of Hungary was
by treachery murdered at Buda in Hungarte (not without the due punishment of
God inflicted upon the murderers and their abbettors for the same) he
allowing the fact, A Popes allowaunce of the treacherous murdering of a king.
handled the said svvorde so embrued with blood in his hand, and took great
pleasure in beholding of it.

If a Pope made allowance of so treacherous a murder of a good king, what
disalowance is there to be made of a just and honorable sentence given of a
tumultuous Queen.

And yet this is that Pope Vrbanus minime Vrbanus, Platina in the life of Urban
the vi. Collinutius li. 5. Mexia in the life of Vencelaus.
(as Platina says) which not long before did advance the said Charles,
with all the blessings and aid that he could in his title and claim against
the said Ione to the kingdom of Naples, pronouncing his curse against her, as
a scismatike and rebel, and that notvvithstanding, he afterward fell as fast
to the cursing of the said Charles, Collinutius. li. 5.
because he would not create one Bitillus a bitelhed and very lewd person,
the said Popes nephew to be Prince of Capua, and Lord of Dirachium in
Dalmatia.

These fevve examples where kings, Emperors and Popes, have put other
princes of like condition to death, may serve in case of the Scottish Queen to
persuade any man, that is not too too far distempered in his judgment,
especially seeing the practices of these, which for their treasonable
demerites, were put to death, are far inferior to this her most horrible and
treacherous conspiracy, and that there can never be one history, or example
shovven in such villainy, co^parable to this, where a Queen has had so many
times her honor, and life preserved, when her own subjects were in arms
against her in Scotland, when her Nobility for the murdering of the king her
husband, craved her death by Justice in England, and when the nobility and
commons of England for new and fresh conspiracies, and by her often reiterated
against the Queens Majesty and the good estate of the land, have again, and
again, earnestly requested both in open Parliaments, and else where due
execution of justice against her.

A confirmation by many reasons gathered out of the Civil and Canon law, of
the honorable sentence and execution past against the Scottish Queen.
BEfore I proceed to the instifying of the said sentence and execution, I
think it not amiss, here to set down what the Laws of England have been in
these Capital offenses, not only from the Conquerors time, but from the
beginning of any Empire or principallity within this Realm: and searching what
has been written herein, I find, that the very imagination and intent of
treason, being in the highest degree without ouert fact, has in the times of
all Kings, and in all persons, been loss of life and member, loss of goods
and lands, and perpetual corruption of blood: which Law agrees very well
and seems to have commencement and beginning from a Civil constitution, made
by the famous Emperors Arcadius and Honorius in the year of our Lord God. 3 8
9. The effect of which Law, for the matter in question follows: L. quisquis
C. ad L Julian matestatis.
Quisquis de nece principis eorumque qui consilijs principis intersunt etc.
cogitauerit (eadem enim seueritate voluntatem sceleris, qua effectum puniri
iura voluerunt) ipse quidem, vt maiestatis reus, gladio feriatur, bonis eius
omnibus fisco nostro addictis. Whosoever shall imagine or intend the death of
the king or any of his counsel (for the Laws would with the same severity
have a man punished, as well for his will in intending as for his fact in
committing treason) he shall be beheaded, as guilty of high treason, and his
goods forfaited to our Exchequer.

Note here, that the said words be general and suffer no exception, L. 4.
C. ad L. Julian maiestatis.
which also is in the very next Constitution precedent by three other
Emperors, Valentinian, Valens and Gratian confirmed, where they use these
words, In sola causa laesae maiestatis omnibus aequa conditio est, nulla
habita, militie generis vel dignitatis defensione: In the only cause of
treason all persons are of egal condition, debarred from all defense and
privilege of military virtue, birth, or dignity. And as the words of the
law are general including all persons whosoever, so is the selfsame law
general, because it receives allowance in all countries, and in Scotland it
self, where the civil law is exercised, and in that regard may be called Ius
Gentium, the law of Nations: Quia eo iure omnes gentes vtuntur because in all
Nations the same law and penalty for treason is used: wherein the Scottish
Queen could not pretend ignorance, seeing it is the law of her own
country, and the law of all the world, and seeing she confessed her
presciencie and knowledge thereof, as also of the statute made in the same
effect, the seven and twentieth year of her Majesty's reign, discovering in
her letters to Babington, that if her conspiracies were known to her Majesty,
it were sufficient for that Queen to enclose her in some hole, forth of which
she should not escape, if so be she did not use her worse: as though she had
said the heinousness of her desert and penalty of the law did inflict a
greater punishment on her, than being kept close prisoner, which she further
confesses in plain words in her letter to Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador: Let
this be kept secret, forasmuch as if it come to be revealed, it should be in
France the loss of my Dower, in Scotland a clear breach with my some, and in
this country, my total ruin and destruction. And the said statute of the
said xxvij. year of her Majesty's reign does not alter the substance of the
offense in treason, or make it more grievous or prejudicial than it was
before: but for as much as her Majesty's life (whom Almighty God preserve to
the end of all time) was sought by many wicked complots of desperate miscreants
to be taken away, and the public peace disturbed: the body of the whole
Realm (to prevent that mischief, and that this might serve as an other
warning to stay their fury) enacted and set down a more honorable proceeding
against all such violent Competitors of the kingdom, than there was before
therein, adding rather form than substance, that if any such villainies were
attempted, it might both in the matter and manner have the more honorable
proceeding.

Seeing than the Scottish Queen is both by general words and also by
especial demonstration within the compass of the law, it remains to see
what can be said for her exemption from the said law. I hear that
principally alleged for an excuse, that she was an absolute Queen, and
therefore in her person not to be impeached, as though it were to be justified
by any law in the world, for a Queen to contriue the death of an other
Queen, and that (which is most treacherous) in her own kingdom. Or that a
King or Queen coming forth of her own Realm, to the kingdom and dominion
of an other King or Queen, may there do what they list without controlement,
under color of their kingly prerogative. And although I should grant that she
was an absolute Queen, and in respect thereof, had diverse privileges incident
unto her person: yet in this case all privileges that go to, and follow the
person, In case of treason no privilege will serve.
are excluded: Quia in causa laesae maiestatis (says Baldus) priuilegiatus non
potest allegare priuilegium. A man privileged in his person, in case of
treason, cannot allege his privilege.

And this is a most general law and all persons whosoever are subject to the
same, L. Q. in Prouincia vbi de criminine agi oportet.
that in what place they have committed any crime, there according to the law of
the place (without regard of any privilege) they ought to be adjudged, Et hoc
ius perpetuum est, L. edita de edendo C. 1. Inst. de satisdat. tutor. Parag. 1.
says the Text: that is, this law is general, for so this word perpetuu^, is
in the civil law in sundry places used, and in this very place it it is so
by the learned expounded. Neither can a king in in another kingdom challenge
any such prerogative unto him, that for an offense given in the highest degree
he may not there be punished. For every king out of his own kingdom is to be
accounted of, Lapus de castillo allegat. 92.
but as a private person, for that he has no longer merum imperium, that is
supreme and absolute government, but does only retain, honoris titulos and
dignitatis, the title of honor and dignity within the territory of an other
king. So that there where he has offended per omnia distringitur etiam quoad
personam, he may be punished in all that he has and that in his person,
zabarella. e pastoral. de re iudicata. D. D. c fi. de sore competent.
for ratione delicti-sortitur forum, by reason of his offense, he is now
become of another princes jurisdiction and prerogative where he has offended.

Insomuch that neither our friends which are confedered with us, nor
Ambassadors which coming from great and mighty Princes are resiant amongst
us, nor the kings and princes themselves that carry so great a majesty in
their persons can challenge any immunitie or privilege by reason of their
confederacy, honor, or dignity: but where they contract, and where they
offend, there must they abide the order of law and condign punishment. For of
our friends that are in league and amity with us, hear what the law says: Si
sint apud nos rei ex ciuitatibus confederatis in eos damnatos animaduertimus: L
non dubito ff. de captiuis de postlimiuio reuersis.
if any person of the confedered Cities be found guilty amongst us they are
iusticiable here, and after their condemnation shall receive execution
accordingly.

And of the Ambassadors, Julius Paulus, who for his excellent skill in the law,
came to be both Praetor and Consul in Rome, writes in this manner: L non alias
parag. legati ff. and iudiciis.
Legati ex delictis in legatione co^missis cogu^tur iudicium Romae pati, sieve
ipsi admiserint sieve serui eorum. Ambassadors that are come to Rome out of far
countries, are there to answer for their offense committed there in time of the
Embassy, whether it be done by themselves or any of their retinue. L si
legationis ff codem^^tulo.
Likewise Saluius Iulianus the chief counsailer to Adrian the Emperor writes
thus: Si legationis tempore quis seruum vel aliam rem emerit, aut ex alia causa
possidere cepit; no^ inique cogetur e^us iudiciu^ accipere: aliter enim
potestas daretur legatis sub hac specie res alienas domu^ auferendi: That is,
Note the reason of the law.
if any during his Embassy shall buy a bondman or any thing else, or shall
come to the possession of any thing by any other title or means, he shall be
compelled to answer to the law in that behalf, for otherwise Ambassadors
should have liberty under this color to carry into their country other men's
goods: but that ought not to be granted them, say the interpreters upon that
law, Ne occasio daretur delinquendi: least an occasion thereby should be given
them to deal lewdly.

Then if a law will have an Ambassador as well as the subject, to answer
upon any contract or wrong done to the subject, would the same law (trow
you) allow the practices of high treason in an Ambassador against the common
peace unpunished? And although some have written that Ambassadors have had
their lives spared them in cases of high treason: yet that proves not that for
treason they might not by law have bin executed. For as Theodatus said to the
Ambassadors of Bizance, Procopius lib. 1. de bello Gothoru^
if an Ambassador should in his Embassy commit adultery, or else use any
villainy toward the Prince, Tunc quide^, Vide Iustinum. lib. 7. in the case of
adultery.
and iure, legatum occidere pro humanis legibus licet: than were it lawful by
the law of the land to put such an Ambassador to death. Wherefore Conradus
Brunus writing both gravely and learnedly of the dignity and immunitie of
Ambassadors does after a great discourse, conclude with these words. Ius
violandorum legatoru^ ijs tantum seruandum esse, qui honest in legatione
versantu^r: Vide L. per id te^pus de curiosis. lib. 12. and L quoties and L
iudices de dignitat lib. 12. C etc iuarum nos parag. verum. Ext. de priuilegiis.
the law that wills no hands to be laid upon an Ambassador, is to be kept
with them only that do in their Embassy behave themselves honestly,
otherwise, in vniuersum priuilegium amittit, qui concessa sibi abutitur
potestate: for ever he does lose all privilege that does abuse his commission
and authority.

Let us go higher from the Ambassador to his Master the king himself.

Bonifacius de vitallinis, c pastoralis de re iudicata. verse. nos tam ex
superioritate nu. 65.
writing upon the case of king Robert of Sicely has these words. Si non
subditus imperatori, aliquid perpetrat infra fines imperij, ex quo si fuisset
perpetratum per hominem subditum imperatori, processisset crimen laesae
maiestatis: committit ex hoc illud crimen, quod ratione loci delicti, sortitur
forum imperatoris, and sub eius jurisdiction and potestate ex eo constituitur
and quoad delictu^ and quoad qualitatem delicti. If any person being no subject
of Themperors, do commit any crime within the limits of Thempire, whereby the
same being committed by one of the Emperors subjects, should amount to the
offense of high treason: the same does commit the like crime hereby, which in
regard of the place of the offense is subject to the Emperors authority, and
he is hereby brought under his jurisdiction and power both concerning his
offense and the quality of his offense. And if some will yet object, that all
this may and ought to be understood in such persons as are inferior and
under the degree of Kings and Princes: hear what he adds farther in the
same place, Bonifacius nu. 72
Rex (inquit) delinquendo in imperio efficitur de jurisdiction imperatoris
ratione delicti, and sic fit ligabilis delinquendo sicut contrahendo. A King if
he does offend within the Empire, is made thereby one of the jurisdiction of
the Empire, by reason of his offense, and so is answerable by his delict, as he
is by his contract: for else this absurdity would follow and a dangerous
plague to all Princes, that one king might safely kill an other king, and that
in his own kingdom by violence, and the king (whose death is sought) may not
for his safety put to death such a murdering king by Justice, and by that
means also (as I said before) there should be given an occasion of
treacherous dealing, which the law abhors, and wills by all means to be
eschued. The law therefore is general and reaches not only to the Nobility
and Commons of any Realm in regard of subjection, but also to the forreiner,
to the Ambassador, to his Lord and master the King, in respect of their
coniurations, if any such conspirators be apprehended where they within an
other kings dominion, have offended: for the offense of conspiracy, does
deuest and deprive them, and every of them of their privilege and prerogative
(if they had any) like as the sanctuary will save a man's life for homicide:
but not when homicide is committed within the sanctuary, for the^ by his own
fault he does wave the benefit of all privileges and prerogative. L auxilian
de miuoribus c. been de electione.
Quia frustra legis auxilium inuocat qui in legem committit. He does claim in
vain the benefit of the law, that does offend against the law.

So is the Queens Majesty in her gracious Realm, a sanctuary to every king
that comes within the same under her highness protection, until he
commits a capital delict and offense against the same, and than upon the
reason of the foresaid laws, he loses the benefit and privilege thereof:
like as the benefit or privilege of safeconduit is lost, when after the safe
conduit granted, any crime is committed, but for a farther confirmation of the
premises we shall speak more at large in the next chapter.

The sixth Chapter, containing an answer to certain objections lately made
by certain favorites of the Queen of Scotts.
FOR as much as some partial and evil affected Aliens, and some hollow and
dissembling subjects will perhaps in this honorable and just action, malign
the proceedings of the whole Parliament, and the sentence and execution
thereuppon, I think it not amiss to meet with some of the best of their
Arguments, the which at the first show might seem to cross or control their
doings.

The first objection.
The first objection is, That Par in parem non habet imperium, that is an
absolute Prince over and against another absolute Prince has no jurisdiction
or soueraintie.

And this was by Prince Conradine a Prince more skillful in feats of war,
than in points of law, Collinutius. lib. 4 hist. Neapolit.
objected unto Barius, king Charles his Prothonotarie after that he had read
the sentence of death given against him.

The like argument does Matheus Parisiensis allege in king John's case,
Parisiensis Monachus in sua historia.
when the French king would have sentenced him for the Dukedom of Norma^die.
Upon the which maxim or rule it is inferred that forasmuch as our Queen, and
Marie of Scotland were both Queens, and of egall power and authority, that
the one can have no such power to sentence or punish the other.

The Answer.
For answer, it may then truly and justly be said, that whatsoever show
this argument makes in appearance, yet it is nothing at all in substance.

For to let pass that (which is much doubted of by many) whether the Scottish
Queen were, at the time of the sentence given, Queen of Scotland or no,
seeing by the three estates of Scotland she was disabled.

To omit also that she relinquished long time before all her right, title and
interest in the same realm (if she had any) to the Lord Iemie her son now
king of Scotland.

To pass over in like manner how evident a thing it is, and most notorious,
that the kings of Scots have been feudataries and done homage unto the kings
of England, See Hall, and Foxes history, reg. 4. William Conqerour. malconib.
Edward. 1. Richard. 2.
and have appeared in person in Parliament at York, and had the place of the
first Peer in England, whereby it may be inferred that the Scottish Queen
was no absolute Queen, but had respect and was inferior to the crown of
England: if we should grant them all this, for dispution sake, that she was
still Queen of Scotland, and farther, that she was an absolute Queen, what
than? what can they infer of this? does equality in dignity give supreme
power and soueraintie in the kindome of England?

This her soueraintie has undoubtedly a necessary relation to her own
subjects the Scots, and kingdom of Scotland, not unto the English and realm
of England: and albeit I do grant here for argument sake more than may do, to
wit, that she was still a Queen in dignity, Thomas Grammaticus.
yet I may right well deny her to be a Queen in soueraintie: for she left all
her soueraintie behind her, and became a private person and no sovereign, at
what time she came from Loghleuen castle in Scotland, to the castle of
Cokermouth in England.

And this point may soon be tried by sampling the same in an other Princess
coming into any foreign country. If the King of Spain should come into
France, although perhaps the French King might take him for his brother, in
the sense of the Poet (fratrum concordia rara) yet I doubt he would not take
him there for his fellow, Lucan. Tullie in his book of dutiess.
Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit: there is no kingdom that will
abide a Copartner. D D in l. est receptum f. de iurisd. omnium Iudicum.
And (as Tullie says) Nulla sides nec sancta societas regni est, There can be
no firm faith, nor holy society of a kingdom: over and above that every
Prince in his own principality is the greater, c cum inferior de mayor. and
obed.
and it is an infallible rule, that every King out of his own kingdom is no
more but a private person. Lapus in allegat. xcij.


Preses (says Paulus) in suae prouinciae homines tantum imperium habet, and
hoc dum in prouincia est, I. preses f. de officio presidis.
nam si excesserit priuatus est, A president, has souerainty, only upon the
subjects of his own province, and that whilst he is within his province, but
if he goes forth of it, he is a private person.

Upon the conclusion of which law there grew amongst the learned this
question, Baratolus. lib. 12. de dignitatibus. c.
whether a King passing thorough, or resiant in another kings Realm and
dominion, might make any of his subjects knights: and some held opinion,
that he could not, for that he had not there merum imperium, supreme power and
soueraintie, but Regiam duntaxat dignitatem, that is only the honor and
dignity of a king. Other resolved thus, that albeit in this case he had no
such soueraintie in him, yet because this act was not co^tentiosae
iurisdictionis, of a co^tentious jurisdiction as when suits pass in the kings
co^sistory between party and party, Jason and Alexander in L. extra territorium
de iurisd. omnium iudicum.
but iurisdictionis voluntariae, of a jurisdiction voluntary, such as pass
upon pleasure before himself: they were of opinion, that he might make
knights, like as one Bishop may approve wills, and confer orders in the
Diocese of another Bishop, because the same is iurisdictionis voluntariae, of
a jurisdiction voluntary: but that a king in another kings dominion, or a
Bishop in the diocese of another Bishop has merum imperium, or sovereignty,
that can never be shown, but the quite contrary.

Neither only is every one in his own territory chief and greater than an
other, who in other respects notwithstanding, is many ways greater than
himself: but also he may punish there such a person greater than himself,
offending in his territory insomuch that an Archbishop by a Bishop in the
Bishops own territory, an Emperor by a king, in a kings dominion and country,
and a king by a Magistrate of a free City may there be punished for his
offense.

Neither does the rule Par in parem take any place in that case, and so in the
case of an Archbishop Panormitan and Felin expressly set down, C cum
inseriors de mayor. and obed.
that he may by his inferior Bishop (being not his suffragan) receive
condign punishment for the offense, that he has committed within the said
Bishops diocese.

Anchoranus adds farther, Anchoran clem. 1. de fore comperente.
that if a patriarche should offend within the territory of Bononie, the
Bishop there might punish him accordingly.

And that an Emperor may be in like manner punished by an other Prince, in
whose territory he has offended, Vaskins lib. 1. contr. f. illustrium.
Ferdinandus Vaskins in his book of princely controversies does affirm in
these words: Imperatorem ab alio principe in cuius territorio deliquisset,
puniri posse non dubitauerim. And that a Magistrate in like manner of a free
City may punish a king offending within the territory of the City, we read
examples in sundry histories, as how Justinian a king, Functius in cronologia.
was put to death by Helias a patrician, etc.

And the reason of the premises, is grounded upon two conclusions of the law.
The one is that the Emperor, the King, the Archbishop, and the Bishop, are
out of their own kingdoms, countries, and diocese, but as private persons,
The other that every Prince and ruler within his own kingdom and rule is
greater than any other, although he were the greatest monarche in the world.

The which a great learned man called Lapus de castello, in plain words most
apparently shows, his words be these: Lapus de castello alleg. 91. nu. 7.
and 8.
Extra territorium suum quilibet Rex censetur ad instar priuati, and constat,
quod vnusquisque in suo territorio mayor est: vnde populus Senensis in suo
territorio magis potest, quam Dominus Rex illustrissimus and perpetuus
Anglorum, Every king out of his own kingdom is accounted as a private
person, and it is apparent that every person in his own territory is the
greater. And therefore the people of Senes in Italy can in their own state and
territory, do more than the mighty and illustrious Lord the King of England.

Again, we may further show in this case that although she were a Queen and
by her royal prerogative not to be touched, yet if she does deuest herself of
her prerogative or make herself subject to the jurisdiction of another, than
can she not claim her privilege nor exempt her self from the others
jurisdiction. For as Vlpian praefectus praetorio to Alexander the Emperor,
says: Est receptum eoque iure vtimur, L. 14. ff. de iurisdict. omniu^ Iud.
vt si quis mayor, vel aequalis subijciat se iurisdictioni alterius possit ei
and aduersus eum ius dici. It is received, and is a law which we have daily
in ure, that if the greater or egall do submit himself unto the jurisdiction
of an other, the law may there be ministered to him and against him, upon
which law Paulus Castrensis, Jason and diverse other learned me^ do note that
there are two kinds of submission, Expressa and tacita: express commission, by
giving open consent: secret submission by making any contract or committing
any offense: and so within their territories. Vnus Princeps vel Baro potest
alium principe^ vel Conbarone^ punire. One Prince or Baron may punish an other
prince or Baron.

Than since the Scottish Queen in her Majesty's Realm against her Majesty,
not of ignorance, but wittinglie desirous of her crown, has offended, and
that in no less case than the case of high treason, by her treasonable fact:
she has yielded a secret submission to the jurisdiction of England, and
therefore there rightfullie to be punished by law.

Wherefore to conclude, since some doubt whether she were a Queen (as which had
resigned up and thereby had no kingdom) since, if she were a Queen in
dignity, yet in soueraintie she was no Queen, but a private person coming
into another Princes dominion, since every Prince in his own kingdom is
chiefest, and other there are inferior to him, since an inferior person may
punish his superiors for such offenses they commit within his jurisdiction,
since a Prince by offending submits himself to the state of that country
where he offends, and may have the law pass against him for it: This
objection of Par in parem little serves their purpose, as which is to be
understood of facts committed in their several kingdoms and territories. For
than may not the queen of England punish her for ought she has done amiss
in Scotland, because they are in this case Pares, that is, of egall authority,
but for her demerites in England (where they are not Pares) but the Queen of
Scots inferior to the Queen of England, there the queen of England reteineth
only the supreme soueraintie, and therefore there may notwithstanding the said
objection, lawfully sentence the Scottish queen.

The 2. Objection.
AN other objection is made thus: The Scottish queen pursued by her own
subjects fled into the realm of England as a suppliant for succor, and
therefore of common courtesy she ought to be well entreated there, nor to be
detained as a prisoner, or if she were detained yet to have the liberty to be
put unto her ransom.

The Answer.
TO this may be answered, first that every person passing through or resiaunt
in another kingdom, without a safe conduct or pasport being not in amity or
league with the other is a lawful prisoner in the same. And therefore in all
the leagues that we make with the house of Burgu^die or kingdom of France, or
they with us, there is an express article or capitulation set down, vt sit
amicitia foedus and pax, and vt liceat per dulces aquas etc. commeare, that
there be an amity, league, and peace: and that it may be lawful for the
subjects to pass by water or land through the realm freely and without
impeachment.

Which being granted, than must we farther in this case consider, how that
until the last year there never was Foedus vel pax inita, any league or peace
made beween Scotland and England, but only Cessatio a billo, an abstinence
from the wars, whereby the Scottish Queen coming into England could not
challenge any liberty or freedom within that kingdom.

Than the law standing thus that no man Nisi confederatus retinet sibi
libertate^ in aliquo regno etc. L. non dubite ff. de captiuis.
No man can reteyne liberty in an other kingdom without he be in league, and
confederated with the king, or come into the realm by safe conduct: I think
it will not be gaine-said, but she was staide here and detained lawfully.

Again, it is not here to be past over in silence, how the Queen of Scots
usurped the style and arms of the crown of England, a thing most notorious to
the whole world.

Since therefore she was a Competitor of the crown, and thirsted after the
crown of this realm in possession, and could not be reclaimed from the same,
although by her Ambassadors she promised diverse times to do it: since God had
put her into her Majesty's hands, well might her Majesty take and keep her
until she had performed her promise.

For did not Tiberius deteine king Cotys? did not Constantine the Emperor, do
so with the Emperor Licinius? Did not Jews the French king, called Jews the
Pitiefull, do the like unto Barnard king of Italy? Does it not stand with the
law of nature, which is ( ius immutabile, a law immutable) for every person to
provide for the saftie of himself, and all that are committed unto his charge?

And if we should grant her, that she came in as a suppliant, and of free
will, and not driven in by tempest, when she meant (according to some writers)
to have gone into France: what if she came hither for succor? (as it may be
when she saw no other remedy she showed to be her intent) is it not as great
or more reason for our sovereign to succor her self as to succor her?

For if the Scottish queen thinks our queen bound by the law of nations, to
take her after this manner coming into her protection: does not the law of
nature teach our queen under color of protection to provide against
prodition?

So that whiles the other carried always with her this ambitious mind, to
bereave the queen our sovereign of her kingdom of England, if she had been
set at liberty, had she not been far more enabled to accomplish her desseines?
for otherwise to what intent did the princes and her allies, and all her
adherents desire, and thirst so much her enlargement, but to make her an head
to be set up in time of invasion against her Majesty?

But supposing that her Majesty had no just cause of her so doing and her
deteyning here, had been wholly unlawful, might she therefore seek to take
away the life from the queen of England?

The practice of so many horrible treasons, may not be shifted with this so
untrue and slight pretense, nor colored with a fair show of natures law:
for so many seditious unnatural and ungodly desseinmentes most repugnant to the
law of nature, and contrary to the laws both of God and man, can not abide
any such shift or color.

The 3. Objection.
THe two first objections made against the said honorable sentence, are in
regard of the Queen of Scotts person: But the two objections following, do
rather tend to the disalowance of the law, whereupon the sentence is
grounded. For (say they) although we should grant that one king may sentence
an other king delinquent and resident within his kingdom, we think it not
co^uenable that in the case of a king, the trial should be by the municipall
and statute law of the land, but only by the common and general law
received amongst all other nations.

Again since the law of Nations (as they say) punish the effect and not the
affect: him that has committed, not him that wills or intends treason,
that therefore they have dealt injuriously with the Scottish queen in punishing
her by death, for only willing and intending treason, which as yet had not the
intended effect.

The answer.
FOr answer to the first of these two objections. A Prince may be tried by
the municipall and statute law of the land, where he offends, the which
appears by one of the most ancient interpreters of the Civil law Albericus
de Rosate, and that in the case of a king sentenced for high treason, Albericus
L quisquis ad L Iuliam may. C D D in L 1. c de trinitate.
where he moves this said case, and resolves it thus:

Nonne vnusquisque delinquens iudicabitur secundum leges loci in quo deliquit?
Respondeo, verum est, si de intention legislatoris fuit, factum ipsum afficere
and omnem personam quae incideret in ipsum factum, Nam non plus extenditur lex
quam fuit de intention legislatoris: That is to say, Is not this agreed for
law, that every delinquent or offender against the law, shall be adjudged
according to the laws of the place where he committed his delict or offense?
That is true, (says he) if it were the mind and meaning of the maker of the
law, to punish that offense, and every person that should fall within the
compass of the said offense, for the law is never extended farther than the
intention of the law maker.

And was not the intention of the makers of the statute law, made the 27 of
her Majesty's reign, most evident after so many seditious desseignme^ts and
most wicked plots laid both for the indaungering of her highness most royal
person, and also for the ruin of the common weal, to devise a speedy remedy
for such an apparent mischief? Did not the wicked attempts of Throgmorton and
Parie, and the continual practice of fugitives beyond the seas, and
traitorous subjects at home, make it as clear as the sun in the eye and
heart of every good subject, how necessary it was to provide speedy remedy
herein? Did not (upon these respects, and to meet with these and such like
mischiefs) the whole Realm assembled in Parliament enact thus:

That if any open invasion or rebellion should be made, in, or within her
majesty's Realm, or dominions, or any act attempted tending to the hurt of
her Majesty's most royal person, by or for any person that should or might
pretend any title to the crown of this Realm, after her Majesty's decease,
or if any thing should be compassed or imagined tending to the hurt of her
Majesty's royal person, by any person or with the preuitie of any person,
that shall or may pretend title to the crown of this Realm: that then, such
person whatsoever should be within the compass of that law. Wherefore by
that law (as may be gathered both by the preamble and body of the act) the
said two great dangers were sought to be provided for, her Majesty's
preservation and the common peace of thole realm.

You will say it tended only to subjects.

To that I answer, it had been then a needelesse law, for those attemptes
by subjects by the common laws of this Realm, and so agnized by the statute
of 25. Ed. 3. de proditionibus, were high treason before, and therefore there
needed no new law for them.

For whom was this law then especially made? It plainly appears by that
which is before alleged, that it especially respects all those persons
whomsoever, that should or might pretend title to the imperial crown of this
Realm. And did not Marie of Scotland at, (and long time before) the making of
that act, pretend title to the crown of this Realm, not only to have it
after her Majesty's decease, but forthwith to be put in actual possession?
And did not the said Marie after the making of the said statute by her
subscription and letters, specially addressed from her to the Queens most
excellent Majesty, allow and give her assent to the same? Nevertheless after
the making of this act, and her said consent given thereunto, the monstrous
conspiracy of Babington, by her privy consent, and promise of reward for the
murdering of her Majesty's sacred person, and atcheiuing the crown and diadem
in full possession, was practiced and miraculously discovered. Which I need
not here particularly to deduce, since there was a most honorable sentence
given thereof by the most part, and the most auncientest of the nobility,
since their proceedinges were declared to the whole body of the Realm
assembled in Parliament, and of them received all allowance: since both the
houses often sued unto her Majesty, that according to law, justice might be
administered and since her highness at the great entreaty of her subjects,
suffered the sentence by Proclamation to be published, it plainly appears
that the intention of the law makers, was, that the law should reach unto the
Queen of Scots, and to every other person whosoever being a Competitour of
the kingdom. Wherefore it is manifest, that although this is statute law, yet
since it was the mind and intent of the makers that this law should reach
to the Queen of Scots, that by offending she is made subject unto it. Neither
is the statute law herein repugnant in substance to the law of Nations,
howbeit, there be some difference in some matter of circumstaunce: but the
same agrees with the laws both civil, and of Nations in substance, which
generally do inflict the penalty of death upon every one, that is a worker of
treason.

Besides, if the statute laws of England will bind the king himself for any
matter within his realm when the intention of the makers of the law is such
(as it is very plain and clear without all controversy, that it does) shall
not a statute law bind the queen of Scots, especially for mattter perpetrated
within the realm.

And as touching the said statute of the 27. she could not pretend ignorance,
for that she had understanding of it: nor allege a mislike thereof, for that by
her voluntary subscription, she had approved it: nor except against the
severity of the law, because it is agreeable both to the civil law of the
Romans, and also to the law and custom of her own country: and therefore it
may be said to her, Non potest quis improbare quod ipse approbauit, a man may
not be contrary to himself in disalowing that which himself has allowed.

Also Patere legem. quam ipse tuleris, suffer the same law which you have made
your self. She meant death to the queen of Englands person, let her not
therefore mislike if the queen of England does minister the like measure to
her person: for as it has been near fifteen hundred years ago truly
written:

Non est lex aequior vlla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
No iuster law can reason crave
The^ seeking death, the same to have.
Also it is a rule of the civil law grounded upon the law of nature: Id debet
cuique placere in sua persona quod placuerit in aliena, that every man ought
to like that in his own person, which he would have done in the person of
another: neither does the privilege of dignity in the person alter the nature
and quality of the offense in case of treason, howsoever it does in other
cases, as before I have sundry ways confirmed.

The 4. objection.
THE fourth objection made against the sentence and excution of the Scottish
queen is another exception taken against the law of the land, because in the
case of treason it punishes as severely the intent as the deed, the mind in
conspiring as the hand in executing: for thus they reason.

It is both against the law of nations and the law of nature, howsoever it be
according to the law of your land to put a queen to death for a bare and
naked intent, an imagined treason, be it never so heinous, when there follows
no hurt. For when her desseines, neither did nor could hurt the Queen of
England, as never having their intended effect: what reason is it to punish a
fancy and fear of treason with so great a punishment as death?

The Answer.
TO this, I make this answer, that the law of England, herein inflicteth
none other punishment for treason, than the civil law and law of nations
throughout the whole world, commands, uses, and practices.

The civil law has these words, Eadem seueritate voluntatem sceleru quae
effectum puniri iura voluerunt: L. quisquis C. ad L. Iuliam. maiestatis.
the laws will have him that conspireth treason, to be punished with the same
severity as him that does commit it.

Again, not only in the case of high treason, but also in omnibus
atrocioribus delictis punitur affectus, licet no^ sequatur effectus, in all
criminal offenses of the highest degree, the affect is punished, although no
effect follow. And this law has not only been so observed generally in all
nations above twelve hundred years past: but there was many hundred years
before Christ's time, in casu perduellionis, in the case of treason committed
against the state, the like law called ( lex 12 tabularum) established, 12.
Tabularum ff. ad L. Iuliam. maiestatis.
which inflicteth death for the will and intent of treason. And therefore the
said two Emperors Arcadius and Honorius in their co^stitution made against
treason, said not volumus, D. L. quisquis ad L. Iuliam.
sed sic iura voluerunt, the laws were so before their time.

But to say that there ought, in offenses of the highest degree no punishment
to ensue, unless the act were consummate: were most against law, for two
special causes. The one for that such hope of impunitie would encourage
malefactors to practice most dangerous and audacious attempts against kings
and commonweals. Secondly if they stay to punish till the fact be done, the
loss will be irrecuperable: and the offense, as this case is in a competitor
(though most heinous) dispunishable. For in this case in question, the death of
her Majesty (whom God ever preserve) being taken away, all commissions and
magistracies for judicial places should cease: so that this being contrived by
a co^petitor to the kingdom, (as the Queen of Scots by open and express
accord has often declared herself) the same offense by the access or taking
upon her the crown and dignity should by law be purged and the competitor
cleared.

For king Henry the sixth, after the overthrow given him by king Edward the
fourth, was by act of Parliament disabled from his crown and dignity. And yet
afterward, the said king in his redemption held Parliament, and in the same
the question did grow, whether there needed any reuersall of the said former
act made against the said king. It was resolved that no reuersall was
needful, but ipso facto that the said king Henry the vj. took upon him the
royal dignity to be king, whether it were de iure or de facto that all the
fame was void.

The like came in question in the first year of king Henry the vij. at the
first Parliament, by him holden: and received the same resolution. For the
place does so dignifie the person, that all steine of former acts, is clean
washed away: and so the Queen of Scotts, if she might have brought her
practices to execution meant, (as these pleaders or rather plodders, about
delictum consummatu^ mean) to have escaped unpunished.

Seeing than the law of England in case of treason, is no other than Lex per
omnes gentes diffusa, the law spredde abroad through out all Nations, by the
which generally all the Nations of the world are governed, kings obeyed,
offenses punished: I think it appears to any indifferent Reader, unto how
broken a staff they lean, that cite the law of Nations against us.

And whereas they add farther that the law of Nature makes for the Scottish
Queen in this behalf: I take that objection farther out of square than the
other.

Of this law Tullie writes very gravely in his book of common wealth in this
wise: Cicero. lib. 3. de republica.
Est vero lex recta ratio, naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, constans,
sempiterna, quae vocet ad officium iubendo, vetando a fraud deterreat. There
is a law which is reason it self, agreeable to Nature, imprinted in the
hearts of all, always one and the same, and whereof there is no end, which
puts every man in mind to do his duty by commanding, and withholdeth
every man from doing wrong by forbidding.

Now is this Recta ratio to practice a Princess death, Rectaratio.
and for a kingdom, to thirst after the blood of an innocent? If this be no
reason, but a Counsel reasonlesse: then what is more agreeable to reason than
this, that the Scottish Queen should have that done to her, which she meant
to have done to our Sovereign.

And what is more disagreeable to reason, than that the Prince should not
punish the intent of a Traitor, until he had murdered the prince, and
brought his wicked purpose to effect? Is there any thing more absurd and
vnconsonant to reason, than for a king still to spare the Conspirator till the
Conspirator has made away the king?

Neither is this naturae congruens, Naturae congruens.
agreeable to nature for a Prince to incite, to counsel, to promise a reward
unto subjects to kill their own liege Lady and Sovereign.

For Florentinus says, Flore^tinus L. vt vini de instit. and iure ff.
that cum natura cognationem quandam inter homines constituerit, hominem homini
insidiari nefas est: seeing nature has conjoined men in a certain kindred, it
is nefarious for one man to destroy another. And as this is unnatural and
monstrous for a man to compass the death of his brother: so this is contrary
and repugnant to nature, for a man by all possible means not to defend
himself. For as Tully says: Cicero pro Milone.
Est haec non scripta sed nata lex: quam non didicimus, accepimus, degimus,
veru^ ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus: ad qua^ no^ docti sed
facti, no^ instituti sed imbuti sumus: vt si vita nostra in aliquas insidias,
si in vim atque in tela aut latronu^ aut inimicoru^ incidisset, omnis honestae
ratio esset expediendae salutis: There is a law (says he) not written for us,
but borne with us: which we have not learned, received, or read of other, but
which we have taken, drawn, and wrested from nature herself: unto which we
are not taught by other, but borne by nature, not instructed, but naturally
inclined: that if our life shall fall into any danger, violence, or weapons of
thieves or enemies, in that case every means to save and succor our selves,
is both honest and commendable. Silent enim leges inter arma, nec se expectari
iubent, cum ei qui expectare velit, iniusta poena luendae sit, quam iusta
repetenda: For the laws are silent among princes weapons: neither do command,
that they should be regarded, when he that has regard unto them must abide
some unjust punishment before, that any good means by them can be had to
punish the offender. And not only this (to defend himself) is according to
nature, but this is also, to cut off evils in the first spring, least by
sufferance they grow so strong, that hereafter, when men would, they cannot
remedy them.

Further is added by Tullie: Diffusa in omnes.
Diffusa in omnes, that it is generally received of all nations: Constans,
that is constant, Constans.
always one and the same, not variable either in respect of person, place, or
time, but to all persons, and in all places, and times it is one, the same, and
like it self.

Sempiternall, Sempi terna. Quae vocet ad officiu m iubendo, veiando, a fraud
deterreat
which has been from the beginning, and shall continue the same to all
succeeding ages that shall come hereafter, whose property is inwardly to
speak to a man's heart showing what he should follow, and what he should
forsake.

Now had the Scottish queen this warrant from nature? and did nature teach her
to kill her Protector? Or if her nature did so instruct her, is this the
conscience of all other? and are these the defires of good men's hearts? has
this been the practice of natures law, which has been from everlasting, and
is always to continue?

Nay since the law of Nature is imprinted in the heart of man, and there
shows what he should will, or what he should intend: whosoever does not so
will and so intend to do, as this law commands, he is not to be accounted
an obseruer but a breaker of the law. And therefore for them to appeal to the
law of Nature, for excuse of their evil purpose or doing, is either to make
Nature repugnant to her self, or to give sentence against them for their evil
intent.

Wherefore as these properties of the Law of Nature nothing make for the
Scottish Queen, but are wholely abhorrent from her endeavors: (for who dare say
that such her complots are approueable by nature) so they are a great warrant
to her Majesty, when there is no means left to save both, than by the others
death to provide for the safety of her own person and her Realm. For this
Nature teaches, and the conscience within, better than a thousand witnesses
does warrant, this has been the guise of all Nations, other Princes have
done it before, and they that do come after will do the same.

And as the will that wills treason is therefore culpable, because it so
wills: so is it likewise punishable if it be known. But in this case of the
Scottish Queen, there was not only treason in her will, and in her secret
intent, (a thing much repugnant to the good instinct of Nature) but also her
intent was communicated unto other, concluded on with other. And howbeit she
failed of her main purpose, which was to have her Majesty killed, the land
ouerrunned, and her self to be possessed of the crown: yet she had her forth
in many her desseinmentes, as the rebellion in the North, the confederacy of
foreign Princes to invade the land, the coniuration of natural English, most
unnaturally to destroy their own Sovereign, and many other.

Wherefore since the will and intent in heinous faults, by Civil law is to
be punished by death, and nature likewise reproves and punishes every unjust
thought, since the other did still will and ingeminate her treasons, and still
would if she could bring it to effect, since in this her case, there is not
only her will to desire treason, but her approuement to allow, and promise to
reward the same, accompanied with many other seditious deseignes: who can say
that so to will, deserves not death, although the will lacks both force and
forth, and brings not all that is conspired to effect.

That in two especial cases, the drawing of the sword of one Prince against
an other, is not only lawful, but necessary.
ALthough the persons of Princes are most sacred, and the majesty of an
absolute king very reverend, as being the Lords anointed, advanced by him
to their imperial crowns and dignities, in such sort as it behooves every
man reverently to speak of them, and in all dutiful sort to demean themselves
toward them: yet since there be evil Princes as well as good, such which have
made themselves unworthy to rule, whom God has thrust from their crown: it
is not amiss for the contentment of other, (if so be there be any so evil,
that is therewith discontented) to prove unto them, how lawefull it is in
these two cases, for one absolute Prince to draw his sword against an other.
And that is, first, where the royal person of a Prince, is by another Princes
means endaungered of life: that then and in this case, he may redeem his own
life and safety, by the death and destruction of that other.

Secondly, where not the life of the Prince, but the disturbance of the public
weal, the subversion of the state is intended and sought for, and likely
without this last remedy to ensue: In this case to save his country, and
people, whom God has committed to his charge, a Prince may lawfully sentence
the abfolutest Monarche in the world.

For the first, I take it as well by the learned in the law of God as by those
of the law Civil allowed of, that Charitas incipit a se, charity or love
begins at it self: unto which accords that which Florentinus writes quod
quisque ob tutelam corporis sui facit, hoc iure fecisse existimatur. L 3. de
iustitia and iure.
That which every man does for the safegarde of his person, he is deemed to
have done it lawfully. The which Tullie in these words farther shows:
Cicero pro Milone.
hoc and ratio doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos gentibus, and feris
natura ipsa praescripsit: vt omnem semper vim quacunque open possent, a corpore,
a capite, a vita sua propulsarent. This both reason has taught the learned,
and necessity the ignorant, and custom all Nations, and nature it self the
wild and savage beasts: that they should by all means possible, preserve
their lives from all violence.

The which being granted, 1. case lawefull for one king to draw his sword
against an other, when his life is endaungered.
then where a Prince has no means left him, by the evil and treacherous
practices of that other, to save his own life, but this one: in this case he
may reward the other according to the wickedness of his ways, give the
others life a ransom for his own, and bring that due death on him, which
unjustly he had thought to have inflicted on an other. For since nature and
wisdom teaches this, if so be there fall out so desperate a case of two
evils, to choose the least: when one cannot as he would, to do then (as he
may) that which makes for the best: what should a Prince in this case do?
should he suffer himself unjustly to be murdered as an innocent? or should he
justly draw out his sword against the nocent? Let a man, let a Prince, make
this case his case, and say, what would he? would he betray his own guiltless
blood, and suffer the wicked to have his forth? would he still lie at the
ward, and never strike, being so often assaulted? If so be there be one found
so void of reason, so careless of himself, yet is not God delighted
therewith: for he would have us to prevent the occasions of greater evil, and
to punish the wicked for their sins. For be he the greatest Monarch of the
world, yet God neither likes nor approves folly in him, neither would he
have any man to be a furtherer of him in his sin.

And do not Princes sin in compassing the death of other innocent and
harmless princes? Cicero in his book of duties.
As God abhors this fact in them, so he disliketh all them that further it,
all that will not hinder it. For as Tully says, he that hinders not evil
when he may, is as well in fault as he that did it.

May then Princes punish treasonable facts, and will they suffer them
unpunished, when they are again and again attempted, and likely to effect
their intended purpose? if they do thus suffer, they do not hinder but
further treason: and are in a sort guilty (if after they miscarrie) of their
own death. For if they had punished them for the first attempts, they had
freed themselves from the danger of the second: but by winking at, and
pardoning the first, they themselves are in cause of their after misfortune.
Which if it should follow, that an over merciful Prince should be murdered by
his Competitor whom he spared: whether had it been better in it self, or more
allowable by the laws of God and man that a wicked Prince which had often
practiced, and at length has compassed the death of another, should first
himself have been put to death, than that an innocent and harmless Prince
should by the villainous practice of that other, be traiterouslie flaine? Surely
justice and vengeance will soon make aunsweare, and teach us what answer in
this case we should make. For what is more absurd, than that the Prince should
stay from taking away the Conspirator till the Conspirator has taken away the
Prince? Or who is there that should think that the law in this case does not
account even in a Prince, voluntatem pro facto, the very intention, for the
act, where post factum, that is, after the deed done, and the prince flaine,
there is neither law nor magistrate remaining.

Neither is this without many notable presidents: Cicero pro^ege Deiotaro.
for when Tully pleaded for Deiotarus king of Gallograecia, he was so far from
vrgeing or standing on the pre-eminence and prerogative of a king, that he
confessed, if Castor the kings nephew could have justified his accusation, to
wit, that the said king had gone about to make war on Caesar, or any ways
to have conspired against his person: that than he was worthy to suffer
death, Cicero Orat. prorege Deiotaro.
Non est (inquit) iniquum in tuo duntaxat periculo, Caesar, vt rex reus capitis
arguatur, Not unlawful for a king to be arraigned of life and death.
if thy life, O Caesar be shot at, and endaungered, than is it not an unlawful
thing for a king to be arraigned of life and death.

In like manner all the Doctors of the law in both the kingdoms of Naples and
Sicelie being asked their judgment by king Charles aforesaid, The opinion of
the learned in Italy in this case.
what by law he might do with king Conradine his prisoner: Collinutiue. li 4.
they gave this their sentence for law, that he might lawfully put him to
death.

Neither was this the judgment of the lawyers alone, Henricus Gildefingensis
in historia Austriaca. A popes judgment in this case.
but it was by Pope Clement the 4. when he was in the same case consulted,
answered, in vita Conradini mors Caroli, mors Caroli vita Conradini, that is,
Collinutius. li. 4. The articles of treason laid to king Conradines charge, and
comprehended in the sentence. Note the very same case of sentence against the
Scottish queen, as was against Conradine.
the life of Conradine is Charles death, and the death of Charles, is the life
of Conradine. whereupon there ensued a solemn sentence against the said
Conradine in these words, Quia Conradinus ecclesiae pacem perturbauit, Regiu^
nomen falso sibi adsumpsit and regi mortem intentauit: morte damnamus, because
Conradine has troubled the peace of the Church, and unjustly has taken on him
the name and title of the king and conspired his death: we condemn him to die.

The like cause moved the virtuous and merciful Emperor Constantine the
Great, Eusebius, Mexia, Socraies, and a lij.
to put first Maximinianus the emperor, whose daughter he had married, and
after that, Licinius the Emperor his brother in law to death; and so by the
death of others to purchase the safety of himself: neither ought this to move
a disdain of the punisher, Non me paena dolet, sed me ruisse doles.
or pity toward the punished in other Princes hearts. For if evil kings be
not ashamed to practice and compass the death of kings and princes, their
equals in dignity: what reason have good kings to pity such shameless
princes, when they are justly punished for their demerites? That which thou
approuest in thy self, dislike not in another
since they have disgraced their princely order conspired against their equals,
and made themselves unworthy to reign, and unworthy to live.

Nay what prince would not commend and wish that his were such a people, that
in so extreme and desperate a case, would for the safety of their Sovereign,
labor what they could, in an orderly proceeding the death of another? For
since they have but one head unto whom they are sworn; since they have but one
anointed whom God has set over them: whosoever he be that seeks by
treachery to bereave their Sovereign of his life, or by open force to trouble
their estate; though he be a prince and anointed of the Lord, yet unto them he
is no prince, nor given of God to rule over them; but a stranger, and (as he by
his own desseines has made himself) an enemy. Wherefore since no good prince
will accept him as his fellow and equal, that is the secret co^triuer of
another princes death; since necessity enforces, and the miserable estate of
princes otherwise requires, that, which nature teaches, reason urges; God
allows; the presidents of princes, the advice of popes; the censure of
lawyers, the authority of the law (which is the most egall judge) farther
confirms and approves: Let no man think strange that one prince may
redeem his saftie by the death of an other, Pereat Adonia, and viuat Solomon.

The second case.
AND touching the second point, Lawful for the king to draw his sword against
an other king for the preservation of the public peace.
as it is lawful in a prince for the safety of his life, which the other
daily seeks to destroy, to draw his sword against another; so much rather,
when together with his own person the good estate of his whole people and
common wealth is endangered: For this the prince is sworn to preserve unto
them in duty and conscience he is bound, these he ought to prefer before his
own life, or whatsoever is dearest to him in the world. There is no such
bonds of friendship betwixt him and any other, no such favor and love to be
showed, but in regard of his country, in regard of his people to him, they
ought to be of far less account and value: Tullie.
Nulla potest esse lex sanctior quam rei publicaesalus, nec vinculum arctius
quam quod est patriae. For as this stands with the prince his honor to save a
prince that is worthy to be saved: so how does this stand with his honor,
not to respect the future safety of his people? to save a prince that is
unworthy to be saved, nay that is likely to be the very ruin and calamity of
his country. So that if the case so stands, that he must needs allow the
execution of some or by sufferance be the cause of the overthrow of his
country: he were impious to his country, cruel to his people, That is
merciles cruelty, that saves one to the plague of many.
that would choose the safety of one, with the ruin and destruction of many,
rather then the saftie of many thousands of his people with the death of one,
which deserves to die. And this appears more plain in an Epistle of S.
Austin to Boniface, and is canonized in the decrees, Augustinus in Epist. ad
Bonisacium cap. 23. q. c. noli.
Sicut bellanti and resistenti violentia redditur, ita victorijs cap to
misericordia iam debetur: maxim in quo pacis perturbatio non timetur. By which
decree appears, that whereas any stir or trouble of the peace public is
feared, there severe justice, and not remiss mercy is to be extended.

So in this sense the said law has been in the like case of princes,
Hugolinus. Ioh. de lignano in tractaiu de bello.
namely in the case of king Conradine by Hugolinus, and other the best learned
of their time, ruled and adjudged, as Ioh. de lignano reports, and not
without great reason: for else to save one particular person for pity sake,
The reason and Soul of the law.
and to show no spark of pity to the whole realm, were no mercy at al, but
a pitilesse cruelty. For as S. Austine says: Sicut est misericordia puniens,
ita est crudelitas parcens as there is mercy in punishing, Augustinus ad
Marcellum.
so there is cruelty in sparing: which by many presidents of sundry princes
may be showen.

For Solomon (unto whom for wisdom no Prince was ever comparable) when he
considered what was intended by his brother Adonia, (who yet thirsted and
longed for his crown) making a conscience to endaunger the life of his
subjects, the which assuredly had followed, if either Adonia, 1. Regum. 2.
or any for him, had taken arms: without any farther process, he commanded
him to be taken and slain.

So did the virtuous and most merciful Empe^rour Constantine, Eusebius, Mexia,
and alii.
upon the like fear of a new insurrection and destruction of his people, take
away the life of the Emperor Li^^nius.

So did king Henry the 5. after his glorious victory over the French at
Egincourt, Grafton in his Cronicles on the reign of H. 5.
show great clemency unto the persons that were taken: but when his tents
were spoiled, and he justly feared a new assault: then contrary to his
accustomed pity, he commanded every man upon pain of his life, to kill his
prisoner: for then to have spared them, beginning a second fight might have
turned to the destruction of him and his whole army.

And therefore least a prince might seem to honor one above the safety of
his people, and to leese the hearts of his loyal subjects, by not having
care of them, and their posterity; least the massacring of them be reputed his
fault, and God require their blood at his hand; least by his conniuencie he
should embolden the hearts of the wicked, and cause his subjects to take part
with the enemy: he may well conclude as in the like case did Cicero, Natura
me clementem, sed patria seuerum fecit, Tullie contra Catelinam.
Nature made me pitiful, but the love of my country has made me cruel.
Pereat Absolon and viuat Israel.

The Conclusion.
WHerefore let all the world witness, and the consciences of good men, which
without all partial affection in the singlenes of their hearts, follow and
favor a truth, what the Prince and people of England for the glory of God, and
furtherance of his truth, for the safeguard of her Majesty and preservation of
their estate, either could or should have done rather than this; by the death
of one troublesome, and treason-working person, to have redeemed the quiet and
safety of themselves.

For since she has taken on her the arms and title of the crown of England,
and refused to repeal her doings being thereunto solicited: since she has
been the ruin of many worshipful houses, and cause of the destruction of some
of the Nobility.

Since she incited the rebels of the North to leauie open war against her
Majesty; and relieved them being fled, by her friends in Scotland; and
afterward by the Pope, who through her procurement sent to their relief in
Flaunders, 12000. crowns: Nay since, not content with all this, she has
labored by her letters and ministers, sundry foreign princes to invade this
realm: and the pope and Spanish king, with sundry co^bined and co^federed,
have a long time intended, in part have practiced, and are now in some
readiness to perform the same.

Since her feed servant Morgan practiced with Parrie to murder our Sovereign,
and she after she knew it, yet favored and maintained him still.

Since by her priuitie consent and direction, Babington with his company
would have killed her Majesty, and she promised to reward their doings in
them, or if they miscarried in their posterity.

Let kings and princes and all nations of the earth witness, whether ever so
many, so monstrous, so horrible treasons were committed by a prince, a woman,
and that against the Lords anointed, in her own realm and if they were, yet
that ever they escaped unpunished.

And here although so many impieties do call for vengeance and command by
Gods law every Magistrate to justice so high a trespasser: yet, see, upon
pity rather than policy; hoping for amendment, rather than looking for a
new conspiracy; not harkening to the manifold requests of her humble,
loyal, and most loving subjects, her majesty continued her a troublesome
Jonas in the ship of England still: yet notwithstanding after, since the
graceless minds of malecontented subjects, could not so be satisfied, nor her
Majesty's great clemency could work in them a conscience of their duty, but
like nettles the gentler they were handled, the more they stinged.

Since after her condempnation published, the Scottish Queens fauorits, yet
again and again, practiced the death of her Majesty:

Since the Pope for her sake has cursed our sovereign and his seeds men
teach, that the Queen is no Queen, if the Pope depose her:

Since they have encouraged her evil minded subjects, to move rebellion, and
like vipers brood to gnaw out the womb of our common mother:

Since her favorites concluded at home, that which was consulted abroad, and
is of late confessed by them, to invade our Realms, ouerrun the land, spoil
the Cities, massacre the subjects, destroy her Majesty, and together with
religion to make a change of the government that is now amongst us, nay to
subject us all, our goods, lands, liberties, children, posterity, to the
slavery and tyranny of the Spanish and foreign power.

Since the whole Realm assembled in Parliament made their many and humble
petitions unto her Majesty, as specially interressed in the matter being the
body of the same common wealth, whereof her Majesty is the head, by taking
away one to deliver them all from their present fears and future dangers.
Since her Majesty was moved by remembrance of her oath, than solemnly taken
when she was invested in her crown to distribute justice equally to all, and to
defend her Realm, and people, crown, and dignity, from the pestilent
underminers and subuerters of the same; since the matter grew so dangerous,
and came to that extremity, that either her Majesty must justice and sentence
the Scottish Queen, or must hazard the loss of her life, the disturbance of
the common peace, the conquest of her country, the loss of the love and
hearts of her subjects, without which no Prince can well govern, or kingdom
stand.

Since the like sentence and execution of life and death, as the Scottish
Queen has received is testified, confirmed and warranted by the testimonies,
reasons, and examples of so many Emperors, Kings, and Popes. Since no law
will save so high a trespasser, but the law of Nations, of Nature, and of every
kingdom and country would inflict death on so great offenders.

Since the like sentence and execution have been practiced and put in ure by
godly and Christian Princes, and that upon consultation disputation and
resolution of the cause by learned men of the law.

Sithence the statute law of every kingdom, where the intent of the law
makers is such, does bind as well the king himself as every other king coming
within and offending in that jurisdiction.

Since the Queen of Scots by her delict and manifold offenses, made herself so
fubiect to the laws of this country, as if she had actually consented to them.

What man of reason, in whom there is any natural love to his country or
appearance of an honest man would not counsel by justice to remove the Scottish
queen; the very plague and calamity of our country, the very groundwork and
chief impulsive cause of all these treasons and conspiracies; the hope of
disconte^ted subjects; and the very cause, for who^ the Pope thundereth and
keeps this stir, for who^ so many monsters have adventured themselves to
destroy her Majesty, and for whose sake other pretend to have just cause
offered to invade this land.

To conclude, since that mercy is without mercy, that spares one to the
spoil of so many; since to do justice on the offender cannot be but honorable,
and God is well pleased in the punishment of the wicked; since there was no
hope of reconcilement with one, which deadly hated, and was still aspiring to
the present possession of the kingdom; since there was no remedy left, but to
justice her, or to live in continual fear of being daily murdered, many
attempting since her sentence published to destroy her Majesty: Since many
good princes have redeemed their safeties with the death of other, and there is
no just place or cause left to her of complaint, that is so dealt with, as she
would have dealt with other.

Let other princes and people of the earth make the queen of Englands case,
their case and the state of England, the state of their country: than I doubt
not but as England has done, so would they have done: and as England is right
sorry, that such treasons were committed, so would they sorrow, if they escaped
unpunished.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the first chapter.
IN the 3. page in margin, examinution, for examination. In the 5. page
maintenatce, for maintenance. 6. page in marg. letters imploiment, for, letters
of imploiment. Ibid. Petrus exea, for Pe^^us Mexia. 8. page laly, for Italy.
In the 2. Analogy, First page by any writer, for by any good writer. Ibid. in
margin, marentij, for maxentij. 2. page in marg college for colleague. 6. page
in fine, to England, for of England. In the 3. chapter. Sixth page that than
postested in the kingdom, for, that than were possessed in the kingdom. Ibid.
page Conradine king, for Conrade king. prisoned, for, poisoned. he bequeathed,
for, who bequeathed. Ione Neapolitan Queen, for, Ione the Neapolitan Queen.
In the 4. chapter. In marg. 2. page of putting a king to death, pro, for
putting a king to death. In the 5. chapter, second page presciencie, for
prescience. Ibidem made in the same effect, for, to the same effect. 3. page
than being kept close prisoner, for, than this to be kept a close prisoner. 4.
page an offense given in the highest degree, for, an offense committed in the
highest degree. 3. page therein, adding. without comma therein. in the time of
Embassy, for in the time of their Embassy. In the 6. chapter. And is a law,
for, it is a law. Fardinand Vaskins, for, Vaskius. to the 3. objection, her
privy consent, for, her priuitie, consent, and promise. to the 4. objection,
express accord, for, express action. In the 7. chapter. in vita Conradini,
for, vita Conradini.

Anthony Babingtons letter to the Queen of Scots.
MOST mighty, most excellent, my dread Sovereign Lady and Queen, unto whom
Only obedience to the Queen of Scots: ^rgo not to the Queen of England.
only I do owe all fidelity and obedience. It may please your gracious
Majesty to admit excuse for my long silence and discontinuance from your
duetifull office, incepted upon the remove of your Royal person from the
ancient place of your aboade, to the custody of a wicked puritan, a mortal
enemy both by faith and faction to your Majesty and state Catholic, I held the
hope of your countries The weal of the realm to depend upon the Queen of
Scots.
weal (depending next under God upon the life and health of your Majesty,) to
be desperate, and thereupon resolved to depart the land, determining to spend
the remna^t of my life in such solitary sort as the wretched and miserable
estate of my country did require, only He expected the confusion of the realm.
expecting according to the just judgment of God the deserved confusion
thereof (which the Lord of his mercy sake prevent:) the which my purpose being
in execution and standing upon my departure, there was addressed unto me from
the parts beyond the seas, one Ballard the traitor comme^ ded for a man of
virtue, and zealous to their religion and the Squeens service.
Ballard a man of virtue and learning, and of a singular zeal to the Catholic
cause, and your Majesty's service, the man informed me of great preparation by
the Christian princes your Majesty's Allies for the deliverance of our
country, Preparation by Christian princes her may. allies of fortaine
invasion for alteration of religion.
from the extreme and miserable estate, wherein it has so long remained.
which when I understood, my special desire was, to advise by what means I
might with the hazard of my life and my friends general, to do your sacred
Majesty One good days service.
one good days service.

Whereupon most dread Sovereign, according to the great care, which those
princes have of the preservation and safe deliverance of your May. sacred
person, I advised of means and considered of circumstances according to the
weight of the affairs. And after long considerations and conference had with
so many of your wisest and most trusty, The consultation.
as with safety I might commend the secrecy thereof unto: I do find (by the
assistaunce of our Lord Jesus) assurance of good effect and desired fruit of
our travel. These things are first to be advised in this great and honorable
action upon the issue of which depends not only the life of your most
excellent Ma. (which GOD long preserve to our most inestimable comfort and the
salvation of English souls, Upon these traitorous actions depended 1. the life
of the Sc. Qu. 2. thewealth of the country 3. restoration of faith. 4.
redemption from heresy.
and the life of us al actors heerin) but also the wealth of our country far
then our lives more dear unto us, and the last hope ever to recover the faith
of our forefathers and to redeem our selves from the servitude and bondage
which heresy has imposed us, with the loss of a 1000 souls. First assuring
of invasion with sufficient strength in the inuadors parts to arrive well
appointed with a strong part at every place to join with them and warrant the
landing, the deliverance of your Ma. the dispatch of the usurped He calls our
Queen an usurped competitor.
competitor, for the These desperate practiscs undertaken by B.
effectuating of all which it may please your Excellency to rely upon my
service, I vow and I protest before the face of almighty god (who has
miraculously long preserved your sacred person no doubt tosome universal good
end) that what I have said shall be To be performed or to dye.
performed, or al our bodies happily lost in the execution thereof, Which The
traitors vow and oath taken.
vow all the chief actors herein have taken solemly, and are upon assurance by
your Majesty's letters unto me to receive the blessed sacrament thereupon,
either to prevail in the Churches behalf and your May. or fortunately to
die for the honorable cause.

Now forasmuch as the delay is extreme dangerous, it may please your
Excellent Ma. by your wisdom to direct us, and by your princelye authority to
enable such as may aduau^ce the affairs foreseeing that there is not any of the
nobility at liberty, assured to your Majesty in this desperate service (except
unknown to us.) And seeing it very necessary that some there be to become
heads to lead the multitude, ever disposed by nature in this land to follow
some noble man to be head.
Nobilitye, considering withal it does not only make the commons and the
country to follow, without contradiction or contention, which is ever found
in equalitye, but also does add great courage to the Adds courage to the
leaders.
leaders. For which necessary regards I would recommend some to your
majesty, as fittest in my knowledge to be your Liuetenants in the Weste
parts, in the North parts, Southwales and Northwales, the Counties of
Lancaster Derbie and Stafford.

All which countries by parties already made, and fidelity taken in your
Majesty's name, I hold us most assured and of undoubted fidelity. My self
with 10. The delivery of the Queen of Scots.
gentlemen and an hundred followers will undertake the delivery of your royal
person from the hands of your enemies, from the dispatch of the usurped (from
the obedience of whom, by the execution of her we are made free Our Queens
death the Catholics freedom.
) There be 6. noble The tragical execution by 6 gentlemen.
Gentlemen al my private friends who for the zeal they bear to the Catholic
cause, and your Majesty's service, will undertake that tragical execution. It
rests according to their infinite good deserts and your majesty's bounty
their honorable attempt may be honorably Ambition and aspiring hope.
rewarded in them (if they escape with life) or in their posterity, and that
so much I may be able by your Majesty's authority to assure them. Now it
remains only, that by your Majesty's wisdom it be reduced into The S.
queen to prescribe the method of thesetraiterous actions.
method, that your happy deliverance be first, for that therevppon depends
the only good, and that all other circumstances so concur that the
untimely fall of one end do not overthrow the rest. Al which your Majesty's
wonderful experience and wisdom will dispose of in so good manner, as I
doubt not through Gods assistance all shall come to desired effect. For the
obteyning of which every one of us shall think his life most happilye spent.
Upon the 12. day of this month I will be at Leichfield expecting your Majesty's
answer and letters, in readiness to execute what by them shall be commanded.

Your Majesty's most faithful subject, and sworn servant Anthony Babinton

The Queen of Scots letter to Anthony Babington. xij. July. 1586.
TRusty and well-beloved. According to the zeal and entire affection which I
have known in you toward the Two things in tended. 1 rehgion 2 her cause.
common cause of religion and Her cause 1 for her delivery 2 bringing in of
foreign forces 3 the murdring of the Qu. ma. 4 Rebellion within the Realm.
mine: having always made account of you, as a principal and right worthy
member to be employed both in the one and the other: It has been no less
consolation unto me, to understand your estate, as I have done by your last,
and to have found means to renew mine intelligence with you; than I felt
grief all this while paste, to be without the fame. I pray you therefore from
hence forth to write unto me so often as you can of all occurrances which you
may judge in any wise important to the good of my affairs. Whereunto I shall
not fail to corresponde with all the care and diligence that shall be in my
possibility. For diverse great and important considerations which were here too
long to be deduced, I cannot but greatly praise and commend your common desire
to prevent in time the desseignment of our enemies for the extirpation of our
religion out of this realm, with the ruin of us all. For I have long
Pretenses long sithence with other princes for alteration of religion here.
ago shown unto the foreign Catholic princes, and experience does approve
it, the longer that they and we by delay of execution of the complotts the
number of Papists diminished.
delay to put helping hand on the matter on this side, the greater leisure have
our said enemies to prevail and win advantage over the said princes, as they
have done against the king of Spain. And in the mean time the Catholics
here remaining exposed to all kind of persecution and cruelty, do daily
diminish in number, forces, means, and power. So as if remedy be not
thereunto hastelye provided, I fear not a little, but that they shall become
altogether unable for ener to arise again, and to receive any aid at all,
whenever it were offered them. For mine own part I pray you to assure our
principal freindes, that albeit I had not in this cause any particular
interest (that which I may pretend unto being of no consideration unto me in
respect of the public good of this state) I shall be always ready and most
willing to imploye therein my life and all that I have, or may ever look for
in this world. Now for to ground substantially this enetrprise, and to bring
it to good success, you must first examine deeply what Forces of rebels and
capteins to be prepared in every shire in englad
forces as well on foot as on horse, you may raise amongst you all, and what
captains you shall appoint for them in every shire, in case a chief general
cannot be had. Of what towns, Ports and havens to be assured for landing.
Ports, and havens you may assure your selves of, as well in the North, Weste,
as Southe, to receive Succor from France, Spain and the low untr^yes.
succor. from the Low Countries, Spain, and France What ^co be place
fittest to assemble their forces
place you esteem fittest and of greatest, advantage to assemble the
principal company of your forces at, and the same being assembled which way
you have to march. What What foreign forces would be required
foreign forces as well on horse as foot, you require, which would be
compassed conform to the proportion of yours) for how long pay and what What
provision for munitio^, money etc
munition and ports the fittest for their landing in this realm, from the
three foresaid foreign Countries. What provision of money and armor (in case
you want) you would ask. By what means do the six The 6. gentlemen's
proceeding.
Gentlemen deliberate to proceed. Her own deliverance.
And the manner also of my getting forth of this hold upon which points
having taken amongst you (who are the principal authors, and also as few in
number as you can) the best resolution, my aduife is that you imparte the same
with all diligence, to Bernardino de Me^doza, To impart all to Bernardine de
Mendoza
Ambassador Leiger for the king of Spain in France, who beside the experience
he has of the state of this side, I may Her assurance of the spanishe
ambassador.
assure you will imploye himself most willinglye. I shall not fail to write
unto him of the matter with all the earnest recommendations that I can, as I
shall also to any else that shall be needful.

But you must make choice for managing of this affair with the said Mendoza
and others out of the realm, of some faithful and very secreat personage,
unto whom only you must commit your selves, to the end things be kept
more secreat, which for your own securitye I commend unto you above the rest.
If your Messenger bring you back again sure promise and sufficient assurance
of the succor which you demand, then thereafter (but no sooner for that it
were in vain) take diligent order that all these of your party on this side,
make so secretlye as they can, provision of armor, fit horse and ready
money, wherewith to hold themselves in Readiness for to march
readiness to march so soon, as it shall be signified unto them by their
chief and principals in every shire.

And for better The color in providing armor and horse to be the papists
defense against the putitans.
coloring of the matter (referring to the principals the knowledge of the
ground of the enterprise) it shall be enough for the beginning to give out to the
rest, that the said provisions are made only for fortifiing your selves in
case of need against the puritans of this realm. The principal whereof
having the chief forces of the same in the low countries, have (as you may
let the bruit go) desseigned to A slanderous rumor of a massacre.
ruin and overthrow at their return home, the whole Catholics, and to usurp
the crown not only against me and all the lawful pretenders thereunto: but
against their own Queen, that now is, if she will not altogether commit her
self to their only government. The same pretexte may serve to found and
establish amongst you all an A wicked association
association and consideration general, as done only for your own just
preseruations and defense as well in the religion, as lives, lands and goods
against the attempts of the said puritans, without touching directly by
writing any thing against the Queen. But rather An old pretense of rebels to
pretend one thing and intend another.
showing your selves willing to maintain her and her lawful heirs after her
not naming me. The affairs being thus prepared, and forces in readiness both
without and within the realm, then shall it be time to set the The 6.
gentlemen toexecute the desseignment.
six gentlemen to work, taking order upon the accomplishing of their
disseigne, I may be suddenly transported out of this place, and that al your
forces in the same time be on the field to meet me in tarying for the
arrival of foreign aid, which then must be hastened with all diligence. Now for
that there can be no certain day appointed of the accomplishing of the said
gentlemen's desseignement, to the end that others may be in readiness to take me
from hence I would that the said gentlemen had always about them, or at the
least at court, Some to be furnished with speedy horse to advertise the
desseigne
a four stout men furnished with good and speedy horses, for so soon as the
said desseigne shall be executed, to come with all diligence to advertise
thereof those that shall be appointed for my transporting to the end that
immediately thereafter, they may be at the place of my aboade before that my
keeper can have advise of the execution of the said desseigne, or at least
before he can fortify himself within the house, or carrye me out of the
same. It were necessary to dispatch two or three of the said aduertisers by
diverse ways, to the end that if one be stayed, the other may come through:
and at the same instant were it also needful to assaye to cut of the posts
ordinarye ways. This is the plotte which I find best for this enterprise, and
the order whereby you should conduct the same for our common securities. For
sturring on this side before you be well To be sure of foreign forces before the
rebellion begin here.
assured of sufficient forre^ forces, it were but for nothing to put your
selves in danger of following the miserable fortune of such as have hertofore
traveled in like occasions. And to take me out of this place vnbeeing before
Upon her delivery to set he^r in the midst of an army of rebels.
well assured to set me in the midst of a good army, or in some very good
strength, where I may safely stay on the assembly of your forces, and
arrival of the said foreign succors, it were sufficient cause given to that
Queen in (...) catching me again, to enclose me for ever in some hole, forth
of the which I should never escape, if she did use me no worse, and to pursue
with all extremity those that had assisted me, which would grieve me more than
all the unhap which might befall on my self. And therefore must I needs yet
once again admonish you so earnestly as I can, to look and take heed most
carefully and vigilantly to compass and assure so well all that shall be
necessary for the effectuating of the said enterprise, She refers the
managing of this co^plot to the domestical traitors.
as with the grace of God you may bring the same to happy end, remitting to
the judgment of our principal friends on this side with whom you have to deal
therein to ordein or conclude upon this present (which shall serve you only
for an ouerture and proposition) as you shall among you find best. And to your
self in particular I refer to The reward promised to the 6. gentlemen.
assure the gentlemen above mentioned of all that shall be requisite on my part
for the entire execution of their goodwill, I leave also to your common The
rest of the enterprise referred to consideration, if the desseigne were not
done.
resolutions (in case the desseignment do not take hold as may happen)
whether you will or not pursue my transport and the execution of the rest of
the enterprise. But if the mishappe should fall out, that you should not come
by me being set in the Tower of London, or in any other strength with great
guard, But if she were kept in the tower that then for Gods sake the rest of the
conspiracy must proceed.
yet notwithstanding leave not for Gods sake to proceed in the rest of the
enterprise, for I shall at any time die most contented understanding of your
delivery forth of the Our freedom under our most gracious Qu. she calls a
servitude and slavery.
servitude, wherein you are holden as slaves. I shall assaye at the same time
that the work shall be in hand in these parts, to make the Catholics of She
would raise a rebellion in Scotland and take the king her son prisoner.
Scotland to arise, and to put my son in their hands to the effect that from
thence our enemies here may not prevail of any succor. I would also that
some A rebellion or invasion in lielande.
stirring in Irelande were labored for, and to begin some while before that
any thing were done here, to the end that the alarm might be given thereby
on the But the blow and invasion to come by the king of Spains forces, out of
Flaunders.
flat contrary side that the stroke should come from. Your reasons to have
some general She liked to have an head and chief stay in rebellion.
head or chief me thinks are very pertinent, and therefore were it good to
sound some obscurely for that purpose. From over sea the 11The Earl of
Westmerland a man of that faction.
Earl of Westmerlande may be had, whose house and name may do much, you
know, in the North parts, as also the The L. Paget to return and be head of
the conspiracy.
Lord Paget of good ability in some shieres here abouts. Both the one and the
other may be brought home secretly: amongst whom some more of the principal
banished may return, if the enterprise be once resolute. The said Lord Paget
is now in Spain and may entreat all there, which by his brother Charles
Paget.
Charles you will commit unto him, touching this affair. Beware that none of
your messengers, whom you send forth of the Realm, A caveat for transporting
of letters.
carry over any letters upon themselves, but make their dispatch be conveyed
either after or before them by some other: take good heed of spies and A
caveat of false brethren and especially priests.
false brethren that are amongst you, specially by some Priests that are
already by our enemies wrought for your discovery. And in any wise never
keep any A caveat to keep no paper that may do harm.
paper about you that may in any sort do harm, For from like The
inconvenience that has happened by papers.
errors have come the only condemnation of all such as have suffered
heretofore, against whom could there otherwise have been nothing proved.
Discover as little as you can your names and intentions to the french
Ambassador now leiger in London, for although he be as I understand a very
honest gentleman and of a good conscience and religion, yet fear I that his
Master entertaineth with that Queen, a course far contrary to our
desseignements, which may move him to cross us, if it should happen he should
have any particular knowledge thereof, All this while past I have sued to
change and remove from this house and for answer only the castle of Dudleye
has been named to serve the turn, so as by apperance within the end of this
summer, I may go thither, Wherefore advise so soon as I shall be there, To
make pronision for her escape when she shall come to Dudley castle.
what provision might be had about that part 19 for my escape from thence. If
I stay here, there is for that purpose one of these 20 three means following
to be looked for, The first that at one certain day appointed in my walking
abroad on horseback on the moors betwixt this and Stafford where ordinarilye
you know very few people do pass, She deuiseth 3 means to escape. The 1.
mean to escape.
a fifty or threescore men well horsed and armed may come to take me there, as
they may easily, my keeper having with him ordinarily but eighteen or twenty
horsemen only with daggs. The second mean to come at midnight or soon after
to set fire in the barnes and stables which you know are near to the house,
The second.
and whilst my Guardian his servant shall run forth to the fire, your
company having every one a mark, whereby they may know one an other under
night, might surprise the house, where I hope with the few servant I have
about me, to give you correspondency. And the third, some that bring carts
hither, ordinarily coming early in the morning, The 3 mean.
the carts might be so prepared, and with such cart-leaders, that being just
in the midst of the great gate, the carts might fall down or over whelme,
and that thereupon you might come suddenly with your followers to make your
self Master of the house, and carry me away, so you might do easily before
that any number of souldiars (who lodge in sundry places forth of this place,
some half a mile, some a whole mile of) might come to their relief. Her large
promise of reward to the traitors.
Whatsoever issue the matter take, I do and will think my self obliged as long
as I live toward you for the offers you make to hazard your self as you do
for my delivery: And by any means that ever I may have I shall do my endeavor
to recognize by effect your deserts heerin I have commanded a more ample
alphabet to be made for you, which herewith you shall receive.

The contents of a letter written by the Scottish Queen to Bernardin de
Mendoza 20. of May, 1586. after the Popes Calender.
I Find my self greatly troubled what course to take To take a new course for
an other course before.
a new for the affairs on this side the sea: Charles Paget has a charge from
me to imparte unto you certain an ouerture to be imparted to the spanish
Ambassador for his master by C. Paget.
ouertures in my behalf: whereupon I pray you deliver him freely, what you
think may be obtained thereof from the king your master.

There is an other point depending thereof, which I have reserved to write to
your own self for to be by you sent unto the king your master on my
behalf, no man else, if it be possible, being privy thereunto, that is, that
considering my sons great obstinacy in heresy, and foreseeing hereupon the
imminent danger and harm like to ensue to the catholic church, he coming
to the succession of this Realm: I have resolved with my self, in case my
said son do not reduce himself before my death to the catholic religion
(as I must tell you plainly, I have small hope so long as he shall remain in
Scotland) to A promise to give by her last will to the spanish king the
succession of the crown of England.
give and grant my right to the said king your master in the succession of
this crown by my last will and testament, praying him in Note the
consideration.
consideration hereof from this time forward to take me wholely into his
protection, likewise the state and affairs of this country, the which for
discharge of my conscience, I can not think I can put into the hands of a
Prince more zealous of our religion and able in all respects to reestablish
the same on this side, as it importes all the rest of Christendom. Let this be
kept secrecy required for 3. causes 1. loss of dower. 2. breach with her
son. 3. her total ruin.
secret for as much as if it come to be revealed, it should be in France the
loss of my dower, in Scotland a clear breach with my son, and in this
country my total ruin and destruction.

Thank on my behalf the said king your master for the favor and
liberality extended to the The kings liberality to the L. Paget and his
brother.
L. Paget and his brother, which I pray him most earnestly to continue, and to
gratify for my sake with some pention What poor Morgan has endured for her
and the common cause
poor Morgan, who has so much endured not only for me, but for the common
cause.

I recommende likewise unto you, Fulsambe to have some supply.
Fulsambe (whom you know) to help him to some supply, above the
entertainment, that I have allotted him, according to the small means I have.

Points out of Babingtons letter subscribed by Curle. 13. Sep. 1586.
Upon the sight and perusal of the copye of the letter written by Babington to
the Queens Majesty my mistress, I do remember well that the clauses
hereafter written were contained in the same letter dispatched at her
Majesty's commandment by me Gilbert Curle 23. of September. 1586.

THere was addressed unto me from the parts beyond the seas one Ballard a man
of virtue and learning, and of singular zeal to the Catholic cause and your
Majesty's service. This man informed me of great preparation by the Christian
princes your Majesty's alies for the deliverance of our country from the
extreme and miserable estate, wherein it has so long remained: my especial
desire was to advise by what means with the hazard of my life and my friends
in general, I might do your sacred Majesty one good days service etc.

Afterward did follow.
THese things are first to be advised in this great and honorable action etc.
First, assuring of invasion: Sufficient strength in the inuador, ports to
arrive at, appointed with a strong party to join with them, and warrant their
landing. The deliverance of her Majesty. The dispatch of the usurped
competitor. For the effectuating of all which I vow and protest etc. that what
I have said shall be performed, or all our lives happilye lost in the execution
thereof, which vow all the chief actors have taken solemnly, etc.

After some other sentences this does follow.
MY self with ten Gentlemen and an hundredth our followers, will undertake the
deliverance of your Royal person from the hands of your enemies, for the
dispatch of the usurper, from the obedience of whom (by the excommunication of
her) we are made free: there be six noble gentlemen all my private freindes,
who for the zeal they bear to the Catholic cause, and your Majesty's
service, will undertake the tragical execution: It rests that according to
their infinite good deserts and your Maiestics bountye, their heroical attempt
may be honorablye rewarded in them, if they escape with life, or in their
posterity, and that so much I may be able by your Majesty's authority to assure
them. etc.

By me Gylbert Curle,
23. September. 1586.
Nawes affirmation of the manner of the Scottish Queens writing translated,
out of her ciphered letters, 6. September. 1586.
TOuching the letter written by the Queen of Scotts my Mistres to Babington,
I wrote the same by her express direction and commandment, as I have deposed
it. Touching the other letters (as always her Majesty has accustomed her
self sitting at table, and Curle and I before her) her Majesty commanded me
particularly, and from point to point all that which it pleased her to have
written, and under her I did draw the points thereof as particularly, and amply
as may be. After I showed and read them unto her according to the which (there
resting no more but the disposition of the matter) I wrote the said letters:
and showed them unto her, and delivered the same, after which that was done
therewith which it pleases her Majesty to appoint, for her Majesty will not
suffer that any do write her letters of secrecy, or importance out of her own
Cabonet. And there is not any dispatche sealed, but that she is present at it:
And she does always peruse all the letters before they be put in Cipher and
translated, which is done by Curle, namely of the letter written to Babington.

Points out of the Scottish Queens letters subscribed by Curle 23. September.
1586.
Certain principal points contained in the letter written from the Queen of
Scotts in answer to a letter of Babingtons, which were expressed by the
said Queen in these kind of sentences hereafter following, as upon the sight
and perusal of the coppie of the letter which was first written by Nawe in
French by the Queens commandment I do acknowledge to have been so written.

Now for to ground substantially this enterprise, and to bring it to good
success, you must first examine deeply what forces as well on foot as on
horse, you may raise amongst you all, and what Captains you shall appoint for
the^ in every shire, in case a chief general cannot be had. Of which towns,
ports, and havens you may assure your self, as well in the North, West, as
South, to receive succors from the Low countries, Spain, and France. What
places you esteem fittest and of greatest advantage, to assemble the
principal company of your forces and the same being assembled, which way you
have to march, what foreign forces you require, for how long pay, etc. what
provision of money, in case you want would you ask, by what means do the vj.
gentlemen deliberate to proceed, and the manner also of my getting forth of
this hold.

In an other part of the same letter this also did follow.
IF your messenger bring you back again sure promise and sufficient assurance
of the succor you demand, then thereafter, (but no sooner, for that it were
in vain) take diligent order that all those on your party on this side make so
secretly as they can, provision of armor, fit horse, and ready money,
wherewith to hold themselves in readiness to march, so soon as it shall be
signified unto them by their chief and principales in every shire. And for
better coloring of the matter reserving to the principal the knowledge of the
ground of the enterprise, it shall be enough for the beginning to give out to the
rest, that the said provisions are made only for fortifying your selves in
case of need against the puritans of this Realm.

In an other part of this same letter this also follows.
THe affairs being thus prepared and forces in readiness both without and
within the Realm, than shall it be time to set the six gentlemen to work,
taking order upon the accomplishment of their desseignement, I may be
suddenly transported out of this place, and that all your forces in the same
time be in the field to meet me tarying for the arrival of foreign aid,
which then must be hastened with all diligence. Now for that there can be no
certain day appointed for the accomplishing of the said Gentlemen's
desseignement, to the end they may be in readiness to take me from hence: I
would that the said gentlemen had always about them or at the least at the
Court a four stout men, furnished with good and speedy horses, for, so soon
as the said desseigne shall be executed, to come with all diligence to
advertise thereof, those that shall be appointed for my transporting, to the
end that immediately thereafter they may be at the place of my aboade before
that my keeper can have advise of the execution of the said desseignement, or
at the least before he can fortify himself within the house or carry me out
of the same.

It follows also in the same letter.
This is the plot which I find best for this enterprise, and order whereby you
should conduct the same for our common security, etc.

There follows also in the same letter.
I shall affaie, at the same time that the work shall be in hand in these
parts, to make the Catholics of Scotland to arise, and to put my son into
their hands, to the effect that from thence our enemies here may not prevail
of any succor. I would also that some sturring in Ireland were labored for,
and to begin some while before that any thing were done here, to to the end,
the alarm might be given thereby on the flat contrary side that the blow
should come from.

Toward the end of the Letter this does follow.
IF I stay here, there is for that purpose but one of these three means
following. The first that on a certain day appointed in my walking abroad on
horseback on the mores betwixt this and Stafford, etc. a fifty or threescore
men well horsed and armed may come to take me there etc. The second mean is
to come at midnight or foone after to set fire on the barnes and stables which
you know are near to the house, and whilst my guardiant servant shall come
forth to the fire, your company might surprise the house etc. And the third,
some that bring carts hither ordinarily, their carts might be so prepared, and
with such cart-leaders that being just in the midst of the great gate, the
carts might fall down or ouerwhelme, and thereupon you might come suddenly
with your followers, and make your selves masters of the house and carry me
away.

These are the points that were in the letter written in the Queens Majesty
my Mistress name to Babington, which as already I have said and written, was
first written in French by Master Nawe, and translated into English and
ciphered by me Gilbert Curle by the Queens commandment. September. 23. 1586.

Navve in effect is contest with Curle, with the concurrency of Babington and
Ballardes confession, and other of the conspiracy.


