OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE BISHOPS IN THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND: With their
Succession, Jurisdiction, and other things incident to their calling: AS ALSO
OF THE ORDINATION of Priests and Deacons. FIVE BOOKS: Wherein they are cleared
from the slanders and odious imputations of BELLARMINE, SANDERS, BRISTOW,
HARDING, ALLEN, STAPLETON, PARSONS, KELLISON, EVDEMON, BECANVS, And other
Romanists: And justified to contain nothing contrary to the Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers, or approved examples of Primitive Antiquity.

By FRANCIS MASON, Batchelour of Divinity, and sometimes Fellow of Merton
College in Oxeford.

Hebr. 5. 4. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God as was Aaron.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1613.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE, LORD ARCHbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan: And one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel.
AS in the Roman triumphs, the worthy Conqueror gloriously ascending unto
the Capitol, did show his magnificence by giving ample gifts unto the people:
even so (most reverend father) our victorious Savior and noble Redeemer,
having conquered Hell, Death, Devil and damnation, Triumphantly ascending to
the Capitol of Heaven, did show his unspeakable bounty in giving admirable
and incommparable gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
That is, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Teachers. For what has the Church of God of so precious account, as the
holy ministry of the Word and Sacraments, whereby CHRIST JESUS with all his
blessings is revealed and applied to the soul and conscience? It may well be
resembled to the Rivers of Paradise, which did water and fructify the Garden
Genesis 2. 10.
of God: to the Golden pipes, whereby the two Olive branches replenished Zach.
4. 2, 3.
the seven Lamps in the golden Candlestick: to the Crown (which the woman in
the Revelation clothed with the Sun, and having the Moon under her Revel.
12. 1.
feet, had upon her head) being richly beset, not with stones, but with
Stars.

Which holy function flowing from CHRIST, as from the fountain to his blessed
Apostles, was by the^ derived to posterity. But as the water which near the
spring is clear and chrystalline, in further passages may be polluted: so in
process of time, (by the subtlety of Satan) the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments being the ordinance of God was mingled with sacrifising and other
humane inventions. Yet such was the goodness of God, that even in the darkness
of Popery* as Baptism, so the Ministerial function (notwithstanding the
abominations cleaving thereunto) was wonderfully preserved; for the Church of
Rome, by Gods special providence, in her Ordination of Priests, retained such
Evangelical words, as in their true and native sense, include a 2. Cor. 5. 18.
19.
ghostly Ministerial power to forgive sins, by the Ministry of
Reconciliation, consisting in the due administration of the Word and
Sacraments. So remission of sins is ascribed to the Minister, as to Gods
instrument in effecting it, and Ambassador in pronouncing it. Wherefore in
that they have authority to forgive sins, they have also authority to use the
means thereof, that is the Word and Sacraments. Thus the Church of Rome gave
power to her Priests to teach the truth, although it did not reveal the truth
unto them.

Now when it pleased him, which causes the Light to shine out of darkness,
in the riches of his Mercy, to remember his distressed Church, those blessed
instruments which he first used in the Reformation, were such as had received
their Calling corruptly in the Church of Rome: But when their eyes were opened,
they disclaimed the sacrifising abomination, and other impurities, which by the
iniquity of the time were incorporated into their calling. Thus the pollution
of Popery (by the Grace of God) was drained and drawn away* and the
Ministerial function restored to the original beauty.

And here let us admire and magnify the Mercy of God, who did not forget this
remote Island situate in a corner of the world, but did most graciously shine
upon it with his Golden beams from the Sphere of Heaven* For whereas in other
Countries the Bishops which should be stars and Angels of the Church, did
resist the Reformation, and persecuted such as sought it; It pleased God that
in England, among other Bishops, Archbishop Cranmer, the chiefest Prelate of
the Kingdom, was Gods chiefest instrument to restore the Gospel, which
afterward he sealed with his blood; The event whereof was, That whereas other
Reformed Churches were constrained by necessity to admit extraordinary fathers,
That is, to receive Ordination from Presbyters, which are but inferior
Ministers, rather then to suffer the Fabric of the Lord JESUS to be dissolved:
the Church of England had always Bishops to confer sacred Orders, according
to the ordinary and most warrantable custom of the Church of CHRIST. And
although in Queen Mary's time, five blessed Bishops were burned to ashes, yet
God reserved to himself a number, which being then forced to take the wings of
the Dove, and fly beyond the Seas, or to hide themselves in the clefts of the
rock; when the tempest was ouerblowne, the clouds cleared, and the Sun of
Righteousness began to display himself in the happy reign of Queen Elizabeth,
returned again, clapped their wings for joy, praised God, preached the Gospel,
and with holy imposition of hands, ordained Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in
the Church of England.

These are the Ordinations which reproachful Papists do most traduce and
slander, as though they were no Ordinations at all, but only Nullities; thence
persuading their Proselytes, That our present Ministers are no Ministers, but
merely Laymen, and thereupon inferring that we have no Church, no salvation.
In which point some Popish Recusants have been so confident, that they have
professed, That if we could justify our Calling, they would come to our
Churches, and be of our Religion. The consideration whereof (most Reverend
father) gave me occasion to made into this Controversy, being desirous, next
the assurance of mine own salvation, as I am a Christian, to be fully and
clearly assured of my Calling, as I am a Minister. In prosecuting whereof, I
did evidently find, That their chiefest Objections are nothing but slanders,
confutable by Authentical monuments of public Record. Whereupon I wished,
from the bottom of my heart, That some learned man would have vouchsafed for
the glory of God, and the good of the Church, to scatter these Popish mistes,
and to set the Truth in the clear light.

A work in my opinion very important; First in respect of us of the
Ministry; and secondly in regard of the people committed to our charge. For
how chearefully, and with what joy of heart may we preach* and they hear us,
when the lawfulness of our Calling is made manifest to all men? Thirdly, If
any have formerly made scruple to enter our Orders, out of ignorance, how these
odious and scandalous imputations blazed in Popish Books might be truly
answered, and the point soundly cleared by Record, it is verily to be hoped,
That all such shall receive singular comfort, when they see our Calling
justified not only in it self, as the true Ministry of the Gospel, but also
in regard of the deriuation to us by such Bishops, and in such manner as is most
correspondent to the sacred Scripture, and the practice of Primitive
Antiquity. And if any upon this surmise be fallen away to our adversaries,
who knows what effect God may work in them, when they shall plainly
perceive how they have been deluded with Popish stratagemes? Or who can tell
whether this may be a gracious means to stay others from yielding to the
inticements of subtle serpents? Finally, the defense of innocence in a matter
of so high a nature, must needs rejoice the hearts of the godly, when Popish
politicians shall be forced to hide their faces for shame, and confusion.
These motives induced me to wish, that some great Master in our Israel would
have undertaken this eminent Argument, which now (the Divine providence so
disposing) is befallen unto me, One of the children of the Prophets.

Which my labors concerning the Ordination of the Pastors of England, to whom
should I rather present, then to your Grace, whom God (by the means of a most
prudent and Religious Sovereign,) has to the singular comfort of all that
sincerely love the Gospel, advanced to be the chief Pastor, and chief
Ordainer in the Church of England? Especially, seeing I proceeded in this
Argument with your graces fatherly direction, and encouragement. Now the Lord
so direct and sanctify your endeavors, That as the Rod of Aaron did bud and
blossom, and bring forth ripe Almonds: so Number. 17. 8.
the Church and Ministry of England by the means of your Grace, as of Gods
blessed instrument, may prosper, flourish and bring forth fruits of
Righteousness to the glory of God, and the comfort of all true Christian
hearts.

Your Graces in all humble duty at command FRANCIS MASON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOKS FOLLOWING.
THE first book contains the entrance and division of the whole work into
three controversies, with their several Questions: as also the handling of the
first Question, whether three Canonical Bishops be absolutely necessary to the
Consecration of a Bishop.

The second is of the Consecrations of the Bishops of England, from the first
planting of Christianity, till the last year of Queen Marie.

The third is of the Bishops consecrated in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and
of our Gracious sovereign King James.

The fourth entreats of Episcopal Jurisdiction.

The fifth is of the second and third controversy, concerning Priests and
Deacons.

The particular Contents of the first Book.
CHAP. 1. THe entrance, wherein is described the proceeding of the Popish
Priests in winning of Proselytes, by praising Rome, the Roman Religion, the
Popes love, the English Seminaries; As also by dispraising the Universities,
Church, Religion, and Ministry of England. Page 1. CHAP. 2. Wherein is
declared in general how the Papists traduce our Ministers, as merely Laymen.
And in particular, what they mislike in our Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons:
Whereupon the general controversy concerning the Ministry, is divided into
three particular controversies, The first of Bishops, The second of Presbyters,
The third of Deacons. Page 8. CHAP. 3. Wherein they descend to the first branch
concerning Episcopal Consecration, whereupon arise two Questions: The former,
whether three Bishops be required of absolute necessity, to the Consecration
of a new Bishop; the state whereof is explained out of Popish writers. Page 14.
CHAP. 4. Wherein the Popish Arguments drawn from the Canons of the Apostles,
and the decretall Epistles, are proposed, urged, and answered. Page 21. CHAP.
5. Wherein their Argument drawn from the Councels, is propounded, urged and
answered. Page 26. CHAP. 6. Wherein their Arguments, pretended to be drawn
from the Scripture, are answered. Page 30. CHAP. 7. That the presence of three
Bishops is not required of absolute necessity. Page 34.
The Contents of the second Book.
CHAP. 1. WHerein they descend to the second Question, whether the
Consecrations of the Bishops of England be Canonical. Page 39. CHAP. 2. Of the
first conversion of this Land in the time of the Apostles. Page 44. CHAP. 3. Of
the second conversion (as some call it) or rather of a new supply of Preachers,
and a further propagation of the Gospel in the time of K. Lucius, and Pope
Eleutherius. Page 51. CHAP. 4. Of Austine the first Bishop of Canterbury, sent
hither by Pope Gregory. Page 56. CHAP. 5. Of the Bishops from Austin to
Cranmer. Page 61. CHAP. 6. Of the Consecration of the most reverend father
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Page 64. CHAP. 7. Of the abolishing
of Papal Jurisdictions by K. H. 8. which the Papists injuriously brand with
imputation of Schism. Page 67. CHAP. 8. Whether to renounce the Pope, be
schism and heresy. Pa. 74. CHAP. 9. Whether schism and heresy, annihilate a
Consecration. Pa. 78. CHAP. 10. Of the Bishops Consecrated in the time of King
Henry the eight, after the abolishing of the Popes Jurisdiction. Page 88. CHAP.
11. Of the Bishops Consecrated in the time of King Edward the sixth. Page 91.
CHAP. 12. Of the B. Consecrated in the days of Q. Mary. Page 97.
The Contents of the third Book.
CHAP. 1. OF the Bishops deposed in the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, with an answer to certain odious imputations concerning some
antecedents and consequents of their depositions. Page 99. CHAP. 2. The
deposition of the Bishops justified by the example of Solomon deposing
Abiathar. Page 106. CHAP. 3. Of the oath of the Princes Supremacy, for denying
whereof the old Bishops were deprived. Page 113. CHAP. 4. Of the Consecration
of the most reverend Father Archbishop Parker. Page 121. CHAP. 5. Of the rest
of the Bishops Consecrated in the second and third year of Queen Elizabeth.
Page 132. CHAP. 6. A brief view of all the Bishops of some of the principal
Sees during the whole reign of Queen Elizabeth. Page 135. CHAP. 7. Of the
Bishops in the Province of Canterbury, Consecrated since our gracious
Sovereign K. James did come to the Crown: with a little touch concerning the
Province of York. Page 138. CHAP. 8. The Episcopal line of the most reverend
Father in God, George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, particularly declaring
how he is Canonically descended from such Bishops as were Consecrated in the
days of King Henry the eight, which our adversaries acknowledge to be
Canonical. Page 140.
The Contents of the fourth Book.
CHAP. 1. WHence the Bishops of England receive their Jurisdiction. Page 143.
CHAP. 2. Whether S. Peter were the only fountain under Christ, of all
spiritual Jurisdiction. Page 147. CHAP. 3. Whether the Pope succeed Saint
Peter in all his right by Law Divine. Page 155. CHAP. 4. Of the election of
Bishops in the Primitive Church, before there were any Christian Princes. Page
158. CHAP. 5. An answer to certain objections against the election of Bishops
by Christian Kings and Emperors out of the Councels and other authorities.
Page 161. CHAP. 6. Of the election of the Bishops of Rome, under Christian
Emperors, before the division of the Empire. Page 163. CHAP. 7. Of the
Election of Popes, from the Emperor Charles to Otho. Page 175. CHAP. 8. Of the
election of Popes from the time of the Emperor Otho to Henry the fourth. Page
173. CHAP. 9. Of the election of the Bishops of Constantinople. Page 178. CHAP.
10. Of the election of the Bishops of Spain. Page 179. CHAP. 11. Of the
election of the Bishops of France. Page 180. CHAP. 12. Of the election of the
Bishops of England. Page 182. CHAP. 13. How lamentable the state of England
was, when Bishoprics and benefices were given by the Popes provisions. Page
188. CHAP. 14. Whether it belongs to the Pope, to confirm all the
Metropolitanes of the world, and namely the Metropolitanes of England. Page
199.
The contents of the fifth Book.
CHAP. 1. WHerein the second controversy is proposed, divided into two
questions, the former about sacrifising, the latter about absolution; the state
of the former is set down and the Method of proceeding. Page 207. CHAP. 2. Of
their argument drawn from Melchisedec. Page 208. CHAP. 3. Of their argument
drawn from the Paschal Lamb. Page 216. CHAP. 4. Of their argument drawn from
certain places of the Prophets. Page 218. CHAP. 5. Of their argument drawn
from the words of institution. Pa. 222. CHAP. 6. Of their arguments drawn from
the actions of Christ. Pa. 234. CHAP. 7. Of their argument drawn from the
practice of the Church in the Apostles time. Page 239. CHAP. 8. Of their
arguments drawn from the authority of the Fathers. Page 241. CHAP. 9. Of the
second question which concerns the power of absolution. Page 244. CHAP. 10.
An answer to the arguments of Bellar. by which he goes about to prove
absolution to be judicial, and not declaratory. Page 249. CHAP. 11. Of the
third controversy concerning Deacons. Page 259. CHAP. 12. Wherein is declared
that though we derive our calling from such Bishops as were Popish Priests,
yet our calling is lawful, and theirs, as it is used, unlawful. Page 260.
THE FIRST BOOK CONTAINING THE ENTRANCE, AND DIVISION of the whole work into
three Controversies, with their several Questions; As also the handling of the
first Question, whether three Canonical Bishops be absolutely necessary to the
Consecration of a Bishop.
Framed in form of a conference between PHILODOX a Seminary Priest, And
ORTHODOX a Minister of the Church of England.

CHAP. I.
The entrance, wherein is described the Proceeding of Popish Priests, in
winning of Proselytes; by praising Rome, the Roman Religion, the Popes love,
the English Seminaries: As also by dispraising the Universities, Church,
Religion, and Ministry of England.

PHILODOX. WHat, My old friend Orthodox! I salute you in the kindest manner, and
congratulate your coming into France, the rather because I hope you are
passing this way to Rome, as sundry of your fellows and friends have done
before you.


ORTHODOX. To Rome, Philodox? Alas, Quid Romaefaciam? mentiri nescio. What
shall I do at Rome? I cannot lie, I cannot aequiuocate.


PHILO. It seems si^, that you are pleasantly disposed; but in good earnest
there are many inducements, which in all reason should draw you to Rome. For he
that has seen Rome, has seen all things, and he that has not seen Rome,
has seen nothing. It is the Queen and Lady of Cities, the Storehouse of
Nature, the admiration of Art, the Epitome of the world; wherein all
Excellencies shine in their Orient colors, and exquisite beauty. In old time
men did wonder at the Temple of Diana, the Tomb of Mausolus, the Colossus of
the Sun, the Image of Jupiter Olympicus, the Palace of Cyrus, the walls of
Babylon, and the Pyramides of Egypt, because these things in their several
ages were rare and singular, and justly had in precious account. But who would
now so esteem them, when he may see in one City so many spectacles which are
able, not only to ravish the beholders with admiration, but also to strike
them with astonishment? The Emperor A^^^i^^^^ Marcellinus lib. 16.
Constantius when he beheld the Rostra, the Capitol, the Bathes, the
Amphitheatrum, the Pantheon, the Theater of Pompey, his eyes were dazeled with
miracle upon miracle; but when he came to the Market place of Traiane, he stood
clean amazed at those huge and admirable Fabrics, neither imitable by the
hand, nor vtterable by the tongue of man. And though time which wears all
things has now defaced them, yet if new Rome be compared with old Rome, we
may say with a learned man, Lipsiu^ de mag^it. Romans in praefas. ad lect^r.
Non mayor sed melioriam Roma, non cultior sed sanctior; That is, Rome at this
present, is not bigger but better, not more sumptuous, but more sacred. And we
may add, that still it ouershineth all other Cities, so far as the golden
Moon does the twinkling stars.


ORTHO. Suppose that the buildings of Rome were as glorious at this day, as
they were in the days of Constantius, yet what of all this? Ammian^^
Marcellinus ibidem.
Hormisd^ the Persian, being then asked what he thought of Rome, made answer,
That this only pleased him, that he had learned, that men do die, even at
Rome also, as in other places. And surely though the walls of our Cities were
of gold, and the windows of Sapphire, yet while we live in this vale of
vanity, we dwell but in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. God
give us grace to seek a City which has a foundation, whose maker and builder
is God: God grant that when our earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may
have an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.


PHIL. You say well sir, and the right way to attain thereunto, is to be
reconciled to the holy Church of Rome; Without it, there is no hope of
salvation; within it, is a very Paradise of God, and a sanctuary for all
distressed souls: wherefore if you take this course, you shall be a thrice happy
man, and enjoy the precious blessing of a quiet conscience.


ORTHO. In deed a quiet conscience is a jewel of jewels, the price of it is
far above the Pearl, neither can it be valued with the wedge of fine gold.
But this is a flower which grows not in the gardens of Rome, no not in
Beluidere the Popes Paradise. For there is no Religion in the world which can
pacific the troubled conscience, but that only which teaches the penitent
spirit the remission of his sins, and an infallible certainty of his
salvation, by the merits of Jesus Christ apprehended by a true and lively
faith, and sealed to the sanctified soul by the Spirit of grace. But the
present religion of the Church of Rome, teaches only a Bell. de ^ustif. li.
3. cap. 2. and 3.
moral, coniecturall and fallible, That is, an uncertain certainty, which
must needs plunge the poor soul into a thousand perplexities. Wherefore the
present Romish religion is not a doctrine of comfort, but of doubt and
distrust, so far from quieting the troubled conscience, that it is a
continual tormenting to the soul and conscience.


PHIL. Howsoever you conceive of our Religion, you must give me leave to tell
you, that it was derived from God the Father, revealed by Jesus Christ,
inspired by the Spirit, planted by the Apostles, watered with the blood of
Martyrs, and confirmed by miracles, being reverend for antiquity, honorable
for universality, certain for succession, amiable for order, and admirable
for unity.


ORTHOD. You brag of the Casket, but the Jewels are gone. For the faith of Rome
was sometimes renowned through the world, and commended by the voice of the
Apostle himself. But since those days, Rome has suffered many and great
alterations. For as in respect of her Civil estate, she has been powered from
vessel to vessel, lost her language, left her seven mountains to plant her
self in campo Martio, changed her face and her fashion, and is so intombed in
her own ruins, that Lipsiu^ de mag. Romans l. 3. c. 11.
Iustus Lipsu^s one of her lovers, cannot so much as trace the ancient tract of
her walls: even so in respect of her state Ecclesiastical, one might now
seek old Rome in new Rome, and not find it She has matched traditions with
the written Word, therein injurious to the Wisdom of God: she has mingled
man's merits with the Merits of Christ, therein injurious to the Grace of God:
She has communicated divine worship to stocks and stones, therein injurious
to the glory of God. Thus the garden is ouer-growne with weeds, and the
daughter of Ston is become the whore of Babylon. Yet for all this she vanteth
herself, as though she were a Virgin, because she was sometimes a Virgin. She
painteth herself with counterfeit colors of Antiquity, Universality,
Succession, Unity and the like, which are nothing else, but a little Vernish
that will vanish away.


PHIL. I hope you speak all this, only for disputation sake. But howsoever,
for your better resolution, I wish you would take between your hands the
glass of Experience. You have already had a trial of your English
Universities: may it please you now to take a taste of our English Seminaries;
where (I dare warrant you) you shall receive ample satisfaction of all your
doubts. And because I love you, I will undertake that you shall be bountifully
entertained in the English College at Rome, and every way respected according
to your vvorth. But o how our holy Father will embrace you with the arms of
compassion, and receive you as the Dove into the Arc! Such is his imcomparable
love to our English Nation.


ORTHOD. How well the Popes have loved our Nation, may appear by Pope Apud
Mat. Paris. ^. 683. vere ^ortus noster deliciarui^ est Anglia.
Innocent the fourth, who called England his garden of delights. And who would
not love such a garden? He called it also a Well Vere pute^^ inexha^st^^ est.
never drawn dry; And does not such a Well deserve to be well loved? Now the
fruit of his tender affection toward it was witnessed by these his own words,
Ibidem.
Vbi multa abundant, multa extorqueri possunt, Where many things abound, many
things may be extorted. The Poets feign, that the river Arethusa being
swallowed up in the ground, runs through the Sea, and rises again in
Sicilie: but without all feigning, from England as from a Well did spring
golden Rivers, which being suddenly swallowed up, did run through the Sea,
and rise again at Rome in the Popes Exchequer; And who so reads the
Chronicles of our Kingdom written by Matthew Paris, and Thomas Walsingham,
shall find that the Popes loved our Silver and our Gold. This was their love
to the English Nation.


PHIL. You make mountains of molehilles: for the Popes receipts out of England
were but as a Hardings confut. of the Apol. part. 6. c. 23.
Gnat to an Elephant; and such as his Holiness little regarded, but only as
tokens of love to holy Mother Church.


ORTHOD. Bishop Praefa^. in Guard. de vera ^^^d.
Bonner may teach you, That the Popes yearly p^ay out of England did almost
equal the revenues of the Crown. And verily if this had not been prevented,
though England had been an Ocean, it would have been drawn dry. Such
Elephants you swallow, and yet you count them gnats.


PHIL. You mistake the matter; He loves not your silver, but your souls: for
since he reaped one penie out of England, he has employed many thousand
crowns in founding and maintaining two English Colleges. So pure is his love
to the English Nation.


ORTHOD. Your English Seminaries were founded (if the turning of an Hospital
into a College may be called founding) by Gregory the thirteenth. But to what
end sent he those soldiers (mentioned by H^sp^^^ and Ital^ milit^^ qu^
Pontifici^rum nom in sib^ ind^derunt clau^bus pro insignibus ^^si in Hiberniam
appellunt. Geneb. Chron. l. 4.
Genebrard and Campana del hist. de mond. vol. 2. l. 1. anno 1580.
Campana) into Ireland? Was it not to assist the Rebels against their
Mun^t^onem erigunt contra Anglos. Genebrard. quo supra.
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth? So pure was his love to the English Nation.


PHIL. The love of his Holiness is most plainly demonstrated in those noble
foundations, where Card. Allen. Apol c. 5.
we have more disputations, lessons, conferences, examinations, repetitions,
instructions, catechisings, resolutions of cases both of conscience and
controversy, methods and manners, to proceed to the conversion of the deceived,
and such like exercises in our two Colleges, then are in your two
Universities, containing about thirty goodly Colleges. As for the Masters and
Professors of our Colleges, specially the Roman Readers, we may be bold to
say, they be in all kind the most choice and cunning men of Christendom. Now
for that part of education which appertains to Christian life and manners, our
chief endeavor is to breed in our Scholars devotion, which is done by diverse
spiritual exercises, and daily examinations of their consciences, often
receiving the blessed Sacrament, much praying, continual hearing, and
meditation of holy things. So by these means a number of the best wits of
England, are here trained up, most happy in regard of their rare education.


ORTHOD. What reason you have to compare your two Colleges with our two
Universities, let wise men judge. You vaunt of your variety of exercises, God
give us grace to glory in the simplicity of his Truth, with the testimony of
a good conscience. As for the exercises of our Universities, you might know (if
malice did not blind you) that they are famous throughout the Christian world
and that these Camps of Christ have from time to time trained up Soldiers,
able to encounter the proudest Philistines. Neither doubt we but they shall
always have a David to cut off the head of Golias with his own sword. Which
we rather hope, because of that Treasury of Learning and Languages lately
erected, I mean that renowned Library, the honor of Oxford, the Jewel of
England, the admiration of strangers, and the Phaenix of the world. O noble
Bodley, many Benefactours have done worthily even in this kind, but thou
surmountest them all. Blessed is the stock which brought forth such a branch,
and blessed is the branch which yields so pleasant fruit. Devonshire was the
mother, Merton College the nurse to this most gracious plant: happy mother,
happy nurse, happy plant. Prosper O Lord, O prosper thou his handy work; Let
it be as an Armorie for defense of thy Church: and as a Quiver full of arrows
to shoot at thy enemies; Let it flourish and continue for ever, to the
advancing of thy Gospel, and to the utter overthrow of Antichrist. But to come
to the Romish Readers which you so commend, what are they like, or to whom
shall I compare them? They are like to Italian Mountebanckes, who will price an
oil at six hundred Crowns, which is not worth six pence. Whatsoever they
bring must be admired for rare and excellent, as though it were found in the
Phoenix nest. By these glosing means partly gilded over with golden promises,
and partly working upon male-contented humors, (for you delight to fish in
troubled waters) you have prevailed with many, and applaud them as the best
wits of England. So long as they stay with us you account them but Leaden-wits:
if once they set a foot within your Seminaries, they are presently
Metamorphised and become Golden. But let your Orders be exquisite, your Readers
skilful, your Students witty and painful, I would gladly know what is the end
of all this rare education.


PHIL. You might have learned that of Nauar. consil. l. 3. de regularibus.
Cons. 1.
Nauarrus, who declares that in the English College at Rome, there is a
statute or constitution, That whosoever will enter into it, is bound to swear,
that after so many years, he shall go into England for defense of the
Catholic faith, and shall preach it there publicly, and privately. Lo the
end of their education is the Catholic faith, which they learn not only for
their own information, but for the instruction of England; So all is referred
to the ghostly good of our dear country.


ORTHOD. But what do you mean by the Catholic faith? Bellarmine, who was
appointed by Gregory the thirteenth, to read the Controversies of faith, in
the Bellar. de verbo Dei in praef ad lect.
Roman Colleges of the English and the Germans, and for his service to the
Church and Court of Rome, was advanced to the dignity of a Cardinal, uses
these words; Bellar. in respons. ad apol. pro iuram. fidel* page 7.
De fide Catholica, id est, de Primatu sedis Apostolicae, quem in Scripturis
sanctis apertissime f^ndatum, Catholici omnes vt fidei Orthodoxae dogma
certissimum habent; Of the Catholic faith, that is, of the Primacie of the Sea Apostolic, which being most evidently grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
all Catholics account as a most certain received opinion, or doctrine of the
Orthodoxe faith. And again, speaking of the branches of the Oath of
Allegiance, he says, That they contain Ibidem. page 32.
abnegationem fidei Catholicae de Primatu Ecclesiastico Romani Pontificis, The
denial of the Catholic faith, concerning the Ecclesiastical Primacie of the
Bishop of Rome. And again, Si Ibidem page 69.
rem totam apud te diligenter cogitare volueris, videbis profecto non esse rem
paruam, quae ob iuramentum istud in discrimen adducitur, sed vnum ex praecipuis
fidei nostrae capitibus ac religionis Catholicae fundamentis; That is, if you
will diligently consider this whole matter in your mind, truly you shall see,
That it is no small thing which by reason of this Oath is brought into danger,
but one of the principal heads of our faith, and foundations of Catholic
Religion. This he indeuoureth to prove, because Pope Gregory calls himself
Caput fidei, the head of faith; Whence he infers this conclusion, Itaque
sancto Gregorio test, cum de Primatu fidei Apostolicae, vel turbando, vel
minuendo, vel tollendo satagitur, de ipso capite fidei amputando, ac de totius
corporis omniumque membrorum statu dissipando satagitur; Therefore as S.
Gregory witnesses, when men go about, either to trouble, diminish or take
away the Primacie of the Sea Apostolic, they go about to cut off the very
head of faith, and to dissolve the state of the whole body, and of all the
members. So he is not content to make his new head equal to other heads, but
he will have it to be Ipsum fidei caput, The very head it self; singularly and
supereminently mounted above all other heads. Thus the Popes Supremacy is
become the Supreme article of your Catholic faith. But how far extends
this Supremacy? The same Roman Reader teaches, That if Bell. de Romans Pontif.
l. 5. c. 7. ergo tria.
a Prince, of a sheep or a ram become a wolf, That is, of a Christian
become an heretic, the Pastor of the Church may drive him away by
Excommunication, and withal command the people that they do not follow him,
and therefore may deprive him of his dominion over his Subjects. Yea, he
teaches that the Pope may Bell. de Romans Pontif. l. 5. c. 6. quantum.
change Kingdoms, take them from one, and give them to another, as the chief
Spiritual Prince, if it be necessary for the salvation of souls. But when
shall it be holden necessary? That may appear by the dealing of Sententia
declaratoria cont. Eliz. apud Sand. de schis. l. 3. page 315.
Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth: for when that virtuous Princess had
banished the Pope, and Popish abominations, and planted the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, continuing constant in the profession thereof, her Religion he judged
heresy, her constancy he called obstinacy, and thereupon pronounced her
deprived of her Crown and dignity, dissolved the sacred bond of Allegiance,
and cursed all that should obey her. Which proceedings he called Arma
iustitiae, the weapons of Justice, pretending he was constrained thereunto
Adarma Iustitiae, contra eam de necessitate conuersi. ibidem.
of necessity. Wherefore if a Prince shall banish Idolatry and superstition,
and continue zealous in the reformation of Religion, it shall be judged a just,
sufficient, and necessary cause of deprivation. Thus you make a show of
Learning and Religion, but train up your scholars to treason and rebellion.
Is this the preaching of the Catholic faith? Is this the ghostly good of your
Country? Is this the Popes incomparable love? And as he has small love to
England, so notwithstanding his fair pretenses, he bears not very much to
you: for the Pope being an old politician, may be well resembled to the
Mariner, which looks one way, and roweth another; He sends you ample gifts,
but he sends them upon a hook, and while you catch at the bait, you swallow
the hook. And as the Fisher baiteth with little fishes to catch the greater,
so the Pope being a cunning Fisher, uses you but for a bait to catch England,
and there to restore his Golden Supremacy, which may be called Golden, because
it brought unto him mountains of Silver and Gold. But that you may the better
perceive the dangerous state wherein you stand, give me leave to use a plain,
but a fit comparison; An Ape seeing a Chestnut in the fire, and not knowing how
to get it, spied a Spaniel by the fire side, and suddenly catched his foot to
rake out the chestnut. Here you may see your own faces in a homely glass. The
Golden Supremacy is the Chestnut, perils and dangers are the fire, the Pope
loath to burn his own fingers, uses you but as the Spaniels foot to scrape
for the Chestnut; little regards he how you be scorched, so he be in hope
to obtain his desire. But though many of you have burned both your hands and
your hearts, yet hitherto (God be thanked) he has missed the Chestnut.


PHIL. NOw I plainly perceive, That you are deeply engaged in 5.
the schism and heresy of England. O England, England, thou wast sometimes a
most famous and flourishing Church, thy faith and Religion shining like a
Diamond of true luster, thy zeal and devotion burning like the flaming fire,
the sparkling Stars in the firmament were not so glorious: but now, alas,
since Caluinisme came in, thou have lost thy luster, thy glory is eclipsed,
there remains no sparkle of thy ancient love, no faith, no Religion, no
Church.


ORTHOD. You tread in the steps of your fo^efathers, and help to fill up the
measure of their iniquity. For it has been always their custom to lay
odious imputations upon our Religion, that by this stratageme they might win
Proselytes unto their own. Brist. demand. 48.
Rich. Bristow affirmed that our Religion is proved by experience to be indeed
no Religion. Apol. c. 1.
Cardinal Allen, speaking of our Sacraments, Service and Sermons, calls them
things which assuredly procure damnation. Caluino-turcis. l. 1. c. 7. and l. 4.
c. 11. and passim.
William Reinolds has blazed to the world, that our Religion is worse then the
Turkish. The books of Sanders and Parsons have been as full of slanders, as a
serpent is of poison. To pass over Harding, Stapleton and others, the latter
brood is as venomous as the former. One example for all may be that lewd
Libeller which exclaimeth, That the Certain Articles or forcible reasons.
Artic. 1.
Protestants have no faith, no hope, no charity, no repentance, no
Justification, no Church, no Altar, no sacrifice, no Priest, no Religion, no
Christ. What shall we say to these intemperate spirits? If they speak of
malice, then I say with Michael the Archangel, Epist. Iud. v. 9.
The Lord rebuke them: but if they speak of ignorance (as I hope they do) then
I say with the holy Martyr S. Stephen, Acts 7. 60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; Or with our blessed Savior, Luke
23. 34.
Father, forgive them, they wot not what they do. For that faith and Religion
which is agreeable to the Scripture is true, holy, ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic: But the faith and Religion publicly professed at this day in
England is in every Article and branch thereof, agreeable to the Scripture:
therefore it is in every Article and branch thereof, true, holy, ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic. Moreover, where the Gospel is truly preached, and
the holy Sacraments rightly administered, there is a true Christian visible
Church: but both these duties are religiously performed in England: what
reason have you then to say, that we have no Church?


PHIL. BEcause you have no Ministry: for there cannot be a Church 6.
without Pastors and bishops, as Cypr. l. 4* Epist. 9.
S. Cyprian teaches, who defines the Church to be a people united to a
Bishop. And Iere. cont. Luciferia^o^.
S Hierome, when he says, That it is no Church which has not Priests. This
does appear evidently by S. Paul, who declares that Christ Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
gave Pastors and teachers for the consummation of the Saints, the work of the
Ministry, and the edification of the body of Christ, until we meet all in
the unity of faith into a perfect man, and the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. In which place as our learned Bell. de Ectles. militante l.
3. c. 13. praeterea. and l. 4. c. 8. sed vt vi^.
Cardinal has observed, the Apostle teaches, That there shall be Pastors in
the Church till the day of Judgment, for then we shall meet the Lord in the
unity of faith. Behold, says father Hess. quaest. 2. de Eccle. p. 51.
Hessius, till the number of the Elect be accomplished in the end of the
world, the Church shall always have Pastors and teachers. Neither does Vide
Bellar. de eccles. milit. l. 4. c. 8.
Luther deny this, but rather put it among the Notes of the Church; And Call
Inst. l. 4. c. 3. sec. 4. sequ^ntur pastores and doctores quib^^ carere nunquam
potest ecclesia.
Calvin affirms, That the Church can never want Pastors and teachers. From
this plain approved principle, thus I dispute; Where there is no true
Ministry, there is no true Church: but among the Protestants in England there
is no true Ministry: therefore among them there is no true Church.


CHAP. II.
Wherein is declared in general, how the Papists traduce our Ministers as
merely Laymen: And in particular what they mislike in our Bishops, Presbyters
and Deacons: Whereupon the general controversy concerning the Ministry is
divided into three particular controversies, The first of Bishops, the second
of Presbyters, The third of Deacons.

ORTHODOX. WHat mislike you in our Ministry?


PHIL. Not one thing or two, but the whole frame of it absolutely and
altogether: for to deal plainly, your Ministers are no Ministers, but merely
Lay men; Neither is this my private opinion, but the general judgment of our
learned divines which affirm the same. As for example; Brist. Motive 21.
Ri. Bristow. Consider what Church that is, whose Ministers are but very Lay
men, unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated, and therefore executing their pretended
Office without benefit or spiritual comfort of any man, yea to the certain
and great damnation of themselves and others, unfit and unworthy (by this only
that they be called to that fond function) of any service in the Church of
God; holding therefore amongst us, when they repent and come again, no other
place, but the place of Laymen: in no case admitted, no nor looking to minister
in any Office, unless they take our Orders, which before they had not. Hard.
confut. of the Apol. part. 2. c. 5.
M Harding. In this your new Church, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, or
any inferior Order you have none. Sand. de schism. l. 3. page 299.
D. Sanders. The new Clergy in England is composed, partly of our Apostataes,
partly of merely Laymen. Houl^t. brief discour. reason 7.
M. Houlet. That either all, or the most part of the Ministers of England be
merely Lay men, and no Priests, and consequently have no authority in these
things, it is evident. Annotat. Romans 10. 15.
Cardinal Allen, with our learned divines at Rhemes; All your new Evangelists,
which have intruded themselves into Church and Pulpit, be every one from the
highest to the lowest false prophets, running and usurping, being never
lawfully called. Stap princ. doct. l. 1^. c. 6.
D. Stapleton; They being sent of no man, nor having Ordination, have invaded
the Ecclesiastical Chaires. Kellison reply to Doct. Sutl. page 31.
D. Kellison; Forasmuch as the inferior Ministers are made by those Bishops,
and are children of those fathers, they also are no true Priests, having
neither Order, nor Jurisdiction. Caluino-tur. l 4. c. 15. page 975.
William Reinolds; There is no feeder of sheep or oxen in all Turkey, which
does not undertake the government of his flock, or drove upon better reason,
and greater right, order and authority, then these your magnificent Apostles
and Evangelists can show, for this their Prophetical and Apostolical, and
most divine and most high Office of governing souls, reforming Churches,
teaching heavenly Truth, and declaring the mind and will of God to men. And
finally the Catholic Priests in their Suppli^. Anno 1604.
supplication to King James; Neither is any of your Protestant Ministers
coming to our Catholic fraternity, reputed other then merely Laymen
without Orders. Thus you see how we all agree in this point. Neither is this
the opinion of us English Exiles only, but other Catholic doctors are of the
same mind. The Heretics of our age (says Bell. de eccl. milit. l. 4. c. ^.
Bellarmine) have neither Ordination, nor succession, and therefore they usurp
unto themselves the name and Office of a Bishop more immodestly, then ever did
any other heretics. And other Posna^en. se^assert de Christi in terris
eccles. These. 60.
reverend divines use almost the same words: Greg. de Va^en. tom. 4. disp. 9.
q. 3. punct. 2.
Gregory de Valentia says, Certainly it is apparent, that in the Catholic
Roman Church there are lawful Ecclesiastical Ministers, as being rightly
ordained of true Bishops, but in the Synagogues of Sectaries it is evident that
there are not lawful Ministers, for they are not ordained of lawful Bishops:
and therefore it is manifest that they have no Church, seeing that a Church
cannot want lawful Ministers. Likewise father Tur. de i^re ordinand. l. 2. c 3.
Turrian says, That the Donatists and Luciferians had after a sort some
fashion of a Church, because they had Bishops, though schismatic, and other
Ministers whom Bishops ordained: But the Protestants have no form or fashion
of a Church at all, because they have no Ministers at all of the Church or
word, but mere Lay men. Lanoius cited by Schultingius, bib. cathol. t. 4. page
33.
Mattheus Lanoius has proved, that only the Roman Church has lawful
vocation. And Apud Schulting^bid^^.
D. Tyreus has written of the false calling of the new Ministers, but these
are sufficient. And that this is the judgment of holy Church may appear by
the practice: for as you have heard out of Rich. Bristow* Your Ministers
returning to us, are not admitted to minister, unless they take our Orders,
which shows, that in the judgment of the Church, they are not lawful
Ministers, but merely Laymen.


ORTHOD. Our Ministry is agreeable to the blessed book of God, and therefore
holy: and I doubt not but when the chief Shepherd shall appear, those that
have instructed many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. But how prove you that our Ministers are no lawful Ministers?


PHIL. CAn there be a lawful Minister without a lawful calling? 2.



ORTHOD. It is impossible; Hebr. 5. 4.
For no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron. It is written of John the Baptist, John 1. 6.
There was a man sent from God. The Apostles did not preach before they had
this warrant, Matthew. 10. 16.
Behold I send you. And S. Paul says, Romans 10. 15.
How can they preach except they be sent? And the Lord in the Prophet Iere. 23.
25.
Jeremy, reproves such as ran before they were sent. Therefore though a man
were wiser then Solomon and Daniel, he must expect till the Lord send him: he
that teaches without a calling, how can he hope that Christ will be with him?
This is an order (says Bez. Epist. 5.
Beza) appointed in the Church by the Son of God, and observed inuiolably by
all true Prophets and Apostles, That no man may teach in the Church unless he
be called.


PHIL. If there cannot be a lawful Minister without a lawful calling, then I
must demand how the Ministers of England can justify their calling; Might not
a man say to every one of you, as Hard. confut. of the Apol. part. 2. c. 5.
Harding said to Jewel? How say you sir? you bear your self as though you
were Bishop of Salisburie, but how can you prove your vocation? by what
authority usurp you the Administration of Doctrine and Sacraments? what can
you allege for the right and proof of your Ministry? who has called you?
who has laid hands on you? by what example has he done it? how and by whom
are you consecrated? who has sent you? who has committed unto you the Office
you take upon you? be you a Priest, or be you not? if you be not, how dare you
usurp the name and Office of a Bishop? if you be, tell us who gave you Orders?


ORTHOD. You please your selves, and beat the air with a sound of idle and
empti^ words, but leave your vain flourishes, and let us hear what you can
say against our calling.


PHIL. Then I demand whether you have an inward or an outward calling?


ORTHOD. We have both.


PHIL. An outward calling must either be immediately by the voice of Christ, as
was the calling of the Apostles, or mediatly by the Church.


ORTHOD. We are called of God by the Church: For it is Ephesians. 4. 11. 1^.
he which gives Pastors and teachers for the consummation of the Saints.


PHIL. All that are called of God by the Church, derive their authority by
lawful succession from Christ and his Apostles. If you do so, then let it
appear, show us your descent, let us see your pedigree. If you cannot, then
what are you? whence come you? If you tell us that God has raised you in
extraordinary manner, you must pardon us if we be slow in believing such things;
there are many deceivers gone out into the world, and Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light. In a word, every lawful calling is either
ordinary or extraordinary: if yours be ordinary, let us see your authority: if
extraordinary, let us see your miracles. If one take upon him extraordinary
authority, as an Ambassador from a King, he must produce his commission under
the Kings seal. If you will challenge the like from God, then we require a
miracle, that is the Seal of the King of heaven. But (to use the words of
Stap. ^^rtr^ss. p. 2. c. 3. fol. 102.
Doct. Stapleton,) In the hatching of the Protestants brood, no ordinary
vocation, nor sending extraordinary appears: so the ground and foundation
being naught, all which they have builded upon it falls down.


ORTHOD. The Ministers of England receive imposition of hands in lawful manner,
from lawful Bishops, endued with lawful authority; and therefore their
calling is Ordinary.


PHIL. Your Bishops themselves, whence have they this authority?


ORTHOD. They received it from God, by the hands of such Bishops as went before
them.


PHIL. But your first reformers, whence do they derive their succession?


ORTHOD. Archbishop Cranmer, and other heroical spirits, whom the Lord used as
his instruments to reform Religion in England, had the very selfsame
Ordination and succession whereof you so glory; and therefore if these argue
that your calling is Ordinary, you must confess that theirs likewise was
Ordinary.


PHIL. We must not only examine Cranmer, and such others consecrated in King
Henry's time, but them also which were in King Edwards, and in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's, as Parker, Grindall, Sands, Horn, and the like, which were
Priests after the Roman rite, but leaped out of the Church before they were
Bishops.


ORTHOD. As the first Bishops consecrated in King Edwards time, derived their
Spiritual power by succession from those that were in King Henry's: so the
first that were advanced under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, received theirs
from such as were formerly created, partly in K. Henry's days, partly in King
Edwards; And the Bishops at this day under our gracious sovereign King JAMES,
have the like succession from their predecessors, as may be justified by
Records in particular, and is confessed in general by Exempla habemus in
Anglia quam ^inri^a, v^ Parkeri, Grindalli, Sa^d^s^^, Hor^^, and aliorum qui
secundum ritum Catholicum (...) Presbyteri ordinati, etc. Brist. ant^h. motiu.
t. 2. p. 266.
^udsemius, who came into England in the year of our Lord 1608. to observe the
state of our Church, and the Orders of our Universities. ^udsemius de desper
Call. causa. c. 11. p. 108.
Concerning the state (says he) of the Caluinian sect in England, it so
stands, that it may either endure long, or be changed suddenly, and in a
tr^ce, Propter Catholicum ibidem in perpetua Episcoporum ^uorum seri^,
legit^maque pasiorum successione, ab Ecclesi^ accepta Ordinem.
in regard of the Catholic order there, in a perpetual line of their
Bishops, and the lawful succession of Pastors received from the Church: for
the honor whereof we use to call the English Caluinists by a milder term, not
heretics, but schismatics. Behold, he confesses we have the Catholic order,
a perpetual line of Bishops, and a lawful succession of Pastors, and that
derived from the Church. But withal I would have you to know, that though we
received it from the Church of Rome, yet with a double difference. For first
Cr^nmer and the rest received their Orders from Popish Bishops in a Popish
manner, that is, defiled with many Popish pollutions; but when it pleased God
to open their eyes, they pared away the pollutions, and retayning only that
which was good, delivered it unto posterity. So we succeed you in your Orders
not simply, but so far as they are agreeable to the Scripture: for the man of
^in did ^it in the Temple of God, and Antichrist had usurped the chair of
Christ; so that now in the Church of Rome, good things and bad things were
mingled together: therefore in that which you received from Christ, we
willingly succeed you: in that which you have from Antichrist, we renounce and
disclaim you. Secondly Cranmer and the rest received from you a shell of
succession without the kernel of Doctrine. For though your Church did give men
power to preach the truth, yet being bewitched with Antichrist, in many things
it did not reveal the truth, but when God by the Scriptures revealed it unto
them, they both preached it themselves and commended it to posterity. Neither
was this to leap out of the Church, but out of the corruptions in the Church,
even as the wheat kernel when it is cleansed, leapeth not out of the barn, but
out of the chafe. Moreover though our Doctrine may seem to you
extraordinary, because it differs from the Doctrine of the present Church of
Rome, yet as our calling and function, so our Doctrine is the same which the
spirit of God has delivered in holy Scripture, to be ordinary in the Church,
till the end of the world, and therefore you have no reason to require any
Miracles at our hands.


PHIL. These points shall be further skanned I warrant you. In the mean time, As
E^ (...)tur. l 4. ^. 13. page 928.
Tigellius in Her. l. 1. sat. 3.
Horace had nothing certain and settled in all the course of his life, but was
always distracted into contrary affections: In respect of his pace, some times
he ran most swiftly as though he had fled from his enemy; some times he
moved so slowly as though he had carried the sacrifices of Juno: In respect
of his train, he had many times two hundred attending him, again, sometimes
he had only two: And in his speech, now he imitated Kings and Tetrarches, and
spoke nothing but all big words; an other time he would stoop to very mean
matters; So that nothing was more unlike and unequal in the course of life,
then this poor wretch was to himself: even so your D^ctors some times they
creep upon the ground, by and by they catch at the clouds and stars. Now
they refuse all miracles and ^nock at such at require them, on a sudden they
challenge to themselves all the miracles since the beginning of the world.


ORTHOD. And herein they do nothing, but what may stand with reason. For if
you speak of our doctrine, we profess and are ready to prove, that we
teach the same doctrine for substance, which Moses and the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles both taught and confirmed by Miracles: And in this sense all the
Miracles of Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles are ours, because
they are so many seals and confirmations of that Doctrine which we teach. But
if the question be concerning our persons, then we confess that we can
work no miracles, we take no such matter upon us; neither is it necessary
because both our calling and doctrine are Ordinary.


PHIL. I will prove that you have no lawful ordinary calling in the 3.
Church of England. And first you challenge to your selves no other ministers,
but either Bishops or Priests or Deacons, for other inferior orders you have
none. But neither your Bishops, nor your Priests, nor your Deacons, have any
lawful ordinary calling. For first to the ordinary calling of a Bishop,
ordination or consecration is requisite by precedent Bishops having episcopal
power of order and jurisdiction; but your Bishops are descended from such
progenitors as had neither of these; no Episcopal power of Order, because
either they had no consecration at all, or at least such as is not able to
abide the touchstone; no Episcopal jurisdiction, because they are neither
elected nor confirmed by our holy Father the successor of Peter, to whom only
Christ gave the Keys, and in them the fullness of all Ecclesiastical power.
Therefore your Bishops are no Bishops, and consequently all ordinations derived
from them are mere nullities.

SEcondly your ordination of Priests is most intolerable: for according 4.
to holy Church this sacred action consists of two parts answerable to the
two principal functions of Priesthood: the former is garnished with these
seemly ceremonies. First of all the Bishop with all the Priests present
Catechis. Triden de Ordin. sacram.
lays his hands upon the head of the person to be ordained: then he inuesteth
him in a sacred Ibidem.
stoale, so fitted and fashioned that it makes a Cross upon his breast: after
this he anointeth his hands with Ibidem. Sacr. cerem. l. 1. s. 2.
holy oil; and lastly he delivers him the Chalice with wine, and the Paten
with the host, saying: Pontif. De ordinac. presbyteri. p. 66. Catechis. ibid.
Sacr. cer. ibid.
Accipe potestatem offerre sacrificium Deo, Missasque celebraretam pro viuis
quam pro defunctis in nomine domini: that is, take thou power to offer
sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Masses as well for the quick as for the
dead in the name of the Lord. This is the first part of the ordination, which
graceth him with the principal function of Priesthood, whereby he is made
Catechis. ibi.
interpres and mediator dei and hominum. That is, an Interpreter and mediator
of God and man: Yea, Bonner in crat. ad synod. Londmen.
higher then a King, happier then an Angel, creator of his Creator. This is
that which makes the holy Priesthood to be honored, because no King nor
Emperor, no Angel nor Archangel is able to do as we do; that is, with
pronouncing of a few words to make the body of Christ, flesh, blood, and bone,
as it was borne of the Virgin Mary. Moreover after Mass the Bishop Pontif.
ibid. page 73.
imposes hands, saying. Accipe spiritu^^ sanctum, quorum peccata remiseris
remituntur cis, and quorum retinueris retenta sunt, that is, Receive the holy
Ghost, whose sins thou forgiuest, they are forgiven them, and whose thou
retainest, they are retained. This is the second part, wherein he receives
the second function of Priesthood, that is, the power of absolution. Such are
the rites of holy Church, wherein you are notoriously defective. To pass over
with silence your contempt of the sacred ceremonies, of Crossing and anointing,
which are but accidental, you want the very essential and substantial parts
of Priesthood. For your Church gives no authority to offer the sovereign
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ; and though you have a kind of
absolution, yet to small purpose. For you neither use auricular confession, nor
sufficient inioyning of penance, nor satisfaction for sin, but have turned
the true judicial absolution into a declaratory.

LAst of all your Deacons are no Deacons, not only because your Bishops 5
have no authority to ordain, but also because they are defective in the
maine point of their function: for though the Bishops say, The form of
consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon, yet he means nothing
less: for the chief office of a Deacon is to Diaconorum erat sacerdoti
sacrificanti assistere, etc. Bell. de cler. c. 13.
assist the Priest in saying of Mass, which you scorn and contemn. By this
it appears that you have not one Bishop, one Priest, one Deacon in all the
Church of England, that has a lawful ordinary vocation: therefore your
pretended Ministers are merely lay men. All these things with every branch
thereof shall be justified to your faces, from point to point, if you or any
of your Rabbines dare encounter us in a Fateor mescholasacademicat cupide
requirere. Camp. rat. 2.
scholasticall combat, either privately or rather publicly, in the face of an
University, or rather solemnly in In curiam verbo principis inniri
Conuolabimus. Campian. rat. 4.
Court, in the Princes presence. This is the thing that we desire.


ORTHOD. THe world is well enough acquainted with your boasting books, and
vain glorious vaunts. We have heard the bragges of Bristow, and of Parsons
the great Polypragmon: but especially we 6
cannot forget Campian, the glorious Jesuit, who coming into England to
display the Popes Banner, like a worthy Champion cast out his gantlet and
braued both our Universities. But the success of this proud popish
challenger, may call to your mind the saying of the King of Israel to Benhadad
King of Syria; 1. King. 20. 11.
Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast as he that puts it off.
You exclaim against our ministry, as though we had neither Bishops,
Presbyters, nor Deacons: whereupon it follows that the whole controversy
about our ministry consists of three particular controversies; the first
concerning Bishops, the second concerning Presbyters, and the third concerning
Deacc^s. Again in our Bishops you disanul both their consecration and
jurisdiction: Wherefore the first particular controversy is divided into two
branches, the former of Episcopal consecration, the latter of jurisdiction,
concerning which for mine own part I do not profess my self a champion to
accept your challenge, our Church (God be thanked) is far better furnished,
and our two famous Universities, are like to the Canticl. 4. 4.
Tower of David built for defense, a thousand shieldes hang therein, and all
the Targets of the strong men. Yet I must needs confess, that my soul is
grieved to hear the host of Israel, the army of the living God reviled.
Wherefore in regard of my duty to God, and the Church, I will not keep
silence. Yet one thing I admonish you, if you mean to dispute with reproach
and disdain, the garland is yours; I will yield you the bucklers before we
begin, but if you desire in singlenes of heart to find and follow the truth,
if to this end you will compare reason with reason, and argument with
argument, in meekenes and mildnes of spirit, if you hold the truth of God in
that precious account, that you will suffer it to ouer-ballance all popular
applause and worldly respects, then I am content to be partaker with you in
the search thereof. The Lord give us wisdom and grace to know his will, and
to do that which is acceptable in his sight. If it please you to embrace these
conditions, then propose and prosecute your arguments in order.


PHIL. I will begin, and prove that your Bishops are no Bishops.


CHAP. III.
Wherein they descend to the first branch concerning Episcopal consecration,
whereupon arise two questions; the former, whether three Bishops he required
of absolute necessity to the consecration of a new Bishop, the state whereof is
explaned out of Popish writers.

ORTHODOX. WHerein are they defective? Are they bare titularie Bishops without
any Sees? or are they Bishops without the Bishoply office and function? The
first you cannot affirm, because we consecrate none but such as are assigned
to the administration of a certain place, according to the Canon of the
Council of Act. 15. Can. 6. Bin. t. 2. p. 129
Chalcedon. But whether you have offended in this or no, witness your own
famous Panor. de officio ord. c. quoniam. n. 4.
Panormitane. Nota quod multi sunt Episcopi sine administratione Episcopatuum,
vt sunt illi qui vulgariter Nullatenenses appellantur. i. Note that there are
many Bishops without the administration of Bishoprics, as are they which are
commonly called Bishops of Vtopia. These pretend great titles, and please
themselves in that sweet humor, which is nothing else but a vain dream and
mere mockery. They are like unto the Thrasylaus.
mad man, which when any Athenaeus dipnos. l. 12
ships arrived at Athens, cried out, al is mine, and took an Inuentory of
their goods, yet was he never one penny the richer. Of this frantike crew were
Gentilletus in examine.
Olaus Magnus, and blind Robert, Archbishops in conceit, the one styled
Vpsalensis, the other Armachanus, both sent to the Slcid. com. l. 17
Council of Trent to fill up the number. So Bish. Godwin. in Catal.
Robert King the last Abbot of Osney was entitled Episcopus Roanensis, whose
episcopal See was supposed to be in the Province of the Archbishoprike of
Athens, but he was glad to be translated from thence to Oxford. Ibidem
Thomas Merkes Bishop of Carlisle was removed by the Pope from his own
bishopric which yielded him convenient maintenance, to the imaginary
bishopric of Samos in Greece, whereof he knew he should never receive one
penny of profit: but as Ibidem.
one has well observed, He was so happy as neither to take benefit of the
gift of his enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked malice of his counterfeit
friend. Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham was advanced by the Pope to be Lelandus
in Com. in cygn. cant. Antonius Beccus hic fuit Episcopus Dunelm. regnante Ed.
1. electus est in patriarcham Hieros^lymitanum anno. 1305
Patriarch of Jerusalem: but if he had reaped no better maintenance from the
Bishopric of Durham, then from Jerusalem, for all his glorious title he might
have starued. For the Pope (as Jewel. def. part. 5. c. 6. did. 10
B. Jewel has told you) being forsaken of the four principal Patriarchs of
the world, appoints out four of his ordinary Chaplains (or other Prelates
whom it pleases him) and gives them the names of four Patriarchs, the first
for Constantinople, the second for Alexandria, the third for Antioch, the
fourth for Jerusalem: and thus having these four at command, in this pleasant
fancy he rules and governs the whole world. In such a solemn bravery the
great Cham of Tartary at this day, after he has dined himself, sounds out a
trumpet, and gives all the Emperors and Kings of the world leave to go to
dinner; in which imagination and iollitie he continues his claim to the
possession of the world. So the Pope makes painted Patriarchs, filling their
ambitious heads with empty titles like to great bladders blown full of wind.
Such Vtopian Bishops may justly be called no Bishops; but they are found in the
Church of Rome, and not in the Church of England.


PHIL. YOur Bishops are no Bishops, because they are not ordained 2
according to the Cited afterward.
Canons.


ORT. The ancient Canons are more reverently regarded in the Church of England,
then in the Church of Rome. For how well you have observed them in former ages,
let your own Bar. anno 912. n. 8.
Baronius testify. How foul (says he) was then the face of the holy Roman
Church, when most potent and withal most filthy harlots did bear all the
sway at Rome? at whose lust Sees were changed, Bishops appointed, and (which is
horrible to be heard and not to be uttered) whose lovers the false Popes, were
thrust into the seat of Peter, which were not to be written in the Catalogue
of the Roman Bishops, but only for the noting of the times: for who may say,
they were lawful Popes which were thus without right thrust in by such
strumpets? No where we find any mention of Clergy choosing, or giving
consent afterward; All Canons were put to silence; the pontifical decrees were
choked, ancient traditions proscribed, and the old customs, sacredrite, and
former use in choosing the high Bishop utterly extinguished. And for later
times, your own learned friends also complain as follows: Bud. de ass. l.
5.
Budeus: The holy Canons and rules of Church discipline made in better times
to guide the life of Clergy men, are now become leaden rules, such as
Aristotle says the rules of Lesbyan buildings were. For as leaden and soft
rules do not direct the building with an equal tenor, but are bowed to the
building at the lust of the builders: so are the Popes Canons made flexible as
lead and wax, that now this great while the Decrees of our ancestors, and
the Popes Canons, serve not to guide men's manners, but ( that I may so say) to
make a bank and get money. Vict. rel. 4. de potest pap. prop. 6. p. 139.
Franciscus de Victoria, Doct: of the chair at Salmantica in Spain. We see
daily so large or rather so dissolute dispensations proceed from the Court of
Rome, that the world cannot endure them. Neither is it only to the offense of
the little ones, but of the great ones also. Nullus quaeris dispensationem quin
obtipeat. page 148
No man seeks a dispensation but he obtains it: Yea at Rome there are
which give As may be collected. page 149.
attendance to see if any be willing to crave dispensation of all things
established by law: Omnes qui petunt afferunt dispensationes. ibid.
all that crave it have it. If you Philodox would see the particulars, read
but Espen. in Tit. c. 1. digr. 2.
Claudius Espencaeus a divine of Paris upon the Epistle to Titus, and unless
your forehead be as hard as brass it will make you blush. I will conclude
this point with the saying of Tapp. Orat. 10. anno 1552
Ruardus Tapperus Chancelour of Louaine. In the Court of Rome all things are
set at sale, with dispensations containing many things wherewith Christ
himself is not able to dispense. Behold, this is your keeping of Canons in the
Church of Rome. But because you accuse the Church of England for breaking the
Canons in making of Bishops; I answer first, that the consecration of our
Bishops is most canonical: Secondly, that if we failed in this or that Canon,
yet every transgression of an Ecclesiastical Canon does not make a nullitie in
a consecration: As for example, It was provided by the great Conc. Sard. can.
10. Bin. t. 1. p. 437.
Council of Sardica that none should be made Bishop, unless he had passed
the inferior orders, and stayed a long time in them. Notwithstanding Soz. l.
7. ^. 8
Nectarius was chosen Patriarch of Constantinople, being not only a layman;
but as yet unbaptized: and was presently made Bishop in the second general
Conc. Constable. in ^p. synod. Bin. t. 1. p. 529
Council held at Constantinople. Likewise Saint Socr. l. 4. c. 25
Ambrose, Zacharias in Con. 8. Bin t. 3. page 887.
Tarasius, Nicephorus, Eusebius of Caesarea, Thalasius; yea and some Marcel.
Corc. l. 1. sect. 2 sacr. Ceremon.
Popes also as for example Petrus Moronaeus, were of lay men advanced to the
Episcopal office, yet I know you dare not pronounce a nullitie in their
Consecration. Wherefore seeing it is a plain case, that every breach of a Canon
does not annihilate a consecration, you must tell us what Canon you mean and
wherein we break it.


PHIL. I mean that Canon which requires that a Bishop should be consecrated
by three Bishops: which Canon the Catechis. Trid. de ordinis sacramento:
Episcopi ex Apostoloru^ traditione qu^ perpetuo in Ecclesia custodita est,
atribu^ Episcopic consecrantur.
Council of Trent calls an Apostolic tradition.


ORTHO. HEre arise two questions; the former, whether three Bishops 3.
be required of necessity to an Episcopal consecration; the later, whether
the Bishops of England be consecrated by three. Now that the state of the
former may be the clearer, give me leave to ask you a few things. And first,
what say you to Amphilochius, who was created Bishop not by men but by Angels,
unless Lib. 11. c. 20
Nicephorus delude us with fables?


PHIL. It seems to be no fable, but a true Story. For Amphilochius was
allowed for a lawful Bishop, but this was done (as Cardinal Bell. de sacram.
in genesis l. 1. c. 24.
Bellarmine says) by divine dispensation extraordinary.


ORTH. What say you then to the blessed Apostles? were they Bishops or no? And
if Bishops, whether in that they were Apostles, or by distinct consecration?
and if by distinct consecration, by whom were they consecrated?


PHIL. Cardinal Ioh. de Tur. sum. de Eccl. l. 2. c. 32.
Turrecremata teaches, that Chirst himself made Peter a Bishop
immediately, and Peter ordained the rest, first John, next James, then others.
And Cardinal Bell. de R. Pont. l. 1. c. 23.
Bellarmine makes it the two and twentieth prerogative of Peter, Quod solus
Petrus a Christo ordinatus Episcopus fuerit, caeteri autem a Petro Episcopalem
consecrationem acceperint, i. That only Peter was ordained Bishop by Christ,
and the rest received their Episcopal consecration from Peter.


ORTHOD. These conceits and fancies when they shall be weighed in the balance,
will be found too light. In the mean time, what say you to the consecration of
John and James, were they sound and Canonical?


PHIL. They were sound no doubt, but why should you ask if they were
canonical, seeing the Canon was not then made? You must understand, that there
is one consideration to be had of the Church when it is in the cradle, and
another, when it is grown to ripe and flourishing years. In the infancy of
the Church, when Christ ascending into glory had consecrated Peter, and made
him the spring and fountain of all Episcopal Order, it was necessary that
the first should be consecrated by Peter alone, the next by two at the most,
and these consecrations were sound and sufficient: but when James the brother
of our Lord was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by Peter, John and the other
James, they gave a Form or Pattern to their successors, as Anacl. ep. 2. c.
1. apud Bin. tom. 1. p. 101.
Anacletus declares that a Bishop should by no means be consecrated by fewer
then by three, all the rest giving their consent.


ORTHO. Suppose a Church should suffer such desolation (which the Lord forbid)
that a Canonical number of Catholic Bishops were not to be found, what
should then be done in this case of necessity?


PHIL. We may learn that, partly of the Council of Conc. Sar. c. 5. Bin.
tom. 1. p. 435.
Sardica, which permits a supply from the next province: partly of Pope
Greg. 7. epist. 19. apud Bin. ^. 3. p. 1210.
Gregory the seventh, who when the Churches of Afric were brought to so low
an ebb, that they had only two Bishops, would not suffer those two to
consecrate a third, but willed them to proceed to an election, and send the
party elected to Rome to be consecrated by three.


ORTHO. The presence of three, when they may conveniently be had, we greatly
commend, yet not as a commandment of God, but as a constitution of the Church,
to be embraced of congruity, and not of necessity.


PHIL. YEs of necessity, and that both necessitate precepti, by the necessity 4.
of a command, which we are bound to obey, because as Epist. ad Galliae Episc.
Bin. tom. 1. p. 126.
Anicetus says, instituente domino sieri iubetur, it is commanded to be done
the Lord so appointing: and also necessitate medij, as a necessary means;
necessary I say, not only ad been esse, to the well performance of the
consecration, but also, ad esse, to the very being of it, so that without it
there is a nullity. For first of all this is the general iugdement of the
Iurists, as appears by those words of Cardinal Ioh. Turr. in Great. decr.
tom. 1. p. 492.
Turrecremata, Iuristae quasi omnes sunt huius opinionis quod requiratur
ternarius numerus Episcoporum, ita vt si quis a paucioribus consecretur,
dicatur nihil agi; that is, almost all the Iurists are of this opinion, that
the number of three Bishops is so required, that if one be consecrated by
fewer, it may be said that nothing is done. Which judgment of the Iurists
prevails with most eminent Canonists, as appears by the words following in
the Cardinal: Vnde Hugo and Archidiaconus dicunt, vt Papa solus cum vno
Episcopo non posset consecrare hac forma durante, that is, whereupon Hugo and
the Archdeacon say that the Pope alone with one Bishop cannot consecrate, so
long as this form endures. The words of the Archdeacon are these, Archid.
sup. deret. part. 1. did. 66. Porro. p. 88.
est ergo de forma and substantia sacramenti quod ibi sint tres Episcopi, and
si ordinetur a minus, non est Episcopus, quia deest substantia sieve forma qu^
exigitur in collatione illius ordinis, that is, therefore it is of the form
and substance of the Sacrament that there be three Bishops, and if one be
ordained of less he is no Bishop: because the substance or form required in
the Collation of that Order is wanting. Moreover whereas in the second Conc.
Arelat. 2. ^a. 5. Bin. tom. 1. p. 537.
Counsel at Arles it is said, that a Metropolitan should not presume to
ordain a Bishop without three of his provincial Bishops: which the Canon
Decr. Greg. l. ^. tit. 6. c. 7. nec Epis.
Law aleadgeth three or two, that is, three with the Metropolitan, or two
besides him; the gloss upon the word (three), says thus, quod dicit (tribus)
est de substantia consecrationis alias non esset consecratus ^iessent
pauciores, that is, Whereas the Council says, (three) it is of the substance
of the consecration, otherwise he should not be consecrated if there were fewer.


ORTHO. IS this the Judgment of your Jesuits?


PHIL. Father Turrian speaking of the Metropolitan 5.
and two Bishops assistant, says, Tur. pro can. apost. l. 1. c. 22. fol. 7^.
Hi sunt tres prorsus necessarij, these are three altogether necessary: and
Tur. de. eccle. and ordinat. minist. l. 1. c. 11.
elsewhere he produces this saying of Dama. Epist. 5. apud. Bin. tom. 1. p.
502.
Damasus, Quod Episcopi non sint qui minus quam a tribus ordinati sunt
Episcopis, omnibus patet, quoniam prohibitum est a sanctis patribus vt qui ab
vno vela duobus ordinati sunt Episcopis neque nominentur Episcopi: si nomen non
habent qualiter officium habebunt? that is, it is manifest to all men that they
are no Bishops, which are ordained of less then three Bishops: Because the
holy Fathers forbid that such as are ordained of one or two Bishops, should not
so much as be called Bishops: if they have not the name, how should they have
the office? and he infers this conclusion in the words of Damasus: Quare
quicquid inter Episcopos aut de rebus solummodo adeos pertinentibus egerint;
necesse est vt irritum fiat, quia quod non habent, dare non possunt: that is,
Wherefore whatsoever they shall do among Bishops, or concerning things
belonging only to Bishops, it must needs be void, because they cannot give
that to another which they have not themselves. Whereupon he accounts your
Bishops no Bishops, your Ministers no Ministers, your ordinations, no
ordinations. Turr. in Epist nun^^^ at. prefix. lib. de eccle. and ord.
Nec enim schismaticae ordinationes sunt, sed nullae penitus, ac potius mere
laicae; For the ordinations (of the Protestants) are not Schismatic
ordinations, but no ordinations at all, and mere laick.


ORTHO. What says Bellarmine to this matter? for he was the noble and renowned
Jesuit, though now he has changed his habit for a red hat.


PHIL. He says, Bell. de e(...)l lib. 4. ca^. 8 nota quart^.
Nostri temporis haeretici neutrum habent, id est, nec ordinationem, nec
successionem, and propterea long inuerecundius quam vlli vnquam haeretici sibi
nomen and munus Episcopi vsurpant: i. the Heretics of our time have neither,
that is, neither ordination nor succession, and therefore they usurp unto
themselves the name and office of a Bishop far more immodestly then ever did
any other Heretics; the ground of which assertion (as may appear both by the
antecedents and consequents) is because they are not consecrated by three.


ORTHO. Does he not allow a consecration by fewer in case of necessity?


PHIL. It cannot be doubted (says he) Ibid. quantum ad.
but ordinarily three Bishops are required to the ordination of a new Bishop:
unless peradventure by dispensation with one Bishop ordaining, there be
present two mitred Abbots which may supply the place of Bishops, as it uses
sometimes to be done, ob Episcoporum raritatem, for the scarcity of Bishops.
Hitherto Bellarmine to which Bin. in can. apost. tom. 1. p. 14.
Binius adds, aliamue iustam causam, or for any other just cause.


ORTHO. By whose dispensation must this be?


PHIL, Ibidem.
Binius says per summi Pontificis dispensationem, by the Popes dispensation.


ORTHO. If there be neither three nor two nor any Abbots assisting, nor yet
the Popes dispensation, what is then the judgment of Bellarmine?


PHIL. You shall hear himself speak: Be(...) que.
from which an insoluble argument is taken in this manner. A Church cannot be
without Bishops, as we have declared: among the Lutherans there are no Bishops,
for they have no ordination, nor succession from the Apostles: therefore among
them there is no Church, And verily that neither Luther who was accounted
Bishop of Wittenberge, nor Zuinglius, who was reputed Bishop of Tigur, nor
Oecolampadius, who in the very Epitaph upon his grave is called the first
Bishop of Basil, nor Calvin, who was called the first Bishop of Geneua, nor
any other of them were ordained of three Bishops, nor of one by dispensation
with the assistance of Abbots is a thing notoriously known; neither do they
deny it. Therefore these are no Bishops, at least in the judgment of the
Fathers of the Nicen and Carthaginian Council, yea in the judgment of the
Apostles themselves, who have decreed that a Bishop ought to be ordained by
three Bishops. Thus Bellarmine is clearly of opinion that a Bishop must either
be ordained of three, or have assistance of Abbots with a dispensation, or else
he is no Bishop, and this argument he calls insoluble.


ORTHO. HOw this does cross and condradict it self in due place 6.
shall appear: in the mean time I would willingly know what is the received
opinion of your Seminaries. There is a certain manuscript book called
Controuersiae huius temporis in Epitomen reductae, made by Parsons the Jesuit
out of the Dictates of Bellarmine and Maldonate, and appointed to be written
out by every Student in your College; I pray you what says that book to this
point?


PHIL. It agrees with the former, the words are these; Epit. controu. part. 1.
Cont. 4. q. 2.
Primus Canon Apostolorum hoc idem declarat, scilicet, Episcopum non posse
ordinari nisi a tribus Episcopis; hinc sequitur ineuitabiliter Haereticos non
habere vllos pastores seu Episcopos, cum primi illorum Episcopi, Caluinus,
Lutherus, Zuinglius nunquam fuerunt ordinati ab alijs Episcopis. That is, The
first Canon of the Apostles declares this same thing, to wit, that a Bishop
cannot be ordained but of three Bishops, hence it follows unavoidably* that
the Heretics have not any pastors or Bishops, seeing that their first Bishops
Calvin, Luther, Zuinglius had never been ordained of other Bishops.


ORTHO. HItherto we have seen how you hold the state of the first 7.
question, but do your Jesuits and Seminaries urge this against the Church of
England?


PHIL. Yes for it is a maine point.


ORTHO. Then your maine point is a vain point, but let us hear them.


PHIL. Bellarmine speaking of the marriage of English Bishops, says, Bellar.
apol. pro resp. ad. lib. Jacob. R. cap. 7. page 119.
Nullam excusationem habent, nisi forte velint libere confiteri (quod
verissimum est,) se veros Episcopos non esse, neque aliquid de Episcopatu
habere, nisi quae sibi unjust vsurpant, nomen and opes; That is, They have no
excuse, unless peradventure they will freely confess (which is most true)
that they are no true Bishops, neither have any thing of the Episcopal
function, but what they unjustly usurp unto themselves, to wit, the name, and
the riches. If nothing else, then not the Character, not the Jurisdiction, not
the Order, not the Office, they have nothing, nothing at all, except the name
and the riches.


ORTHOD. The riches? alas, Is it not strange that a Cardinal swimming in
streams of gold to the chinne, should envy the riches of the Bishops of
England? But be they rich or poor, surely if the Pope might have had his will,
before this time he would have made them poor enough. In the days of King
Henry the eight when a view was taken, it appeared that he had received out of
England only for Inuestitures of Bishops, Antiq. Brit. page 326.
4000. pounds by the year, one year with another, and that for 40. years
together. But how dare Bellarmine thus accuse our Bishops, as though they had
nothing belonging to the Episcopal function? What? no learning? none at all?
It is not long ago since he put off his Cardinals robes, disguising himself
under the ill favored habit and vizard of Tortus, when one of our Bishops,
(whether learned or no, let the world judge) did so unmask and display him,
that all Popish hearts have cause to bleed, to see the weakness of their
chief Champion so plainly discovered. And as our Bishops have learning, so
let the Cardinal know, that they are famous and eminent Preachers, very
labourious in the Vineyard of Christ, and in this respect far unlike to his
brethren the Cardinals. For Ricard. Pacaeus lib. de fruct qui ex doctr na
percip^tur. Cited by Doct. Rainold. Conf. c. 7. s. 6.
Julius the second said, that he could not with a good conscience make Friar
Giles a Cardinal, because then he should leave his preaching: and afterward
Pacaeus ibid.
Leo the tenth made him a Cardinal, that he might hold his peace. For commonly
in the Church of Rome the great Bishops preach seldom, the Cardinals seldomer,
and the Popes never. But what is the ground of his accusation?


PHIL. Because they are not Canonically ordained. The same point is likewise
urged against them by Doctor Stap. Fort. part. 2. c. 7. f. 141.
Stapleton; Whether went they into France, Spain or Germany, seeing that at
home there was no number of such as might and would serve their turn? No, no,
as their Religion is contrary, their end is diverse, their beginning has been
utterly different from the true Christian faith planted among us, so are their
proceedings different and repugnant; they have not come in by the door, they
have stolen in like thieves without all Spiritual authority or government.
This difference between the Protestants and our true Bishops the first
Apostles, imports so much, that it may not lightly be passed over: for their
authority being proved naught, all their doings can be no better; I say
therefore by the verdict of holy Scripture, and practice of the Primitive
Church, these men are no Bishops; Your pretended Bishops have no such
Ordination, no such laying on of the hands of Bishops, no authority to ordain
Priests and Ministers, and therefore neither are you true Ministers, neither
they any Bishops at all.


ORTHOD. What reason have you to say, that our Bishops are not consecrated by
three? the Canon has always been observed in our Church, neither can all the
Papists in the world give any one instance to the contrary since the time of
Reformation.


PHIL. Sand. de schis. l. 3. p. 297.
Doct. Sanders declares, That there was a time when you had neither three nor
two Bishops, and yet at the same time your new Superintendents invaded the
Ecclesiastical Chaires, and were glad to seek their Confirmation from the
Prince and Parliament, after they had enjoyed the Episcopal Office certain
years, without any Episcopal Consecration: And therefore all the water in the
Thames, cannot clear the Clergy of England from being usurpers.


ORTHOD. But if this be false, then all the water in the Tybur, though it were
turned into Holy Water, cannot purge the Papists from being slanderers. And how
false it is, shall ^. Lib. 3. c. 4.
hereafter be declared out of authentical Records, by which it shall appear,
That the Queens Letters patents of Commission concerning the Confirmation and
Consecration of the very first Bishop made in her time, were directed to 7.
Bishops, and also that the Consecration was accomplished by 4 Bishops, whose
names and titles shall be specified. In the mean time this only I say; In
lying and slandering, many Papists have had an admirable dexterity, but
Sanders surmounted them all. For as his book of Schism is truly called by a
learned Bishop, Tort. Torti. p. 363.
Sterquilinium mendactorum, A dunghill of lies; so it might be justly termed
Sterquilinium calumniarum, A very dunghill of slanders, Insomuch that for his
noble faculty that way, he deserves no more to be called M. Doct. Sanders,
but M. Doct. Slanders.


PHIL. It is no slander, but a truth, which shall be avouched to your faces; for
I will prove all that I have said in order. My masters, mark what I say; The
Papists prisoners in Framlingham castle in the late Q. time.
If you can justify your Calling, we will all come to your Church, and be of
your Religion.


ORTHOD. Remember your promise, and proceed with your Argument.


PHIL. I will proceed and prosecute an unanswerable Argument. Every true Bishop
must of necessity be Consecrated by 3. Bishops at the least; But the Bishops
of England are not so: therefore the Bishops of England are no true Bishops.


ORTHOD. The Bishops of England are so, as in due place shall appear; And if
in case of necessity they were not so, What then? The presence of 3. is
required only to the well-being, not simply to the being. It is no essential
part of Episcopal Consecration, but an accidental ornament, a comely
complement of singular conueniencie, no substantial point of absolute
necessity.


CHAP. IIII.
Wherein the Popish Arguments drawn from the Canons of the Apostles, and the
Decretall Epistles, are proposed, urged and answered.

PHIL. I Will prove the contrary by sundry arguments, and first by the Canons
of the Apostles, which were collected and set out by Clemens Saint Peter's
scholar.


ORTH. If those Canons were made by the Apostles, then the Church of Rome is
much to blame, for the 84. Canon allows the 3. Book of Maccabecs, as also 2.
Epistles of Clemens, and his eight books of constitutions, for Canonical
Scripture, which the Church of Rome rejects: again, it omitteth the Son of
Sidrach, Wisdom, and diverse others which your Church imbraceth for Canonical.


PHIL. It seems probable (says De verbo dei l. 1. c. 20.
Bellarmine) that this Canon was not set out by Clemens; yea, it is Apocryphus
and Surreptitius as is affirmed by Bin. in notis in Canon. ^post. tom. 1. p 15.
Binius.


ORTH. What say you then to the 65. Canon which forbids to fast upon the
Saturday, excepting one only, (that is as Page 17.
Binius declares) the Paschall Saturday.


PHIL. I say with Bar. Anno. 102. ^. 15.
Baronius, it is counterfeite.


ORTH. But what say you to Pope Distinct. 15. sanct. Romana.
Gelasius, who in a council at Rome of 70. Bishops, says, Liber Canonum
Apostolorum Apocryphus, the book of the Canon of the Apostles is Apocryphal.
And in what sense he called it Apocryphal, is expounded by Bellarmine: De
verbo Dom. l. 1. c. 20.
Eos libros vocat Apocryphos qui sunt aediti ab auctoribus haereticis vel certe
suspectis: Gelasius calls those books Apocryphal, which were set out by
such authors as were either heretical, or at least suspected.


PHIL. Gelasius did not call the book Apocryphal, as though all the Canons
therein contained were Apocryphal, but as Ibidem.
Bellarmine thinks, Propter aliquos vel corruptos, vel additos ab haeret^cis:
that is, in respect of some which were either corrupted or added by heretics:
of which stamp were those two which you alleged. But the first 50.
containing nothing but Apostolic and Orthodoxe doctrine approved of ancient
Popes, Councels and Fathers, Velut authentici recipiuntur, are received as
authentical, says Quo supra. page 14.
Binius.


ORTH. Pope Zeph. epistol^ 1. apud Bin. tom. 1. p. 134.
Zephirine allowed 70. or at least 60. (for there are diverse readings) how
does this agree?


PHIL. Well enough: for Pope Zephirine speaks not of Canons, but of
Sentences: and you must know that those 60 or 70. sentences are all contained
in the 50. Canons, as Ibidem. page 14 and 134.
Binius affirms out of Father Tur pro can. apost. l. 1. c. 20.
Turrian.


ORTHOD. Quo supra.
Bellarmine expounds these sentences to be so many Canons in these words;
Zephirine the fifteenth from Peter delivers in his first Epistle that there
were only 70. Canons of the Apostles.


PHIL. Pope Did. 16. Clem.
Leo allows only fifty: Apostolorum Canones numerant patres inter Apochrypha
exceptis 50. Capitulis: The fathers do reckon the Canons of the Apostles
amongst Apocryphal writings, excepting fifty Chapters, by which he means
fifty 50. Canonibus sieve capitu^^s. Bin. t. 1. p. 14
Canons.


ORTHO. Then to pass over the fifth Canon, forbidding a Bishop or Priest to
cast off his wife under pretense of religion: as also the one and thirtith,
inhibiting all other Bishops to restore a Priest or Deacon, excommunicated by
his own Bishop: What can you possibly say to the ninth, which excommunicateth
all those which being present at the communion do not communicate? concerning
which Bin. in hun^ canonem.
Binius is forced to confess: Totum hoc decretum non divine sed humano iure
constitutum, iam contraria consuetudine est abrogatum, that is, This whole
Decree being made not by law Divine, but humane* is now abrogated by a
contrary custom: and alleges for him Bellarmine, Zuarez, and Turrian: which
is a notable acknowledgement, that such a Canon as you account Apostolical and
Authentical may not withstanding be abrogated. But not to stand upon these
and the like exceptions, let us hear what the Canons say concerning the
consecration of Bishops.


PHIL. THe words are these. Let Canon apost. primus.
a Bishop be ordained of two or three Bishops. 2



ORTHO. Does the Canon require two or three? Then ordination by two is
canonical, as well as by three.


PHIL. Not so, for the Canon means that there should be two or three
assistants, besides the Metropolitan, as is declared by Cardinal Bell. de
eccl. l. 4. c. 8.
Bellarmine and father Turrian de. eccles. and ordi. l. 1. c. 4.
Turrian.


ORTHOD. The Canon says not two or three assistants, but two or three Bishops.
Neither has it this clause besides the Metropolitan, but pronounces simply,
let a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops. Wherefore the Canon is
satisfied with the presence of two or three Bishops. This is the judgment of
your own Pamel^n Cypr. Epist. 68.
Pamelius, who says that conseration or imposition of hands was per Episcopos,
qui conuenerant, quos vt minimum duos esse oportebat. i. By the Bishops which
were assembled, which should be two at the least. Where note that he does not
say the Bishops assistant, but the Bishops assembled, should be two at the
least. This also was the judgment of Cardinal de Io^. de Turrecrem. in
Gratianum. c. 1. page 493.
Turrecremata, who urges this very Canon against your position, and proves
by it that three are not necessary.

Neither is the presence of two required of absolute necessity, if you 3
will believe the Apostolic constitutions of Clemens: a book which for my
own part I would not once name, but only that your chief champions do so
See Master James of corruptions. page 2. and 3.
commonly allege it. Wherefore as Saint Act. 17. 28
Paul cited a Poet against the Athenians; so let me cite this book against
you which so highly esteem it. Apostolic. Constit. l. 8. cap. 27.
I Simon of Chanany appoint by how many Bishops, a Bishop ought to be ordained,
to wit, by two or three Bishops, but if any shall be ordained by one Bishop,
let both the ordained, and the Ordainer be deposed, but if necessity shall
compel to be ordained by one because many cannot be present, for persecution,
or some other cause, let the Decree of the commission of many Bishops be
produced. If this authority be of credit, then you are confuted, for it
allows consecration by one in case of necessity.


PHIL. But that one must have the commission of many.


ORTHOD. The commission is only for concord sake and to avoid Schism, for
the Ecclesi^ vs^ satis ostendit neque absolutinem neque ordinationem vel a
muto, vel ab absente conferri posse Bell. de sacr. matr. l. 1. c. 8. ad ea.
absent cannot impose hands, nor give the power; therefore they do not
ordain, though they consent to the ordination which is performed by him only
that is present. Now if in any case a Bishop may be ordained by one and yet
be a true Bishop, then the presence of more is a matter of conueniency and not
of absolute necessity. And if you think that these constitutions proceeded
from the Apostles, then you must confess that they are the fittest
interpreters of the Canons of the Apostles.


PHIL. THe Canon will be cleerer if we compare it with the Decretall Epistles.
4



ORTH. Those Decretals are out of date. They have long shrouded themselves
under the vizard of reverent antiquity, but now they are unmasked and appear
to be counterfeit, as is confessed by your Cusanius Bellar, and Contius
alleged by Doctor Reinoldes conf. c. 8. Diuis. 3.
own men. Yet I will not take you at this advantage, and therefore let us
hear them.


PHIL. Anacl. Epist. 2. apud. Bin. t. 1. p. 101. and did. 66. Porro.
Anacletus says that James who was named the Just, and the brother of the Lord
according to the flesh, was ordained the first Archbishop of Jerusalem by the
Apostles, Peter, the other James, and John, giving a form to their successors
that a Bishop should by no means be consecrated by fewer then three
Bishops, all the rest giving their consents. Likewise Epist. ad Galliae
Episco. apud Bin. t. 1. p. 126
Anicetus; We know that the most blessed James called the Just, which also
according to the flesh, is called the brother of our LORD, was ordained
Bishop of Jerusalem by Peter, James and John, the Apostles. Now if so great a
man was ordained of no less then three; verily it is apparent that they
delivered a form or pattern^, the Lord so appointing, that a Bishop ought to
be ordained of no fewer then three Bishops.


ORTHODOX. Here are two things to be considered, the ordination of James, and
the collection thereupon. Concerning the ordination, your Anacletus and
Anicetus affirm, that he was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by three Apostles,
and the same is avouched by Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1
Eusebius, Hier. de viris illustribus in Iacobo.
Hierome and others. But what is meant when it is said that the Apostles
ordained him?


PHIL. What else but that they conferred upon him the Episcopal power, as our
Bishops do when they consecrate a Bishop?


ORTHOD. Then belike, before this ordination, Saint James had not the
Episcopal power.


PHIL. Very true.


ORTHOD. Was not he an Apostle of Jesus Christ?


PHIL. Yes: for they speak distinctly of James the brother of our Lord, of
whom Saint Gal. 1. 19.
Paul says, None other of the Apostles saw I save James, the brother of our
Lord: so it is evident that he was an Apostle.


ORTHOD. And was he not called to the office of an Apostle immediately by Jesus
Christ? and consequently had he not from him al Apostolic authority?


PHIL. All Apostolic I grant: but we speak of Episcopal.


ORTHOD. As though all Episcopal authority were not comprehended in the
Apostolic. For what commission can be more ample then this which Christ gave
jointly to all his Apostles? As Io. 20. 21
my Father sent me, so send I you: and Saint 2. Cor. 12. 12.
Paul proclaims that he was in nothing inferior to the chief Apostles. If
in nothing; then not in Episcopal power and authority. This is agreeable to
the judgment of the best learned among you. Bellarmine says, Bell. de sacr.
bapt. and confir. l. 2. c. 12.
Obseruandum est in Apostolica authoritate contineri omnem Ecclesiasticam
potestatem, i. It is to be observed that in the Apostolic authority, is
contained all Ecclesiastical power. If all Ecclesiastical, then surely all
Episcopal. In another De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 23.
place he proves the same by the authority of S. Cyrill, grounding upon the
words of Christ before alleged. Likewise Kelectione 2. Quest. 2. Conc. 3.
Franciscus de Victoria, Omnem potestatem quam Apostoli habuerunt receperunt
immediate a Christo, i. The Apostles received immediately from Christ, all the
power which they had. Wherefore to say, That Christ made Peter Bishop with his
own hands, and that the rest derived Episcopal power from Peter, is a mere
fancy. Likewise to say, that Peter, John and James, did ordeine James Bishop,
that is, confer upon him any Episcopal power, is a mere dream.


PHIL. Do not the fathers commonly say, That he was a Bishop?


ORTHO. They say so, And in so saying, they say truly if they be rightly
understood. For 1. The Scripture says of Judas, Acts. 1. 20.
His Bishopric let an other man take, That is, his Apostleship. If the
Apostleship may be called a Bishopric, then an Apostle may be called a Bishop.
2. The word Bishop signifies an Ouerseer, and may most aptly be applied to the
Apostles, which were the chief overseers of the Church of Christ.


PHIL. Every Apostle, in that he is an Apostle, may be called a Bishop in this
general sense; But James being an Apostle, was properly made a Bishop in the
usual Ecclesiastical sense.


ORTHOD. A Bishop in the Ecclesiastical sense has two properties; For 1.
hereceiueth his Episcopal power by imposition of hands. 2. For the execution
thereof he is confined to a certain place. Neither of which can properly be
applied to an Apostle. For though the Apostles made their chief abode in great
Cities and populous places, as namely James at Jerusalem, yet because their
Commission extended to all Nations, they could not be so tied to any one place,
as the Bishop was; Which is well expressed by Haeres. 27.
Epiphanius, saying, The Apostles went often to other countries to preach the
Gospel, and the Citte of Rome might not be without a Bishop. As though he
should say, The Apostles were to preach to all Nations: but the Bishops duty
did confine him to his own charge* This is correspondent to the Scripture,
which calls the Apostles, Matt. 5. 14.
The light of the world; whereas the 7. Bishops of Asia are styled, The 7.
Reave. 1. 20.
Stars and Angels of the 7. Churches. And though the Apostles while they
stayed in those Cities did preach, ordeine Ministers, execute Censures, and all
other things which are now performed by the Bishops, who succeed them in the
government of the Church, (in regard whereof the fathers call them the Bishops
of those places,) yet their Episcopal power was not distinct from their
Apostolic, but included in it as a branch thereof: not derived from any
Ordination by the hands of man, but given them immediately by Jesus Christ.


PHIL. If James received no Episcopal power by Ordination, in what sense is it
said, That they ordained him?


ORTHOD. Your gloss of the Canon Law gives 4. senses of that speech, Gloss^n
did. 67. Reliqui.
Either say, that these 3. did Consecrate him only with visible Unction, but
he was before Anointed of the Lord after an innisible manner: Or say, they did
not ordeine him, but only showed a form of ordaining unto others: Or say that
they ordained him not to be a Bishop, but an Archbishop: Or say that they
ordained, that is Inthronised him to the administration of a certain place;
for before he was a Bishop without a title. Hitherto the Gloss. And verily as
the Prophets and teachers at Antioch, imposed hands, with fasting and prayer
upon Acts. 13. 2* 3.
Paul and Barnabas, not to give them any new Ecclesiastical power; for that is
more then we find in the Scripture: but as the Text says, To set them apart
for the work whereunto the Lord had called them; So the Apostles might impose
hands upon James, not to give him any Episcopal power, (that fancy has been
before confuted,) but by common consent, to design him to the government of
the Church of Jerusalem, and to commend him and his labors to the grace of
God: which imposition of hands the ancient writers term Ordination, using the
word largely, and improperly. But if we should imagine that he was properly
ordained, what can be collected thereupon?


PHIL. THat this should be a pattern to all posterity, as appears 5
by the authorities before alleged, and consequently, that a Bishop should
not be ordained by fewer then three.


ORTHOD. There may be a fair pattern, and yet posterity may sometimes want
means to imitate that pattern. When the number may be had, we greatly commend
it; when it cannot, then both this, and all other Ecclesiastical Constitutions
must yield to necessity.


PHIL. The contrary is manifest by the words of Epist. 2.
An^cletus, A Petro, Iacobo and Iohanne Apostolis est ordinatus, successoribus
dantibus formam eorum, vt non minus quam a tribus Episcopis reliquisque omnibus
assensum praebentibus vllatenus ordinetur Episcopus. Wherefore a Bishop must
not be ordained Vllatenus, by any means, or in any respect by fewer then
three, and consequently not in case of necessity. Is not this to make the
number of three, a substantial point of Episcopal Ordination?


ORTHOD. The same word in effect is used about the Consecration of an
Archbishop, Distinct. 66. Archiepiscopus.
Archiepiscopus ab omnibus suae Prouinciae Episcopis ordinetur, hoc autem
nullatenus liceat immutare; That is, Let an Archbishop be ordained of all the
Bishops of his Province; and let it by no means be lawful to change this
Where this word Nullatenus does not prove, that the consent of all is
substantial, as is confessed by Cardinal Turrecr. in Great. decret. t. 1. page
493.
Turrecremata.


PHIL. You must mark what follows; Sin aliter praesumptum fuerit, viribus
carere non dubium est, quia irrita erit secus acta ordinatio. i. If the action
shall be otherwise done through presumption, there is no doubt but it wants
validity: because the Ordination otherwise performed, shall be void.


ORTHOD. It shall be void; but how? Quoad officij executionem, says the
Distinct. 66. Archiep.
Gloss; i. According to the execution of the Office. Whereupon Apud Tur.
ibidem.
Hugo, says, Episcopus tamen erit, licet ab omnibus non consecretur, sed
repelletur ab Officio Episcopali nisi dispensetur cum illo. i. Yet he shall be a
Bishop, although he be not Consecrated of all, but he shall be repelled (for his
presumption) from the Episcopal Office, unless he be dispensed withal.
Wherefore in the judgment of Hugo, the Ordination is not void in respect of the
power, but the Church may make it void, in respect of the execution: and yet
upon his repentance he may be admitted to the execution, not by a new
ordination, but by dispensation, which proves that the transgression was not
substantial, but accidental.


PHIL. Epist. 5. apud Bin. t. ^. p. 502.
Damasus says, It is apparent to all men that they are no Bishops, which are
ordained of fewer then three, because it is forbidden by the holy Fathers, that
they which are ordained of one or two Bishops, should not so much as be named
Bishops: If they have not the name, how shall they have the office? Wherefore
whatsoever they shall do amongst Bishops, Necesse est vt irritum fiat: i. It
must needs be void, Quia quod non habent dare non possunt: i. because they
cannot give that which they have not.


ORTHO. Your own Turr. Cr. quo supra.
Cardinal shall answer you; Wheresoever (says he) it can be found that an
ordination is void and of no validity, because it is performed by fewer then
by three, it is to be understood, Non quantum ad veritatem Sacramenti, sed
quantum ad executionem officij* i. Not in respect of the truth of the
Sacrament, but in respect of the execution of the office. And truly there is
no reason that he should enjoy an honorable office in the Church, which
presumptuously breaks the Laws of the Church. Therefore the Church may
justly repel them from execution; but cannot take away their power which they
have in themselves, and have power to imprint in others. Yet while they have it
without the Churches approbation, they cannot give it with the Churches
approbation: and while they stand in opposition, the Church esteems the
orders they give as no orders, yet are they true orders in the nature of the
thing, but the Church restrains the execution of them, as though they were
none, for order and discipline sake. Yet as you heard before even in case of
presumption, the Church may dispense upon due consideration, and consequently
receive into her bosom, such as were ordained in Schism, and let them enjoy
both their orders and honors. But when the defect springs neither from
schism, nor heresy, from presumption, nor singularity, but only from urgent
necessity, there being no voluntary violation, necessity it self is a
sufficient dispensation. And this must be the meaning of Damasus, or else ^f
you urge from his words an absolute nullity, you will make him condradict both
the positions and practice of your own Church, as Chap. 7.
hereafter shall be declared.


CHAP. V.
Wherein their Argument drawn from the Councels, is propounded, urged and
answered.

PHIL. THE contrary may be proved by the Councels, and I hope as in all other
Controversies between us and you, so in this you shall be presently confounded
by them. I will begin with that first famous general C^nc. Nic. 1. Can. 4.
Council of Nice.


ORTHO. Indeed a vain Campian rat. 4.
Jesuit cries: Concilia generalia mea sunt: primum, vltimum media, that is,
All general Counsels are mine, the first, the last, and the middle. For
trial whereof let us take a little view of this Nicen Council, wherein you
so glory: and first concerning that very Canon which you produce against us, as
though we did transgress it, we may justly say, that the Church of England
has as well observed it, as ever did any Church upon the face of the earth:
But the Church of Rome does indeed transgress it, In which sometimes one
Bishop alone does consecrate a Bishop, two Abbots supplying the place of the
other two Bishops, as Bell. de eccl. milit. l. 4. c. 8.
Bellarmine confesses. Secondly, according to the Nicen Canons, the power to
confirm Bishops, belongs to the Canon. 4.
Metropolitan of the province, without whose approbation whosoever is ordained
a Bishop, the Nicen Fathers account for no Bishop* but the Church of Rome
allows him whom the Pope allows, though he be not allowed by his
Metropolitan, and disalloweth him whom the Pope disalloweth, though he be
lawfully allowed by his Metropolitan. Thirdly, the Nicen Canon 5.
Canons forbid that any Bishop should absolve them, which are excommunicate
by another Bishop. But the Pope will open and shut, bind and loose at his
pleasure. Fourthly the Nicen Canons appoint that old Canon 6.
customs should be kept, and namely that the Bishop of Alexandria should have
the pre-eminence in Egypt, Lybya and Pentapolis, because such also is the
custom of the Bishop of Rome: and likewise that in Antioch, and other
Provinces the Churches should enjoy their dignities and prerogatives. Which
words in all reason import, that every Metropolitan should have pre-eminence
within his own Province, according to the custom of Rome, which custom they
commend and propose for a pattern: But the Bishop of Rome cares neither for
Canons nor Customs which make against him. He is not content to be Bishop in
his own Diocese, and Metropolitan over Bishops in his own Province, and
Patriarch over his own Metropolitans: but he would stretch out the paws of
his Supremacy over the Christian world. Fifthly the Nicen Canons would have no
Priest made without Canon 9.
examination, and such as are rashly ordained they do not allow: But the
Bishop of Rome makes Ordines autem etiam maiores, etiam presbyteratum posse
conferri infantibus nondum vsum rationis habentibus est Communis doctrine
Theologorum, and Canonistarum. Toll. de instr. sac. l. 1. c. 61. n. 3.
boy Priests and boy Bishops, and boy Cardinals. For proof of these examples,
See Doct. Reinolds Apol. These. 26. with whose fountain in this place I have
watered my garden.
Ferdinandus Medices a Florentine was made a Cardinal by Sixtus Quintus, when
he was not full thirteen years old: and Johannes Medices which was afterward
Pope Leo the tenth, was Cardinal before he was fourteen years complet, yet
he was an Archbishop five years before he was Cardinal. And least you should
imagine that this favor was afforded only to Florentines, Odettus Castilioneus
was Cardinal at eleven year old, yet he was elected Bishop before he was
Cardinal. Alphonsus son to Immanuel King of Portugal was Cardinal at seven
years old; and yet he was Bishop before he was Cardinal. These are the men,
whose office is, to choose the Pope, to assist him with their Counsel, and to
sit with him as Judges of the whole world. And that which is more wonderful,
if we may believe Glaber Rodulphus, a Monk of your own, which lived at the
same time; Benedict the ninth was made Pope at twelve years old: Was not this
a fit man to be Father of the Church, Moderator of general Councels, Decider
of all Controversies, Expounder of all Scriptures, the only Oracle upon the
face of the earth, and Judge Paramount of the Christian World? Sixthly the Nicen
Canon 18.
Canons do not suffer a Deacon so much as to sit amongst Priests, but as the
Priest was in place, inferior to the Bishop, so the Deacon to the Priest. Now
though it were granted to be true which De cler. c. 16.
Bellarmine affirms, that under Syluester there was seven Cardinal Deacons in
Rome, yet the Nicen Council makes no exception at all of Cardinals. But be he
Cardinal or not Cardinal, the Deacon is inferior to the Priest, and the Priest
to the Bishop; but the Bishop of Rome has advanced his Cardinals, even such as
are neither Bishops nor Priests. First above Bishops, then above Archbishops,
last of all above Patriarchs. Seventhly, the Nicen Can. 17.
Canons forbid any Bishop to ordain in his Church a Clerk belonging to
another Bishop, without the consent of the Bishop to whom he belongs. But the
Bishop of Rome ordains, whomsoever, wheresoever, whenever; not expecting
the consent of any man. Last of all the Nicen Can. 18.
Canons forbid all Clerks to follow filthy lucre: Wherein how his holiness
excels, is plainly platted out by Claudius In Tit. c. 1.
Espencaeus, a Divine of your own, out of a shameless book openly sold in
Rome, called the Tax of the Chamber, or Chauncery Apostolic, wherein a man
may learn before hand, at what price to be dispensed withal, for any villainy
he shall commit, be it adultery, symony, perjury, incest, or worse then
incest. Wherefore Philodox, if paper could blush, I am persuaded the leaves of
that book would be as red as scarlet. So at Rome nothing is forbidden, but to
come without money; if a man bring money, it will procure a dispensation for
any thing: A wedge of gold finds grace wheresoever it goes, and a Key of
gold can open Saint Peter's lock. For all things are weighed at Rome in a
balance of gold, as though poverty were the only irregularitie, and no sin
in the world were greater then to want money, so well does the Church of Rome
observe the Nicen Canons. But let us hear the words of the Canon.


PHIL. A Conc. Nicen. 1. can. 4.
Bishop must be ordained if it be possible of all the Bishops in his province,
2.
if this be hard to perform either by occasion of urgent necessity, or for
the length of the journey, yet surely three ought to be congregated into one
place, so that they have the consent of the absent, and solet the^ make an
ordination. Likewise the fourth C. 2. apud. Bin. t. 1. p. 553.
Council of Carthage; when a Bishop is ordained, let two Bishops lay the Book
of the Gospels, and hold it over his head and neck, and one Bishop pouring the
blessing upon him, let all other Bishops that are present, touch his head with
their hands. Likewise the second Cap. 5. apud. Bin. t. 1. p. 537.
Council of Arles. Let no Bishop presume to ordain a Bishop without
permission of the Metropolitan, nor any Bishop being a Metropolitance without
three Bishops of the same Province, so that others of the same Province be
admonished by Epistles, that they may signify by their answer, that they have
consented. So the sixth Cap. 4. Bin. t. 1. p. 617.
Council of Carthage: A Bishop must be ordained of all the Bishops which are
within the Province, but if this be hard either for urgent necessity, or for
the length of the journey, yet by all means three meeting together, there may
be imposition of hands, the absent Bishops consenting thereto by writing.
So the second Council at Cap. 2. Bin. t. 2. p. 669.
Brachar; It is meet that Bishops should be appointed, especially by the
whole Council: but if this shall be hard in respect of necessity, or for the
length of the journey, let three of them be gathered together, and let the
subscriptions of all both present and absent be taken, and so afterward let
the ordination be performed. Thus you see the Councels, and namely the Nicen
requires the presence of three. For first it should be performed by all the
Bishops of the Province, but if that cannot be by reason of urgent necessity,
yet surely three must be congregated: so they make it not a thing indifferent,
but a matter of necessity, and in any case require three.


ORTHOD. WHat if three present proceed to a consecration not 3
expecting at all the consent of the absent?


PHIL. Their consent seems to be only of congruitie, and not of necessity.


ORTH. But the Nicen Canon not content with three present, requires also the
consent of the absent in the same strictness of words, Yet surely let three
be congregated into one place, so that they have also the consent of the
absent, and so let them make an ordination. Wherefore if you expound the one
branch as a point of co^gru^ty, why do you urge the other as of absolute
necessity? Again these Councels were holden, Florente Ecclesia, when the
world was furnished with plenty of godly Bishops, but you urge them against a
Church lately eclipsed and newly recovered from darkness, the world round
about being drowned in superstition and Idolatry. These answers might be
sufficient; but for your better satisfaction, let us search the sense of your
authorities, by comparing them one with another. The first was a Canon ascribed
to the Apostles, which being made when Bishops were scant, requires two or
three. The second drawn from the decrees of Popes, supposed to be made when
the number was somewhat increased, requires three at the least, and the
consent of the rest. So the Nicen Canon being made when the Church flourished,
as also the second at Arles, the sixth at Carthage, and the second at Brachar,
besides three present requires the consent of the absent: but the fourth
Council of Carthage contenteth it self with the present, and makes no
mention at all of the absent, wherein it agrees with the Canon ascribed to the
Apostles. Whence comes this variety? surely the very consideration of time
and persons may teach us, that they thought it a thing in it self indifferent
to be disposed by the discretion of the Church in sundry manners, as sundry
occasions and occurrences did lead them. This exposition runs gently, and
all things do sweetly agree; but if we follow your rigorous interpretation,
then your witnesses cross and discredit one another. For your Anacletus
requires three at the least, so do the Councels alleged; but do they
require them of simple necessity? if it be so, then he is no Bishop which is
ordained by fewer then by three. But the Canons of the Apostles allow him for a
Bishop which is Consecrated by two. Again, the Nicen Fathers, and others by
you alleged, require the consent of the absent, which is not required by the
fourth Council of Carthage, nor by the Canon ascribed to the Apostles. By this
it appears that reverend antiquity did judge these things to be only
matters of conueniencie, and not of simple and absolute necessity. And being
of this nature, they are subject to alteration in case of necessity. Neither is
this to despise the Commandments of the Church, but to yield to the
countermand of the great tyrant necessity. And this is confessed by your own
Writers, concerning all ecclesiastical constitutions: Pope Gel. epist. 9* Bin.
t. 2. p. 243.
Gelasius says, Priscis pro sui reuerentia manentibus constitutis, quae vbi
nulla vel rerum vel temporum perurget necessitas, regulariter conuenit
custodire* that is, The ancient customs still remaining in force for the
reverence due unto them; it is convenient regularly to observe, where no
necessity either of things or times does greatly urge to the contrary. And
Pope Apud. Bern. dep^ae^. and dispen. c. 4.
Leo: vbi necessitas non est, nullo modo sanctorum patrum instituta violentur,
that is, The decrees of holy Fathers, let them by no means be broken, where
there is no necessity. And again: Cited by John. 8. epist. 8. Bin. t. 3.
part. 2. p. 977.
omittendum esse and inculpabile iudicandum, quod intulit necessitas: that
which necessity occasioned to be omitted, is to be omitted, and to be judged
blameless. And Pope Felix Ibid. apud. Bin.
says. Aliter tractandam necessitatis rationem, aliter voluntatis. That a
respect of necessity is otherwise to be handled then a respect of a voluntary
mind. Andr. degen. Conciliorum authoritate* p. 115. 116.
Andradius affirms, That humane laws made upon best council and advise, are
varied by the variety of times, and may be inuerted and changed by the
necessities of men, and so are dispensable: whence it comes so to pass that
De lib. arb. c. 6.
Saint Austin calls humane laws temporal, because although they be just,
yet they may justly be changed according to the times. I will conclude this
point with the saying of t. 2. p. 243. in marg.
Binius, Pro temporum necessitate rigor Canonum relaxatur, that is, the rigor
of the Canons, is released according to the necessity of the times.


CHAP. VI.
Wherein their arguments pretended to be drawn from the Scriptures are
answered.

PHIL. THen to leave the Canons, I will prove it by Scripture.


ORTH. By Scripture, why? did you not say it was a tradition?


PHIL. I said so.


ORTH. And do not you define a tradition to be the word of God unwritten, and
scripture to be the word of God written?


PHIL. Be it so, what then?


ORTH. Then if it be Scripture, it is no tradition: if it be tradition, it is
no Scripture. For it is not possible to be the word of God both written and not
written.


PHIL. Though it be a tradition and therefore not expressly written in
Scripture* yet it may be collected out of the Scripture.


ORTH. You change your self like a Cameleon into all colors, but this will
not hold. For Bell. de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
Bellarmine builds up Babylon by pulling down the stones of Sion, he goes
about to prove the necessity of traditions by the insufficiency of Scripture:
and endeavors to prove the Scripture insufficient, because there are many
things in his opinion simply necessary to be known and believed, which cannot
possibly be Nullo modo probari possunt exs^ripturu Quo modo ex Scriptura
colligam hoc euang. (Marci) non esse supposititium? quo supra. Sexto.
collected or concluded out of the Scripture. Whereby it is clear that he
calls their traditions unwritten, because they are not at all in the written
word, neither directly nor by consequence. But where do you find it in
Scripture?


PHIL. SAint Paul says to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Neglect not the grace, that is in thee, 2.
which Was given thee, by prophecy, per impositionem manuum Presbyterij: that
is, by the imposition of hands of the Presbytery.


ORTHO. This is the only place which Bell de eccl. l. 4. c. 8. quantum ad.
Bellarmine produces, and yet I think his conscience told him it is not very
pregnant for his purpose: for whereas his custom is to place Scriptures in the
front of the battle, and humane authorities after; here he places the Canons
and Decretals in the front, and the Scripture follows after. But let us hear
you dispute from this place.


PHIL. Thus I dispute. Timothy was consecrated Bishop by imposition of hands of
the Presbytery: But this Presbytery was an assembly of Presbyters: Therefore
Timothy was consecrated by an assembly of Presbyters: Now those Presbyters were
not inferior Priests, but Bishops, as appears by In hunc locu^.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius: therefore Timothy was consecrated by
an assembly of Bishops. But an assembly of Bishops must needs be three at the
least. Therefore Timothy was consecrated Bishop by three Bishops at the least.
Now this consecration of Timothy should be a necessary and perpetual pattern
inviolable, and unchangeable to all posterities. Therefore all Bishops must of
necessity be consecrated, by three Bishops at the least, which was to be
proved.


ORTHOD. S. Paul in this place, exhorts Timothy to be diligent in his Calling
by three Arguments: First, because in his Ordination he had received Grace;
that is, Not only the gracious gift, that he should be Pastor of the Church
of Ephesus, but also the graces of the Spirit to furnish him for the execution
of that holy Calling. Secondly, because he was designed and pointed out to this
Sacred function, by the Spirit of Prophecy. Thirdly, because he was ordained
by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. What this Presbytery was, I
will not take upon me to decide and determine; It shall be sufficient so far
to discover the weakness of your Argument, that it may appear, that you
cannot hence conclude your purpose by any sound consequence. For what think
you did S. Paul mean by Presbytery, when he exhorted Timothy not to neglect
the Grace which was in him by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery?


PHIL. O then I know where you are; You will make us believe, That the Apostle
speaks of Lay Elders: but I pray you do not trouble me with such
fantastical conceits, unknown to Antiquity.


ORTHOD. You need not fear. For it is clear that the Presbytery here
mentioned, ordained Timothy, by imposition of hands, which no Layman may do:
therefore doubtless they were no Laymen. But what in your judgment is meant
by Presbytery?


PHIL. What else can Presbyterium signify, but a company or assembly of
Presbyters?


ORTH. (...), Does signify not only a company of Presbyters, but also the
Office and function of a Presbyter. For example, For these authorities
concerning the Greek word, see B. Bilson: perp. government. c. 7. p. 77
Eusebius says, That the Bishops of Caesarea and Jerusalem, (...), That is,
Imposed hands upon him, (.i. upon Origin) for the Office of a Presbyter. And
again* The Bisop of Caesarea prayed him to expound the Scripture, (...), That
is, When as yet he had not obtained Ordination of Priesthood. And not long
after he received (...), That is, The Ordination of Priesthood. And (...), is
likewise used. Socrates says, That Atticus placed Proclus, (...), That is, in
the Order of Deaconship. And he was thought worthy (...), That is, the Office
and Order of a Priest. This signification is embraced by In hunc locum.
Hierome, Prim^sius, Anselmus, expounding Presbyterium, by Presbyteratus, or
Episcopatus, That is, the Office of a Priest or Bishop. Likewise Lyra, Lyra in
hunc locum.
Presbyterium est dignitas vel Officium Presbyteri, That is, The Presbytery (
mentioned by Saint Paul) is the dignity or office of a Priest. Yea, your own
Rhemistes confess so much, in that they transtate the word Presbyterium in
this very place ( Priesthood) which does not signify a company of Priests,
but the office and order of a Priest. If this be true, then your argument is
shaken in pe^ces. For that may be said to be performed by the order or office
of Priesthood, which is done by one Priest only as well as though it were
done by a thousand, and this interpretation may seem to be countenanced by
conference of Scripture, because Paul though an Apostle, yet according to the
phrase of Scripture may be Called a Presbyter: for this word Presbyter in the
New Testament taken for an Ecclesiastical person, does signify sometimes the
Pastor of a particular flock, as when Paul wills Titus to Titu. 1. 5.
ordain Presbyters in every City; sometimes it is taken more generally and
extends even to the Apostles themselves: so John calls himself a 2. Ioh.
v. 1. and 3. Ioh. v. 1.
Presbyter, and Peter speaking to Presbyters calls himself 1. Pet. 5. 1.
their fellow Presbyter: Whence we may conclude by analogy, that Paul also
may be called a Presbyter. Now it is certain that Saint Paul imposed hands
upon Timothy. For he says, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee,
by the putting on of my hands. Wherefore seeing the word Presbytery may
signify the office of a Presbyter, and Saint Paul may be called a Presbyter,
and it is evident that Timothy was ordained by the hands of Paul; therefore it
is possible, that when the Scripture ascribes his ordination to the
Presbytery, it may be meant that he was made only by the hands of Paul,
which is the opinion of Dionysius Carthusianus, who says, manuu^ Presbyterij,
id est, manuu^ mearu^ qui te ordinaui Episcopum. Of the hands of the
Presbytery, that is, of my hands which ordained thee a Bishop. But suppose that
Presbytery in this place signify a company or assembly of Bishops, as
Chrysostom Theophylact and Oecumenius interpret it; How many will you judge to
make an assembly?


PHIL. Suppose that three.


ORTH. If it be so, then upon Bell. de Eccl. l. 4. c. 8. nomine Presbyterij
intelligit caetum Episcoporum, qui simul cum ordinante imponebant manus super
caput ordinandi.
Bellarmines imagination, that an assembly of Bishops imposed hands together
with the ordainer, it will follow, that Timothy was consecrated by four:
therefore if you make this example a perpetual pattern, then all Bishops must
be consecrated by four, which is against your self.


PHIL. It seems that two Bishops may be Called an assembly.


ORTHOD. Though it were so, yet you cannot conclude; for how prove you, that
there was an assembly besides the principal consecrator?


PHIL. Bellarmine has proved it by the fathers alleged.


ORTHO. Bellarmine abuses his Reader: for to begin with Chrysostom, he
says, He speaks not of Presbyters in this place, but of Bishops, for
Presbyters ordained him not a Bishop. And Theophylact, with imposition of hands
of the Presbytery, that is of Bishops; for Presbyters did not ordain a
Bishop. Likewise Occumenius, by Presbyters he means Bishops, for Presbyters
were not to impose hands upon a Bishop. So these fathers by Presbytery,
understood Bishops; the number they do not define, neither do they affirm
that there was an assembly besides the principal consecrator. But concerning
the number you shall hear the judgment of your Angelical Doctor, who
brings two readings of this place. Presbyteri and Presbyterij, and handling
the first, he demands, Why Aquin, in 1. ad. Tim. c. 4. lec. 3
it should be said, Presbyteri in the singular number, seeing a Bishop should
be consecrated by three: to this he frames two answers. First because,
though many meet together, yet one is principal, the rest conssistants.
Secondly yet (says he) it may be said, that this Canon was not then made,
and that then there were but few Bishops, which could not be congregated. So
he thinks it probable, that Timothy was not consecrated by three. Whereto
agrees Cardinal Ioh. de Turrecr. in Gratian^m. ^. 1. p. 493.
de Turrecremat^, Petrus dicitur solus consecrasse beatum Iohannem
Euangelistam, Paulus, Timotheum, Titum and Dionysium. i. Peter is said alone to
have consecrated blessed John the Evangelist, and Paul to have consecrated
Timothy, Titus and Dionysius. And In 4. sent. did. 27. q. 3.
Johannes Mayor, Paulus non quasiuit duos pro ordinatione Titi and Timothei. i.
Paul sought not other two Bishops for the Ordination of Titus and Timothy. So
far is this place from proving the necessity of three Bishops.


PHIL. I Will prove it by another place. For Act. 13. 1.
there were in the Church 5
which was at Antioch, Prophets and Doctors, among whom was Barnabas and
Simeon, that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manahen, who was the
foster brother of Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul. And as they were ministering to
our Lord and fasting, the holy Ghost said, Separate me Saul and Barnabas unto
the work whereto I have called them. Then they fasting and praying, and
imposing hands upon them dismissed them. Behold, not only Barnabas, but also
Saul, that is, Paul the Apostle was consecrated Bishop, and that by three
Bishops, Simeon, Lucius and Manahen. Though he were an Apostle, not of men, nor
by men, yet, it was the will of God that he should be ordained Bishop by 3.
Bishops, that the discipline of the Church might be observed.


ORTHO. Neither were they Bishops, neither did they make Paul and Barnabas
Bishops.


PHIL. Father Turrian Turr. de eccl. and ordi. l. 2. p. 302.
shows, that by Doctors were meant Presbyters, and by Prophets Bishops, and
also that Barnabas and Saul were Doctors, or Presbyters, the other three
Prophets or Bishops, which advanced Saul and Barnabas from the Presbyteral, to
the Episcopal office.


ORT. These are doting dreams not worth the answering. For seeing the text
faith only, that there were in the Church which was at Antioch Prophets and
Doctors, among whom were Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manahen and Saul, why should
not we think Barnabas to be called a Prophet as well as Simeon, Lucius and
Manahen, seeing he is first named? A point so clear that it is confessed by
Ior. in Act. 13. v. 1.
Lorinus the Jesuit, ascribing the titles of Prophets and Doctors as well to
Saul and Barnabas, as to the rest. If these Prophets were Bishops as Turrian
imagines, then it will follow that Barnabas was a Bishop before they laid
hands upon him. And consequently, that he was reordeined, which is absurd.
Moreover as it cannot be proved, that those three were Bishops, so it is
certain that they did not ordain Paul and Barnabas Bishops. For Paul being an
Apostle could not receive any Episcopal grace from man, as has been declared.
Wherefore this imposition of hands was not to give them any new power, but as
the text says, To set Verse. 2.
them apart for the work, whereunto the Lord had called them, which when they
had fulfilled, they sailed back to Antioch, whence they had been Act. 14. 26.
commended to the grace of God. It is not said they failed to Antioch, where
they were made Bishops, or where they received Episcopal grace, but whence
they had been commended (with fasting and prayer) to the grace of God. To
which truth Tom. 3. part. 3. disp. 34
Suarez the Jesuit gives testimony affirming that this imposition of hands
was only preca^ory, and denying that Saul or Barnabas were here ordained,
either Priests or Bishops, which seems also to be the opinion of Apud
L^rinum quo supra.
Aloysius de Leon, and other late writers. These are the only examples which
you produce out of the Scripture, yet neither of them is pregnant for your
purpose, and if they were, what then? An example may not be urged as an
unchangeable rule when the matter discovers it self to be contingent and
variable.


CHAP. VII.
That the presence of three Bishops is not required of absolute necessity.

NOw, that it is no substantial point of absolute necessity may be concluded
out of your own positions and practice. For the declaration whereof, first I
demand, whether Episcopal consecration be a Sacrament or no?


PHIL. That Ordination is a Sacrament truly and properly, is rightly defined
by the Council of Sess. 22. can. 3.
Trent. For there are three things only required to a Sacrament, as your
selves confess, an external sign, a promise of grace, and a commandment, or
divine institution: All which are found in ordination as our learned Bell. de
sacr. ord. c. 2.
Cardinal has proved out of the Scripture; Ibidem. c. 5.
who has also declared, that those Scriptures whereby Catholics do prove
Ordination to be a Sacrament are understood of Episcopal Ordination.
Whereupon he affirms, that if Episcopal Ordination be not a Sacrament, we
cannot prove evidently out of the Scriptures, that Ordination is a Sacrament.


ORTHOD. If the word Sacrament be taken somewhat largely, for any external
sign instituted of God; whereto is annexed a promise of grace, then we will
grant with Saint Contra. epist. Parm. l. 2. c. 13.
Austine, that Order may be called a Sacrament: but if it be taken strictly
for such a sign as is Romans 4. 11.
a seal of the righteousness of faith, whereto is annexed a promise of the
grace of Justification and Remission of sins: in which sense Baptism and the
Lords Supper are Sacraments, then we may not admit it for a Sacrament. For in
Baptism and the Lords Supper, the saving grace of Justification and Act. 2. 38.
Remission of sins is signified, sealed, and exhibited, to the worthy
receiver; but the grace given in Ordination is of another nature, respecting
not so much the good of the receiver as of the flock, for which he receives
it. For the Ministers of the Gospel are salt to season others, candles to
shine unto others, pipes and conduits to conueigh the water of life unto
others. But did you not say, that though three Bishops were ordinarily required
to the Consecration of a Bishop, yet the Pope might dispense with two of the
three?


PHIL. I said so out of Cardinal Bellarmine and Binius.


ORTHOD. What authority has the Pope to dispense in Sacraments?


PHIL. That may appear by the Council of Sess. 21. c. 2.
Trent. Moreover, the holy Synod declares, that this power has always been
in the Church, that in the Dispensation of Sacraments it might appoint or
change such things as it should judge to be most expedient for the profit of
the receivers, or the reverence of the Sacraments themselves, according to the
variety of things, times, and places, Salua illorum substantia, so the
substance of the Sacraments be preserved. Whereby it appears that the Pope
can dispense only with circumstances and not with substance.


ORTHOD. Why then did the Church of Rome dispense with the Sess. 21. Can. 2.
Cup in the Communion? Can you take away one half not diminishing the
substance? But to let this pass, do you not mark the conclusion which
flows from your premises? If Episcopal Consecration be a Sacrament, and the
Pope may not dispense with the Substance of a Sacrament, and yet he may
dispense with two of the three Bishops required in a Consecration; then it
follows, that two of the three are not of the Substance of Consecration.
Secondly, your own present practice does prove the same. For you profess
that in your Church sometimes, one Bell. de eccles. milit. l. 4. c. 8. quantum
ad.
Bishop alone assisted with two mitred Abbots does perform it. If this be
sufficient, then three Bishops are not required of absolute necessity. Now let
us a little look back to former times, and consider the judgment of better
ages.

I Will begin with the fourth Conc. Carth. 4. c. 2. Bin. t. 1. page 553.
Council of Carthage, and the very 2
place which you your self alleged, wherein are prescribed the offices to
be performed by the Bishops, when one is to be consecrated, to wit, how two
should hold the Book of the Gospels over his head, one power out the
blessing, (that is, pronounce the words, whereby the spiritual power, grace,
and blessing is given,) and all the rest touch his head with their hands. When
one alone pronounces the words, thenone alone ordains. For the words are
confessed on all sides, to be the very essential form of Ordination. This is
agreeable to the collection of your own Turrec. in Gratian. p. 493.
Cardinal, Tenent librum, etc. Ergo videtur quod nihil agatur per illos
Episcopos quod sit ad substantiam consecrationis pertinens. Ergo eorum
assistentia non pertinet ad substantiam consecrationis, sed magis ad quandam
solennitatem. i. They hold the book, etc. Therefore it seems that nothing is
done by these two Bishops which is pertaining to the substance of Consecration.
Therefore their assistance does not belong to the substance of the
consecration, but rather to a certain solemnity.

IN the year of our Lord 441. there was a Council holden at Orange in 3
France where it was thus Conc. Auraus. c. 21. Bin. t. 1 page 1010.
decreed. Duo si presumpserint ordinare Episcopum in nostris Prouincijs, etc.
If two presume to ordain a Bishop in our Provinces, it pleases us (to decree)
concerning those presumptuous persons, that if it shall any where happen that
two Bishops shall make a Bishop against his will, the authors being condemned,
he which suffered violence, shall be substituted in the Church of one of them, if
his life be answerable; and that another nevertheless be ordained in the place
of the other being cast out: If two shall make a Bishop with his consent, then
he also shall be condemned, to the end that those things which were instituted
by antiquity, may be observed more warily* Here are two Cases: for the
ordained was either unwilling or willing: If unwilling, he enjoyed the
Bishopprick, because he was not consenting to the breach of the Canon: If he
were willing, then he also was condemned, and put from the Bishopprick, which
was not for want of receiving the Episcopal power; for if two Bishops could
confer it to one against his will, undoubtedly they could give it to one that
was willing. But the first is confessed by the Council, in that they allow
him, and give him a Bishoppricke, where he may exercise his Episcopal
function, therefore the latter was not then doubted of. But though both had
received alike power in their ordination, yet the innocent was allowed, and the
offender rejected for discipline sake.


PHIL. This Canon is Did. 64. de abiectione.
chafe.


ORTH. If Gratian mean this, then he has foully mangled it, but that you may
know that this is no chafe, you shall hear your own famour Bar an. 441. number.
3.
Baronius. Nobilus quidem, etc. Truly this is to be called a most noble Synod,
being adorned with a garland of most famous Prelates. And again, Ibidem.
Florebant quidem, etc. Truly the said Provinces of France, if any other
coasts of the Christian world did flourish at this time with Bishops, both most
holy and most learned, by whose painful vigilancie, the Ecclesiastical Laws
remained in their strength. And again, Tot igitur, etc. Ibid. an. 441. number. 15.
Therefore so many most famous Prelates made the Council of Orange famous and
glorious in all things, although it consisted of a small assembly of Bishops.
And least a man should wonder at this rare commendation, he renders his
reason, Ibidem.
Porro vt tot insignes, etc. Moreover, that there should be found in the same
Provinces so many men notable for learning, and godliness, the cause may seem
to be the most famous Monastery of Iusula Lerinensis the land next adjoining,
being a Seminary of most holy Bishops. Which he further extolleth, by the
verses of Sydonius Apollinarius. To Baronius we will adioyne Binius, who uses
to gather sticks under Baronius his hedge. Haec Bin. in not. in Conc. Araus*
^. 1. p. 1011.
Synodus Clarissimorum, etc. This was a most noble Synod beautified with a
crown of most noble Prelates. In it fifteen Bishops of the Province of Lions,
and Marbona meeting after their manner made 29 Canons concerning the laws and
discipline of the Church. Wherefore by the judgment of this most noble Synod,
it is apparent, that he may be a Bishop which is Consecrated only by two, and
therefore three are not required of absolute necessity. Hitherto of the
Councels; Now let us consider examples of antiquity.

DIoscorus Patriarch of Alexandria was consecrated only by two, and 4.
yet was acknowledged to have sufficient Episcopal power. The former point is
testified by the Bishops of Pontus in a Synodall I^ Epist ^llust* personarum
pro Conc. Chalced. apud Bin t. 2. p. 1^3.
Epistle. Ordinationem suam adamnatis Episcopis and hoc duobus accepit: i. He
received his ordination of Bishops condemned, and that (only) of two. The
latter may appear by the Council of Chalcedon in the Vid. Bin. t. 2. page 1.
Acts whereof he is usually styled, The most Reverend Bishop of Alexandria; yea
that title is given him by Epist. ^us. ad Imper. apud Bin t. 2. p. 5.
Eusebius Bishop of Doryleum his accuser: by the Epist im^erat. ad D^^s^. Bin.
tom. 2. p. 7.
Emperor Theodosius, and by the Ibid. p. 72.
Council it self, in a Synodall Epistle. And as they acknowledge him for a
Bishop, so they allow of Anatolius whom he did consecrate, as may appear by
the words of Tharasius, uttered in the seventh general Tharas. in Con^ N^^. 2.
apud Bin. t. 3. page 307.
Council. Tharasius the most blessed Patriarch said, what say you of
Anatolius? was he not a Prince of the fourth Synod? Yet he was created Bishop
by Dioscorus, and that Eutyches being present; therefore let us also receive
the ordained of Heretics, in like manner as Anatolius was received. Yea he was
approved and received into Communion by Pope Leo the first; approved in these
words; Leo Leo Epist. 40.
Episcopus Anatolio Episcopo: received into Communion in these words; in qua
(Communionis integritate) societatem tuae dilectionis amplectimur: i. in which
soundness of Communion we embrace the fellowship of your love. Now seeing
Anatolius was acknowledged, for a Bishop by a Pope, and two general Councels:
you must needs confess that Dioscorus, who ordained him, was likewise a
Bishop, although he were not consecrated by three.

NOw let us cross the Mediterranean Sea, and pass from Alexandria to 5.
Rome. And here, what think you of Pelagius the first? was not he a true and
lawful Bishop?


PHIL. He is commended by Pope Hadr. in ep. ad Carol. mag. de imagine.
sanctissimi eius successores dominus Pelagius and dominus Johan, vide Bin in
not. in vit. Pelag. 1. t. 2. page 626.
Adrian and generally put into the Catalogue.


ORTHO. But Pope Pelagius was not consecrated by three, as appears by In vit.
Pelagij 1.
Anastasius, whose words are registered both by Bin. t. 2. page 626.
Baronius and Bar^an. 555* number. 10.
Binius. Et dum non essent Episcopi qui cum ordinarent, inuenti sunt duo
Episcopi, Johannes de perusio and Bonus de ferentino and Andreas presbyter de
Ostia, and eum ordinauerunt Episcopum. Upon which place Bin. t. 2. page 627. ex
Bar. anno 556. ^. 1.
Binius says, When Pelagius had approved the fifth Synod, he so greatly
offended all the Western Bishops, that he could not find sufficient Prelates
of which he might be ordained according to the Apostolical constitution; and
so it was necessary that at the Command of Pelagius, a Priest of Ostia (which
had never happened before) should perform the office in stead of a Bishop.
Here is a clear confession, that a Bishop of Rome in case of necessity, was
consecrated only by two Bishops and a Priest. And yet it appears by the same
place of Anastasius, that he ordained in his time 26. Priests, and 49. Bishops.
Now if three Bishops be required of absolute necessity, then there was a
nullity in his Consecration, and consequently in all the Consecrations derived
from him, and so there will follow a world of nullities in the Church of Rome:
or if there be no nullitie in his Consecration, then you cannot conclude a
nullitie for the want of three.

HItherto of three, Now I will prove that two are not required of absolute 6.
necessity. For Euagrius Patriarch of Antioch, was ordained by Paulinus alone,
and yet was allowed for a lawful Bishop.


PHIL. I doubt of both branches; how prove you the first?


ORTHOD. Paulinus alone says, Theod. l. 5. cap. 23.
Theodoret transgressing many Laws had created him. For the Canons do not
permit one to choose his successor; they command that all the Bishops of the
Province should be assembled: they forbid any man to be created unless three
be present, but they not willing to take knowledge of any of these things,
admitted the Communion of Euagrius and exasperated the ears of the Emperor
against Flauianus.


PHIL. I will answer with Bar. an. 389. ^. 64.
Baronius: Those things which Theodoret says concerning the Ordination of
Euagrius performed during the life of Paulinus, are altogether repugnant to
those things which are spoken by Socrates, and Sozomen affirming that the
auditors of Paulinus did not attempt to substitute Euagrius into his place,
till after the death of Paulinus.


ORTHO. It is a shameful course of Baronius, to reject in Histories, whatsoever
does not fit his fancy. In this present point he pretends repugnancie where
there is none at all. For Theodoret speaks of ordination: Soc. l. 5. c. 15.
Socrates and Soz. l. 7. c. 15.
Sozomen, of installation.


PHIL. How prove you the other Branch, that Euagrius was allowed for a lawful
Bishop?


ORTHO. Anno 389. ^. 64.
Baronius says, Pro Euagrio Syricius Theodosium interpellauit. Syricius the
Pope did solicit Theodosius the Emperor in the behalf of Euagrius. And Bin.
in not. in Con. Capuan. t. 1. p. 536.
Binius; Pontifex, etc. The Pope, and with him almost all the Bishops of the
West, being against Flauianus, as before they stood for Paulinus, so now they
took part with Euagrius, and animated the Emperor against Flauianus. Moreover
Innocent the first granted the Communion of the Roman Church to Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, upon this condition amongst others, that he should
receive those that were ordained of Euagrius the successor of Paulinus with
their orders, and honors, as is likewise confessed by Bin. in not. in 17.
Epist. Innoc. 1. t. 1. p. 579.
Binius. Here is a plain example of a Bishop ordained by one Bishop alone, and
yet allowed both by the Bishops of the West, and by two Popes. Hitherto the
examples of three Patriarchs.

NOw let us consider our neighbors of France, concerning whom Johannes 7.
Ioh. Mayor in 4. sent. did. 29. quest. 3. inter opera. Gers. Paris. 1606. p.
681
Mayor, a Doctor of Paris, says, Rusticus and Eleutherius qui cum beato
Dionysio ad Gallias venerunt non erant Episcopi, sed Galliae Episcopos solus
Dionysius ordinauit. Rusticus and Eleutherus which came into France with S.
Denis were no Bishops, but Denis alone ordained the Bishops of France.

FInally, I will add some testimonies of your own writers, Johannes 8.
Mayor; Quo supra.
Dico esse constitutionem humana^, quod Episcopus ordinetur a tribus: ^. I say
that it is a humane constitution, that a Bishop should be ordained of three.
Pet. de pal^de potestate.
Petrus de palude: In Ecclesia vnus Episcopus sufficit ad alium Consecrandum:
nec est nisi propter solennitatem ab Ecclesia inuentum, vt tres concurrant: i.
In the Church one Bishop is sufficient to Consecrate another: and it is nothing
else but for the solemnity of the matter, that the Church has devised that
three Bishops should meet together. Cardinal In Gratian page 492.
Turrecremata is plentiful in this point, and proves it by fourteen
Arguments.


PHIL. Yet other Doctors, as you have heard, are of another opinion.


THE SECOND BOOK WHEREIN THE CONSEcrations of the Bishops of England, from the
first planting of Christianity, till the last year of Queen Mary, are
examined.
CHAP. I.
Wherein they descend to the second Question, whether the Consecrations of the
Bishops of England be Canonical.

ORTH. SVppose I should admit, that three Bishops were everlastingly, and
unchangeably required to the Consecration of a new Bishop, and that of such
absolute necessity, that the defect should make a nullitie: what would this
advantage you, or disadvantage us?


PHIL. Very much: For then it would follow, that your Bishops are no Bishops.


ORTHO. Why so? There is not a Bishop in England at this day living, which was
not Consecrated by three. Our book of Consecrating may inform you, That in
the Church of England, two Bishops do always present the person to be
Consecrated, and the Archbishop or some other Bishop appointed by his
Commission, pronounces the Blessing, as principal Consecratour. Is not this
Canonical?


PHIL. No, because your Requiritur vt qui sit Episcopus, Ordinetur a tribus
Episcopis: qui and ipsi s^rt ab alij* Ordinati, and illi ab alijs don^^ ad
Apostolo^ veniatur. Id clare habetur. Can. 1. Apost Bell. de Eccl. l. 4. cap. 8.
Consecrating Bishops are not themselves Canonical. For to a Canonical Bishop
it is required, That he have three such Bishops for his Consecrators, as were
every one of them Consecrated by three: And again each of them by three; And
so by continual succession, till we come to the Apostles. For as Doct. Stapl.
princ. doct. l. 13. ^. 6.
Stapleton says, Christi Ecclesia illa sola est quae suos Pastores and
Episcopos perpetua successione potest ostendere. i. That only is Christ's
Church which can show her Pastors and Bishops in a perpetual succession. And
Ibidem.
again, Vbicunque talis perpetu^ successio, non in eisdem locis sed in eadem
legitima, and successiua vocatione, missione, and Ordinatione ostendi potest,
ibi sit vera Christi Ecclesia Catholica, id est Ecclesiae Catholicae pars and
membrum. i. Wheresoever such a perpetual succession of Pastors can be showed,
not in the same places, but in the same lawful and successiue vocation,
mission, and Ordination, there is a true Catholic Church; That is, A part and
member of the Catholic Church. Stapl. fort. par. 2. c. 1. f. 95.
Now, If you can show any succession of Bishops in England, or elsewhere, you
can show it no otherwise, then could the Donatists, of whom Optatus thus
writes, Missus est Victor, etc. Victor was sent of the Donatists to Rome,
There was a son without a father, a servant without a ruler, a scholar
without a master, a successor without a predecessor. Igitur quia Claudianus,
etc. i. Therefore because Claudian seems to succeed to Lucian, Lucian to
Macrobius, Macrobius to Encolpius, Encolpius to Boniface, Boniface to Victor;
If now we should ask Victor in whose place he sat, and to whom he
succeeded; He could not show any other Chair or See, but the Sea and Chair
of pestilence. Thus I say, That as Victor among the Donatists, so Luther among
the Protestants of Wittenberge, so Zuinglius among the Sacramentaries of
Zurich, so Calvin among those of Geneua, so Bernard Rotman among the
Anabaptists, so M. Jewel, Grindall and Horn, and such other false Bishops
among us, have risen and started up suddenly without fathers, without
predecessors, without masters, in any right and lineall succession; Or if they
have any, let them search their Records, turn their Registers, produce their
Evidences, unfold their Monuments of Antiquity, and witness to the world
their Canonical succession; which they neither do, nor can do. But we can
show you Bishops of Rome even from S. Peter, to our holy father Paulus Quintus,
who now lives. De sacrif. Miss. l. 2. c. 6.
Antonius Democharis has described the Bishops of France, or rather of all the
Provinces of the Christian world. Stap. princ. doct. l. 13. c. 7.
Doct. Stapleton wrote with his own hand, a Catologue found in a Monastery,
containing the Bishops of all the Western Church. Histories, Registers,
public Tables, the very Temples and most ancient Monuments of Ecclesiastical
Colleges, are evident Arguments of our succession. Yea we have a Catalogue in
Polydor Virgil, of all the Bishops of our Nation for almost a thousand years.
Then was the Church of England like a Golden chain, whose Sacred linckes had
such a mutual connection and dependencie, that from the blessed Apostles, we
might descend by degrees to the lowest lincke, even to the last Bishop of
England; whence we might return again, ascending and climbing up to the
Apostles themselves. But now, alas, since the time of Schism, in stead of
Golden linckes, you have added leaden: so that there is a breach, a rupture, a
plain dissolution in the chain. You may well climb up a few steps by the
leaden ladder, but you must down again; you have no part nor portion in the
Golden ladder of succession, which leads us up to S. Peter, and so to Christ
himself. For the Church of Rome, and that only has Canonical Bishops; All
other are but counterfeit.


ORTHOD. Just; For all the Popes geese are Swannes: and other men's Swannes are
geese.


PHIL. I Might bring the Church insulting against you, as Tertullian did 2
against the heretics of his time; Tert. de praes. c^p. 37.
Qui estis? quando and vnde venistis? quid in meo agitis non mei? quo Marcion
iure syluam meam caedis? qua licentia Valentine fontes meos transuertis? -- Mea
est possessio, olim possideo, prior possideo, habeo origines firmas ab ipsis
authoribus quorum fuit res. Ego sum haeres Apostolorum: sicut cauerunt
testamento, sicut fidei commiserunt, sicut adiurauerunt, ita teneo. 1. Who are
you? when and whence came you? what do you in my ground, seeing you are not
mine? O Luther, by what authority do thou cut down my woods? O Calvin, By
what license do thou turn away the course of my fountains? -- It is my
possession, I possess it by prescription, I was first in possession, I have
strong Evidences from the true owners. I am the heir of the Apostles, as they
appointed by testament, as they committed it to trust, as they bind men by
adiuration that it should be enjoyed, so I enjoy it.


ORTHO. To answer all your demands in order; We are the children of God, and
when it pleased him, which causes the light to spring out of darkness, we
did spring from your selves; being still content to be yours, so you would be
Christ's. Otherwise know, that the Vineyard is not yours, but Christ's; wherein
we have cut down nothing but your corruptions. Neither have we diuerted the
fountain, though we were forced to cut out a channel to draine it, to strain
it, to purge it from your pollutions, that so we might drink the water of
Life, out of the wells of salvation. Whatsoever you have by lawful possession,
by ancient and just prescription, by inheritance from the Apostles, whereof you
have sound Record and evidence out of the Scripture, All that is common to us
with you. Whatsoever is controuersed between us in any point of Religion,
therein we appeal to the written Will and Testament of Christ; Let that be
Judge between us and you.


PHIL. When the question was between the Jews and the Samaritanes concerning
the Temple, whether the Lord in his Law allowed that at Jerusalem, or that
other in mount Garizin, Ex Joseph. antiquit. l. 13. c. 5.
Andronicus produced the succession of the high Priests from Aaron; Whereupon
Ptolomeus King of Egypt gave sentence for the Temple at Jerusalem. What say
you, had he not reason?


ORTHO. He had: For the Lord gave the Priesthood only to Aaron and his sons;
so they only had title to the Priesthood, who descended from Aaron by carnal
generation. But Aaron and his sons according to the Law of the Lord,
performed the Priests Office in the Tabernacle, and afterward in the Temple at
Jerusalem, the place which the Lord had chosen. Wherefore as they alone were
the Priests of the Lord: so that alone was the Temple of the Lord.


PHIL. Very well. Now to proceed* We of the Church of Rome are built upon S.
Peter, as it were upon mount Sion, you are built upon Cranmer, as it were upon
mount Garizin. We have a Church and Priesthood, which derive their original
from Christ; you can go no further then Cranmer: Now if this matter were put
to King Ptolomy, or any other indifferent man, would not he give judgment for
us against you?


ORTHOD. No, Neither for your Priesthood, nor for your Church; Not for the
first, because the Priesthood which the Apostles conferred, was only a power to
minister the word and Sacraments, which being conveyed to posterity
successively by Ordination, is found at this day in some fort in the Church of
Rome, in regard whereof you may be said to succeed the Apostles, and Cranmer
you, and we Cranmer, and consequently we also in this succeed the Apostles as
well as you. But besides this, which is the Ordinance of God, you have added
another thing, the imagination of your own brain, which you esteem the
principal function of Priesthood, to wit, a power to offer a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. Now, how is it possible that in this you
should succeed the Apostles, seeing (as in due place shall be proved) they
neither were such Priests themselves, nor ever by Ordination delivered any
such Priesthood? And as Ptolomy if he lived in this age, could not justify
your Priests; so neither could he nor any indifferent man justify your
Church by virtue of this Argument drawn from outward succession. For how
slender it is, may appear by consideration of the Greek Church, which Bell. de
Eccl. l. 4. c. 8. quod autem apud Graecos non sit Ecclesia probamus.
Bellarmine denies to be a Church, pretending That they were convicted in
three full councels of Schism and heresy; yet Constantinople can fetch her
pedigree from Saint Andrew the Apostle, as witnesses Niceph. l. 8. c. 6.
Nicephorus, and bring it downward, even to Jeremy, who Genesis Chron. l. 4.
lived in this present age. Likewise the Church of Alexandria chalengeth
succession, as well and as truly as the Roman. Legate. Eccl. Alexand. apud
Bar. annal. tom. 6. in fine.
Baronius records an Embassage from Gabriell their Patriach, to Clemens the
eight, in the title whereof he calls himself, the 97. Patriarch successor of
Saint Mark the Evangelist. If you say that the line of Constantinople and
Alexandria has been interrupted, be it so: And has not the Roman been so
likewise? Legate. Eccl. Alexand. apud Bar. annal. tom. 6. in fine.
Genebrard is of opinion, that fifty Popes by the space of almost 150. years
were not Apostolical, but Apotacticall and Apostaticall. Genesis Chron. l. 4.
Baronius lamenteth that false Popes were thrust by strumpets into the seat of
Peter. Platina Bar. anno 912. n. 8.
says, it was grown to that pass that any factious fellow might invade the
seat of Peter. I pass over g Plat. in V^a Clementis 2.
your heretical Popes, your woman Pope, and your Antipopes, whereof you have
had some times two, some times three at once, so that one could not tell which
was the true Pope, but only by the preuayling faction. For he that won it in
the field must wear the garland, the weaker side must to the walls; and
ambitious wits must be set a work by writing to maintain the Popes
quarrel. Have you not now great cause to brag of this noble succession? If
you expound your self not of Local, and personal, but of such as appears in
successiue Vocation, Mission and Ordination, then why do you tell us of
Polydor Virgil, or of Democharis, or of the old monument found in a Monastery,
which have only set down the names of such as succeeded such persons, in such
places, but have not described their successiue ordination? and if you could
show us this also, yet it would not prove the Church of Rome to be a true
Catholic Church. For why should we not think that Constantinople, and
Alexandria might have this as well as Rome? Moreover your own former example
does confute you. For Sigon. de rep. heb. l. 2. c. 6
Manasses the high Priest of the Temple in mount Garizim was brother to Iaddi
the high Priest in Jerusalem, and had the like succession from Aaron, yet the
Samaritans were not a true, but schismatic Church, in regard whereof their
Temple was called Ibid.
Templum transgressorum. Finally suppose that into the place of a Catholic and
Canonical Bishop deceased, a capable and Catholic man, were canonically
chosen and consecrated; yet it is very possible, that he may become an
heretic, as for example an Arrian, and may draw his flock after him. Will you
now say that this flock so poisoned with Arrianisme, are the true members of
your Catholic Church? Yet here is local and personal succession, yea even
the golden chain of successiue ordination. Therefore that assertion of
Stapletons, to with, that wheresoever this succession is, there is also a true
Catholic Church, cannot be defended; but Bell. de eccl. l. 4. c. 8.
Bellarmine says far more truly: It is not necessarily gathered that the
Church is always where there is succession. For besides this outward
succession, there must likewise be the inward succession of doctrine to make a
true Church. Lib. 4. 6. 43
Irenaeus describes those which have true succession from the Apostles, to be
such as with the succession of the Episcopal office have received the certain
grace of truth. And this kind of succession he calls the principal
succession; so Gregory Naz. Orat. 21.
Nazianzen having said, that Athanasius succeeded Saint Mark in godliness,
adds that this succession in godliness is properly to be accounted
succession: For he that holds the same Doctrine is also partaker of the same
throne, but he that is against the Doctrine, must be reputed an adversary,
even while he sits in the throne, for the latter has the name of
succession, but the former has the thing it self and the truth. Therefore you
must prove your succession in doctrine, otherwise you must be holden for
adversaries even while you sit in the throne.


PHIL. We can prove it when occasion requires. In the mean time though we
cannot conclude affirmatively, that where successiue Ordination is, there is a
Church, yet we may conclude negatiuely, that that where it is not, there is no
Church.


ORTHO. Had not Pope Pelagius this ordination you speak of?


PHIL. He had no doubt, and so succeeded the blessed Apostles.


ORTHOD. But he was consecrated only by two as I have Lib. 1. c. 7.
proved. So Euagrius was a lawful Bishop approved by the Pope and Church of
Rome, and consequently in your own judgment had succession from the Apostles.
Yet as has been declared, he was consecrated only by one, therefore you must
confess that one may be a lawful Bishop, and have succession from the
Apostles, although he were consecrated only by one. Yet mistake me not, I
speak not this as though any of our English Protestant Bishops since the time
of reformation were so consecrated: We are ready to justify that their Orders
are not only sufficient in the nature of the thing, but also exact according
to the strictness of the Canon.


PHIL. Or if they be not, then as those which could not show their pedigree
from Aaron, Nehe. 7. 64
were put from the Priesthood; so you must be content to be served in like
manner.


ORTHODOX. SEeing you accuse us for breaking the golden chain, 3
behold, take it in your hand, examine it from end to end, look upon every
lincke, let us see those breaches, those ruptures, those dissolutions you
speak of, and let it appear to the world, whether you or we have broken the
Canon. And because you so brag and blaze your own Arms, let us first see
how you can prove your glorious succession?


PHIL. We can name the Bishops which succeeded one another in their several
Sees, even till the time of Schism.


ORTHOD. What is this to the purpose? It is one thing to make a Catalogue of
Bishops succeeding one another; and another thing to plot out the whole chain
of their successiue ordination. This is the thing you require at our hands, can
you perform it? if not, by your own sentence you must be put from your
Priesthood.


PHIL. We can, if you will grant that unto us which is reason should be
granted. For you must understand that our English Catholic Bishops derive
their succession from the Saxons, the Saxons from the French, some of both from
the Roman, and the Roman from all Nations; therefore an infinite number of
Records must be searched, if we will particularly deduce the successiue
ordination of any one Bishop of later times. Now although the Church in all
ages has been careful to record the Consecrations, yet it is possible that
some may be omitted by negligence of Registers, it is possible that some
formerly recorded may be perished by injury of time, it is possible that some
yet remaining upon record, cannot by us be attained because they are in the
hands of our enemies. But what of all this? seeing the law of the Church in all
ages and kingdoms required three, seeing the constant practice of the
Christian world, was continually by three, therefore when we read of any
Bishop generally reputed a Bishop, performing the office of a Bishop, by giving
holy orders, subscribing to general Councels, executing without any check or
controulement the duties belonging to a Bishop, we may in all reason presume
that he was made canonically by three; if there be neither public fame, nor
probable reason nor suspicion to the contrary. For wanton wits must not be
suffered upon their own fancy to call reverend antiquity into question.
Otherwise seeing none can be a Bishop unless he be first a Priest, a
peevish man might deny them to be Bishops unless he did see their letters
of orders. Again seeing no man can be a Priest except he be baptized, a
froward fellow might deny their Priesthood, unless it could be produced, by
whom and where they were baptized. No Sir, we may not admit of such dealing,
neither must we be put to prove these things, but when there is nothing to
the contrary, we may presume them to be done according to the laws of the
Church, and the general practice of all Christian nations.


ORTHODOX. You speak reason: Only this I require at your hands, that the same
liberty which you assume to your selves, you will according to equity allow to
others, and seeing you challenge all the Bishops before Cranmer for your own,
may it please you to let us see the several linckes of your golden chain,
from the first conversion until his time, and we will extend them to this
present day.


CHAP. II.
Of the first Conversion of this Land in the time of the Apostles.

PHIL. Our Country of great Britain has been three times converted to
Christianity by three Bishops of Rome. First, by Saint Peter. Secondly, by
Eleutherius. Thirdly, by Pope Gregory. Saint Peter, came hither in person,
Eleutherius and Gregory by their Legates.


ORTHOD. The first conversion may be considered in general or in particular,
In general it is most clear, that our country received very anciently the
Christian faith. Theod. de curandis grecoru^ affec. l. 9.
Theodoret says: Neither the Aethiopians which border upon the Egyptian
Thebes, nor many other nations of the Ismaelites, not the Lazi, not the Sammi,
not the Auasgi, not many other barbarians having yielded themselves to the
dominion of the Romans, do use in their traffic any of the Roman Laws; but
these our fishermen and Publicans, and this our tent maker have brought the
Evangelical law upon all nations: neither have they induced the Romans only,
and those which live under the Roman Empire, but the Scythians, Sauromatae,
also the Indians, Persians, Seres, Hyrcans, Britans, Cymmery, Germans; and to
speak in one word, all kind of men, and all nations to receive the laws of
Christ crucified; not using any armor, not an infinite number of chosen
soldiers, not the violence of Persian cruelty, but the persuasion of words,
setting before them the commodity of the Laws which they preached; Thus far
Theodoret. And before him Saint Hier. epist. ad Euagrium 85.
Hierome; France, and the Britains, and Affricke, and Persia, and the East,
and India, and all Barbarous nations adore one Christ, and observe one rule of
truth. And before him Saint Chrysostom. in sermon de pen tecoste.
Chrysostom: Whithersoeuer thou shall go, to the Indians, to the Moors, to
the Britains, to the Spaniards, yea to the furthest end of the world, thou
shall find, in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, etc. And
before Chrysostom, Ath. Epist. Synod. apud Theodor. l. ^. cap. 3.
Athanasius: To which Fathers of the Nicen Council, all Churches every where
have given their consent in Spain, Britain, France, etc. And before
Athanasius Tert. aduersus Iudaeos c. 7.
Tertullian: the places of the Britanes, whereunto the Romans could not have
access, are subject unto Christ. And before Tertullian, Orig. Hom. 4. in Ezech.
Origin; When did the land of Britain consent to the Religion of one God,
before the coming of Christ? when did the land of the Moors? when did the
whole world at once? but now the whole earth prays to the Lord of Israel with
joy, because of the Churches which are in the utmost cost of the world. To
these agrees that which Polyd. Hist. Ang. l. 2.
Polydor Virgil brings out of Gyldas the most ancient Writer of our nation;
That Britain received the faith, ab initio orti Euangelij, from the first
springing of the Gospel. So at the very dawning of the day to them that were
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, the everlasting light appeared, and
the Sun of righteousness did shine upon them. The barren wilderness of
Britain, became a fruitful garden, and was graciously watered with the dew of
heaven. Thus it was in part fulfilled which was foretold by the Psalmist; Psalm.
2. 8.
I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for thy possession.

HItherto in general; Now in particular, who were the first golden 2
pipes and Conduits to conueigh the water of life unto them is not so certain.


PHIL. Some think it to be Saint Peter, some Saint Paul, some Simon Zelotes,
some Aristobulus, some Joseph of Arimathea. But the best opinion is, that it
was Saint Peter, which father Pars. 3. conuers. p. 1. c. 1. n. 20.
Parsons has proved by sundry authorities. First, by Simeon Apud Surium, Die
23. lunij. p. 862.
Metaphrastes.


ORTHODOX. This authority deserves small credit, as you may learn of Anno
44. n. 38.
Baronius in these speeches: If any credit be to be given to Metaphrastes.
And again, In Ibid. n. 54.
many other things by him set down, it is certain that he erreth.


PHIL. This (matter) Pars. ^bid.
seems to be somewhat confirmed by that which Innocentius Epist. ad
Decentium.
the first Bishop of Rome has left written above a thousand and two hundred
years ago, saying, That the first Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Africa,
Sicilia, and the Islands that lie betwixt them, were founded by Saint Peter, or
his scholars, or successors.


ORTHOD. Parsons proposes this very faintly; not daring to say it is, but it
seems to be: neither seems to be confirmed, but seems to be somewhat
confirmed; and yet this somewhat is never a whit: for Innocent says not that
these Churches were all founded by Saint Peter, but by Saint Peter or his
scholars and successors. Neither does it appear that he speaks of
Britain, either expressly or by consequence, for though it be an Island, yet it
lies neither between Italy and France, nor Italy and Spain, nor Italy and
Africa, nor between France and Spain, nor France and Africa, nor between
Spain and Africa, neither is it near to Sicily. What then is the meaning of
Innocent? having named on the one side of the Mediterranean sea Italy, France
and Spain: and on the other side Africa; he adds Sicily and the Islands that
lie between them: as though he should have said, Sicily and the other Islands
in the Mediterranean sea; howsoever, the situation will not suffer us to
understand it of Britain.


PHIL. Pars. ibidem
Gulielmus Eyseng. cent. 1. part. 7. did. 8.
Eysengrenius in his first Centurie or hundred years, does write also, that
the first Christian Churches of England were founded by Saint Peter under Nero.


ORTH. Eysengrenius a man living in our own age, (for he wrote Anno. ^566.)
cannot be of great authority, especially in a matter of antiquity, and yet
he is of less, because he leans on such rotten reeds as Metaphrastes,
saying; Metaphrastes affirms that many Churches were built by Peter, the
standard bearer of the Apostles, through Britain.


PHIL. To Pars. ibidem.
this founding of Churches in England by Saint Peter, it may be thought that
Gild. Epist. 2. de excid. and conq. Brit.
Gildas had relation, when expostulating with the Britain Priests of his time
for their wickedness (for which the wrath of God brought in the English Saxons
upon them) he obiecteth among other things; Quod sedem Petri apostoli
inuerecundis pedibus vsurpassent: That they had usurped the seat of Saint
Peter with unshame fast feet: meaning thereby, either the whole Church of
Britanie first founded by him, or some particular place of devotion, or Church
which he had erected.


ORTH. Neither is Parsons peremptory in this point. For he says not, it is to
be thought, but it may be thought; wherefore in his own judgment it is not a
consequence of necessity, but a collection of probability; and to any
indifferent man it will not appear so much as probable, if he ponder the
place of Gildas: Sedem Petri Apostoli inuerecundis pedibus vsurpantes, sed
merito capiditatis in Iudae traditoris pestilentem Cathedram decidentes: they
occupy the seat of Peter with unshame fast feet, but by the desert of their
covetousness, they fall into the pestilent chair of the traitor Judas. If
the chair of Judas do not argue that Judas was in England, why should the
seat of Peter argue that Peter was in England? And the same Gildas a little
after speaking against such Bishops as ordained Symoniacall persons, says;
Nicholaum in locum Stephani martyris statuunt; they install Nicholas into the
place of the Martyr Saint Steven: Does this prove that the Martyr Saint Steven
was locally in England, or that either the whole Church of Britain or any
particular place of devotion was founded by him? No more does the other,
concerning Saint Peter.


PHIL. What then will you make to be the meaning of Gildas?


ORTHOD. He lamenteth to see those Churches which had been governed by
zealous men like to Saint Peter, and Saint Steven, now to be defiled with
unclean persons like unto Judas and Nicholas the Deacon.


PHIL. Why should he rather name Peter, then any other Apostle, if Peter were
not in England?


ORTHOD. The speech of Christ concerning the feeding of his flock was directed
in a special manner to Peter, whence it comes to pass, that all to whom the
care of feeding Christ's flock is committed, are called Saint Peter's
successors. Saint Chrysostom. de sacerd. l. 2.
Chrysostom says; Why did Christ shed his blood? truly that he might purchase
those sheep, the charge where of the committed to Peter, and Peter's
successors; And this he says to Saint Basil, to encourage him in the
Episcopal office. Whereby it is evident that Chrysostom calls all that feed
Christ's flock, Saint Peter's successors. In like manner they may be said to
occupy Saint Peter's seat, not locally, but in respect of their doctrine and
holy conversation. And all such as by Simony invade this holy function; all
that defile it with heresy or leaudenesse of life, may be said to usurp the
seat of Peter with unclean feet. Thus much for the place of Gildas.


PHIL. Pars. ibid.
Alredus Apud. Surium. 5. Ian. page 131.
Rienuallus an English Abbot, left written above 500. years agone, a certain
revelation or apparition of Saint Peter to an holy man in the time of King
Edward the confessor, showing him how he had preached himself in England,
and consequently, the particular care he had of that Church and nation.


ORTHOD. This your fashion, when you cannot prove a thing by sufficient
testimonies, you run to dreams and revelations not worth the answering. And
yet this doting dream extends not so far as Parsons dreameth. For Alredus
in that place relates how in the time of King Edward the Confessor, Saint
Peter appeared upon the night in a vision, to a certain recluse who had lived
in a cave under the ground many years, and bad him tell the King that he had
dispensed with his vow, concerning his going a pilgrimage, and instead thereof
had commanded him by the Pope to build a Monastery, which he thus
described; Est mihi locus, etc. I have (quoth Saint Peter) a place in the West
part of London chosen by my self, and dear unto me, which sometimes I did
dedicate with my own hands, renown with my presence, and illustrate with
divine miracles, the name whereof is Westminster.
Thorneia. This is all in effect which he says, and yet here is no mention of
his preaching in England; Therefore Parsons has committed a notable
falsification.


PHIL. Is it not said that he did dedicate it with his own hands, renown it
with his presence, and illustrate it with divine miracles?


ORTHOD. That does not prove the point in question. For Alredus presently after
declares, how in the days of Ethelbert King of Kent, Sebertus King of the
East Saxons built without the walls of London Westward, a Monastery to S.
Peter, and withal adds, how the night before the dedication, Saint Peter
appeared in the habit of a Pilgrim, to a certain Fisherman upon the Thames,
and being transported by him to Westminster, went presently to the Church,
where there was suddenly a glorious light, a multitude of Angels, heavenly
melody, with an unspeakable fragrancy of sweet odours. Now the solemnity of
the dedication being finished, he returned to the Fisherman, who at his
command, cast his net into the river, and took a great draught of fishes,
which Saint Peter bad him take for his passage, reserving only one of
extraordinary greatness to himself, which he sent for a token to Mellitus
Bishop of London. Here is his miracle, his presence, and his dedication of the
Church, with his own hands; but here is no preaching; or if there were, then
he preached more then 500. years after he was dead. But why do I dwell so
long upon so fond a fable? Or what is this to the first Conversion of England?
Wherefore I conclude, that though S. Peter were a famous Fisher, searched
innumerable streams through the wide world, and catched many thousand souls;
yet father Parsons has not made it appear by any sound authority that ever
he spread hisnet in the English Ocean.


PHIL. IF he did not convert the nation in his own person; yet it was
converted by such as he sent.


ORTHOD. If this blessed work were performed by S. Paul or Simon of 3
Canany, then we may boldly say, that the first conuerters were not sent by S.
Peter. For they were Apostles, and had commission to teach all nations, not
from S. Peter, but from Christ. Concerning S. Paul's coming, Parsons con^ers.
^* 1. n. 22.
Parsons produces the authorities of Theodoret, Sophronius, and Venantius
Fortunatus, to which he adds Arnaldus Mirmianus, affirming that he passed
into Britain, in the fourth year of Nero, being the year of our Lord 59. And
verily that he was here, is a point not without probability. He was the Apostle
of the Gentiles, in labors abundant, in perils often, and that by Sea* he was
a Star swiftly gliding from East to West, a Herald proclaiming the
acceptable day of the Lord: and a shrill trumpet sounding out the Name of
Jesus. Now though father Parsons say, that for his being in Britain, there are
not so many particular testimonies, yet those which he has brought are far
more pregnant then the former, for the coming of S. Peter. To pass over the
rest, what can be more plain and direct, then that of Venant. l. 3. de vita
sanct. Mart. in fine.
Venantius?

Transit and Oceanum, vel qua facit insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras, atque vltima Thule.
Saint Paul did pass the Seas, where I Will makes ships in harbor stand,
Arriving on the British Coast, and cape of Thule land.
COncerning Simon Zelotes, Nicep. l. 2. ca. 40.
Nicephorus says, that having received the holy 4
Ghost coming down from heaven, he passed through Egypt, Cyrene, Afric,
Mauritania, and all Libya preaching the Gospel, yea he did carry it to the
Western Ocean and the Islands of Britain. Dor. in Synop:
Dorotheus (whom Pars. quo sup. n. 23.
Parsons calls a very ancient writer,) says that he was crucified, slain,
and buried in Britain. In the Greek Menolog. Maij. 10.
Menologe it is said, that going into Britain, when he had enlightened many
with the word of the Gospel, he was there crucified and buried. Which
authorities what weight soever they carry, surely they over balance all that
Parsons has produced for the coming of S. Peter. Now from the Apostles let us
come to the Apostolic men, Aristobulus and Joseph of Arimathea.


PHIL. OF Pars. quo supra 24.
Aristobulus, S. Peter's scholar, do testify in like manner the 5.
foresaid authors, Mirmianus, Dorotheus, Baronius, out of the Greek
Martyrologe, that he was sent by S. Peter into Britain, and there made a
Bishop.


ORTHO. What you or your fellows say, is not greatly material, but how
falsely you report of Doreth. in Syn.
Dorotheus may appear by these his words: Aristobulus, even he which is
mentioned by the Apostle, to the Romans, was made Bishop of Britain: this is
all which he says; if he say so much, for there are diverse readings. But
howsoever, there is not one word of S. Peter; yet Parsons brings him to avouch
that Aristobulus was sent by S. Peter. And whereas Parsons calls him S.
Peter's scholar, he is not so described by Dorotheus, but rather as S. Paul's.
Therefore if he were Bishop of Britain, it is far more likely that he was
sent by S. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, then by S. Peter. Let us now
proceed to Joseph of Arimathea.


PHIL. OF Pars. ibid. 25
Joseph of Arimathea* his coming into France, and his sending thence into
Great Britain, either by S. Philip, ( as some say) who preached then in Gaul,
or ( as others hold) by S. Peter himself, as he passed that way to and from
Britain, and how he obtained a place to exercise an Eremiticall life, for him
and his ten companions in the Island called A^allonia, where Glanstenbury after
was builded, albeit I find no very certain, or ancient writer to affirm it,
yet because our latter Historiographers, for two hundred years past or more,
do hold it to have come down by tradition, ( and namely Johannes Capgrauius,
a learned man of the order of S. Dominicke, and others after him,) I do not
mean to dispute the matter here, but rather to admire and praise the heavenly
providence of God, etc.


ORTHOD. The words of John Cap. in Sanc. Brit. catalog.
Capgraue are thus; Joseph cum silio, etc. i. Joseph with his son Joseph, and
other ten companions, tra^eiling through Britain under the reign of King
Aruiragus, preached the faith of Christ boldly, in the year of our Lords
incarnation 63. And again, They came into France to Philip the Apostle, and of
him were sent into Britain; And again, The King granted unto them a certain
Island environed with woods, bushes and fennes, called of the inhabitants, Jnis
Ditrin, i. the Island of glass. Which relation seems very probable. There is
extant an Epistle (if it be not counterfeit) alleged by I. el. in assert.
Arthuri^. f. 20. b.
Lelandus and other Antiquaries, and ascribed to S. Patrick, wherein it is thus
written; Ostenderunt mihi, etc. i. The brethren which I found at Glastenbury,
showed unto me the writings of Fugatius and Damianus, in which it was
contained, That 12. disciples of Philip and Jacob, had built the old Church,
and that three Pagan Kings gave to the said 12* so many possessions of lands.
King Antiq. Erit. p. 3. in marg.
Henry the second in the Charter of Glastenbury, affirms, That the Church
thereof was founded by the Disciples of our Lord. William of Apud. Camdenum in
Somerset shire.
Malmesbury, in his book of Glastenbury Abbey, says, That the old Church was
built by Joseph. Yea, The Camd. Ibid
ancient Monuments of the said Abbey do testify the same; And also that
Joseph was sent thither by S. Philip out of France. This is that Joseph which
made Mat. 27. 60. Ioh. 19. 41, 42
Sepulcher in his Garden, That in the midst of his pleasures, he might think
of mortality; He buried the blessed body of Christ, and afterward became a
Preacher of the Resurrection. In Glastenbury he powered out his precious
Ointment, and all Britain was filled with the sweetness of the odor. Now
whether he were the first Preacher in Britain* I cannot define; but if he
were, then the first Conuerter came from Arimathea, and not from Rome, being
sent by S. Philip, and not by S. Peter.


PHIL. That the Gospel came first to Glastenbury from Rome, may thus be proved;
Pars. 3. con^. p. 1. ^ ^. n. 2.
King Inas above 900. years past, when he laid the foundation of Glastenbury
Abbey, in memory of S. Joseph and his fellows, that had lived a solitary life
there, caused these Verses to be written in the Church.

Anglia plaude lubens, mittittibi Roma salutem;
Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat.
Be glad England, for that Rome sends health to thee, and Apostolical
brightness does lighten Glastenburie; Which could not well be spoken, if the
coming of these Saints and first inhabiters there, had not had some relation
to Rome, and to the Apostles that sent them.


ORTHOD. If Inas laid the foundation of Glastenbury Abbey in memory of S.
Joseph, who lived there, then we have a noble Monument of Joseph's being in
England. But that ever he was at Rome, or sent hither by any Bishop of Rome, is
more then we can find, or you can prove. William of Apud Camd. quo supra.
Malmesbury declares, That when the ancient Church built by Joseph, was
utterly decayed, there was another built by Deui Bishop of S. David's; Which
also in time growing ruinous, was repaired by 12. men coming out of the North:
but K. Inas pulled it down, and reared a stately one to Christ, Peter, and
Paul. In this certain Verses are written; The first 12. whereof, are a
continual commendation of Peter and Paul, by way of comparison; then follow
those two which you have cited, in which he wills England to rejoice. And
why? because Rome sends her health: But how? the next verse declares,
Because the Apostolic brightness does lighten Glastenbury. Where if the
Poet speak of the brightness of doctrine (as you seem to take it) then it is
not necessary to refer it to the first inhabitants; it may have relation to
the doctrine not long before preached by Austin: For I know you will call his
doctrine Apostolic. Yet it seems, that the Poet means not the brightness
of doctrine, but of patronage and protection: imagining according to the
corrupt opinion of those times, that the Saints by whose names the Churches
were called* were Patrons and Protectors of the said Churches. For in the words
following, Peter and Paul, are called two Bulwarks and towers of faith. And K.
Inas (who dedicated the Church unto them,) is said to have given these
Bulwarks, as everlasting gifts to his people. By which what can be meant, but
that those Apostles were now by his Dedication, become their Bulwarks and
towers of protection? So the Apostolic brightness, (that is their glorious
Patronage and protection,) is said to shine most radiantly over Glastenbury;
And health is said to be sent from Rome, because they ascribe their safety to
those Apostles, which were the founders of the Church of Rome: which does in
no case argue that Christianity was first brought hither from Rome.

NOw, what will you say, if the Britains were Christians before the Romans? 7.
For who was the first founder of the Church of Rome? you proclaim every where
that Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 2. ^. 2.
S. Peter. But when came S. Peter thither? Baronius says, in the year 44*
being the second of the Emperor Claudius. Now let us consider when our Island
first received the sweet influence of the Gospel. And here for our direction,
we will follow the conduct of a star, I mean of Gildas, who for antiquity,
is the most ancient Historian of our Nation; For his wisdom was surnamed
Sapiens: and for his devotion and eloquence, may well be termed, The zealous
and Golden mouthed Gildas. This Gild. de ^^cid. and* conq. Brit.
Gildas declares, how these frozen Islands, far remote from the visible
Sun, received the glittering beams of Christ Jesus the invisible Sun, in
the time of Tiberius Caesar. Which point is the more remarkable, because he
professes in the same place, That he pronounces it upon sure grounds, and
certain S^imus.
knowledge. Now Baron. an. 39. n. 1.
Tiberius died in the year of Christ 39. according to Baronius. Whereupon it
follows, That Britain received the Gospel five years at least before either
Paul or Peter came to Rome. By which it is manifest, that the first conuerters
of our Nation did not come from Rome.


PHIL. Pars. ^. 1. c. 2. n. 2. and p. 1. c. 1. n. 26.
If they did not come from Rome, yet preached they the Roman faith; of which
S. Paul had written to the Romans themselves, before the going of S. Joseph
into Britain: Romans 1. 8.
Fides vestra annuntiatur in vniuerso mundo, i Your faith is preached and
diuulged throughout the whole world; Signifying that the Christian faith
planted in Rome by S. Peter, was derived already for a platform into all other
parts of the world round about.


ORTHOD. Whosoever they were, or whence*soeuer, blessed be the Name of God, who
vouchsafed even in the morning of the Gospel, graciously to remember us, and to
display unto us the riches of his mercy in Christ Jesus. Now, whereas you say
they preached the Roman faith, Be it so, The Roman, yet not yours, but the
very same which is professed this day in the Church of England: Let the present
doctrine of Rome be made conformable to that which Saint Paul delivered to the
Romans, and we will embrace with you the Roman faith. Hitherto of the first
conversion; Now let us come to the second.


CHAP. III.
Of the second Conversion, (as some call it) or rather of a new supply of
Preachers, and a further propagation of the Gospel in the time of King Lucius,
and Pope Eleutherius.

PHIL. NOw Pars. 3. con^. p. 1. c. 4. n. 1.
do follow two other more famous and public conuersions of the said Island
under two renowned Popes of Rome, and by their special industry, which are
acknowledged, and registered by the whole Christian world, and do so much press
the spleen, and move the gall of our Rome-biters, as they leave no corner of
their wits vnsisted, to discredit or reject the same. The former of them was
under Pope Eleutherius and King Lucius.


ORTHO. This is not to be called a conversion of the Island, but rather a new
supply of Preachers and further propagation of the Gospel. For John In Sanct.
cat.
Capgraue, (who is commended by Conuers p. 1. cap. 1. n. 25.
Parsons for a learned man) relates that Eluanus (who was brought up at
Glastenbury) had dispersed through the wide fields of Britain, those first
seeds of the Gospel sown by Joseph. It is also recorded in your Apud Bar^^um
anno 183. ^. 4*
Martyrologe which used to be read in your Churches, that Lucius never carried
himself as an enemy to Christian religion, but showed himself favorable in
respect of their miracles, and integrity of life, and that he had embraced the
Christian religion sooner, if he had not seen Christians reproched by the
Pagans, as infamous persons, and despitefully handled by the Romans that were
in authority. But afterward understanding by the Emperors Ambassadors, that
some Senators were become Christians, and amongst other Pertinax and
Trebellius* yea and that Marcus Aurelius the Emperor having gotten a victory
by the prayers of the Christians had used them kindly: he sent an Embassage to
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome by Eluanus and Meduinus Brittans, entreating
Eleutherius by them, that he would open a passage by himself and his
Ministers for the fostering and cherishing of Christian religion in Britain.
John Que supra.
Capgraue reports, that Eleutherius made Eluanus Bishop of Britain, and
Meduinus a Doctor, to preach the faith of Christ through the whole Island.
Which shows that when they were sent Ambassadors to Eleutherius, they were
no nouices, but profound Divines and practiced teachers in the school of
Christ, as they are termed, by one of your own (...) ^itus (...) (...). l. 5.
(...) d^^inarum r^r^m per^to.
Historians Thus it appears, that there were learned Preachers, who had sown
the seed of the Gospel through the whole Island, and Christians famous for
miracles, even at the time of Eleutherius his sending.


PHIL. Peradventure some private Christians, but neither the King nor 2
any induced by the Kings authority. For it is manifest by Saint Be^^ (...)
^^st. l. 1. c. 4
Bid, that the King wrote to Eleutherius, desiring that by his commandment he
might be made a Christian; whereby it is plain that as yet he was not made a
Christian.


ORTH. In that he wrote this Epistle to this purpose, you may see the motion
proceeded from his own breast, and not from Eleutherius: he was already made a
Christian by the baptism of the spirit, and therefore was desirous to be made
a Christian by the baptism of water. He had already entered himself into the
school of Christ, and sought means that his whole kingdom might follow
after. Which argues that his soul was sanctified and seasoned with grace.
^o^ticus (...) Brit: ^^s^. l. 4. (...) (...), ex Gal^. M^n^^* l. 4. c. ^9. 20
Serenauerant enim eius mentem sanctorum miracula; the miracles of the Saints
had cleared his mind.


PHIL. What moved the King to send to Rome, when there were 3
Bishops in France and other places nearer then Rome?


ORTHO. First, the Church of Rome being in the Imperial City planted by two
so great Apostles, Peter and Paul, and flourishing with store of excellent men,
was most famous and likely to furnish them. Secondly, the Romans before this
time had spread their golden Eagle over a great part of the Island. The Emperor
Hadrian as (...) Hadrian ^.
Aelius Spartianus reports, had made a wall fourscore miles long; Antoninus
Pius, as Julius (...) (...):
Capitolinus declares, had made another to divide the Romans from the
Brittans; and all that lived within this wall were tributary to the Romans; of
which number King Lucius is said to be, whose father was brought up at Rome,
entertained friendship with the Romans, and p^ide them (...)
tribute. In which respects, as also for the great intercourse between Rome
and Britain, King Lucius had opportunity to send, and might conceive great
hope to prevail. Thirdly, it is not vnl^^elie, that the Ambassadors which
informed him how some of the Senators were become Christians, might be
themselves Christians, and perswaders of him, both to become a Christian, and
to send to Rome for Preachers.


PHIL. You have omitted the principal reason, for seeing there was not at that
time any face or fashion of a Church in Britain, to whom should he seek for
planting of religion, and erecting of Bishoprics, but only to the Bishop of
Rome, the fountain and fullness of all Ecclesiastical authority? A
particular Bishop has jurisdiction only over his own D^oces, an Archbishop
only over his own Province, a Patriarch is likewise confined and
circumscribed with in his bounds and limits. But the authority of the Bishop
of Rome is like unto the Ocean inuironing the earth, or to the highest heavens
incompassing all; therefore in such cases we must have recourse to the Bishop
of Rome.


ORTHOD. To whom had Frumentius recourse for the converting of India? The Story
whereof is this. A Tyrian Philosopher arriving in India, was slain by the
Barbarians, with all his company, except two little children which were gone
out of the ship and were learning their lessons under a tree. These children
were brought up by the King and advanced by him: one of them, that is Adesius,
being made his Steward, the other, that is Frumentius, his Secretary.
Afterward the King dying, and leaving his son in his nonage, the Queen
entreated them both, but especially Frumentius, to assist her in the
Government of the kingdom. While Frumentius was in this authority he
inquired among the Roman Merchants for Christians, he showed them all favor
and countenance; and admonished them to have their assembles for prayer and the
service of God. When the King came to age, they delivered him the kingdom and
departed: Adesius to Tire, Frumentius to Alexandria: where he went to
Athanaesius, and told him what was done, entreating him to send some worthy
Bishop to those multitudes of Christians, and to those Churches which were
built in that barbarous place. Then Athanasius calling an assembly of Priests,
said, Where shall we find such a man in whom is the spirit of God to perform
these things? so he made Frumentius Bp. and sent him into India, and the Lord
blessed his labors, signs and wonders were wrought by him, and an infinite
company of those barbarous people were conuetted to the faith. This Story is
recorded by Ruff Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 9.
Ruffinus (who lived at the same time) not out of the rumors of the people, but
by the relation of Adesius himself (the companion of Frumentius) who was
afterward a Priest of Tire: And Soc. l. 1. c. 15
Socrates, Theod. l* ^. c. 23.
Theodoret, and Soz l. 2. c. 23.
Sozomen do all borrow the same from Ruffinus. Thus Athanasius sent a Bishop
to convert India without consulting with the Bishop of Rome, which verily he
would have done if he had thought it necessary. But the Pope then did
challenge no such thing, neither did that age ascribe it to him. Wherefore the
Kings sending to Eleutherius was not of necessity, but because it stood most
with his conueniencie.


PHIL. You are unthankful and unwilling to acknowledge your obligation to
Rome.


ORTHOD. We confess a singular blessing from thence derived unto us. For
Ele^ther^us sent Fugatius and Danatianus, otherwise called Damianus, by whom
joining with Eluanus and Meduinus, Christian Religion was advanced. Then King
Lucius was baptized, and many of his people. Then the Druides were removed, and
in their rooms, christian Preachers placed. Then the Temples which had been
founded to the honor of their many Gods, were dedicated to the one and only
true God: thus Idolatry was dispoiled of her pray, and Dagon did fall down
before the Arc of Israel. For the better understanding whereof, it must be
observed, that the Romans before this time had divided Britain into three
^^titia pro^^n^ Occid.
Provinces, one of them was called Maxima Caesariensis, the Metropolis whereof
was York; Another Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof, was London: the
third Britannia secunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegion. Now in other
cities they had their Flamines: In Will. Read de vit. pontificum in Eleuth. p.
3. in. ^.
these three noble Cities were the seats of the Arch flamines, so there were
28. Flamines, and three Archiflamines in stead of which so many Bishops and
Archbishops were appointed. This is denied by Gultelmus Paruus, but Lelaud* in
assertione Art^ur^* f. 36. a.
Lelandus confuteth him; first by Asserius Meneuensis, who was schoolmaster to
King Alfred; secondly by Geraldus in Dialogo Syluestri; thirdly, by Ptolomeus
Lucensis, who says in the life of Eleutherius, that the three Protoflamines of
Britain, were converted into so many Archbishops. Concerning their seats
Lelandus adds: London of the Trinobantes, and York of the Brigantes, did
undoubtedly shine with this dignity; therefore where is the third seat? where
but in Wales? in which point though I hold my peace, Trithemius is an evident
witness. Hitherto Lelandus. Now although Britain was after the Nicen Council
divided into five Notitia pro^^n^. Occid. p 117.
Provinces, Valentia and Flauia Caesariensis being added to the former: yet
there were no new Archbishoprickes erected. The reason whereof was, because
those two new Provinces were taken out of the former: and consequently, could
not have Bishoprics without the diminishing of the authority of the former,
in whose jurisdiction originally they were, which was not sufferable, because
it was against the Can. 6.
Canon of the Nicen Council, decreeing, that in Antioch and in other
Provinces, the dignities, prerogatives, and authorities of Churches should be
maintained.


PHIL. Were not all these Bishoprics erected, or at least confirmed by the
authority of the Bishop of Rome?


ORTHOD. When the King desired to receive from him the Roman Laws, he
returned this answer, That there Epist. Eleut. ad Lucium. vide Ant^q. Brit. p.
5.
were already in Britain, the old and new Testament, out of which by the
Council of his kingdom, he might take a Law to govern his people. For he
was the Vicar of Christ in his own Kingdom. And as he did not interpose
himself in matters temporal; so neither does it appear, that he did in
matters spiritual, or ecclesiastical. He sent not one Preacher into
Britain, before he was entreated by the King. Neither do we find that he
assumed to himself any authority in erecting of Bishoprics. Neither did
that age ascribe it unto him, as may appear by the former example of
Athanasius: but it seems that the King being supreme Governor, even in
religious causes, within his own Kingdom, and assisted by learned Preachers,
established such government, and in such places as was most convenient. Yet
make we no doubt, but Eleutherius both gave them instructions what he thought
fittest to be done, if the Lord should bless their labors: and likewise
approved it with joy of heart, when he heard it was done: not by virtue of any
jurisdiction, but out of a Christian devotion. Their diversity of ceremonies,
and their rejecting of Austin may induce us to think, that they had never been
under the Roman Patriarch. And it is most likely that as the Churches of Con.
Ephesians. t. 1 c. 4. Bi^. t. 1. page 768.
Cyprus had a government within themselves exempt from the Jurisdiction of all
others, so the Churches of Britain, (a little world without the world) might
be governed by Primates of their own, and exempt from all foreign
Jurisdiction.


PHIL. DId not the Bishop of Rome deliver them from Alle^ apol. cap. 2.
Arianisme 4.
and Pelagianisme?


ORTHO. If it were so, yet this would not argue any Papal Jurisdiction, but
only Christian compassion; But indeed it was not so. We read in Bid l. 1. c.
8. and 10.
Bid, that the land was infected with these heresies. That Rome did recover it
we read not. He tells how that at the request of the Britains, the French
met in a L^b. 1. c. 17.
Synod and sent Germanus and Lupus, two reverend Bishops, by whose industry
the Heretics were confounded, and the faith of the Britains strengthened.
When the disease did break out again* Idem. c. 20.
Germanus went again and cured the malady: So we were not recovered by such as
came from Rome, but by our neighbors of France, teaching the same faith that
was here from the beginning?


PHIL. That was the Roman faith, even the same which we profess at this day.
For Pars. 3. con^^* p. 1. c. 9. s. 6.
that which S. Austin brought, and that which the Britains had before, must
needs be one, and the self same in all material and substantial points. And
that is the same that came from Eleutherius, which being first planted by the
Apostles, continued from King Ethelbert to King Henry the eight.


ORTHOD. That there was the same under the Apostles, and under Eleutherius we
grant, neither will we depart further from you, then you depart from
Eleutherius. But if the faith of Austin, and the old Britains were the same in
all material and substantial points; Then the observation of Easter, after
the Roman rite, is no substantial point. Again, if the faith of the Britains
and Apostles were all one, then the Popes Supremacy was no Article of the
Apostles faith; for undoubtedly, it was none of the Britains faith. Thus
neither the conversion of the Island, nor the planting of the Bishoppricks nor
the supplanting of Heretics, nor the replanting of the faith can be referred
to the Bishop of Rome. Now time requires that we speak a word or two of the
Bishops themselves; What say you therefore, were they Canonical?


PHIL. WHat else? For were they not approved through the 5.
Christian world?


ORTHO. There is no doubt of it. At the Council of Ariminum, in the year 359*
were three Bishops of Britain, as witnesses Hist. sacr. lib. 2.
Sulpitius S^uerus. At the great Council of Sardica, in the year 347. were
present also some Britain Bishops, as witnesses Apol. 2.
Athanasius. At the Counsel of Arles in France, in the year 314. Restitutus
Bishop of London was present and Apud Bin. t. 1. page 265.
subscribed But if the Britain Bishops were Canonical, then by your assertion
they had successiue ordination by three. Whence had they three? you will not
grant that there was any Bishop in the land, when Lucius sent to Eleutherius.
Of the two that were sent to Rome, he made only one, that is Eluanus a Capgra^.
in sanct. Catal.
Bishop: from Rome there came two, Fugatius, and Damianus, but we cannot learn
that either of them was a Bishop: neither do we read of any coming at that
time from France, or any other place to assist him: therefore it is probable
that all the British Bishops did originally spring from Eluanus alone, though
afterward when the number increased they might observe the Canon.


PHIL. If they had their beginning from him alone, yet it touches not us,
because the English Catholic Bishops derive not their succession from the
Britains, but from the Saxons.


ORTHOD. Though it touch not your persons, it touches your positions: But
seeing you descend from the Saxons, we will dismiss the Britains, and come to
the Saxons.


CHAP. IIII.
Of Austin the first Archbishop of Canterbury, sent hither by Pope Gregory.

PHIL. NOw are we come to holy Pope Gregory, whom (to use a Bedal 2. c. 1.
(...)ct^ (...) (...) and (...) Apostolum.
the words of S. Bid) we may well, and also must call our Apostle, for
although he were not an Apostle to others, yet he was unto us; 1. Cor. 9. 2.
the scale and token of his Apostleship, we are in our Lord.


ORTHOD. If Gregory had been truly an Apostle, he should not sit still at
home, and send another; but go himself. For Christ says not, sit still and
send, but Mat. 28. 19.
go and teach. Wherefore an Apostle is so called, not because he sends
another, but because he himself is sent.


PHIL. Though Gregory being Pope sent another, yet before he was Pope, he
should have been sent himself. For being Archdeacon of Rome, Beda qu^ supra
in sine cap.
passing through the Market place, he espied certain beautiful boys, and
demanded out of what Country they came, answer was made that they came out
of the I Will of Britain, where the inhabiters, were all of that beauty. Then
asked he whether the people of the land were Christians, and it was answered
that they were Paynims Then sighing from the bottom of his heart, Alas quoth
he, that the author of darkness should possess men of such shining beauty;
and so gracious a countenance, should inwardly bear so foul a soul; then he
inquired the name of the people, and it was answered that they were called
Angles or English. It is well, says he, for both they have an Angelical face,
and it is fit that such should be fellow heirs with the Angels in heaven. But
what says he, is the name of the Province? It was answered, the people of that
Province were called (Deiri) It is well says he, they may be called Deiri,
that is, de ira eruti, delivered from the Ire of God: then he demanded what
was the name of the King: it was answered Elle, then says he an Alleluia must
be sung in those parts to the praise of God. He went to the Pope, besought him
to send some Preachers to convert Britain, and offered his service: but the
Romans being unwilling, he could not be suffered. So one after, he himself
being Pope, sent S. Austin, and so the work was accomplished, but if for all
this S. Gregory may not be called our Apostle, because he was not sent, Yet I
hope you will give us leave to honor S. Austin, with that title because he was
sent.


ORTHOD. He was sent I grant, but not as an Apostle, that is, immediately by
Christ, neither did he lay the foundation of the Church, but built upon
another man's foundation; for there were in Britain at his arrival seven
Bishops and an Archbishop professing and teaching the Christian faith, and
above 2000. Monks in the Monastery of Bangor.


PHIL. They were Britains, but Saint Austin laid the foundation in the other
parts of the Island.


ORTHOD. Not so; for the Scots received the Gospel even Baron. an. 431. n. 4.
before the preaching of Bed. l. 1. c. 13.
Palladius. The Picts which were more Bed. l. 3. c. 4.
Southren received it afterward, by Ninianus a Britain borne. The rest of them
inhabiting the high Northren mountains and craggie cliffes, were converted by
Ibidem.
Columba an Irish man.


PHIL. Yet Austine converted the Angles or English.


ORTHOD. The Angles possessed the Kingdoms of Northumberland and Mercia. Bed.
l. 3. c. 5. and 6.
Northumberland was converted in the days of King Oswald by the ministry of
Aidan a Scot: And Bed. l. 3. c. 21.
Mercia under King Penda, who being desirous to marry the King of
Northumberlands daughter, could not enjoy her but upon this condition, that he
and his people should become Christians. By which occasion he first attained
to the heavenly truth, wherein he was exceedingly delighted above all earthly
joy. So he was brought to Christ by means of his blessed bride, and baptized
by Finanus, one of Aidans successors.


PHIL. The people which were procured to come out of Germany to assist the
wearied Britains against the Scots and Picts, were generally called by the
name of English or Saxons, but in particular, were of three nations, English,
Saxons, and Iutes. Now to pass over the rest, the Iutes (which flourished in
the kingdom of Kent) first received the water of life from Austin, from whom
also the golden streams were derived unto the Saxons.


ORTHOD. We acknowledge to Gods glory, that he and his converted thousands; yet
dare we not say, that they laid the first foundation in Kent. For in Canterbury
the regal city, even when Austin arrived, there was a Christian Bed. l. 1 ^.
25. and 26.
Church built in the time of the Romans, dedic^ed to the memory of Saint
Martin, whither Berta the Queen (descended from the blood royal of France)
with Lethardus a Bishop her Chaplain usually resorted to divine service. So
it is most likely, that Lethardus the french man had laid some stones in the
foundation before the coming of Austin. Therefore if he that first lays the
foundation of Religion in a kingdom be called an Apostle, then Austin was not
the Apostle of Kent, but rather Lethardus. Notwithstanding, for as much as
Lethardus gathered but a few clusters, and the maine vintage was reserved for
Austin, let us enlarge the signification of the word Apostle, and extend it to
Austin, and moreover (though improperly) to Gregory and Eleutherius, and I wish
your Romanists would imitate these Apostles. Eleutherius did not obtrude any
upon the kingdom, but only sent Bed. l. 1. c. 4.
at the Kings request; Austine coming from Gregory, did not steal in
secretly, but stayed in the Island of Bed. l. 1. c. 25.
Tennet till such time as he knew the Kings will and pleasure, neither
offered he to Preach in Kent before the King gave him and his fellows
license. They came not in disguised, they lurked not in corners, they brought
no Bulls in their bosoms to discharge subjects, or depose Princes; But their
proceedings toward the Prince, were Christian, honest, and orderly They came
to plant the faith of Christ, you come to supplant it: They to preach
obedience, you to teach rebellion: Their Gospel was a Gospel of peace; You
arm the subject against his Sovereign: They converted people; You pervert
them: They sought to build the Church; You seek the ruin of Church and common
wealth. And I heartily wish you which are the Popes Emissaries, to consider
even upon your beds, what great difference there is between you and Austin.


PHIL. I marvel to hear you so commend S. Austin, and to propose him for a
pattern. It is the custom of your men to detract from him, and to blemish his
credit.


ORTHO. Concerning patterns, we are taught by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 1.
Follow me as I do follow Christ. That which is good in Austin we embrace and
commend, wishing to be decked with those garlands; but that which is otherwise,
let it wither in the root from whence it sprang. His desire to convert the
Pagans, and his duetifull respect to the Prince, deserve to be written in
letters of gold; but his superfluity of Ceremonies might well have been
spared: He was too forward to display the Popes banner, and his behavior
toward the Britains, was full of pride and disdain.


PHIL. I Thought for all your fair speeches, you would come to this at last;
but you do not well to reproach so great a Saint, by whom your Country
received so great a blessing.


ORTHO. It is no reproach but a truth, let Beda lib. 2. cap. 2.
Bid be witness, who declares, that a Synod being appointed, the Britain
Bishops came to a certain holy Anchoret, and asked his counsel, Whether they
should leave their Traditions at the preaching of Austin; Who answered, If he
be a man of God, follow him They said, how may we try this? He answered, The
Lord says, Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and
humble of heart: Therefore if Austin be meek and humble in heart, it is
credible, that both he himself bears the yoke of Christ, and offers it to
be borne of others; But if he be churlish and proud, it is certain that he is
not of God, neither are we to regard his words. Then they enquired of him
again, how they might know whether he was proud, or no. Pr^cure (says the
Anchoret,) That he with his company may come first into the Synod; And if when
you approach near, he arises unto you, then you knowing him to be the
servant of Christ, hear him obediently; But if he despise you, nor will
vouchsafe to rise at your presence, which are more in number, let him likewise
be despised of you. And truly as this Anchoret bad them, so did they. For it
happened, that when they came thither, Austin was already there, and sat in
his Chair; Which when they saw, straightway waxing wroth, they noted him of
pride: and therefore endeavored to overthwart and gain say, whatsoever he
proposed His Oration was thus; Although in many other points ye do contrary to
our custom, or rather contrary to the custom of the Universal Church of
Christ: Yet notwithstanding, if you will in these three things obey me, That
is, In celebrating Easter in due time, In accomplishing the Ministry of
Baptism, (by which we are borne again to God) according to the manner of the
holy Roman, and Apostolic Church, And last of all, in preaching with us to
this English Nation the word of our Lord; All your other Ceremonies, fashions
and customs, though they be contrary to ours, yet we will willingly suffer,
and be content to bear with them. But they answered, That they would do none
of the things requested, neither would account him for their Archbishop; Saying
with themselves: Nay, if he would not so much as rise to us, truly, the more
we should now subject our selves to him, the more would he hereafter despise
us, and set us at naught.


PHIL. Ex Baron. anno 604. n. 58.
Truly they came to Austin, as the Pharisees came to Christ, that they might
tempt him with that sign.


ORTHOD. Do you think they meant to entangle him? Then belike as by his not
rising they took occasion to reject him, so though he had risen, they would
have found some cuasion, and not have yielded unto him. But is not this an
uncharitable judgment? He called a Synod of the nearest and greatest
Province? they came unto it, but withal wished, that the matter might be
debated in a greater Synod. That also was agreed upon, and they appeared; But
before the appearance, they asked advise of him, who was thought most godly and
wise. The advice was this in effect, If he behave himself humbly, accept of
him; If he show himself disdainful, reject him. Now, what reason is there to
think, but as they followed his counsel in rejecting him, because the event
did show him proud, so they would have accepted of him, if in the event they
had found him courteous!


PHIL. Bar. ibidem.
The false prophet gave a false sign.


ORTHOD. The sign which he gave, and they made use of, was by the proud and
disdainful gesture of the body, to discover the pride and disdain of the
heart. How was this a false sign? Undoubtedly to deny strangers a common
courtesy, is a token of arrogancy; And a proud look does argue a proud
heart, according to the saying, Ecclus. 19. 27.
A man may be known by his look.


PHIL. Ex Baron. quo supra.
It is the judgment of S. John the Apostle, That we must vouchsafe such men as
are divided from the Catholic Church, no honor or office of courtesy, in
these words, 2. John. 10.
If any man come to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
house, neither say unto him, (God save you.)


ORTHO. How can you apply this to the British-Bishops, who confessed, (as Bed.
l. 2. c. 2.
Bid relates) That they understood that to be the true way of righteousness,
which Austin had preached? Yea Conuers. part. 1. c. 9. s. 6.
Parsons the Jesuit affirms, That the faith which S. Austin brought, and
that which the Britains had before, must needs be one, and the self same in
all material and substantial points.


PHIL. Ex Baron. an. 604. n. 65.
They were all Schismatics, and guilty of departing from the Church of Rome.


ORTHOD. How could they depart from it, seeing they were never lincked to it by
any bond of obedience? For when should Rome have any such jurisdiction over
Britain? At the first planting of Religion? You cannot prove it. In the days
of Eleutherius, it does not appear that ever he challenged any such thing. And
even their manner of Baptizing, observing Easter, and other Ecclesiastical
institutions, contrary to the customs of the Church of Rome, make more then
probable proof, that Britain was not under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome. Wherefore, though we cannot excuse the Britains, for refusing to join
with him in the conversion of the Saxons, yet we must needs say, they had just
reason to refuse to put their necks under his yoke. And surely if Austin had
not had a proud spirit, he would only have requested their helping hand for
the Lords work, and not c Greg. in resp. ad inter. Aug. inter 9. apud Bed.
lib. 1. cap. 27.
have sought dominion over them for himself, and for his lord the Pope. Yet
the pride of his spirit, and his aspiring cogitations may further appear; in
that he demanded of Gregory, i How he should deal with the Bishops of
Britain and France, thereby affecting not only to have jurisdiction over the
Britains, but over the French also. Which Gregory well enough perceiving,
answered, We gave thee no authority over the Bishops of France: for that of
ancient time of my predecessors, the Bishop of Arles received his Pall, whom
we must not bereave of his authority. Thus much of his pride.

NOw whether he were the cause of the massacre following, I will not 3
define. You shall hear the opinion of Antiq: Brit. p. 48.
Amandus Xierixensis, a Friar Minorite; When the Brittans (says he) were
Catholics, the Saxons were Gentiles, for the conversion of whom blessed Gregory
sent Austin and Mellitus, which converted the Saxons, but when Austin would
have brought the Bishops and Abbots of the Brittans by Apostolic authority,
that they should receive him as Legate, and preach with him to the English,
discord was moved for their disobedience to Saint Austin, and so war was
raised between the Kings of the Brittans, and of the Saxons, which, now being
converted would have subdued the Brittans to Austin. Bid Fertur minitan^
praedixisse. Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
himself testifies how Austin threatfully prophesied, that if they would not
take peace, and be at concord with their brethren, they should receive war
from their enemies; and if they would not preach to the Englishmen the way of
life, they should suffer at their hand, and by their power, the vengcance of
death. Now because the event did answer to the speech, it is called a
prophecy. For what followed? Edilbert King of Kent, moved Edelfride King of
Northumberland to join with him against the Brittans, and there was made a
bloody massacre, the narration whereof is thus set down by Galf. Monemut. l. ^
c. 12
Galfridus Monemutensis. In a part of the Brittans, Christianity yet
flourished, the which beginning in the days of Eleutherius, never failed among
them. When Austin came, he found seven Bishoprics, and an Archbishopricke
supplied with very godly Gouerners, and Abbeys a great number, in which the
flock of Christ was kept in good order. Besides other Cities, in the City of
Bangor, there was a most noble Church of 21. hundred monks, all living with the
labor of their hands. Their Abbot was named Dinooch, a man marueilously well
learned, who by diverse arguments made it appear, when Austin required the
Bishops to be subject unto him, that they ought him no subjection. Edilbert
therefore the King of Kent, as soon as he saw them refuse to yield obedience
to Austin, and despise his preaching, stirred up Edelfride, and other Princes
of the Saxons to gather a great army, and go to Bangor, to destroy Dinooch and
his Clergy; Who taking the City commanded the swords of his men to be turned
first upon the monks; so twelve hundred of them the same day decked with
martyrdom entered the kingdom of Heaven. If they were martyrs, what were they
that made them Martyrs? If the Saxons were persecutors, and did persecute them,
to that end that they might make them subject to Austn, what then is to be
thought of Austin? It had been the duty of Austin, (says Vide antiq: Brit.
p. 9.
Lelandus) to have admonished the Saxons that perfidious nation, that if they
would admit Christianity sincerely, they should restore to the just Lords and
possessours, the Empire of Britain, which contrary to the oath of warfare,
they had occupied by tyranny. If Austin sought, by any sinister means, to
enlarge his own jurisdiction, he was far unlike to Palladius, Bishop of
Scotland, who ( as Hist. Ang. l. 3.
Polydor witnesses) besought Constantine their king with many prayers, that
he would not assist with arms, the idolatrous nation of the Saxons against
the Christian Brittans.


PHIL. Saint Bed. l. 2. c. 2
Bid says that Saint Austin, long before that time was taken out of this life
to the kingdom of Heaven.


ORT. That is not Saint Bedes, but some false finger has foysted it in. For a
learned Supposititiu^ est nec in libris Bedae Saxonicis habetur. Ant Brit. p.
48.
antiquary skillful in the Saxon language affirms, that it is not found in
the Saxon copy. Hitherto of circumstances incident to his person. Now at last,
let us come to his ordination, and I hope you will confess him to be a
canonical Bishop.


PHIL. He was most canonical. For (as Doctor Stapl. pr. doc. l. 13. c. 6. and
a successore Romans pont. missus est, and ab. Episcopis Galliae. ordinatus.
Stapleton declares 4
out of Saint Bede) he was sent from the Bishop of Rome, the successor of
Peter, and consecrated by the Bishops of France.


ORTHOD. Pope Greg. l. 7. Ep. 30. indic. 1.
Gregory says, he was consecrated by the Bishops of Germany.


PHIL. That is the fault of the copy, for it should not be Germaniarum, but
Galliarum, as Anno 597. n. 17.
Baronius thinks


ORT. When did the French Bishops ordain him?


PHIL. After he had bin a while in Britain, and had converted Ex Bed. l. 1.
c. 26. and 27.
diverse.


ORTHO. Baronius Quo supra.
is persuaded by a place of Gregory, that it was before the conversion of the
English, but by whom was he ordained?


PHIL. Saint Bed. l. 2. c. 27.
Bid says, that it was performed by Aetherius Archbishop of Arles.


ORTHOD. Baronius Bar. quo supra.
says that Aetherius was Bishop of Lions not of Arles, and that Virgilius was
then Bishop of Arles. But seeing you fetch his succession from the French, I
must request you to call to remembrance that which was said before, Lib. 1. c.
vltimo. s. 7.
concerning the ordination of the first French Bishops, to wit, that they all
were ordained by Dionysius alone, and consequently, that they were not
canonical. And therefore if you turn the edge of your argument against
Austin, as you do against the present Bishops of England, you must conclude a
nullity in his consecration, and in all your Popish Bishops derived from him.
Thus you have made ship wrack in the very haue^. Now from Austin, let us
proceed to those whom Austin did consecrate.


CHAP. V.
Of the Bishops from Austin to Cranmer.

PHIL. THere can be no doubt, but as Austin himself, so all that were
consecrated by him, were consecrated by three.


ORTH. Yes, if you consider the question of Austin, and the answer of Gregory.
The question proposed was this: If Bed. l. 1. c. 27. Greg. Epist. l 12. ind. 7.
Epist. 31.
the Bishops are so far apart one from the other, that they cannot
conveniently assemble together, whether one may be ordained a Bishop without
the presence of other Bishops? Gregory answers, In the Church of England in
which thou Greg. either did not know or did not remember that Lethardus the
Queens Chaplain was a Bishop. as Bede calls him. l. 1. c. 25.
only art as yet a Bishop, thou can ordain none, but without other Bishops.
For when come there any Bishops out of France which might assist thee in
ordeyning Bishops? We will therefore that thou ordain Bishops, but so that
they may not be far one from an other, that there be no such necessity but
that they may hereafter come together to the creation of other. The Curats
also, whose presence may do good, should easily come together, when then by the
help of God the Bishops shall be so made, that they shall not be far
asunder, one from the other, there shall be no Bishops created without three
or four Bishops assembled together, etc.


PHIL. This place has diverse readings, both in Gregory and Bid, what edition
do you follow?


ORTHOD. Even that which you will confess of all other to be most excellent.
For what edition of Bid was that which Stapleton translated?


PHIL. Doctor Stapleton being a man of such learning, wisdom, and zeal, and
purposing to benefit his country in singular manner by turning the story of
Saint Bede into English, without question did use all possible diligence to get
variety of copies, both printed and manuscript, and comparing all together,
made choice of the best.


ORTHOD. Then have I followed the best edition of Bid, for I have not departed
one letter from the translation of Stapleton; yet you see your own approved
edition which Stapleton made choice of, conuinceth, that Pope Gregory willed
Austin at first to make bishops alone, though he would have none created
afterward without three or four.


PHIL. Do you think that there came no Bishops out of France to assist?


ORTHOD. No such thing can be collected out of Bid; neither is it probable:
for in the very next Bed. l. 1. cap. 28.
Chapter, Gregory writes to the Bishop of Arles, to give kind entertainment
to Austin, if he should come unto him, But of any Bishops to be sent into
England, there is not a word. And in the Chapter following, Gregory writes to
Austin, sends him a Pall, and wills him to ordain twelve Bishops, But of
French Bishops to assist him, he says nothing at all. And in the second book
and third Chapter it is declared, how that in the year of the incarnation of
our Lord 604. Austin Archbishop of Britane consecrated two Bishops, Mellitus
Bishop of London, and Iustus Bishop of Rochester, but of any French Bishops
assisting him there is no mention. And for the British Bishops that they
should help him, it is not once to be imagined, because they stood at utter
defiance with him. Therefore if we consult with Stapletons Bid, and embrace
that copy for best which he followed, it will appear that Austin proceeded to
Episcopal consecration, and yielding to necessity, made the first Bishop,
that is Mellitus, alone, and the next that is Iustus, by the assistance of
Mellitus only, and when there was a canonical number, then they observed the
number of three at the least.


PHIL. Surely in diverse copies it is otherwise then you have alleged: as for
example, in the Parisian edition of Gregory, Anno 1586. It is thus, Et quidem
etiam in Anglorum ecclesia in qua adhuc solus tu Episcopus inueniris, ordinare
Episcopum non aliter nisi cum Episcopis potes. i. Truly even in the Church of
the English, wherein thou only art found as yet to be a Bishop, thou can
not ordain Bishops otherwise then with other Bishops. And because Austin was
the only Bishop then in England, therefore in the next sentence he tells
him, whence he shall have Bishops; Nam quando de Gallijs Episcopi veniunt,
illi in ordinatione Episcopi testes tibi assistant. i. For when the Bishops
come out of France, let them assist thee in the ordination of a Bishop.


ORTH. For the clearing of this point we must consider both these sentences
with their dependencie and connection. In the former there are two readings, cum
Episcopis, and sine Episcopis. The latter was followed by Doctor Stapleton,
and is the true reading. For understanding that in Oxford some were appointed
for the collation of the printed copies of Gregory, with the manuscripts, I
enquired how this place was read in the manuscripts, and answer was made that
these Interrogata were not in the written copies, but inserted as it seems
into the works of Gregory out of Bid. Then I enquired after the manuscripts
of Bid, and saw diverse, all consenting in this reading sine Episcopis, with
which concordeth a most worthy copy of venerable antiquity at Eton College,
which the learned and judicious Sir Henry Sauil did show unto me. With the
manuscripts agrees your own last edition of the works of Bid printed at
Collen in the year 1612. As also the Epistles of Gregory both in the Roman
edition, as they are in the Councels set out by Surius and Binius: yea these
Interrogata are produced by John Ioh. Capgrauius Catal. sanct. in sancto
Augustino f. 3. It is in the library of Corp. Chri. Coll. in Oxford.
Capgraue who reads precisely in the same manner. Wherefore it is as clear
as the noone day, that the true reading is sine Episcopis, as Stapleton
translateth: and thus much of the first sentence. In the second we must
consider, both the reading and the pointing, concerning the variety of reading
(to pass over de gallis and de gallijs, veniunt and venient, which are of
small moment, and do not alter the sense.) The Parisian and Roman editions,
read ( illi) which is erroneous, for the true treading is qui, to be justified
by Capgraue, the manuscripts before alleged, and Doctor Stapleton. Now the
words being thus cleared, must needs be read with an interrogation,
(otherwise there will be no sense) and the latter sentence renders a reason
of the former in this manner. Thou must needs make Bishops alone, for who
should assist thee? the Britains? they stand in opposition, and are not once
to be thought upon: the English? there are none: both which branches he
presupposes as granted: the French? but when does any of them come over into
England: as though he should say, their coming is uncertain, so he
concludes, that Austin must make Bishops alone without other Bishops. Now from
Austin we will proceed to his successors


PHIL. They may all be presumed to be Canonical.


ORTH. Yet they came from such as were not canonical. Now from the Saxons we
will proceed to the Normans. And here, what say you to Malmsb de gest.
Pontific. Anglor. lib. 1. page 205.
Lanfranck, whom William the Conqueror made Archbishop in stead of Stigandus?


PHIL. There is no reason to doubt of him or any other till we come to Cranmer.


CHAP. VI.
Of the Consecration of the most Reverend Father Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury.

ORTH. THen it remains that we consider the Consecration of that most
reverend Father and blessed Martyr, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
concerning whom, I expect your judgment.


PHIL. My judgment is, that he was a principal cause of all those lamentable
alterations, which happened in the days of king Henry the eight, and Edward
the sixth.


ORTH. Do you call them lamentable? therein you resemble Envy in the ^^^^.
^^ta(...)* ^* ^.
Poet which lamented because she saw nothing worthy of lamentation. For those
alterations which ye call lamentable, were a gracious beginning of a thousand
blessings both to the Church and Common wealth of England. But speak directly
to the point in question, whether Cranmer were a Canonical Bishop. Why do
you not answer? You are like to one which holds a Wolf by the ears, who
neither knows how to hold him, nor how to let him go; feign would you
infringe the Consecration of Cranmer, but alas^e you cannot.


PHIL. Father ^^^. Co^r^^. A^g. c c. 4. q. ^. (...). 6.
Becan directing his speech to the Bishops of England says thus; Legitime
consecrati non estis, a quo enim? an a rege? at is consecrandi potestatem non
habet: An ab Episcopo Cantuariensi vel aliquo simile? ne id quidem. Nam Thomas
Cranmerus qui sub Henrico 8. Cantuariensem Episcopatum obtinuit, non fuit
consecratus ab vllo Episcopo, sed a solo rege intrusus and designatus; igitur
quotquot ab eo postea consecrati sunt, non legitime, sed e^ presumptione
consecrati sunt. 1. You are not lawfully consecrated: for by whom were you?
whether by the King? but he has not power to consecrate: Or by the Bishop of
Canterbury or some like? Neither that truly. For* Thomas Cranmer who under K.
Henry the 8. obtained the Bishopric of Canterbury was not consecrated by any
Bishop, but intruded and designed by the King alone; therefore as many as were
afterward consecrated by him, were not consecrated lawfully, but by presumption.


ORTH. Or rather Becan plays the part of a presumptuous Jesuit against the
Lords anointed, in saying that King Henry intruded Cranmer, as also in
glauncing at his most famous and religious successors, as though they
themselves had consecrated Bishops. For what needed he to move any such
question, if it were not to raise a mist, and cast a cunning surmise to induce
men to think that it was so? But indeed it was not so: for our sovereigns in
the advancing of Bishops do nothing but that which they may lawfully by their
Princely right, agreeable to the pattern of most religious Kings and
Emperors, and justifiable both by the laws of God and the land, as in due
place shall appear. And as he wrongeth the Prince, so does he traduce
Archbishop Cranmer, as though he were consecrated either by the King, or by
none at all, and consequently the whole Clergy of England at this day,
deriuing their consecration from that renowned Martyr. But if this accusation
were true, do you not mark how it would make a crack in your golden chain,
of succession, wherein you so rejoice and glory? For if Cranmer were no Bishop,
then some approved in Queen Mary's time would prove no Bishops, as for
example, Anthony Kitchen, Bishop of Landaff, and Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Ely,
both which Ex Regist. Cranm.
derived their Consecration from Cranmer, as may be justified by records; the
latter whereof was highly commended by the Pope and made one of his (...) of
Commissi^n* (...) Acts and (...). in the life (...) Cranmer.
Commissioners in the time of Queen Marie, and employed in the proceedings
against that most Reverend Archbishop. If this cannot content the Jesuit, I
will refer him to Parsons; conuers. part. ^. p. 3^0.
Parsons his fellow Jesuit, a man who neither loved Archbishop Cranmer nor any
other of our Religion, and yet clearly confesses that he was a true Bishop.

But what mislike you in Cranmer? was he not in the order of Priesthood? 2
let the Pope be Judge, who in his Bull to Cranmer calls him, Regist. Cran.
fol. 2* b.
Magistrum in Theologia, in Presbyteratus ordine constitutum. i. Master or
Doctor in Divinity settled in the order of Priesthood. Or was he made
Archbishop without the Popes authority? The Pope himself affirms the
contrary, both to the King in these words.

Ibid. fol. 1. a.
Clemens Episcopus Henrico Anglorum Regi illustri. De persona dilecti filij
Thomae electi Cantuariensis, etc. De fratrum eorundem consilio Apostolica
authoritate prouidimus, ipsumque (illi Ecclesiae Cantuariensi) in
Archiepiscopum praefecimus, etc. Bonon. 1532. 9. Kal. Mart. Pontif. nostri. 10.

Clement Bishop to Henry the glorious King of the English.

We have made Provision by our Apostolic authority by the Counsel of our
said brethren of the person of our well-beloved son, Thomas elect of
Canterbury, and we have set him over the said Church of Canterbury, to be their
Archbishop.

And to Cranmer himself in these words.

Ibid. fol. 2. b.
Clemens Episcopus dilecto filio Thomae electo Cantuariensi. Praefatae
Ecclesiae (Cantuariensi) de eorundem fratrum consilio Apostolica authoritate
prouidimus, teque illi in Archiepiscopum praefecimus and pastorem, and curam
and administrationem ipsius Ecclesiae tibi in spiritualibus and temporalibus
plenarie committendo.

Bon. Anno 1532. 9. Kal. Mart. That is, Clement Bishop to our well-beloved son
Thomas elect of Canterbury.

We have provided by our Apostolic authority by the Counsel of the same
brethren for the foresaid Church of Canterbury, and have set thee over it to be
their Archbishop and pastor, and fully committing unto thee, the charge and
administration of the same Church in things spiritual and temporal.

Or, did the Pope and his Cardinals accept the person of Cranmer undeservedly?
Let your holy Father speak for himself.

Clemens Episcopus H^n Angl. Regi illustri. Ibid. fol. 1. a.
De persona dilecti filij Thomae electi Cantuariensis, nobis and fratribus
nostris ob suorum exigentiam meritorum accept^, etc. That is,

Clement Bishop to Henry the most glorious King of England.

(We have made provision) of the person of our well-beloved son, Thomas elect
of Canterbury accepted of us and our brethren, according as his deserts
required.

OR, was he Consecrated without the Popes license? Behold the Bull for 3
his Consecration,

Clemens Episc. dilecto filio Tho. Electo Cant. Ibid. fol. 1. b.
Tibi, vt a quocunque malueris Catholico Antistite, gratiam and Communionem
Apostolicae sedis habente, accitis, and in hoc sibi assistentibus duobus vel
tribus Episcopis, similem gratiam and Communionem habentibus, munus
Consecrationis recipere valeas, etc. Concedimus facultatem.

Dat. Bonon, 1532. Pontificatus nostri decimo. That is,

Clement Bishop to our well-beloved son Thomas elect of Canterbury.

We grant license to thee, that thou may receive the gift of Consecration,
of whatsoever Catholic Prelat thou will, so he enjoy the favor and Communion
of the Apostolic See, two or three Bishops enjoying the like favor and
communion, being sent for and assisting him in this business.

Or, was he entangled with any Ecclesiastical censures which might
peradventure be imagined to hinder his Consecration? That is more then we find;
or if he were, behold his absolution.

Clem. dil. fill. Thom. Cran. Archidiac. de Tanuton in Ecclesia Wellensi.
Magistro in Theol. salutem. Ibid. fol. 2. a.
Te a quibusuis excommunicationis, suspensionis, and interdicti, alijsque,
Ecclesiasticis sententijs, censuris, and poenis, a iure vel ab homine, quauis
occasion vel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet innodatus existis etc. tenore
praesentium absoluimus, etc.

Dat* Bonon. 1532. 9. Mart. That is,

Clement to our well-beloved son Thomas Cranmer, Archdeacon of Tanuton, in the
Church of Wells, Master (or Doctor) in Divinity. Salutation.

We absolve thee by the Tenor of these presents, from whatsoever sentences of
excommunication, suspension, and interdiction, and other Ecclesiastical
sentences, censures and punishments, inflected by the Law, or by man, upon any
occasion or cause, if by any means thou be entangled with any.

Or was he not Consecrate by so many, and such Bishops as the Popes Bull
prescribed? The time, place and persons are extant in Record, against which you
can take no exception. The brief extract whereof I will communicate unto you,
for your better satisfaction.

Ibid. fol. 5. ^*
Tho. Cran. consecrated, 30. of March 1533. 24. H. 8. by John Lincoln. John
Exon. Henry Assaph.
OR was it not performed with wonted Ceremonies, according to the 4
usual form of your Church? But those continued all the days of K. Henry the
8. even when the Pope was banished, as Sanders confesses.

Sand. de schis. p. 297. Ceremoniam autem and solennem vnctionem more
Ecclesiastico adhuc in consecratione illa (Episcopali) adhibere voluit. That is,

It was the will and pleasure of King Henry the eight, That the Ceremony and
solemn unction should be used after the manner of the Church, in that
(Episcopal) consecration.

Or, did he want the Pall, which (if we may believe you) contains the name of
an Archbishop, with the fullness of Bcclesiasticall power? But this was sent
him from your holy father.

Clem. Episc. dilecto filio Tho. Electo Cantuar. Ibid. fol. 3. b.
Pallium ipsum de corpore beati Petri sumptum per venerabiles fratres nostros
Archiep. Ebor. and Episcop. Londin. Tibi assignandum per praefatum nuntium tuum
duximus destinandum, vt ijdem Archiepiscopus, and Episcopus, vel eorum alter,
illud tibi, postquam munus consecrationis acceperis, assignent, etc. Dat. Bonon
1532. 5. Non. Mart. That is,

We thought good that it should be appointed by your foresaid messenger, That
the Pall it self taken from the body of blessed Peter should be assigned unto
you by your venerable brethren the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of
London, that the said Archbishop and Bishop, or either of them, may assign it
unto you after you have received the gift of Consecration.


PHIL. Kellisons reply to D. Sutiisse.
I deny not that Cranmer was truly ordained, because Catholic Bishops
consecrated him, and so I confess that he lived and died a true Bishop, but
peradventure he was never any lawful Archbishop of Canterbury.


ORTHOD. Why so? he was Canonically chosen by the Church of Canterbury, with
the consent of the King, and the Popes approbation, appearing both by his Bulls
and the Pall which he sent him: he was Canonically consecrated by his
Comprouincials, with the Popes consent, who styled him, Thomam Cranmerum olim
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem: i. Thomas Cranmer sometimes Archbishop of
Canterbury, both in his Bull of Commission to the Bishops of London and Ely,
authorizing them to proceed against him; And likewise in his Regist. Card* Poli
page 2.
Bull of provision for Cardinal Poole. Neither did he only give him the title
of an Archbishop, but he took order also for his Degradation, which was openly
performed by the Commissioners* Concerning which it is famously known, That
whereas they did only Act. and Mon. in the life of Ridley page 1604.
Vnpriest Ridley, Hooper, and Farrer, as taking them for no Bishops, they did
Vnbishop Cranmer, taking from him both his Episcopal and Archiepiscopall
robes. In the doing whereof, Cranmer said unto them, Act. and Monum. in the
life of Cranmer.
Which of you has a Pall, to take away my Pall? To whom they answered, That
they did it by the Popes Commission. Wherefore you must of force confess,
without all peradventure, That he was not only Bishop, but also truly
Archbishop of Canterbury.


PHIL. Let all this be granted, yet I must needs add, that his proceedings
were Schismatic, and opened a way for the great Schism of Henry the eight.


CHAP. VII.
Of the abolishing of Papal Jurisdictions by King Henry the eight, which the
Papists injuriously brand with imputation of Schism.

ORTH. FOrasmuch as it is the custom of Papists to brand the reign of King
Henry the eight, with the odious name of Schism, let me a little dispell those
clouds and mists wherewith they darken the glory of that Heroical Prince.
When the time was come that it pleased the Almighty to deliver England from
the usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome: the beginning of it did grow from
a detestable dispensation. For whereas Prince Arthur, elder son to Henry the
7. had Kal. Dec. 1501. Sand. de schis. l. 1. p. 2. Hollinsh. vol. 3. p. 789.
married the Lady Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spain, it pleased
God that the said Prince Arthur shortly after Hollinsh. p. 790. Ant. Brit. p.
307. Sand. qu^ supra.
deceased without issue, so his younger brother Henry Duke of York was
proclaimed Prince of Wales. Now Ferdinando King of Spain, being disappointed
of his former hope, and still desirous to make his daughter Queen of England,
after long suite with great cost and charges in the life time, and with the
consent, of Henry the 7. obtained a Q. Kat. in her answer to the K.
messengers. Ant. Brit. p. 318.
dispensation, that she being wi^e to the one brother, might lawfully be
married to the other. This matter was referred first to Pope Sand. de schis.
lib. 1* p. 2.
Alexander the sixth, then to Ibidem.
Pius the third, both which died before it could be accomplished. After them
succeeded Julius the second the noble warrior, who brake through al
difficulties, and courageously granted the Sand. ^. 1. p. 3. nupti^s (...),
veniam potest a (...) fe^^^.
dispensation, ( Hall. fol. 2. ^n. 1. Hen. 8.
contrary to the opinion of all the Cardinals of Rome, being Divines.) By
virtue whereof, Prince Henry being yet of tender years was Sand. de schis. ^.
1. page 4.
contracted to his brothers wife. While the marriage was expected, it pleased
God, that in Spain, Sand. de schis. ibidem.
Elizabeth mother to the Lady Katherine, and in England, Henry the seventh
departed this life, so the kingdom descended to Henry the eight, who was Ibid.
quanquam sem^ d^^^sset se ^ nuptijs Kath. abstenturum.
once of mind to have proceeded no further. But, after the Cum H. R. 7.
mortuo, and West^n. sepulio Regnum A^giure h^reditario H. 8. (...) R.
^bu^ni^et, egerunt cum eo quidam vt D. Kath. Arthuri fratris su^ re^^ctam
viduam in vxorem du^^ret. Ant. Brit. p. 307.
funeral of his father, some of his Council alleging reasons, and producing
the Popes dispensation, so prevailed with him, that the Katherinam in vxorem,
tertio nonas Iunij pa^^m accepit. Sand. ^bid m.
marriage proceeded, and they had issue (besides those that died in their
infancy) the Lady Marie. This was misliked of many, insomuch that when a
motion was made of a marriage between the Duke of Orleance, and the Lady Mary,
one of the King Henry the 8 in his Oration to the Prelates and Nobles, Ant.
Brit. p. 317. Hollinsh. p. 907.
Counselors to the French King, made a doubt, whether she were the king of
Englands lawful daughter, because she was begotten of his brothers wife;
which scruple was first moved in the Hall. fol. 201.
Court of Spain, and thence was spread, to France and Flanders. Moreover
Cardinal Woolsie advised Longland Bishop of Lincoln the Kings Confessor, to
admonish him of it. Which the Bishop modestly refused, as Sand. de Schis^. 1.
p. 9.
fitter to be performed by himself. So the Cardinal undertook the
business; to whom the King answered Anti-Sand p. 13
Take heed that you call not again into question, a thing which is already
judged. About three days after, Longland being brought by Wolsey unto the
King, entreated his Majesty, That he would permit the matter to be
considered and examined. In the mean time, the Cardinal did cast abroad
rumors among the people, concerning the blemish of the former marriage, and how
both the Germans and French men misliked the same; which he is supposed to
have done not of conscience, but of Q. Kath. answer to the Kings message.
malice and subtilty, because having missed the Popedom by the Emperors
means, he would be revenged of the Queen, which was the Emperors Aunt, and
withal he is said to have commended unto King Henry, The beautiful Lady
Sand. ibid. p. 9.
Margaret, Sister to the French King; hoping by the assistance of two such
mighty Princes, in time to aspire to the Popedom.

WHich project, (though God which scatters the imaginatio^s of the 2
proud disapointed him of his purpose) was such, that nothing could have bin
invented, either more profitable for the kingdom, or more pernicious to
himself, the Pope, and the Court of Rome. For this scruple did kindle such a
fire in the kings bosom, that it vexed his very soul and conscience.
Whereupon the king being desirous to have the matter decided to the uttermost,
so far prevailed with Pope Clement the seventh, that he appointed two
Cardinals to hear the matter: Wolsey Archbishop of York, and Hollinsh. p. 906.
Campeius who arrived the seventh of October 1528. At this time there was great
war between Charles Antisand. p. 15.
the Emperor, and Francis the French king, about the kingdom of Naples,
wherein the Pope wished that the French might prevail, least the Emperor
obtaining it should sit too close upon his skirts. Wherefore to weaken the
Emperor, he moved a league between the English and the French; for procuring
whereof he did not only refer this matrimonial cause to his said Legates
but also of his own mere motion no man requesting him, gave Campeius a secret
Bull The coppie whereof is in Antisand: p. 200.
in his bosom, dated the sixth of the kal: of Ian. anno 1527. Wherein he
infringeth the former dispensation, affirming, that the king could not continue
in such a matrimony without sin. Whereupon he decreed, that after the
declaration of the nullitie of the former marriage and the kings absolution, it
should be lawful for him to marry another. This Bull he forbad him to show to
any save only to the King and Cardinal Woolsey. And though Antis. p. 15.
openly he commanded him to handle the cause with all expedition, yet
secretly he willed him to protract the time, promising that he himself
would watch a fit opportunity to publish the Decree. So the King and Queen
were cited to appear before them in May following, at which time after some
debating of the cause, they protracted the sentence till the beginning of
August, notwithstanding the Kings earnest entreatie, to have a final
determination one way or other, for the better quieting of his troubled
conscience. When August came, the King expected an end, but the crafty
Cardinals considering, that if they should judge according to Gods law, it
would be a great derogation from the Church of Rome, devised delays; so
Campeius alleged, that he was a member of the Court of Rome, whose custom
was to keep a solemn vacation in the dog days, and thereupon deferred
judgment till October following. In the mean time the Pope seeing that King
Henry could not be drawn by hope of divorce, to take part with the French,
sent to Campeius, Antisanderus p. 17.
Commanding him to burn the former Bull. And before the beginning of October
Campeius was called home by the Popes letters. The King being thus deluded
sent to the Pope at Bononie, requesting some end, but he would needs pause
upon the matter till he came to Rome.

ABout this time it pleased the divine providence so to dispose, that 3
the King Antiq. Brit. p. 321. 322.
for his recreation, went to Waltam, twelve miles from London, and in the way
imparted his grief to Stephen Gardener his Secretary, and Doct. Fox his
Almoner entreating them to be careful in so weighty a cause. It fell out,
that they lodged in the house of one Master Cressy, whither Cranmer also
(being tutor to two of Master Cressyes sons) was come at that time with his
pupils, by reason of the plague then in Cambridge. At supper they asked his
judgment concerning the Kings cause, he Ibidem.
answered, that nothing did more prolong the cause, nor more torment the Kings
conscience, then the dilatory protractions, and winding inuolutions in the
Roman Court, with which snares whosoever are once entangled, do hardly ever
recover themselves. Wherefore he thought good, that leaving those Courtly
trials and delays wherewith the King was so tossed with such griefs of mind.
The opinions of Divines both in our own Universities and in others should be
enquired concerning this cause which is determinable by the Law of God, and
not by the Law of man. And if the Divines shall agree and pronounce that the
marriage is lawful or unlawful by the Law of God, let not the king seek any
more to the Court of Rome, but cause sentence to be given in his own
dominions, according to the judgment of the Divines, so being cheerful in
mind, and free in conscience, he may live a Princely life, and worthy this
commonwealth in lawful matrimony, which is to be wished of all us Christian
subjects. This answer pleased them exceedingly, and they presently related it
unto the King, to whom Doctor Fox made mention of Cranmer, but Gardener would
have challenged all the glory to themselves. Then said the Act. and Mon.
King, Where is that Cranmer, he has the sow by the right ear. If I had
known this device but two years before, I might have saved much charges and
trouble; so the King conferred with Cranmer, and commanded him to set down his
mind in writing; at the delivery whereof the King asked him if he would stand
to justify that which he had written before the Bishop of Rome: Cranmer
answered, yea that I will do by Gods grace, if your Majesty do send me
thither. Marry (quoth the King) and to him will I send you. So he was sent
with the Earl of Wiltshier Ambassador to the Pope; who Antiq. Brit. page 322.
Act. and Mon. quo supra.
thrust out his glorious foot to be kissed of them, which (they refusing) the
Earls spanniell running somewhat too familiarly, did catch and bite him by the
great toe: Then the cause of their Embassage being declared, the Earl
delivered Antiq. Brit. 323.
Cranmers book to the Pope, and with all told him that he had brought with
him learned men out of England, which were ready to defend by Scriptures,
Fathers, and Councels, whatsoever was contained in that book against all that
should contradict it. The Pope promised sundry times a day of disputation, but
dallied out the matter, as his Legates had done before in England, so giving
them honorable entertainment, he made Cranmer his Ant. ibid.
penitentiarie, and dismissed them. Then the rest returning, Cranmer was sent
by the kings appointment, Ambassador into Germany to the Emperor, where he
drew many unto his side, and among the rest Ibidem.
Cornelius Agrippa. Moreover the King did not only consult with the most
learned Divines, and Lawyers in the whole kingdom, but also caused the
question to be publicly disputed in the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, both which did utterly condemn the marriage. Neither did he thus
rest, but sent Bishop Holins. in Hen. 8. ^. 923.
Bonner to the The determinations of them are in Antisand^^ fine.
Universities of France and Italy, which affirmed under their seals that the
marriage was unlawful, and that no man might dispense with it. Where it is to
be observed, that some of these Universities profess that they took an
Holinsh. p. 924.
oath every man to deliver and to study upon the foresaid questions as should
be to the pleasure of God, and according to conscience. After these
determinations were read in open Parliament Hall. an. 22. H. 8. fol. 199.
there were showed above an hundred books drawn by Doctors of strange
regions, which all agreed the kings marriage to be unlawful. Now to proceed,
the King considering the Popes dealing, forbad all suites to the Court of Rome
by The copy whereof is in Hollinshead.
proclamation in September 1530. which In H. 8 p. 914 Sand. de schis. l. 1 p.
58.
Sanders calls the first beginning of the manifest schism. About the same
time Cardinal Wolsey was cast in a Antiq. Brit. page 325. Hal s^^. 184 and
194. in H. 8.
praemunire, and all the Bishops of England for maintaining the power Legatine
of the Cardinal. But the Bishops being called into the Kings Bench, before
the day of their appearance concluded an humble submission, offered the King I
18000. pounds to pardon the praemunire, and withal gave him the title of
Supreme Lib. M. S. sacrae synodi 11. febr. 1530. page 125. Hall. fol. 195. in
H. 8
head of the Church of England. Yea, Archbishop Cranmer apud. Foxum Act. and
Mon. an. 1610. page 1702.
Warham told him, that it was his right to have it before the Pope, and that
Gods word would bear it. Which proceedings in England, did so kindle and
inflame the Popes choler, that neither the books of learned men, nor the
determinations of Universities, nor the offering of disputation, nor his own
former Bull and Decree could now hinder him from giving a contrary public
definitive The Copy whereof is in Anti-Sand. in fine.
sentence, dated in his consistory at Rome the twenty third of March, Anno
1532.

ABout this time dyed Archbishop Warham while Cranmer was Ambassador in
Germany, and upon the vacancie of the Archbishopricke, the King sent for him
home, with purpose to advance him to that great dignity: but he pretended
matters of great importance requiring his abode in Germany, by which means he
deferred his coming for half a yeeare. And being come home, and perceiving
that the place was reserved for him, he employed his greatest friends to shift
it off. When the King did personally impart his intent unto him, he disabled
himself by all possible means, using all persuasions to alter the Kings
determination. When he saw the Kings constant resolution, he humbly craving
pardon of his grace, franckly opened his conscience unto him, declaring that if
he accepted that office, then he must receive it at the Popes hand; which he
neither would not could do, for that his highness was the only supreme
governor of this Church of England, as well in causes ecclesiastical as
temporal, and that the donation of Bishoprics belonged to the King, and not
to any foreign authority whatsoever. All which proceedings do not argue any
ambitious or aspiring cogitations, but rather an humble and lowly mind:
preferring the sincerity of a good conscience before all glorious pomp, and
worldly dignities. The King seeing the tenderness of his conscience, consulted
with the learned in the law, how he might bestow the Bishopric upon him, and
yet not enforce him to any thing against his conscience. In conclusion, he
took the oath to the Pope, but not after the manner of his predecessors, as
De Sch* l. 1. page 58.
Sanders slanderously affirms. For then he should have taken it simply and
absolutely, which he did not, but with a protestation, expressing the
condition and qualification. Neither did he make his protestation privately in
a corner, and then take the oath in public, as Sanders would make the world
believe, (for if this could be proved, then had you reason to condemn him of
fraud and perjury,) but it was not so. He did not use his protestation in any
secret and concealed manner like to equiuocating Papists, which take oaths in
absolute words, and yet delude them with mental reseruations: but he made it
plainly and publicly, first in the Chapter house; secondly kneeling before
the high Altar in the hearing both of the Bishops and people at his
consecration: Thirdly, in the very same place, and in the very same form and
tenor of words, when by commission from the Pope, they delivered him the
Pall. And the sum of the protestation was this, that he Ex Reg. Cranm. fol.
4. b.
intended not to bind himself to anything which was contrary to the law of
God, or contrary to the king or common wealth of England, or the Laws and
prerogatives of the same, nor to restrain his own liberty to speak,
consult, or consent, in all and every thing, concerning the reformation of
Christian religion, the government of the Church of England, and the
prerogative of the Crown, or the commodity of the Common wealth. and every
where to execute and reform such things, which he should think fit to be
reformed in the Church of England, and according to this interpretation, and
this sense and no otherwise, he professed and protested, that he would take the
oath. Now if you censure Cranmer, because he qualified his oath with such a
protestation, what censure shall be given of your Popish Bishops before Cranmer,
which took two (absolute) oaths, to the King, and to the Ant. Brit. in Hen.
Den^o. p. 302.
Pope, containing manifest contradiction as K. Ha^in Hen. 8. f. 206. Act. and
Monum. vol. 2. p. 961. col. 1.
Henry himself declared, causing the^ both to be read in open Parliament? And
Cranmer has made the point plain, both in his answer Ibid. p. 1701.
to B. Brooks, and in his Ibid. p. 1714.
letters to Queen Marie. Or if you censure Cranmer for swearing to the Pope
with Qualification, what censure will you give of Heath, Bonner, Thurlby and
the rest, that in King Henry's days, took absolutely the oath of Supremacy,
which evidently excludes the Popes authority?

But to return to K. Henry, who seeing his former marriage condemned 6.
by such a world of witnesses, so grounding their judgments upon the blessed
word of God, as was sufficient to settle any man's conscience, proceeded the 14.
of November in the 24. year of his reign, to Hal^n H. 8. fol. 217.
marry the Lady Anne Bullen, who the seventh of September following, Hal^n
Hen. 8. f. 209. Hollinsh. in Hen. 8. page 929.
brought forth the Lady ELIZABETH, the Joy of England, the Star of Europe,
and the Phoenix of the world, a Glass of Gods providence, and the Mirror of
his mercy. When the Royal infant was yet in her mothers womb, Pope Clement
the seventh, the Pontu^ Heuterus Delfin^ de libera hominis natiuitate.
base borne son of Iulianus Medices the Florentine, favoring the Lady
Katharine Dowager sought by all means to dissolve the lawful marriage of
Queen Anne, and to make her issue incapable of the crown. For which purpose,
being enraged like a Dragon, he disgorged his poison, and spit fiery flames
against the Bulla Clem. 7. ^pud. Sand. deschis. l. 1. page 81.
king, the Queen, the Realm, and the blessed babe before she was borne. But
death closed up his eyes with darkness, while the young Lady began to behold
the light of heaven, arysing like a luckie star in the midst of a storm,
shining to the Church of God with tokens of joy and deliverance; but to the
Pope and his adherents like a blazing or fatal Comet, portending the overthrow
of Antichrist. Which in part came to pass about a year after that the young
Lady was borne. For whereas the Bishop of Rome like the daw in Aesop, had
decked and adorned himself with the fair feathers of other birds, and ietted
up and down with pride and disdain, tyrannizing over all the fowls that fly
in the middle of heaven: King Henry the eight, the Eagle of England, plucked his
own feather out of the Popes wing, and 3. Nouem. 1534. being 26 Hen. 8. Holl.
in Hen. 8. page page 938.
resumed to himself the rich plume of the Princes supremacy, that is, the
lawful authority which God had given him. Then The contents of his Bull are in
Sand. de schi^. ^. 1. p. 109.
Paul the third flashed out his excomunications like lightnings, and
interdicted the kingdom, hoping thereby to reduce it to his obedience, or at
least to disable the young Lady for the succession of the crown. Yet after a
while the angry old man withered away, but the young Lady did grow up like the
lilly, and flourished like the Rose plant of Province. Now though for
extirpating the Popes jurisdiction, this renowned King had the honor before
and above all Christian Princes; yet the glory of abolishing Popish religion,
was by divine providence reserved to his blessed children, Edward and
Elizabeth: They pulled up superstition by the very roots, whereas their father
(for God revealed his truth by degrees) did only hew at a few branches.
Hitherto of the Popes expulsion.

NOw for as much as Archbishop Cranmer was a principal means 7
thereof, the Papists did hate him worse then a scorpion, heaping upon him
whatsoever wit sharpened with malice could possibly devise. He resorted
sometimes to the Dolphin in Cambridge, where he placed his wife, the mistress
of the house being her cousin: thereupon they blazed abroad that he was an Act.
and Mon. in the life of Cran. p. 1088.
Hostler, and unlearned. He kept his wife secret, for fear of the law: they
reported that she was carried up and down in a Pars. 3. Conu. part. 3. cap. 7.
number. 27.
Chest, and that at Graves end, the wrong end of the Chest was set upward. And
surely King Henry did foresee, that one day, if they might prevail, they would
have his blood and burn him at a stake. Therefore, whereas he gave the three
Cranes the ancient arms of his house, the King caused him to change them into
three Ant. Brit. p. 341.
Pelicanes, presaging that he should feed the flock of Christ, with his dearest
blood, and dye a Martyr; which came to pass, in the days of Queen Mary, when
they disgorged all their poisoned malice upon him. They Act. and Mon. in the
life of Cranmer.
disrobed him of his Episcopal ornaments, and put him into a lay man's gown;
they cited him to appear at Rome within eighty days, and put him to death
before twenty of them were expired. They caused Alphonso the Spanish Friar, to
draw him to a recantation by sweet promises of life, yet they had a settled
purpose to put him to death. They had no intention by Alphonso to do him good,
but sought a color by his recantation to justify themselves; so they clapped
their hands, and rejoiced at his fall. But as he sinned and denied his Master
with Peter, so God gave him grace to repent with Peter. And as he lamented all
his sins, so especially he bewailed his subscribing to Popery with his
unworthy right hand. Wherefore when he came to the fire for a godly revenge,
he thrust it like another Scaeuola into the flame, and did not so much as draw
back his arm till it was wholly consumed: thus lifting up his eyes to heaven,
in the midst of the furious flames, he said, Lord Jesus Ant. Brit. page 343.
receive my spirit, and so gave up the Ghost. When his body and the wood were
consumed to ashes, behold his heart was found whole, and perfect, as having
escaped the force of the fire; concerning which, these verses were written by a
learned man.

Ecce inuicta fides cor inuiolabile seruat,
Nec medijs flammis corda perire sinit.
Cranmer amid the fiery flames,
thy heart vnscorcht was found:
For why, behold undaunted faith
preserved it safe and sound.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether to renounce the Pope be Schism and Heresy.

PHIL. WEll, though you and your crew commend Cranmer, yet I will prove in
spite of all Heretics, that when he revolted from the Pope, both he and all
his consorts, became notorious Schismatics.


ORTHOD. Then you will prove in spite of all Heretics, that Stephen Gardener
was a Schismaticke, Edmund Bonner a schismatic, Cutbert Tunstall a
schismaticke, Nicholas Heath a schismaticke, John Stokesly a schismaticke; and
in a word, that all the Bishops of your Catholic Church which were in
England, after the banishing of the Pope, till the end of the reign of King
Henry, by the space of 12. years, were notorious schismatickes. For they all
revolted from the Pope, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester only excepted, who was
Hall in H. 8. 206.
then lately made Cardinal, but lost his head before his Hat came over. What?
will you prove that there were so many schismatics at once in your Catholic
Church?


PHIL. They were not then of the Catholic Church: for that worthy Bishop of
Winchester, In a Sermon at Paul's Cros^e.
Stephen Gardener affirmed, That when K Henry did first take upon him to be
head of the Church, it was then no Church at all. And Doct. Sanders says,
Sand. de schis. l. 2. page 209.
That Bishops were made in Schismate Henriciano, extra, vel potius, contra
Ecclesiam, 1. in the schism of Henry the 8. without the Church, or rather
against it.


ORTHOD. Pope De cons. did. 1. Eccles.
Nicholas defines the Catholic Church to be a congregation of Catholics.


PHIL. When they renounced the Pope, they were no Catholics.


ORTHOD. They were Mass Priests, and professed that faith which you call
Catholic. Why then should you deny them the name of Catholics?


PHIL. Because they did not profess it under the Bishop of Rome: from whose
communion whosoever renteth himself, is a schismaticke.


ORTHOD. Heresy and schism (says Secunda secundae q. 39. a^. 1. ad tertiam.
Thomas Aquinas,) are distinguished according to those things whereto each of
them is opposed properly and directly. Now, Heresy is opposed properly unto
faith, but Schism is opposed properly to the unity of Ecclesiastical love.
Which is agreeable to In Epist. ad Titum. c. 3.
S. Hierome, saying, Between Schism and Heresy, this I take to be the
difference, That Heresy has always a perverse opinion, but Schism makes a
separation from the Church. Out of which words, says Nauar. Manuale. c. 27. p.
878.
Nauarrus, We may gather, That Schism taken generally, is a sin whereby one
separateth himself from due unity: but taken specially, it is a sin whereby
he is separated from the unity of the Church. But what is this to the Pope?


PHIL. Sculting. Var^arum lect. tom. 4. p. 22.
Schismatics are therefore no members of the Church, because they are divided
and rent from the visible head, That is, the Pope. For Bell. de Ecc^. mil. l.
3. c. 5. respon.
no man can be under Christ, and communicate with the Church Celestial, who
is not under the Pope, and does not communicate with the Church Militant.
Which does plainly appear by the decree of Pope Boniface, Extrau. com. l. 1.
de Mayor. vnam sanctam.
Porro subesse Romano Po^tifici, omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dic^mus,
definimus and pronuntiamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis; That is,
Furthermore we declare, say, define and pronounce, That to be under the Bishop
of Rome, is to every humane creature, altogether of the necessity of salvation.


ORTHOD. What say you then to Athanasius, who was persecuted for the Catholic
faith, Pope Liberius consenting and subscribing to the Synodal sentence,
whereby he was excluded from the communion of the Church; as witnesses Bin.
tom. 1. p. 474 ^n not is in Council. Sirmiense.
Binius; saying, To the wicked profession whereof (that is, of the Sirmian
Council) he, (that is Liberius) subscribed by violence and fear. And again,
Liberius Bishop of Rome provoked by violence and threats, as At^. ^n Epist. ad
Solitar.
Athanasius, Hilarious ad Constable.
Hilarie, and Hier. in Chron.
Hierome do testify, subscribed to this first form of faith, (of the Sirmian
Council) condemned Athanasius, communicated with the Arrians, and signifying
the same by letters written to Valens and others, he entreated to be freed
from exile, and to be restored to his See; Yea, Liberius himself in his
Epistle to the Eastern Churches, confesses so much, saying, Liberius Epist 7.
Bin. tom. 1. p. 465.
So soon as I knew, when it pleased God, that you had justly condemned him,
(that is Athanasius,) I presently yielded my consent to your judgment, and
gave Letters to be carried to the Emperor Constantius, by our brother
Fortunatianus of his name, That is, concerning the condemning of him: therefore
Athanasius being removed; concerning whom the Decrees of you all, are to be
received of me with the Sea Apostolic; I say that I have peace and unity
with all you, with all the Eastern Bishops, or through all Provinces. This
Epistle is extant in the Vatican Library, and acknowledged for true and proper
by Ibidem.
Binius, who thereupon takes up a lamentation, That Liberius the Roman Samson
deceived by envy and vain glory, as it were by Dalila, was conquered and lost
his golden locks. Thus it appears, that this renowned Patriarch, this stout
Champion of Jesus Christ, this pillar of the Church, this hammer of Heretics
was divided from the communion of the Pope, and yet he was not separated from
the blessed communion of Jesus Christ: For when the whole world was against
him, he against the whole world defended the cause of Christ, and the Lord gave
him victory. Shall now this glorious Athanasius be reputed a Schismaticke? I
hope you will not dare to say so. If he be not, then one may be separated from
the communion of the Bishop of Rome, and yet be no Schismaticke.


PHIL. Schism, as Cardinal Toll. instruct. sac^rd. l. 1 c. 19. s. 12.
Tollet defines it, is a rebellious separation from the head of the Church,
and the Vicar of Christ, which possibly cannot agree to Athanasius.


ORTHOD. Do not you think that this was rebellious? The Emperor Constable. apud
Theod. l. 2. cap. 16.
Constantius affirmed, that the whole world had judged, that Athanasius should
be separated from the communion of the Church: which was done in the Council
at Millan, and also at Smirnium, the Pope himself subscribing thereun^o. Yet
Athanasius stood out stiffely, he did not relent, but chose rather to remain
excommunicate, then to submit and conform himself to your holy father the
Pope. Now what say you? will you accuse him or excuse him? Accuse him you
cannot; because if he should have yielded, he had rebelled against God, and
denied the Divinity of Christ: And if you excuse him, then you are forced to
confess, That not every separation from the Bishop of Rome is a Schism, but
such only as separateth from the Church of God, and from Christ. Hitherto of
Schism in general.

NOw in particular; The separation of King Henry was so far from 2
Schism, that I will prove it lawful by Bellarmine himself, who says, De
Romans ^ont. l. 2. c. 29. respondeo negando.
As it is lawful to resist the Pope inuading the body, so it is lawful to
resist him inuading the souls, or troubling the commonwealth, and much more if
he go about to destroy the Church: So there are four cases wherein
Bellarmine holds it lawful to resist the Pope. Wherefore, if King Henry's
case were any of these four, his resistance was lawful. To pass over the
first, and the last, it shall be sufficient if we ponder the other two, touching
the inuading of the soul, and the troubling of the Commonwealth. While the
King was yet in his nonage, he was dispensed with all by the Pope, against the
eternal Commandment of God, to marry his brothers wife: and afterward being
informed of the vnlawfullnesse thereof, he entreated the Pope either to
justify his dispensation by the word of God, or to dissolve the marriage; yet
he would do neither, but left him long in anguish of mind and perplexity of
conscience: and at last gave final sentence to bind him to live in a
marriage, condemned by his own Cardinals, his own universities, yea and by
his own former Bull, wherein he had pronounced, That the King could not
continue in it without sin. Let any indifferent man judge whether this were not
to invade the souls of men? Now let us see, whether he did trouble the
Commonwealth. By means of this dispensation the minds of men were greatly
distracted, some holding with the Pope, others embracing the judgments of
learned men through the famous universities of Christendom. Thus the whole
world stood in suspense, and the inheritance, and succession of the Crown was
commonly called in question both by subjects and strangers: Was not this
evidently and notoriously to trouble the Commonwealth? So according to
Bellarmines positions, it was lawful for K. Henry, and his subjects to resist
the Pope, and therefore this resistance was not schismatic.


PHIL. You must consider the manner of resistance set down by Bellarmine:
Licet Quo supra.
inquam ei resistere, non faciendo quod iubet, and impediendo ne exequatur
voluntatem suam: non tamen licet eum iudicare, vel punire, vel deponere, quod
non est nisi superioris: that is, It is lawful I say to resist him, by not
doing that which he commands, and by hindering him from executing his will:
yet it is not lawful to judge him, or punish him, or depose him, which
belongs to none but the superior.


ORTHOD. And you must consider that it is one thing to punish by virtue of
Jurisdiction over a party: and another thing to hinder the injuries which the
party endeauoreth, actuallie to infer, as the Venetian Contr^uers. me^or. p.
230.
Doctors have proved out of Caietan, Turrecremata, and Bellarmine. Now King
Henry did challenge no jurisdiction, but over his own subjects, and within his
own dominions, yet it was fit that in his own necessary defense, he should
remove papal injuries, by providing as it became a virtuous Prince, for the
quiet of his own conscience, and the good of his subjects. Which blessings
could never have been procured, if the Pope had still enjoyed his usurped
authority in England.


PHIL. You shall not persuade me, but that King Henry was guilty both of
Schism and heresy. Onuph. in Paulo 3.
Onuphrius says that Paul the third, did think him unworthy to be accounted
in the number of Christians, ob inauditum heresis crimen, that is, For such a
crime of heresy as had not been heard of.


ORTHOD. What meant the Pope think you, when he condemned him for heresy?
Sigonius records, that in a Council at Mentz, in the presence of the
Emperor, there was a disputation, Sig. de regn^ Ital. l. 9. an. 1085.
Vtrum Henricus Regio titulo a Gregorio spoliari potuisset, that is, Whether
Henry the Emperor might be deprived of the title of a King by Pope Gregory:
Wherein most of the Bishops assented to Geberardus defending the Popes
authority. So it came to pass that Vecilo Archbishop of Mentz, being of the
contrary opinion, was branded for heresy in an other council, wherein Otho
Bishop of Ostia the Popes Legate was present. And the same Sigon ibid. an. 1105.
Sigonius says, that the Emperor Henry the fourth, renouncing his Fathers
heresy, did embrace the obedience of the Pope. Not to perform obedience to
the Pope, was his Fathers heresy; but his son was a gracious Catholic, for
showing obedience to the Pope, though therein he were an ungracious son
against his own father.


PHIL. Onuphrius Onuph. in Clement 7.
says, That king Henry the eight followed, Noua and nefaria Lutheri dogmata,
the new and wicked opinions of Luther. Bell. de Romans pont. l. 5. c. 7.
Bellarmine says, that in England, in the reign of Henry, and afterward in
the reign of Edward, the whole kingdom did after a sort slide back from the
faith.


ORTHOD. That which you call Heresy and Apostasy is true religion, and that
which you honor with the name of true religion, is full of Heresy and
idolatry. Many papal abuses were discovered in the days of King Henry, more in
the days of King Edward, so the Gospel was like to the light which shines
more and more, to the perfect day; the brightness whereof abolished both the
Pope and the Popish religion. Afterward when Queen Mary had restored both, the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Queen Elizabeth, who with an invincible courage
reformed religion. And that which she happily begun our gracious Sovereign
King James has happily continued. Neither can any man accuse them of Schism,
unless they will accuse the holy Apostle Saint Paul, who Act. 19. 9
When certain were hardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of God
before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the Disciples. As
the Apostle practiced this in his own person, so he gave the like
commandment to others. 1. Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5.
If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness etc.
From such separate thy self. And the Lord cries by his Prophet, Hose. 4. 15
Go not up to Bethauen. This Bethauen was Bethel, but her idolatry made her
Bethauen, therefore go not up to Bethauen. If Rome which was sometimes Bethel,
the house of God, become Bethauen, the house of vanity: then thou must not go
up to Bethauen. Revel. 18. 4*
Go out of Babylon my people, go out of Babylon: if Rome which was some times
a pure virgin become the whore of Babylon, then go out of Babylon my people,
least you be partakers of her plagues. Wherefore al Christian Kingdoms were
bound to separate themselves from the erroneous and idolatrous Church of Rome.


PHIL. Thus you say, But I rather account of the judgment of the Church of
Rome which notes both them and you for schismatickes and heretics.


CHAP. IX.
Whether Schism and Heresy annihilate a Consecration.

ORTHO. WHether we or you be guilty of those crimes, God the righteous judge
will one day reveal. In the mean time let us admit (though for all your brags
you are never able to prove it) that Cranmer upon his reuolte from the Pope did
presently become a schismatic, and an heretic: Yet tell me in good sooth (
Philodox) does a Bishop falling into schism and heresy cease to be a Bishop?
does he loose his power of giving orders?


PHIL. It is a disputable point, and I can tell you that great Clerks seem to
be of that opinion. Pope Vide Bellar. de sacram. ord. c. 3. igitur.
Innocent says, that those which are Baptized of heretics, are received with
their Baptism, but the ordained of heretics are not received with their
order. And again, the Innocent. 1. ep. 22. c. 3. Bin. t. 1. p. 581.
ordained of Heretics have their head wounded. And again, it Ibidem.
is affirmed, that he which has lost the honor, cannot give the honor: and
that he which received, received nothing, because there was nothing in the
giver which he could receive. Which he seals up with this conclusion,
Aquiescimus and verum est; We yield, and it is true. Pope John the twelfth
caused those which were ordained of Leo 8. a schismatic Pope, to say:
Council. Romans sub. Ioh. 12. apud. Bin t. ^. part. 2. p. ^066.
Pater meus nihil habuit sibi, nihil mihi dedit: that is, my father had nothing
to himself, and nothing he gave to me. Pope Nicolas the first says: Nicol. 1.
ep. 9. ^in. t. 3. page 699.
No reason does teach how Gregory who was Canonically and Synodically deposed
and excommunicated, can promote or bless any man, therefore Photius received
nothing of Gregory but that which he had, but he had nothing, he therefore gave
nothing He which stops his ears from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abominable; if abominable, then not to be heard; if not to be heard, then
ineffectual, if ineffectual, then verily it brings nothing to Photius.
Wherefore though Cranmer had a lawful consecration, yet it seems, when he
fell into schism and heresy, he lost his order, and power of ordination.
Therefore the Bishops in King Edwards time consecrated by Cranmer received
nothing, because Cranmer had nothing to give. And the Bishops in Queen
Elizabeth's time, consecrated by those whom Cranmer did consecrate, received
nothing, because their consecrators had nothing to give. And those which now
succeed them, received nothing, because their predecessors had nothing to
give.


ORTHO. Take heed ( Philodox) least while you go about to put out our eyes,
you put out your own. For if your allegations be sound, what shall become of
Bonner Bishop of London? what shall become of Nicolas Heath, whom Queen Mary
made Archbishop of York, and after the death of Gardener, Lord Chancelour of
England? what shall become of Thurlby, whom Queen Mary translated from Norwich
to Ely? For all these were consecrated at such time, when in your judgment
both the consecrators and consecrated were stained with schism and heresy.
Did all these receive nothing, because their consecrators had nothing to give?
If they were no Bishops, then what becomes of the Bishops in Queen Mary's
reign, whom these did consecrate? if they all received nothing, then you must
confess that the Priests whom they ordained were no Priests: If they were no
Priests, then though they used the words of Consecration, they could not
Consecrate* the host: If this be true, then all that worshipped the host which
they did Consecrate, were idolatours.


PHIL. Edmond Bonner, and the rest of our Bishops and Priests were Reverend and
Canonical, whatsoever you esteem of them.


ORTH. Can there be a Bishop without effectual Consecration?


PHIL. It is impossible.


ORTHO. And other Consecration they had none, but that which we have
mentioned: for I hope they were not reordained in Queen Mary's time.


PHIL. Reordained? I do not think so, for as rebaptizations, so reordinations
were forbidden in the Council of Bar. anno. 389 number 74.
Capua. And Greg 1. Epi. l. 2. indict. 10. Ep. 32.
Gregory says as he which is once baptized, ought not to be baptized again,
so he which is once consecrated, ought not to be Consecrated again in the
same order. Therefore undoubtedly they were not reordained: but Cardinal Poole,
the Popes legate, absolved them from Schism, and heresy, so they were
confirmed for lawful Bishops. c Episcopos omnes qui sententia religionis erant
Catho^ici, in priori schismate factos confirmauit. Sand de schis. l. 2. c. 260.



ORTHOD. You hold that it is impossible to be a Bishop without effectual
Consecration. Therefore seeing they had no other Consecration, but that
mentioned, and yet were Bishops, it follows that their Consecration was
effectual: wherefore you are forced to confess, that if a schismatical and
heretical Bishop give orders, the orders are effectual. But least this
conclusion should seem to flow rather from the affection you bear to your
own Bishops, then from any force of reason, especially your own allegations
standing still to the contrary; let us reuiew the whole matter, and proceed by
degrees, ballancing every thing with advice and judgment: And answer I pray
you, not out of private humor, and passion, but from the public and most
authentical records of your Church.

ANd first, if a wicked priest, as for example, a drunkard, fornicator, or 2
blasphemer, baptize a child, I demand whether the baptism be good or no?


PHIL. If it be performed in the true element of water, with Evangelical
words, that is, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, according to our Savior Christ's holy institution, it is sound and
sufficient, and never to be iterated, as our learned Popes, Councels, and
Fathers alleged by Cardinal Bell. d^sacr. in genesis l. 1. c. 26.
Bellarmine do testify. For the wickedness of the Minister, cannot pollute
the purity of the mysteries of God: they are available to his children,
though they be ministered by a Judas. For it is well said of our learned Ibid.
Respondeo ad minorem.
Cardinal that he which has not forgiveness of sins formally, may have it
Ministerially: as he that has not in his purse, one halfepeny of his own, may
notwithstanding carry many crowns to another, from his lord and master.


ORTHO. Very true, for that which S. Paul says of preaching, may be extended
to other Ministerial duties. If 1. Cor. 9. 17
I do it willingly, I have a reward: but if I do it against my will;
notwithstanding, the dispensation is committed unto me. As though he should
say, If I do it willingly, that is cheerfully for conscience sake, seeking
only the glory of God, and the salvation of his people, then there is a reward
laid up for me: But if I shall perform it unwillingly, that is, for fear,
covetousness, vain glory, or any other carnal respect, though to my self it
be not profitable, because I loose my reward, yet it may be auailable to
others, because the dispensation is committed unto me. The foulness of an
unsanctified hand, cannot stain the beauty of these glorious mysteries. For
as Orat. 40.
Gregory Nazianzen says, A seal of Iron may imprint the Princes image as well
as a signet of gold. And we know by experience, that a garden may as well be
watered with an earthen, as with a silver pipe. But what if the Priest we speak
of, be a schismaticke and an heretic?


PHIL. Though he be, yet if he baptize according to the institution of Christ,
the baptism is effectual, and never to be repeated.


ORTHOD. You say well, for in such a case, though it be ministered by Heretics,
and schismatics, yet it is not the baptism of heretics and schismatickes,
but of Jesus Christ. For it is Ioh. 1. 33.
he that baptiseth and 1. Cor. 3. 7.
neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, b^^ God which
gives the increase. To which purpose it is excellently said of Aus^^n, De bap.
cont Donat. l. 4. cap. 15.
To the baptism which is Consecrated with Evangelical words, pertains not
the error of any man, either of the giver, or of the receiver, whether he
think otherwise then the heavenly doctrine teaches of the Father, or of the
Son, or of the holy Ghost. Indeed it was decreed in the great counsel of
Nice, that the Can. 19.
Pauli^nistae coming to the Catholic Church, should be rebaptized: where, by
rebaptizing they mean the repeating of that action, which was erroniously
supposed to be true baptism, but in truth was not, because it wanted the true
essential form of words, which the Council judged necessary to be supplied.
Therefore there is no repugnancie between them and the Affrican Council, which
decreed under Pope Stephen, that the Vide Binium in notis in con. Nic. Can. 19.
Nouatians returning to the Catholic Church, should not be rebaptized,
because their former baptism (though given by heretics) was according to the
true form of the Church, and therefore sufficient. It is true that Vincentius
Lyri^ensis in commo^it. ca. 9.
Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage, defended rebaptization, and he was the first of
all mortal men which defended it: wherein he was followed by Saint Cyp. t. 2.
and council. Carthag. ibid.
Cyprian, and the Bishops of Afric, but then they had not seen the point
defined by any general Councels, and though they held an error, yet they did
not judge them heretics which held the contrary, neither did they rebaptize
those whom the Catholics had baptized, nor make any rent in the Church, but
kept the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace: yea Saint Epi. 48.
Austin says some report that Cyprian recalled this error: and S. In dial.
con. Luci^.
Hierom affirms that the Bishops of Africa did the like, moved by the
authority of Stephen Bishop of Rome. But after them came the Donatists stiffely
maintaining and increasing this error, even when the Church had determined the
contrary, and therefore were justly judged heretics. Yea, they took upon them
to Aug. de vnico bapt. c. 13.
rebaptize such as were baptized in the Catholic Church, which was a
diabolical presumption. For which causes Vincent. Lyrinen. cap. 1^.
Vincentius Lyrinensis says, Of one and the same opinion we judge (which may
seem strange) the authors Catholic, and the followers heretical. We acquit
the Masters, and condemn the Scholars: they are heirs of heaven which have
written those books, the defendours whereof are trodden down to the pit of
hell. But now the Church has long ago with one voice condemned this Heresy*
When Aug. con. Epist. Parm. ^. 1. c. 4.
Praetextatus and Felicianus having baptized sundry in schism returned to
unity, the Church did not rebaptise them whom they had baptized, but kept them
in that baptism which they had in Schism. For according to Saint Aug. de bap.
cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 7.
Austin, some do minister baptismum legitimum, and that legitime: some neither
legitime, nor yet legitimum: some legitimum, but not legitime. Such as perform
it in the true element and form of words, being themselves in the bosom and
unity of the Church, do minister both legitimum and legitime: such as fail
in the institution, and are themselves in Schism or Heresy, do neither
minister legitime, nor yet legitimum: such as do observe the substance of
institution, being themselves in Schism or Heresy do minister legitimum, but
not legitime; And those which receive it from them have a lawful baptism, but
not lawfully. For it is one thing to have a lawful thing unlawfully, and
another thing not to have it at all. The Sacraments of the Church may be found
without the Church, as the rivers of Paradise are found without Paradise.
Heretics and Schismatickes may have rem columbae, though they themselves be
extra columbam.


PHIL. The truth of this Doctrine is so plain, that no common Bell. de Romans
pont. l. 4 c. 10.
Catholic is ignorant of it.


ORTH. Then to proceed, what if the Priest we speak of, were interdicted,
suspended, excommunicated, degraded?


PHIL. Yet if he observe in all points of substance, the institution of
Christ, it is effectual and never to be repeated. This is undoubtedly the
judgment of our Church; And therefore in Queen Mary's time, though the land
had been interdicted, and under the Popes curse for Schism and Heresy, by
the space of twenty years, we did not rebaptise them who were then baptized,
but have kept them with us in their former baptism.


ORTH. COncerning baptism we agree; Now to come to the eucharist: 3
shall the ungodly life or wicked opinion of the Minister make his ministration
of it ineffectual to the people of God?


PHIL. In no case, so he observe the ordinance of Christ.


ORTHOD. You answer rightly: For 1. Sam. 2. 12.
the sons of Eli were wicked men, and procured Gods heavy wrath against
themselves, yet there is no doubt, but the God of all Grace did accept of those
Sacrifices, which his faithful children with an honest heart presented
according to the Law of the Lord, to be offered even by their hands, so long as
they inioyed the Office of Priesthood. Our Mat. 5. and 15. and 23.
Savior in the Gospel, reproved the Scribes and Pharisees for their false and
superstitious doctrine, which was so commonly received, and so anciently
continued, that there can be no question, but many of the Priests were infected
with it: Yet Christ commanded the Matthew. 8. 4.
Leper to show himself to the Priest. Yea, he himself frequented the Feasts,
wherein Sacrifices were offered by those Priests. But to go forward; Can the
Eucharist be ministered by a Priest whom the Pope has excommunicated, and
degraded?


PHIL. Bell. de Romans pont l. 4. c. 24. at contra.
Though all Priests have the power of Order under the Pope, yet for as much as
they have it not immediately from the Pope, but from God, therefore the Pope
cannot so take it away, but that if they will they may use it. For a Priest,
though the Pope should Excommunicate* suspend, interdict and degrade him, yet
if he will himself, he shall truly Consecrate. For every Priest has an
indeleble Vide apud. Bell de sacram. in Genere. l. 2. c. 19. and desacr.
Confirmae. 12. sed instant.
Character, which is a certain spiritual and supernatural power, imprinted
in the soul of man in Baptism, Confirmation, and holy Orders; whereby the
Baptized, Confirmed and Ordered, are enabled to give, or receive, the Offices
of certain Sacraments. The Character of Confirmation, being not greatly to our
present purpose, may be passed over. The Character of Baptism is a passive
power, whereby the Baptized is made ^it to receive other Sacraments, whereof
without Baptism he were incapable. The Character of Order, is an active power
to minister the Sacraments unto other. Now, in holy Orders it must be observed,
That the Priestly Character does differ from the Episcopal. For the
Episcopal is either an other, or the same extended: so that it contains the
Priestly, and somewhat else. A Priest in respect of his Priestly Character, is
first of all the public and ordinary Minister of Baptism: For a Layman may
not Baptize publickely, but only privately; Neither privately in the presence
of the Priest or Deacon, but only in their absence. Neither always in their
absence; but only in case of necessity; for then a Layman, be he Jew or
infidel, may Baptize, so he intend to do that, which the Catholic Church
does, in that kind of Administration. A Deacon may Baptize, not only
privately but publickely, so it be at the appointment of the Bishop or Priest.
But a Priest may suo iure Baptize, ex Officio, even in the presence of a
Bishop; as is declared by In Catechis. Trident.
Pius Quintus, and the Council of Trent, who qualify the contrary opinion,
and reduce it to a tolerable sense. Secondly, a Priest by virtue of his
Priestly Character, may consecrate the Hoaste, which no Layman, King, nor
Emperor, no Angel, nor Archangel, can perform: because they want this
Character. Indeed a Deacon may help to minister the Eucharist, but he cannot
Consecrate, no not by dispensation; If he should take it upon him, he should
effect nothing. But every Priest receives in his Ordination, a Character, not
from man, but from the Eternal God, which in respect of the Eucharist, is
absolute, perfect and independent. Bell de sacr. in Genesis l. 2. ^. 19.
Wheresoever it is, there God is present, ex pacto, and co^curreth to the
producing of supernatural effects, which he does not, where this Character is
wanting. Now the holy Councels of D^cret. Eu^^^. 4. in C^nc. Flor. B^^. t. 4.
p. 49^.
Florence and S^^^. 23. c. 4. B^^. t. 4. p. 847.
Trent do teach us, That this Character is indeleble: death only, if death,
can dissolve it, otherwise it is everlasting.


ORTHOD. If by indeleble Character be meant only a gracious gift never to be
reirerated, then we may safely confess, that in Baptism, and holy Orders,
there is imprinted an indeleble Character. For a man rightly Baptized,
becoming a Turk or a Jew, and afterward returning to the faith, and Church of
Christ, is in no case to be rebaptized: the virtue of his former Baptism is
not spunged out, but still remains available. Likewise when a Priest
lawfully ordained, becoming a schismaticke, or heretic is justly censured for
his crimes, and afterward is reclaimed; if the Church shall need his labors,
and hold it convenient that he execute the Ministerial function, he may in no
case be reordained, but may perform it by virtue of his Orders formerly
received. Hitherto of a Priest.

NOw to transfer our speech to a Bishop; Shall his iniquity hinder him 4.
from giving Orders?


PHIL. No verily: for there is the same reason of this, and the former.


ORTHOD. There is so: For as Christ is the chief Baptizer, so he is the c
Ephesians. 4. 11.
chief Ordainer. It is he that gives d Pastors, and teachers, unto the
Church; therefore the personal iniquity of the servant, cannot disanull the
gracious gift of the master. For who conferred Priesthood among the Jews?
After the consecration of Aaron and his sons, which was performed by the
hands of Exodus 29. leuit 8.
Moses, and was extraordinary, there is no doubt but the honor of it belonged
ordinarily to the high Priest. But did not Aaron make a Exodus 32. 4.
golden calfe? Did not Eli 1. Sam. 3. 13.
see his sons run into a slander, and stayed them not? Yet so long as they
lived, they did execute the Pontifical office, neither were their Ordinations
called in question; no not the Ordinations of Annas and Caiaphas. But is there
the same reason here also of Heretics and schismatiks?


PHIL. Card. Bell says; De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 10. Respondeo falcissimum esse.
Quis ignorant Catholicorum, Baptizatos ab Haereticis vere esse Baptizatos, and
similiter Ordinatos, vere esse Ordinatos, qua^do Ordinator Haereticus vere
Episcopus fuerat, and adhuc erat, saltem quantum ad Characterem? i. Which of
the Catholics is ignorant, that the Baptized of Heretics, are truly
Baptized, and those that are likewise Ordained (of Heretics) are truly
Ordained, when the Heretical Ordainer had been truly a Bishop, and was still,
at least in respect of the Character?


ORTHOD. Apud Nicetam in vita Ignatij. Bin. t. 3. p. 869.
S. Basil affirms, That of all the Arch heretics of the whole world,
whereof many were then very famous, none ever durst reordaine the Ordained,
except one Eustathius Ancyrogalata, whose wicked crime the Council of Gangren
declares. In the Act. 1. Bin. t. 3. part. 1. p. 306.
2. Council at Nice the Monks said, According to six holy and general
Councels, we receive those that return from Heresy, unless there be some
intolerable cause. Tharasius the most blessed Patriarch said, And all we also
being instructed of our holy fathers do so define. And again, Page 307.
Tharasius the most blessed Patriarch said, What say you of Anatolius? was not
he President of the fourth Synod? yet he was Created of that wicked Dioscorus.
Therefore let us also receive the Ordained of Heretics, as Anatolius was
received. And again, Tharasius, the most blessed Patriarch said, Page 308.
Truly very many which were Presidents in the sixth Synod, were created of
Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, teachers of the Heresy of the Monothelites;
Yea, these likewise divided the Constantinopolitan Sees among the Clergy. From
Peter their last teacher, unto the sixth Synod, there came between no fewer
then fifteen years, in which space were Thomas, John, and Constantine,
ordained of heretics, who notwithstanding were not for this cause rejected.
The heresy lasted about fifty years, yet the fathers in the sixth Synod
condemned only the forenamed four: whereby it is evident, that heresy in
their judgment does not take away the power of giving orders, which you
confess, and must needs, because one of your own Popes was ordained by
heretics: if Felix the second were a Pope.


PHIL. In Ex Baron. anno 357. n. 63.
the time of Gregory the thirteenth, the Roman Martyrologe was set out at Rome,
where there was a great controversy among learned men concerning Felix,
whether his name were to be spunged out: and Baronius with many other were of
that opinion: but it fell out as it were by a divine miracle, the very day
before Saint Felix his day, that some digging for treasure found a chest,
wherein was this inscription; The body of Felix, Pope and Martyr, which
condemned Constantius: so Baronius yielded to Felix, as it were pleading his
own cause: especially seeing Pope Gregory himself, was of that judgment.
Therefore we confess that Felix was a lawful Pope, although his entrance is
much to be misliked. For Bin. in notis in vitam Felicis. 2. t. 1. p. 490.
according to the common sentence of the Fathers, he was intruded by the
Arians, and ordained of them: therefore at the first, while Liberius suffered
persecution for the Catholic Faith, he was a Schismatic Antipope, but as
Ibidem.
Binius says, from such time as he advanced the banner of faith, by
excommunicating Constantius, Vrsacius, Valens and other Arians, and Liberius
for his manifest Communion with Heretics, was plainly accounted banished from
the Communion of Catholics, omnium Catholicorum iudicio, quanquam antea
schismaticus fuisset, legitimus Ecclesiae Catholicae Pontifex haebericaepit,
that is, Although before he had been a schismatic yet then he began to be
accounted the lawful Bishop of the Catholic Church by the judgment of all
Catholics.


ORTHOD. Then you confess that Felix which was ordained of Arians, was
notwithstanding a lawful Bishop, yea and a lawful Pope by the judgment of
all Catholics; for if you should say otherwise, what would become of those
five Deacons, 21. Priests 19. Vita Faelicis apud Bin. quo supra.
Bishops, which he ordained? If heretics have no power to ordain, then Felix
was no Bishop, and consequently according to your own positions, al
ordinations derived from him, were mere nullities.


PHIL. You heard before out of the councels of Florence and Trent, that the
Character is indeleble; whereupon it follows, that neither schism nor
heresy, nor any censure of the Church can take it away: wherefore seeing the
Episcopal character, whether it be a diverse from the Presbyterall, or the
same more extended, is an absolute, perfect and independent power of conferring
the Sacraments of Confirmation and Order: therefore a Bishop may not only
without any further dispensation, confirm and order, but he cannot be
hindered by any superior power, but that he may truly confer these
Sacraments if it please himself, as our learned De Confir. c. 12.
Cardinal affirms: which is also the common opinion of the schoolmen.
Heretics (says Dom. ^oto. in 4. s^nt. d. 25.
Dominicus a Soto,) whosoever they be, even such as are cut off, although they
were not formerly promoted lawfully by the Church, but by heretics, do verily
confer the Sacrament of order, although they be forbidden by the Church: and
therefore while they do confer it they sin mortally. Gabriel Biel: Bi^l.
in 4. sent. d^st. 25. q. 1* con. 4.
although a Bishop being an heretic, and Apostata, degraded, cut off, or
publicly excommunicated, be deprived of all jurisdiction by the law it self,
neither can he absolve any man from his sins: yet he may actually ordain
any man capable of the order, being willing, yea though he be not subject to
his jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the Church does justly prohibit him. And
Capreolus: Cap. in. 4. sen* d. 25. q. 1. art. ^. in ma^gi^e.
Bishops although they be heretics, schismatickes, and degraded, may confer
orders. This is agreeable to the Decree of Anastasius Bibl. apud Bin. ^. 3.
page 832.
Pope Anastasius, concerning those whom Acasius ordained after his
condemnation, to wit, (...)nis attiger^t.
That no harm at al should befall them. By all this it appears that the orders
thus ministered are effectual.


ORTHO. But does not degradation deprive a man of the degree?


PHIL. Non est dubitandum (says Petrus a Soto) per haeresim vel
excommunicationem, sieve etiam degradationem, non amittipotestatem, quae
sacramento collata est, sieve characterem (vt dicunt) baptismi, confirmationis,
and ordinis: quanquam vsus illius amittatur* that is, It is not to be doubted,
that the power which is conferred by the Sacrament or the character (as they
call it) of baptism, confirmation, and order, is not los^ by heresy,
excommunication, or degradation, although the use of it be lost. With whom
agrees Greg. de Val. tom. ^. disp. 9. ^. 1. certum est ordin^tiones bu^usmodi
ministrorum sic ^sse immutabi^^s, vt qui semel in aliquem eiusmodi ordmem
ecclesiacticum cooptatus sit, nequea^ omnino ^ccepti ordinis potestate ^riu^ri
a^t fieri laicus et si possit vsus interdici.
Gregory de Valentia. So degradation takes not away the character and power,
but only the use, and that only so far, as if he use it, this use is sinful,
yet does not cease to be effectual.


ORTHO. THen Pope Stephen was much to blame, who Ex Sigeberto in Chron. an. 902
and 903.
vnordained them whom his predecessor Formosus had ordained, and he also gave
out a commandment, that they should al be In vita Seph. 7. Bin. t. 3. p. 1047.
Consecrated and ordained a new. Yea he took up his carcass out of the
grave, brought it unto judgment before a council of Bishops, spoiled it of
the papal robes, clothed it in a layman gown, endited it, arraigned it,
condemned it, cut off those fingers which were principally used in
consecration, and cast it into the stream of Tyber.


PHIL. Ex Bell. de Romans pont. l. 4. c. 12.
Formosus a Cardinal and Bishop of Portua being degraded by John the eight,
went out of the city and swore that he would never return, either to the city
or to his bishoprike. Soon after, John the eight died, and Baron. calls him
Marinus, an. 883. 1
Martin the second, absoluing Formosus from his rashoth, restored him to his
dignities. Not long after; Martin died, and Formosus being made Pope, ordained
diverse. After him comes Stephen, who either not knowing or not believing that
Formosus was absolved, caused them whom he had ordained to be re*ordained. But
his fact as Bellarmine confesses, displeased all men, and three Popes
following, Romanus, Theodorus, and John the ninth, disanulled the sentence of
Stephen, judging Formosus a lawful Pope, and his ordinations sound.


ORTHO. Pope Sergius succeeding them, reuersed their sentence, condemning
Formosus and pronouncing all holy orders by him conferred to be void and
frustrate.


PHIL. I confess with Ex Bell. d^ Romans pont. l. 4. c. 12. respondeo.
Bellarmine, that Pope Stephen and Sergius erred, In quaestione facti non
iuris; By evil example not by false doctrine. For Sigon. de reg. Ital. l. 6*
an. 896
Sigonius says, Omnia Formosi pontificatus acta rescidit, atque in primis eos
qui initiati ab eo fuerant exautorauit, that is, Pope Stephen disanulled all
the actions done during the Popedom of Formosus, and especially he casseered
those which he had ordained. And Luitp. l. 6. c. 8
Luitprandus, cunctos quos ipse ordinauerat gradu depositos iterum ordinauit,
that is, When he had deposed al which Formosus had ordained, here-ordained
them. Thus the fact is apparent; but here is no decree.


ORTHO. Sig. ^n. 902.
Sigebert says: Ordinationes eius irritas esse decernit, that is, He decrees
his ordinations to be void. And Martinus Mart. Pol. in Steph.
Polonus says: Omnes ordinationes eius irritas debere esse decernit, that is,
He decrees that all his ordinations ought to be void. And Bell. idid.
public in concilio Episcoporum decernit, Formosum nunquam legitimum pontificem
fuisse. etc.
Bellarmine himself, though he run counter in the point, yet confesses,
that Stephen decreed publikelie in a Council of Bishops, that Formosus was
never a lawful Pope, and consequently that all his acts were void.


PHIL. It were no prejudice Ex Bin. in vita Steph. 7. t. 3 p. 2. ^. 1047.
to the Sea Apostolic, if we should grant that an intruder not lawfully
chosen, but a false Pope thrust in, might decree an error.


ORTHOD. As though Stephen, and Sergius were not true Popes. For though they
were most wicked men, and came in by intrusion, yet that hinders not. An. 897.
n. 1.
Baronius declares, that Some which got the place by tyranny did afterward
get the consent of the Clergy, which thought good rather to tolerate them,
then to suffer the Church to be rent with Schism, And he adds, that he is
constrained of necessity to say so, because the whole Catholic Church did
honor them as lawful Popes, obeyed them, acknowledged them for the Vicars of
Christ, and successors of Peter, and frequented them with that reverence which
became a true Pope, which had not been done unless there had been certain
assurance of their lawful election afterward made: Hitherto Baronius: all
which he speaks by occasion of this Stephen whom (notwithstanding his
intrusion) he places in the rank of true Popes, and so does Tom. ^. p. 1047.
Binius likewise. The like honor Bar. Ann^ 909.
is also afforded to Sergius, who sent the Pall to the Archbishops of Colen and
Hamborowe, and exempted the Church of Breme from the jurisdiction of Colen, as
An. 908. ^. 4.
Baronius witnesses. And so it appears that he was acknowledged for Pope,
and quietly enjoyed the place. Therefore if we be so favorable to him as
Baronius is to Stephen, we may judge that though he entered by intrusion, yet he
might be confirmed for the peace of the Church by a new election.


PHIL. Whatsoever we judge of Stephen or Sergius, concerning the Popedom, we
confess that they erred, touching ordinations. For though Formosus had never
been Pope, yet he was Bishop of Portua, and though he had been an Heretic
or Schismaticke, though justly degraded, yet his Episcopal character remained,
and his ordinations were effectual; therefore they dealt injuriously with him,
and his innocence was sufficiently cleared by miracle. For when his body,
being found by certain fishermen in the stream of Tibur, was brought into
Saint Peter's Church, the very Baron. anno 897. n. 3. ex Luitprando l. 1. c. 8.
Images did reverence unto it.


ORTH. Then Pope Stephen, and Pope Sergius erred, or at least your Images were
deceived.


PHIL. How often shall I tell you? we confess that they erred: what will you
have more?


ORTH. And so erred Pope Stephen 4. who reordained those Bishops which
Constantine the Antipope had ordained, and that according to a decree of a
Roman Council as appears by these words of Anastasius alleged by An. 769.
^. 6.
Baronius: In eodem concilio statutum est, vt omnia, quae idem Constantinus in
ecclesiasticis sacramentis ac diuino cultu egit, iterari debuissent, praeter
sacrum Baptisma ac sanctum Chrisma: that is, It was decreed in the said
Council, that all things which the said Constantine did in Ecclesiastical
Sacraments and divine worship ought to be reiterated, beside holy Baptism and
holy Chrisme. That the Pope himself did actually reordaine them, may appear
by these words: In vita Stephani 4. apud Bin. t. 3. ^art. 1. page 238.
Huiusmodi promulgatis sententijs, illico Episcopi illi, qui ab eode^
Constantino ordinati sunt, reuertentes iuxta ciusdem Pontificis sententia^ in
pristino honoris gradu electi denuo a Clero, and plebe, cum solito decreto ad
sedem Apostolicam propera^tes ab eodem sanctissimo Papa Consecrati sunt. That
is, After the promulgation of such sentences, presently those Bishops which
were ordained of the same Constantine, returning according to the sentence of
the same Pope, being chosen again, in the same degree of honor by the Clergy
and people, making have with the accustomed decree to the Sea Apostolic, were
Consecrated of the same most holy Pope.


PHIL. That place has diverse readings. For some read not Consecrati sunt,
but Conciliati sunt: as you may see in Baronius.


ORTHO. Indeed Baronius puts Conciliati in the margent, because he would
have it so, but he puts Consecrati in the text, because in Anastasius a
Bin. t. 3. ^. ^. p. 238.
he found it so. And g Binius, though he be exceedingly addicted to Baronius,
yet in this point he forsakes him, and makes no mention of Conciliati.


PHIL. You must not think that they were consecrated again, but Bar. quo
supra.
received the mystery of blessing after the manner of their ancestors, which
the Author named the Sacrament of blessing.


ORTHOD. By Sacrament of blessing, is meant the Sacrament of order. For the
Bishop which pronounces the words whereby the mystical blessing, or the
spiritual power is given, is said in the fourth Council of Conc. Cart. 4. c.
2. Bin. tom. 1. page 553.
Carthage to power out the blessing.


PHIL. But the means only, Bar. quo supra.
those solemnities which were accustomed to be used in the reconciliation of a
Schismaticke or Heretic.


ORTH. So says Baronius, but I will prove the contrary. For as you heard
before, it was decreed that all which Constantine did in Ecclesiastical
Sacraments and divine worship should be reiterated, excepting only Baptism
and confirmation; but what think you, did not Pope Stephen and the Roman
Council, account holy orders an Ecclesiastical Sacrament?


PHIL. Yes undoubtedly.


ORTH. Then undoubtedly they decreede that the holy orders should be
reiterated, which were given by Constantine. And therefore if they were only
reconciled, and not reordained, then Pope Stephen did contrary to his own
decree; which is most absurd. Wherefore it is a clear case that Pope Stephen
the fourth used reordination.


PHIL. If he did so, then he was blame worthy. For though Constantine were a
Schismatic Antipope, though of a lay man, he was suddenly made Bishop, and
hudled up his orders in all have contrary to the Canons: yet we cannot deny,
but he received those orders, and had power in respect of his Episcopal
Character to deliver them unto others. And seeing his Character was indeleble
as we have proved, therefore though he had not only been a Schismaticke, but
also an Heretic excommunicated and degraded, yet he could not have lost his
power of given orders.


ORTHOD. If you continue constant in this opinion, then you must at your
leisure bethink yourselfe, how it may be reconciled with your former
allegations out of Pope Innocent, Pope John, and Pope Nicolas: in the mean
time it is sufficient for us to take that you grant.


PHIL. I told you, it was a disputable point, and seemed almost insoluble to
Peter Lombard. Yet now at last by much disputing the truth is found out,
learned men are agreed upon it, and unless I be deceived, the holy doctrine of
the indeleble character delivered in the Councels of Florence and Trent, was
the very needle to direct their course.


CHAP. X.
Of the Bishops Consecrated in the time of King Henry the eighth, after the
abolishing of the Popes Jurisdiction.

ORTH. THen at last to gather into brief heads, that which has been
discoursed at large, you grant that Archbishop Cranmer was a Canonical Bishop.


PHIL. I grant it, for the reasons before alleged.


ORTHO. And you make no doubt of any of the Bishops of England, before Cranmer.


PHIL. None at all, as you heard before.


ORTHOD. And you say, that every Canonical Bishop has an Episcopal Character.


PHIL. We say so.


ORTHOD. And that this Character is so indeleble, that no schism, no sin, no
heresy, no censures of the Church, no excommunication, suspension,
interdiction, degradation, nothing, nothing at all saving only death, if
death, can dissolve it, otherwise it is everlasting.


PHIL. All this was proved out of the most famous Councels of Florence and
Trent.


ORTH. And that every Bishop by virtue of his Episcopal Character, has power
to give holy orders, yea even the order of a Bishop.


PHIL. Very true, so he be assisted by a sufficient number of Bishops, and
impose hands upon a capable person, according to the form of the Church.


ORTHOD. THen to proceed to the rest of the Bishops, consecrated in King
Henry's days, in the time of the pretended schism: were not they capable of
the Episcopal function?


PHIL. Though King Henry abolished the authority of the Pope, yet the
sacrifice of the Mass continued till the end of his reign; So we make no
doubt, but the Priesthood then in use, was a sacrificing Priesthood, complete
in all points, and consequently capable of the Episcopal Character,
notwithstanding the crime of schism, and heresy.


ORTHOD. Then George Brown, Archbishop of Dublin, Edmond Bonner, whom king
Henry preferred to Hereford, and thence to London, Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of
Westminster, and such like were all capable of the Episcopal office.


PHIL. There is no doubt of it.


ORTH. If these, and such other as returned to the Pope in the days of Queen
Mary; why not William Barlow, Rowland Lee, Thomas Goodrich, John Hodgeskins?
For in King Henry's days, they were all alike, all Mass Priests, and yet all
opposite to the Popes Supremacy.


PHIL. There is one reason of all.


ORTHOD. If the Consecrated were capable, what say you to the Consecrators?
were not they sufficient? If they were not, then what will become of Heath,
Bonner, and Thurlby?


PHIL. They were sufficient.


ORTHOD. But were the Consecrations performed by a sufficient number of
assistants?


PHIL. Yes verily.


ORTHOD. Then it seems that King Henry did not disanull the Canons of the
Church, which required that a Bishop should be Consecrated by three.


PHIL. No truly; but rather established them by act of Parliament as Doctor
Sanders acknowledges, speaking of Henry the eight. Sand. de schi. l. 3. p. 296.
Cum ab Ecclesia and sede Apostclica regnum suum diuisisset, decreuit ne
quisquam electus in Episcopum bullas pontificias, vel mandatum Apo^^olicum de
consecratione requireret, sed regium tantum diploma vt adferret, secundum quod
a tribus Episcopis, cum consensu Metropolitae ordinatus iubebatur lege
con^it^orum, facta ad imitationem antiquorum Canonum esse verus Episcopus, nec
alto modo ordinatum pro Episcopo agnosci oportere. That is, Henry the eighth,
when he had divided his kingdom, from the Church and see Apostolic, decreed
that no man elected Bishop should require the Popes Bulls, or mandate
Apostolic, concerning his Consecration, but that he should bring only the
kings letters patents according to which being ordained of three Bishops, with
the consent of the Metropolitan, he was enacted to be a true Bishop by the law
of Parliament made to the imitation of the ancient Canons, and that no man
otherwise Consecrated should be acknowledged for a Bishop.


ORTHOD Then it seems that all the Bishops in King Henry's time were
Consecrated by three.


PHIL. How could it be otherwise? you have heard out of Doctor Sanders, that
the Canons required three, the act of Parliament required three, and it
appears by the 25. Hen. 8. cap. 20.
act itself, that if any Archbishop or Bishops, did not within twenty days
next after that the kings letters patents came to their hands, Consecrate the
person presented with all due circumstance, they incurred the penalty of a
praemunire: therefore we may presume that the practice of those days was
continually by three.


ORTHOD. SVrely it was then practiced from time to time, as may appear by
record, whereof I will give a taste, beginning from Cranmer.

Anno 1533. Thom. Ex Regist. Cran. fol. 5.
Cran. Cons. Arch. of Cant. 30. Mart. by John Lincoln. John Exon. Henry Assaph.
Anno 1534. Rowland Ibid. fol. 156
Lee Cons. B. of Lichfield. 19. April. by Thom Cant. John Lincoln. Christ.
Sidon.
Anno 1535. George Brown Cons. Arch. Dublin 19. Mart. by Thom. Cant. e Ibid.
fol. 186.
John Roff. Nich* Sarum.
Anno 1536. Rob. Ibid. fol. 197.
Warton cons. B. of Assaph. 20. Iul. by Tho. Cant. Ioh. Bangor. Will. Norwic.
An. 1537. Rob. Ibid. fol. 200.
Holgate cons. B. of Landaff. 25. Mart. by Ioh. Roffen. Nich. Sarum. Ioh.
Bangor.
An. 1537. Henr. Ibid. fol. 215.
Holbeck cons. B. of Bristow. 24. Mart. by John Roff. Hug. Wigorn. Rob. Assaph.
An. 1538. Will. Ibid. fol. 214.
Finch cons. Suf. of Taunton. 7. April. by John Roff. Robert. Assaph. Will.
Colchest.
An. 1540. Tho. Ibid. fol. 261.
Thurlby cons. B. of Westminster. 9. December. by Edm. Land. Nich. Roff. Ioh. Bedf.
An. 1541. Ioh. Ibid. fol. 271.
Wakeman cons. B. of Gloucest. 25. Sept. by Thom. Cant. Edm. Land. Tho.
Westmonast.
An. 1541. Arth. Ibid. fol. 278.
Buckley cons. B. of Bangor. 19. Febr. by Ioh. Sarum. Will. Meneuensis. Ioh.
Glocest.
An. 1542. Paul. Ibid. fol. 285.
Bush cons. B. of Bristow. 25. Iun. by Nich. Roff. Thom. Westmon. Ioh. Bedf.
An. 1545. Ant. Fol. 310.
Kitchen cons. B. of Lan. 3. Mat. 37. H. 8. by Thom. Westminster. Thom. Sidon.
Suffrag. Salop.



NOw from the Consecrators, let us proceed to the form of Consecration, 3
and consider whether the ancient Canons, which you approve and urge, were
altered in King Henrtes time.


PHIL. It does not appear by the Statute, that there was any alteration: For
it was 25. Hen. 8. c. 20.
enacted, that the Consecration should be solemnized with all due circumstance.
And moreover, that the Consecrators should give to the Consecrated, all
Benedictions, Ceremonies and things requisite for the same. And surely if there
had been any alteration in things essential, Doct. Sand. de schis. l. ^. p.
297.
Sanders speaking purposely of this very point, would not have concealed it.
But he says plainly, It was his will, (speaking of King H. 8) that the
Ceremony and solemn Unction, should as yet be used in Episcopal
Consecration, after the manner of the Church. And again more plainly, Sand de
schis. lib. 2. p. 205.
Primo loco sancierunt, vt cum Episcopi, ac Presbyteri Anglicani, ritu fere
Catholico (excepta R. Pontificis obedientia quam omnes obnegabant) ad illud
vsque tempus ordinati fuissent, in posterum alia omnino forma ab ipsis
praescripta, Ordinationes fierent authoritate a puero Rege, adid accepta. That
is, First they decreed, (speaking of K. Edwards time) That whereas the Bishops
and Priests of England, had been ordained even unto that time, almost after the
Catholic rite, (excepting the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, which they all
dented) hereafter Ordinations should be made altogether after an other form,
by them prescribed, by authority which they received to that purpose from the
King being a child. But the 1. Mariae sess. 2. cap. 2.
Statute of Q. Mary puts all out of doubt, Enacting, That all such divine
Service and Administration of Sacraments, as were most commonly used in this
Realm of England in the last year of King Henry the 8. should be used and
frequented through the whole Realm of England, and all other the Queens
dominions, and no other, in any other manner, form or degree. Now the makers of
this Statute were persuaded, that holy Order was a Sacrament: therefore holy
Orders were ministered in Q. Mary's time, as they were in the last year of K.
Henry. But all good Catholics will confess, that in Q. Mary's time, the true
essential form of Consecration was observed: Therefore I grant, that it was
also used all the time of King Henry.


ORTHOD. If the persons were capable, and consecrated by a sufficient number of
Canonical consecrators, according to the form of your Church, then you must*
needs judge their Consecration effectual, and them Canonical Bishops.


PHIL. Our Church in Q Mary's time, did so judge of them: for most of her old
Bishops were made Sand. de Schis. l. 2. page 209.
in Schismate Henriciano; Yet they were allowed; and the new (even Cardinal
Poole among the rest) did all derive their Consecration from the old: yet were
they all approved by our holy Father the Bishop of Rome; and by name B. Bonner,
and B. Thurlby, to whom he gives honorable testimony, in his Commission, for
the proceeding against Cranmer.


ORTHOD. Then, if we can derive our Bishops from any three in King Henry's
reign, before the banishing of the Pope or after, you must acknowledge them to
be Canonical.


PHIL. It seems so.


ORTHOD. Or else Bonner and his coequals must lie in the dust, and all the
Bishops made in Q. Mary's time, must eternally be cancelled out of the
Catalogue of Bishops. Hitherto of K. Henry's time; Proceed we now to the
Bishops in K. Edwards days, and consider whether those were Gold or lead.


CHAP. XI.
Of the Bishops Consecrated in the time of King Edward the sixth.

PHIL. THe Bishops in King Edwards time we take for no Bishops.


ORTHOD. No* But you must, there is no remedy And for the more perspicuitie,
let us distinguish them into certain ranckes. The first of such as were made
both Priests and Bishops in K. Henry's time, and were continued in King Edwards
The second of such as were Priests in K. Henry's time, and made Bishops in K.
Edwards; To these you may add a third, of such, (if any such you find) as were
made both Priests and Bishops in the days of K. Edward The first you have
confessed already to be Canonical; therefore let us come to the second, in
which are those blessed Saints and glorious Martyrs, Ridley, Hooper, and
Ferrar, concerning whom first I demand, whether they were in the order of
Priesthood or no?


PHIL. Yes, father Parsons grants it, saying, Part. ^. Con^^r^. part. 3.
cap. 14. page 20^.
Ridley studied at Cambridge, and there was made Priest, travailed over the sea
to Paris, and returning again, became King Henties Chaplain. Likewise John
Hooper ( as may be seen by b P^^^. ^uo supra ^. 6. ^. 3^5.
Fox his relation of him) was a Priest in Oxford in the days of King Henry the
eight, So Robert * Ferrar Priest and Chaplain to Cranmer in King Henry's time;
c P^r^* quo su^ra p. 336.
Thus I confess, that they were Priests, but I deny that they were Bishops,
for father Parsons speaking of the ^oxian Calendar, and Saints of the month of
February, in which number were Hooper and Ferrar, says, * Among Fox his d
Quo supra. p. 340.
Saints, there is neither erem^^icall nor monas^icall life, no^ solitude either
from the world or women, nor any one so much as pretending the title of
v^rginitie in any se^e, nor any true Bishop indeed; if their ordination be
examined. For beside Cranmer, other Bishops or Clergy men were there none, of
all the pack that was burned.


ORTHOD. What say you then to father ^atimer, who was ordained in the same
manner, in all respects as Bonner was? Though he had now relinguished his
Bishopric, yet still according to your own principles, he was a true
Bishop (...) respect of the Episcopal character But to prosecute the present
point* what mislike you in Ridley* Hooper and Ferrar? you have already
confessed, that they were Priests, why should you deny them to be Bishops?


PHIL. The Popes Commissioners Vnpriested them in Queen Mary's time but would
not Vnbishop them, thereby acknowledging their Priestly function, received in
King Henry's time, but denying their Episcopal, received in King Edwards: as
may appear by the words of Doctor Brook Bishop of Gloucester the Popes
subdelegate, to Ridley at his degradation. We must against our will^s proceed
according to our Commission to disgrading, taking from you the dignity of
Priesthood, for we take you for no Bishop, as John A^^^ and Monup 1604.
Fox your own historian records.


ORTH. Was not he and all the rest of them Consecrated by a sufficient number?


PHIL. Yes undoubtedly; for that law was always observed in King Edwards time,
as Doctor Sanders confesses: (...) de (...) ^. 3. page ^97.
C^remontam autem and solennem vnctionem more Ecclesiastico adhuc in
consecratione illa adhiberi voluit, quam postea profi^^^ns in p^^^^ Edouardus
Sextus sustulit, and proea Caluinicas aliquot deprecationes substituit; ser^ata
tamen semper priori de numero presen^^um Episcoporum qui ^anu^ ordinando
impo^erent, lege: that is, It was his will (speaking of King Henry the eight)
that the ceremony and solemn unction should as yet be used in Episcopal
consecration* after the manner of the Church: which King Edward profiting from
better to worse, did afterward take away, and instead thereof substitute
certain Caluinicall deprecations; yet the former law concerning the number of
Bishops which should impose hands upon the ordained, was always observed.


ORTHOD If you or any other dare deny it, it may be justified by authentical
records* Out of which behold a true abstract of the consecration of those
renowned Martyrs.

Nich: Ex Registro Cranm f. 321.
Ridley Cons: 5. September. 1547. 1. Ed: 6. by Henry Lincoln. John Bedford. Thom.
Sidon.
Rob. Ibidem fol. 327.
Ferrar Cons: 9. September. 1549. 2. Ed: 6. by Thom. Canterb: Henry Lincoln.
Nich: Roff.
John Ibidem fol. 330.
Hooper Cons. 8. Mart. 1550. by Thom. Canterb: Nich: London. John Roff.



To which, let us add those worthy confessors, John Poynet, John Scory, and

Miles Couerdale. John Ibidem fol. 331.
Poynet Cons. 29. June 1550. by Thom. Canterb. Nich: London. Arthur Bangor.
John Ibidem fol. 334.
Scory, and Miles Couerdale. Cons. 30. Aug. 1551. by Thom: Canterb. Nich:
London. John Bedford.



NOw seeing the Consecrated were capable, and the Consecrators a 2.
sufficient number, why should not the Consecration be effectual? For if
Cranmer or any other lawful Bishop, by his Commission with sufficient
assistants could make canonical Bishops in the days of K. Henry, as you have
confessed: what reason can you give, why the same Cranmer, or the like Bishop,
with the like assistants should not make the like in the days of K. Ed?


PHIL. Because the case was altered: for in King Henry's time, Ordinations were
made with Sanders de Schis. l. 3. page 297. and l. 2. page 205.
ceremony and solemn unction, after the Ecclesiastical manner, which king
Edward took clean away, and in place thereof appointed certain Caluinicall
deprecations, as was before declared.


ORTHO. Those which Sanders calls Caluinicall deprecations, are godly, and
religious prayers, answerable to the Apostolic practice. For whereas the
Scripture witnesses, that Act. 1. 24.
Matthias, the Act. 6. 6.
Deacons, and Act. 13. 3. and 14. 23.
others, received imposition of hands with prayers; Salmeron the Jesuit
expounds the places thus: Salm. in 2. Tim. 1. disp. 2.
intelligendum est de precibus quibus a deo petebant, vt efficeret illos bonos
Episcopos, Presbyteros, and Diaconos, potestatemque illis ad ca munera
prestaret: that is, It is to be understood, of prayers whereby they desired of
God, that he would make them good Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and would give
them ability to perform those offices. Such prayers are used in the Church of
England. As for example in the ordering of Priests.

ALmighty God giver of all things, which by thy holy spirit, have appointed l
See the book of making and cons^crating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
diverse orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold these thy
servants, now called to the office of Priesthood, and replenish them so with
the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word and good
example, they may faithfully serve thee in this office to the glory of thy
Name, and profit of thy congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus
Christ, etc. And in the Consecration of Bishops.

ALmighty Ibidem.
God, etc. Grant we beseech thee to this thy servant, such grace, that he may
evermore be ready to spread abroad the Gospel, and glad tidings of
reconcilement to God, and to use the authority given unto him, not to destroy,
but to save; not to hurt, but to help: so that he as a wise and a faithful
servant, giving to thy family meat in due season, may at the last be received
into joy, etc. These and the like are the prayers which Sanders traduceth.
Wherefore we may with comfort apply to our selves the saying of Saint Peter;
1. (...). ^* 14.
If we be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are we, for the spirit
of glory and of God, rests upon us, which on your part is evil spoken of,
but on our part is glorified. Thus, that which you impute to them as a blemish,
is perfect beauty. But what else do you mislike in their ordinations?


PHIL. They did not observe the Ecclesiastical manner.


ORTHOD. In the third and fourth year of Edward the sixth, there was an 3. and
4. Edward ^. (...). 10.
act made to abolish certain superstitious books, and among the rest, the
Ordinals. About the same time was made another Ibidem ^. 12.
act, for the ordering of Ecclesiastiall Ministers, the effect whereof was,
that such form of consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as by six
Prelates, and six other learned in Gods Law should be agreed upon, and set
out under the great Seal of England within a time limited, should lawfully be
used and none other. In the fifth and sixth of his reign was made another 5. and
6. Edward ^. cap. 1.
act for the explaining and perfecting of the book of common prayer and
administration of the Sacraments, which book so explained, was annexed to the
act or statute, with a form or manner of making and consecrating Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Which as at this The book of common prayer and
of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons contains in it, etc* ca^. 36.
day, so then, was not esteemed another distinct book, from the book of
common prayer; but they were both jointly reputed as one book, and so
established by act of Parliament. In the first of Queen Mary, by the 1. Mar^^
^es. 2. cap. 2.
repealing of this act, the book was disanulled; but it was 1. Eliz. c. 2.
established again in the first of Q. Elizabeth; and 8. Eliz. c. 1.
confirmed in the eight of her reign; so that all the Ministers of England are
ordered according to that book: concerning which I would know wherein it
transgresses the Ecclesiastical manner. Sanders says, that King Edward took
away the Ceremony. What Ceremony? If he understand the Ceremony of imposition
of hands, he slandereth King Edward: If he mean their blessing ofrings and
Crosiers; the gravity of that sacred action may well spare them: as for the
solemn unction, your selves confess it to be Bell* de Sacram in gen^re l. 1.
cap. 24.
accidental. Other of your Ceremonies being partly superfluous, partly
superstitious: the wisdom of our Church has discreetly and religiously pared
away, establishing such a form as is holy and acceptable in the sight of God.
But whereas you grant that the persons were capable, and the consecrators
Canonical, it behooves you to discover some essential defect in our form,
or else you must of necessity approve our consecration.


PHIL. Doctor Kel. reply to Doctor Sut^^f. fol. 31* b.
Kellison says, that in King Edwards time, neither matter nor form of
ordination was used, and so none were truly ordained, much less had they
commission to Preach Heresy, and so could not send others to Preach: whence it
follows, that all the superintendents and Ministers are without calling and
vocation.


ORTHOD. What means Kellison by the matter of ordination?


PHIL. According to the doctrine of the Catholic Church holy order is a
Sacrament, and every Sacrament of the new Law consists of things and words,
as the matter and the form, which are so certain and determined of God, that
it is not lawful to change them. Now in ordination the matter is a sensible
sign: as for example, imposition of hands, which Bell. de sacram. ord. c. 9.
Bellarmine calls the matter essential.


ORTHOD. Others of your own men are of another opinion: for Sal. t. 15. disp.
2. in 2. Tim. 1.
Salmeron the Jesuit having proposed the question, brings reasons for both
sides, but seems to incline to the contrary. Fab. Incarn. Scrut. Sacerd. page
120.
Fabius Incarnatus asks this question, how many things are of the substance
of order, and answers that six. But imposition of hands is none of the six.
Manual. c. 22. page 585.
Nauarrus speaking of imposition of hands, says: Illa non est de substantia
Sacramenti, that is: it is not of the substance of the Sacrament. For which
opinion he alleges Scotus. But if imposition of hands be the matter of
ordination, then Kellison is guilty of lying and slandering, when he says
that in King Edwards days, the matter of ordination was not used. For Sanders
himself, though a shameless fellow, yet confesses that in the days of King
Edward, the former law, concerning the number of Bishops which should impose
hands upon the ordained was always observed. A point so clear, that it might
be justified by many records: but what need we go to records, seeing it is
a plain case, that the very book of ordination which was made and established
in the days of King Edward, commands imposition of hands? wherefore if the
essential matter be imposition of hands, then I must conclude out of your
own principles, that in King Edwards days the essential matter was used.


PHIL. In the ordering of a Deacon, there is not only imposition of hands,
but also the reaching of the Gospels: so in ordering of a Priest, not only
imposition of hands, but also the reaching of the instruments, that is, of the
Patten and Challice: and both these Ceremonies are essential, as Bell. quo
supra. ^0. Nota.
Bellarmine proves. Therefore why may we not say, that in Episcopal
Consecration, not only imposition of hands, but other ceremonies also belong to
the essential matter?


ORTHOD. What other ceremonies I beseech you? do you mean the holy oil,
wherewith the head of the consecrated is anointed with these words: Sacrarum
C^rem. l. 1. sect. 2. pontific. p. 96.
Let thy head be anointed and consecrated with celestial benediction? or the
ring which is blessed with prayer and holy Tum aspergit ipsum annulum aqua
benedicta. Pontificale* page 105.
water, and put upon his finger with these words: Ibid. p. 106.
Accipe annulum, fidei signaculum: Receive the Ring, the seal of faith? or the
Crosier, delivered in these words: Pontificale page 105.
receive the staff of the Pastoral office? If you mean these or the like,
and urge them as essential, you must give us leave to reject them, because
they are only human inventions* You told us before out of Bellarmine, that the
matter of ordination is certain and determined of God; now where shall we
find the determinations of God, but in the book of God? we find in holy
Scripture imposition of hands, and we embrace it as Apostolical; as for your
rings and Crosiers, when you can demonstrate them out of the book of God, we
will then accept them as the determinations of God: in the mean time, we
cannot acknowledge them for the essential matter of ordination. But now from
the matter, let us come to the form.


4. PHI. IT is agreed upon, (...)
that the form consists in the words which are uttered, while the sensible
sign is used, and they are the very same, whereby the spiritual power is
given.


ORTHOD. I hope you will not say, that these words: receive the ring, or
receive the staff, concern the essential form, tell us therefore in what
words the true form consists, that so we may the better examine the speech
of Kellison.


PHIL. The words may be diverse, yet the sense the same, and this diversity of
words may severally signify the substance of the Sacrament: as for example,
the Eastern (...)
Church baptizeth in these words, Let this servant of Christ, be baptized in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. The Latin
Church in these words: I baptize thee, etc. Here are two forms of words, but
each of them contains the true, and substantial form of baptism. So in
ordination, the Eastern Bishops instructed of their ancestors confer the
orders of a Bishop Priest, and Deacon, Per Salm qu^ su^^a.
orationem deprecatoriam, By the way of prayer: whereas we after the manner of
the Roman Church, do confer them, Per modum imperandi, in the imperative
mood, by way of command: and yet the spiritual power, may be conveyed by
both. For Pope (...)
Innocent teaches, that the Scripture mentions only imposition of hands and
prayer; as for other things used in ordination, he says they were invented by
the Church: otherwise it had been sufficient, if the ordainer had said only,
be thou a Priest, or be thou a Deacon; but seeing the Church has invented
other forms, they are to be observed.


ORTHOD. By what words is the Episcopal power given in the Church of Rome?


PHIL. By these words, receive the holy Ghost, because they are (...)
used when the Bishop imposes hands. And therefore as Priests in their
ordination, receive the holy Ghost, that is, (as Bell* de sacr. ^^genere. ca
26. (...) nega^^^.
Bellarmin expounds it out of Chrysostom and Cyrill^a ghostly power consisting
in forgiving and retaining of sins; so a Bishop in his Consecration receives
the holy Ghost, that is, A ghostly power consisting in the performance of those
things which are reserved properly to Bishops, amongst which the power of
ordination is most eminent.


ORTHOD. If you call these words the form of Consecration, then you must
acknowledge that not only the matter, but also the right form of Consecration,
was used in the days of King Edward, (for these words were then used while the
Bishops imposed hands, as appears by the book:) and consequently you must
confess that Ridley, Hooper, and Ferrar, were rightly ordained Bishops, and
moreover, that Kellison is a notorious slanderer.

5. THus much of the second rank. Now come we to the third, wherein we may
place such (if any such be found) as were made both Priests and Bishops, in the
days of king Edward.


PHIL. We think that no man can possibly have the order of a Bishop which has
not the right order of Priesthood, but the Priesthood conferred in King Edwards
time was no Priesthood, because they wanted the authority to offer the blessed
sacrifice of the Mass, therefore those Priests were not capable of the
Episcopal order.


ORTHO. I answer first that seeing that King Edward rained but six years and
five months, it is likely that most of them which were advanced in his time to
be Bishops, were before his time in the order of Priesthood. Secondly, if any
be produced which were not, yet it shall be justified (God willing) when we come
to the point, that the order of Priesthood conferred in the days of King
Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and King James is the true ministry of the Gospel,
and that your sacrificing Priesthood is sacrilegious, and abominable. In the
mean time, you must give us leave to hold that the ministry of the Church of
England, is holy in the sight of God, and justifiable in the sight of man.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Bishops Consecrated in the days of Queen Marie.

THe lineall descent has led us to the Bishops in Queen Mary's time,
concerning which, shall I crave your judgment?


PHIL. You know it already, they were all Canonical.


ORTHOD. For the more distinct proceeding, let us divide them into two ranckes,
the old Bishops, and the new: the old, I call such as being consecrated before
her time, were continued in her time; the new, which were Consecrated in her
time.


PHIL. All which were allowed for Bishops in Queen Mary's time, whether old or
new, were Canonical.


ORTHO. The old Bishops were all made in the days of K. Henry the eighth, and
almost all in those very times, which you brand with imputation of schism and
heresy: when none could be Consecrated, unless he did swear to the king
against the Pope. Wherefore seeing you judged both Consecrators, and
Consecrated schismatic, and heretical, and yet esteem them Canonical,
your objections of schism and heresy, must eternally be silenced in the
question of Canonical Bishops. For if these crimes can frustrate a
Consecration, then their Consecration was frustrate, and they were no Bishops,
or if they were Bishops and Canonical, then all the Bishops in King Henry's
time, were likewise Canonical. Moreover, some of them whom you so commend*
were Bishops in King Edwards time, as for example. Thomas Thurlby, whom King
Henry promoted to be Bishop of Westminster, was advanced by King Edward to the
Bishopric of Norwich, and afterward preferred by Queen Mary to the
Bishopric of Ely, and moreover to be one of her privy Council. Yea some of
them had the place of a Bishop in the days of Queen Elizabeth; Namely Anthony
Kitchen, who in King Henry's time was made Bishop of Landaff, kept his
dignities and place in the days of K. Edward, continued the same all the
reign of Queen Mary, and so till the day of his death, which was in the fifth
year of Queen Elizabeth. Wherefore in justifying the old Bishops, you
justify al generally which were Consecrated in King Henry's days, and some
which continued in King Edwards and Queen Elizabeth's: But now from the old,
let us come to the new.


PHIL. QVeene Mary advanced Holiman bishop of Bristow, Coats bishop of 2
Chester, Watson bishop of Lincoln, Morris bishop of Rochester, Morgan bishop
of S. Dauis, Brook bishop of Gloucester, Glin bishop of Bangor, Christophorson
bishop of Chichester, David Poole bishop of Peterborow, Cardinal Poole bishop
of Canterbury, and others.


ORTHOD. And these reverend Prelates, Bush bishop of Bristow, Tailor bishop of
Lincoln* Scory bishop of Chichester, Barlow bishop of Bathe and Wells,
Couerdale bishop of Exeter, and Harly bishop of Hereford, with sundry others,
were at that time forced to leave their bishoprics; For what cause? partly,
for not yielding to the Pope, and Popish Religion; partly, because they were
married, which Greg. Mart. d^s^. c. ^5. ^. (...).
Greg. Martin calls a polluting of holy Orders, though S. Paul says* it is
honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But let us see the
Consecration of your new bishops.


PHIL. I will begin with that renowned Prelate Cardinal Poole, whose
Consecration follows.

Anno 1555. Reginald Ex Regist. Poli fol. 3.
Poole cons. Archb. Cant. 22. Mart. by Nichol Arch. Ebor. Thom. Eltens. Edmund.
Land. Rich. Wigorn. Ioh. Lincoln. Mauric. Roff. Thom. Asaph.
Anno 1557. Thom* Regist. Poli. fol. 10.
Watson. David Ibid. fol. 12.
Pole.
Cons. B. 15. Aug. by Nich. Ebor. Thom. Eli. Will. Bangor.
Anno 1557. Ioh. *Christophorson. cons. B. 21. No. by Edmund Land. Tho. Elien.
Mauric. Roff.




ORTHOD. All these derive their Consecration from bishops, which were made in
the time of the pretended Schism, and some of them from Cranmer himself:
therefore you must either acknowledge all them, and namely Cranmer for
Canonical or neither Cardinal Poole, nor any of the rest made in Queen
Mary's time, can be Canonical.


THE THIRD BOOK* OF THE BISHOPS CONSEcrated in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and
of our gracious Sovereign King JAMES.
CHAP. I.
Of the Bishops deposed in the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
with an answer to certain odious imputations concerning some Antecedents, and
Consequents of their Depositions.

PHIL. THe revolution of times has brought us to the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, even to that black and doleful day, wherein all the Bishops of
England, all, I say, one only excepted, were deposed from their degrees and
dignities: Sand. de schis. lib. 3. p. 285. D^cent^^ aureos, which I translate
200. Nobles, because as I take it, he means 100. marks, according to the
Statute, 1. Eliz. cap. 2. though he fail in some points of it.
For, a great penalty was inflicted upon such as should after the Feast of S.
John Baptis^ 1559. say or hear Mass, or procure any other Ecclesiastical
Office whatsoever, after the old rite, or administer any Sacrament after the
Roman manner, to wit, That he which offended against that Law, for the first
time should pay 200 Nobles, or be in bonds six Months: for the second 400.
Nobles, or a year in bonds: for the third, he should be in perpetual prison,
and forfeite all his goods; By which means it came to pass, That at the day
prescribed, the holy and divine Offices ceased to be performed publicly
through the whole Kingdom. And because the Bishops would not consent to those
impieties, nor affirm upon their Oaths, that they believed in their
consciences, That the Queen only was the Supreme gouernesse of the Church of
England, under Christ, they were all, save one, shortly after deposed from
their Degree and dignitte, and committed to certain prisons, and custodies,
whereupon they are all at this day dead, with the long tediousness of their
miseries; The names of which most glorious Confessors, I will set down, that
the thing may be had in everlasting remembrance. First of all Nicholas
Archbishop of York, and a little before that time, Lord Chancellor of
England, then Edmund Bonner Bishop of London, and Tunstall of Durham, John of
Winton, Thomas of Lincoln, Thurlby of Ely, Turberuill of Exeter, Borne of
Bath, Pole of Peterborow, Baine of Lichfield, Cuthbert of Chester, Oglethorp of
Carlisle, and Thomas Goldwell of S. Asaph, etc.


ORTH. Here are two things to be discussed; The deposing of the old Bishops,
and advancing of the new. Concerning the first, you make a grievous complaint
that they were not only deposed, but also used with great indignity, both
before their deposing and after. Wherefore let us first consider the
circumstances, and then come to the deposition it self.


PHIL. I say that a Grievous penalty was inflicted upon such as should after
the feast of Saint John Baptist 1559. say or hear Mass, or procure any other
Ecclesisticall office whatsoever after the old rite.


ORTHOD. You mask your novelty under the vizard of antiquity, and call that
the old rite, which was but yesterday; but proceed.


PHIL. This penalty extended to such as should administer any Sacrament, after
the Roman manner.


ORT. Saint Paul says; 1 Cor. 11. 23
That which I received of the Lord, that deliver I unto you; teaching us that
Sacraments must be ministered in such manner, as we have received of the Lord:
we are not tied to the rite of Rome, or any other City or Country, but only
to the institution of Jesus Christ: If Rome follow this, we will follow it
with Rome; if Rome forsake this, then farewell Rome: But what was the penalty?


PHIL. To wit, That he which offended against the law, for the first time
should pay two hundred crowns, or be in bonds six months; for the second,
four hundred crowns, or a year in bonds; for the third, he should be in
perpetual prison, and forfeite all his goods.


ORTHOD. What has that good Lady done, which does not become a most virtuous
and gracious Prince? has she made laws to establish religion? So did Codex
l. 1. tit. 1. Cunctos.
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius. Has she inflicted a penalty upon the
infringers? So did August, Ep. 48.
Constantine upon the Donatists, That their goods should be confiscate: so did
August. Ep. 50.
Theodosius upon the Donatists likewise, Ten pound of gold, to be paid to the
Emperors Exchequer. And these laws are highly commended by Saint Austin.
Indeed he was some times of opinion, that they were to be dealt withal, only
by Ep. 48. verbo agendum, disputatione pugnandum.
persuasions, not by penalties; but when his fellow Bishops laid before him so
plain examples of so many cities, infected with Donatisme, and all reclaimed
by help of imperial laws, he His exemplis a collegis meis mihi propositis
cessi. ibidem.
changed his mind, and yielded unto them. Then he perceived, that the
Circumcellions, which were like unto mad men, were brought into their right
wits again and made good Catholics, by being bound as it were with the
chains of imperial laws: then he perceived that others being in a
spiritual lethargy, were awakened with the severity of Imperial laws: then
he perceived, that the Kings of the earth serve Christ, even by making laws
for Christ. So did that gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth; wherein how mildely and
mercifully she proceeded, you may learn by looking back to her sister Queen
Mary, who was not content to inflict a pecuniary mulct, or a little
imprisonment upon those of the contrary religion, but tied the^ to stakes, and
burned the^ to ashes in flaming fire.


PHIL. As though a life lingting in disgrace were not worse then a present
death: For Defense of Engl. Catholics. p. 15.
Fourteen noble and most worthy Bishops, inferior in virtue, and learning to
none in Europe, were all deposed from their honors, and high calling, and most
of them imprisoned, and spitefully used in all respects.


ORTHOD. FIrst, let us consider what they deserved, and secondly 2
how they were served. How well they deserved at the Queens hands may appear
by their behavior in three points, concerning the Coronation, Disputation and
Excommunication. First when the Queen was to be crowned, they all conspired
together, refusing to perform such solemnity, as by them of duty was to be
performed at her Coronation: Owen Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlill only excepted.


PHIL. Had they not cause to refuse? Sand: de Schis. l. 3. page 272.
So soon as she came to the crown, she presently revealed her mind in
religion, both by many other means, and especially in that she straightway
silenced the Catholic Preachers: and suffered the heretics to return into
the kingdom from diverse places, where they were in banishment: Moreover she
gave charge to a certain Bishop about to perform the holy rite before her,
and now standing at the Altar attyred in holy vestments, that he should not
eleuate the Consecrated hoaste: whereupon it came to pass, that the
Archbishop of York, whose office it was (Cardinal Poole Archbishop of
Canterbury being departed this transitory life) to annoint and Consecrate her
to be Queen, denied his help, and the rest of the Bishops likewise, al
saving one, and he almost the last among them.


ORTHO. Your elevation is referred to adoration, which is Idolatry; therefore
if she forbad it, as also the Preaching of error, and commanded the Preaching
of truth, she did but her duty: For as Saint August: contra Chresconium l. 3.
c. 51.
Austin says: Princes may command that which is good, and forbid that which
is evil within their own kingdoms, not in civil affairs only, but in
matters pertaining to divine religion also. But if it were so that the Queen
therein had committed an error, if it were so that Popery were true religion;
yet she was the lawful Queen, the Kingdom descended to her by right of
inheritance; the Nobles and commons according to their duty acknowledged her
for Queen, she was proclaimed, by order taken by the Lords and the Archb. of
York himself, then Lord Chancelour of England; what reason then had the
Bishops to deny her that solemnity, which was never denied to any of her noble
progenitors? If she had pulled the Miters from their heads, for refusing to
set the Diadem upon her head, had not this been a just reward for a due
desert? Hitherto of the first point, that is, the Coronation.

SEcondly, it was the Queens pleasure, that there should be a solemn 3
disputation between the Popish Bishops, or some other Champions appointed by
them on the one part, and other learned divines of our religion, on the other
part; but the Bishops with one accord most obstinately refused the encounter.


PHIL. They had reason: for (as they then answered for themselves) It Sand. de
Schis. l. 3. p. 283.
was not fit that those things which for many ages had been defined by so
famous judgments of Popes, Councels and Fathers, should now come again into
question and disputation.


ORTH. You tell us of Popes, Councels, and Fathers, but I hear no mention at
all of the Scripture: truly Philodox, we build not our faith upon Popes nor
Councels, nor Fathers, but only upon the blessed and sacred word of God,
registered in the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. but for the better
understanding of this word, we make honorable account of ancient Councels and
Fathers, yet so that we put an infinite difference between them and the word
of the living God. For the word of God is infallible; it can neither deceive,
nor be deceived; but the word of man is subject to error: therefore we must
try all things, and hold that which is good, and the touchstone of all is the
word of God. Neither are we afraid of the Councels and Fathers: you bear the
world in hand that all make for you, but upon manifold and just experience it
proves otherwise. As for the Popes, if you mean the ancient Bishops of Rome,
we regard them with reverence, and if their true writings were extant, we
would willingly embrace them: but as for your late Popes, we little respect
them. Moreover, if your Bishops had for them the former definitions of Fathers
and Councels, they might more easily have convinced their adversaries in
disputation; this should have been a spur unto them, and not a bridle.


PHIL. As it was not fit to call the former definitions in question again, so
Sand. quo supra.
much less was it fit, that those things which ought to have been discussed
in the Universities by certain order before the learned and judicious, should
be handled before the people which was unskillful, and desirous of novelty,
which uses to define every thing rather by outcryes, then by arguments.


ORTHOD. As though this disputation had been intended before the rude and
barbarous multitude, and not rather before the most honorable, grave, wise and
judicious in the whole Kingdom. The truth is, that the Bishops doubted the
cause, they feared that they were not able to defend it by the Scriptures.


PHIL. Sand. de schis. l. 3. page 284.
They said that against the contentious, and such as would not rest in the
judgment of the Church, little good could be done by disputation. And verily
no marvel if they were loath to have trial by disputation, when the Judge
Sand. abidem Pollinus l. 4. c. 5. p. 420. Eudemon Ioh. Parallel. c. 5 p. 244.
Nich. Baconum non haereticum modo aclaicum hominem, sed, etc. vide infra.
was Nicholas Bacon, a layman, an Heretic, altogether ignorant of Divinity:
the most reverend Archbishop of York assisting for fashion sake only. The day
came, which was the third of April, there was infinite concourse, unequal
laws of disputation were prescribed of the Heretics only; nothing was done
with order and reason, the time slipped away with declamations on both sides,
the profane judge moderateth all things as it pleases him, all comes to
nothing, and so the Heretics proceed in their madness.


ORTH. These are figures of rehetoricke, wherewith you use to embellish your
speeches, as it were with precious stones. Whosoever will hold with the Pope,
is presently with you a good Catholic and a very learned man; but let him be
never so wise, learned, and judicious, if he love God, his Prince and country
better then the Pope, he shall be reproached with ignorance and heresy; as
appears in that honorable personage Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England, a man famous for wisdom piety, and the zeal of Gods
glory. But why do you blemish him? because he had the favor of a gracious
Prince? you might have learned of Prou. 22. 11.
Solomon: He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the
King shall be his friend? can you blame him, for that he was designed by his
Sovereign, to be a moderatour at the disputation? you should rather have
considered the Queens great mildness, and gracious proceeding, in that she
vouchsafed to join with him an assistant (as Sanders confesses) one of your
own Religion, a man of eminent note in Church and common wealth, who stood
not for a cipher, or for fashion sake, but was armed with authority, and had
power to provide that the Papists should have full liberty to speak their
minds before that great and honorable assembly. How was it possible that the
business should be contrived with greater equality and indifferency?


PHIL. Should a lay man judge of Bishops, and profound Divines?


ORTH. Did not Sozom. l. 4. cap. 5.
Basil, Bishop of Ancyra, and other Bishops dispute with Photinus before
certain noble men, which the Emperor had appointed to be Judges? did not
Saint Breuic. Coll. in prefatione.
Austine dispute with the Donatists, Marcellinus the tribune being Judge? did
he not dispute with August. epist. 178.
Pascentius the Arrian, Laurentius a secular man being Judge? And if it please
you to look into the volumes of Councels, you shall find, that in the fourth
general Council, being the first at Chalcedon, noble men of the Apud. Bin. t.
2 page 1.
Laity were appointed Judges, whose names are set down in the beginning of the
first action. The like is to be found in the sixth general Council being the
third at Apud. Bin. ^. 3. page 7.
Constantinople. And in the third general Council, being the first at
Ephesus, Theodosius and Valentintan appointed Conc. Ephesians. t. 2. c. 32 Bin. t. 3
page 732.
Candidianus an Earl to be the Judge.


PHIL. These were Judges after a sort: But how? that may appear by the words
of the Emperor concerning Candidianus: Ibidem.
Ad Sacram vestram Synodum abire iussimus; sed ea lege and condition vt cum
quaestionibus and controuersijs quae circafidei dogmata incidunt, nihil
quicquam commune habeat: i. we have commanded him to go unto your sacred
Synod; but upon this condition that he have nothing at all to do with
questions and controversies of faith.


ORTHOD. Very true: Ibidem.
But, first to remove all such persons as might be troublesome to the sacred
Synod. Secondly, not to suffer those which were of the Synod to depart before
the consultation were ended Thirdly, not to let them dispute any by-matters,
before the principal were fully discussed and concluded. Fourthly, to provide
that the disputation might be peaceable without tumult. Fifthly, to see that
every man might have liberty without offense, to propose what he thought good,
and to confute the contrary. In like manner Sir Nicholas Bacon was appointed to
these and the like offices; and not to decide or determine any controversy of
faith.


PHIL. He was a capital Eudemon I^l. quo supra. sed etiam Catholicorum
capitale^ hostem.
enemy of the Catholics.


ORTHOD. All that was done or said at those meetings, is extant to be Act. and
Mon. in the end.
seen: whereby it may appear, that all his proceedings about that business,
were most mild, moderate, honorable, and Christian; though the Bishops did
show themselves very obstinate.


PHIL. Sand* l. schis. l. 3. page 284.
The Protestants would have had them to dispute upon such Articles proposed for
questions, as seemed to have a greater show of proof in the Scriptures for
the Heretics; as of the Communion under both kinds, of public prayers to
be had in the vulgar tongue, and such like.


ORTHOD. In the public reformation of a Church, the first thing to be
considered, is the due ordering of divine service, and Sacraments: therefore
the questions were chosen with singular discretion; one concerning the prayers,
whether they should be in the vulgar tongue, another concerning the Lords
Supper, whether it should be ministered in both kinds. In both which points
you had done great injury to the people of God. But you say that the
Protestants made choice of such questions as seemed to have a greater show of
proof in the Scripture: and have we, think you, but a seeming show of proof,
and no sound substantial proof indeed? If the Bishops had bin of this opinion,
it should rather have encouraged them to the encounter, then have caused them
to fly the field. Is the holy Scripture for us in these questions only? if
the disputation had been about the worshipping of images, inuocations of
Saints, justification by faith, and such like, could not we have produced as
pregnant proofs out of the Scriptures for these, as for the former? but now
one may lay his finger upon your pulse, and easily discern the trembling of
your heart. For this speech which you have borrowed from Sanders, does intimate
unto us, that the Bishops refused to dispute, because they were not able to
maintain their opinions by the Scriptures.

ANd as their behavior was undutiful in these two former respects, concerning 4
the Queens Coronation, and the disputation; So thirdly it was most disloyal,
in that many of them went about to excommunicate the Queen, as is testified
both by Sand. quo supra.
Sanders, and D^fence of Cath. p. 52.
Allen, who commended their wicked intention, as a point of magnanimity,
affirming that therein they did stoutly, and worthily as could be wished. Now
let any indifferent man judge what these men merited at her highness hands,
and yet have I said nothing of their refusal of the oath of Supremacy, which
point is referred to the proper place. Hitherto we have considered how they
deserved, now let us see how they were served.


PHIL. THat is set down by Pius Quintus, in his sentence declaratory against 5
Queen Elizabeth, in these words: Apud Sand. de Schis. lib. 3. page 317.
Catholicos Antistites and Ecclesiarum rectores in vincula coniecit, vbi multi
diuturno languore and tristitia confecti, extremum vitae diem misere finierunt:
That is, She laid in chains the Catholic Bishops and governors of Churches,
where many of them wasted with long languishment, and sorrow, ended their life
miserably.


ORTHOD. Thirteen of these Bishops are named by Page 286.
Sanders, to which we may add Pates of Worcester, so the whole number is
fourteen, as Cardinal Defense of Cath. page 45.
Allen has it. Now of these fourteen, four were of the Province of York,
and 10. of Cant. In the Province of York, to begin with N. Heath Archb. of
that see, he being L. Chauncelour of Eng. made open declaration in Parliament,
of Q. Mary's death, and the undoubted title of the Lady Elizabeth: Whereupon*
she was presently proclaimed Queen. For which loyalty he was honorably
regarded, never committed to prison or custody, but permitted to live at his
own liberty, (upon some lands which he had purchased) in quietness and ease,
and last of all dying full of years, was suffered to bequeath his substance by
will and testament. From York, let us go to Durham, the Bishop whereof Cut.
Tonstal, after his deprivation, kept at Lambeth, with Matthew Parker,
Archbishop of Canterbury, where he lived, (so long as he lived) with comfort,
and being 85. years old, yielded to nature, and was honorably buried. The
third was Owen Oglethorp Bishop of Carlill, who as he had showed himself more
dutiful then the rest, in the Coronation of the Queen: so there is no doubt
but he was accordingly respected: who being neither in prison nor custody,
shortly after paid his debt to nature, and dyed of an apoplexy. The last of
these four was Cutbert Scot, Bishop of Chester, who slipped away beyond the
seas, where he lived in voluntary banishment. From the Province of York, let
us come to the Province of Canterbury: where we find that John white Bishop of
Winchester, saluted the prison, though not for any of the reasons alleged by
Sanders, but for an undutiful Sermon* yet afterward he was set at liberty, and
died out of prison. Thomas Thurlby Bishop of Ely, having endured a time of
imprisonment, neither very sharp nor very long, was permitted to live in the
Archbishoppes house, where till the day of his death, (that is, for ten
years) he was entreated so kindly, that he is supposed to have taken more
pleasure in this time of his restraint, then ever he did before, in the midst
and fullest stream of his highest honors. Gilbert Borne Bishop of Bath was
committed to the custody of Master Carew, his old acquaintance, Deane of
Exeter. James Turberuill Bishop of Exeter enjoyed a private life a long time,
living and dying in liberty. David Pole, Bishop of Peterborrow, being always
used with courtesy, and using his liberty, dyed in his own house in a ripe
age. Neither do I find that Bayne Bishop of Lichfield, was in durance, who
dyed soon after of the stone. Richard Pates Bishop of Worcester, and Thomas
Goldwell of Saint Asaph, departed the kingdom, not by constraint of law, but
of their own accord. The Bishop of Lincoln Thomas Watson, a churlish and
froward man, lived after his deprivation 24. years, first at more liberty in
the houses of the Bishops of Ely and Rochester, but afterward when your
Emissaries from Rome, did trouble the Church, he was kept somewhat more
straightly in the I Will of Ely. The last of all is Edmund Bonner, Bishop of
London, who in Queen Mary's time was the principal Butcher, and therefore so
odious to the people, that as our learned Tort Torti* page 147.
Bishop has of late truly delivered, It was not safe for him to go abroad,
least the people should have stoned him to death: and he indeed lived, and dyed
in prison, but where, if you had seen him (to use the words of our Reverend
Ibidem.
Bishop) You would not have said, that he had been pined, or starued with
hunger, he lived daintily, there were Gardens and Orchards, if it pleased him
to walk: Finally this prison was nothing like a prison, but only that
(therein) he was confined. Thus it appears, that of the 14. some were never
confined at all; Others confined only to the custody of their friends, but
never saluted the prison: others saluted it, but were soon released; and those
which stayed longest in prison, yet were not laid in fetters, as impious Pius
Quintus has blazed to the world. All these 14. did live even till the glass
of Nature was fully run and expired, and some of them were entertained at the
Tables of Bishops, Ibidem.
Gratis sine sumptu, copiose sine defectu, in o^io sine molestia omni: That is,
Freely without cost or charges plentifully without want, in ease without all
trouble or molestation. If you will not believe me, yet believe your own
fellow and friend, our mortal enemy Page 103 dum initio Regni etc. cited
Tort. Torti. page 149.
Philopater the Jesuit, who uses these words unto the Queen, While in the
beginning of your reign you dealt more mildly with the Catholics, while as
yet you urged no man with very great violence, while as yet you pressed none
very much, either to the partaking of your Sect, or to the denial of the
ancient faith: truly all things seemed to go with a more calm course,
neither were there heard any great complaints, neither was there seen any
great dissension, or repugnancie, etc. Thus malice it self, conquered with
evidence of truth, bears witness that those beginnings were more mild and
calm; none greatly then urged or pressed, so that in those days were not
heard any great complaints. Thus we see even by the judgment of your Jesuit,
what great cause you had to complain in such pitiful manner: if your little
finger do but ache, you must be moaned, but if you make our very hearts to ache,
it is nothing: your mole-hils of miseries must be made mountains, and our
mountains must be accounted for mole-hilles. Hitherto of the circumstances,
now we come to the deposition it self.


CHAP. II.
The Deposition of the Bishops, justified by the example of Solomon deposing
Abiathar.

PHIL. IN a lawful Deposition, there must be sufficient authority, proceeding
upon a just, and sufficient cause. Now let me ask you, by what authority were
the old Bishops deposed?


ORTHOD. And I might ask you, by what authority 1. King. 2. 27.
Solomon deposed Abiathar?


PHIL. You are still telling us of Solomon and Abiathar, If a king deprived
this high Priest, Bell. resp. ad Apolog. p. 157.
an other high Priest (that is Iehoiada) deprived Queen Athalia both of her
kingdom and life.


ORTHOD. Q. Athalia? No Queen sir, by your leave: Ioas the true heir of the
kingdom was then alive, and he was the true King by right of inheritance:
therefore she was no Queen* but a wicked usurper; Your Page 92.
Defense of Catholics might teach you so much, which calls her, A pretenced
Queen, and says, That she usurped the kingdom. Yet behold with what
blindness and giddines they are stricken, which traitorously oppose themselves
against their Prince and country. Cardinal Ibidem.
Allen is not ashamed to bring the example of Iehoiada deposing Athalia, that
usurping and pretenced Queen, to prove that the Pope has authority to
depose, lawful Princes. Neither did Iehoiada this, as being high Priest, but
whatsoever he did in this case, he might have done it, though he had not been
high Priest: For Iehosheba his wife was 2. Chron. 22. 11.
daughter to king Iehoram, and sister to king Ahazia, who was father to Ioas,
and consequently she was aunt to King Ioas; So Iehoiada her husband, was of the
next alliance that the young King had: Yea, and when Athalia like a bloody
Tiger Verse 10.
murdered the kings seed, Iehosheba the wife of Iehoiada, conveyed away her
nephew Ioas out of the midst of the kings sons, which were massacred, Verse
11.
and hid him and his nurse in a chamber, and kept them close Verse 12.
6. years in the House of the Lord. So Iehoiada by Gods providence, was made
Protector of the Kings person: yea, and when the time came wherein he thought
fit to disclose him, he first acquainted the 2. Chron. 23. 2.
Fathers of Israel, and the Captains, and so proceeded with their consent:
Therefore what did he herein, but protect the person, age, innocence, and
title of his Lord and Sovereign* whereto he was bound by the Law* of Nature,
and Nations? Therefore when you bring this to prove the Popes Supremacy, you
mistake the matter: you cannot show us in Scripture, where ever a Priest
deposed a lawful Prince. The Kings of Israel were all of them idolaters, and
so were 14. of the Kings of Judah, yet not one Priest or Prophet did so much as
ever offer to depose any one of them; but we show you in Scripture this plain
example, where Solomon the Prince, removed Abiathar the lawful Priest.


PHIL. IT Bell. quo supra.
is one thing to relate the actions of kings, and another thing to approve 2.
the authority.


ORTHOD. Did the Spirit of God, think you, relate this only as an Historian,
and not approve the action? or dare you accuse Solomon, as proceeding in this
case without authority? If Solomon had no authority to depose Abtathar, then
there must needs be a nullitie in the Deposition. For how can any Judicial
action be of validity, when there is no authority in the Agent? If the
Deposition were a nullitie, then Abiathar still retained the true right, title
and interest to be high Priest. But what? could there be two high Priests at
one time?


PHIL. Surely no; for though Luke 3. 2.
S. Luke say, that the word of the Lord came unto John, when Annas and Caiaphas
were high Priests, yet we must not think that they were both high Priests in
equal authority at once; For the word See Baron. Anno 31. n. 9. 10.
Summus Sacerdos, or princeps Sacerdotum, is taken three ways* First, whereas
the Priests were divided into 24. Orders, the chief of each Order was called
Princeps Sacerdotum, The Prince of the Priests, or high Priest; Secondly, there
was a College of 72. Seniours, which was called Synedrin, the first or chief
whereof was also called, The Prince of the Priests, or high Priest. Thirdly, it
is taken, both most properly, and most usually, for him that had the first and
chiefest place of all, to whom the other Princes of the Priests were subject.
Now Baronius thinks that S. Luke called Annas an high Priest, because he was
both the Prince and highest of his Order, and also the Prince and highest of
the Synedrin, but Caiaphas in his judgment was called high Priest, because he
was simply and absolutely highest of all: in which sense there can be but one
high Priest at once, nor ever was; Baron. An. 31. n. 8.
Vnum tantummodo non duos simul, and ante, and post haec tempora summum
Sacerdotem penes Iudaeos fuisse, certum exploratumque habeatur: That is, It is
certain and a tried truth, that there was one only high Priest among the
Jews, not two at once, both before and after these times, speaking of the time
of Annas and Caiaphas. Hence Cardinal De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 9.
Bellarmine, with other of our learned divines do commonly conclude, that, As
there was but one visible governor in the Church of the old Testament, so
there should be but one in the Church of the New.


ORTHOD. If there could be but one high Priest at one time, and Abiathar
(notwithstanding that he was put from the possession) still retained the true
right, title, and interest to be high Priest, then Sadok was not a lawful high
Priest, but an intruder upon another man's right: what say you to this?


PHIL. It were hard to call Sadok an intruder; for Hector Pintus, in Ezech. c.
44.
Sadok idem est quod iustus, and reuera fuit Sadok nomine and factis, that is,
Sadok does signify just, and indeed he was just both in name and deeds.


ORTHO. If Sadok were no intruder, but a lawful high Priest, then Abiathar
ceased to be high Priest, for you say there could not be two at once. If
Abiathar ceased to be high Priest, then the place was lawfully void: but how
was it void? Not by death, for Abiathar was still alive; not by resignation or
voluntary cessation, for we find no such matter. How then? no other reason
can with reason be imagined, but only because h^e was deposed by Solomon; If
the place were justly and lawfully void, by virtue of this deposition, then it
must needs be a lawful deposition, and consequently it must be done by
lawful authority. For if the deposer had no authority, then could not the
deposition be lawful; wherefore as you confess that Sadok was lawful high
Priest, so you must likewise confess, that Solomon in casting out Abiathar,
and placing Sadok had lawful authority.


PHIL. WHat if he had? was he not a Prophet as well as a King? 3



ORTHO. All the books of the old Testament are called by the name of 2. Pet.
1. 20. 21.
Prophecy, because they prophesied of Jesus Christ; therefore the pen men
thereof, which did speak as they were moved by the holy ghost (amongst which
was Solomon) may rightly be called Prophets.


PHIL. Bell^de Romans pont. l. 2. c. 29.
I say that Solomon deposed Abiathar, not as a king but as a Prophet, and
executer of divine justice.


ORTHOD. As though the King as a King were not an executer of divine justice:
yes Philodox, it is the Romans ^3. 3. 4.
King, as King, which bears not the sword in vain: it is the king, as king,
which is, The minister of God, and a r^uenger of wrath to him that does evil;
therefore the King, as King, is the executer of divine justice; And so when you
say, not as a king, but as an executer of divine justice, you put those things
asunder, which the Lord has put together; again, when you say that he did
it, As a Prophet and an executer of divine justice, you put those things
together, which the Lord has put a sunder: for a Prophet, as a Prophet is the
mouth of the Lord, the executer of divine justice is not the mouth, but the
hand of the Lord; the hand and the mouth must be distinguished.


PHIL. I will prove that Solomon did it as a Prophet, Bell. quo supra.
For in the same place it is said, that Solomon put out Abiathar, that he
might fulfill the words of the Lord, which he spoke against the house of Eli in
Shilo.


ORTHOD. Do you think that such like speeches import the final cause, and
the intents of the Agents? The soldiers seeing the coat of Christ to be
without seame, wouen from the top throughout, said one to another, Ioh. 19. 24.
Let us not divide it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, they parted my garments among them,
and on my coat did they cast lots; do you imagine that the soldiers had any
intent hereby to fulfill the Scripture? Even just as much as Judas had, when
he sold his master for Mat. 26. 15.
thirty pieces of silver: or Mat. 2. 17.
Herod, when he slew the infants: or the Jews when they Ioh. 19. 28. 29.
gave him vinegar to drink. They had no purpose in so doing to fulfill the
Scripture, yet God so disposed, that by their action the Scripture was
fulfilled. Likewise your own Bishop In 3. Reg. c. 2. quaest. 28. non pon^tur
(Vt) denotando ca^sam sinalem sed Consecuti^um. etc.
Tostatus may teach you, that in this place the particle, vt, does not signify
the final cause, but the consecution. But what if Solomon had done it to that
very end, and purpose, that the word of the Lord concerning the house of Eli
might be fulfilled? would this prove that he did it as a Prophet? 2. Kin. 9.
25 26.
Iehu, when he had slain Iehoram, said to Bidkar a Captain, Take him and cast
him in some place of the field of Naboth the Iezrelite; for I remember that
when ^ and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid this
burden upon him; surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the
blood of his sons said the Lord; and I will render it thee in this field
says the Lord, now therefore take and cast him into the field according to the
word of the Lord: The casting of him into the field was not only a fulfilling
of the prophecy, but it was also commanded to be done even directly to that
end that the prophecy might be fulfilled: yet I think you will not say that
Iehu was a Prophet: so far are you from proving that Solomon did it as a
Prophet.


PHIL. Either as a King, or as a Prophet; not as a King, and therefore as a
Prophet.


ORTHOD. NOt as a King? why so? the Lord had 1. Chro. 22. 10. 2. Sam. 7. 12. 13.
promised that 4
Solomon should sit upon the Throne of David his father, so Solomon was heir
apparent to the crown, by Gods own appointment: yet for all this 1. King. 1.
5.
Adonias exalted himself, and said I will be king: and Ioab, and Abiathar Verse.
7.
helped him forward, they said, Verse. 25.
God save King Adonias: Whereupon all three were guilty of high treason against
the king, and all three were punished by the king.


PHIL. True, by the king, but Tortus.
not by kingly power.


ORTHO. Yes, by kingly power: the king did it as a king. And to begin with
Adonias, the king granted him a conditional pardon, that 1. King. 1. 52.
If he showed himself a worthy man, there should not a hair of him fall to
the earth: but if wickedness were found in him, he should die: and therefore
when he desired 1. King. 2. 17.
Abisha to wife, the wisdom of the King reaching into the profoundnesse of the
policy, did interpret it as a means of aspiring to the 1. King. 2. 22.
kingdom: So King Verse. 25.
Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Iehoiada, and he smote him
that he died. Who did this? the spirit of God says, that King Solomon did it:
so it is ascribed to the King: yea it is clear that the King did it as a King:
for who could pardon treason, but a King, as a King? Or who should draw the
sword of justice against malefactors, but he that bears not the sword in
vain, that is, the King by the power, and authority of a King? Concerning
Ioab 1. Kin* 2. 29.
it was told Solomon, that he was fled to the Tabernacle of the Lord, and
Verse. 30.
Benaiah said, thus says the King, come out, and he said nay, but I will die
here, and Benaiah brought the King word again, and the King said, do as he
has said, and smite him: in all which there was nothing but the execution of
justice which belongs to a King as a King. Now to come to Abiathar; his
offense against the King was the same, and the Scripture ascribes the
punishment in the same tenor of words unto the king: 1. King. 2. 26.
Then the King said unto Abiathar the Priest: even the king, who in the former
verse commanded Adonias to be slain; that is, the King, as a King: which may
appear further by that which he said, Go to Anathoth to thy own fields, in
which words he confineth him, which is the action of a King. And again, thou
art worthy of death, but I will not this day kill thee, because thou barest the
Ark of the Lord God before David my Father: and because thou have suffered in
all things wherein my Father has been afflicted. In which words he grants
life, to one that had deserved death: and who could do this, but a King? Verse.
27.
So Solomon cast out Abiathar from being high Priest unto the Lord: Where we
see death changed into deprivation. All which do argue the power of a King:
yea it is said, Verse. 35.
that the King put Benaiah the son of Iehoiada in the room of Ioab over the
host; which undoubtedly belonged unto the King, as he was King: and it
follows immediately in the same verse; and the King set Sadok the Priest in
the room of Abiathar. Thus you see that the whole course of Scripture
ascribes it to the King, as a King: and why should you think otherwise?


PHIL. BEcause in the old Testament the Levites were free by the law of God,
from the power of secular Princes: Bell. de exemp. cler. c. 1. page 2^4.
For in the third 5
of Numbers God does not once, but often repeat that the Levites are properly
his Ver. 12, 41.
own, and that he has chosen them to himself out of all his people, and he
commanded them to be Verse 9.
given for a gift unto Aaron and his sons, that is to the high Priest and his
successors: for it was his will that they whom he himself had chosen to the
ministry of the Temple and holy things, should be subject to the high Priest
only, who represented the place of God on earth; and by this he freed them
from the jurisdiction of earthly Princes; Bell. de exemp. cler. c. 2. page 272.
for Clergy men are the Ministers of God, and offered to God by the whole
people, whereupon they are called Clerici, as belonging to the inheritance of
the Lord, as Saint Hierom teaches in his Epistle to Nepotianus: Now surely
secular Princes can have no authority over those things which are offered, and
consecrated unto God, and made as it were proper unto God himself, which both
the light of reason shows, and God himself declares not obscurely in holy
Scripture, when he says in the last of Leuiticus, Whatsoever shall be
consecrated unto the Lord, it shall be holy of holies unto the Lord.


ORTHOD. As houses, and lands dedicated to God, remained his proper and
everlasting possession; so the tribe of Leui being once consecrated unto God,
became for ever his peculiar inheritance. But does it therefore follow, that
they are all exempted from the jurisdiction of Princes? the whole nation of the
Jews are called, Exodus 19. 6.
an holy nation, and a kingdom of Priests; all the males of Israel had the
seal of the living God set upon them in the Sacrament of circumcision; yet not
one of them were exempted from the power of their Prince. It is true that by
the law of God in matters concerning their office, the Levites were
subordinate to the Priests, and the Priests to the high Priest; but both
Priest, and high Priest were under the authority of the civil Magistrate 2.
Chr. 17. 7. 8.
Iehosaphat sent Priests and Levites to instruct the cities of Judah, and did
he this without authority? he sent 2. Chr. 19. 8.
Priests and Levites to be judges and Delegates, and Verse. 11.
Amariah the high Priest to be chief over them in the matters of the Lord;
did he this also without authority? when the house of God was defiled, 2.
Chr. 29. 4. 5.
Hezechias called the Priests and Levites, commanding them to sanctify
themselves, and the house of the Lord; and they did so, Verse. ^5.
according to the Kings commandment: then he Verse. 21.
commanded the Priests the sons of Aaron to offer sacrifice unto the Lord,
and they did so: he Verse. 25.
appointed all the Levites in the house of the Lord with Cymbals, with Viols,
and with Harpes, and the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the
Priests with Trumpets; and Hezechias commanded the Priests to offer the
burnt offering upon the Altar, and they did so: then the Verse. 30.
King and the Princes commanded the Levites to praise the Lord with the words
of David, and Asaph the seer; so they praised with joy: Then he commanded the
Priests to offer the sacrifice of praise, and they did so: yea the King (this
holy King) 2. Chr. 31. 2.
appointed the courses of the Priests and Levites by their turns; which
things he did well and 2. Kings 18. ^*
uprightly before the Lord his God: therefore we must not think he passed the
bounds of his authority. If Priest, or high Priest were exempted from the
jurisdiction of Kings; why did 2. King. 23. 4*
Josias command Helkiah the high Priest, and the Priests of the second order,
to fetch out of the Temple all the instruments prepared for Baal, for the
grove, and for all the host of heaven, which he burned without Jerusalem, in
the fields of Kedron, and caused the dust of them to be carried unto Bethel?
If Priests were exempted, why did he Verse 8.
bring all the Priests of the high places out of the cities of Judah, and all
such of them as were Ieroboams Priests, of which the 1. King. 13. 1.
man of Judah prophesied, he 2. King. 23. 20.
sacrificed upon the Altars; the rest which were of the line of Aaron, but yet
had offered in the high places, he brought back from Jerusalem, though they
were not Ezech. 44. 13.
suffered to sacrifice unto the Lord, but were thrust out of their Priesthood,
to the meanest offices amongst the Levites. Now from Kings, let us come to
Nehemias the Viceroy, who relating how Eliashib the high Priest had made a
great chamber in the house of the Lord for Tobias the Ammonite; adds
immediately; Nehemiah 13. 6.
But all this time was not I in Jerusalem: signifying that if he had been
there, he would not have suffered such abomination: And when he came, he
Verse 8. 9.
cast out the vessels of Tobias, and commanded the Priests to cleanse them,
and bring again the vessels of the Lord. When one of the nephews of the high
Priest had married the daughter of Sanballat; Nehemias Verse 28.
chased him away: With what face now can you say that Princes in the old
Testament had no authority over the Priests? If Kings had no authority, then
they should not have enjoined, appointed, commanded, and punished; but only
have advised, admonished, and exhorted them. If Priests had any such
privilege, it is strange, that in all the story of the old Testament, we
find not one Priest, once pleading his privilege. If they submitted
themselves when their conscience told them that they had offended, yet why did
they not plead their immunitie, when they were injuriously handled? 2. Chr. 24.
21.
Zacharias the Priest was slain, at the commandment of the King, and yet
never mentioned any privilege: When 1* Sam. 22. 18.
Saul slew Abimelech, and above eighty Priests which wore a linen Ephod,
Abimelech declared his innocence, and acknowledged the Kings jurisdiction over
him, by calling the King his Lord, and himself the Kings Verse 12. 15.
servant, but spoke not a word of any privilege. Therefore all the world may
see that there was no such matter, these are but fictions of idle brains;
wherefore we may truly conclude, that the tribe of Leui was not exempted from
secular jurisdiction, but the King might convent, command, reprove, and punish
them, and yet not transgress the law of God.


PHIL. Bell. de exemp. c. 2. p. 272.
Who dare affirm, that a profane person has any authority or jurisdiction,
over those things which have deserved to be called holy of holies, that is
most holy?


ORTHOD. Who but a profane Jesuit durst be so bold as to call the light of
Israel, the anointed of the Lord, the Minister of God, a profane person? The
ancient sages of the Christian world did use to speak of Princes with all
reverence, not only of those which professed the true faith: but of others
also. The third Roman council under Symmacus, calls Theodoricus (who was
known to be an Arrian) a holy Prince; whereupon Tom. 2. page ^85.
Binius writes thus; An Arrian king is named most holy, and most godly, not
according to his merits, but according to custom, like as Valerian and
Gratian, Ethnicke Emperors, were called most holy, by Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, as witnesses Eusebius: Which was done by the example of the
Apostle Paul, who called Felix ( being a wicked man, but then in authority) by
the usual style of, most noble. Hitherto Binius out of Anno 452.
Baronius. Thus much for the profane title. As for the thing it self. The
Scripture witnesses, that Solomon was King over 1. Kin. 4. 1.
all Israel; if over all Israel, then over the tribe of Leui, and consequently
even over Abiathar the high Priest: if he be their king, why are not they his
subjects? If they be his subjects, and he their Sovereign, how can they be
exempted from his Jurisdiction? A point so clear, that sundry of your learned
writers have confessed it.

Johannes De potestate Reg. cap. 19.
Parisiensis says, that in the old Testament, the Priests which anointed 6.
kings, without all doubt were subject unto kings. Your own Jesuit De
potestate Eccle. tom. 12. tract* 63. p. 428
Salmeron affirms, that potestas spiritualis legis naturae vel Moisisminor
erat Regia potestate in veteri testamento, and ideo etiam summi Sacerdotes
regibus subdebantur: that is, the spiritual power of the Law of nature, and of
the law of Moses, was lesser then the princely power in the old Testament,
therefore even the high Priests were subject unto kings. Yea De Romans pont. l.
2. c. 25.
Bellarmine himself says, Non mirum esset si in veteri Testamento summa
potestas fuisset temporalis, that is, It were no marvel if in the old
Testament the chief power were the temporal. Dominicus a I^ 4. sent. d. 25.
q. 2.
Soto: in veteri Testamento dubio procul, Sacerdotes a principibus secularibus
iudicati: that is, In the old Testament without doubt, the Priests were judged
by the secular princes. Friar Consideratio P. ^. Pauli.
Paul: This doctrine, that Ecclesiastical persons, unless they be free by
privilege, and favor, should be subject to secular Magistrates, is
demonstrated and confirmed by examples of the old Testament, whereby it
appears that all the kings did command, judge, and punish Priests, and that
this was done not only of bad kings, or indifferent, but of the most holy and
religious, David, Solomon, Ezechias, and Josias. Carerius l. 2 c. 18. respondeo
primo.
Carerius in veteri Testamento Rex super Sacerdotes potestatem habebat, eosque
pro crimine occidere, multo magis officijs and dignitatibus spiritualibus eos
priuare poterat: that is, In the old Testament, the king had power over the
Priests, and might for their offenses kill them, much more deprive them of
their offices and spiritual dignities: Hitherto Carerius, out of Tossed. in 4.
Reg. ^. 12. q. 8. Ipse (Rex) ^ahebat potestatem super Sacerdoses and poterat
^os occidere pro crimine sicut quoscunque laicos, and a fortiori priuare eos
officijs and dignitatib* quantu^cunque essent spirituales.
Tostatus.


PHIL. IF the kings of Israel had such authority, does it follow that 7.
Christian Princes must have the like?


ORTHOD. What else? You must consider that the new Testament does yield us no
examples of Christian kings, therefore when the question is concerning the
power of kings in the Church of God, we must go to the fountain, that is,
the old Testament, where there was both a Church, and kings in the Church,
religiously performing the office of kings: and what Princely authority they
exercised, for which they are approved by the spirit of God, the same without
all question, belongs in like manner to Christian Princes: therefore what
authority Solomon had over Abiathar, the same have Christian Princes, by the
law of God, over their own Clergy.


CHAP. III.
Of the Oath of the Princes Supremacy, for denying whereof the old Bishops were
deprived.

PHIL. IS not the deposing of a Bishop, a spiritual censure? how then can it
be performed by the secular powers?


ORTH. The secular powers do no^ depose a Bishop by degradation, nor by
utterly debarring him from his Episcopal function: but only by excluding him
from the exercise of Episcopallactes upon their subjects, and within their
dominions. And this godly Princes have performed from time to time, in the best
and primative ages, against the Arrians, Nestotians, and other heretics, as
might be declared by many examples.


PHIL. Shall a Prince take that from them, which he cannot give them?


ORTH. He cannot give them an intrinsecall power to minister the word and
Sacraments which proceeds from the key of order; but he may give them an
extrinsecall power, that is, a liberty to execute their function within his
dominions. This he may do by virtue of the scepter, which God has given him,
though he meddle not with the keys which God has given to the Church; and as
he may give this liberty, so he may take it away upon just cause, as Solomon
did when he deposed Abiathar.


PHIL. If we should admit that Queen Elizabeth had so much authority as king
Solomon, yet this would not justify her proceedings. For it belongs not to
Parliaments, or secular Princes to make laws concerning the depositions of
Bishops, or to inflict any such punishments.


ORTHOD. Did not the Emperor Epist. Episc. ad Leonem imper. a^ud bin. t. 2. p.
178.
Martian, make a law, that such Bishops as went about to infringe any of those
things, which were enacted by that holy and general Council of Chalcedon,
should be deposed? Did not Nouel constable. 6. iuxta sinem.
Justinian make a constitution, that if any Patriarch, Metropolitan, Bishop,
or Clerk, should violate his decrees made for the preservation of holy order,
and estate, he should be excluded from the Priestly function? Did not Euagrius
l 1. c. 12. ex Codice l. 1. tit. 1. Saucimus.
Theodosius the younger, likewise make a law that the Nestorian Bishops should
be expelled and deposed?


PHIL. The laws of these Emperors concerning the deposing of Bishops, were
not put in execution by laymen, as Queen Elizabeth's were, but by Bishops.


ORTH. Theodor. l. 5. cap. 2.
Gratian the Emperor made a law against the Arrians, commanding them like
wild beasts, to be driven from the Churches, and the places to be restored to
good pastors: the execution whereof, he committed to Saporas, the most famous
captain of that time. If this were allowable in the Emperor Gratian, then
much more in Queen Elizabeth: for he did it when there was plenty of good
Bishops, within his own dominon; Queen Elizabeth did it only in case of
necessity: Neither did she send a captain to drive them away by violence, as
Gratian did, but appointed honorable commissioners to tender the oath unto
them; upon the obstinate refusal whereof, their places were void, by virtue of
the Statute.


PHIL. GRatian had for him the determination of Synods, which had already 2
condemned the Arrians, therefore in this case it was lawful for him both to
make a Law, and to commit the execution of it to Laymen.


ORTHOD. So had Q. Elizabeth. For a Synod of Bishops, professing your own
Religion, (among whom was John Fisher Bishop of Rochester) gave to K. Henry the
title of Supreme head of the Church of England, as may appear by the Acts of
the (...) 153^. p. 11^.
Synod it self. About two years after, the same was renewed in another Synod,
and about two years after that, the two Universities delivered their
judgment, That the Pope had no more to do in England, by the Law of God, then
any other Bishop. The determination of Cambridge is already (...).
extant in print. The like of Oxeford remains in (...).
Record; wherein after long deliberation, and much disputation with all
diligence, Zeal and conscience, they make this profession; Tandem in hanc
sententiam vnanimiter omnes conuenimus ac concord^s fuimus; viz. Romanum
Episcopum maiorem aliquam iurisdictionem non habere sibi a D^o collatam in
sacra Scriptura, in hoc regno Angliae, quam alium quemuis externum Episcopum,
i. At the length we all agreed with one mind and one heart, upon this
conclusion: to wit, That the Bishop of Rome has not any greater jurisdiction
given him of God in holy Scripture, over this kingdom of England, then any
other foreign Bishop. And (...).
Bellarmine himself tells us out of Cheynie the Carthusian Monk, that in
the year 1535. there was a Parliament, wherein it was Enacted, That all should
renounce the Pope, and all other foreign powers, and acknowledge the King to
be head of the Church, upon their oath. Thus it is manifest, that the Bishops
and Clergy did then both approve the Title and take the oath: which Bishops
were such as your selves commend Defense of English Cathol. page 4^.
to be inferior to none in Europe for virtue and learning. And truly
excepting their opinions in Religion, wherein they were carried away with the
stream of the time, it cannot be denied, but that generally they were very
well learned. Erasmus invited into England by William Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury, when he had considered what difference there was between the
Bishops of England, and other Nations, he published to the world in Print, That
Ant. Brit page 306.
only England had learned Bishops. Moreover, most of these learned Bishops,
did openly in the Pulpit at Pauls-Crosse defend the Kings Title, and (...).
sundry of them by their published writings maintained the same. The selfsame
oath was taken again in the ^aigne of K. Edward.


PHIL. They changed their minds in the days of Q. Mary.


ORTHOD. Very true; But their inconstancy cannot abolish the soliditie of
their former confession: and though they recalled their opinions, yet they
never answered their own Arguments which remain still in Print, as a witness
to the world, that their former judgment was grounded upon Gods Verity, and
that the Princes Title did stand with right and equity.


PHIL. THese were Bishops and Synods of our own nation only; but 3.
was there ever any learned man elsewhere, that did approve this Title* was
there ever any King, or Queen, Christian or Heathen, Catholic or Heretic
in all the Sea (...). Apol. cap. 1.
world beside, before our age, that did practice, challenge, or accept it?


ORTHOD. Look into the godly Kings of Judah; Look into the proceedings of
Christian Emperors, (...) 4. c. 42. So^r. l. 1 c. 3^. The^^. l. 5. c. ^.
Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, and such like; Look into the Laws of
(...). l. 1.
Charles and (...). 2.
Lodowicke; and you shall see, that they practiced as much, as ever we ascribed
to the Queen in this oath. When the Council of Ephesus by the packing of
Dioscorus, had allowed the cursed opinion of Eutyches, and deposed Flauianus
Bishop of Constantinople, Pope Leo upon this occasion wrote thus unto the
Emperor Theodosius; Leo Epist. 24.
Behold, most Christian and reverend Emperor, I, with the rest of my fellow
Bishops, make supplication unto you, That all things may stand in the same
state, in which they were before any of these Judgments, until a greater
number of Bishops may be gathered out of the whole world. Who made this
supplication? Pope Leo, a holy and learned Pope. To whom? To the Emperor
Theodosius. For what? That the Emperor would command; not entreat, but
command: So this is an action of Royal authority. What should he command?
That all things might stand in their former state. What things means he? The
highest mysteries of Religion, concerning the Natures and person of Christ. But
what is it to stand in the former state? That it might be lawful for all men,
so to judge and speak of these holy Mysteries, as they did before the
springing up of the Eutychian Heresy: for then they held the Truth, according
to the Apostolic faith. And this he beseeches the Emperor to command,
notwithstanding the contrary determination of the Council of Ephesus. Leo
Epist. 43.
The second Council of Ephesus, which apparently subverted the faith, cannot
rightly be called a Council, which your Highness for very love to the Truth,
will make void by your Decree to the contrary, most glorious Emperor. I
therefore earnestly request and beseech your Majesty by our Lord Jesus Christ,
the founder and guider of your Kingdom, That in this Council (of Chalcedon)
which is presently to be kept, you will not suffer the Faith to be called in
question, which our blessed Fathers preached, being delivered unto them from
the Apostles; Neither permit such things as have been long since condemned by
them, to be freshly revived again, but that you will rather command, That the
Constitutions of the ancient Nicene Council may stand in force, the
interpretation of Heretics being removed. Here the Pope ascribes to the
Emperor power to ratify and establish those Councels, which are according to
the Scripture, and to disanull those whose determinations are contrary to the
Scripture; Yea, he acknowledges, that the Emperor has authority to inhibite
and restrain General Councels, that they call not the Truth of God in
question. Which the Emperor Martian practiced, entering the Council of
Chalcedon in his own person, and Mart. Imper. orat. in Conc. Chalced. act. 1.
Bin. t. 2. p. 4.
forbidding the Bishops to avouch any thing concerning the birth of our
Savior, otherwise then was contained in the Nicene Creed. Moreover, when the
Council of Chalcedon was concluded, Pope Leo Epist. 59.
Leo wrote thus again to the Emperor; Because I must by all means obey your
piety and most Religious will, I have willingly given my consenting sentence
to those Synodall Constitutions, which concerning the confirmation of the
Catholic faith, and condemnation of Heretics, pleased me very well. The
Emperor required the Pope to subscribe; And he cheerfully did so, Protesting
that for his part, he must by all means obey the Princes will in those cases.
Now tell me whether the Pope did not acknowledge the Emperor, and the Emperor
show himself to be Supreme governor over all persons, even in causes
Ecclesiastical?

AS the Emperor Martian did practice this Supremacy, so the Emperor 4.
Concilium octauum act. 1. B^n. t. 3. p. 880.
Basil did challenge the Title* when he said in the Council of Constantinople,
That the government of the universal Ecclesiastical Ship, was committed unto
him by the Divine providence.


PHIL. The words are thus in Surius, Tom. 4. ^art. 11. edit. Venet. Vide
T^rturam T^rti. p. 349.
In exordio Synodi ita locutus est Basilius: Cum diuina, and benignissima
prouidentia nobis gubernacula vniuersalis Nauis commisisset etc. that is, In
the beginning of the Synod thus said Basilius the Emperor: when the divine and
most benign providence had committed unto us the government of the universal
ship etc. Where, by universal ship, is meant civil administration, not
Ecclesiastical; as Surius has well observed.


ORTHO. ^^n. qu^ (...).
Binius relating the acts of the council, tells how the Emperors
Epainagnosticum was read in the council in these words: Diuina clementique
prouidentia gubernacula Ecclesiasticae n^uis vobis committente, that is, The
divine and gracius providence of God, committing unto you the government of the
Ecclesiastical ship. Where you see that he speaks of the Ecclesiastical
ship.


PHIL. To whom was the government of the ship committed? Vobis, to you: that
is, to the Bishops: what is this to the Emperor?


ORTH. Indeed, Binius has Vobis; but it should be Nobis, which may appear,
first, because the Emperor himself in the words shortly after following in
Binius, said, Nos proratione datae nobis in Ecclesiasticis rebus potestatis,
non tacebimus, that is, We in regard of the power given unto us in
Ecclesiastical matters will not hold our peace. Where it is clear that the
Emperor did think himself to have power given him from God, not only in
matters civil, but also in Ecclesiastical. Therefore when the Emperor said,
That the divine providence had committed unto him the government of the
universal ship, he must needs be understood as well of causes Ecclesiastical
as civil. Which may yet appear further by the Emperors words, as they are in
Surtus immediately following in the same sentence; Omne studium arripuimus and
ante publicas curas Ecclesiasticas dissoluere, i. When the divine providence
had committed unto us the government of the universal ship, we used all
diligence to dispatch Ecclesiastical cares, before the public affairs of the
Commonwealth. So if Surius will be judged by his own Edition, and give the
Emperor leave to expound himself; then Ecclesiastical affairs must be
comprehended in the government of the Universal ship. Wherefore though Surius
would raze out the word Ecclesiastical, and Binius foist in Vobis instead of
Nobis, yet whether we compare either of them with himself, or each of them
with other, it is evident that the Emperor Basil, did challenge the government
of the universal ship, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and that in a general
Council, no man resisting him. What does this differ from Supreme governor as
it is used in the Church of England?

AS Basil did challenge this government, no man resisting; so sundry Synods 6
have given the like to Princes not refusing it. There was a Council holden at
Cont. M^g^^t (...) pr^^^^* B^^^* 34. 402.
Mentz in Germany, the year 814. In the time of the Emperor Charles the
great, and Pope Leo the third, the Synodall acts whereof Binius professes that
he compared with a manuscript sent him out of the Emperors library at Vienna.
Now the Bishops assembled in this Synod, begin thus. In the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. To the most glorious and most
Christian Emperor Carolus Augustus, governor of the true religion, and
defender of the holy Church of God, etc. And a little after, We give thanks to
God the Father Almighty, because he has granted unto his holy Church a
governor so godly etc. And again, About all these points we greatly need your
aid and sound doctrine, which may both admonish us continnally, and instruct
us courteously so far, that such things which we have briefly touched beneath
in a few Chapters, may receive strength from your authority: if so be that
your piety shall so judge it worthy, whatsoever is found in them worthy to be
amended, let your magnificent and imperial dignity command to amend.

In the year 847. there was holden another Synod at Mentz, in the time of Leo
the fourth, and Lotharius the Emperor, where the Bishops begin in the like
manner. Bin. t. 3. page 631.
Domino Serenissimo and Christianissimo regi Ludouico verae religionis
strenuissimo rectori, i. To our most gracious Lord and Christian king Lodowick,
the most puissant governor of true religion. The like was ascribed to King
Reccesuinthius in a Council holden at Council. Em^rit^ex Garsia Loa^sa. sect.
23. Bin. to. 2. p. 1183.
Emerita in Portugale about the year 705. in these words: Whose vigilance does
govern both secular things with greatest piety, and Ecclesiastical by his
wisdom plentifully given him of God. So they acknowledged him governor both in
causes secular and Ecclesiastical. This Council of Emerita received much
strength and authority from Pope Innocent the third, in his Epistle to Peter
Archb. of Compostella, as witnesses Gars. in notis in Con^. Emer.
Garsias. Thus you see that most famous Bishops assembled in Synods have given
unto Princes, such titles as are equivalent to the st^le annexed to the
imperial crown of this kingdom. To which we might adioyne the judgment of
other fathers; Tert. ad Scopul.
Tertullian; Colimus imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo
minorem. i. We reverence the Emperor as a man next unto God, and inferior
only to God. Contra. Parmen. l. 5.
Optatus; Super imperatorem non est, nisi solus Deus qui fecit imperatorem.
Above the Emperor is none but only God who made the Emperor. So Saint Ad
pop. Antioch. hom. ^
Chrysostom says, that the Emperor has no peer upon earth, and calls him
the head and crown of all men upon earth. If he be next unto God, and
inferior only to God; If none be above him but God only; If he have no peer
upon earth, as being the head and crown of all men upon earth; then must he
needs be the supreme governor upon earth, according to the judgment of the
fathers. This is agreeable to the Scripture, which testifies, that most godly
kings commanded both Priests and high Priests, even in cases of religion as was
before declared. Neither is this authority taken away in the New Testament, but
continues the very same; As may appear by Saint Paul, who lifts up his
voice like a trumpet, proclayming, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, which words every soul
comprehend all persons, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, yea though they were
Evangelists, Prophets or Apostles, as Saint Chrysostom does truly expound
them. If every soul be subject to the higher powers, then the Prince is
superior to all, and consequently supreme within his own dominions. But why
do I stay so long upon this point, which has been of late so learnedly and
plentifully handled, that to say any more were but to cast water into the sea,
or to light a candle at noone day?


PHIL. HOw unreasonable it is, may appear by the absurdities which follow 6
thereupon, for if the Prince be supreme governor in causes spiritual, then he
may command what religion he list, and we must obey him.


ORTHOD. Not so; for he is supreme governor in causes temporal, yet he may not
command a man to bear false witness, or to condemn the innocent as Iesabell
did; or if he should, we must rather obey God then man; so in cases of religion
Nabuchodonosor had no warrant to erect his image, nor Jeroboam, to set up his
golden calves. For the king, as king, is supreme under God, not against God, to
command for truth, not against truth; And if he shall command ungodly things,
we may not perform obedience, but submit our selves to his punishments with
patience.


PHIL. Do not you by this title ascribe as much to the King as we do to the
Pope?


ORTHO. We are far from it, For when some malicious persons did wrest the
words of the oath of supremacy to a sinister sense, notifying how by words of
the same oath it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this realm,
possessours of the crown, may challenge authority and power of ministry of
divine service in the Church; Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her
reign, Admonition annexed to the Queens m^un^tions.
admonished all her loving subjects not to give credit to such persons;
professing that she neither did, nor would challenge any other authority, then
was challenged and used by king Henry the 8. and Edward the 6. and was of
ancient time, due to the imperial crown of this realm, that is, under God to
have the sovereignty and rule over all manner persons borne within her realms,
dominions, and countries, of what estate, either ecclesiastical or temporal
soever they be, so as no other foreign power, shall or ought to have any
superiority over them. And that no other thing was, is, or should be meant, or
intended by the same oath. Which was also further declared man act of
Parliament, the fifth year of her reign, with relation to the former
admonition, and moreover fully explained in the Articles of Art. 37.
religion in these words. We give not to our Princes the ministering either of
Gods word, or of the Sacraments, which things the injunctions lately set forth
by Queen Elizabeth, do most plainly testify, but only that prerogative
which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in the holy
Scripture by God himself, that is, that they should rule all estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be ecclesiastical or
temporal, and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn and evil doers.
This is the substance of the title due to the imperial crown of the Kingdom.


PHIL. If it be due to the imperial crown, then it skilleth not whether the
Prince be man, woman, or child, nor of what religion. For the Princely power
was no less in (...) Cal^^^t^^. l. 4. ^. 10.
Traiane, then in Theodosius, in K. Henry, then in Q. Mary; In Q. Mary the
enemy of the new Gospellers, then in Queen Elizabeth their protector; yea it
was no less in King Lucius before he was baptized, then after. And
consequently, the Emperor of the Turks may be called supreme governor in
causes ecclesiastical within his own dominions.


ORTHOD. Here are two things to be considered. First the princely power and
authority; Secondly the ability rightly to use and exercise the same. The
princely power and authority is given immediately from God, both unto Christian
Princes, and also unto Ethnickes which are guided only by the light and law of
nature, and by constitutions thence deduced by the wit of man. For this is true
in all; Pro. 8. 15.
By me kings reign; And Dan. 2. 37.
Daniell said to Nabuchodonosor, O king thou art a king of kings, for the God
of Heaven has given unto thee a kingdom, and power, and strength, and glory.
But the ability rightly to use and exercise this authority, by refering it to
the true end, that is, the glory of God (for all our rivers should run into
that Ocean) and the eternal good of the subjects, is communicated from the
Lord above, only to such as know him in Christ Jesus, and are guided by his
grace. The fountain therefore of al power is God himself; as the Apostle
witnesses saying, Romans 13. 1.
there is no power but of God. To which purpose it is well said of Saint De
ciuit. Dei l. 5. c. 21.
Austin. Qui dedit Mario, ipse and Caesari; qui Augusto, ipse and Neroni; qui
Vespasiano vel patri vel filio suauissimis imperatoribus, ipse and Domitiano
crudelissimo: and ne per singulos ire necesse sit, qui Constantino Christiano,
ipse Apostatae Iuliano. i. He that gave it to Mar^^s, gave it to Caesar, he
that gave it to Augustus, gave it to Nero, he that gave it to Vespasian the
Father, or his son, most sweet Emperors, gave it also to Domitian the most
cruel. And that I should not need to reckon up the rest in particular; he
that gave it to Constantine the Christian, gave it also to Julian the Apostata.
But though domination and power were in the law of nature, yet the right use of
it is not from nature but from grace. A Prince, as a Prince, be he good or bad,
Christian or Pagan, in respect of his princely calling has sufficient power
and authority to govern his people according to the will of God. And it is
his duty so to do. Esai. 45. 2. 3.
The Lord said unto Cyrus, I will go before thee and make the crooked
straight; I will break the brazen doors, and burst the Iron bars. And I
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and the things hid in secret
places, that thou may know that I am the Lord. Upon which words Saint Ierom
notes, that God gives kingdoms unto wicked men, not that they should abuse
them, but as for other reasons, so for this, that being invited by his bounty,
they should be converted from their sins. So it is their duty to serve God,
not only as they are men, but as they are Kings. And Kings (says Saint Aust.
ep. 50.
Austin) do in this serve God as Kings, when they do those things to serve
him which none but Kings can do. But what is that? It may appear by these
words; Epist. 48.
Seruiant reges terrae Christo, etiam leges ferendo pro Christo. i. Let the
Kings of the earth serve Christ even by making laws for Christ. For though the
immediate end of humane societes be peace and prosperity, yet the last end of
all, and most principally to be respected is the glory of God, and eternal
happiness. For which purpose it is the duty of all subjects to pray for their
Prince, though he be a Pagan, that 1. Tim. 2. 2.
under him they may live a godly and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty* But though every Prince, in that he is a Prince, has authority to
serve God as a Prince, yet for the due execution thereof there is required
grace. Authority is in a Pagan; the due execution requires a Christian. The
King of Niniuie had authority long before, to proclaim a fast; Nabuchodonosor
had authority to command, that all nations and languages should worship the
God of Daniel: but they put it not in execution till God touched their hearts:
and when they put it in execution, it was not by any new authority, but by
virtue of their former Princely power heretofore abused, but now used rightly
by direction of Gods Spirit, and assistance of his grace. The truth of which
answer that you may see in another glass, let us a little remove our speech
from the Prince to the Priest: I demand therefore, if the Priests, the sons
of Aaron were not the messengers of the Lord of hosts?


PHIL. Yes verily as says the Prophet Malach. ^ 7.
Malachy.


ORTH. But he may be a false prophet, an Idolater, an Apostata, he may turn
Pagan or Atheist. Is such a Priest the messenger of the Lord of hosts?


PHIL. A Priest in respect of his office ought so to be.


ORTH. But the Prophet speaking of the wicked Priest which seduceth the people,
says not, he ought to be, but he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.


PHIL. A Priest as a Priest, be he good or bad, in respect of his priestly
calling and authority, is the messenger of the Lord of hosts; he ought to
leave his impieties in seducing the people, and to serve God, by teaching the
truth. In that he is a Priest, God has armed him with a calling, to deliver
his message, for performance whereof, he needs no new calling, but grace to
use that well, which before he abused.


ORTHOD. Apply this to the present point, and you may satisfy your self.


PHIL. To make the Prince Supreme Governor, or head of the Church, is
unnatural, for shall the sheep feed the flock, or the son guide the
Father?


ORTHO. As the Priest is a father and shepherd, in respect of the Prince, so
the Prince is a shepherd and father, in respect of the Priest. The Lord chose
Psalm. 78. 70.
David his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds, even from behind the
ewes with young brought he him to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance
in Israel, so he fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and
guided them by the discretion of his hands. And 2. Chron. ^9. 11.
Ezechias called the Priests his sons; If the Prince be their shepherd,
then he must feed them, if he be their father, then he must guide them, this
is natural.


PHIL. THis style of the Crown was so distasteful to Calu^n Amos. 7. 13.
Calvin, that he called 7.
it blasphemy and sacrilege.


ORTHOD. It is certain that he did not differ from us in judgment. But he was
wrong informed by Steph. Gardener, who expounded it as though the king had
power vt statuat pro suo arbitrio quicquid voluerit, to establish at his
pleasure, whatsoever he would, which Calvin exemplifieth in the words of
Gardener, the king may forbid Priests to marry, and debar the people from the
Cup in the Lords Supper, because forsooth potestas (umma est penes regem; the
highest power is in the king. This is that which Calvin calls blasphemy and
sacrilege, and so will we. But if Calvin had been truly informed that
nothing had been meant by this title, but to exclude the Pope, and to
acknowledge the kings lawful authority over his own subjects, not in
diuising new Articles of faith, or coining new forms of religion, as Jeroboam
did his calves, but in maintaining that faith and religion which God had
commanded; without all question Calvin had never misliked it. In this sense,
and no other, that title was given him. Neither did the king take it otherwise,
for ought that we can learn.


PHIL. If the title were not blame worthy; why was it altered?


ORTHOD. In the beginning of the Queens reign, the nobles and sundry of the
Clergy, perceiving that some out of ignorance, and infirmity, were offended at
the title of Bish. Bilson true diffrence.
supreme head of the Church, humbly entreated her majesty, that it might be
expressed in some plainer terms; whereto her clemency most graciously
condiscended, accepting the title of supreme governor, being the same in
substance with the former. So this alteration was not made as though the other
were blame worthy: for the phrase is according to the 1* Sam. 15. 17.
Scripture, which calls the king head of the tribes of Israel; And the sense
thereof is agreeable to the true meaning, both of Scripture and also of ancient
Fathers, Councels, and practice, both of the kings of Judah, and of Christian
Emperors; as has been declared, where it was as lawful for the Parliament
to exact an oath in behalf of the Prince against the Pope, as it was for
Iehoiada, to exact an 2. Kings 11 4.
oath in behalf of king Ioas, against the usurper Athalia; which oath being
holy and lawful, the refusal of it was disloyalty and a just cause of
deprivation. Hitherto of the Bishops deposed, now let us proceed to such as
succeed them.


CHAP. IIII.
Of the Consecration of the most reverend father, Archbishop Parker.

PHIL. YOur Bishops Scultingius Biblioth. Catho. t. 5. p. 106.
derive their counterfeit authority, not from lawful Consecration, or
Catholic inauguration, but from the Reginales prelati* Sand. de schis. l. 3.
p. 297.
Queen and Ibidem. p. 298.
Parliaments. For in Brist. Anti. mot. ^om. 2. p. 264.
England the king yea, and the Queen, may give their letters patents to whom
they will, and they thencefoorth may bear themselves for Bishops, and may
begin to ordain Ministers: So we may justly say that among the Caluinists in
England, there reigned a John Brierly Cath. apol. see Doct. Mort. appeal. p.
633.
woman Pope. But Brist. mot. 21.
such was the order of Christ's Church, which the Apostles founded, Priests to
be sent by Priests, and not by the letters patents of kings or Queens.


ORTHOD. These shameless Papists would make the world believe that our Bishops
derive not their Consecration from Bishops, but from kings and Queens, which
is an impudent slander For our kings do that which belongs to kings, and
our Bishops do that which belongs to Bishops. In the vacancie of any
Archbishopricke, or Bishopric, the Ann. 25. H. 8. ca. 20.
king grants to the Deane and Chapter a license under the great Seal, as of
old time has been accustomed, to proceed to an election, with a letter
missiue, containing the name of the person which they shall elect and choose,
which being duly performed and signified to the King, under the common seal of
the electors, the king gives his royal assent; and signifying, and presenting
the person elected to the Archbishop and Bishops, as the law requires he
gives them commission, and withal requires and commands them to confirm
the said election, and to inuest, and Consecrat^ the said person, using all
ceremonies and other things requisite for the same. Whereupon the Archbishop
and Bishops proceeding according to the ancient form, in those cases used, do
Ex regist. Cant. passim in citatione contra oppositores.
cause all such as can object, or take exception, either in general, or
particular, either against the manner of the election, or the person elected,
to be cited publicly and peremptorily, to make their appearance. When the
validity of the election, and sufficiency of the person are by public acts,
and due proceedings iudicially approved, then follows Consecration, which is
performed by a lawful number of lawful Bishops, and that in such form as is
required by the ancient Canons.


PHIL. I Will prove that your Bishops, in the beginning of the Queens 2.
reign, derived not their authority from lawful Consecration, but from the
Queen and Parliament. For Sand. de schl. l. 3. p. 298. Pollinu* l. 4. c. 6. p.
434.
being destitute of all lawful ordination when they were commonly said, and
proved by the laws of England to be no Bishops, they were constrained to
crave the assistance of the secular power, that they might receive the
Confirmation of the lay Magistrate in the next Parliament, by authority
whereof, it any thing were done amiss, and not according to the prescript of
the Law, or omitted and left undone in the former inauguration, it might be
pardoned them, and that after they had enjoyed the Episcopal Office and Chair
certain years, without Absque vlla Episcopal consecratione.
any Episcopal Consecration. Hence it was, that they were called Parliament
Bishops.


ORTHO. The Anno 8. Eliz^^. c. 1.
Parliament which you mean, was in the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth,
wherein first they reprove the over much boldness of some which slandered the
estate of the Clergy, by calling into question, whether their making and
Consecrating, were according to Law. Secondly, they touch such laws as
concern the point, declaring that every thing requisite and material, was
done as precisely in her Majesty's time, as ever before. Thirdly, they confirm
again the book of Common prayer, with the form thereunto annexed, enacting
that all persons that then had been, or afterward should be made, ordered, or
Consecrated Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Ministers, of Gods holy word and
Sacraments, or Deacons, after the form and order herein prescribed, were by
authority thereof declared and enacted to be, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Ministers, and Deacons, rightly made, ordered, and Consecrated: any Statute,
Law, Canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Whereby it is
evident that the Parliament did not make them Bishops, but being in very deed
true Bishops, by lawful Consecration, that honorable court did declare and
enact them so to be. But what say the Papists to all this? When they cannot
infringe their Consecration, for a poor revenge they call our Religion
Parliament Religion, and our Bishops Parliament Bishops.


PHIL. Hard. conf. of the Apol. part. 6. c. 2.
If you will needs have your matters seem to depend of your Parliament, let us
not be blamed if we call it Parliament Relgion, Parliament Gospel, Parliament
faith.


ORTHOD. It is a marvel that you said not a Parliament God, and a Parliament
Christ. Might not we say as well, that in Q. Mary's time, you had a Parliament
Mass, and a Parliament Pope? Was it lawful for Q. Mary with her Parliament,
to subject the kingdom to the Pope and his Canons; and was it not lawful for
Q. Elizabeth with her Parliament, to submit themselves to Christ and his
Gospel? Indeed you have a spite against the Prince and Parliament, because they
expelled the Pope, advanced true Religion, and defended the Preachers and
Ministers thereof: neither against the persons only, but against the very
place wherein the Banner of Jesus Christ was so gloriously displayed. A French
Historian speaking of the bloody Massacre, says, Thuanu^ hist. l. 54. anno
2572. oppend.
Wise men which were not addicted to the Protestants part, seeking all manner of
excuse for that fact, did notwithstanding think, that in all Antiquity there
could not be found an example of like cruelty. But the English Powder Plot,
does so far exceed the French Massacre, that there is no degree of
comparison; this cannot be patternd, or paraleld. It was of such a
transcendencie, that all the devils may seem to have holden a black
convocation in Hell, and there to have concluded such a sulphurious and
Acheronticall device, as was never heard of since the world began. But the Lord
of Heaven did so strangely reveal it, as though the birds of the air had
carried the voice, and that which has wings, had declared the matter. As for
the chief instruments thereof, the Ravens of the valleys did pluck out their
eyes, and the young Eagles did eat them. Wherefore, if you will not believe us
disputing for Religion, yet believe God himself, with his own right hand, and
with his holy arm defending our Prince and State, our Church and Ministry,
and that very House, wherein the Standard of the Gospel was advanced, maugre
the malice of all the devils in hell. All glory be to thee, O Lord, for this
thy unspeakable mercy; still protect and defend them, that Israel may be
glad, and thy servant Jacob rejoice.


PHIL. IF you can justify your Bishops, produce their Consecrations, make it
appear to the world, when, by whom, and how they were Consecrated, beginning
with the first which was made in the Queens time, That is, with Matthew
Parker, who did bear the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury.


ORTHOD. You learned this disdainefull speech of Sand. Rock of the church,
Lo^anij 1567.
Nicholas Sanders, who dedicated his rock of the Church to that reverend
Archbishop, in this irreverent manner; To the right worshipful Master Doct.
Parker bearing the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Wherein (to let pass
that right worshipful, and right scornful title) he does not style him
Archbishop; but bearing the name of Archbishop: As though our Bishops were
Bishops only in name. But what can you say against him?


PHIL. I would feign learn of you the place where he was Consecrated. I have
read that Maximus was consecrated in the house of a Greg. presb. in vit. Greg.
Naz.
minstrell, and it seems that Matthew Parker was Consecrated in a Tavern.
For doct. Reply to D. Sutl. p. 31.
Kellison says, That he heard it credibly reported, that some of your new
Superintendents, were made Bishops at the Nags-head in Cheap. A fit Church for
such a Consecration: and it is most likely, that Matthew Parker was one of
them, because he was the first.


ORTHOD. This of the Nagges head, does call to my remembrance Pope John the
12. who ordained a Deacon in a stable amongst his horses. A fit sanctuary for
such a Saint. Neither is it a tale or fable, as yours is, but a story
Chronicled by Lib* 6.
Luitprandus, who is, and ever will be esteemed a learned Historian:
notwithstanding that Anno 963.
Baronius goes about to discredit him, as he does all other writers that
make against him. And Luitprandus groundeth himself not upon flying reports,
as Kellison and you do, but upon two witnesses, the one a Bishop, the other a
Cardinal, John bishop of Narnium in Italy, and John Cardinal Deacon, who did
testify in a Roman Council, in the presence of Otho the Emperor, Se vidisse
illum Diaconum ordinasse in equorum stabulo, i. That they themselves did see
him with their own eyes, ordain a Deacon in a stable of horses. But whereas
you say, that Kellison heard this credibly reported, I must tell you, that you
are very forward in spreading false reports against the Protestants. It is
credibly reported at Rome, that we in England have Tortura Torti. p. 152.
wrapped some Papists in bears skins, and baited them with dogs; That we
enclose dormise in basins, and lay them to the sides of the Catholics to eat
out their bowels; That we bind them to mangers, and feed them with hay like
horses. These are shining lies, fit Carbuncles for the Popes Miter. Neither do
they report them only, but Print them, and paint them, and publish them with
the Popes Eccles. Angl. trophen. Anno 1584. cum priuil. Greg. 13.
privilege. They need a privilege which tell such glorious lies. This of the
Nagges head, though it go current at Rome, and be blazed for a truth through
the world by men of your rank, is cousine -- german to the former, as
appears by the Reg. Park. tom. 1. fol. 9.
Records of the Archbishopricke, which declare, that he was consecrated in
Capella infra manerium suum de Lambhith, That is, in the Chapel within his
manor of Lambhith. Thus you see the falsehood of this fable, which was devised
to no other purpose, but only to make our Ministry and Religion seem odious
to all men. Is not this strange dealing, for men that make such great
ostentation of sincerity and gravity? But for my own part I do not marvel
at it, your proceedings are but answerable to your doctrines. For you teach,
That an officious lie is but a Bell. de amiss. great. l. 3. c. 8.
venial sin. And again, That the Church of Rome is the holy mother Church:
Therefore to whom should kind offices rather be performed, then to the Church
of Rome? And what office will she take more kindly, then the discrediting of
those whom she accounts Heretics? therefore I do not wonder that you put
it in practice, I fear nothing, but that shortly it shall grow with you a
point meritorious. Well, the Eccl^s. 28. 17
Stripe of the rod makes marks in the flesh, but the stripe of the tongue
breaks the bones: But let them remember, That the Wisd. ^. 11.
tongue which lies, slays the soul; And that all Revel. 21* 8.
liars shall have their portion (except they repent) in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone.


PHIL. Whatsoever is to be thought of the place, yet I will prove by 5
the Laws of England, That neither he, nor any of his associats were lawful
Bishops.


ORTHOD. By the laws of England? how prove you that?


PHIL. It was Ex Sandero de schism. l. 3. p. 297. Hier. Poll. l. 4. c. 6. p.
434.
ordained by the Parliament in the days of Henry the eight, that no man should
be acknowledged a Bishop, unless he were Consecrated by three Bishops with the
consent of the Metropolitan; which law was revived by Queen Elisab. in
integrum restituit ac renouauit. Sand* ibid.
Elizabeth, and in full strength at the time of the Consecration of Matthew
Parker: but Matthew Parker was not so Consecrate, and therefore by the laws of
England he was not to be acknowledged for a Bishop. For what Archbishop was
either present at his Consecration, or consenting unto it? Cardinal Poole then
late Archbishop of Canterbury was dead, and Parker elected into his place.
Nicholas Heath then last Archbishop of York was deposed. Indeed there was a
certain Ibidem.
Irish Archbishop, who^ they had in bonds and prison at London, with whom they
dealt very earnestly, promising him both liberty and rewards, if so be he would
be chief in the Consecration. But he (good man) would by no means be
brought to lay holy hands upon heretics, neither to be partaker of other men's
sins. Wherefore having neither Archbishop of their own religion, nor being
able to procure any other, the Consecration was performed without a
Metropolitan, clean contrary to the laws of England.


ORTHO. What if both Sanders and you abuse the laws of England in this point?
as indeed you do: For the words are these. An. 25. Henry 8. c. 20.
And if the person be elected to the office and dignity of an Archbishop,
according to the tenor of this act, then after such election certifyed to the
kings highness in form aforesaid, he shall be reputed and taken Lord elect of
the said office and dignity of Archbishop, whereunto he shall be so elected, and
after he has made such oath and fealty, only to the kings Majesty his heirs
and successors as shall be limited for the same, the kings highness by his
letters patents under the great seal, shall signify the said election to one
Archbishop, and two other Bishops, or else to four Bishops within this Realm,
or within any other the kings Dominions, to be assigned by the kings highness,
his heirs or successors, requiring and commanding the said Archbishop and
Bishops, with all speed and celerity to confirm the said election, and to
inuest and Consecrate the said person so elected to the office and dignity that
he is elected unto, and to give and use to him such pall, benedictions,
ceremonies and other things requisite for the same, without suing, procuring,
or obtaining any Bulls, Briefes, or any other things at the Sea of Rome, or by
authority thereof in any behalf. Where it is clear that the King his heirs
and successors might by the statute send letters patents for Consecration of
an Archbishop, either to an Archbishop and two Bishops, or else to four
Bishops, therefore it might be performed without an Archbishop, and yet not
contrary to the laws of England.


PHIL. ADmit this were true, yet it avails you nothing; for Math. 5
Parker was Consecrated neither by Sand. de Sch. l. 3. p. 297. nec inter se,
aut tres du^sue Episcopos haberent.
three, nor by two, much less by four, though by your own confession the law
required four.


ORTHOD. How know you that? were you present at his Consecration? or did you
learn it of any that were present?


PHIL. I cannot say so, but it is very likely, because the Catholic Bishops
being required to crown Queen Elizabeth, refused, all except one.


ORTHO. That one was Owen Oglethorp Bishop of Carlill; but he was none of the
Consecrators of Archbishop Parker. For he continued in your Popish religion,
refused the oath of the supremacy, and was therefore deprived.


PHIL. That was the common case of them all but one; Hard. Consut. of the Apol.
part. 6. c. 2.
For one alone I must confess was made to break unity, of whom a right good
and Catholic Bishop said to a Noble man, we had but one fool amongst us, and
him you have gotten unto you, little worthy of the name of a Bishop and Lord,
whose learning was small, and honor thereby much stained. And he as it
seems was the only Bishop which you had; therefore Math. Parker could not be
Consecrated by three.


ORTHO. He whom you mean was Anth. Who only remained in his See, and agreed
to the religion. Witness the author of the life of the 70. Archbishop.
Kitchen Bishop of Landaffe, who was in the commission, but was none of the
Consecratours; therefore you shoot at random and miss the mark.


PHIL. Whence then had you your Consecrators? Surely you did not go Sand. quo
supra.
to the Churches of the Caluinistes, and Lutherans, if peradventure they had
any.


ORTHOD. We did not.


PHIL. Then you must be glad to run to your usual refuge, that you had one
from Eudaemon Ioh. Cydoniu^ parall. c. 5. accerser^ vobis nescio cuius
ordinatorise Graecia auxilium soliti ^itis.
Greece. Alas my masters, you are narrowly driven, when you are forced to fly
to such miserable shifts.


ORTHOD. This tale proceeded not from Eudaemon, but from Cacodaemon, the father
of lies. No Sir, we needed no Grecian, though it pleases you to play the
Cretian.


PHIL. If you had neither Bishops of your own, nor procured any, either from
the Catholic Church, or from the reformed Churches, or from the Greekish
Church, then it is true which Doctor Reply to D. Sutl. f. 31.
Kellison reports out of Sanders, That they made one another Bishops.


ORTHO. Though Sanders in that book has almost as many lies as lines, yet he
has not this loud lie; it is the invention of Kellison himself, you promise
demonstratiue reasons, and when your argument comes to the issue, where all
your strength should lie, you bring nothing but slender surmises, flying
reports, and detestable lies: Do these go at Rome for demonstrations? But I
will answer you with evidence of truth which may be justified by monuments of
public record.

QVeene Mary died in the year 1558 the 17. of November: and the 6.
self same day died Card nall Poole Archb. of Canterbury, and the very same
day was Queen Elizabeth proclaimed. The 15. of January next following was the
day of Queen Elizabeth's Coronation, when Doctor Oglethorp Bishop of Carlill
was so happy as to set the Diadem of the kingdom upon her royal head. Now the Sea of Canterbury continued void till December following, about which time the
Deane and Chapter having received the congedelier, elected master Doctor
Parker for their Archbishop. Ex Regist. M. Parker.
Iuxta morem antiquum and laudabilem consuetudinem Ecclesiae praedictae ab
antiquo vsitatam and inconcusse obseruatam; i. proceeding in this election
according to the ancient manner* and the laudable custom of the foresaid
Church, aunciently used, and inuiolably observed. After which election orderly
performed and signified according to the law, it pleased her highness to send
her letters pattents of Commission for his confirmation and consecration to
seven Bishops, (six whereof were lately returned from exile;) whose names, with
so much of the commission as concerns this present purpose, I will here set
down for your better satisfaction.

Litter^ patent* regiae ^x Regist. Park. fol. 3. b. And the same record is to
be found in the Chauncery.
Elizabeth Dei gratia, etc. Reuerendis in Christo patribus. Anth. Landauensi.
Will. Barlow quondam Bath. Episcopo nunc Cicestrensi electo. Ioh. Scory quondam
Cicestrensi Episcopo nunc Herefordensi electo. Miloni Couerdale quondam
Exoniensi Episcopo. Ioh. Suffraganeo Bedford. Ioh. Suffraganeo The^ford. Ioh.
Bale Ossorensi Episcopo.


-- Quatenus vos aut ad minus 4. vestrum eundem Math. Parkerum in
Archiepiscopum, and pastorem Ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi
Cantuar: praedictae sicut praefertur, electum, electionemque praedictam
confirmare and eundem Magistrum Math. Parker in Arch: and Pastorem Ecclesiae
praedictae consecrare, caeteraque omnia and singula peragere, quae vestro in
hac part incumbunt pastorali efficio, iuxta formam statutorum in ca part
editorum and prouisorum velitis cum effectu, etc. Da^. 6 December. Anno 2. Elizab*
that is: That you or at the least four of you would effectually confirm the
said Matthew* Parker elected to be Archbishop and Pastor of the Cathedral and
Metropoliticall Church of Christ at Canterbury aforesaid, as is before
mentioned, and that you would effectually confirm the said election, and
consecrate the said Matthew Parker, Archbishop and Pastor of the said Church,
and perform all and every thing which belongs to your Pastoral office in this
respect, according to the form of the statutes set out and provided in this
behalf. Behold how both the commission and statute concur with the Canons.


PHIL. But was the consecration accordingly performed? 7



ORTH. You need not doubt of it. For first, the Bishops to whom the letters
patents were directed, had reason to set their hands cheerfully to so good a
work, so much tending to the advancing of the true Religion which they all
embraced, and for which all of them except one, had been in exile. Secondly,
how durst they do otherwise, seeing it was enacted by a statute made in the
25. year of King Cap. 20.
Henry 8. and still in force, that if any Archbishop or Bishop within the Kings
dominions after any such election, nomination* or presentation signified unto
them by the Kings letters patents, should refuse and not confirm, inuest, and
consecrate with all due circumstance within twenty days after that the Kings
letters patents of such signification or presentation should come to their
hands, then he or they, so offending, should run in the dangers; pains and
penalties of the statute of provision and praemunire made in the twenty five
year of the reign of king Edward the third, and in the sixteenth of king
Richard the second.


PHIL. This is some probability: but yet for all this, seeing master D.
Sanders says, that you had neither three nor two Bishops, and master D.
Kellison says you could find none, I will not believe the contrary unless
you produce the consecration it self.


ORTHOD. Then to take away all scruple, I will faithfully deliver unto you out
of Authentical records, both the day when he was consecrated, and the persons
by whom.

Anno 1559. Ex Registro Matthew. Park. ^om. 1. f. 2. and 10.
Matt. Park. Cant. Cons. 17. December. by William Barlow. John Scorie. Miles
Couerdale. John Hodgeskins.



PHIL. IF all this were granted, yet it were nothing unless you could 8
justify the consecration of his consecratours, therefore you must tell me
when they were made Bishops?


ORTHOD. Two of them in the reign of king Henry 8. and two in the days of
king Edward the sixth. In the reign of K. Henry, B. Barlow and the Suffragan of
Bedford. Bishop Barlow was a man of singular note, who, (to use the words of
Descript^ribus Angl. Cent. 9. 41.
Bale) ab erudito ingenio famam accepit: that is he had great fame and renown
for a learned wit. In regard whereof he was advanced to be Prior of Registrum
Cranm. f. 181. b
Bisham and from thence elected to the Bishopric of Saint Ibid. f. 179.
Asaph, which election was confirmed 23. Febr* 1535. and soon after it pleased
the King to prefer him to the Bishopric of Saint Ibid. f. 205.
David's, where he continued all the days of King Henry duly discharging all
things belonging to the order of a Bishop, even Episcopal consecration, as I
have Li^* 2. c. 10. in the consecration of Arthur Buckly.
already declared out of authentical records. He was also translated by King
Edward to the Bishopric of Bath and Wels, and by Queen Elizabeth promoted to
Chichester. And as he was generally acknowledged and obeyed as a Bishop in his
own nation, so Bucanan relating how King Henry sent him Ambassador into
Scotland, does give him his just Anglus misit in Scotia^ Sanct^ Dau^^is sieve
Meneuensem Episcopum
Episcopal title. Now you told us Lib. 2. c. 10.
before out of Sanders, that in King Henry's time, none might be acknowledged
for a Bishop unless he were consecrated by three, with the consent of the
Metropolitan. Wherefore seeing Barlow was so famously and notoriously
acknowledged not only in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and King Edward, but
also in the days of King Henry* it is a clear case that he was so
consecrated. The same is to be said of the Suffragan of Bedford.


PHIL. What tell you me of Suffraganes? you know how Epist. 3. Bin. t. 1. page
502.
Damasus speaks against those titulary Bishops, called Chorepiscopi.


ORTHOD. There are two sorts of Chorepiscopi, the first had no Episcopal
Consecration, who are reproved and that justly, for they were only Priests,
and not Bishops, and of these Damasus speaks in the judgment of De Cleric.
c. 17.
Bellarmine. The second had Episcopal Consecration, and these though they had
no city, nor diocese of their own, but only some country town for their
See, yet in regard of their Consecration, they were true Bishops, as De
s^cr^onf. l. 2. cap. 12.
Bellarmine confesses: Respondeo, Suffraganeos esse veros Episcopos, quia and
ordinationem habent, and Iurisdictionem, licet careant possessione propriae
Ecclesia: that is, I answer that Suffraganes are true Bishops, because they
have both ordination and Jurisdiction, although they are not possessed of a
Church of their own. And of this latter sort are the Suffraganes of England,
established by act of Parliament, in these words. Be it 26. H. 8. c. 14.
therefore enacted by authority of this present Parliament that the towns of
Thetford, Ipswich, Colchester, Dover, Gilsord, Southampton, Taunton,
Shaftesbury, Molton, Marleborrow, Bedford, Leicester, Gloucester, Shrewsbury,
Bristow, Penreth, Bridgwater, Nottingham, Grantham, Hul, Huntingdon, Cambridge,
and the towns of Pereth, and Barwicke, S. Germans in Cornwall, and the I Will of
Wight, shall be taken and accepted for Sees of Bishops Suffraganes, to be
made in this Realm, and in Wales. And the Bishops of such Sees shall be
called Suffraganes of this Realm. And for their consecration, provided always
that the Bishop that shall nominate the Suffragane to the kings highness, or
the Suffragane himself, that shallbe nominated, shall provide two B. or
Suffrag. to Consecrate him with the Archbishop.


PHIL. Was John Hodgeskins accordingly Consecrated?


ORTH. He was Consecrated by three as appears.

John Ex registro Cran. f. 204.
Hodgskins Suffrag. Bedf. Cons. 9. Dec. 29. Hen. 8. by John Land. John Roff.
Rob. Asaph.




PHIL. But the Statute produced requires two Bishops, with an Archbishop*
where is that Archbishop?


ORTHO. Your institutions of the Canon Law recognized at Rome by the Popes
Mandat, may tell you, that an Archbishop may Lanc. inst. l. 1. de consec.
alicui Coepiscoporum vices suas demandare, commit his room to any other of
his fellow Bishops. And this you must hold, for otherwise ye can no ways
defend the Consecrations of your chief Bishops, namely Bonner, Heath, and
Thurlby, whom Archbishop Cranmer did not Consecrate in his own person, but by
Regist. Cran. f. 259. and 261.
others, to whom he gave commission. To conclude this point, your principal
Bishops in Queen Mary's time descended from this same Ioh. Bedford. For Tho.
Thurlby, who was one of the Consecrators of Cardinal Regist. Car. Pol^ f. 3. a.
Poole, was Consecrated by Ioh. Regist. Cran. f. 261.
Bedf. The other two were Consecrated in King Edwards time, both in one day as
has been Libr. 2. c. 11.
before declared. And these also were very learned men; Couerdale helped
Tindall, in the translation of the Bible: his fame and renown caused the Act.
ad Mon. where the copy of the letters are to be scene.
King of Denmark, to write earnestly unto Queen Marie, that she would send
him unto him, which she did. And how learned a man, Bishop Scory was, may
appear by this, that when the disputation was appointed with the Popish
Bishops, he was the Acts and Mon. in fine.
first and principal man named on the Protestants side, with whom the
adversaries durst not encounter. And thus much of their Consecrations.


PHIL. ADmit they were truly Consecrated, and were Bishops of their 10
several Sees, yet they fled away and so dispossessed themselves, and
therefore could not Consecrate him by virtue of their former Episcopal titles.


ORTHOD. By what power does a Bishop Consecrate a Bishop?


PHIL. By virtue of his Episcopal Bell. de^ap. and Cons l. 2. c. 12.
Character.


ORTHO. But you told us that the Character is indeleble: therefore they could
not loose the power of Consecrating by loosing their Bishopriks. Again if a
Bishop flying in the time of persecution does cease to be a Bishop and loose
his title, then famous Athanasius did cease to be a Bishop, and lost his
title, for it is plain that he fled from Alexandria. Athanas. in Epist. ad
Orthodoxos.
I did says he withdraw my self by stealth, frrom the people being mindful
of the word of my Savior, Matthew. 10. 23.
if they persecute you in one City, fly into another. But Athanasius for all
this did not cease to be Bishop of Alexandria. For although the Arrian faction
preuayling* the Council of Tire Concilium vero Tyrium, eum indicta causa
condem. not, abdicat Episcopatu. ^oz. l. 2. c. 24.
deposed him, yea and the Council of Antioch, in the presence and with the
consent of the Cogitur Concilium Antiochiae present imperatore Constantio.
Socr. lib. 2. c. 5^
Emperor, did institute Decernunt vt Gregorius Ecclesiae Alexandrinae antistes
constituatur Soz. l. 3. c. 5. vid. Bar Anno 341 number. 1.
Gregory in his place, yet the council of Epist. Sardic. Concilij ad Episc.
Africanos Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 207. Paris. 1608
Sardica pronounced Athanasius (as also Marcellus Asclepas and other Catholic
exiled Bishops) to be pure and innocent: and deny that Gregory the Usurper, of
Alexandria, Basil of Ancyra, Quintianus of Gaza, (which had entered like Qui in
eorum Ecclesias ^uporum instar ingressi sunt. ibidem. Binius ^om. 1. p. 446.
Woolues upon the Churches of these men) should be called Bishops. So the
Council judged the Churches to belong to the Catholic Bishops, even at such
time as they were exiled, and the Arrians in possession: and accordingly they
See Baron* Anno. 347.
deposed Gregory with such like, and restored Athanasius, and the rest with
honor. Which act they signified in a Synodall Epistle, to the Church of
Alexandria, in this manner. Athanas. Apol. 2. Bin. t. 1. p. 444.
We would have you to know that Gregory, being made Bishop unlawfully, by
heretics, and brought by them into your city is deposed from his Bishopric
by the whole Synod, although in very deed he was never Bishop, therefore
farewell, and receive your Bishop Athanasius. Thus you see that though
Athanasius fled away in time of persecution, though he were deposed by a
Council, and another chosen in his place, by another Council, with the consent
of the Emperor; yet for all this* he is judged to be the true Bishop of
Alexandria, and Gregory never to have been the Bishop thereof. The like is to
be said of Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, Paulus Bishop
of Constantinople and others, who were persecuted for the Catholic Faith, as
well as Athanasius. Wherefore if you will conform your judgment to the
Council of Sardica, you must confess that such as in King Edwards time were
lawfully possessed of Bishoprics (though in Queen Mary's time being
persecuted in one city, they fled into another) did still retain the titles
of true Bishops, and that those which invaded their Churches, were intruders
and usurpers. Thus it appears, that as Athanasius, and the rest returning
from exile, might ordain and do, all such things as belonged to their
Episcopal Office, even so Bishop Barlow, Bishop Couerdale, and the rest
returning from exile, might likewise ordain, and justify their proceedings in
their Episcopal function.


PHIL. There is not the same reason: for Athanasius and the rest were restored
by a Council, yours were not, but only by the Prince.


ORTHOD. Athanasius was restored sundry times, sometimes with a Council,
sometimes without. When the Council of Tire deposed him, the Emperor
Constantine the Great called them to Eusebius. de vitae Constant. lib. 4. cap. 42.
Socr. l. 1. c. 22.
account for their judgment: But when he heard him accused by Catholic
Bishops, which formerly had been his own friends, (whom the Arrians had now
suborned against him) for threatening to hinder the carriage of corn from
Alexandria to Constantinople, he Socr. lib. 1. cap. 23.
exiled him into France; From whence after the death of Constantine the father,
he was restored to Alexandria by the Letters of Constantine the son, with the
Licet inuito animo ferret, ^ulit tamen. Baron. anno 338. n. 3.
permission of his brother Constantius, and that according to the prescript of
their father, as appears by these words of Athanasius: Athanasius apol. 2.
Blessed Constantine the younger, being mindful of the prescripts of his
father, while he restored me to my Country, wrote an Epistle in these
words. And so he sets down Constantines Epistle to the Church of
Alexandria. Concerning which you shall hear your own An^^ 338. ^. 1.
Baronius, Constantinus Augustus Athanasium quem viuente patre exceperat
Treueris, regio diplomate, datis ad Alexandrinos litteris, in suam Ecclesiam
summo cum honor restituit, i. Constantine the Emperor restored Athanasius
(whom he had entertained at Treuers while his father was alive) by his Letters
Patents to the people of Alexandria, with very great honor. Thus you see that
though he was deposed by a Council, and exiled by a Prince, yet he was
restored only by the Princes Letters without a Counsel.


PHIL. The Council of Antioch Soz. l. 3. c. 5.
objected a Conc. Antioch. 1. Can. 12. Bin. tom. 1. p. 423.
Canon against him* to wit, That he which is deposed by a Council, cannot be
restored but by a Council of a greater number: And therefore seeing he was
deposed by the Council of Tire, and restored, neither by a Council of a
greater number, nor by any Council at all, but only by the letters of the
Emperor, they deposed him, and put another in his place.


ORTHOD. First, it is Vide Bin. in notis in Conc. Antioch.
confessed, that this Council of Antioch, was a wicked Arrian Council:
Secondly, Lib. 6. c. 16.
Socrates declares, that this very Canon was urged against S. Chrysostom, who
rejected it as being made by the Arrians, of set purpose against Athanasius:
Thirdly, if we should admit this Canon, yet it makes nothing against the
Consecratours of Archbishop Parker: for they were not deposed by any Council,
and therefore needed no Council to restore them; but as Athanasius and other
Bishops being forced to flee in the time of Sozom. l. 5. cap. 14.
Julian, returned again in the days of Iouian, Greg. Naz. orat. de laud.
Athan.
Qui cum omnes alios Episcopos, tum eum (nempe Athanasium) ante omnes, qui
omnibus virtute antecellebat, and citra dubitationem vllam pietatis causa bello
vexatus fuerat, ab exilio reuocat, i. Who recalled from exile, as all other
Bishops, so especially Athanasius, who in virtue excelled all men, and without
doubt was vexed and troubled (only) for his piety and Religion: So these
reverend Bishops being forced to flee in the time of Q. Mary, only for their
piety and Religion, returned again in the days of Q. Elizabeth, who as she
recalled all godly Christians and Preachers from exile, so especially those
that excelled in learning and virtue. Hitherto of the Consecratours.

NOw for the Consecrated, he was a man against whom you can take no 11.
exception: for you must needs acknowledge that he was capable of the
Episcopal Office, because Antih^ret. motiu. p. 266.
Bristow confesses, that he was a Priest secundum Catholicum ritum, i.
according to the Catholic rite, Which is most true; He was Chaplain to the
Lady Anne Bullein, and afterward to K. Henry the 8. who greatly preferred him,
and he was thought by Q. Elizabeth the fittest man to be advanced to the Sea of
Canterbury. He was very learned (as may appear by his writings famously
known to the world,) and a great lover of learning, and Religion: For he
founded a See B. Goodwin. in catalogo.
Grammar School at Rochdale in Lancashire; Unto Corpus Christi College in
Cambridge (where he was brought up) he procured 13. Schollerships, built the
inward Library, and two fair chambers in the same. He gave to the Library of
that College a great number of Books, some printed, other written, very rare,
and much to be esteemed for their value and Antiquity. He gave also to the
University 50* written books of great value, and 50 printed. He gave to the
same College, land for the maintenance of two Fellows, above the ordinary
number. He took order for the preaching of 6. Sermons yearly, in 5. several
Churches in Norfolk. To Trinity Hall he gave a Scholars place, and books
likewise. And otherwise bestowed much money unto charitable uses Lastly, he is
commended by a great Camd. in Brit.
Antiquary, for being singularly studious of Antiquities; by whose care and
industry, many excellent Monuments both in the Latin and Saxon tongue were
preserved, which otherwise had perished in the darkness of Oblivion. But from
the persons we will proceed to the matter and form of the Consecration.


PHIL. I Kel reply to D. Sutl. p. 31.
Have heard credibly reported, That your new Superintendents, were 12.
made Bishops with no other ceremony, then with the laying of the English Bible
upon their heads.


ORTHOD. Yes, they were all made with imposition of hands, which is the only
ceremony of Ordination which the Scripture mentions; And De Sacram. Ordinis.
c. 9.
Bellarmine thinks it to be the matter essential. And for the other
Ceremonies which are but the invention of man, you cannot enforce them upon us,
further then the wisdom of our Church does hold it convenient. But concerning
Archb. Parker, Ex vita Matthei Parker.
this was his singular felicity, That being the 70. Archbishop after Austin,
yet of all that number he was the only man, and the first of all which
received Consecration without the Popes Bulls, and superfluous Aaronicall
Ornaments, as gloves, rings, Sandals, slippers, Miter, Pall, and such like
trifles: making a happy beginning (more rightly, and more agreeable to the
simplicity and purity of the Gospel) with Prayer, invocation of the holy
Ghost, imposition of hands, and Religious promises, in Attire correspondent to
the gravity and authority of an Archbishop, with a Sermon made by a learned
and godly Divine, concerning the Office, charge and faithfulness, of a Pastor
to his flock, and the love, obedience, and reverence of the flock to the
Pastor; And after Sermon, with receiving the holy Communion in a great
assembly of most grave men. And last of all, with the common and fervent
prayers of them all, that the Office imposed upon him, might redound to the
glory of God, the salvation of his flock, and the joyful testimony of his
own conscience.


PHIL. WHat form of words did they use, to give the Episcopal 13.
power, with the imposition of hands?


ORTHOD. The very same which was used in King Edwards days, and is used still
in the Church of England* yea the very same words, which by the great
providence of God are still retained in your own Church. And this may appear
by the act of his Consecration, remaining in record.

Ex regist. Mat. Park. fol. 10.
Cicestrensis, Heref: Suffraganeus Bedford and Milo Couerdale manibus
Archiepiscopo imposit is dixerunt anglice. viz. Take the holy Ghost etc.

Thus have we examined the place, the persons, the matter, the form of his
Consecration, and find nothing but agreeable to the laws of the Land, the
Canons of the Church, and the practice of reverend antiquity: wherein how
circumspectly the Queen proceeded, may further appear by this that her
letters patents were sent to diverse learned professors of the law, that they
might freely give their judgment, and all of them ioynthe confessed, that both
the Queens Majesty might lawfully authorize the persons to the effect
specified, and the said persons also might lawfully exercise the act of
confirming and Consecrating in the same to them committed: whose names
subscribed with their own hands remain in Ex reg. Mat. Park.
record as follows.

William May. Robert Weston. Edward Leedes. Henry Haruie. Thomas Yale. Nicolas
Bullingham.


Hitherto of Archbishop Parker, now let us hear your exceptions against the
rest.


CHAP. V.
Of the rest of the Bishops Consecrated in the second and third year of Queen
Elizabeth.

PHIL. IF his or their Consecrations were sound, why did the Queen in her
letters patents directed for the consecrating of them, use diverse general
words and sentences, whereby she dispensed with all causes, or doubts of any
imperfection or disability that could or might be objected in any wise against
the same, as may appear by an act 8. Eliz. c. 1.
of Parliament, referring us to the said letters patents, remaining of record?


ORT. She might entertain some reason in her royal breast, which you and I,
and such shallow heads are not able to conceive: But if I might presume to give
my conjecture, I suppose she did it, ad maiorem cautelam. For there wanted not
malicious Papists, which would pry into the state of the Clergy, and observe
the least imperfection that could be: Whereupon to prevent their slanders and
to stop the mouths of malice, that gracious Queen was not only careful
that Every thing requisite and material should be made and done as precisely
as ever before, but also to the end that all men might be satisfied, that all
doubt, scruple, and ambiguitie might be taken away, and that there should not
the least spot of suspicion cleave unto her Clergy, it pleased her Majesty if
peradventure quick sighted malice could find any quirk or quiditie against
them by color of any Canon or Statute, graciously to dispense with it; Which
does not argue any unsoundness in their consecrations, but the godly care and
providence of a religious Prince.


PHIL. You use to find fault with the Popes dispensations, and will you your
selves in an act of Parliament affirm that the Queen dispensed with all
causes or doubts of any imperfection, or dissabilitie, and that in a matter of
holy Orders?


ORTHOD. The Pope takes upon him to dispense against the law of God, (as for
example, That a brother may marry his brothers wife;) So did not Queen
Elizabeth, but only with trespasses against her own laws, not in essential
points of ordination, but only in accidental; not in substance but in
circumstance. Neither did she give them leave to make any voluntary violatio^
of the law, but only dispensed with such omission as Temporis ratione and rerum
necessitate id postulante.
necessity it self should require, as may appear by the said letters patents.
And it pleased the Almighty so to dispose that al things were performed in most
exquisite manner; yet the Papists, (such was their hatred against the Clergy)
did blaze abroad the contrary: Whereupon the high Court of Parliament
assembled in the eight year of that famous Queen, having deeply considered
and pondered all things, pronounced, that their speeches were Slanderous not
grounded upon any just matter, or cause. For Gods name be blessed, all things
were done honestly, and in order, even from her first coming to the crown.

ANd verily as Joshua Ios. 24. 10.
protested, I and my house will serve the Lord: so Queen 2
Elizabeth resolved with her own heart, I and my kingdoms will serve the
Lord. Therefore as 2. King. 23. 3.
Josias assembled the ancients of Judah and Jerusalem to make a Covenant with
their God: so Queen Elizabeth assembled her high Court of Parliament for the
same purpose. But as when Nehemias went about reformation, the Neh. 13. 28
Priests and Neh. 6. 12
Prophets which should have bin the principal helpers, were principal
hinderers; so it came to pass in that Parliament, that whereas the Prince, and
Barons, and the Commons were great instruments of Gods glory; the Popish
Bishops sought by all means the glory of their holy father the Pope.
Notwithstanding God in his mercy gave a blessing, so that the truth prevailed.
And as 2. Kin. 11. 4.
Iehoiada required an oath in behalf of King Ioas; so the Parliament did in
behalf of Queen Elizabeth. And as 2. Kin. 2. 35
Abiathar was justly deprived for refusing Solomon and joining with Adonia:
even so were the Popish Bishops for refusing the oath of the Queens supremacy,
which contained nothing else, but the Princes lawful title. And as Abiathar
being displaced, Sadok was advanced: so those undutiful Bishops, being
removed, godly Pastors were preferred.

THe Bishops deprived, were in number fourteen, in whose Sees, 3
who succeeded may appear by this table, wherein is set down first, the
Province of Canterbury, and then of York.

Sees. Displaced. Placed. province Cant. London. Bonner. Grindall. Winchester.
White. Horn. Ely. Thurlby. Coxe. Lincoln. Watson. Bullingham. Cou. and
Lichfeild Bane. Bentham. Bath and Wels. Bourne. Barckly. Exon. Turberuill.
Ally. Worcester. Pates. Sands. Peterburrow. Poole. Scambler. Asaph. Gouldwell.
Dauis. York. York. Heath. Young. Durham. Tunstall. Pilkinton. Carlill.
Oglethorp. Best. Chester. Scot. Downham.

The Consecration of the B. of the Province of Cant.
Anno 1559. Edm. Regist. Park. r. 1. fol. 18.
Grindall Cons. 21. Dec. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Will. Cicester. Ioh.
Hereford. Ioh. Bedford.
Anno 1560. Robert Ibid. fol. 88.
Horn cons. 16. Feb. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Tho. Meneu. Edm. London. Tho.
Cou. and Lich.
Anno 1559. Rich. Ibid. fol. 22.
Coxe cons. 21. December. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Will. Cicester. Ioh. Hereford.
Ioh. Bedford.
Anno 1559. Nich. Ibid. fol. 54.
Bullingha^ cons. 21. Ian. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Edm. London. Rich. Eliens.
Ioh. Bedford.
Anno 1559. Tho. Ibid. fol. 69.
Bentham cons. 24. Mart. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Nich. Lincoln. Ioh. Sarum.
Anno 1559. Gilb. Ibid. fol* 74.
Barckly cons. 24. Mart. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Nich. Lincoln. Ioh. Sarum.
Anno 1560. Will. Ibid. fol* 80.
Ally cons. 14. July. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Edm. London. Gilbard Bath and
Wells.
Anno 1559. Edwin Ibid. fol. 39.
Sands cons. 21. December. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Will. Cicester. Ioh.
Hereford. Ioh. Bedford.
Anno 1560. Edm. Ibid. fol. 92.
Scambler cons. 16. Febru. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Tho. Meneuens. Edm.
London. Tho. Cou. and Lichfield.
Anno 1559. Rich. Ibid. fol. 5^.
Dauis cons. 21. Ianu. by Math. Archbishop Cant. Edm. London. Rich. Eliens.
Ioh. Bedford.



Of the Cons. of the Bishops of the Province of York.

Thomas Young was translated to York from Saint David's, whose Consecration was
as follows.

Anno 1559. Thomas Young cons. 21. January by Math. Archb. Cant. Edm. London.
Rich. Eliens. Ioh. Bedford.


The like is to be judged of the rest which I have not set down, because as
yet I have not seen the records of York.


CHAP. VI.
A brief view of all the Bishops of some of the principal Sees, during the
whole reign of Queen Elizabeth.

ORTH. TO the intent that all men may know the godly 1
care of the Church of England in observing the ancient Canons, I will set
down all the Bishops of some of the principal Sees which were consecrated
from the first entrance of Queen Elizabeth, till the end of her Reign.

Canterbury.

THe Archbishops of Canterbury in the Queens time were Math. Parker, 2
Edmund Grindal, and John Whitgift, the consecration of the two former you have
heard already, the third remains to be declared.

Anno 1^77. Ioh. Regist. Grindal.
Whitgift cons. 21. April. by Edm. Archb. Cant. Ioh. London. Rob. Winton. Rich.
Cicester.


London.

THe Bishops of London in the Queens time, were Edmund Grindall, 3
Edwin Sands, John Elmer, Richard Fletcher, and Richard Bancroft. The
Consecration of the two first were before expressed, the rest as follows.

Anno 1576. Ioh. Ibidem.
Elmer Cons. 24. Mart. by Edm. Archb. Cant. Edw. Archb. Ebor. Ioh. Roff.
Anno 1589. Rich. Regist. Whitg. t. 1.
Fletcher Cons. 14. Dec. by Ioh. Archb Cant. Ioh. London. Ioh. Roff. Ioh. Glou.
Anno 1597. Rich. Ibidem.
Bancroft Cons. 8. May by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Ioh Roff. Anton Meneu. Rich Bangor.
Anton. Cicest.



Winchester.

THe Bishops of Winchester, in the Queens time, were Robert Horn, 4.
John Watson, Thomas Cooper, William Wickham, William Day, and Thomas Bilson;
the Consecration of Bishop Horn was before handled, the rest were as follows.

Anno 1580. Ioh. Regist. Grindal.
Watson Cons. 18. Septem. by Edm. Archb. Cant. Ioh. London. Ioh. Roff.
Anno 1570. Thomas Ex Regist. Park. t. 1.
Cooper Cons. 24. Febr. by Matthew. Archb. Cant. Robert Wint. Nich. Wigorn.
Anno 1584. Will. Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 1.
Wickham Cons. 6. December. by John Archb: Cant. Edm. Wigorn. Ioh. Exon. Mauricius
Meneu.
Anno 1595. William Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 2.
Day Cons. 25. Ianu. by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Rich. Land. Ioh. Roff.
Anno 1596. Thomas Ibidem.
Bilson Cons. 13. Ianu. by Ioh. Archb Cant. Rich. Land. Will. Wint. Rich.
Bangor.



Ely.

THe Bishops of Ely in the Queens time, Richard Coxe, and Martine 5.
Heaton, the Consecration of Bishop Coxe was handled before, the other
follows.

Anno 1599. Martin Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 3.
Heaton Cons. 3. Febr. by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Rich Land. Will. Cou. and Lichf.
Anton. Cicest.


Salisbury.

THe Bishops of Salisbury, were John Jewel, Edmund Gueast, John Peirs, 6
John Goldwell, and Henry Cotton.

Anno 1559. John Ex Regist. Park. fol. 46.
Jewel Cons. 21. Ianu. by Matthew. Archb. Cant. Edmund London. Rich. Ely. Ioh.
Bedford.
Anno 1559. Edmund Ibid. fol. 64.
Gueast Cons. 24. Mart. by Matthew. Archb. Cant. Nich. Lincoln. Ioh. Sarum.
Anno 1576. John Ex Reg. Grindall.
Peirs Cons. 15. April. by Edm. Archb. Cant. Edw. London. Rob. Winton.
Anno 1591. John Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 1.
Coldwell Cons. 26. December. by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Ioh. London. Tho. Wint. Rich.
Bristoll. Ioh. Oxon.
Anno 1598. Henry Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 3.
Cotton. Cons. 12. Nouem. by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Rich. London. William Covent.
Ant. Cicest.



Norwich.

THe Bishops of Norwich, were Thomas Parkhurst, Edmund Freake, Edmund 7
Scambler, William Redman, and John Iegon: Of these, Edmund Scamblers
Consecration has already been declared; the rest follow.

Anno 1560. Thomas Ex Regist. Park. t. 1.
Parkhurst Cons. 1. Sep. by Matthew. Archb. Cant. Gilbert Bath and Wells. William
Exon.
Anno 1571. Edmund Ibid.
Freake Cons. 9. Mart. by Matthew. Archb. Cant. Robert Wint. Edm. Sarum.
Anno 1594. William Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 2.
Redman Cons. 12. Ianu. by John Archb. Cant. Rich. London. John Roff. William
Lincoln.
Anno 1602. John Ex Regist. Whitg. t. 3.
Iegon Cons. 20. Febru. by John Archb. Cant. Rich. London. John Roff. Ant.
Cicest.



Rochester.

THe Bishops of Rochester were Edmund Gueast, Edm. Freake, John Pierce, and
John Young, whereof the three first have been already handled, the fourth
follows.

Anno 1577. Ex reg. Grindall.
John Young Cons. 16. Mart. by Edm. Archb. Cant. John Land. Ioh. Sarum.



CHAP. VII.
Of the Bishops in the Province of Canterbury, consecrated since our gracious
Sovereign King James did come to the Crown: with a little touch concerning
the Province of York.

ANd that you may know that the same order in Consecration of Bishops is still
retained under the reign of our gracious Sovereign King James, behold these
that follow.

Anno 1603. These Record following were taken out of the original instruments.
Ioh. Bridges Cons. B. of Oxon. 12. Febr. by Ioh. Archb. Cant. Rich. Land. Tob.
Durham. Ioh. Roff. Anthon. Cicest.
Anno 1604. Rich. Parry Cons. B. of Asaph. 30. Dec. by Rich. Archb. Cant. Rich.
Land. Tob. Durham. Mart. Eltens.
Anno 1604. Tho. Rauis Cons. B. of Glouc. 17. Mart. by Rich. Archb. Cant. Tob.
Durham. Anth. Cicest.
Anno 1605. Will. Barlow Cons. B. of Roch. 30. Iun. by Rich. Archb. Cant. Rich.
London. Anth. Cicest. Thom. Glouc.
Anno 1605. Lanc. Andrews Cons. B. of Cic. 3. Nou. by Rich. Archb. Cant. Rich.
Land. Ioh. Norwich. Thom. Glouc. Will. Roff.
Anno 1607. Henr. Parry Cons. B. of Glouc. 12. Iul. by Rich. Archb. Cant. Thom.
Land. Will. Roff. Lancel. Cicest.
An. 1608. Ia. Mountagu. co^s. B. of Ba. and Wels. 17. Ap. by Rich. Archb.
Cant. Thom. Land. Henr. Sarum. Will. Roff. Lanc. Cicest. Henr. Glouc.
Anno 1608. Rich. Neile Cons. B. of Roch. 9. October. by Rich. Arch. Cant. Thom.
Land. Lanc. Cicest. Ia. Bath and Wells.
An. 1609. Geor. Abbot. Con. B. of Cou. and Lich. 3. Dec. by Rich. Archb. Cant.
Lanc. Ely. Rich. Roff.
Samuel Harsnet Cons. B. of Cicest. the same day, by the same persons. Anno
1611. Giles Thomson Cons. B. of Glou. 9. Iul. by Georg. Archb. Cant. Ioh. Oxon.
Lanc. Eli. Ia. Bath. and Wells. Rich. Cou. and Lichf.
John Buckridge Cons. B. of Roch. the same day, by the same persons. Anno 1611.
Ioh. King. Cons. B. of Land. 8. September. by Georg. Archb. Cant. Rich. Cou. and
Lichf. Giles Glouc. Ioh. Roff.
Anno 1612. Miles Smith Cons. B. of Glou. 20. Sept. by Georg. Cant. Ioh. Land.
Rich. Cou. and Lich. Ioh. Roff.



The like has been continually observed in the Province of York; for a taste
whereof, I will give you two examples: The former in the Queens time, the
later in the reign of our gracious Sovereign.

Anno 1598. [ Hen. Robinson. Cons. B. of Carl. 23. Iul.] by Rich. Land. Ioh.
Roff. Anth. Cic.
Anno 1606. [ Will. James Cons. B. of Durham. 6. Sept.] by Tob. Ebor. Rich.
Land. Will. Roff. Lanc. Cic.



THis which you have seen may seem sufficient; Yet because I desire to give
ample contentment* I ha^^ ^et down^ the successiue Ordination, and Golden
chain of the most reverend Father George, now L. Archbishop of Canterbury,
(the joy of the Clergy, and Gods great blessing upon this Church) ascending
lincke by lincke unto the Bishops in the time of King Henry the 8. which our
adversaries acknowledge to be Canonical. Whereunto, (that all the Clergy of
England may know in particular, how to prove their succession,) I intend, when
God shall grant me opportunity to view the Records of the other Province, to
annex the like Episcopal line of the other most reverend Metropolitan, Tobie,
L. Archbishop of York.


CHAP. VIII.
The Episcopal line and succession of the most Reverend Father in God, George
now Lord Archb. of Canterbury, particularly declaring how he is Canonically
descended from such Bishops as were Consecrated in the days of King Henry the
eight, which our Adversaries acknowledge to be Canonical.

He was Consecrated 3. December. 1609. By 1. R. Bancroft Cons. 8. May 1597 by
Lancel. Eli. Whose Consecrations were before described, and may be deduced in
the like manner. Richard Rosf. Whose Consecrations were before described, and
may be deduced in the like manner. 2. Ioh. Whitg. Cons. 21. Apr. 1577. by John
Young. See the next page. Anthony Rud. See the next page. Richard Vaughan. See
the next page. Anthony Watson. See the next page.
3. Ed. Grindal Cons. 21. Dec. 1559. by 4 Mat. Parker Cons. 17. Dec. 1559 by
Will. Barlow. in the time of Henry 8. Ioh. Hodgskins. in the time of Henry 8. 5
Miles Couerdale Cons. 30. Aug. 1551. by Thomas Cranmer. in the time of Henry 8.
John Hodg^kins. in the time of Henry 8. 7 Nicholas Ridley, Cons. 5. Sep. 1547.
by Henry Lincoln. in the time of Hen. 8. John Bedford. in the time of Hen. 8.
Thomas Sidon. in the time of Hen. 8.

6 Ioh* Scory, Cons. with Miles Couerdale vide 5.
8 Ioh. Hurly Cons. 26. May 1553. by Thomas Cranmer. Christ. Sidon. 9 John
Taylour Cons. 26. July 1552. by Thomas Cranmer. John Scory* vide 6. Nich.
Ridley, vide 7.

William Barlow. in the time of Henry the 8. John Bedford. in the time of Henry
the 8.
10. Ioh. Elmer Cons. 24. Mar. 1577 by Edmund Grindall, ^ide 3. 11 Edw. Sands,
Consecrated with Edmund Grindall. vide 3. 12 John Piers Cons. 15. Apr. 1576. by
Robert Horn vide 13. 19 Ri. C^r^else cons. 21. May 1570. by Matthew Parker vide
4. Robert Horn. vide 13 20 Edm. Guest cons. 24. Mar. 1559 by Matthew Parker
vide 4 Nicholas Bullingha^ vid. 17 John Jewel vide 18


Edmund Grindall. vide 3. Edwin Sands. vide 11. 13 Rob. Horn cons. 16. Feb.
1560. by Matthew Parker. vide 4. Edmund Grindall. v. 3. 14 Tho. Young Cons. 21.
Ian. 1559. by Math. Parker vide 4. Edmund Grindall. v. 3. Ioh. Hodgskins, in
the time of H. 8. 15 Rich. Cox, with Edm. Grindall. v. 3.
16 (...) (...) cons. 24. Mar. 1559. by Matthew Parker vide 4 17 N. Bullingha^
cons. 21 Ian. 1559 by Matthew Parker v. 4 Edm. Grindall v. 3 Richard Cox vide 15
John Hodgskins.
18 Ioh. Jewel cons. 21 Ian. 1559 by Mat. Parker v. 4 Edm. Grindal v. 3
Richard Cox v. 15 Io. Hodgskins.




21 John Young Consecrated 16. Mar. 1577. by Edmund Grindall vide 3 John Elmer.
vide 10 John Jewel. vide 18
22 Ant: Rud, Consecrated 9. Iun. 1594. by John Whitgift. vide 2 John Young.
vide 21 23 Richard Fletcher Cons: 14. Dec: 1589. by John Whitgift. vide 2 John
Elmer. vide 10 John Young. vide 21 24 John Bullingham. Cons: 5. Sep: 1581. by
Edmund Grindall. vide 3 John Elmer. vide 10 John Young. vide 21


25 Richard Vaughan, Cons: 25. January 1595. by John Whitgift. vide 2 Richard
Fletcher. vide 23 John Young. vide 21
26 Anthony Watson, Cons: 15. August 1596. by John Whitgift. vide 2 John*
Young. vide 21. Richard Vaughan. vide 25 27 Thomas Bilson, conse: 13. June
1596. by John Whitgift. vide 2 Richard Fletcher. vide 3 28 William Day,
consecrated 25. January 1595. by John Whitgift. vide 2 Richard Fletcher. vide
23 John Young. vide 21






PHIL. These are domestical testimonies of your own; neither do I know
whether they be true.


ORTH. The records alleged, are of such high credit and reputation, that they
cannot possibly be infringed. As for the maine point whereupon all the rest
depends, that is, the Consecration of Archbishop Parker, as it was solemnly
performed in a great assembly, so it was published in print in his own time,
when all things were in fresh memory. And though some of his spiteful and
bitter enemies did then scornefully coment upon his life, yet the truth of
this fact they never called in question.


PHIL. Surely ( Orthodox) I cannot but marvel* if your extracts be true, how
the contrary opinion was so commonly received in the English Colleges at Rome
and Rhemes.


ORTH. Truly ( Philodox) that which a man wishes, he is willing to believe,
and the mind sophisticate with malice is ready upon every light occasion to
imagine the worst, yea and sometimes to blaze that for certain which has
neither show nor shadow of truth. Yet these vain surmises you receive for
oracles, and deliver one to another by the holy hand of tradition, wherein you
glory as in an unanswerable argument. So did your fellows at Framlingham: so
did Heart in the conference with Doctor Rainolds: but when he had heard his
answer, justifying our Bishops by authentical records, Doct. Reinolds in his
letter to M. Thomas Barker of Monck Soham in Suffolk, the original whereof is
in my hands, and the same Doctor of godly memory did sometimes relate the same
unto myself.
he would needs have that whole point left out of the conference, saying he
would not press him with it, and confessed, he thought that no such thing
could have been showed, and that himself had been borne in hand otherwise.
Now ( Philodox) as he was deluded, so are you: but as he received satisfaction,
so I hope will you.


THE FOVRTH BOOK. VVHERIN IS ENTREATED of Episcopal Jurisdiction.
CHAP. I.
Whence the Bishops of England receive their jurisdiction.

PHIL. THough it were granted that the Bishops of England have Canonical
Consecration, yet it will not follow that they are perfect and complete Bishops
For, whence have they their Jurisdiction?


ORTH. Partly from Christ, and partly from the Prince.


PHIL. From the Prince? how can this be? Is Episcopal Jurisdiction of the
same nature with the Princely?


ORTHOD. Between the Regal and Episcopal there are many differences; but it
shall be sufficient for our present purpose to observe these two: first the
Episcopal Jurisdiction is only spiritual, or Ecclesiastical: but the Regal
is both Ecclesiastical and temporal. Secondly, the King does govern
Ecclesiastical affairs, not Ecclesiastically but regally, that is, with a
sovereign authority outwardly coercitiue with temporal punishments: The
Bishop handles Ecclesiastical matters in Ecclesiastical manner. For he is
enabled by himself, and ex officio ordinario, not only to minister the word
and Sacraments, but also to perform other holy and eminent actions: as for
example, to ordain Ministers, and to inflict spiritual censures upon the
offenders, namely the sentence of excommunication, and again, to absolve and
restore them to the Communion of Saints: Which sacred offices Nos Principi
censurae potestatem non ^acimus Tort. Tor. page 151.
our Church ascribes not unto the person of the Prince, neither did our Kings
or Queens ever practice them. For regal Jurisdiction consists not in a
ministerial power, nor personal performance of such things, but in an outward
supreme commanding authority, as was Lib. 3. c. 3.
before declared out of the admonition annexed to the Queens injunctions, an
act of Parliament, and the Articles of Religion: Wherefore as it was not
lawful for the Kings of Judah to take upon them the Priestly office, to 2.
Chron. 26. 18.
burn incense, or offer sacrifice, and yet they might command the Priests
even in these things to do their duty as it was proved Lib. 3. c. 2.
before by many examples; so it belongs not to the Prince to minister the
word and Sacraments, to ordain, or excommunicate: yet being supreme governor
over all persons, and in all causes within his own dominions, he may make
laws, and command that these things be done by such persons, and in such
manner as is agreeable to the blessed will of God. Nouel* Constable. 123.
Justinian made a law that no Bishops nor Priests should separate any man
from the holy Communion before the cause were declared, for which the holy
Canons command him so to do; inacting there-withall that if any were otherwise
excommunicated, he should be absolved by a greater Priest, and restored to the
Communion of Saints. When Maximus Bishop of Salonae, had incurred
Ecclesiastical censures, Pope Gregory the Great did release them, Greg. Epist.
l. 5. c. 25.
secundum iussiones serenissimi Domini imperatoris: i. according to the
Commandments of his most gracious lord the emperor. Which commanding
authority as Pope Greg. did acknowledge in the Prince; so some of your own men
ascribe it even to an Abbot or an Abbatesse. S^^p. de Alu. tract. ^e potest.
Episcoporum, Abbat. etc. c. 3. n. 13.
Tabiena and Armilla scribunt, etc. i. Tabiena and Armilla write after
Panormitane, Astensis, and others, that an Abbatesse may command such Priests
as are subject unto her, to excommunicate her rebellious and obstinate Nuns, or
absolve the same, so that the Priests shall be bound to obey her. Which kind
of spiritual jurisdiction you give to a woman not only delegated but ordinary,
according to the common opinion of the Canonists: Ibid. c. 2. n. 3.
Canonistae volunt, etc. i. The Canonists are of this mind, that the dignity
of Prelacie and excellency of office, may give to Ecclesiastical women
spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they may enjoy, not only by
right delegated and committed unto them, but also by ordinary. Ibid. c. 2. n. 7.
Stephanus de Aluin inclines to the same opinion. Dicendum videtur, etc. It
seems we may say, seeing an Abbot governs his Monastery by ordinary
Jurisdiction, and an Abbatesse is equal unto him in freedom of
administration, that she has ordinary Jurisdiction as well as the Abbot. Yea
the same Vid. Tort. T^r. p. 151.
Stephen strives to attibute unto her, the power of excommunication, which is
more then the Church of England ascribes to Princes. For it attributes unto
them Ar^^^. 37.
only that prerogative which we see to have been given always to godly
Princes, in the holy Scripture by God himself; that is, that they should rule
all estates and degrees, committed unto their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or temporal and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn
and evil doers. When the B has used his spiritual censures, he can proceed
no further: but as Josias 2. Chron. 34. 33.
compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord: So may every Prince
by his royal authority compel all his subjects to do their duty, and those
which refuse to be reformed by the Church, he may restrain with the civil
sword, inflicting temporal punishments, as the qualitity of the offense
requires. When Paulus Samosatenus was excommunicate and deposed, in the
Council of Antioch, he did notwithstanding hold his Church, and chair by
violence; whereupon the Council knowing that of themselves, they could proceed
no further, were forced to seek the aid of Aurelian the Emperor, by whose
commandment he was Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. l. 7. c. 24. ^.
expelled.


PHIL. IF the Jurisdiction of the Prince and the Prelate be so different; how
then is the Prelates derived from the Prince?


ORTHOD. Here we must consider the matters handled in the consistories of
Bishops, and the manner. The matters originally, and naturally belonging to
those Courts, are only such as are originally and naturally Ecclesiastical:
the manner to ratify their judgments, is not properly under any corporal
mulct, but only by spiritual censures, as suspension excommunication and such
like. In both which respects, the Jurisdiction of Bishops has been much
enlarged by the favor and indulgence of Christian Princes. Concerning the
matter; Constantine the Great, gave liberty to Clerks to Nice^^. l. 2. c. 4^
decline the judgment of civil Judges and to be judged by their own
Bishops; By occasion whereof many Civil Causes, were brought to the cognizance
of Ecclesiastical Courts. He made also a law to ratify those judgments,
(...). 9.
As though they had been pronounced by the Emperor himself. Now all the
Jurisdiction which Bishops have in Civil Causes is merely from the Prince.
Concerning the manner, it seems sometimes expedient to annex coactiue power
to the Episcopal office, both for the honor of Prelacie, and also to make
their spiritual censures the more regarded, which also without controversy,
must be acknowledged to proceed from the Prince. For as the Lord has
compacted the light into the body of the Sun, that thence it might be
communicated to Moon and Stars: So he has put all civil and coactiue
Jurisdiction, into the person of the Prince, from whom as from a glorious Sun
or fountain, all other inferior lamps do borrow their light. But if we
speak of that Episcopal Jurisdiction, which both in respect of matter and
manner, is merely spiritual; the immediate fountain of it is God himself;
as our most learned and religious King, with his royal Pen, has thus
witnessed to the world. Prae^^^^^. page 44.
That Bishops ought to be in the Church, I ever maintained it as an
Apostolic institution, and so the ordinance of God, contrary to the
Puritanes, and likewise to Bellarmine, who denies that Bishops have their
Jurisdiction immediately from God. If his Majesty's judgment be contrary to
Bellarmines who holds the negative, then his Princely wisdom embraces the
affirmative, to wit, that Bishops have their Jurisdiction (merely spiritual)
immediately from God. Notwithstanding, for so much as they exercise the same in
a Christian Common wealth, at the holy direction and command, and under the
gracious protection of a religious King, within the kings dominions, upon the
Kings subjects, according to the Canons and statutes, established by the Kings
authority, we may justly call those Courts the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts,
and the Archbishops, and Bishops the kings Ecclesiastical judges. Wherefore,
though this spiritual power in regard of it self be immediately from God, yet
in these respects it may rightly be said to be derived from the king. So it is
a Christo tanquam ab authore conferente: a Rege tanquam a iubente, dirigente,
promouente, and protegente.


PHIL. If your Bishops have their spiritual Jurisdiction immediately from God,
when do they receive it?


ORTHO. When they are Qu^ and vnde (...)* sunt* iurisdictionem habent. Episc.
(...). i^ ^esp. ad (...) c. 8.
made Bishops; that is, in their Consecration. For the party to be Consecrated
is presented to the Archbishop in these words. The form of Consecrating
Bishops.
Most reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly and well learned
man, to be Consecrated Bishop Where, the word Bishop is taken in the usual
Ecclesiastical sense, for a Timothy, or a Titus, an Angel or governor of the
Church: And the Archbishop with other Bishops present imposes hands saying, f
Take the holy Ghost, that is, such ghostly and spiritual power as is requisite
to advance a Presbyter to the office of a Bishop; so here is given him
whatsoever belongs to the Episcopal office, as the prayers going before the
pronouncing of these words, and following after do declare, wherein humble
petition is made, for Gods blessing and grace, that he may duly execute the
office of a Bishop, faithfully serve therein, and minister Episcopal
discipline.


PHIL. If it be given in Episcopal Consecration; how then is it given
immediately from God?


ORTHOD. I will answer you, if you will answer me a few questions. And first
I demand, whence is the power of Order?


PHIL. It is Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 2^.
immediately from God, because it requires a Character and grace, which only
God can effect. For though it be said to be given with 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Imposition of hands, yet the meaning is not that either the Imposer, or the
Imposition of hands does give it, but God himself, while hands are Imposed.
To which purpose it is excellently said of Ambr. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 5.
S. Ambrose, O brother, who gives the Episcopal grace? God or man? Thou
answerest without doubt, God; but yet God gives it by man. Man imposes hands,
God gives the grace; The Priest imposes an humble hand, and God blesses with
a mighty hand.


ORTHOD. And whence comes the grace of Baptism?


PHIL. This also without question, is immediately from God.


ORTHOD. And whence comes faith in the hearing of the Gospel?


PHIL. It is likewise immediately from God.


ORTHOD. And does not God in all these use the ministry of man?


PHIL. There is no doubt of it.


ORTHOD. Then you see a thing may be given immediately from God, though in
giving it, he use the means and ministry of man: for in such like speeches
the word Immediately is not so taken as excluding means, but as distinguishing
the action of God, from the means. When the children of Israel were stung of
the fiery Number. 21. 9.
serpents, God in healing them used the means of the brazen serpent; yet the
virtue of healing proceeded not from the brazen serpent, but immediately from
himself; Wisd. 16. 7.
For ^e that turned toward it was not healed by the thing that he saw, but by
thee, O Sautour of all. Even so, though God in giving this Spiritual power,
use the ministry of man; yet the power it self is immediately from God. For
whereas 1. Cor. 12. 28.
S. Paul among the gifts of God to the Church, names governments; And S. Peter
says, 1. Pet. 4. 11.
If any man minister, let him do it, as of the ability which God ministers;
Your Jesuit Salmeron, though striving to derive it from the Pope as it is
actual; yet considering it in it self, being convicted with the evidence of
truth, says thus, Salm. tom. 12. Tracta^. 67. page 473.
Ministrationes quoque Domino ascribuntur, sicut and gubernationes a Paulo,
quia quicquid est supernaturale in ministerio and gubernatione, Deus per se
fecit: id autem ad quod creatura potest concurrere, sinit eam agere, etsi ipse
praecipue id operetur. Gratia igitur gratis data administrandi, and gubernandi,
a Deo est immediate, i. Ministrations are ascribed to the Lord by S. Paul, as
also governments, because whatsoever is supernatural in minister^^ and
government, God has wrought that by himself; but he suffers the creature to
work that, unto which it can concur, although himself in that be the (...)
pall agent. Therefore the freely given grace of administering and governing, is
(...)
(...)tly from God. And again, ^ Si s^matur, pro gratia gratis data gubernandi
vel administrandi iurisdictionem, vt sumunt Petrus and Paulus, procul dubio
donumest quod ab homine procedere non potest, i. If (Jurisdiction or
government) be taken for the freely given grace of governing or administering
Jurisdiction, as Peter and Paul take it; without doubt it is a gift which
cannot proceed from man. Wherefore, when S. Paul wills Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
To stir up the grace which is given him, it is to be expounded not only of
the grace of Order, but of all Episcopal grace. And S. Ambrose, when he
says, God gives the grace, does undoubtedly mean all Episcopal grace. For
who can give any grace to the Pastors of the Church, but only the God of all
grace, which gives Pastors to the Church, and appoints them to be rulers
over his family? To Salmeron we may add Henr. Gandauensis, affirming that
Bishops have their power, both of Order and Jurisdiction, immediately from
Christ; As also Gottifredus de Fontibus, and Johannes de Poliaco, all alleged
by Salmeron; Whose opinions he controuleth without reason, seeing before in
effect he affirmed the same. I will conclude this point with the University of
Paris, which ratified this position with a Decretum sacrae facultatis
Theologiae Parisiensis. Anno 1429. Proposit. 6.
Decree, and caused one Johannes Sarazim a Friar, to recant the contrary.


PHIL. If Jurisdiction be given in Consecration, then it should be equal in
all Bishops.


ORTHOD. The power it self is equal in all, though the determination of the
power, which is from the Church, be unequal. When a Bishop is translated to
another See, he does not lose his former habitual power, no more then the
Sun does lose his light when he passes to the other Hemisphere. When a
Bishop of a smaller Circuit is advanced to a greater, he gets not a greater
power, but a larger subject whereupon he may exercise his power. And when a
Bishop is deposed, he is not absolutely deprived of his power, but the matter
is taken away, upon which his power should work. This is confessed by Franc.
Varg. de Episc. iurisd. p. 126.
Vargas, to be the opinion of Alphonsus and others; If it happen that a Bishop
for any crime be deprived of his Bishopric, then he shall be deprived of
his subjects upon whom he ought to exercise his power of Jurisdiction, but he
shall not be deprived of the power of Jurisdiction it self, received in his
Consecration.


CHAP. II.
Whether S. Peter were the only fountain under Christ of all Spiritual
Jurisdiction.

PHIL. THe Catholic divine, answer to the fifth part of Reports. p. 172*
giving of Jurisdiction must only proceed from him that is the fountain of
all Spiritual Jurisdiction under Christ, which is the Bishop of Rome, or some
Metropolitan or Bishop under him, that has authority and commission from
him. For the Church of God is like unto a City, which has one only
fountain, from whence there issue diverse great floods, which are branched out
again into sundry goodly streams, whence the water is conveyed by pipes and
conduits to serve the whole City. This fountain is the Bishop of Rome, the
great floods are the Patriarchs, Archbishops and Metropolitanes: the streams
are the rest of the Bishops: the pipes and conduits are all those which derive
their Jurisdiction from the Bishops. Now the Church of England was sometimes
flourishing like the Paradise of God, but since it was cut off from the lively
spring (alas for woe) it is like to a barren and forsaken wilderness.


ORTHOD. The Church of England, God be thanked, is in such a case, that all her
friends have cause to rejoice, and all her enemies to gnash their teeth. And as
for the fountain you speak of, it is not a well of living water made by the
King of heaven, but a puddle or pit of poison* dug by the Prince of
darkness. The Bishop of Rome, we grant, has of ancient time been
reverently regarded, and had, though not a general jurisdiction, yet a large
extent; yea he had precedencie of dignity and place, before all other Bishops:
but this was only by law humane, because he was the Bishop of the Imperial
City; but now he is like a furious flood which ouerfloweth the banks, he
will be no more confined with bounds and limits, he chalengeth a generallity
of jurisdiction over the Christian world, and that by law divine.


PHIL. I Will prove, That he is the fountain of al spiritual jurisdiction by
law 2
divine: for Saint Peter was so, and the Pope succeeded him in this right.


ORTHOD. There is more required to infer this conclusion, then all the
Seminaries, and Jesuits in the world are able to perform: but first, how
prove you that Peter was invested in this right by law divine?


PHIL. The Scripture is full of testimonies declaring both his lawful
authority, and his due execution thereof: his authority might appear by many
arguments, but I will make choice of two, which prove the point in question
most directly; the promise of the keys, and the commission of feeding the
sheep. To begin with the first: Christ said to Peter, Mat. 16. 19
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; Christ gave him not one
keye only but 2. the key of knowledge and the key of power: by the key of
knowledge he was able to open all Scriptures, and controversies of religion:
The key of power is of order, or of jurisdiction: by the key of order, he was
able to ordain Bishops and Pastors of the Church, and again to lock them out
of the ministry by deposing, and degrading as occasion required: by the key of
jurisdiction, he might open and shut both the outward court by
excommunications, absolutions, dispensations, calling general councels etc.
and the court of conscience by forgiving and retaining sins. In a word, in
these keys all Ecclesiastical power was comprehended, and given unto Peter.


ORTHOD. The keys were given to the rest of the Apostles, as well as to Peter;
for the occasion of these words was a question of Christ proposed to al his
Apostles, Mat. 1^. 1^
whom say you that I am? this question, was answered by Peter, (...). 16
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Aug. (...) 13. de (...).
Whereupon Saint Austin observes that Peter alone made answer for all the
Apostles; and his observation is according to the Scriptures, which testify
that Peter before this time had answered in the name of them all Ioh. 6. 69
We believe and know that thou art Christ the son of the living God. Now as
Peter answered, one for all, so Christ said to Peter, and in him to them all, I
will give you the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Thus the Fathers in terpret
the place: Austin: Aug. in Ioh. t^. 118. illud ^nus pro omnibus (...) omnibus
(...).
Peter received the keys together with them al: (...). l. ^. c. 1^. (...)
regn^ caelorum (...).
Jerome, they did all receive the keys: Origin, In Mat. tract. 1.
Christ's promise of building his Church, of giving the keys, of binding and
loosing, made as to Peter only, was common to all. Hilarie, Detrinitate. l. 6.
They obtained the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Ambrose, What is said to
Peter, is said to the Apostles. This consent of Fathers should over balance c
Amb. in Psa^m. 38. (...) finem. quod Petro dicitur Aposto^^s dicitur.
your opinion by the Council of Sess. 4.
Trent: And here I might justly return Campians flourish upon you: Camp:rat. 5.
Patres admiseris, captus es; excluseris, nullus, es: If you admit the Fathers,
you are catched. If you exclude them, you are no body. Indeed my Masters, you
make the world believe, that you will be judged by the Fathers, but when it
comes to the trial, you commonly forsake them, the Fathers must be pretended
for a fashion, but the holy Father of Rome is the very needle and compass
whereby you sail.


PHIL. WE confess that all received the keys, but Christ gave 3
them to Peter immediately, to the rest by Peter, so all power both of order and
jurisdiction proceeds from Peter.


ORTHO. Let De Roman. ^ont. l. 4. cap. 23.
Bellarmine himself judge the cause between us, who proves by four
arguments, That the Apostles received their jurisdiction immediately from
Christ. First by these words of Christ himself, As my Father sent me, so send
I you, which exposition he strengthens by the authorities of Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Cyrill and Cyprian, by the evidence whereof he affirms* that the
same thing was given to the Apostles by these words, I send you, which was
promised to Peter by these words, I will give thee the keys, and afterward
delivered by these words, Feed my sheep: and adds, Constat autem per illa
(tibi dabo claues) and per illud (pasce oues) intelligi iurisdictione^
plenissima^ etiam exteriore^, i It is clear that by these words (I will give
thee the keys) and by this saying (feed my sheep) there is understood a most
full jurisdiction even in the outward Court. Secondly, he proves it, because
Mathias was neither elected by the Apostles, nor received any authority by
them, but being elected by God was presently accounted amongst the Apostles;
And verily (says he) if all the Apostles had their jurisdiction from Peter,
that should have been manifested most of all in Matthias. Thirdly, he proves
it by Saint Paul, who professes that he had his jurisdiction from Christ, and
thence confirms his Apostleship, for he says, Gal. 1. 1.
Paul an Apostle not of men, or by man, but by Jesus Christ: And that he might
declare, that he received no authority from Peter, or any other Apostle, he
says, Gal. 1. 15.
When it pleased God (which had separated me from my mothers womb, and called
me by his grace) to reveal his son in me that I should preach him among the
Gentiles, immediately I communicated not with flesh and blood: Neither came I
again to Jerusalem to the^ which were Apostles before me, but I went into
Arabia, and turned again into Damascus. Then after three years I came again
to Jerusalem to visit Peter. And again* Gal. 2. 6
To me those that seemed to be something, conferred nothing. Fourthly,
because the Apostles were made only by Christ, and yet had Jurisdiction as
appears, First by Paul excommunicating the Corinthian: Secondly by the same
Paul making Ecclesiastical laws: Thirdly because the Apostolic dignity is
Prime and suprem dignitas in Ecclesia. Bell. quo supra Quarto.
the highest dignity in the Church. Wherefore it is evident that the rest of
the Apostles received not their Jurisdiction from Peter, but from Christ.


PHIL. CHrist promised the keys to Peter only: therefore in this respect he
must have a pre-eminence above the rest. 4



ORTH. Whatsoever Christ promised, that he performed; but he performed not the
keys to Peter with any pre-eminence above his fellows, but alike to all:
therefore he did not promise them to Peter by way of pre-eminence, but to him
with the rest.


PHIL. Did he not say, I will give thee the keys, and whatsoever thou shall
bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose?
etc. So they were promised to Peter in the singular number.


ORTHO. Though these words be of the singular number, yet they were not
spoken to Peter, as he was Peter, or a singular person, but to Peter
representing the person of the Church, as the Vid. Tort. Tort. p. 62.
Fathers say according to the Scripture. For when he said, I will give thee the
keys, he added immediately by way of explication, and whatsoever thou shall
bind upon earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
upon earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Upon which words De R^m. Pont. l.
1. c. 12. v^r^^.
Bellarmine says thus, The plain sense of these words, I will give thee the
keys, and whatsoever thou shall loose, is this, that first there is promised
an authority or a power signified by the keys, and then the actions or office
is explained by these words, to bind and to loose. So that to loose, and to
open: to shut, and to bind: is altogether the same. But the Lord expressed the
actions of the keys by loosing and binding, not by shutting and opening, that
we might understand that all these speeches are metaphorical, and that heaven
is then opened unto men when they are loosed from their sins, which hindered
their entrance into heaven. But the power of binding and loosing was given to
all the Apostles, by Christ in these words, Mat. 18. 18.
whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.


PHIL. Tho. Ca^^tan^^^ in tract. de inst. and auct. Rom po^^. c. 5.
Cardinal Caietan thinks, that to open and to shut is of a larger extent,
then to bind and to loose.


ORTHOD. Bellarmine thinks this more subtle then sound, because there are no
keys in the Church saving only of Order and Jurisdiction, both which are
signified by the actions of binding and loosing, as Quo supra.
Caietan confesses, and Bellarmine proved before, both by Fathers and
Scripture.


PHIL. The power of binding and loosing, is less then the keys in the
judgment of the Schoolmen.


ORTHOD. You cry antiquity, antiquity, Fathers, Fathers: yet you forsake both
antiquity and Fathers, and lean to the Schoolmen. But what if the Schoolmen
be against you? Alexander of Hales says, Sum. theol. part. 4. quaes^. 2.
membro. 2. and 5.
that to bind and to loose, is as much as to open and to shut. In magist. sent.
l. 4. distinct. 18. quaest. 1. art. 1.
Thomas makes the power of binding and loosing the substance of the keys. And
so does Scotus. But what if we should admit that the keys contained more then
the power of binding and loosing? yet seeing this power includes Jurisdiction
as Bell de Romans po^t. l. 1. c. 12. Et quanquam.
Bellarmine proves by the Fathers, and this was given by Christ to the rest of
the Apostles, therefore it follows that they all had their Jurisdiction
immediately from Christ. A point so clear, that not only De Romans pont. l. 1.
c. 22. Prima
Bellar. but Franciscus de victoria, Alphonsus de castro, and Cardinal Caietan
as Bellarmine records, acknowledge the same, beside many others*


PHIL. IF all this were granted, yet Peter shall be the fountain of
Jurisdiction: because the rest received it only as delegates; He as the 5
ordinary pastor of the Church, from whom and his successors, all posterity
must derive it.


ORTHOD. You coin distinctions of your own brain, whereof you have no
warrant in the Scripture. For whose delegates shall they be? Not S. Peter's, 1.
because I have proved that they received not any Jurisdiction from him; 2. If
they were S. Peter's delegates, why did S. Paul always call himself an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, and never the Lega^^ latere of S. Peter? 3. If they were S.
Peter's Delegates, then all their Jurisdiction died with him. So belike S. John
who outliued S. Peter, lost his jurisdiction, and was glad to light his candle
again from Linus, and after his death from Cletus, and after his, from
Clemens. For he lived as In Catal. scriptorum in Iohanne.
S. Jerome witnesses, 68. years after the Passion of Christ, and consequently
died in the year 101. which according to Anno 101. number. 2.
Baronius, was the 9. year of Clemens. If this be so, then there was after the
death of Christ while an Apostle lived, a greater jurisdiction in the Church,
then the jurisdiction of an Apostle, which cannot be, because the Scripture
says, that 1. Cor. 12. 28.
God has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc. and Bell.
confesses that the authority of the Apostles is De Romans pont. l. 4. c. 23.
Addit.
Iurisdictio plenissima. If S. John had this, then he was not Legate a latere to
Linus, nor Cletus, nor Clemens, neither so long as he lived could they be
called the fountain of all spiritual jurisdiction. If you say, they were
Christ's delegates, it is true, and so was Saint Peter, therefore in this there
is no difference. But in what respect was he the ordinary pastor of the
Church? As an Apostle? then they should be all ordinary, because they were
all Apostles. If in regard of any other authority, what should that be? Was
it greater the^ the Apostleship or no? if it were not, how could it give him
jurisdiction over the Apostles? and greater it cannot be, for the Apostleship
is the greatest jurisdiction which Christ left unto his Church, as was proved
both by the Scripture and your own confession. But when was he made an
ordinary pastor?


PHIL. When Christ said unto him, Ioh. 21. 15. 16.
feed my sheep.


ORTHO. As Christ said to Peter, feed my sheep; so he said to them all Mat.
28. 19.
go teach all nations, Ioh. 20. 21.
as my father sent me, so send I you. Do not these comprehend as much, as,
feed my sheep?


PHIL. No. For Christ gave commission to Peter to feed his sheep, even all his
sheep, none excepted: but the Apostles were his sheep, so the Apostles
themselves were committed to S. Peter. Therefore he was the pastor of the
Apostles, and consequently the ordinary pastor of the whole world.


ORTH. And Christ gave commission to them all, and among the rest, to S. Andrew
to Mark 16. 15.
preach the Gospel to every creature, even to every creature none excepted. But
S. Peter was a creature, therefore S. Peter himself was committed to S.
Andrew. What think you, was S. Andrew S. Peter's pastor, or the ordinary
pastor of the whole world?


PHIL. There is not the like reason. For the words which you allege were
spoken to them all. The commission which I urge was given particularly by name
to S. Peter.


ORTHOD. These words feed my sheep, have been so much vexed that now for
pity you should let them alone: but to answer you, though our Savior, when
he said, Feed my sheep directed his speech to Peter, yet he did not therein
give any new office, or special commission to Peter, but willed him to look
to his charge already received. For Peter had bewrayed great want of love in a
threefold denial of his master, therefore Christ to kindle his love did ask
him three times, Peter do thou love me? Whereupon as he had formerly denied
him thrice, so now he protested his love, and confessed him thrice; then Christ
having as it were blown the fire by a threefold question, which began to
kindle in Peter by a threefold confession, did presently strike while the iron
was hot, using this exhortation, Feed my lambs, and to make the more
impression, he redoubled the stroke, saying, Feed my sheep, Feed my sheep;
As though he should say, if thou love me, deny me no more in word nor deed; but
show thy love by keeping thy station, and by feeding the flock which I have
purchased with my precious blood. Feed them by doctrine, Feed them by example:
thou shall meet and encounter with many Bears, and lions, yet forsake not thy
function for fear, but if thou love me, feed my flock. As if a Pilot should
say to his mariners, here is like to be a great storm, but if you love me,
look well to your tacklings: or a Captain to his soldiers, here may be a
hard battle, yet if you love me be of a good courage: or a husband being to
go a far journey, and leaving at home his young son, the hope of his
house,, with his wife, which had sometimes showed herself somewhat unkind,
should say, wife if thou love me, look well to my child; which is not to give
her any new commission or office, but to put her in mind to discharge that
office which God had formerly committed unto her. And what if Christ said to
Peter, Feed my sheep? shall he therefore be the master shepherd, and the
rest of the Apostles his underlings? shall he be a Bishop, and they his
Chaplains? Saint 2. Cor. 12. 11.
Paul denies this, proclaiming himself in nothing inferior to the chief
Apostles. The Apud C^p. Ep. 3.
Church of Rome denies this (I mean the ancient Church in the time of S.
Cyprian) in their Epistle to the Church of Carthage. For having mentioned these
words, Feed my sheep, they add, Et caeteri discipuli similiter fecerunt: i.
the rest of the disciples performed this office of feeding the sheep in the
like manner that Peter did it. So S. Amb. de dig. sacer. c. 2.
Ambrose: quas oues and quem gregem non solum tunc beatus suscepit Petrus, sed
and nobiscum eas, and cum illo nos suscepimus omnes i. which sheep, and which
flock not only blessed Peter did then undertake, but both he has undertaken
them with us, and all we have undertaken them with him. And S. De agone Christ.
c. 30.
Austin: Cum ei dicitur ad omnes dicitur, amas me? pasce oues me as. i. when it
is saia to Peter, it is said to al love thou me? Feed my sheep. I will
conclude this point with a memorable saying of one of your own friends. De
Eccle. and polit. potc. p. 6. 7.
Non me latet recentiores, vt sua priu^legia expeditius propugnent, obtendere
dominum hac voce, pasce oues meas, vni and soli Petro, totam detulisse
Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, quo ^am deinceps pro animi sui arbitrio,
quibuscunque vellet dispartiretur. At sacrae scripturae oraculis, omnium
antiquoru^i doctorum monumentis, nec non etiam praxi veteris Ecclesiae, tam
plane atque aperte confutantur, vt mirum sit illos tam absurda comminisci
audere i. I am not ignorant that late writers, that they may defend their
privileges, with greater expedition, do pretend that the Lord, by these
words, Feed my sheep, did give all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to Peter
alone that he might afterward bestow it upon whomsoever he would, according to
his own discretion; But they are confuted so plainly and so openly, by the
oracles of the holy Scripture, by the monuments of all ancient learnedmen, yea
also by the very practice of the old Church, that it is a marvel they dare
imagine such absurd things.


PHIL. I will prove it by the practice.


ORTH. BY the practice? Nay, the practice does prove the contrary. For 6.
as Christ did not erect any peculiar tribunal, in a singular manner to Peter,
Neither said he, Dic Petro, tell it to Peter, but he established a tribunal
for the Church, and said, Mat. 18. 17.
Dic Ecclesiae. i. make thy complaints, and tell thy grieuances to the Church:
so other Apostles did exercise the Jurisdiction, belonging to this tribunal,
as well as Peter; whether we consider them assembled in Synodes, or severally
by themselves.


PHIL. Not so, for in the Synod holden at Jerusalem in the year 34.
immediately after the ascension of Christ, S. Peter was president. For his
Rhemists acts ^. 15.
act in prescribing to the Apostles and the rest, this election of Matthias and
the manner thereof is so evident for his Supremacy, that our adversaries
confess that he was Antistes the chief of the whole Colleage, and company.


ORTHOD. His proposing the matter, argues a primacie of place, not of
Jurisdiction or power. For though he alone proposes the matter, yet he alone
had not the appointment* the text says plainly, they Verse. 23.
appointed two, and of the two God himself made choice, and elected Matthias,
as appears by these words, they Verse. 24.
prayed saying, thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show whether of
these two thou have chosen: and when the lot fell upon Matthias, S. Peter gave
him no Jurisdiction, neither did they expect, till S. Peter sent him a Pall,
but he was presently Verse. 2. 6
counted among the Apostles; therefore his authority was not from man, or by
man, but from Jesus Christ. Moreover, that the Scripture ascribes no more to
him in elections then to the rest, may appear by the second Synod (as Binius
calls it) wherein the Deacons were chosen. For who called the multitude
together? the text says, the Act. 62.
twelve, not S. Peter alone, but the twelve: and who chose them? Not S. Peter,
but the multitude, as the Scripture witnesses: Verse. 5.
The saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Stephen, a man full of
faith, and the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon,
and Parmenas, and Nicholas a proselyte of Antiochia: which they set before the
Apostles, and they prayed and laid their hands on them. So it is evident, that
though the Apostles ordained them, yet the whole multitude chose them.


PHIL. The Ex Bell de cler. c. 7. Respondeo. ^.
election of Deacons was given to the people, ex concessione Apostolorum, by
the grant of the Apostles, as Luke himself does testify.


ORT. Then it seems there is great difference between the Apostles and the
Pope, for the Apostles did not challenge their own right, they did gratify
the people and grant it unto them: but the Pope will rake all unto himself
though he rob Prince, Priest, and people. Now whereas you say they did that by
the grant of the Apostles, it is true, if by grant you mean the consent and
counsel of the Apostles; Acts 6. 3*
For they exhorted the multitude to look out seven men of honest report: but
if you mean that the whole right belonged so absolutely to the Apostles, that
they might totally have excluded the people; you must consider, that in this
case the consent of the people depended upon the grounds of humane society. For
there was then special reason, why the whole Church should have interest, in
the choice of Deacons, because the treasure of the whole Church was committed
to their trust. But admit it were absolutely by the grant of the Apostles: yet
mark what you say, by the grant of the Apostles; not of Peter alone, but of
the Apostles. Thus it does not appear that Peter had any prerogative more then
other Apostles, no not so much as in the choice of a Deacon.


PHIL. That he had Jurisdiction more then they, is manifest by the third Synod
holden at Jerusalem in the year of Christ 51. where indeed S. Peter showed
himself: for Vide Stapl. princ. doctr. l. 6. cap. 13
he spoke first and last, and S. James and all the rest yielded to his sentence.


ORTHOD. Not one of all these points is true. That, S. Peter spoke not first,
is clear by these words, Acts. 157.
When there had been much disputation, Peter rose up and said, etc. That he
spoke not last, appears also: for the Text mentions no speech of his, but
one; After him spoke Verse 12.
Paul and Barnabas: after them Verse 13.
S. James: and the Council concluded the matter according to the words of
Verse 20.
S. James: yea according to a special point not mentioned by S. Peter. Neither
were the Acts of the Counsel set out in the name of S. Peter, but a Synodall
Epistle was sent in the names of them all; Neither did S. Peter subscribe unto
it, I Peter the Vic^r of Christ, the Prince of the Apostles, the visible head
and ordinary Pastor of the Church; but he was only put in among the rest,
Verse 28.
It seems good to the holy Ghost, and us. Where is now his super-eminent
authority? If ever he should have showed it, this was the time, this was the
place, especially seeing he was present, not by his Legate, but in his own
person. If now he had challenged it, his successors might for ever quietly have
enjoyed it. What did he mean thus to forget himself, and to prejudice
posterity? And as the Apostolical Synods received not their authority from
him, so neither did the Apostles themselves, severally considered. As is
evident in S. Paul delivering the incestuous Corinthian unto Satan, by which
(in the judgment of Hill. in Psalm. 118.
Hilarie, Hier. Ep^. 1.
Hierome and Anselm. in 1. Cor. 5.
Anselmus, followed by Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. ^ 16.
Bellarmine, B^r. anno 57. ^. 10* ^.
Baronius and others, both of your side and ours) is meant Excommunication. And
though some do take it for a miraculous operation, whereby the offenders were
committed for a time to Satan to be tormented bodily; yet they do not deny
that the Corinthian was Excommunicated. Let us therefore see by what authority
this was done. I ^. Cor. 5. 3.
verily, (says S. Paul,) as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
determined already, as though I were present, that he that has so done this
deed, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together and my
Spirit with you, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ be delivered unto
Satan, etc. He says not, the Spirit of S. Peter, but my Spirit. So your
visible head, had neither hand nor foot in this action. S. Paul acknowledges
neither subordination to him, nor deriuation of authority from him. And as he
had Jurisdiction, so had Timothy and Titus, to 1. Tim. 5. 19.
receive accusations, 1. Tim. 1. 3.
to command them not to teach any other doctrine; or if they did, Tit. 1. 11.
to stop their mouths. All which places are to be expounded of judicial
proceeding in the Consistory, and argue a Jurisdiction in Titus and Timothy,
which (so far as we can learn) they received from S. Paul, and not from S.
Peter. Wherefore we conclude, that S. Peter was not the only fountain under
Christ of Spiritual jurisdiction by Law divine, but the 12. Apostles were 12.
fountains, all equally derived from Christ Jesus the Fountain of fountains.
But if Peter had any such prerogative by Law divine; what is that to the Pope?


CHAP. III.
Whether the Pope succeed S. Peter, in all his right by Law divine.

PHIL. THe Pope is the successor of S. Peter, therefore what power soever
belonged to S. Peter, belongs to the Pope.


ORTHOD. Was not S. Peter an Apostle? can there be succession in the
Apostleship?


PHIL. Doctor Princ. doctr. l. 6. cap. 7.
Stapleton teaches, that of the Apostleship there is no succession.


ORTH. Why then do the Popes so adorn themselves with Apostolic See Doct.
Rainold. conf. c. 6. sect 4.
titles? his See apostolic, his Legate Apostolic, his pardon Apostolic,
his seal Apostolic, his Bull Apostolic, and all Apostolic: yea, his
office is an Apostleship, causes must be heard by his Apostleship, weighty
matters must be reserved to his Apostleship, and Bishops must visit the
thresholds of the Apostles, unless they be dispensed withal by the Apostles,
that is, by the Pope. Yea the Rhemists affirm, That, Rhem. in Ephesians. 4. 11.
certes the room and dignity of the Pope, is a continual Apostleship. And of
By Gabriel, who called himself Patriarch of Alexandria.
late the Pope had a title given of the first Evangelist, and of the 13.
Apostle, as is related and approved by Bar. in Corollario de legatione Eccl.
Alexandr. in fine tomi 6. n. 6.
Baronius. But we hope that God will raise such Angels in our Church, as he was
in the Church of Ephesus, of whom it is written, That Revel. 2. 2.
he had tried them, who say they are apostles and are not, and had found them
liars. But if the Pope do not succeed S. Peter in the Apostleship, how is he
then his successor?


PHIL. Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 25. Respondeo. Stapl. quo sup^.
Not in that he was an Apostle, but in that he was the ordinary Pastor of
the whole Church.


ORTHOD. If not as an Apostle, then the Pope succeeds him not in all his
right. But have not other Apostles successors, as well as Peter?


PHIL. No, For their authority was Ibidem.
extraordinary, his ordinary: whereupon it follows, That theirs was
temporary, and died with their persons; his perpetual, and lives with his
successors.


ORTHOD. This you say often, but prove never. For the clearing whereof we must
consider, that in the Apostles, some things were extraordinary, some things
ordinary. They had 4. extraordinary prerogatives, immediate vocation by Christ
himself, unlimited Commission over all Nations, infallible direction both in
preaching and writing, and power to work Miracles; All which were necessary
for the first planting of Churches, but were not conveyed to posterity by
succession. Other things they had which were necessary for the Church in all
future ages, in which they had successors. They had power to minister the word
and Sacraments, wherein every Presbyter succeeds them. They ordained
Ministers, executed censures, and other things belonging to the government of
the Church; wherein every Bishop succeeds them. So in the latter, the rest
have successors as well as Peter: In the former as the rest had no
successors, so neither had Peter.


PHIL. Yes, the Bishop of Rome succeeds him in the government of the whole
world.


ORTHO. You dare not say, that this power in Peter was extraordinary, for then
it could not go by succession; and if it were ordinary in Peter, why not in
the rest, seeing as has been proved, Christ gave as ample commission in as
ample words to the rest as to Peter? But if we should faigne, that Peter had
such Monarchical jurisdiction, by what law shall the Pope succeed him in it?


PHIL. The (...).
succession of the Bishop of Rome into the Popedom of Peter, is of Christ's
institution, and therefore by Law divine.


ORTHOD. Of Christ's institution? where, or when? if you allege these words,
feed my sheep, they were spoken only to Peter, yet so that the substance of
the precept was not proper to him, but common to all. And if we should imagine
that Christ did institute a monarchy personally in Peter, how comes it to be
local? This certainly cannot be Christ's institution, because he names no
place.


PHIL. It (...)
was in Peter's power never to have chosen to himself any particular See, but
to have continued as he did the first five years: And then after his death
neither the Bishop of Rome nor the Bishop of Antioch had succeeded, but he
whom the Church had chosen.


ORTHOD. Then you make it local by Peter's choice, and not by Law divine: and
if it be local; is it tied to the Bishop of Rome by Law divine?


PHIL. Was not Saint Peter Bishop of Rome?


ORTHOD. So men say, but can you prove it by Law divine?


PHIL. Will you deny a History so famously recorded by Eusebius and other
ancient authors?


ORTH. Not I, but now you ground upon humane history, and not upon Law divine.
And as the histories say, that he was Bishop of Rome, so they say, he was
Bishop of Antioch, before he was Bishop of Rome.


PHIL. It Bell^bid.
was in his power to have continued at Antioch, and then without doubt the
Bishop of Antioch had been his successor; but because he translated his
chair, fixed it at Rome and there died, thence it comes to pass that the
Bish. of Rome succeeds him.


ORTH. If the succession depend upon the fixing of Saint Peter's chair at Rome;
what shall be said of those Popes which kept at Auinion in France, and never came
at Rome? Moreover this is to build upon the fact of Saint Peter and not upon
Law divine.


PHIL. It is not improbable, that the Lord did expressly command, that Peter c
^ibid. and qu^nui.
should so fix his seat at Rome, that the Roman Bishop might absolutely
succeed him.


ORT. This is your own conjecture and not Law divine.


PHIL. B^^^^bid.
Pope Marcellus says that Peter came to Rome, iubente Domino, the Lord so
commanding.


ORTH. This is your own tradition, and not Law divine. And as your succession,
so your monarchical jurisdiction cannot be proved to be by Law divine. This
was well known to the Fathers of the first general council, who confined the
Bishop of Rome, as well as the Bishop of Alexandria, ascribing his
patriarchical power unto (...).
custom, and not to Law divine. This was likewise known to the Fathers of the
(...).
second and fourth general councels, who ascribe the pre-eminence of the
Bishop of Rome, to the honor of the Imperial City: for so the Fathers of the
fourth council interpret the second, and affirm it themselves. Antiquae Romae
throno, quod vrbs illa imperaret, iure patres priuilegia tribuere; and eadem
consideratione moti 150. Dei amantissimi Episcopi, sanctissimo nouae Romae
throno aequalia priuilegia tribuere, recte iudicantes, vrbem quae and imperio
and senatu honorata sit, and aequalibus, cum antiquissima regina Roma,
priuilegijs fruatur, etiam in Rebus Ecclesiasticis, non secus ac illam extolli
ac magnifieri, secundam post illam existentem. The Fathers did rightly give
privileges to the throne of old Rome because the City then reigned, and the
150. Bishops most earnest lovers of God (assembled in the second general
council, which was the first at Constantinople) moued^y the same consideration
gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of new Rome, rightly judging,
that the City which was honored both by the Empire, and the Senate and
enjoys equal privileges with Rome, the most ancient Queen of Cities, should
be extolled and magnified even in things Ecclesiastical, no otherwise then
Rome, being the second in order after it. Thus they hold the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome to be not Monarchical (because they give equal privileges
to Constantinople) but Patriarchicall; which they refer not to the
Institution of Christ, nor to Peter's fact, nor to the succession in Peter's
chair, but to the honor of the Imperial City, in that it was Imperial,
therefore as In not* in Conc.* Chalc. ^. 2. p. 180
Binius confesses, they hold it to be by Law humane and not divine.


PHIL. An. 450. (...) 451.
Baronius De Romans cont. l. 2. c. 22
Bellarmine and Bin. quo supra*
Binius do tell you that this Canon was not confirmed by Pope Leo.


ORTHO. Conc. Chal. act. 16. Bin* t* 2. p. 136.
Eusebius Bishop of Doryleum did testify the contrary openly in the council
in these words. Sponte subscripsi, quoniam and hanc regulam sanctissimo Papae
in vrbe Roma relegi, praesentibus clericis Constantinopolitanis, eamque
suscepit. i. I have subscribed willingly, because I read over even this Canon
to the most holy Pope in the City of Rome, in the presence of the Clerks of
Constantinople, and he embraced it. But let us imagine that he did not
embrace it, yet I refer this point to any indifferent judge, whether we
should rather believe six hundred Bishops and upward, speaking uprightly what
they think, and grounding their judgment upon the decrees of former general
councels, then one man with a few flattering favorites, speaking partially in
his own cause.


PHIL. This Canon was not made by the council, but Bin. ibid.
Anatolius with the Eastern Bishops, made it secretly, and by stealth, after
the Judges, and the Popes Legate were gone out of the Council.


ORTHOD. The Church of Constantinople being desirous to propose this matter
Conc. Chal. act. 16. Bin. t. 2. p. 134
Entreated the Popes Legates to communicate with them in the handling of it, who
refused because the Pope had given charge to the contrary: then they made
relation of it to the Judges, who commanded the holy council then present to
look into it, which they did accordingly: therefore though it pleased the
Judges to depart, yet the council proceeded by authority from the Judges: And
the Popes Legates might have stayed if it had pleased themselves. Moreover, The
Decrees Ibid.
were read at the next meeting openly in the council before the judges, who
Ibid. p. 137
ratified them by their sentence, and all the council cried and redoubled
again and again that the sentence was just.


PHIL. The Popes Ibid.
Legates interposed a contradiction, affirming that the Apostolic See ought not
to be debased.


ORTHOD. The Judges notwithstanding would not relent, but concluded the whole
business thus: Ibid.
Tota Synodus approbauit. i. The whole Synod has approuedit: wherefore it was
the judgment of the whole Synod that the Popes jurisdiction is not by Law
divine.


CHAP. IIII.
Of the Election of Bishops in the primitive Church, before there were any
Christian Princes.

PHIL. IF we consider the practice of the Christian world in primitive
antiquity, which was nearest to the fountain, and knew best the meaning of
Law Divine, we shall find that they were either elected, or at least
confirmed by the Pope, or by authority from the Pope, either expressly, or by
his permission or conniuencie, and so received their jurisdiction.


ORTHOD. To examine these points in order, let us begin with the election of
Ministers, concerning which, we find three varieties in the new Testament. The
first by lots: the second by voices: the third by the spirit of prophecy. Act.
1. 26.
Matthias was chosen by lots; the Act. 6. 5.
Deacons by voices; 1. Tim. 1. 18. and 4. 14.
Timothy and others by the spirit of prophecy. For as Chr^in 1. ad Tim. c. 1.
Hom. 5.
Chrysostom says; In those days the pastors were made by prophecy: what
is, by prophecy? by the holy Ghost; as Saul was showed by prophecy, when he
lay hid among the stuff: as the holy Ghost said, separate unto me Paul and
Barnabas, so was Timothy chosen. Theod. in. 1. ad Tim. c. 1.
Theodoret; thou have not thy calling from men, but thou receiuedst that order
by divine revelation. Oec. in 1. ad Tim. cap. 1.
Oecumenius; by revelation of the spirit, Timothy was chosen of Paul to be a
Disciple, and ordained a Bishop. This kind of election seems to be usual in
the Apostles times, and to have continued so long as the gift of prophecy and
discerning of spirits remained. Now of these three, the first and third were by
God himself; the second by all the faithful. This is all we find in
Scripture; yet here is no precept, but only example. Wherefore it seems that
the Lord has left this point as a thing indifferent to be ordered by the
discretion of the Church, so all things be done honestly and in order. From the
Scripture, if we come to the ages following, they referred it to the Clergy
and people.


PHIL. To the Clergy I grant by the conniuencie of the Pope, but in the
Council of Conc. La^d. cap. 13. Bin. ^. 1. page 289.
Laodicea elections of B. are forbidden to be made by the people.


ORTH. The Council in that place names Priests, not Bishops; and if under
the name of Priests you comprehend Bishops, yet you must consider that it
being only provincial, could not impose laws to the whole Christian world.
That Bishops were chosen by popular elections after this Council, may appear
by the great Nicen Council (assembled as Baronius thinks six years after
the Council of Laodicea) in their Synodall Epistle to the Church of
Alexandria, and to the beloved brethren of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis. Apud.
Theod. lib. 1. cap. 9.
If peradventure any prelate of the Church do fall asleep, let it be lawful
for such as have been received into the Communion of the Church a little
before, to succeed into the place of him that is dead, if so be that they
shall seem to be worthy, and if the people shall choose them, yet so
notwithstanding that the voice, and as it were the seal of the Bishop of the
Catholic Church of Alexandria be added thereunto. And that they inioyed the
same liberty before the Nicen Council is clear by Saint Cyprian, saying,
Cypr. epist. 63. sect. 4.
The people obeying the Lords commandments, and fearing God, ought to separate
themselves from a sinful ruler, and not to intermingle themselves with the
sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest, seeing they especially have power either
to elect worthy Priests, or to reject unworthy.


PHIL. I answer with Pam in eande epist. Cypr. quia ipsius erat, crimina seu
merita detegere.
Pamelius, that the people are said to have power to elect or reject, because
they gave testimony of the conversation of the parties. A thing so notoriously
known, that the Emperor Alexander Seuerus (as Lam^. in Seuero.
Lampridius reports) when he would send any rulers to the provinces, or make
governors, proposed their names, exhorting the people that if they could
object any crime, they should make just proof; and used to say, that it were a
shame not to do that in the rulers of the Provinces, which Christians did in
proclaming their Priests, that were to be ordained.


ORTHOD. Was their testimony only required, and not their consent? why then
says Leo, Leo primus epist. 89.
Teneatur subscriptio clericorum, honoratorum testimonium, ac ordinis consensus
and plebis, that is, let the subscription of the Clergy be obtained, the
testimony of the honorable, and consent of order and people.


PHIL. It Turrian de iure ordinandi. l. 2. c. 1. p. 131. in margina.
is one thing if the consent of the people be required in ordination, 2
and another if their proper suffrages.


ORTHOD. But Saint Cyprian calls it a just and lawful ordination which has
been examined, Cypr. epist. 68. sect. 4.
Omnium suffragio, by the suffrage or voice of all, that is both of Clergy and
people; which he exemplifieth in the ordination of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, in
these words, Epist. 52. sect. 4.
Cornelius was made Bishop by the judgment of God, and his Christ, by the
testimony of almost all the Clergy, by the suffrage of the people which was
then present, and by the College of ancient Priests and good men. Yea the
suffrages of the people are a thing so clearly set down in antiquity, that
Pamelius himself cannot deny them, Pam* in epist. Cypr. 68.
we deny not (says he) the old rite of electing Bishops, by which they are
wont to be chosen, the people being present, yea rather by the voices of the
people: for that it was observed in Africa, is evident by the election of
Eradius the successor of S. Austin, Concerning which there is extant his 110.
Epistle: In Grecce in the age of Chrysostom, as appears by his third book
of Priesthood: In Spain by this place of Cyprian, and Isidor in his book of
offices: In France by the epistle of Celestinus: At Rome, by those things which
were spoken before upon the epistle to Antonianus: yea every where else by the
87. epistle of Leo; and that this custom continued until Gregory the first
(appears) by his epistle, yea even unto the times of the Emperors Charles
and Lodowick, as it is manifest enough out of the first book of their
chapters; and the same Pamelius in another place says, the manner of choosing
the Bishop of Rome was often changed; first Saint Peter chose his successors
Linus, Cletus, and Clemens: then Anacletus and the rest unto the second Schism
between Damasus and Vrsicinus were created by the suffrages of the Clergy and
the people: behold how Pamelius who a little before interpreted the peoples
elections in Cyprian, as though they elected only by way of testimony (a
cold and a hungry interpretation,) is now forced to confess (o the evidence
of truth) that they elected by way of suffrage: yea, and that the Roman
Bishops from Anacletus to Damasus, (that is, from the year 103. to the year
307.) were so elected. Wherefore it is most true which is affirmed by our
learned Epist. Elien. resp. ad apo. Bell. c. 13. page 313.
Bishop. Presentia plebis apud Cyprianum includit testimonium de vita, nec
excludit suffragium de persona. i. The presence of the people in Cyprian
includes a testimony of their life; and excludes not a suffrage of their
person.


PHIL. There are two kinds of Suffrages: the former of Turr. quo supra. p. 136.
petition, consent, or testimony, the latter of power or authority: the former
belonges to the people, the latter does not.


ORTHO. If one make petition, give consent, or testimony, is this to give a
voice, or Suffrage? surely this is a deluding distinction.


PHIL. It is said of Lucius, who was intruded into the place of Peter,
Patriarch of Alexandria: Theodoret l. 4. c. 22.
Not an assembly of Orthodox Bishops, not the Suffrages of true Clergy men,
nor the desire of the people made him Bishop, as it is commanded in the
Ecclesiastical sanctions: where you see that Suffrages are ascribed to Clergy
men, and only desire or petition to the people.


ORTHOD. In a Roman Council holden under Syluester, it is said, that a Priest
may be ordained Bishop, Conc. Roman. apud. Bin^. 1 p. 299.
S^ vota populi and Cleri concurrerint, if the desires of the people and
Clergy concur; where you see that desires or requests, are ascribed to the
Clergy, as well as to the people. Moreover, you heard out of Cyprian, that
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, was chosen by the testimony of the Clergy, and the
Suffrages of the people.


PHIL. The Clergy gave Suffrages of power and authority: so did not the
people; for the Bishops were not bound to admit whomsoever the people required.


ORTHOD. Neither were the people compelled to receive whomsoever the Bishops
elected. Pope Leo commands, Leo primus Epist. 84. c. 5.
vt nullus inuitis and non petenti^us ordinetur, that no B. be ordained to the
people against their wills, and not requiring it.


PHIL. PAmelius says, Pam. in Ep. Cyp. 68.
It is evident that the Suffrages only were granted to 3.
the people, and not the election which uses to be by subscription.


ORTHOD. In the days of Greg. Ep. l. 2 ind 10. Ep. 19. and 26. and. 27. ind.
^1. Ep. 22. and 26.
Gregory the great, when a Bishopric was void, he used to admonish the
Clergy and people of that city, to agree in the election; which being done,
there was made a Cum solennitate decreti omnium subscription ^bus roborat^. l.
2. ind. 10. Ep. 26. and 27.
solemn decree, strengthened with subscriptions of all, and sent to the
Consecrators* where we must observe these words, the subscriptions of all, not
of the Clergy alone, but of all, that is, of all the electours, both Clergy
and people; wherefore the people did then choose with the Clergy, even by
Suffrages of subscription.


PHIL. True, but this was by the Popes permission.


ORTH. What permission had S. Aust. from the Pope, in electing Eradius, his
successor, when he Hoc ad vltimum rog^ vt gestis ist^s dignemini su s^ribere
qui potestis Aug. Ep 1^9.
desired the people, so many as could, to subscribe, and the people cried fiat,
fiat, 25. times? or the people and Roman army which subscribed in the
election of A^astas. ^n vit. Con^nis.
Conon? wherefore if the people gave Suffrages by subscription in those times,
we need not doubt that they gave Suffrages in the time of S. Cyprian; neither
was it by the Popes permission. For S. Epist. 68.
Cyprian makes no mention of the Pope, but declares that almost in all
Provinces after the death of a Bishop, the Bishops next adjoining did meet
about an election, in the city of the Bishop deceased, and so the election was
performed in their presence, by the Suffrages of the whole fraternity; that
is, both of the Clergy and like wise also of the people. Wherefore that which
you say concerning the Pope, is but a voluntary speech, without any ground. And
surely seeing God has set down no certain rule nor precept in holy
Scripture, but left it as a thing indifferent, it was most fit that in those
primative times, the people should have a Suffrage, for by this means it came
to pass, that they did not only more quietly receive, diligently hear, and
heartily love, but also more willingly and bountifully maintain their Bishop,
wherefore their Suffrage was grounded upon right and reason.


PHIL. The Church of God has had doleful experience of the tumults which
arise from popular elections: Euag. l. 2. c. 5. 7. 8.
Euagrius declares what vprores were at Alexandria, about Proterius, when the
people beat the soldiers into the Church, and destroyed a number of them with
fire, yea they slew Proterius in the Temple upon Easter day, drew his body
along the city, hewed it in most miserable manner, burned that which was left
and scattered his ashes in the wind. And Amian. Marcell. l. 27.
Amianus reports, that at the election of Damasus, the people slew in the
Church in one day, 137. persons, so that the holy places did flow with streams
of Christian blood. These are the fruits of popular elections.


CHAP. V.
An answer to certain objections against the election of Bishops by Christian
kings and Emperors, out of the Counsels and other authorities.

ORTH. IF popular elections be so dangerous, unto whom should their ancient
right rather be translated then unto the Prince, who by the law of God is their
Sovereign to rule them, and the Father both of Church and Common wealth, to
provide for their good?


PHIL. The Council of Council. Paris. 3. secundum Bin. t. 2. p. 639.
Paris says, that if any man by overmuch rashness presume to invade the
height of this honor by the Princes commandment, let him in no wise be
received by the Bishops.


ORTHO. The meaning of the Council appears by the words going before; let
not a Bishop be intruded by the Princes commandment, nor by any other means
against the consent of the Metropolitan, and the Bishops of the Province: so
this Council makes nothing against our kings of England who use most orderly
lawful and Canonical proceeding, never intruding any against the consent of
the Metropolitan and comprouincialls.


PHIL. In the year 566. there was a Council holden at Santonia in France where
d Emerius was deposed from his Bishopric, because he was intruded by King h
Conc. Santon^ns e^vide Bin. t. 2 p. 646.
Clotharius.


ORTHO. He was put in contrary to the Canons. For he Greg. Turon. l. 4. c. 26.
had the decree of the King that he should be consecrated without the advice of
the Metropolitan, so this is no parallel for our Princes.


PHIL. By the second Conc. Nicen ^* Can. 3. B^n. t. 3. p. 393.
Nicen Council, All elections of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,* made by the
Magistrates are void: And the ground of their assertion is that Can. Apost 31.
Canon of the Apostles, If any obtain a Church, by secular powers, let him be
deposed, and all that communicate with him.


ORTHO. That Canon is to be expounded of secular powers excluding the Clergy,
or inuading the Church by force, and violence, and so the Council took it,
neither did they urge it any otherwise, as may appear plainly by the very
title of their Canon. Apud Bin. quo supra.
Electiones Episcoporum quae vi Principum procedunt infirmari debent. i. the
elections of Bishops which proceed by the violence of Princes, ought to be
infringed.


PHIL. But you cannot so delude the 22. Canon of the eighth general Council,
being the fourth at Constantinople, which is most pregnant to this purpose. For
there it was decreed, That Apud. Bin. ^. 3. page 857.
no Lay. Prince or Potentate should interpose themselves in the Election, or
promotion of a Patriarch, Metropolitan, or any Bishop, especially seeing it is
not convenient that they should have any power in such things, but rather be
silent, till the Election be finished by the Ecclesiastical College.


ORTHOD. The 22. Canon is a counterfeit, not found in the Vide Episcopum
Eliensem in resp. ad Apol. B^ll cap. 6. page 141.
Greek copies; And the true Canons of the same Council, grounding upon the
Canons of the Apostles and ancient Councels, do justify my former answer in
these words, Conc. 8. Can. 12. Bin. t. 3. p. 856.
If any Bishop shall receive the Consecration of Episcopal dignity by the
fraud and tyranny of Princes, let him be deposed. Wherefore, the intention of
the ancient Councels was not to exclude Princes, but only to remove fraud
and compulsion, that all things might be done according to the Canons. That
Hildebrandicall doctrine was not yet known to the world.


PHIL. Athan. ^* p^st. ad sol^tariam vitam agentes.
Athanasius asks where there is any such Canon that a Bishop should be sent
out of a Palace.


ORTHOD. Athanasius speaks of the proceedings of Constantius, who so far
contemned all Canons, that he would have had his own will to be for a Canon.
And whereas in those days Bishops used to be chosen by the consent of the
people and Clergy, openly created in the Church, and ordained, if it were
possible, by all the Bishops of the Province, at least by three, with the
consent of the Metropolitan; Constantius in stead of the Church, would have it
done in his Palace; In place of the people, there were present three of his
Eunuchs, and for the Bishops of the Province, three, which Athanasius calls
not (...), that is, Bishops, but (...), that is, spies; Thus was one Felix
created a Bishop. This sending of Bishops out of a Palace, was against all
Canons: this Athanasius misliked, neither can any man of wisdom speak well of
it. But such proceedings as are used in the Church of England, shall be
justified as agreeable both to the Councels, and stories of antiquity.


PHIL. Valentinian, when the Bishops would have had him to elect a Bishop of
Millan, said, Theod. l. 4. cap. 6.
It is a greater matter then is convenient for us, but you being endued with
divine grace, and shining with the brightness thereof, shall make the election.


ORTHOD. The Bishops did show their duty to their Prince, and the Prince
showed his elemencie to his Subjects. But what is this to your purpose? There
is no doubt, but a Prince may, if it please him, relinquish his right for a
time, and he or his successors may resume it again, when it seems good to
their Princely wisdoms. For that this was anciently acknowledged to be the
right of Christian Princes, will appear, if we consider the election of
Bishops in the Imperial Cities of Rome, and Constantinople, as also in the
Kingdoms of France and Spain.


CHAP. VI.
Of the Election of the Bishops of Rome under Christian Emperors, before the
division of the Empire.

PHIL. THe Pam^lius in Cypr. Epist. 52.
authority of Emperors began to be interposed in the election of Damasus,
and first of all verily only in Schism to pacify vproares, and so the matter
was composed by Valentintan between Damasus and Vrsicinus; By Honorius,
between Boniface and Eulalius; And by King Theodoricke, between Symmachus and
Laurentius. Afterward Emperors intermedled even when there was no Schism, to
prevent, least peradventure there should be vprores. Yea, and the matter came
by little and little to that pass, that Bishops elected, durst not receive
Consecration without their assent.


ORTHOD. The first Christian Emperor was Constantine the Great, converted
according to the calculation of Baronius, in the year of Christ 312. the
second year of Pope Melchtades, and the 7. year of his sitting in the
Imperial Throne. In his time succeeded three Bishops of Rome, Siluester,
Marcus and Julius; whose elections, Constantine dwelling far of, permitted to
be performed as in ancient manner, by the Suffrages of the Clergy and people.
Yet what authority he thought himself to have in such matters, may appear by
these his words to Athanasius, Socrat. l. 1. cap. 20.
If I shall understand that any man which is desirous to be partaker of the
Church, shall be hindered or excluded by thee, I will presently send one, who by
my commandment shall cast thee out, and give thy place to another. After
Julius succeeded Liberius, Anno 352, Constantius being sole Emperor, who
though he intermeddled not with this Election in the West, yet he interposed
himself before that time in the East. For when the people had slain
Hermogenes the Captain in defense of Proclus, he came himself in person to
Constantinople, and cast Proclus out of the Church, yet he deferred (says
Socrat l. 2. cap. ^0.
Socrates) to pronounce Macedonius Bishop, because he was wonderfully incensed
against him, as for other reasons, so because he was chosen without his advice
and counsel; notwithstanding, he gave him license to execute his function in
that Church only, wherein he was chosen; but afterward understanding that
Paulus was placed again, he sent one Philip to cast out Paulus, and to place
Macedonius. Thus you see how both Constantine and Constantius, interposed their
authority before the time of Damasus. And had not Valentinian done the like,
Ammian. Marcel. l. 27.
Damasus could hardly have obtained the Popedom, because the contrary faction
was so strong.

AFter Damasus, who continued under five Emperors, Valentinian, Valens, 2.
Gratian, Valentinian the younger, and Theodosius, succeeded Siricius, in the
year of Christ 385. being the tenth year of Valentinian, and the seventh of
Theodosius, whose election was memoratus Episcopus ipse permaneat. Bar. Anno
385 n. 6.
confirmed by the Emperor Valentinian, as may appear by his Epistle to
Pinianus, extant in the Vatican, and published by Baronius.


PHIL. This was extraordinary by reason of Schism: but it was no ordinary
matter till the days of Justinian. For then, as Onuph. in Plat. in Pelag. 2.
Onuphrius says, After the Goths were driven out of Italy, (which happened in
the year 553.) there grew a custom by the authority of Pope Vigilius, to
wit, That so soon as the Pope was dead* a new election should presently be
made after the ancient manner, by the Clergy, the Senate, and people of Rome,
but the elected might not be Consecrated, before the Emperor of
Constantinople confirmed the election, and gave license to the Pope elected,
that he might be ordained and Consecrated. Now if this grew by the authority
of the Pope, it does not argue any right originally in the Emperor, but only
derived from the Pope.


ORTHO. A constitution was made at that time, That the new elected Pope should
not only crave license of the Emperor to be ordained, but also pay him a
certain sum of money; which was done to this end, as Ibid.
Onuphrius witnesses, That the Emperor might be assured of the behavior and
conditions of the new Popes, least any turbulent spirit or enemy to the
Emperor being ordained, the City of Rome and the country of Italy might
revolt from the Eastern Empire: for now the authority of the Pope began to be
great, by reason that the Emperor lived far off at Constantinople. But
though this paying of money begun in the time of Vigilius, yet the authority of
the Emperor in elections was before his time, as witnesses Platina in the life
of Siluerius the Predecessor of Vigilius. Siluerius (says he) borne in
Campania having for his father Hormisda a Bishop, was created Pope by the
commandment of Theodohatus; cum antea non regum sed imperatorum authoritas
interueniret, whereas before that time the authority not of Kings but of
Emperors was interposed. So he speaks of it as a known ordinary and usual
matter. Yea and Justinian took it so hainously to be robbed of this right,
that as (...).
Platina declares, this was one of the causes why he sent Belisarius with an
army into Italy. Moreover as it was the custom of the Emperor before Vigilius,
so it remained long after.


PHIL. Indeed this So Bell. c^ll^th (...). (...). ad. ^b. (...)* ^. 6
Tyranny continued til the days of Benedict the second, at which time (...) in
Ben. 2. (...). in Ben. 2
Constantine (...).
moved with the holiness of the man sent a Sanction, that from thenceforth
whomsoever the Clergy people and Roman army should choose, him they should all
presently believe to be the true Vicar of Christ, not expecting the authority
either of the Emperor or of the Exarch of Italy.


ORTHOD. This is your fashion: (...):
If the Emperor do any thing against the Pope, it is mere tyranny, if the Pope
do any thing against the Emperor, it is clear liberty. But you confess that
this custom prevailed from Vigilius to Benedict the second, in which space
were 21. Popes of thereabout all created by Imperial authority, except
Pelagius the second, of who^ Platina reports it as a strange accident* that
he was made Pope (...). 2. And before him* A^asi^ (...).
iniussu Principis, without the Emperors command: whereof he renders this
reason, That they could not send any man because the City was besieged; and
withal he affirms, That whatsoever the Clergy then had done, were nothing,
if the Emperor should not approve it; wherefore Gregory the Deacon was sent to
Constantinople to pacify the Emperor. Afterward when Gregory himself was
chosen Pope, He (...) in Greg. 1.
sent letters to the Emperor Mauritius, earnestly entreating him to make void
the election of the Clergy and people; but his letters being intercepted by
the Governor of the City, were torn in pieces, and other written to entreat
the Emperor to confirm him. Moreover Platina having said that Se^erinus was
confirmed in the Popedom by Isaatius the Exarch, gives this reason* Plat* in
(...)*
For then the election of the Clergy and people was counted vain, unless the
Emperors or their Exarehes had confirmed them. And this you grant continued
till Benedict the 2. but did it then cease? Constantine did not absolutely
refer it to the Clergy and people, but joined with them the Roman army, which
being for the guard of the Empire, was at the Emperors command. And his son
Justinian the younger, who presently succeeded (for Constantine died the same
year that he sent the sanction) Bin. in notis in vitam Cononis. tom. 3. p. 132.
Mandauit vt non crearetur pontifex, sine consensu Exarchi; commanded that the
Pope should not be made without the consent of the Exarch: which mandate was
put in practice the year following, in the election of Conon: For Anastasius
declares that when the Clergy people and Roman army had subscribed, Anast. in
vita Conon. Bin. quo supra.
Missos pariter vna cum Clericis and ex populo ad excellentissimum Theodorum
Exarchum direxerunt, that is, They directed some of the people joined with the
Clergy as Messengers to the most excellent Theodorus the E^arch* for what
purpose may appear by Platina, Plat. in vita Conon.
Omnes ad quos pertinebat eum confirmabant; idem fecit Theodorus Exarchus; all
to whom it belonged confirmed him; the same did Theodorus the Exarch. Hitherto
of the Greek Emperors.


CHAP. VII.
Of the election of Popes from the Emperor Charles to Otho.

WHen the Emperor Leo the third, opposed himself against the worshipping of
Images, Pope Gregory the second did d Sigonius de regno Italiae. l. 3. an. 726
not only excommunicate him, but also a forbad the Italians to yield him either
tribute or obedience; whereupon it came to pass that a great part of Italy
reuolting, Rome and the Roman Duke*dome did fall to the Pope, the rest to the
King of the Lombards. Afterward when there arose variance between the Pope and
the Lombard, so that the Lombard beseiged the City; the seige was raised by the
means of Charles Martell, who then had the administration of the Kingdom of
France; After whose death his son Idem an. 750.
Pipin being made King of France, by means of Pope Zechary (one good turn
requiring another) did not only defend the Pope against the Lombard, but also
having conquered Rauenna and the territories thereof, Idem anno. 754. and 755.
Pipinus Exarchatum pentapolimque iterum S. Petro and successorib. eius in
perpetuum possidenda Concessit.
he gave all the possessions of the Exarch, and also Pentapolis, as a patrimony
to Saint Peter, which gift his son Charles having fully conquered the
Lombard, and subdued Italy) confirmed and enlarged. This was Charles the Great,
King of France by inheritance, of Italy by conquest, who was called the
Emperor of the Romans, that he might be distinguished from the Greek. Now as
before this time the Greek Emperor had power in elections, so after this time
the Emperor of the Romans. For Pope Distinct. 63. Adrianus.
Adrian with a whole Synod delivered to Charles, the right and power of
choosing the Pope, and disposing the Sea Apostolic, and granted to him the
honor to be Patricius: and defined, that Bishops through all Provinces should
take Inuestitures from him, and that a Bishop should be consecrated by none,
unless he were first invested by the Emperor.

2. PHIL. THat which you bring of the grant of Adrian to Charles, is a
Mendacium esse commentum et imposturam quis non videt? Bin. t. 3. p. 252.
lie, a fiction, an imposture.


ORTHOD. It may be proved by a world of See Master Carlton of Jurisdiction. c.
7. page 138.
witnesses, worthy and famous men which have set the truth in the clear light
and made it shine as the noone day.


PHIL. It is a tale devised by Sigebert in favor of Henry the fourth a
schismatic Emperor which challenged inuestitures; and though many writers
have recorded it, yet they were all deceived by Sigebert, he was the first
author, and from him they have sucked it as Cardinal Anno 774. number. 10.
Baronius has learnedly declared.


ORTHOD. If they all sucked it from Sigebert, then it seems they thought him
an honest man, that they durst publish a matter of so great importance, only
relying upon his credit; and if so many have for diverse hundred years had so
good an opinion of him, why should Baronius seek to blemish his name, and
brand him with reproach? But what if Sigebert were not the author of it? what
if it were recorded by Historians before Sigebert was borne? even by the Popes
own friends; even by Anastasius the keeper of the Popes Library; Baronius his
elder brother?


PHIL. It is not; for Anastasius is extant, and there is no such matter.


ORTH. There it was, but it melted away as it passed through the fire of
purgatory.


PHIL. Why? do you think that Anastasius has been purged?


ORTHOD. There is no doubt of it; it behooved you to look about, Ne quid Romana
curia detrimenti caperei; i. least the Roman Court should suffer any loss.


PHIL. These are uncharitable conjectures, unless you can prove that
Anastasius wrote it.


ORTHOD. That is proved out of Platina as clear as the noone day; who says:
Plat. in Pas^. 1.
That the keeper of the Library writes that Lodowick gave to Pascall free
power of choosing Bishops; when as before that time the Emperor was asked
about that matter: Which power the same author reports to have been granted
to Charles by Pope Adrian. Hear you this? Platina tells us that the grant of
Pope Adrian to Charles was reported by the keeper of the Library, that is by
Anastasius, for he was the famous keeper of the Library, who wrote the lives of
the Popes until Nicholas the first as Onuph. in Plat. in Ioh. ^^t. and in
Nichol. 1.
Onuphrius thinks, or as Bar. Anno 885. n. 7.
Baronius judges until Steven the sixth. Thus it appears, that it was in
Anastasius, though now it be not. And here let us admire the wisdom of God
who discloseth the works of darkness, and reuealeth what is done even in
your privy chambers. For Baronius remembering none who recorded this before
Sigebert, but Anastasius, might flatter himself, that if he could father it
upon Sigebert he should do well enough; for those worthy writers and noble
historians which have from time to time delivered this story by the space of
340. years, he cutteth them all off at one blow, as being all deceived by
Sigebert. Sigebert himself he discrediteth, as writing partially in favor of
Henry the fourth, a schismatic Emperor. And as for Anastasius, the popish
physicians gave him a purgation to cleanse him from such noisome humors. But
mark the mischief of it, they did not remember that Platina in Pope Pascall
had blazed to the world, that Anastasius wrote it; for if they had, you may be
sure they would have put a gag in his mouth. But now Platina has played the
blab, Sigebert is found an honest man, and popish packing and iugling is come
to light. Blessed be God which takes the crafty in their own wile, and
makes their wisdom folly. But that every bird may be adorned with his own
feathers, I confess that the honor of this discovery (next unto God) belongs
to master Carlton, who like a good Northren bloodhound, after he had once got
the sent, did follow the footing till he had found out the thief. Baronius
has been thought in the search of antiquities to have the eye of an Eagle,
and the strength of a Lion; his Annalls have been accounted a treasure-house
of antiquity: but upon better view, he is found to have been the Popes
parasite, and his book little better then a foxes burrow. This wily fox has
been vnkenelled by D. Doct. Rain. apologia thesium, s^ct. 43.
Rainolds about Pope Honorius; by master Alexander Dialogue of Pope Ioane.
Cook about Pope Ioane, and now by master George Carlton about Pope Adrian.
Johan. Defens. Ioh. Mars. p. 354.
Marsilius says, that there is a book to come forth shortly entitled the
errors of Baronius, wherein are set down in particular twenty errors, which
he committed in denying the story of Pope John the twelft; and I have heard of
some others which have taken great pains to the like purpose: God bless their
labors, that they may dispell those foggie mists of falsifications, that the
truth may shine as the Sun in his strength. Hitherto of Anastasius, and yet
for your fuller satisfaction, I will refer you to 2. more, the one is
Walthram who wrote before Sigebert, the other Eutropius Longobardus, who was
200. years before them both, as of late has been declared by a learned
Episc. Eliensis in resp. ad apol. Bellar. c. 6. page 140.
Bishop. Now let the world judge who it is which uses lying, feigning and
imposture, whether Sigebert, or Bellarmine, Binius and Baronius.


PHIL. BAronius is amongst the historians, as the Moon amongst the 3
Stars, and I doubt not but whatsoever he says, he builds upon a sure
foundation, which is evident in this point of Pope Adrian, because Ex Bar. an.
774. n. 11. and 12 Bin. in noti^ in vitam Adr. 1. tom. 3. p. 252. Bell. in
apolog. and resp. ad libr. Jacob. R^g. cap. 6. page 76.
Eginhardus who went not from the side of Charles, and wrote his life most
exactly, makes no mention of it, neither do the French Annals.


ORTHOD. Their silence does not prejudice the relation of others, for in a
matter of story, the affirmation of one is to be preferred before the silence
of many: Neither are the French stories silent in it, as may appear by Frosard
in Charlemain. fol. 80.
Frosard, who collecting the actions of Charles out of the ancient French
writers has the same story.


PHIL. Ex Bell. quo supra p. 76. and 77.
How can it be that Adrian gave any such privilege to Charles the Emperor,
seeing Charles was not Emperor in the days of Adrian? for Adrian died Anno
795. and Charles was not Emperor till the year 800.


ORTHOD. The title of Emperor and solemnity of imperial coronation was not
added till the time of Pope Leo, yet he conquered Italy in the year 774.
Sigonius de regno Italiae. l. 3. anno 774.
which was 21. years before the death of Adrian. Wherefore seeing the Romans
did then acknowledge him for their Prince, why should they not attribute that
authority to him in elections which belonged to their Prince?


PHIL. Where was this grant made unto him?


ORTHOD. At Rome in the Lateran.


PHIL. It is impossible, for he was but four times at Rome, and it could not
be at any of Bar. and Bin. vbi supra.
those times.


ORTH. How often he was at Rome before or after skilleth not; this is sufficient
for our purpose, that he went from the seige of Papia to keep his Easter at
Rome with Pope Adrian: which done he went back to the seige, where Desiderius
King of the Lombards yielded himself unto him: so returning to Rome, he
appointed the Synod: wherein, if you will not believe Sigebert, you may
believe Gratian, set cut by Pope Gregory, or Theodoricus de Niem.


PHIL. If he did come from Papia to Rome, yet he did not there hold a Council:
For whence should he so suddenly have so many Ex Bar* quo supra.
Bishops, and Abbots?


ORTHOD. Anastasius says, that Charles went from thence to Rome Anas^ in vita
Adriani. 1. Bin ^om. 3. page ^^1.
Abstollens secum diuersos Episcopos and Abbates, carrying with him diverse
Bishops and Abbots: which may argue that he intended a Council, and made
preparation for it. And here I marvel why the Clerks of the Roman sponge,
which raced out the grant of Adrian to Charles, did leave this of the Bishops
and Abbots vnspunged? for why should he carry with him those Bishops and
Abbots, but to hold a Council? Thus th^se good fellows have conveyed the
grant out of Anastasius, they have stolen away the fairest Swanne that did
swim in the stream, but they have let fall some of the feathers, by which it
appears, that there was the Swanne.


PHIL. To what end should Charles call a Council in Italy?


ORTHOD. Theod. de Niem. de in vest. see M. Carleton of ^urisd* c. 7.
Theodoricke de Niem says, This Synod was celebrated by 153. Bishops and
Abbots, by all the regions and orders of the city, and by the whole Clergy of
the Church of Rome, Exquirentibus vsus, leges, and mores eiusdem Ecclesiae and
imperij. i. searching out the customs, laws, and manners of the same Church
and Empire. Why I pray you, should Charles so employ them, but only that the
privileges of the Empire might be confirmed unto him?


PHIL. What were these privileges?


ORTHOD. The Romans had received great kindness, not only from Charles, but
also from his father, and grandfather. For first of all when the Lombards
besieged the city of Rome, his grandfather, Charles Martell, was the means of
raising the siege: Afterward when the Lombards having won Rauenna, did seek
to have Rome also, and the Roman Dukedom, his father Pipin recovering
Rauenna, did bestow it with the territories thereof, upon Saint Peter and his
successors: which Charles, after his conquest of Italy, did establish and
amplify. He never entered the city with violence, but expelled those which
offered them violence. He never advanced his banner against them, but when they
were vexed by the Lombards, and not being able to defend themselves, implored
his aid, he drove the Lombards out of Italy, and protected them. Finally, he
never was an enemy to Rome, but always a friend; for which great benefits,
the Romans to show themselves thankeful, did yield unto him Princely
prerogatives, both in Church and Common wealth. Concerning the Common wealth,
Did. 63. Adrianus.
Pope Adrian, as the mouth of the whole Synod, Citizens and Nobles assembled,
Patriciatus dignitatem et consesserat. i. did grant unto him, the honor, to be
the Father of the Common wealth that is, the Sea Iunius an* mad. ad libros
Bell. de (...) (...). l. 1. c. 7. n. 6
Prince, Patron, and Protector of the Romans. Concerning the Church; Pope
Adrian with the whole Synod, tradiderunt Carolo ius and potestatem eligendi
Pontificem and ordinandi sedem Apostolicam. 1. delivered unto him: he right and
power of electing the Pope, and of disposing the Sea Apostolic. I pass over
the other part of the decree concerning Inuestitures of other Bishops, because
as yet we speak only of the Bishops of Rome.


PHIL. If the Pope delivered this power, as you say, or Did. 63. in Synodo.
granted it as some say, or Sigeb^n Chron. an. 1111.
gave it, as Sigebert says, to Charles, then it follows that he had it not
of his own right, but only by the gift and grant of the Pope.


ORTHOD. The power of electing the Pope, may be ascribed unto Charles in a
double sense; either that he might do it with the Clergy, and people, or
without the^: if in the first sense, then the meaning of the Canon, is not to
debar the Clergy and people from elections, but to decree that though they
may lawfully make an election, yet their election is not sufficient, and
auailable, unless the Emperor do perfect and accomplish it with his royal
assent. If this be the meaning, then whatsoever is here delivered to Charles,
was before his time anciently acknowledged to belong to the Emperors, as I
have already declared. And yet for your further satisfaction, you may see in
the Did. 63. Agatho.
Canon law, that though the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus, by his Diualis or
sacred Epistle, released to Pope Agatho the some of money, which the Bishops of
Rome ever since the time of the Emperor Justinian, used to pay for their
ordination; yet he added this clause, vt non debeat ordinari qui electus
fuerit, nisi prius decretum generale introducatur in regiam vrbem secundum
antiquam Consuetudine^, vt cum eorum conscientia and iussione debeat ordinatio
prosperari. i. that the party elected ought not to be ordained, unless, first,
the general decree of his election, (strenthned with the subscriptions of the
electors) were brought into the imperial city, according to the ancient
custom, that so the ordination might prosperously proceed with the knowledge
and commandment of the Emperors. Wherefore if we embrace this sense of the
Canon, we may justly say, Episcopus Eliensis in Resad apol. Bell. c. 6 p. 140.
Decretum hoc iuris veteris, vel restitutio, vel continuatio; non concessio
noui. 1. this decree (to speak properly) is either a restoring, or a continuing
of an ancient right, not a grant of a new; and consequently this was no
privilege, proceeding from the grace and bounty of the Pope, but a voluntary
and ingenuous confession of the Princes right. But some do follow the other
sense, extending the decree, even to a sole and plenare power of electing at
his own pleasure, without the Clergy and people. For Duaren. de sa^^. Eccle.
Mi-nisterij. ^. 3. c. 1
Duarenus says thus. In ancient time the Bishop of Rome used not to be
ordained without the consent and authority of the Roman Emperor: and all
kings used in a manner the same power in the Churches of their own kingdoms:
yet the right of Electing was not therefore taken away from the Clergy, but
afterward the right of the electing the Roman Bishops was of their own
accord, altogether granted and permitted to the Emperors, Charles and Otho.
And a little after, a full power of electing at his own pleasure was granted
to Charles, which seems more probable, because Deiur. and pr^^. imperij cited
by the Bishop of Ely. quo supra. p. 145
Theodoricke de Niem says, the Roman people granted to him, and translated
upon him all their right and power: and according to their example, Pope Adrian
with all the Clergy people, and the whole sacred Synod, granted to the
Emperor Charles, all their right and power of electing the Pope. Howsoever,
this is certain that the Pope and Council did ascribe unto him, if not a sole
and plenary, yet at least a principal and prevailing power in electing the
high Bishop. If we embrace the first; then so far as they confered upon him
their own former right, it may be called a gift or grant: If the latter, it
was no gift nor grant, but an acknowledgement of the ancient right and
prerogative of the Empire.


PHIL. Bell. in ap. pro Resp. ad. l. Iacobi Regis c. 6. p. 78.
Charles in his Carolus in Capt. l. 1. c. 84.
Chapters appoints that elections should be free.


ORTHOD. This may seem to argue that Adrian and the Council did yield unto him
a plenary power, yet notwithstanding he like a gracious Prince permitted, that
elections should be free as in former times. But what if they were free? must
the Prince therefore be excluded? Before the division of the Empire, the
Romans might freely elect whom they list, and yet the elected could not be
Consecrated till he were approved of the Emperor: so Charles might grant
freedom of elections, and yet reserve to himself his royal assent.


PHIL. If he had any such power, why did not he and his successors put it in
practice?


ORTHOD. To this I will answer, first in general, and then descend to some
particulars. In general it appears that they did, by these words of Naucl.
generat. 38.
Nauclerus; Imperator volens vti consuetudine and authoritate praedecessorum
suorum, petebat sibi seruari ea quae priuilegijs Carolo Magno, and
successoribus in Imperto iam per 300 annos, and amplius concessa and obseruata
fuerunt, ex quibus priuilegijs licite per inuestituram annuli and virgae,
Episcopatus and Abbatias conferebant, i. The Emperor Henr. desirous to use the
custom and authority of his predecessors, required that those privileges
should be reserved for him, which were granted to Charles the Great, and to his
successors in the Empire, and observed now for 300. years and more; By which
privileges it was lawful for the Emperors to confer Bishoprics and
Abbacies, by inuestiture of a ring and a staff. And Mat. Paris in Hen. 1. p.
62.
Matthew Paris says, That the Emperor was desirous to use the privilege of
his predecessors, which they hadenioyed 300. years under 60. Popes. Thus much
in general.


PHIL. Ex Bell. in apol page 77.
Anastasius who wrote the lives of 12. Popes succeeding Adrian, delivers
only that they were chosen by the people and Clergy, but says nothing of the
Emperors.


ORTHOD. Yes by your leave, he says somewhat; But if he were silent, what
then? Are not other Authors sufficient to witness it? The next Pope after
Adrian, and the only Pope elected in the time of Charles was Leo the third,
who (as Gill^n annal. vide Iunium anim. in Bell de transt. Imperij. l. 1. c. 1.
n. 12.
Gillius says) so soon as he was Consecrated, sent to Charles the Great the
keys of S. Peter's Church, with the banner of the City of Rome, and admonished
him to send certain selected persons, which might exact the Oath of obedience
of the people. Was not this a resignation both of the City and Church into the
Emperors hands? Was not this an ingenuous acknowledgement that he would not
hold the possession of S. Peter's Church, that is, of the Church of Rome without
his Royal assent? Which he undoubtedly obtained. For afterward when a strong
faction had deposed Leo, he fled into France to Charles, Who sent him back to
Rome, and Author a^n^l. de gest. Caroli. anno 796. cited by Iun. ibid.
restored him again with great honor.

AFter Charles, reigned his son Lodowick, in whose time Leo died, and 4
Steven the 4. had the place, who (as Baron. anno 816. n. 101.
Baronius shows out of Aimonius) went in person to the Emperor, within two
months of his Consecration. To what end? We may collect that out of his
decree in Did. 63. quia sa^cta.
Gratian, wherein he complains, that the Church of Rome at the death of the
Popes suffered great violence, because the new Popes were Consecrated without
the knowledge of the Emperor; neither were the Emperors Ambassadors present,
as both the Canons and custom required. Whereupon he decrees, that the
Consecration should be praesentibus Legatis Imperialibus, i. The Emperors
Ambassadors being present. And withal forbids all men to extort any new
Oaths, whereby the Church may be scandalized, and the Imperial honor
diminished. Wherefore it is probable, that his hasty going was to excuse the
matter, because, as it seems, he was Consecrated without the Emperors
knowledge. Which is yet more likely, because the next Pope Plat. in Pasc. 1.
Paschall, being created without Imperial authority, sent presently to the
Emperor Lodowick, to excuse the matter, by laying the blame upon the Clergy
and people; Whereto he answered, That the Clergy and people must keep the
decrees of their ancestors, and admonished them hereafter to take heed not to
offend the Imperial Majesty.


PHIL. If Lodowick had any such authority therein, surely he resigned it in
his Constitution concerning his donation to the Church of Rome, which is partly
in Did. 63. Ego Ludou^cus.
Gratian, but fully set down by Baron. anno 817. n. 10.
Baronius out of the Vatican Monuments; the sum whereof is, that it shall be
lawful for the Romans to elect and Consecrate their Pope, and that nothing
should be required at the hands of the new Pope, but only to send Ambassadors
to the Emperor, to signify his promotion, and to make love and peace between
them.


ORTHOD. Indeed Plat. in pasc. 1.
Platina says, That the keeper of the Library, (meaning Anastasius) writes,
that Lodowick gave free power of Electing Bishops to Pope Pascall, whereas
before this time the Emperors were consulted withal about the matter. If the
Emperor gave it, then the Emperor had it; And if Anastasius say so, then he
says something of the Emperors.

Moreover, if Lodowick did resign it, surely his son Lotharius did resume 5
it. In whose time three Popes were created, Sergius the 2. Leo the 4 and
Benedict the 3, all by Imperial authority. To begin with the first; Sigebert.
anno 844.
Sigebert shows, how Lotharius sent his son Lodowick to Rome, to confirm
the Election of Sergius.


PHIL. Ado sub anno 841.
Ado Vionensis says, He sent him that he might have the name or title of
Emperor, and that Sergius being already Pope, did set the Crown upon his
head; so he was saluted Emperor and Augustus, with the general applause of
all the people, by which you may confute the impudency of Sigebert the
Schismaticke, as Bar. anno 844. n. 5.
Cardinal Baronius has notably done.


ORTHOD. How does this confute it? These things are not contrary, but may
stand well together. The Emperor sent Lodowick to confirm the Pope; the Pope
being confirmed, did Crown Lodowick. So notably does Baronius confute
Sigebert. The next was Leo, at whose Election as the Romans were not a little
glad, so Anast. in Leone 4.
Anastasius himself says, they began again not to be a little sad, because
they durst not consecrate him that should be Pope, without the Imperial
authority.


PHIL. When Anast. in Leone 4.
Lotharius and Lodowick did challenge to themselves the Confirmation i Ex Bar.
anno 847. n. 10.
of the Pope elected, or what other right soever in his Election or
Consecration, Pope Leo resisted, and so far prevailed, that they themselves
consented it should not be done, but according to the prescript of the Canons;
His decree is yet Did. 63. Inter.
extant in these words; Leo 4. to Lotharius, and Lodowick Emperors, It is
decreed and confirmed betwixt us and you, in manner of a Covenant, that the
Election and Consecration of him that shall be Bishop of Rome, ought to be done
no otherwise then justly and Canonically.


ORTHOD. Justly and Canonically? I hope you will say, that S. Gregory was
Elected and Consecrated justly and Canonically: yet he was confirmed by the
Emperor. Wherefore this Covenant did not disanull the Imperial authority.
Which is most clear in the next Pope, Benedict the 3, after whose Election
made by the joint consent of the Clergy and people; Clerus and cuncti proceres
(says Anast. in Benedict 3.
Anastasius) decretum componentes proprijs manibus roborauere, and vt
consuetudo prisca exposcit inuictissimis Lothario and Ludouico destinauere
Augustis, i. The Clergy and all the Nobles, making a decree (concerning their
election) they strengthened it by subscribing with their own hands, and as the
ancient custom requires, they did appoint to send it to the most
unconquerable Emperors Lotharius and Lodowick. And Platina shows how the
Emperors Ambassadors were sent to Rome, to confirm the Election. After
Benedict, succeeded A Nichol. 1. tentatum potius quam in choatum. Plat. in Adr.
3.
Nicholas the first, who went about to infringe the Emperors authority, but
could not. After him came Adrian the second, At whose election the Emperors Ex
Pla^. in Adr. 2.
Ambassadors were in the City, but could not have access to enterpose the
Emperors authority; whereat they were in great indigantion.


PHIL. They were so, Ex Bell. a^ol. c. 6. p. 77.
but answer was made that it was done upon this consideration, as writes I^
Adriano. 2.
William the library keeper, who succeeded Anastasius, Least a custom should
grow of expecting the Ambassadors of Princes in the election of Popes, which
answer being received, the Ambassadors were fully calmed and quieted.


ORTH. This were to cast oil into the fire; to kindle not to quench their
anger, therefore it has no probability. Far more likely is the reason related
by Plat. in Adriano. 2.
Platina, That satisfaction was given by telling them that in such a tumult
they could not rule the people. So the Ambassadors went and saluted the Pope,
perceiving plainly that the people and Clergy began to challenge the whole
authority in elections unto themselves, not expecting the Emperors consent.
Yet the Emperor showed his authority, in that so soon as he heard of the
election, He wrote an In vita Adr^ani. 2. per G^lid. vt O^^^h. and Bell. putant
scripta: ^ei ^b Anast. vt B^r.
Epistle commending the Romans for their worthy choice. Whereupon Bin. ^. 3.
page 8 19
Binius notes in the margent, Imperator approbat electionem factam. i. The
Emperor approoueth the election being made. And the Canon of Adrian the first
did stand unrepealed till the time of Adrian the third, who made a Decree, That
the Plat. in Adr. 3.
authority of the Emperor should not be expected in the creation of the Bishop
of Rome.


6. PHIL. THe Church which had endured a long bondage under the Emperors was
then set ^t liberty, and enjoyed the same till the time of Otho the Emperor,
the year 963.


ORTHOD. Liberty do you call call it, or rather licentiousness, which has
filled the Commonwealth with tumults, the Church with monsters, and the world
with iniquity? For this is the time when as Bar an. 912. n. ^.
Baronius complains, Most filthy harlots did bear all the sway at Rome. This
is the time when strumpets did thrust their lovers into the seat of Peter. This
is the time when Bar. ibidem.
all Canons were put to silence, the pontifical decrees choked, ancient
traditions proscribed, the old custom, sacredrites, and former use of choosing
the high Bishop utterly extinguished. In this time was Formosus chosen, who had
been Bell. de romans pont l. 4. c. 12
degraded by a Pope, and got the Popedom by ^^de Plat. ^n St. ph. 6.
perjury: In this time was Steven, Ibidem
who took up the body of Formosus out of the grave, arrained it, condemned it,
cut off the fingers, and cast them into Tiber, repealing his Decrees and Acts,
and causing those whom he ordained to be See l. 2. c. 9. s^ct. 11
re-ordained. In this time was Plat. in ^orum vitis.
Romanus, Theodorus, and John the tenth, who disanulled the acts of Stephen,
and justified Formosus. In this time was Plat. in S^rg. ^
Sergius, who repealed their acts, maintained Steven, condemned Formosus and
cast his body into Tiber. This was that monster Sergius whom Bar anno 908.
number. 2. (...) rosissimu^ on. mum.
Baronius calls a villen of all villens, affirming that he had a bad
ingresse, a worse progress, and the worst egresse. And yet Pope John the 12.
exceeded him in all monstrous villainy, He Luitprand. l. 6. c. 6.
polluted his own Fathers concubine, and made his palace a stews; he put
out the eyes of his godfather; gelded one of his Cardinals; played at dice,
inuocating Jupiter and Venus, and drunk a health to the devil. This was the
monster of all monsters, of whom Cardinal Sum. de eccl. l. 2. c. 103.
Turrecremata, following Luitprandus says, Because his life was detestable and
marvelous offensive to Christian people, therefore Christ himself gave out the
sentence of condemnation against him. For while he was abusing a certain man's
wife the devil stroke him suddenly, and so he died without repentance. Lo
these were the fruits of excluding Emperors, perjury, cruelty, abominable
lust, and all manner of villainy.


CHAP. VIII.
Of the election of Popes from the time of the Emperor Otho to Henry. 4.

WHen the race of Charles failing the Western Empire, was translated to Otho,
the Romans ashamed to see such a snake in the seat of Peter, earnestly
Luitprand. l. 6.
Entreated the Emperor to provide for the Church, by remoouing the monster.
Whereupon John the 12. was deposed, and Leo the 8 made Pope in his place.

PHIL. Leo was no Pope, but a schismatic Antipope.


ORTHOD. Ex Luit. p. ibid.
He was chosen in a great Roman council, by the voice of all, in the
presence, and with consent of the Emperor. He is acknowledged for a lawful
Pope, and put into the Catalogue of Popes, by an infinite number of writers, as
Bin. t. 3. p. 1065.
Binius confesses; And therefore you must give me leave so to call and
account him. Now to proceed, This Pope Did. 63. in Synodo.
Leo in a Synod with the whole Clergy and people of Rome decreed, that from
hence forth no man of what dignity or religion soever should have any power to
elect either Patricius or Bishop of the high See Apostolic, or to ordain any
other Bishop without the consent of the Emperor.


PHIL. This Canon is counterfeit which may appear, because, Leo is here said
to propose unto himself, The example of Adrian, who granted Inuestitures to
Charles, whereas the name of Bar. an. 774. n. 15.
Inuerstitures was not in use in the time of Charles.


ORTHOD. Baronius, from whom you borrow this argument, should have done well to
have cast the nativity of Inuestitures, that so we might have known under what
constellation they had bin borne. Is it enough for him to say they were after
Charles, and not to prove it? I need not here dispute whether they came from
the Lumbards or no: the testimony of the Canon law is sufficient to
ouerballance the bare conjecture of Baronius.


PHIL. It Bar. ibid.
is said in the Canon, That this grant was made to Otho, in the Church of our
Savior. Now what author makes mention of any such council wherein any such
grant was made to Otho?


ORT. Luit. l. 6.
Luitprandus makes mention of this council, at which he was present; Did.
63. in Synod.
and Gratian has recorded, and enrolled this very Canon: what would you more?
we cite the Popes own Cano^ out of the Popes Canon Law, notoriously known to
all the Canonists, the pillars of Popery, acknowledged by Genesis l. 4. s^culo* 10.
Genebrard a most partial parasite, and related by Sigon. de regn^ ^^al. l. 8.
an. 1046.
Sigon^us the Popes own chronicler. The noble men of Rome (says he) to
advance their own private power, corrupted them to who^ the Popes election
belonged* and thereby filled the Church (almost 200 years together) with
grievous seditions, and scandalous evils and disorders. These were, the Marquis
Albert and Alberike his son a Consul, the Earls of Thusculum, and they who
were of their kin, or by their means had grown to wealth. Who, either
bribing the people and Clergy with money, or spoiling them of the ancient
liberty of the Election by whatsoever other means, preferred at their lust
their kinsmen, or friends, men commonly nothing like to the former Popes in
holiness and good order. For the repressing of whose outrage, Pope Leo the
eight revived the law which had been made by Adrian the first, and repealed by
the third: that no Pope elected, should undertake the Popedom without the
Emperors consent. Which law being taken away, the state of the Church was put
again in great danger through the private lusts of the same factions. Thus
he acknowledges that Leo was a Pope, that Pope Leo revived this Canon, and
likewise that this Canon was profitable to repress sin, and that the
abrogation of it had brought the Church into great danger. But though this
Canon were so good, made by the approbation of the Romans which (...). l. 6.
^ap. 6.
had sworn before unto Otho, that they would never choose a Pope without the
consent of him and his son, yet they went about presently to pluck their
necks out of the collar, Otho was no sooner departed then they P^at. in Io^.
13.
put out Leo, and restored John, after whom (dying within a few days) they
put in Plat. ^n Leon^. 8.
Benedict, whom the Emperor, coming with fire and sword, compelled them to
deliver up unto him, and to admit of Leo.

AFter the death of Leo the Bar. a^. 965. nu. 4. e^ autore a^ud. Regmone^.
Romans sent Ambassadors into Saxony to the 2
Emperor to know his pleasure, at whose return John the thirteenth was
chosen, whom, after a while the Romans banished. When the Emperor heard this,
he came to Rome, Bar. an. 966. nu. 2. ex au^l. ad Anast. Plat. in Ioh. 14.
Banished the consuls, hanged the tribunes, and caused Peter the governor of
the city, being the cause of all these broiles to be stripped and whipped, and
carried through the streets upon a horse with his face backward. Thus Otho put
a bit in their mouths, and kept the bridle in his hand, while he lived: but
after his decease the former faction prevailed. For Boniface the seventh, who
Plat. in B^nis. 7.
came in by villainy, robbed his Church, and being cast out by violence
recovered it again by money got with sacrilege, was chosen by the Romans, of
whom Bar. in. 985. number. 1.
Baronius says, that he was a most cruel murderer of two Popes; and had not
one hair of a Roman Bishop, deserving to be reckoned among most famous
thieues and ransakers of their country in which he went beyond Sylla and
Catiline.

Yet after this, the Emperors had again a hand in the election. For Plat. in
Gr^g. ^.
Otho the third advanced his cosen Gregory the fifth, whom Crescentius a rich
Roman expelled and put another in his place; which when the Emperor heard,
he came to Rome with a great army, he caused the Antipope to be Gla^er
^^dolph l. 1^. 4. vide Bar. anno 996. number. ^.
apprehended commanded his hands and ears to be cut off, and his eyes to be
pulled out. Then he besieged Crescentius, and hanged him up aloft in the sight
of the city. Thus Gregory was restored unto his place.


PHIL. PRoceed unto the next Pope Syluester the second, was not he 3
also chosen by the Emperor? you tell us of monsters; but if we may believe
Plat. ^n (...). 2.
Platina, this was a monster of monsters. For he is said to have been a
Nicromancer, and for the Popedom to have sold his soul to the devil, such
were the elections of the Emperors.


ORTHOD. If he were a Coniurer, then I beseech you make a stand a while, look
back, and take a view of your golden succession, wherein are so many monsters,
villains and rakehels. But what if he were not? Bar. an. 999. number. 3.
Baronius thinks that this is a slander arising from his sudden promotion,
and believed among the ignorant, because he was an excellent Astronomer.
Onuphr. annot an^ lat. in Syluest. 2.
Onuphrius wondreth that Platina and some others were so negligent and
credulous, as not only to suffer without reproof such imputations to be laid
upon the best and most learned men, by the writers of those times, but also to
follow their ignorance. Thus in stead of a Coniurer, he is become a most holy
and learned man. But whatsoever he was, if the Emperor did choose him, it was
at the request of the people, as may appear by A^m^n l. 5. c. 45. Bar. anuo
999 n. 2. Bin in (...). Sylu^st.
Aimonius alleged both by Baronius and Binius. Wherefore either he was no
monster, or if he were, the Romans must impute the blame of his election
rather to themselves then to the Emperor.


PHIL. Whether he were or no, Doctor Genesis l. 4 secul. 10.
Genebrard declares, that there were fifty monsters intruded by the tyranny
of the Germane Emperors.


ORTHOD. I will answer this in the words of a learned man. Doct. Rain. cons.
c. 7. sect. 5.
Genebrard without all reverence both of God and man, does rail, lie and
falsisie stories to deface the Emperors, and cross the Writers of the
Centuries. For he says that the Emperors did, as wild boares, eat up the
vineyard of the Lord: the stories say that they delivered it from wild boares.
The stories say that the monsters of the Popes were chosen by the Romans
themselves: he says that they came in by intrusion of the Emperors. The
stories say, that the Emperors who hunted out those beasts were virtuous and
lawful Princes: he calls them tyrants: not only them, but also many good
Emperors more, who meddled with the Popes election. Finally, the stories say
that the Emperors were allowed by Popes and councels to do it: he says they
usurped it by the right of Herod. And yet himself records, and that in the
same Chronicle too, that Pope Adrian with a Council, Pope Leo with a Council,
Pope Clemens with a Council, did grant it unto Charles, Otho, and Henry the
Emperors. No Philodox, it was not the Emperor, but the Romans which intruded
the monsters; as I have already showed at large, and you may further see by
Benedict the ninth, Syluester the third, and Gregory the sixth, which Plat. in
Or^g. 6.
Platina calls, tria teterrima monstra, i. three most ugly monsters, and
were all chosen by the Romans. Yea the Emperors were so far from intruding,
that they did extrude them; Otho, John the twelfth; and Henry the second,
Gregory the sixth. For the Emperor Henry went into Italy upon purpose to
provide for the Church: which Gregory understanding, met him, and to win his
favor offered him a Otho Prising Chr. l. 6. c. 32.
crown of gold. But the Emperor put on justice as a robe and a crown; It
was dearer unto him then a crown of gold. So he called a council, wherein
Gregory being conuented and convicted, resigned the place as some say, or
rather was Vule Episc. E^iens. in resp. ad apol. c. 6. page 44.
deposed as others affirm: and one Swidiger a German, a man famous for
honesty and learning, named by the Emperor, and approved by all, was chosen
in his place, and called Clement the second; by whom Henry being crowned
Emperor, caused the Romans to Plat. in Clem. 2.
swear that they would not meddle at all with Elections, but by the Emperors
commond. For he saw that the world was come to that pass that every factious
fellow, were he never so base, so he were rich and potent might corrupt their
voices, and obtain the place by bribes. And the new Pope with a Council as
Genesis l. 4* sec. 10.
Genebrard confesses, gave the same to Henry, which was given before to Otho.


PHIL. CLement the second, was no true Pope, in the judgment of 4.
Genebrard.


ORTHOD. But he was a true Pope in the judgments of Bar. Anno 1047. n. 1.
Baronius and Bin. t. 3. p. 1094.
Binius, for they both put him into the Catalogue. Wherefore you must confess,
that this authority was yielded to the Emperor by a true Pope: And as it was
yielded by him, so it was practiced by the Emperor. For the next four Popes,
Damasus the second, Leo the ninth, Victor the second, and Stephen the ninth,
are called of Onuph. in Plat. in Clem. 2.
Onuphrius most holy and good men, well deserving of the Church of God; and he
proves by the Histories of that time, that they were all created by the
authority of the Emperor; Which is most clear in Leo the ninth. For after
the death of Damasus, the Romans sent to Henry, to entreat him to send them a
Plat. in Leone. 9.
good Pope, who presently offered them one Bauno, a Bishop a good and well
meaning man.


PHIL. This Ex Bar. An. 1049. n. 1.
Embassage was sent from the Cardinals, not that the Emperor should elect a
Pope, but that he should send one to be elected at Rome, according to the
custom* by the Council of the Cardinals, as Benno our adversary cannot
deny. And Leo Ost. l. 2 cap. 82.
Leo Ostiensis, witnesses that he was chosen by the Romans. Therefore whereas
some say, that he was chosen by the Emperor, you must understand that he was
delected by the Emperor, but elected by the Cardinals For Otto Fris. see Baron
quo supra.
Otto Frisingensis records that as Leo passed through France in his
Pontifical robes, Hildebrand came and told him that it was unlawful for a
Pope to enter violently, per manum laicam, by the helping hand of a lay Prince,
or as Plat. in Leon. 9.
Platina says, that Henry had no power from God to create a Pope, so he put of
his purple, and entered Rome, as a private man; Whereupon the Roman Clergy
elected him the rather, because by this his fact he had translated all the
authority of choosing the Pope from the Emperor to the Clergy.


ORTHO. If he translated it from the Emperor, then it was invested in the
Emperor as indeed it was even by their own judgment, for else, why did they
send unto him? yea both the Emperor, and the Pope did so take it. as
appears, because he put on his pontifical robes, in the presence of the
Emperor. Otto Fris. Chron. l. 6. ^. 33.
Otto Frisingensis did so take it when he said that Leo was appointed to the
seat of Peter, authoritate regalis excellenciae. i By the authority of the
regal excellency. Onuphrius did so take it, in the words before alleged.
Wherefore howsoever you distinguish between delecting and electing, It is
clear that they sent to the Emperor, as to one that had authority; yea,
Plat. in C^^. 2.
they had bound themselves by oath, not to meddle with elections, but at his
command: wherefore their election was either by his authority, or they were al
perjured. Which Imperial authority continued till Gregory the seventh, for
Plat. in Greg. 7.
Platina says, that the Emperor and Gregory were made friends, eundemque in
pontificatu confirmauit, vt tum Imperatoru^mos erat. i. He confirmed him in the
Popedom, as then it was the custom of Emperors.


PHIL. Now are you come to a worthy man indeed, Ex Bell. in Apol. c. 6. ^. 88
a most courageous 5
maintainer of the liberties of the Church, who was not afraid to renew and
defend the holy and Ecclesiastical laws, namely the 22. Canon of the Council
of Chalcedon. For in a Con. Romans 7. sub Greg. ^. B^n. t. 3. p. 1287.
Council holden in the year 1080, he excluded all secular Potentates
whatsoever from inuestitures, reserving the elections only to the Clergy and
people. Wherein he was seconded, by his noble successors Victor and Urban.


ORTHO. Ancient, and holy laws? which are these? Bellarmine names but one,
and that a counterfeit; contrary to the custom of the Church, which was ancient
and holy. Indeed your courageous Champion, did not only exclude all secular
Potentates from inuestitures, but also in the same Council, he deposed his
own lord and sovereign, who confirmed him in the Popedom, and gave away the
Empire to Rodolph a rebel, promising forgiveness of sins, to all that
obeyed him. Was this according to the ancient and holy Ecclesiastical laws?
Moreover his noble successors what did they? When the rebel Rodolph was
slain in the field, they armed the Vide Sig de regno Ital. l. 9. Anno 1093.
sons against their own father: First, Conrade, the^ Henry, who took his
own father prisoner, and brought him to such misery, that he was glad to
beg for victuals in a Church which he himself had founded, promising to
earne them by doing the duty of a Clerk in serving the quier; which not
obtaining, he pined away and dyed for sorrow: Was this according to the ancient
and holy Ecclesiastical laws? Neither did the Popes malice stay here: their
successor Pope Paschall the second, caused him to be Vide Tort. Torti. page
240.
dug out of his grave, and to lie unburied by the space of five years. Was
this according to the ancient and holy Ecclesiastical laws? Yet after all
these exploits, so valiantly performed, Pope Paschall was glad to restore
again the Ex actis vitae Pasch. 2. apud Bar. Anno 1111. n. 18.
privilege of inuestitures to his son Henry, being the fifth King, and the 4
Emperor of that name.


PHIL. This privilege may be called a prauiledge. For the Emperor took him
prisoner, and constrained him to it by force, and violence, but when he was
enlarged, he cursed both the privilege and the Emperor, in two Roman Bar. t.
3. p. 1309. and 1314.
Counsels, the one holden in the year 1112. the other in the year 1116.


ORTHO. The Emperor enforced him not to any thing unlawful, but to observe
the ancient Canons acording to the custom both of the Church and Empire; this
the Emperor might justly require, and the Pope might yield unto with a good
conscience; so Paschal with sixeteene of his Bishops and Cardinals (whose names
Bar. Anno 1111. n. 19.
Baronius sets down out of Petrus Diaconus) bound themselves by a solemn
oath, sub anathemate, to perform it. Notwithstanding, when he was once set at
liberty, the Pope played the Pope, cursed the Emperor, and revoked his grant
with open perjury.


PHIL. The Emperor himself had no great confidence in this grant, and
therefore he relinquished it, to Calixtus the second.


ORTH. What should he do? It was now commonly taught, that Inuestitures
belonged not to lay men; It was embraced as an article of faith, that the Pope
might depose Princes: for denying whereof, Sigonius de Reg. Ital. l. 9. Anno
1085.
Vecilo Archbish. of Mentz was condemned for an Heretic. He saw his fathers
example* fresh bleeding before his eyes, he was in danger, every day to be
turned out of his kingdom, the Popes were continually flashing their
excommunications in his face, first Pope Paschall, then Gelasius, after him
Calixtus. So at last wearied and tired out he was Calixt. Papa
excommunicationis ^ulmin^ Henricum 5. coegit, ^tomne iu^ inuestiendi Episcopos,
Ecclesiae res^^tueret, atque ita hoc Pontifice auctor^ tande^ pax optatissima
^o^^osita fuit. B^n. in vita Calixt. 2.
compelled to redeem his peace, and rather to loose Inuestitures then the
Empire it self. Thus the authority which was for many hundreds of years
practiced by the Greek, Roman, and German Emperors, ratified by Clement
the 2. with a council, by Leo the 8. with a council, by Adrian the 1. with a
council, and before them all by Pope Vigilius, and before him by the
approbation of those ancient and better times, was now wrested and extorted
from him by perjury, cursing, and banning. And as they excluded the Emperor,
reducing elections to the Clergy and people, so afterward they excluded the
people, and brought them only to the Clergy; after that, they excluded the
Clergy, and brought them only to the Cardinals; Since which time, they have
been as monstrous Popes as ever were before, namely Walsing. Histor. Angl. in
Edouard 1. page 89.
Boniface the eighth. who entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and dyed like
a dog. John the 23. who was called a devil incarnate, and Alexander the
sixth, who was worse then they both. Onuph. in Chron.
Of all the Schisms which were in the Church of Rome, the 29. (says
Onuphrius) was the worst and the longest, continuing 50. years. sometimes two
Popes, sometimes three reigning at once, which proceeded from the ambition of
the Cardinals, the Emperor being excluded who should have repressed them; and
if at last the Emperor Sigismund had not interposed his authority, calling
the Council of Constance, and putting down 3. Popes, by this time as a
learned Doct. Rain. Confer c. 7. sect. 5.
man says) your Church might have had as many Popes at once, as the scarlet
colored beast has heads. Hitherto of Rome.


CHAP. IX.
Of the Election of the Bishops of Constantinople.

WHen Nazianzen had refused the Bishopric of Constantinople, Ex Sozom. l. 7.
cap. 8.
Theodosius the elder commanded the Bishops to give him in writing, the names
of such as they thought fit for the place; reserving to himself the power of
Electing one out of all. It fell out that there was at that time at
Constantinople, an ancient and reverend old man, Nectarius by name, who being
about to return to Tarsus, came to Diodorus the Bishop thereof, to know
whether he would have any thing thither: Diodorus on a sudden liking the
behavior of the man, though a stranger unto him, showed him to the Bishop of
Antioch, praying him to remember him in the catalogue of names. The Bishop of
Antioch smiled at the conceit of Diodorus, because many men of eminent note,
were nominated for this Election; yet for fashion sake to please Diodorus, he
put Nectarius in among the rest, and placed him last. The Emperor having read
over the catalogue, made a pause at the name of Nectarius, and making a mark
with his finger, he read them over again, and chose Nectarius. And when every
man inquired who this Nectarius was, it appeared that he was not as yet
baptized; a thing which was unknown to the Emperor, unknown to the Bishop of
Antioch and unknown to Diodorus; Yet the Emperor having made his choice,
would not be removed, and the Council then assembled, pronounced him Bishop of
Constantinople, even while he was yet in his Christening vesture. After the
death of Nectarius, the Clergy and people chose Chrysostom; the Emperor
Sozom. l. 8. cap. 2.
approved the Election, and sent to fetch him from Antioch. After the death of
Sisinnius, though many made suit for Philip, and many for Proclus, yet it was
the Socrat. l. 7. c. 29.
Emperors pleasure, because of some vain glorious persons to choose none of
that Church, but to send for a stranger, (Nestorius) from Antioch. After the
death of Maximianus, Theodosius the Emperor, lest any tumult should be raised
in the Church, procured the Bishops then present, to install Proclus in the
Bishops seat, even while the corpse of Maximianus was as yet above ground; which
Socrat. l. 7 cap 39.
Socrates commends in the Emperor as a point of wisdom.


PHIL. You should mark what follows in Socrates, to wit, that Celestinus
Bishop of Rome did consent to these proceedings.


ORTHOD. When Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople was deposed, and Proclus in
fair possibility to obtain the place, some stood up Socrat l. 7. ^ 34.
alleging against him, that it was not lawful to be translated from one See
to another; whereupon Proclus was repelled, and Maximianus chosen. Wherefore
after the death of Maximianus, when Celestine heard that Proclus was installed,
he wrote to Cyrill and others, signifying that translations of Bishops was
lawful, and not against the Canons. So Celestine only gives his judgment,
but assumeth no authority in the Election, which was already performed by
Imperial authority. Thus you see the practice of the Emperors in the Church
of Constantinople, no man contradicting them; and the very last of these
examples was above 300. years before the grant of Adrian, yea above 100.
years before Vigilius. Now from the Imperial Cities, let us come to the
kingdom of Spain.


CHAP. X.
Of the Election of the Bishops of Spain.

IN the 16. Council at Council. Tol 16. Bin. t. 3. p. 157.
Tolledo it was concluded, That if a Bishop did not set his helping hand to the
extirpation of Idolatry, he should be deposed: Alio ibidem Principali
Electione constituto, Another being appointed there by the Princes Election.
This Council was holden in the year 693. fourscore years before
Inuestitures were granted to the Emperor Charles, by Pope Adrian. And before
that, it was decreed in the 12. Council of Conc. Tol. 12. de^r. 6. B^n. ^. 3.
p. 104.
Tolledo, as follows; It has pleased all the Bishops of Spain and Galicia,
That saving the privilege of every Province, it shall henceforth be lawful
for the Bishops of Tolledo, to set up such Prelates in the Sees of their
predecessors, and to choose such successors for Bishops departed, as the
Princely power shall Elect and find worthy by the judgment of the foresaid
Bishops of Tolledo. This Council was holden in the year 681. almost an 100.
years before Pope Adrian. And yet the Kings of Spain had authority to Elect
before this Council; which may appear by these words of Bar. anno 631. ^. 60.
Baronius, We must not be ignorant of this point, that the Kings of the Goths
in Spain, did challenge to themselves the nomination of such Bishops as were
to be made, which nomination of them (made by the King) was referred to a
Council, that they might judge of the quality of the person, whether he were
worthy of a Bishopric. These things are evident by the Monuments of ancient
writers; Now because much time passed before they could be dispatched, by
reason whereof the Sees were long vacant, therefore the Council made the
decree. Thus it is evident that the authority of the Council, was translated
to the Archbishop; but the Kings authority was the same as before, and had so
been from the time of the Goths.


PHIL. Indeed Ioh. Garsias inn^^^ in Conc. Tol. 12.
in the time of the Goths it was in the Kings, and so has continued in the
Kings of Spain to this present age, by the indulgence of the Popes.


ORTHOD. The ancient Kings of the Goths were Arrians, and enemies to Christ;
did they elect Bishops by indulgence of Popes?


PHIL. They did it by tyranny; will you take a pattern from Arrians, and
Tyrants?


ORTHOD. The Arrians of Spain were Baron anno 889. n 12. Bin. t. 2. p. 706*
converted in the year 589. and professed the faith in the third Council of
Toledo; Yet the Orthodox Kings continued their authority in Elections. Shall
we say that they took a pattern from Tyrants and Arrians? Neither did the
Arrian Kings offend in that they elected Bishops, but in that they elected
Arrian Bishops. Neither is an Orthodox Prince bound to relinquish his own
right, because it has been abused by heretical Princes. For the right of
Princes is most ancient, derived neither from Pope nor Arrian, but from the
pattern of 1. King. 2. 35.
Solomon, who chose Sadok high Priest, above 1000 years before either Arrian
or Papist was borne. Hitherto of Spain.


CHAP. XI.
Of the Election of the Bishops of France.

IN France the Kings had the choice of Bishops almost 300. years before the
Empire came to their hands. For their first Christian King Clodoueus (converted
in the year 499) Greg. Turon. l. 10. c. 31.
elected Dinifius Bishop of Turone. After him succeeded Childibertus, who made
his brethren Clodomer, Theodorick, and Clotharius partakers of his Kingdom,
all which used the same authority; for by the commandment Ibidem. l. 3. cap.
17*
of Clodomer, Omasius was made Bishop of Turone after Dinifius; by the Greg:
Turon. l. 3. c. 2.
commandment of Theodorick, Quintianus was made Bishop of Aruerne; by the
commandment Idem. l. 4. c. 15.
of Clotharius, Cato was appointed to be Bishop of Turone, which when he
refused, and afterward would have had it, the King repelled him. After the
death of Clotharius reigned his son Cheribert, who Idem. l. 4. c. 18*
made Pascentius Bishop of Poictiers. But why should I reckon up any more? There
is a world of examples recorded by Gregorius Turonensis, and collected from him
by one of our learned Bishop Bilson perpetual government. cap. 15.
Bishops, all which were above a thousand years ago. Afterward when the
French Kings became Roman Emperors, Pope Adrian decreed, and defined that they
should have not only Inuestitures but also the disposing of the Roman See, as
has been declared. And although Lodowick the son of Charles be said to
have renounced the right of choosing the Bishop of Rome; yet as the Paris
curiae de^eus: pro liberate eccl. Gal. sect. 43.
Court of Paris affirms, He always retained Inuestitures. Neither had the
Kings of France of ancient time authority in Bishoprics only, but in
benefices also; Si Duarenus de sacr eccl. numsi. l. 3. c. 11.
ad priscorum institutorum normam ( says Duarenus) omnia exigere velimus,
nullum est in Gallia beneficium, nullum Ecclesiae ministerium quod absque regis
consensu cuiquam deferri possit: if we will examine all things according to
the rule of ancient constitutions, there is in France no benefice, no ministry
of any Church which can be conferred upon any man without the consent of the
King. Notwithstanding it came to pass in process of time, that the Pope by
his provisions, reseruations, and expectatiue graces made lamentable desolation
in the Church of God: for redress whereof, when the council of Basil had
published most worthy Conc. Basil. S. 31. decret. de collationibu^
beneficiorum. Bin. t. 4. p. 72
decrees, Pope Eugenius went about to disanull them. Wherefore Duarenu^ de
sacr: eccl. minist: l. 5. c. 11.
Charles the 7. king of France at the supplication of the council, and by the
advice of his own Bishops assembled in Synod, undertook to protect them, to
which purpose he set out that noble constitution, called the pragmaticall
sanction, which was received with such an applause of all good men, that the
like was never heard of in the kingdom of France. This pragmatical sanction
was fitly called by a great Apud Duarenu^ quo supra.
learned man, the Palladium of France; for as the image of Pallas was said to
fall down from heaven among the Troianes; so this sanction seemed to be sent
from heaven by divine providence among the Frenchmen: And as Apollo did
prophecy that the removing of the Palladium would be the destruction of Troy;
so wise men presaged that the taking away of this Sanction would portend great
calamity to the Church of France. Yet for all this the Popes would never be
quiet till they had, if not wholly vanquished, yet wonderfully weakened it,
especially Pius the 2. who was one of the Bishops in the council of Basil, but
now being Pope, he is become another man; neither wanted there some which to
please the Pope, opposed themselves against it; whose subtilties and Sophismes
are answered by that famous Canonist Archbishop Panormitan, who was himself
also one of the Bishops in the council of Basil. Yea the court of Paris: curiae
defens: pro liberate eccl. Gal. sect. 18.
Paris offered a book to Lodowick the eleventh, wherein they declared, how by
the abrogation of the Sanction four mischiefs would follow: the first, A
confusion of the whole Ecclesiastical order: the 2. a desolation of their
country: the 3. the impouerishing of the kingdom, by wasting their treasure:
the 4. the ruin and subversion of Churches. The consideration of which things
so prevailed with the King, that Pope Pius was disapointed of his purpose.


PHIL. Apoll. Bell* pro resp. ad librum Iacobi Regis. c. 6. p. 88.
That which Pius could not perform in the days of Lewis ( videlicet, that the
pragmaticall Sanction should be taken clean away) was afterward effected by
Leo the 10. in the reign of King Francis the first; therefore in the council
of Lateran the pragmaticall Sanction was abrogated by a public Decree.


ORTH. Duarenus quo supra.
King Francis (to use the words of Duarenus) made choice rather to serve the
stage and the time with his own profit, as he himself confesses, and remit
somewhat of the public right, then to strive so often with the Popes about this
Helena, especially seeing he perceived that some danger from them did hang over
his head. Yet for all this the Sanction cannot be said to be clean taken away;
For the university of Decret. eccl. Gal. p. 1249. vide Episcopum Eliens. in
resp. ad Apol. Bell. p. 148.
Paris did interpose an appeal to the next general council, which appeal
stood with justice and equity for 3. reasons; first because the fact of the
king was not voluntary but by compulsion: Secondly, because the Parisians whom
it must concerned were neither called nor heard. Thirdly, because there is no
reason that the council of Lateran and constitution of Leo, should derogate
from the authority of the council of Basil. And if we should suppose, that it
did not only derogate from it but also abrogate it, yet the very
constitution of Pope Leo yields to the King the power of nomination, in these
words: Duarenus quo supra. c. 12
When a Cathedral or Metropoliticall Church is vacant, let not the Bishop
be chosen by the College of Canons, but let the King within six months
offer and nominate a grave and fit man to the Pope. Thus it is evident that the
French Kings retained their right and authority in making of Bishops ever
since their first embracing of the Christian faith. And had they this by the
indulgence of the Pope? Let the Council of Basil be witness, let Charles the
seventh be witness, let the Court of Paris be witness, yea let King Francis
himself (who confessed that when he went against the sanction, he remitted
of the public right) be witness. And thus much for France.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Election of the Bishops of England.

PHILOD. COncerning England Answer to the 5 part of reports c. 8. page 184.
King Henry the first did pretend to challenge Inuestitures as used by his
father and brother before him, whereof yet notwithstanding we find no
express proof or example in any of our histories that they used them, much
less that they were lawfully granted unto them.


ORTHOD. I will prove both that they used them, and that they used them
lawfully; That his brother William Rufus used them, may appear by William of
Malmesbury, who declares that the King being sick, made mention of the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury (which was then void) and willed the Bishops to
consider of it, who answered that whom the King should think worthy, they all
would accept willingly, Malms. de gestis pont. Angl. l. 1. page 205.
Itaille cubito se attollens, hunc (ait) sanctum virum Anselmum eligo, ingenti
subsecuto fragore fauentium; so he raising himself up upon his elbowe, said,
I elect this holy man Anselmus, whereupon followed a great applause. Now that
Bishoprics in those days were given by delivering of a ring and a staff may
appear by Rafe Bishop of the South Saxons, who being threatened by the same
King, Malms. l. 2. page 257.
baculum protendit, annulum exuit, vt si vellet acciperet; held out his
Crosier, put off his ring, that the King might take them if he would,
intending thereby to resign his Bishopric. That William the Conqueror used
the like authority is also manifest by the same author, saying, Ibidem l. 1^
page 205.
Nondum ille efflauerat, cum a Gulielmo Rege Lanfrancus Cadomensis Abbas ad
Archiepiscopatum electus est; Stigandus had not yet breathed out his Ghost when
Lanfranck Abbot of Saint Steuens in Cane was elected by King William the
Conqueror to the Archbishopric. The like may be showed before the Conquest;
where, by the way let me tell you, that we stand not so much upon the ring and
the staff, as upon the thing it self, that is the Princes power and
authority, for which I will produce some examples as it were a few clusters of
a great vintage, beginning with Edward the Confessor, of whom Malmsbury faith,
Lib. 1. p. 204
Rex Robertum, quem ex Monacho Gemiticensi Londoniae fecerat Episcopum,
Archiepiscopum creauit, the King (Edward the Confessor) created Robert
Archbishop, whom before of a Monk he had made Bishop of London. And before
that, King Alfred made Malms. de gest. regu^ Angl. l. 2. p. 45.
Asserio, Bishop of Shierburne: and Malms. degest. pont. Angl. l. 2. p. 242.
Denewulfus, Bishop of Winchester; and more then two hundred years before
that, Edelwalke King of the South Saxons promoted Malms. quo supra page 257.
Wilfrid to an Episcopal See. Thus it is evident that as in other Kingdoms,
so in England Inuestitures were anciently practiced by Princes. Wherefore King
Henry the first might have challenged them, not only as used by his father
and brother, but also as the ancient custom of the Kingdom in the time of the
Saxons. Wherein only this was the difference, that in ancient time Princes
used them without contradiction, but now the Popes perceiving that if Princes
should have the bestowing of them after the old custom, it would abate that
power to which they themselves aspired, began to spurn, excommunicating both
the giuers and takers. This was done in the fifth and seventh Roman Councels
under Gregory the seventh: but Pope Mat. Paris page 18.
Urban went further, decreeing that not only the giuers and takers, but also
all such as consecrated any man so promoted should be excommunicate. At this
Council Anselmus was present, by whose Anselm. consilio. ibidem.
advise and persuasion the decree was made. Whereupon when after the death of
William Rufus, King Henry the first, (not knowing of this decree, much less
imagining that it was concluded by the means of Anselmus) had called him home,
he well rewarded the kindness of so gracious a Prince; for first he would
not be induced to do his Malms. degest. pont. Angl. l. 1. page 225.
homage to his Lord and Sovereign (was not this a good subject? did he not
well deserve to be canonized for a Saint?) then he refused to consecrate those
whom the King did inuest to Bishoprics by a staff and a ring: so the King
commanded Gerard Archbishop of York to perform that office, as Malms. quo
supra l. 2. p. 226.
Malmsbury, Matthew Mat. Paris page 56.
Paris, and Roger Houed. in H. 1. page 470.
Houeden do testify.


PHIL. But what follows in the same authors? William Gifford Elect of
Winchester refused to receive Consecration from him, and was therefore by the
king banished the land. Rinelmus Elect of Hereford resigned his Bishopric
into the kings hands being troubled in conscience because he received
inuestiture from a lay Prince; by occasion of which broiles, the rest to whom
the king had given inuestitures remained unconsecrated.


ORTHOD. Whose fault was that? not the kings, who required no more then was
confirmed to the Emperors by 3. Popes with 3. Roman Councels, practiced
commonly and anciently by all kings through the whole Christian world, yielded
to his predecessors in the time of the Saxons, used by his own father and
brother, and never denied in England before Anselmus began to broach the
Hildebrandicall Doctrine.


PHIL. This cause was handled at Rome, where the Mat. Paris page 56.
kings Proctour boldly affirmed, that his master the king would not loose
inuestitures for the loss of his kingdom: to whom Pope Paschall answered: if
as thou say thy king will not endure to lose the donations of Churches for
the loss of his kingdom, know thou precisely, I speak it before God, that I
would not suffer him to obtain them without punishment for the redemption of
my head. Thus the cause was determined against the King.


ORTH. No marvel; for the Pope was Judge in his own cause; such a cause as
was not a little both for his pride and profit: such a Pope as within 8. years
after perjured himself in the like matter. But notwithstanding the Popes
determination, the king disdaining to be so deluded, sent to Anselmus Mat Par.
page 57.
forbidding him to enter the land, unless he would observe the customs of
William the Conqueror, and William Rufus: so he was absent three years.


PHIL. Yet at his return he got a glorious victory, for Edinerus writes thus
Edin. a^ud. Bell. in apol. pro resp. ad librum Regis c. 6. p. 91.
rex antecessorum suorum vsu relicto, nec personas quae in regimen Ecclesiae
sumebantur per se elegit, nec eas per dationem virgae pastoralis Ecclesijs
quibus praeficiebantur inuestiuit; the king leaving the use of his
predecessors, did neither himself elect such persons as were assumed to the
government of the Church, nor invested them to the Churches over which they
were set, by the delivering of the pastoral staff.


ORTHOD. Here is a clear confession that inuestitures belonged to the king, by
the use of his predecessors: yet such was the violence and fury, both of the
Pope, and the Archbishop, that he thought good to redeem his quiet, by
releasing of his ancient right.


PHIL. If he had any right, he did yield it up; for Malmsbury says; Malms de
gest. Pont. Angle. l. 1. p. 227.
Venit Rex sublimi trophaeo splendidus, and triumphali gloria Angliam inuectus,
inuestiturasque Ecclesiarum Anselmo in perpetuum in manum remisit; The king
came (out of France) glistering with a stately trophee, entered England with
triumphall glory, and released the inuestitures of Churches to Anselmus, into
his hands for ever.


ORTHOD. True, to Anselmus: here was a final and perpetual end, between them
two, neither did the king intermeddle any more in the matter, while Anselmus
lived: but after his death, Anno 1113. he gave the Archbishopricke to Mat.
Paris p. 62.
Rodolph Bishop of London, and invested him with a Ring and a Staff: and Anno
1123. he gave the said Archbishopricke to William Huntingdon. l. 7. p. 382.
Corboll, he gave also the Bishopric of Lincoln to Alexander, the
Bishopric of Bath to Godfrid, the Bishopric of Worcester to Simon, the
Bishopric of Cicester to Sifrid After the reign of Henry the first, though
the Popes were still busy, especially when the state was troubled, or the king
out of the Realm, yet the succeeding Princes would not suffer themselves to
be robbed of this right, and royalty, but from time to time put it in
practice and maintained their prerogative. King Edward the third, told Pope
Clement the fifth, W^ls. in Ed^ 3. p. 161.
That his progenitors and other noble and faithful men had founded and endowed
Churches, and placed Ministers in them, ever since the first planting of
religion in the Realm of England, and that the kings did of ancient time,
freely confer Cathedral Churches, iure suo Regio, by their Princely right,
so often as they were vacant; he does not say, by the Popes permission, but by
their princely right, so the collation of Bishoprics, is the ancient right of
the kings of England. Moreover he told him that whereas now Deanes and Chapters
elect, this proceeded from the grant of the kings, at the request and instance
of the Pope; he does not say, from the grant of the Pope, but from the grant
of the kings, at the request of the Pope; with which concordeth that famous act
of Parliament, made in the 25. of Edw. the third; Our Sovereign Lord the king
and his heirs, shall have and enjoy for the time the collations to the
Archbishoprickes, and other dignities elective, which be of his aduowry, such
as his progenitors had, before free election was granted: Since that the first
elections were granted by the Kings progenitors, upon a certain form and
condition, as namely to demand license of the King to choose, and after choice
made, to have his royal assent. And in the days of Richard the second,
statutum est (says Thomas Walls. in Rich. 2. p. 343.
Walsingam) in eodem insuper Parliamento, vt de caetero nullus transfre^aret ad
obtinendum prouisiones in Ecclesijs, vel Ecclesiam, and si quis contrarium
faceret, si posset apprehendi caperetur, vt Regi rebellis, and incarceraretur:
A statute was made in the same Parliament, that from henceforth none should
pass the seas to obtain provisions in Churches, or to obtain any Church, and
if any should do contrary, if he could be catched, he should be apprehended as
a rebel to the king, and cast in prison. The next year, the same king set out
a Idem page 344.
Proclamation, that all such as were resident in the Court of Rome, and had
benefices in England, should return by the feast of S. Nicholas, under pain
of forfeiting all their benefices. When the Pope heard all this thundering, he
sent a Nuncio with great complaints; for answer whereof the king referred him
to the Parliament following, which would by no means consent that
Rome-runners, should get their benefices as in former time. In the days of
Henry the fifth, when the Pope by his bulls, translated Richard of Lincoln to
York, the Deane and Chapter standing upon the laws of the land, refused to
admit him, as hereafter shall be declared. Shall we now say that the kings of
England confer spiritual promotions by the Popes indulgence? let king Edward
the first be witness: let the Parliament in the reign of Edward the third be
witness: let the like Parliament in the time of Richard the second, be
witness: let the Deane and Chapter of York be witness: all which were of the
Popish religion, and yet referred this to the king, and not to the Pope.
Hitherto, that the kings of England used Inuestitures.

NOw I will prove that they used them lawfully by a double right, as 2
Princes, and as Patrons. As Princes, for many reasons: First, if we look into
the old Testament, we find that Solomon set Sadock in the room of Abiathar: by
what authority? Verily by the same by which he cast out Abiathar. Which I have
already proved to be done by the lawful and ordinary power of a Prince. If
this be a perpetual pattern for all posterity, then the collation of
spiritual dignities, is the Princes right. Secondly, it was prophesied of
Christian Princes, that they should be Isa. 49. 23
nursing fathers of the Church; therefore it must be a part of their Princely
care to provide such nurses as shall feed it with the milk of the Gospel.
Thirdly, in the new Testament, Concerning the election of pastors, we find
neither precept, nor any such example as can be urged, for an everlasting and
unchangeable rule. And if we look into the practice of the Church, it will
appear that it has been disposed of in diverse ages, in diverse manners,
according to diverse customs, and positive laws of Princes, growing out of the
diversity of circumstances and occasions. Wherefore it seems that the Lord
has left it as a thing indifferent to the discretion of the Church: whereof
the Christian Prince is not only a part, but Supreme governor under Christ;
in which respect though he were not Patron, he has a transcendent and
supereminent power, so that the Sovereign direction and moderation of the
matter belongs unto him. Which was acknowledged to be the kings right, even
in the time of Popery, as may appear by the practice: for after the death of
any incumbent of any Church with cure, if the Patron presented not within six
months, the Bishop of that Diocese might bestow it, to the end the cure
should not be destitute of a pastor: if he neglected the time appointed, the
Metropolitan of that Diocese might advance one to that Church; and if he also
should leave the Church destitute, by the space limited unto him, then it
belonged to the king and not to the Bishop of Rome to provide a competent
pastor for that Church. Thus it is evident that though Churches had Patrons to
provide Pastors for them according to the kings Laws; and Bishops and
Archbishops to see it sufficiently done, yet in case of neglect, the care of it
was deuolued to the King, as being Supreme governor even in these cases within
his own Dominions. If you say that this was by the grant of the Pope, the
contrary is manifest, because in the 25. of Edward the 3. in the noble statute
of prouisours, the Bishop of Rome is said to usurp the Seignories of such
possessions and benefices. Wherefore the Laws of the land, and the ancient
custom of the Kingdom concurring with the general practice of Princes,
received with the applause of the whole Christian world, do sufficiently
proclaim the right of our Princes in this behalf; especially seeing as K
William Rufus truly said, Mat. Par. p. 17.
The king of England has all the liberties in his Kingdom, which the Emperor
challenged in the Empire. Hitherto of the right of Princes, as they are
Princes. Now of their right as they are Patrons.

IN Patronages, we may consider two things, The causes and the effects, 3.
The causes originally inducing the Church of God to approve them, were three.
First, because Princes and Lords of the soil, out of their devotion and
charitable bounty, gave some of their own ground for the situation of
Churches, and the habitation of Ministers, resigning their own right into the
hands of the Bishop of the Diocese, and so dedicating it everlastingly to the
Lord. Secondly, because upon that ground they built Churches for holy meetings,
and dwelling places for the messengers of the Lord. Thirdly, because they
allowed maintenance, both for the Church and the Minister, as is expressed in
this verse: { Glossa in. 16. q. ^* Pi^ mentis.
Patronum faciunt, dos, edificatio, fundus.}

The effects of Patronage are three, Glossa ibid.
Honos, Onus, and Vtilitas; The first is Honos, honor of nominating and
presenting a fit Clerk; the honor of precedence in sitting in his own
Church; and in some places, to great personages, the honor of Procession; For
example, to the Lancel Instit. Iur. Canon. l. 1. page 204.
Duke of Venice in the Church of S. Mark. The second is Onus, a burden; for in
being a Patron, he undertakes the Protection of that Church. The third is,
Vtilitas, profit; for if he or his children fall into poverty, they must be
relieved out of the revenues of the same Church; An example whereof happened in
a noble citizen of Lancel. ibid.
Perusia. These prerogatives of Patrons, were all anciently approved both by
Civil and Canon Law. But to pass over the rest, I will only single out the
prerogative of presenting. In the 9. Conc. Tol. 9. c. 2. Bin. t. 2. p. 1163.
Council of Toledo holden in the year 655. it was decreed as follows, As
long as the founders of Churches remain alive, they shall be suffered to have
the chief care in those places, and they shall offer fit Rectours unto the
Bishop to be ordained in the same Churches; And if the Bishop while the Founder
lives, shall despise them, and presume to ordain Rectours in the same place,
Let him know that his Ordination shall be void, and to his shame others shall
be ordained, whom the Founders shall choose. And before that, in the year 541.
Justinian made this Constitution, That No^el. constable. ^23.
if any man will build an house of prayer, and he or his heirs will have
Clerks to be promoted therein, if they allow maintenance for those Clerks,
and name such as are worthy, let those which are named be ordained. Now to
apply this to our present purpose; It is a clear case, that all the
Bishoprics in England were founded by the Kings Ancestors; And therefore the
Aduousons of them all belong to the King. And it is clear by the Laws of the
land, That See B. Bilson, perpet. government. c. 15. p. 264.
our Kings have had, and ought to have the custody of the same in the Vacancy,
and the presentiments and collations of those Prelacies as Lords, and Aduowes of
all the lands and possessions, that belong either to Cathedral Churches, or
Bishops. Upon all these premises, this conclusion follows, that this right we
speak of belongs to our Princes, as Patrons, by Civil, Canon, and the common
Laws of the land. To these two former respects, we may add a third, drawn
from this consideration, that our Bishops by the favor of Princes, are
Spiritual Lords and Barons in Parliament, and therefore it were very hard if
men of so great power and place, should be Vide Epis. Eliens. in resp. ad Apol.
Bell. c. 6. p. 151.
obtruded upon the Prince without his consent. Hitherto of the lawful right of
Princes.

ANd as they have the collation of Bishoprics most lawfully, so they confer
them most fitly, most freely, and most safely. Most fitly, because 4.
they have largest scope to choose, best means to discern, greatest power to
procure and assist such as are most eminent for learning and virtue. Most
freely, because they are farther from suspicion of corruption, then either
people, or Prelate. For to use the words of a reverend Bishop Bilson perpet.
government. c. 18. p. 350.
Bishop, Howsoever ambitious heads, and covetous hands, may lincke together
under color of commendation to deceive and abuse Princes ears, yet reason and
duty binds me and all others, to think and say, that Princes persons are
of all others farthest from taking money for any such respects. In meaner
persons more justly may corruption be feared, then in Princes, who of all
others have least need, and so least cause to set Churches to sale. Their
abundance, their magnificence, their conscience, are suerties for the freedom
of their choice. These are the sayings of the learned Bishop; among which he
interlaced a memorable example of Guntchrannus King of France, who, when one
offered him money for a Bishopric, returned this answer; It is not our
Princely manner to sell Bishoprics for money, neither is it your part to get
them with rewards, lest we be infamed for silthy gain, and you compared to
Simon Magus. A fit Embleame for a Prince, and worthy to be written in letters
of Gold. Most safely; for how dangerous a thing it is to commit such matters to
popular Elections, the Primitive Church had lamentable experience. What vprores
also followed the Elections by the Clergy alone, let the longest Schism that
ever was in the Church of Rome testify. And for the Popes provisions whereby
he has incroached upon the Princes right, they have been such as have given
both Kings, Nobles, Clergy and people, just cause of lamentation. But since
the nomination rested in the Princes hands, all tumults and grieuances (Gods
Name be blessed) are utterly extinguished. Now I will add a word or two, of
their singular moderation in this behalf. In ancient time our Kings had the
collation before free Election was granted, as was declared out of the Statute
of Edward the 3. whereby it is manifest that they had then in themselves a
plenarie power. And though this were not without presidents of former ages; yet
as Charles the Great granted freedom of Elections unto the Church, so have our
Princes established the like by the Laws of the land, according to which they
proceed most mildly and graciously, doing all things agreeably to the pattern
of famous Princes, and laudable Canons of ancient Councels. With us the King
has the nomination of Bishops, and so had good Sozom. l. 7. cap. 8.
Theodosius as was plainly to be seen in the advancing of Nectarius. With us
the Deane and Chapter make the election of their Bishop: and so did the Hierom.
ad Euag. Epist. 85.
Presbyters of Alexandria, in Saint Ieroms time, which custom had continued
there ever since the time of Saint Mark the Evangelist. With us the Deane and
Chapter elect him, whom the king has nominated: So the Sozom. ibid.
Clergy of Constantinople, with the whole general Council there assembled,
did think it their duty solemnly to elect Nectarius whom the Emperor had
nominated. With us the electours signify their election to the king, humbly
craving his royal assent: so the Roman Ex Onuphr. annot. in Plat in Pel. 2.
Clergy 1000. years ago did use to signify their election to the Emperor,
that he might ratify it by his Imperial authority. And because the ancient
Canons give the power of confirmation to the Conc. Nic. 1. C^n. 4.
Metropolitan, therefore our King grants him a commission, to confirm the
election according to the Canon. Finally, with us none can be consecrated
before the king give commission by his letters pattents; neither might the
Bishops of Rome in ancient time, till the Emperor gave license, and that (as
Onuphr. an^ot in Plat: in Pelag. 2.
Onuphrius says) by his letters pattents. Where yet I will confess, there was
a difference, because the Popes gave Onuphr. ibidem.
money unto the Emperor, but our Bishops give none unto the King. Thus much of
elections.


CHAP. XIII.
How lamentable the State of England was when Bishoprics and Benefices were
given by the Popes provisions.

PHIL. WE Defense of Catholick^. page 156.
refer all men to the pondering of this one point specially, amongst many,
concerning the nominations and elections of Bishops, Abbats, and other Prelates,
whether the world went not as well, when such things passed by Canonical
election, or the Popes provision, as it has don since, or ever hereafter is
like to do.


ORTHOD. Concerning the Popes provisions, this is most certain that howsoever
the Church of God was provided for, he provided for himself and licked his
own fingers. For the demonstration whereof, I will begin with king Canutus,
who about the year of grace 1031. Returning from Rome wrote thus to the
Archbishops, Bishops, and States of the Realm. Ingulphus in histor. sieve
descript. o^^. page 7^3. Malm^b de gestis ^^g. Angl. l. 2. page* 74.
Conquestus sum iterum coram domino papa, and mihi valde displicere dixi quod
mei Archiepiscopi in tantum angariebantur, immensitate pecuniarum quae ab eis
expet^bantur, dum pro pallio accipi^ndo secundum morem, sedem Apostolicam
expeterent, decretumque, ne id deinceps fiat, that is, I complained again
before the Lord the Pope and told him, that it displeased me much that my
Archbishops were so much vexed with huge sums of money, which were demanded of
them, while for receiving the palle they went according to custom, to the Sea
Apostolic, and it was decreed that it should be so no more. Here by the way
you must understand, that a Palle is a little Mart. C^r^^rens. sacr. cerem. l.
1. fol. 112.
^yppet three fingers broad, made of the wool of two white Lambs, which are
offered upon the Altar of Saint Agnes, while Agnus dei is sung in the solemn
Mass, and laid all night upon the bodies of Peter and Paul, under the great
Altar, from whence receiving this virtue to contain the fullness of all
pontifical power, it becomes the Ensign of a Patriarch or Archbishop.

Which glorious ensign who will wear,
Must fetch it far and buy it dear.
In the days of Henry the first, when Anselmus was at Rome, he made
supplication to Pope Paschall the second, for certain Bishops and Abbats
deposed whereupon says Math. Par^^. p. 56. in Henri^^. 1.
Matthew Paris, The most gentle See, which uses to be wanting to none, (so
they bring either white or red) did mercifully recall the said Bishops and
Abbats and sent them with joy to their own Sees.

In the days of Richard the first, Hugh Bishop of Durham, who of an old Bishop
was become a young Earl having made a voluntary vow to go to Jerusalem,
procured a dispensation from the Pope for which he paid Mat. Paris. p. 149.
an infinite sum of money.

In the days of the same king, William Bishop of Ely, was made Legate by a
gentle Pope, upon the gentle consideration of Mat. Paris. p. 155.
a thousand pounds.

In the days of king John, Pope Innocent the third went about to swallow all
England and Ireland at a morsel. For Antiq. Brit. in Steph. Langton. p 154. ex
Mat. Par. p. 213 and alij^.
Hubertus Archbishop of Canterbury being dead, the Monks elected first Reinold
their subprior, and afterward at the kings request, John Gray Bishop of
Norwich, by means of which double election, the Pope took occasion to disanull
both; charging the Canterb. Monks then at Rome under pain of a curse, to
choose Steven Langton a Cardinal, which they did, and brought him unto the
Altar, with a Te deum. The king proclaimed those Monks traitors, the rest that
lurked at Canterb: he prescribed and banished; he forbad Steven Langton to
come into England, and confiscated the goods and lands, both of the
Archbishoprik and of the Church of Canterb: whereupon the Pope authorized
certain Bishops to interdict the kingdom, excommunicated the king, set out a
sentence declaratory to deprive him, and committed the execution of it to
Philip the French king By which papal means bereaft of the love of his
people, abandoned of his nobles, hated of his Clergy, forsaken of his friends,
behold he hoped for some comfort at the Popes hand, but finding none, he was
forced so much as in him lay to resign his kingdoms to Pope Innocent (such is
the innocence of Popes) and to farm the^ again at a 1000. marks by the year.
Thus the Vide Tort. Torti. p. 215.
Pope had caught a pretty morsel, but it was too hot for him; and therefore he
was glad presently to disgorge it.

In the time of the said king, came into England one Antiq. Brit* p. 155. M.
Paris calls him ferentinus. p. 206.
Johannes Florentinus the Popes Legate, having but 3. men and 3. horses,
whereof one was lame, who gathered great heaps of money, hoysted up sail and
bad England adieu. Likewise An^. Brit. p. 158.
Pandulphus when he came to make a bargain with the king for his master the
Pope, provided and carried away with him 8000. pounds.

About the same time the Pope called a Antiq. Brit. ibid. ex Mat. Par. hist.
min.
general council at Rome, where the Bishops being weary with doing of
nothing, desired leave to depart, which they could not obtain without a great
sum of money, that they were forced to borrow of the Roman Merchants, and pay
to the Pope.

In the reign of Henry 3. The Mat. Paris p. 358.
Pope sent a bull that no English man should be preferred til provision were
made for ^. Romans for each of the^ 100. pou^ds by the year; neither did he
express their names but described them in a confused manner, The son of
Bumphred and of such and such, that if any of them should die he might foist
another into the place. At this time the Romans were posessed of so many
benifices, and withal were so insolent that the whole body of the nobles and
commons joining together did style themselves in the subscriptions of their
letters, Ibidem.
The whole company of the^ which had rather die then be confounded of the
Romans.

In the reign of the same King, The Roman Helluo Mat. Paris. p. 316. an. 1226
sent a Nuntio called Otto into England with letters unto the king signifying,
What a great scandal and reproach was brought upon the Church of Rome, because
no man could dispatch his affairs in that Court without great sums of money,
and the cause which constrained them unto this, was their poverty, therefore
he desired that the English men like natural Children would relieve the
poverty of their Mother, and the means thereof, which he with the Council of
his Brethren, the Cardinals had devised was this, that every Cathedral Church
in England should bestow upon him two Prebendes, the one of them to be given
by the Bishop, the other by the Chapter: And likewise that every Abbey should
bestow upon him so much as belonged to the maintenance of two Monks, one
portion whereof to be given by the Abbot, and the other by the Covent. But the
English men deluded him of his purpose, for the Antiq. Brit. page 160.
king went out of the Council, and the Bishops departed to their own home
without the leave of the Legate, and the rest that remained, said they could
do nothing in the absence of them whom it most concerned.

The like suite was commensed in France by another of the Popes Legates to whom
the Proctour of the Archbishop of Lions answered. Antiq. Brit* page 161.
That it was not possible that this grant should fill the gulf of the Roman
covetousness, because plenty of riches did always make the Romans mad. And
the council of France did thus answer the Legate; Let the zeal of the whole
Church and of the holy Roman See move you: because if there should be a
general oppression of all men, it might be feared, least there should houer
over our heads a general departure, which God forbid.

In the year 1231. there was set out Mat. Paris page 358.
a prohibition that none which farmed any benefice of any Roman, should from
henceforth pay them any Rent.

Anno 1232. a sort of armed men, with their faces covered, set upon the barnes
of a certain Roman; and sold out the corn to the country, and gave much of
it to the poor. For which the Bishop of London, with other ten Bishops did
strike the authors with an anathema. Notwithstanding, the same year the
barnes of the Romans almost through all England were robbed, the author
whereof, was one Sir Robert Ibid. p 362.
Twinge a Yorkeshier Knight, who had been defeated of the bestowing of his
Benefiee by the Popes provision.

In the year 1234. the Pope sent his Ibid. p 386.
nuntioes into England, with power legatine, which by preaching, begging,
commanding, threatening, and excommunicating, got infinite sums of money under
color of the holy Land: neither was it known in what gulf that money was
drowned.

In the year 1237. base and Ibid. p. 42^.
unlearned persons, came daily armed with the Popes Bulls. If any resisted,
they would procure he should be excommunicated: so it came to pass, that
where noble and dainty Clergy men, Gardians and Patrons of Churches did use
with their riches to honor the country round about them, to entertain
passengers, to refresh the poor, these base persons void of good manners, and
full of subtlety, Proctors and Farmers of the Romans, scraping whatsoever was
precious and profitable in the land, sent it into far countries to their
Lords living delicately of Christ's patrimony, and proud with other men's
goods. Therefore a man might see, sorrow of heart water the eyelids of holy
men, complaints break out, and groans multiplied, many saying with bloody
sighs, It is better for us to die, then to see the miseries of our country,
and of holy men. VVoe to England, which once was the Prince of Provinces, the
lady of nations, the glass of the Church, a pattern of Religion, but now is
become under tribute.

In the year 1239. Sir Robert Ibid. p. 495.
Twinge the Yorkeshier Knight before mentioned, (a Roman being thrust by a
Popes Bull of provision into a benefice whereof he was Patron) went to Rome and
made a grievous complaint unto the Pope, so that the Pope revoked his Bull of
provision.

By the said Sir Robert Twinge the h Nobles and Barons of England wrote unto *
Quo supra.
the Pope, complaining that they were robbed of their presentations of their
Ecclesiastical livings, which their noble progenitors had enjoined from the
first planting of Christianity, and were in danger to lose their patronages,
affirming that though the Pope had taken order by his Apostolical letters,
that after the decease of any Italian or Roman promoted by the Popes
provision, it should be lawful for them to present a fit Clerk: yet they did
daily see the contrary put in practice, which they called a common plague.

Anno 1240. Page 506.
Otho the Popes Legate, required a procuration of four Marks: and where one
Church did not suffice to the pa^ment, two should join together to one
procuration.

The same year the Pope extorted the Page 507.
fifth part of the goods of all strangers beneficed in England, and the same
was demanded of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and the rest of the Clergy: but
the Bishops answered, they could not undergo so unsupportable a burden, which
concerned the whole Church, without diligent deliberation of a synod. But the
Archbishop afterward did grant unto it.

The same year Pope Gregory Page 314.
the ninth, sent a mandate to the Bishops of Canterbury, Lincoln and Sarum,
that they should provide for three hundred Romans in benefices next vacant,
and that they should give no benefices till those were provided for.

Anno 1241. Pope Gregory sent to the Covent of Burge an Apostolic mandate
with Page 536.
armed prayers that they should confer upon the Pope the revenue of some
Church worth 100. marks by the year, and if it were 200. it should please him
the better, and that they should farm it of the Pope paying him his 100.
marks, and take to themselves the overplus. The Abbot signified the matter to
the King, who detesting the covetousness of the Roman Court, did strictly
forbid it, least so foul a fact should pollute the air.

The same year two Italians Page 547.
Petrus Rubeus, and Petrus de Supino, keeping the Popes authentical mandate of
exacting procurations, extorted much money: and Rubeus taking upon him as the
Popes Legate, gave himself this title, Magister Petrus Rubeus Domino Papae
familiaris, and consanguineus, Master Peter Rubeus the familiar friend and
cousin of the Lord the Pope: Supinus extorted in Ireland Page 555.
1500. marks, Rubeus much more out of England, and hearing that the Pope was
sick unto death, they fled away privily with the money, but were taken by the
Ibidem.
Emperor.

Anno 1244 Innocent the fourth, the new Pope sent Page 594.
Martin a new prouler into England armed with the Popes authentical
instrument, and power to suspend and excommunicate all that gain said him. He
disdaining trifles would have no benefice under thirty Marks by the year:
He exacted goodly Palfryes very imperiously, and suspended the Abbot of
Malmesbury, and the Prior of Marton, for denying him, and when a rich Prebend
of Salisbury belonging to the Chanter was vacant, he presently laid violent
hands upon it, and by the commandment of the Pope conferred it upon a child
the Popes nephew. Yea, Matthew Paris says, Page 603.
Romana curia, rubore deposito, tempore noui Papae nostri Innocentij quarti,
non desinebat per prouisiones quotidianas redditus impudenter extorquere. that
is; The Roman Court without all blushing, in the time of our new Pope Innocent
the fourth ceased not impudently to extort revenues by daily provisions.
Whereupon the king writ to the Pope, but little good came of it. For Martin the
Legate required at least of the Prelates Page 622.
10000. marks; but they did not grant it. Then he used unheard of extortions
of money, and revenues, to be bestowed of the kinsmen of his lord the Pope,
for he was supposed to have bulls with blankes to serve for all purposes.
Moreover, he would send to such an Abbot, or such a Prior, for goodly Page 626.
Palfreys, and presents for the furnishing of his table, and provision for his
robes; and when he had them, he would send them back again, and send for
other, and for better, pretending that the former were not sufficient; and
suspended all from the Collations of benefices of thirty marks and upward,
till he was satisfied. Whereupon says Matthew Paris: Ibidem.
Miseri Anglici acerbiorem quam olim subierunt filij Israel, se doluerunt in
Aegypto Britannica tolerare seruitutem: that is, The miserable English men,
lamented that they suffered a bondage in the British Egypt, more cruel, then
the children of Israel did in times past.

Anno 1245. The Nobles and Canons, sent a Page 646.
supplication, which was red openly before Pope Innocent, in the Council at
Lions: wherein they complained, that an infinite number of Italians, had
benefices in England, which knew not their flock, but only received the
fruits, and carried them out of the Realm, and that the yearly rents of
Italians in England, amounted to Ibid. 647.
threescore thousand marks and upward, which was more then the revenues of
the Crown: and that after the Creation of Innocentius, they hoped for relief,
but were now vnmeasurably oppressed by Martin the Legate, who entered the land
without the kings license; with greater power then ever did Legate, and did
exceed excessiuely. Some benefices now void he gave to Italians, who dying
(the Patrons not knowing) he thrusts other Italians into their places: others
he assigns before hand to Italians, others he reserueth to the Sea
Apostolic, wresting from religious persons immoderate pensions,
excommunicating and suspending those that contradict him.

Anno 1246. Pope Page 674. 675.
Innocent, sent privileges from the Council at Lions that if Englishmen would
be studious, especially the sons of Noble men, he would dispense with them
honorably, for plurality of benefices, Promising that Martin the, Clerk of
his Exchequer, should provide but for twelve more: and that then it should be
lawful for Patrons to present fit persons: and that no Italian should
immediately succeed an Italian. This the Pope promised, but performed nothing,
insomuch that the king did show in open Parliament articles of Page 677. 678.
679.
grieuances, as in other points, so even in these which the Pope had promised:
for Italians still succeeded Italians; the Popes factor provided for more then
twelve: neither were the Patrons permitted to present. Whereupon letters of
grieuances were sent unto the Pope, first from the Bishops, secondly from the
Abbots, thirdly from the Nobles, with the whole Clergy and people, fourthly,
from the King himself; the copies of all which are in Matthew Paris: and still
there came to the king, complaints upon complaints, of injuries received from
the Court of Rome. Yea and there came fresh letters from the Pope, that the
English Clergy should find him Page 680.
soldiers, with horse and armor, some five, some ten, some fifteen, and
pay them their wages for one whole year.

The same year the Pope espying certain Page 683.
aurifrisia, beautiful to be hold among the Ecclesiastical ornaments, of some
English men, being then at Rome, asked where they were made: they answered in
England. Then the Pope said, Quo supra.
Vere hortus noster deliciarum est Anglia: vere puteus inexhaustus est, and vbi
multa abundant multa possunt extorqueri. that is, England is truly our garden
of delights: it is truly a Well never drawn dry: where many things abound,
many things may be wrested from the^. So the Pope intised with the
concupiscence of his eyes, sent to almost all the Abbots of the Cistercian
order in England, to send him some of them, as though they should have cost
them no money: which disliked not the Londoners, who made and sold them at
their own pleasures. Whereupon many detested the open covetousness of the
Church of Rome. Yet this same Page 684.
year by the industry of the kin^gs Proctours in the Court of Rome, it was
brought to pass, that whereas before the Pope made his provisions
indefinitely, of Ecclesiastical livings, to the use of Italians, Now by the
grace of God, the tempest was so calmed, that if henceforth, the Pope would
provide for his Nephews, or Cardinals, He or his Cardinals should entreat
the King that it would please him to provide for such.

About the same time the Pope hearing, that Robert de Page 685.
Hales, Archdeacon of Lincoln, dying intestate, left to secular men, many
thousand marks, with great store of Plate; and that Almarick Archdeacon of
Bedford, died also very rich; and that John Archd. of Northamton, dyed worth
five thousand marks, besides thirty pieces of plate and infinite Jewels:
Hereupon he made a strange decree, not without note of manifest covetousness,
to be proclaimed in England, that if from thenceforth any Clerk should die
intestate, his goods should be turned to the use of the lord the Pope: the
execution of which mandate he committed to the preaching Friars and Minorites,
but the king hearing of it, detesting the covetousness of the Roman Court,
forbade it as prejudicial to him and his Realm.

The same year, the Pope sent to the Bishops of England, for a tallage of six
Page 686.
thousand mark: The Bishop of Norwich, the Popes prowler in this behalf,
wrote to the Abbot of S. Albans for 80. mark: the king Ibidem.
forbad him to pay, and charged the Bishop of Norwich, and other Bishops, not
to proceed in that exaction, as they desired to keep their Baronies holden of
the King. Thus the Church of England, was miserably torn and ground between
the King and the Pope, as between two Page 687.
milstones moving contrary ways. Yet the same year, the courage of the king
relented, and he suffered the Church to be spoiled of the six thousand mark.
Then the Pope more Page 694.
bold then ever before, gave in charge to all the prelates of England, that
all beneficed men, if they were residents, should pay the Pope the third part,
if non residents, half of their goods; but the king forbad the payment, and
the Clergy rendered many reasons why it was unreasonable.

Anno 1247. There was holden a Page 698* 699.
Parliament at London, wherein were lamentable complaints of the Popes
extortion, and it was concluded, that letters should be sent to the Pope, in
the name of the whole kingdom: which was d^ne, and they obtained only this,
that when the Pope was to make provision here for his Nephews or Cardinals,
he should ask the king leave.

The same year there came two Page 700.
English Friars Minorites, with the Popes Bulls, and got great sums of money:
they demanded of the Diocese of Lincoln 6000. mark: the same year there
was a Parliament, and the Clergy granted to the Pope Page 707.
11000. marks.

The same year the Page 729.
grieuances were much increased: for the Prelates were suspended from Collation
of Benefices, till the greedines of the Romans were satisfied.

Anno 1252. the Bishop of Lincoln caused a true account to be made of the
revenues of strangers in England, and it was found to be more then Page 832.
70000. marks.

Anno 1253. Robert Bishop of Lincoln sent to the Pope this Page 843.
Epistle following, Let your wisdom know, that I obey the Apostolic
Mandates, with a filial affection, devoutly and reverently; And being zealous
of my Fathers honor, I am contrary and opposite to those things which are
contrary to the Mandates Apostolic. For I am bound to both by the Mandate of
God. Apostolic Mandates neither are, or can be other then the doctrines of
the Apostles, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Master and Lord of the
Apostles: For the Lord Jesus Christ says, He that is not with me, is against
me; But the divine Holiness of the Apostolic See, neither is or can be
against him. Therefore the tenor of the aforesaid Letter is not consonant to
Apostolic Holiness, but a thing much dissonant and disagreeing. First, because
from this Addition Non obstante, annexed to this and such like Letters which
are dispersed far and wide, and not induced with any necessity of the Law of
Nature, which is to be observed, there flows a whole deluge of inconstancy,
boldness, malepertnesse, immodestie, lying, deceiving, distrusting, and all
vices thereupon ensuing: where of the number is infinite, shaking and
disturbing the purity of Christian Religion, and the tranquillity of humane
society. Moreover, after the sin of Lucifer, which shall also be the sin of
Antichrist, the child of perdition, whom the Lord shall destroy with the breath
of his mouth, There is not, nor cannot be any other kind of sin, so adverse
and contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists, and to our Lord
Jesus Christ, so hateful, so detestable, and so abominable, as to kill and
destroy souls, by defrauding them of the Office and Ministry of the
Pastoral charge. Which sins they are known by most evident testimonies of
holy Scripture to commit, which being placed in the power of Pastoral charge,
do get the wages of the Pastoral Office and Ministry, arising of the milk
and wool of the sheep of Christ, which ought to be quickened and saved, and
do not minister such things as are due unto them. For the very not
administration of Pastoral Offices, is by the testimony of Scripture, the
killing and destruction of the sheep. And to pass over the rest, because it
is somewhat long, I will only add his conclusion. And briefly recounting, I
say, the Holiness of the Sea Apostolic, can only do such things as tend to
edification, and not to destruction. For this is the fullness of power, to be
able to do all things to edification But these things which they call
Provisions, are not for edification, but for most manifest destruction.
Therefore the blessed See Apostolic cannot accept of them, because flesh and
blood (which shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven) has revealed them, and
not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which is in Heaven. When this Letter
came to the audience of the Pope, he being not able to contain himself, said,
Page 844.
Who is this dotish, surd, absurd oldman, that with such rash presumption
judges our acts? By S. Peter, and S. Paul, if my goodnature did not stay me, I
should hurl him into such a confusion, that he should be the fable of the
world* an astonishment, an example, a wonderment. Is not the King of England
our O Antichristian pride, and impudency.
vassal, or to say more, our slave, who is able at our beck to imprison him,
and to make him a slave to shame and reproach? But the Cardinals said unto him,
Ibidem.
Our good L. it were not expedient that we should decree any hard matter
against the Bishop; for that we may confess the truth) those things which he
says are true, we cannot condemn him, he is a Catholic, yea and a most holy
man, more Religious then we, and more holy then we, more excellent, and of a
more excellent life; so that he is supposed among all the Prelates of the
world, not to have his better, nor his equal. The whole Clergy of France and
England knows so much. The truth of such an Epistle which peradventure is
already known to many, will be able to move many against us: for he is counted
a great Pilosopher, perfitly learned in Greek and Latin, a zealous lover of
righteousness, a reader in schools of Divinity, a preacher among the people, a
lover of chastity, a persecuter of Symonists. These things said Aegidius
Hispanus the Cardinal: and others whose conscience did touch them, gave
council to the Pope, that he should wincke and dissemble the matter, lest some
tumult should be raised upon this occasion, especially because it is well
known, that once there shall a departure come. The same Robert lying upon his
deathbed, sighing, said thus, Page 847.
Christ came into the world to gain souls: therefore if any man be not afraid
to destroy souls, is not he worthily called Antichrist? The Lord in 6. days
made the whole world, but he labored more then 30 years to repair man; Is
not therefore this destroyer of souls, worthy to be judged an enemy of God,
and an Antichrist? The Pope blusheth not impudently to disanull the privileges
of former Popes his predecessors, by this bar Non obstante, which is not done
without their prejudice and manifest injury: for so he pulls down that, which
so great and so many Saints have builded. Behold the contempt of Saints:
therefore the contemner shall justly be contemned, according to that of Esaias,
Woe to thee which despisest, shall thou not be despised? who will observe his
privileges? The Pope answering, does thus defend his error: An equal has no
authority over an equal: therefore a Pope cannot bind me being a Pope, etc.
And again, Although many other Apostolic men have afflicted the Church, yet
he has compeld it to be in bondage more grievously then others, and has
multiplied inconveniences. For the Caursini being manifest Usurers, which the
holy Fathers and our doctors have driven out of France, this Pope has raised
up and protected in England, and if any speak against them, he is tired out
with losses and labors; Witness Roger B. of London. The world knows, that
Usury is accounted detestable in both Testaments, and is forbidden of God; but
now the Merchants of my L. the Pope, do practice Usury openly at London, they
contriue diverse grieuances against Ecclesiastical and Religious persons,
forcing poor men to lie, and to set their Seals to lying writings. As for
example, I receive so many marks by year for an 100. pound, and am forced to
make a writing, and seal it, in which I confess my self to have received an
100. pound to be paid at the years end. And if peradventure thou would pay
the Popes Usurer the principal again within a month or fewer days, he will
not receive it, unless thou will pay the whole hundred pound. Which condition
is heavier then any which is required of the Jews: for whenever thou shall
bring a Jew his principal, he will take it kindly, with so much gain, as is
answerable to the time, etc. And again, We have seen one of the Popes
Letters, wherein this clause was inserted, That such as made their Testaments,
or carried the Cross, or yielded aid to the Holy Land, should receive so much
pardon for their sins, as they gave money. And we know our lord the Pope,
wrote unto the Abbot of S. Albans, that he should provide for a certain man
called John de Camezana, in a competent benefice, and shortly provision was
made in a Church worth forty marks by the year: but he not content
therewithal complained unto the Pope, who wrote to the same Abbot to provide
more bountifully for him, and yet the Pope reserved the donation of the former
benefice unto him self. And to pass over other things, the Pope granted for
secular favor, that one may obtain a Bishopric, and not be a Bishop but an
everlasting elect, which is as much to say as that he should receive the milk
and the wool of the sheep, and yet not drive away the wolves. Matthew Page 848.
Paris tells how this Bishop Robert Grosthead hated all kind of Enormities to
wit, all kind of Covetousness, al Usury, Symony, and Rapine, all kind of
Riot, Lust, Gluttony and Pride, which so reigned in that Court, that this
judgment was justly given of it:

Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis,
Eius Luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
And (being at the point of death) he indeauored to Ibid^m.
prosecute how the Court of Rome hoping, That money would flow like the river
Iordane into their mouth, gaped wide, that they might get unto themselves the
goods, both of those that died intestate and also those that died testate, and
how that they might do it the more licentiously they made the King their
consort in the rapines, neither shall the Church, says he be delivered from
this Egyptian bondage but in the edge of the bloody sword: but verily these
things are light, but shortly, that is within three years, there shall come
more grievous. In the end of this prophetical speech, which he could scarcely
utter for sighs, tears, and groans bursting out, his tongue faultred, his
breath failed, and the organes of speech decaying, imposed silence.

Matthew Paris, concluding the year 1255. says; This Page 889.
year passed away to the Church of Rome, and the papal Court, if one do
respect the devotion of the people, most venomous: for the devotion which
Prelates and people used to have toward our mother the Church of Rome, and to
our Father and Pastor, to wit, our Lord the Pope, gave up the ghost: for
although that Court had many times drawn blood of Christ's faithful people,
yet it never wounded them all and every one so deadly as this year and the
year following.

Anno 1256. Rustandus Page 891.
the Popes Nuntio, the kings proctor: would have the Bishops to set their hands
to a bill, and confess that they had received no small sum of money of the
Italian Merchants, converted to the good of their Churches, which all men knew
to be manifestly false. Whereupon they affirmed, and not without reason that To
die in this cause were a more manifest way of Martyrdom, then it was in the
case of Saint Thomas the Martyr.

The same Page 904.
year, Certain Abbeyes in England were bound over for the payment of two
thousand ounces of gold to the Papes Merchants.

Anno 1259 Sewalus Archbishop of York, lying upon his death bed, lifting his
hands and countenance to heaven with tears, said thus: Lord Tag. 939.
Jesus Christ, of Judges most just, thy infallible judgment knows, how
manifouldly the Pope, whom thou have suffered to be set over thy Church to
govern it, has wearied mine Innocence, for this cause as God knows, and the
world is not ignorant, that I would not admit to the government of Churches
(which thou have committed to me though unworthy) such as were altogether
unmeet and unknown. Notwithstanding, least the Popes sentence although in it
self unjust, should be made just by my contempt, I being entangled with such
bands (that is papal censures) do humbly desire to be absolved But I appeal
to the Pope himself before the high and incorruptible Judge, and heaven and
earth shall be my witnesses how unjustly he has assaulted me, and how often he
did scandalize and provoke me. Thus in the bitterness of his soul he wrote
unto the Pope, provoked by the example of Robert of Lincoln, humbly entreating
him, that he would mittigate the usual tyrranies by following the humility
of his holy Predecessors, and used these words Ibidem.
Dixit dominus Petro, Pasce oues meas, non tonde, non excoria, non euiscera,
vel deuorando consume, that is, The Lord said to Peter, feed my sheep, he
said not vnfleese them, nor flea them, nor vnbowel them, nor consume them by
devouring. But the Pope scorned these admonitions that were so holy.

In the year 1260. the Guiliel. Rishanger in continuatione Mat. Paris p. 959.
Barrons sent four Knights to the Pope, To complain of Aimer elect of
Winchester and his Brethren, of their murders, rapines, injuries, and
oppressions; and with all commanded such as farmed their Churches of the Romans
to pay them no rent, so the Land was quiet by the space of three years.

Anno. 1316. Lewis Antiq. Brit. page 240.
Beaumont a French man, at the instance of the kings of England and France,
obtained of the Pope the Bishoprike of Durham, he was so unlearned that he
could not read the Bulls and instruments of his Consecration: but coming to
the word Metropoliticae, after he had stood long puffing and blowing, and
could not hit upon it, he said soit pour dit, i. Let it stand for spoken: --
and an other time coming to this dangerous word aenigmate, he said to the by
standers in French, P^r Ibidem.
Saint Lowys il n'est pas courtoys qui ceste parolleyci escrit, that is, By
Saint Lewis, he was not a courteous man that wrote this word here, but though
he had small Latin, yet he brought the Pope the more gold, for he entered bond
to pay him more then he was able to discharge in fourteen years.

Anno. 1343. Pope Clement the 6. having made 12. Cardinals, Made Walsingam in
Edw. 3. page 161.
Provisions in England for two of them, of so many benefices next vacant as
should amount to two thousand marks yearly: whereupon the king wrote thus to
the Pope. Ibidem.
We doubt not but it is come to public knowledge, after what manner from the
beginning of the Church, when it had the first birth in our Kingdom of
England, the ancient stock of famous memory of our progenitors Kings of
England, and of the nobles and faithful people of the said kingdom, for the
exercise of divine worship built Churches and endowed them with ample
possessions, and fenced them with privileges, placing in the^ fit ministers
which happily set forward Catholic faith, in languages and people subject unto
them, by whose care and diligence the vineyard of the Lord of hosts, was then
very fertile in beauty and fruit: But (which is to be lamented) the plants of
that vineyard are degenerated into wildshrubs, and the bears of the wood root
it out, and wild beasts devour it, while by impositions and provisions of the Sea Apostolic which grow more grievous the^ they were accustomed, the hands of
unworthy persons, and especially of strangers seize upon the Lords inheritance,
contrary to the godly will, and ordination of the donors, and the dignities
thereof, and fat benefices are conferred upon persons, born out of the Land,
many times suspected unto us, which are not resident upon the same benefices,
and know not the faces of the sheep committed unto the^, nor understood their
language, but neglecting the cure of souls, like hierlings seek only temporal
gain, and by this means the worship of Christ is diminished, the cure of souls
neglected, hospitality is withdrawn, the rights of Churches are lost, the
houses of Clerks are ruinated, the devotion of the people is lessened, Clerks
of the kingdom, men of great learning and honest conversation, which might
well perform the charge and government, and were fit men for our affairs, and
public Councels, forsake their study because hope of fit preferment was
taken away, hitherto the kings letter. But the Pope took this in great
dudgion, and called the kings dealing, Ibid. p. 163.
rebellion.

Anno 1345. The king directly contrary to the tenor of his former letters, and
the desires of his nobles, wrote to the Pope that his Secretary Thomas Walsing*
in Hypodig. Neusi. page 516.
Hatfield might be made Bishop of Durham, against whom, when some of the
Cardinals took exceptions for his insufficiency, the Pope answered, Ibidem.
si rex hac vice supplicasset pro asino, obtinuisset; that is, If the King at
this time had made request for his ass, he should have obtained it.

Anno 1364. being the thirty eight of Edward the third, there was held a
Parliament wherein was made the Antiq. Brit. page 247.
statutes of prouisoes and praemunire, by which the power of the Court of Rome
in England being bridled, did never prevail afterward with such
licentiousness and impunitie.

Anno 1367. Upon a view taken it was found that some had above Antiq. Brit.
page 249
twenty Churches and dignities by the authority of the Pope, and that they
were further privileged to hold so many more as they could get without measure
or number.

Anno 1399. The Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Arundel entreated the King in
the name of the Clergy, that he would take away by his regal authority, the
papal Ibid. p. 273.
provisions, whereby it was come to pass, that learned men studying in
Universities, seeing the rewards given to unworthy and ambitious fellows,
seeking them at Rome, did forsake their studies: So ignorance expelled learning.

About the year 1419. Pope Antiq. Brit. page 278.
Martin the fifth, bestowed in England 13. Bishoprics by translations and
provisions in the space of two years, while Henry the fifth was in the war.

Anno 1420. The same Pope translated Richard of Lincoln to York, but the
Ibid. p. 279.
Deane and Chapter, standing upon the laws enacted against papal provisions,
resisted till the Pope was constrained by new Bulls to bring the said Richard
back again to Lincoln, by which example of the Yorkshire men, the papal
authority in providing Bishoprics (against which, neither the Laws of the
kingdom, nor the Kings Proclamations, nor the threatenings of the Nobles and
Commons prevailed:) was broken and weakened.

Anno 1424. Henry Ibid. p. 284.
Chichly Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal, was made the Popes Legate, but
the Kings (Attorney) appealed from him and the Pope to the next general
Council: then the Archbishop made a protestation that he would not exercise it
without the Kings license.

Anno 1497. Pope Alexander sent John de Ibid. p. 300
Egles into England with large commission but it seems that there was nothing
to be gotten, and therefore he sent his Notary Robert Castilensis with new
mandates, who required of every Curate an English noble.

About the year 1499. The Pope translated Thomas Godwin* in the Cat of Bishops.
Merkes from the Bishopric of Carlill to the imaginary Bishopric of Samos
in Greece.

Anno 1500. Pope Alexander kept a year of Antiq. Brit. page 302.
Iubile, promising remission of sins to all that went to Rome, or redeemed
their journey with money, and at the same time to make them more liberal he
gave out, that there should be a great expedition against the Turks, and that
the Pope would go thither in person as the General of the field. The Popes
Proctor in England for this purpose was Gasper a Spaniard, who in few months
got great sums of money which so soon as the courageous Captain Pope
Alexander had received, he let the wars alone, and followed his pleasures.
This year of Iubile was indeed to England a year of Iubile, for it brought
to Englishmen so often vexed, an end of Papal exactions and robberies. Yet
there remained a tribute of smoke for him that had fed them so long with smoke.

In the year 1532. inquisition was made of Papal expilations, and it was
found that in the four years last past, the Roman Court had received for
inuestitures of Bishops, Ibid. p. 326.
160000. pounds.

In the year 1533. the Pope had of Cranmer for his Bulls concerning his
Consecration and his Pall, Ibid. p. 327.
900. ducats, and the same year his usurped authority was banished out of
England. Thus have I set before you some part of the fruits of Papal
provisions, now I refer it to any indifferent man to ponder how well the world
went.


CHAP. XIIII.
Whether it belongs to the Pope to confirm all the Metropolitanes of the
world, and namely the Metropolitanes of England.

PHIL. THree things concur in making of a Bishop by Divine and Canon Law, to
wit, Election, Confirmation and Consecration. Now howsoever Bishops were
elected; the confirmation must proceed from the Bishop of Rome, or some
Metropolitan under him, which has commission from him, or else they can have
no jurisdiction.


ORTHOD. The confirmation of Bishops was a godly constitution, for the avoiding
of Schism, concerning which the Fathers of the famous Conc. Nic. Can. 4. Bin.
tom 1. page 366.
Nicen Council have ordained, that through all Provinces it shall belong to the
Metropolitan; they say not to the Pope, but to the Metropolitan; but all the
Bishops of England are confirmed by their Metropolitanes: And that by most
lawful and orderly proceeding. For when the Deane and Chapter by license from
the King have made the election, certified it under their common seal, and
thereunto have obtained the royal assent, the Metropolitan with other Bishops
by commission from the King, proceeds to confirm it according to the Canons,
sending out a public and peremptory citation to summon all personally to
appear, which can object any thing either against the party elected, or the
form of election. And when after due examination, and judicial process, they
are both found consonant to the ancient Canons, he confirms the election;
Thus it is clear that all the Bishops of England have Canonical confirmation:
and withal that the Pope in challenging this unto himself, transgresses the
Canon, and usurps the right of the Metropolitan.


PHIL. Your Metropolitanes have no such power because they are not confirmed
themselves by the Bishop of Rome.


ORTHO. They are not I grant, neither is it necessary. For what confirmation
had Ruf. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 9.
Frume^tius from him, whom Athanasius sent to be Bishop in India? What
confirmation had Flauianus from him, against whom three Bishops of Rome opposed
themselves; yet he kept his Chair many years, and all the Bishops of the East
Theod. l. 5. c. 23.
communicated with him. What confirmation had the Bishops of Conc. Ephesians. 1. Bin.
c. 1. p. 768.
Cyprus from him, which were not under the Jurisdiction of any Patriarch, but
governed by a Synod of their own?


PHIL. THat all the Bishops in the world, should derive their confirmation 2
from him, may appear by this, that the Patriarchs themselves were not
exempted, but did show their faith unto him, and were confirmed by him: as for
example, De Nectario etiam ab vniuerso concilio electo, a Damaso tamen
confirmando. Stap. prin. doct. l. 4. c. 20.
Nectarius, Patriarch of Constantinople though chosen by a whole Council, yet
was he to be confirmed by Damasus, as appears by Soz l. 7. c. 8.
Sozomen and Theod. l. 5. ^. 9
Theodoret.


ORTHOD. The Bishops o^ the second Council of Constantinople, being summoned
to the Council of Rome by the letters of Theodosius the Emperor, wrote to
Damasus, Ambrose, and the rest of the Bishops assembled at Rome, to excuse
their not coming, in respect of the state of their Churches whch had so lately
been pestered with Heresies, and stood still in such terms that the Bishops
could not leave them without extreme danger. Yet they thought good to send
three Bishops in the name of the rest; and withal they make relation both of
their doctrine and discipline. Concerning their doctrine, they declare their
faith of the Unity, Trinity, and natures of Christ. Concerning discipline,
they declare that they choose their Bishops and Patriarchs according to the
Canons of the Nicen Council: and so speak of the election of Nectarius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch, and Cyrill
Patriarch of Jerusalem. Concerning Nectarius, whose example you urge, they say,
that he being a most reverend, and zealous man, was chosen in their general
Council, in the presence of the Emperor with the general applause of all,
both Clergy and people. And this they write not to Damasus alone, as though it
were in his power, to make or to mar the election: (they were far from any
such cogitation) but to him with the rest to rejoice him and the rest, by
relating their consent in faith and love. So they desire not Damasus only, but
Ambrose and all the rest, to rejoice with them, and to give their cheerful
assent, that the Christian faith being agreed upon, and love confirmed among
them, they might keep the Church from schisms and dissensions. Thus though
they name Damasus first, and give him preeminence of place; yet they give no
more preeminence of power to the Bishop of Rome, then to the Bishop of Millen.


PHIL. What say you then to Leo Ep. 68.
Proterius Patriarch of Alexandria? to Bar. Anno. 633. n. 9.
Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem? To Leo Ep. 40.
Anatolius, Bar. Anno 811. n. 18. ex Theophane.
Nicephorus, and Anast in vit. Eugen^^ primi.
Peter, Patriarchs of Constantinople? Did not every one of them send to the
Pope his Synodall letters, wherein they declared their faith and consent with
the Church of Rome, before he confirmed or allowed them for lawful Patriarchs?
Does not this prove the singular and sovereign power of the Pope, in
confirming the other Patriarchs?


ORTHOD. As the Patriarch of Rome, did not allow the other Patriarchs for
lawful, till they had signified by letters, their soundness in faith: so the
other Patriarchs, did not acknowledge the Patriarch of Rome, till they were
likewise informed of his faith. And therefore the Patriarchs of Rome, did use
to send the like Synodall letters to the other Patriarchs, as may appear by
Greg. l. 1. Ep. 24.
Gregory, who wrote to John Patriarch of Constantinople, John Patriarch of
Jerusalem, Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, Gregory and Anastasius Patriarch
of Antioch, and this was done (says Ioh. Diac. in vit. Greg. l. 2. cap. 3.
Diaconus) according to the ancient custom of his predecessors Does not this
prove the singular and sovereign power of the other Patriarchs, in confirming
the Patriarch of Rome? And as the Roman Patriarch, sent his Synodicall letters
to the rest, and the rest to him; so the rest did likewise send one to another.
As for example, Tharasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, to the Patriarchs of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, using these words. In Conc. Nic. 2. act. 3.
Bin. t. 3. p. 3^8. Bar. anno. 78^. n. 5.
For as much as a certain observation, or rather an Apostolical tradition
has long prevailed in the Churches, that those which had newly been taken
into the degree of some eminent Priesthood, should declare their faith to them
which had obtained the like degree of eminent Priesthood long time before them;
Therefore it seems good to me both to submit myself unto you, and to declare
manifestly before you, the confession of my faith. Wherefore this practice does
not mount one Patriarch above the rest, but rather level all of them in an
equality; and consequenly the Bishop of Rome had no more power over the
Metropolitanes of other Patriarchs, then other Patriarchs over his.


PHIL. The contrary is evident by the decree of Pope Pelagius, Distinct. 100.
Quoniam.
Placuit vt quisque Metropolitanus, etc. It is my pleasure that every
Metropolitan which shall not send within three months of his Consecration, to
show his faith, and receive the Pall, shall be deprived of his place and
dignitte. Wherefore all Metropolitans are bound to perform this office to the
Bishop of Rome: even all in the whole world. For he that says every one,
excepteth none.


ORTHO. Pelagius means every one within his own Jurisdiction.


PHIL. But all the world was his Jurisdiction.


ORTHOD. Then belike the Pope was acknowledged Universal Patriarch in the
days of Pelagius.


PHIL. Yea, and before Pelagius, that title was offered to Pope Leo, by the
Council of Chalcedon, as S. Lib. 4. indict. 13. Ep. 32. 38.
Gregory witnesses.


ORTHOD. The whole Council is extant, and we find no such matter.


PHIL. In the third Bin. t. 3. p. 68 69. 70.
action, there are three Epistles of three sundry Grecians, all which begin
thus. To the most holy and blessed Leo, the universal Archbishop and Patriarch
of Rome.


ORTHOD. You might have said Bin Ibid* and page 75.
four. But what if a few poor suitors, hungry Grecians, put a flattering
title in their supplications? does this prove, that it was offered by a
Council? one of them was a Pr^est, two were Deacons, and one a lay man, not
one of them was a Bishop, nor yet in your own judgment had a voice in the
Council


PHIL. Conc. Chal. 3. Bin. t. 2. p. 80
Paschasinus the Popes legate in his subscription calls Leo, the Pope of the
universal Church.


ORTHOD. If that title were aequiualent to this (which may be doubted) yet it
was only given by the Popes parasite, and not by the Council.


PHIL. It was given Bin. ibid. in not a marginal^.
audiente and probante universally Synodo. i. The general Council hearing and
approving it.


ORTHOD. This I hear you say, but I would hear you prove it.


PHIL. Ex Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 31. tert^um.
Although the Council decreed nothing concerning that matter, yet it is
evident enough that the giving of the title to the Bishop of Rome was not
displeasing to the Council, seeing no man reprehended it.


ORTHO. They did not reprehend it, but did they therefore commend it? In the
Council of Conc. Later. sub Leone decimo. s. 10. Bin. t. 4. page 624.
Lateran, in the presence of the Pope, an Archbishop in a Sermon speaking of a
Pope, said, He had power above all power, in heaven and in earth. What say you?
Did the Pope and Council approve this blasphemy? for they did not reprove it.
If their silence was no argument of approbation, then neither was the silence
of the Council of Chalcedon. Yea it is most certain that they neither did use
it, nor approve it. In the sixteenth Action they write a Synodall Epistle to
Pope Leo, at which time, if ever, it was fit that they should adorn him with
this title, which notwithstanding they used not, but styled him Apud Bin. t. 2.
page 139.
the most holy, and most blessed Archbishop of the Romans. Neither could they
approve it in that sense which you give it, unless they should cross and
contradict themselves. For you intend by that title to advance him above other
Patriarchs: whereas the Council of Chalcedon gives no greater Conc. Chal.
act. 15. can. 28. apud Bin. t. 2. page 133.
privileges to the Church of Rome, then to the Church of Constantinople. And
as the Council did never give the title, so Pope Leo did never use it.


PHIL. Yes, in his Leo Epist. 54.
Epistle to the Emperor Martian against Anatolius, in the very inscription of
the Epistle, he uses the title of Universal.


ORTH. He uses it thus, Leo episc. Romanae and vniuersalis ecclesiae, i. Leo
B. of the Roman and universal Church, so he applies it not to himself, but
to the church.


PHIL. If he be Bishop of the universal church, then he is an universal Bishop.


ORTHOD. That does not follow: for the Apud Theodoret. l. 2. c. 8.
Council of Sardica, in their Synodall Epistle to all Bishops, calls them
Bishops and Colleagues of the Catholic and Apostolic Church. Is not
Catholic the same with Universal? and yet their meaning was not to call them
universal Bishops, neither was it the meaning of Pope Leo to call himself so,
if we believe Pope Greg. Epist. l. 4. ep. 38.
Gregory, affirming, that never any of his predecessors, did use so profane
a title.


PHIL. Ex Baron. an. 451. n. 151.
It is to be understood, that not any of the Roman Bishops did use the title
of oecumenicall, of a solemn custom, and continually in all their
subscriptions, yet some of them sometimes used it.


ORTHOD. Then some of them sometimes used a profane title.


PHIL. Universal Ex Bell. de Romans Pont* l. 2. c. 31. Responde^.
Bishop may be taken two ways; First for him, which is the only Bishop of the
whole world, excluding all other, in which sense Greg. l. 7. Epist. 69.
S. Gregory says, If one be an Universal Bishop, it remains that you are
no Bishops. Secondly, for him that has a general care of he whole Church, yet
so, that other Bishops retain their place and dignity. In the first sense S.
Gregory calls it profane: In the second, it belongs to the Bishop of Rome.


ORTHOD. Concerning the first, Greg. Epist. l. 4. ep. 38.
Gregory having said, that the name of Universality was offered by the
Council, adds immediately, That never any of his predecessors did use so
profane a title. So it is clear, that he calls that very title, profane,
which as he says, was offered by the Council; Which justifies my former
answer. For unless you will accuse the Council of profaneness, you must
needs say, that Gregory speaks improperly, ascribing that to the Council,
which was only done by the Popes Legate, and a few supplicants in the
Council. Moreover, if this profane title exclude all other from being
Bishops, then the Council (consisting of 630. Bishops,) in giving this title,
should exclude themselves from being Bishops: which is absurd, seeing in their
subscriptions they entitled themselves Bishops. Concerning the second, If he be
an universal Bishop which has care of the whole Church, then S. Paul was
Universal Bishop as well as S. Peter: 2. Cor. 11. 28.
for he had care of all the Churches. Then Athanasius was an Universal Bishop:
for Basil. ad Athanas. Ep. 52.
S. Basil says, He carried the care of all Churches.


PHIL. Peradventure he means, that he carried the care of all within the
Patriarchdome of Alexandria.


ORTHOD. Nor of them only, but of others also: For S. Basil says, Epist. 48.
The whole state of the Church of Antioch depends upon thee. So though his
jurisdiction was confined within the Patriarchdome of Alexandria, yet he carried
a tender care over the whole Church of Christ. Wherefore in this sense the
title of Universal Bishop, belongs as well to the Patriarch of Alexandria,
as to the Patriarch of Rome. Moreover, the very title of Universal Patriarch
was given, and that by a Council, to John Patriarch of Constantinople. In what
sense trow you? You produced but two senses of it out of Bellarmine. In the
first, which profanely excludes all other Bishops they did not give it, for
then they should deny themselves to be Bishops, contrary to their own
subscriptions. If in the latter, then it was common to him with the Bishops of
Rome; and so cannot prove your Monarchical jurisdiction.


PHIL. How prove you that this title was given him by a Council?


ORTHOD. Bin. in notis in Council. Constantinop. sub Menna. tom. 2. page 471.
Binius says, How often John Bishop of Constantinople is named in the acts of
the Council of Constantinople under Hormisda: so often the title of Universal
Patriarch is found added unto him.


PHIL. Binius in the same place ascribes this to the imposture of the latter
Grecians; which he proves, because, though two Popes, Pelagius and Gregory
condemned this title in the Bishop of Constantinople; yet no man objected
against them the authority of this Council, which had been very material,
because the greater part of it was approved by the Church of Rome. Wherefore it
is certain that this was not originally in the Council, but foisted in
afterward.


ORTHO. But Pope Adrian the first in his Epistle to Tharasius, recorded in the
second Conc. Nic. 2. act. 2. Bin. t. 3. page 312.
Nicen Council, intitleth him a general Patriarch.


PHIL. Binius quo supra.
This seems also to be added by some Grecian, which I rather think, because
the same Epistle translated by Anastasius, has no such title prefixed.


ORTHOD. As though Anastasius were not as likely to put it out, as the Grecians
to put it in. But Constit. 42. in titulo.
Justinian in the Authentickes, gives Mennas the very self same title of
Oecumenicall Patriarch.


PHIL. Bin. ibidem.
It must be affirmed that this also crept in, unless we say that he is called
Universal, in respect of the Oriental Bishops and Priests.


ORTHOD. So Holoander takes it, when he translateth it, Vniuersi eius tractus
Patriarchae, i. to the Patriarch of all that circuit. But are you now advised?
Was he called Universal, and yet had not the jurisdiction of the whole world,
but was only an Oriental Patriarch? then you must confess, that this title
might be given to the B. of Rome, and yet not imply that he had jurisdiction
over the whole world, but over the whole West, and so was the Occidentall
Patriarch. Wherefore the decree of Pope Pelagius, requiring all Metropolitanes
to send to Rome to profess their faith, and receive the Pall, extends not to
them of the East, but only to them of the West.


PHIL. Then you grant that he was Patriarch of the West, and that is
sufficient to infer my conclusion, for the Western Patriarch must needs
have jurisdiction over the Metropolitanes of the West, in which compass is
Brittany. I need not here speak of the ancient division of the Provinces, nor
of Saint Peter, nor of Eleutherius: It is famously known that Saint Austin was
sent hither by the Bishop of Rome, received a pall from him, and apparently
submitted himself to his jurisdiction; so did his successors for almost a
thousand years together. Wherefore seeing the Bishop of Rome was in lawful
possession, you must tell us upon what reason you put him from it.


ORTHOD. By what title does the Pope challenge his jurisdiction in England? By
the law of God? you See above. cap. 2. and 3.
cannot justify it. By reason of the first conversion of the Island by Saint
Peter? You See lib. 2. c. 2
cannot make it manifest, that ever he was here. Will you fetch it from
Eleutherius? He only sent Bid. l. 1. c. 4.
at the kings request, and challenged no such authority. Will you derive it from
Austin? Galfrid. Mon. l. 11. c. 12.
It was then made appear by many reasons that the Brittans ought him no
subjection. And it is evident, that he and his associates had first their
assemblies in Saint Martins Church in Canterbury, by the Kings permission:
afterward, when the king himself was converted, they received (to use the
words of Bid. l. 1. c. 26
Bid) more ample license both to Preach through all his dominions, and also to
build and repair Churches. So you see all was received from the king. It is
true that Gregory sent a supply of Preachers, and gave his advise for the
erection of Bishoprics, and sent palls hither; yet there can be no question,
but all this was done by the kings license. Afterward in succeeding ages, when
the Popes did play the wild boares in the Church, in executing Church censures,
and giving Church livings, the kings of England made laws against them, even
in the time of Popery. For as it was defended by Epist. 55.
Cyprian, and afterward also by the Epist. ad Celestinum. cap 105.
African council, under Celestinus, that causes should be ended where they
begun, and not be carried to tribunalls beyond the sea: So it was decreed in
England, in the reign of Mat. Paris in H. 2. Anno 1164.
Henry the second, as witnesses Matthew Paris. De appellationibus si emerserint
ab Archidiacono debet procedi ad Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad Archiepiscopum, and
si Archiepiscopus defuerit in iustitia exhibenda, ad dominum rege^ perueniendu^
est postremo, vt praecepto ipsius in curia Archiepiscopi controuersia
terminetur, ita quod non debeat vltra procedi absque assenssu domini regis, i.
Concerning appeals, if any shall spring, they ought to proceed from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the Archb.
shall be defective in doing justice, they must come at last to our Lord the king,
that by his commandment the controversy may be determined in the Archbishops
Court, so that there ought not to be any further proceedings without the assent
of the Lord the king. Thus it is clear that the Pope could not take to
himself the handling of causes without the kings license. It might also be
declared how little his ce^sures were here respected, unless they received
strength by the kings permission. And whereas he took upon him to dispose of
Church livings, he was censured for it in the time of Edw. the 3 even in the
high Court of Parliament as 25. Ed. 3. statute of Prouisours.
an usurper. These points might be much enlarged, but this little touch is
sufficient to show that whatsoever jurisdiction he had in England, was by the
courtesy of the King: whatsoever he took upon him otherwise, was by
usurpation. Now his challenge by custom is repelled by custom. For, these
six hundred years last past, he affecting to be that which he was not,
disdained to be that which he was, and aspyring to a Popedom neglected his
Patriarchdome: so that which he had gotten by use he has lost by disusing, and
by his own fact has extinguished his former title. Secondly, whereas Pope
Pelagius required only a profession of the faith according to the Scriptures
and the holy ancient general councels, Onuphrius in vita Pij. 4.
Pius the fourth has framed us a new form of faith, without which no man can
be saved, consisting of traditions, transubstantiations, merits, Images,
relics, and such rotten Romish ragges-which he has clapped to the Nicen creed,
as it were a beggars patch to a golden garment. And this forsooth is the Hanc
veram Catholicam fidem extra qua^ nemo saluus esse potest etc. ibid.
Catholic faith, the profession whereof is now required to be made of all
Hanc fidei formulam qua^ Episcopi designati profiterentur instituit. ibid.
Bishops. Thirdly, the Popes of latter times will have Metropolitanes sworn to
their obedience; yea and Pius Veram obedientiam spondeo ac iuro.
the fourth did cunningly convey this oath into his new coined creed; but we
find no such thing exacted in the time of Pelagius.


PHIL. There is yet extant an Epistle of a Bishop, which took the oath to Saint
Gregory, who lived not long after Pelagius. Greg. l. 10. Ep. 30.
Vnde iurans dico per Deum omnipotentem and per haec quatuor Euangelia quae in
manibus teneo, and per salute^ gentium, atque illustrium dominorum nostrorum
remp. gubernantium, me in vnitate, sicut dixi, Ecclesiae Catholicae, and
communione Rom: pontificis se^per and sine dubio permanere. i. Whereupon I
affirm, swearing by God Almighty, and by the 4. Gospels which I hold in my
hands, and by the salvation of the Gentiles, and of our glorious Lords which
govern the commonwealth, that I will remain always, and without doubt, as I
have said, in the unity of the Catholic Church, and in the communion of the
Bishop of Rome.


ORTHOD. You intend to prove that Metropolitanes should swear to the Pope
before their confirmation, or receiving of the palle; the example you bring
concerns no such matter: For first he was only a Bishop, not a Metropolitan.
Secondly, this oath was voluntary, not exacted. Thirdly, it was not upon a
confirmation or receiving of a palle, but upon an abiuration of his heresy.
Neither does it appear, that this oath was in the time of Gregory, though some
have gone about to ascribe it to the time of Pope Pelagius, wherein behold, and
you shall see the cunning of Popish proctors. For whereas Distinct. 100. quoniam.
Pelagius reproved some Metropolitanes, because they did delay, fidem suam
exponere, and thereupon made this decree that those which did not send within
three months, ad fidem suam exponendam, should be deprived: Defens: in
Molineum pro pontif: max. p. 20.
Remundus Rufus, a Popish Lawier of Paris writing for the honor of the Pope,
does change these words, ad exponendam fidem, i. To make profession of their
faith into dandae fidei causa. i. To make a faithful promise or oath; so the
profession of the faith of Jesus Christ was by a strange Metamorphosis
transformed into an oath of the Popes supremacy. Now least the Spanish Lawiers
should come short of the French, in showing their zeal for their Lord the
Pope, Resp. de Episc: iurisd. and Pont. autorit. propos. 5. p. 151
Franciscus Vargas king Philips Councellor, and Ambassador to Pope Pius the
fourth, affirms that Pelagius declared the Popes supremacy by this decree, in
that he would have all Metropolitanes sworn unto him. Mark what he says
sworn unto him, whether deceived by Rufus, or purposing to make an officious
lie for his holy Fathers advantage, I cannot tell. Howsoever, this oath cannot
be referred to Pope Pelagius, but rather to Pope Paschall the second, who
would have forced Archbishop Panormitane to take it, and upon his refusal set
out the decret all Epistle, recorded by Gregory the ninth, in the De election^
cap. 4. significasti.
Canon Law, the title whereof is this: Electo in Archiepiscopum seeds
Apostolica Pallium non tradet, nisi Prius Praestet fidelitatis and obedientiae
iuramentum. 1. The Apostolical See shall not deliver the Pall to an Archbishop
Elect, before he perform the oath of Allegiance and obedience.


PHIL. Though Pope Paschall made this decree, yet it follows not that he was
the author of the oath: it might be more ancient though he renewed it.


ORTHOD. It appears by the Contents of the Decree, that he was the author.
For first he declares that Panormitane had signified unto him, that Kings and
Nobles were stricken with admiration, that the Pall should be offered under the
condition of an oath, and the same Pope did write in the same words upon the
like occasion to an Archbishop of Bar. an. 1102. number. 8. ex co^^ce Vaticano.
Polonia, who had signified unto him the like admiration of the King and Nobles
of Polonia. This denial of the Archbishops, and admiration of Princes and
states does argue a novelty. 2. Whereas some did object that it was not
decreed in the councels, he rejects all Councels with scorn and disdain.
Bar. Ibidem nu. 10. extr. de elect. significasti.
Aiunt in Concilijs statutu^ non inueniri, quasi Romanae Ecclesiaelege^
co^ctlia vlla prefixerint, cum omnia concilia per Romanae Ecclesiae
auctoritate^ and facta sint, and robur acceperint, and in eoru^ Statutis Romani
Pontificis patenter excipiatur auctoritas. i. They say that it was not found
decreed in Councels, as though any Councels could prefix a law to the Church of
Rome, seeing al Councels are both made and receive strength by the authority
of the Church of Rome, and the authority of the Bishop of Rome is manifestly
excepted in their constitutions. Thus he does not refer the oath to former
Popes and Councels but relyeth only upon his own authority. So it seems
that this weed did spring 1100. years after Christ. Neither did they stay in
Metropolitanes, but Innocent the third in the Council Conc. Later. 4. cap. 5.
Bin. t. 3 page 1452.
of Lateran imposed the like oath of allegiance and obedience upon the four
Patriarchs. Yea Extra de iure iurando. Ego.
all Bishops are bound by solemn oath to promise obedience and faith to Saint
Peter, the Church of Rome, and their Lord the Pope; and to put to their helping
hand (which is an essential point of their obedience) to Papatum Romanae
Ecclesiae and regulas sanctorum patrum adiutor ero ad defendendum and retinen
^um sal^o ordine meo contra omnes homines.
defend and maintain the Papacy; By which policy it came to pass that the
soueraign was defeated of his subject, and the bramble did mount aloft above
the cedars of Libanus. So he which was first admitted among us of courtesy, and
continued by custom* that is by right humane, began now to challenge of duty,
and by law divine: And not content with the honor of a Patriarch, he took
upon him to domineer through the Christian world, as Pope Parramount, flashing
out his excommunications like lightning, interdicting kingdoms, trampling
Princes and Emperors under his feet; yea and dispensing with vows* oaths and
the everlasting Commandments of God himself. Is not this to sit in the Temple
of God as though he were God? Wherefore by all right, reason, equity and law
of God and man, he was to be banished. I will conclude this point with the
saying of a reverend Bishop. Bishop Bilson, The true difference part. 2.
As for his Patriarchship, by Gods law he has none; In this realm for 600.
years after Christ he had none: for the last six hundred, as looking to
greater matters, he would have none: above or against the sword which God has
ordained, he can have none: to the subversion of the faith and oppression of
his brethren, in reason, right and equity he should have none. you must seek
further for subjection to his tribunal, this landoweth him none.


THE FIFTH BOOK. OF THE SECOND AND third controversy, concerning Priests and
Deacons.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the second controversy is proposed, divided into two questions, the
former about Sacrificing, the latter about Absolution: the state of the former
is set down, and the method of proceeding.

PHIL. Whatsoever you have as yet said, is nothing, because to the very being
of a Bishop the order of Priesthood is Ex Bell. de sacr. ord. c. 5.
essentially required, which is not to be found in the Church of England. For
there are two principal functions of Priesthood; the first is the power of
Sacrificing, the second of Absolution; but you have neither, as I will prove
in order: to begin with the first, it is given in holy Church by these
words. Pontificale in ordinat. Presbyteri.
Accipe potestatem offerre sacrificium deo, missasque celebrare, tam pro viuis
quam pro defunctis in nomine domini. that is, Receive power to offer Sacrifice
to God, and to celebrate Mass as well for the quick as for the dead in the
name of the Lord. But you use neither these words, nor any aequiualent in your
ordination of Priests, as may appear by the Book: therefore you want the
principal function of Priesthood.


ORTHOD. If you mean no more by Priest, then the holy Ghost does by T^t. 1. 5.
Presbyter, that is, a Minister of the new Testament, then we profess and are
ready to prove that we are Priests, as we are called in the book of common
prayers, and the form of ordering, because we receive in our ordination The
form of ordering of Priests.
authority to Preach the word of God, and to minister his holy Sacraments.
Secondly, by Priests you mean Sacrificing Priests, and would expound your
selves of spiritual Sacrifices, then as this name belongs to all Christians,
so it may be applied by an excellency to the Ministers of the Gospel.
Thirdly, although in this name you have a relation to bodily Sacrifices, yet
even so we may be called Priests, by way of allusion. For as Deacons are not
of the tribe of Leui, yet the ancient fathers do commonly call them Levites,
alluding to their office because they come in place of Levites: so the
ministers of the new Testament may be called Sacrificers, because they suceed
the sons of Aaron, and come in place of Levites: so the Ministers of the new
Testament may be called sacrificers, because they succeed the sons of Aaron,
and come in place of sacrificers. Fourthly, for as much as we have authority
to minister the Sacraments, and consequently the Eucharist, which is a
representation of the sacrifice of Christ; therefore we may be said to offer
Christ in a mystery, and to sacrifice him by way of commemoration. Is not this
sufficient? if it be not, what other sacrificing is required?


PHIL. THere is required sacrificing properly so called, which is an Bell. de
Missa l. 1. c. 2. his ^rgo.
external 2*
oblation made only to God by a lawful Minister, whereby some sensible and
permanent thing is Consecrated and changed with Mystical rite, for the
acknowledgement of humane infirmity, and for the profession of the Divine
Majesty.


ORTHOD. What is the sensible and permanent thing you offer?


PHIL. It is the very body and blood of Christ.


ORTHOD. The Church of England teaches thus according to the Scripture: The
Articles of religion* 1562 art. 31.
offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and
satisfaction, for all the sins of the whole world, both original, and
actual, and there is no other satisfaction for sin, but that alone, and
consequently it condemns your masses for the quick and the dead, as
blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.


PHIL. But the Council of Trent teaches, that in the mass there is offered
to Council. ^rid. sess. 22. Canone 1.
God a true and proper Sacrifice Ibid. Can. 3.
propitiatory for the sins of the quick and the dead, and curses all those
that think otherwise.


ORTHOD. HOw do you prove, that the Sacrificing Priesthood, which offers as
you say, the very body and blood of 3.
Christ, is the true Ministry of the Gospel?


PHIL. That Ministry which was typed in the old Testament, foretold by the
Prophets, instituted by Christ, and practiced by the Apostles, is the true
Ministry of the Gospel. But our sacrificing Priesthood, which offers the
very body and blood of Christ, is such; therefore it is the true Ministry of
the Gospel. The proposition of it self, is plain and evident: the parts of the
assumption, shall be proved in order.


ORTHOD. Then first let us hear where your Priesthood was typed.


CHAP. II.
Of their argument drawn from Melchisedec.

PHIL. THe Sacrifice of Melchisedec, was a type of that which Christ offered at
his last Supper, with his own hands, and shall offer by the hands of the
Priests, until the end of the world. For the understanding whereof, we must
consider, that Melchisedec, was a type of Christ in a more excellent manner then
Aaron, insomuch that Christ is called a Priest, after the order of Melchisedec,
and not after the order of Aaron. For between these two Priesthoods, there are
two differences, (...) Missa ^. ^. c. ^. Porro.
the first consists in the external form of the Sacrifice; For the
Sacrifices of Aaron were bloody and represented the death of Christ, under the
form of living things, that were s^aine: The sacrifice of Melchisedec was
unbloody, and did figure the body and blood of Christ under the form of Bread
and Wine. From which property of the order of Melchisedec we may draw this
argument. If Melchisedec did offer an unbloody sacrifice under the form of
Bread and Wine, then seeing Christ is a Priest, after the order of Melchisedec,
he also must offer an unbloody Sacrifice, under the forms and shapes of Bread
and Wine: but the Sacrifice of the Cross, was bloody: therefore he offered
another Sacrifice besides the Sacrifice of the Cross: and what can this be,
but the Sacrifice of the Supper? But he commaded his Apostles, and in them us,
to do as he did, saying, Luke. 22. 19.
do this in remembrance of me: therefore Christ commanded that we should
sacrifice him in an unbloody manner, in the forms of Bread and Wine, and
consequently the Ministers of the Gospel, are Sacrificers by Christ's own
institution.


ORTH. We grant first, that Melchisedec was a type of Christ, because the
Scripture says, Heb. 7. 3.
he was likened to the son of God: Secondly, that Christ was a Priest, not
after the order of Aaron* but after the order of Melchisedec, because God has
not only said it, but sworn it: Psalm. 110 4.
The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedec: but we deny that Melchisedec did offer any Bread and
Wine, for a Sacrifice to God; we deny that Christ ever offered any such, or
ever gave any such commission to his Apostles. Therefore this is so far from
proving your pretended Priesthood, that it will quite overthrow it.


PHIL. THat Melchisedec Sacrificed Bread and Wine, is plain 2
in Genesis 14. 18.
Genesis.


ORTHOD. In Genesis? Why? there is no such thing: the words are these. And
Melchisedec king of Salem, brought forth Bread and Wine, and he was a Priest
of the most high God; Where your own vulgar translation reads proferens not
offerens, he brought forth Bread and Wine, and not he offered it.


PHIL. True he brought it forth: but the end why he brought it forth was to
Sacrifice unto God.


ORTHOD. That is more then you can gather out of the text. Antiq l. 1. cap 11.
Josephus says, that he gave intertainment to the Soldiers of Abraham,
Tertul. con. Iud. 14.
Tertullian says, that he offered Bread and Wine to Abraham, returning from
the battle. Saint Am^. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 3.
Ambrose says likewise, that Melchisedec did offer it unto Abraham. Your own
And de vulg: lat. Edit. l. 4. Defens. p. 636.
Andradius says* Ego cum illis sentiam, qui lassos Abrahae milites, and
diuturna pug na fractos, Melchisedecum pane vinoque refecisse aiunt. That is, I
will be of their opinion, which say that Melchisedec refreshed with Bread and
Wine, the Soldiers of Abraham, being weary and tired with a long battle. And
Cardinal In Genes* c. 14.
Caietan: Nihil scribitur hic de Sacrificio seu oblatione, sed de prolatione
seu extractione, quam Josephus dicit factam ad reficiendum victores, that is,
here is nothing (spoken) of the oblation or Sacrifice, but of the prolation
and bringing it out, which Josephus says, was done to refresh the Conquerers.


PHIL. These things are subordinate, and may stand together, for first, he
offered the Bread and Wine to God for a Sacrifice, And then, invited Abraham
and his army: so this was not Civil but a Sacred banquet.


ORTHO. How prove you that?


PHIL. Abraham said to the King of Sodom; Genesis 14. 22
I have lift up my hand unto the Lord the most high God, possessor of heaven
and earth, that I will not take of all that is thine, so much as a thread or
shoe latchet, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham rich, save only
that which the young men have eaten, and the parts of the men which went with
me, Aner, Eschol and Mamre, let them take their parts. Now to use the words of
Cardinal Bellarmine, Bell. de Missa ^. ^. c. 6.
Quid opus erat pane and vino ijs qui spolijs abundabant and paulo ante
comederant and biberant? that is, What need had they of bread and wine which
did abound with spoils, and had eaten and drunken a little before?


ORTHOD. That Paulo ante is a trick of a Jesuit, to make the Reader imagine
that they had new dined, which is more then can be proved out of the Text. For
when Abraham who dwelt in the plain of Gene. 14. 13.
Mamre heard that Lot was taken prisoner, he pursued the 4. Kings to Verse 14.
Dan, about 124. English miles: then he and his servants divided themselves,
and pursued them unto Verse 15.
Hobah about 80. miles, where he recovered the substance, and took the
spoils; Thence he returned to Verse 17.
Sodom, about 180. miles, where Melchisedec met him. Wherefore, for ought that
does appear by the Text, the young men's eating of the spoils, might have been
sundry days before Melchisedec met them. But if they had new dined, did
Melchisedec know so much? Or if he did, do you know how long he stayed with
them, or what store of victuals they had remaining? And if there had remained
great plenty, yet, may not a King give entertainment to such as are otherwise
provided of victuals? Surely, this is a speech that does little become a
Cardinal: if Bellarmine be of this opinion, his Cardinalship keeps but a
miserable house, and affords but slender hospitality. Hitherto we have seen
how weakly you have disproued the civil banquet; Now let us see how strongly
you can prove the Sacred.


PHIL. THat this bread and wine were brought out for sacrifice, may appear 3.
by the Text, which says, Melchisedec Rex Salem proferens panem and vinum,
erat enim Sacerdos Dei altissimi, etc. That is, Verse 18.
Melchisedec King of Salem brought forth bread and wine: for he was a Priest
of the most high God. Why did he bring forth bread and wine? because he was a
Priest of the most high God* Now the proper office of a Priest is to sacrifice;
therefore the very connection does teach us, that he brought forth bread and
wine to sacrifice.


ORTHOD. As it was the office of the Priest to sacrifice, so it was his office
to bless: as may appear in the sixth of Numbers, Verse 23.
Speak unto Araon, and to his sons, saying, Thus shall you bless the
children of Israel, etc. Therefore the Spirit of God having said, that
Melchisedec was a Priest of the most High God, adds immediately, that he
blessed him.


PHIL. The conjunction ( for) does evidently show the dependence. He brought
forth bread and wine, (for) he was a Priest of the most High God: therefore
this bringing it forth, was a Priestly action, which must needs import, that it
was referred to sacrifice.


ORTHOD. The Vulgar Translation which you follow, is erroneous: for according
to the Hebrew it is not, Erat enim Sacerdos: for he was a Priest; but and erat
Sacerdos: and he was a Priest, as Arias In (...) inter. line* ^ribus.
Montanus translateth it; and Bell. de Missa. l. 1. c. 6.
Bellarmine confesses. So the clauses are not joined together with a
conjunction causall, but with a copulative: therefore your argument drawn from
the causall vanishes away.


PHIL. The copulative conjunction is much used for a causall: as in the Prophet
Esaias 64. 2.
Esaias, where it is according to the Hebrew, Behold thou art angry, and we have
sinned; which your selves translate, Behold thou art angry, for we have sinned.
The like is to be said of the Greek particle, answering to the Hebrew; As for
example, in the words of the Angel, it is according to the Greek, Luke 1. 42.
Blessed art thou among women, and the fruit of thy womb is blessed. Upon
which place, In annotat. in verse. suam.
Beza proves very well, that the copulative is put for a causall: and your
selves translate it accordingly, Because the fruit of thy womb is blessed.
Likewise in this present place, the copulative must be expounded by the
causall: as may appear even by the Hebrew, which your selves so advance and
magnify. Bell. quo supr.
For after these words, And he was a Priest of the most High God. There is an
accent called Soph pasuk, to signify that the period is ended. Therefore
though we should read, And he was a Priest of the most High God: yet because
there is a full point, the very words thus pointed according to the Hebrew,
Chaldee, Greek and Latin, would proclaim, that he brought forth bread and
wine, as a Priest to sacrifice.


ORTHOD. In the division of the Chapters into verses, there was respect had,
not only of Musical harmony, but also of some equality or indifferency in
the length of the Verses. So it comes to pass* that sometimes a long
sentence extends it self, and is Buxtorf. thesaur gram. l. 2. c. 23.
continued in diverse verses, before the sense be perfectly concluded. Wherefore
though every Verse have his Soph pasuk, yet every Verse is not a full period.
As for example, In the 23. of Genesis, after the 17. Verse, there is the same
point and accent, which is here; and yet in your own vulgar Bibles, set out by
Sixtus 5. and Clemens octauus, there is but a comma: and that no marvel,
seeing sometimes there is only a comma between Chapter and Chapter, As for
example, Between the 21. and 22. of the Acts, both in the Greek and in the
Latin. Now for this present place of Genesis, In Pagnins translation set out
by Vatablus, as also in Gloss. liter. in Genes.
Delrio, yea in the authentical Edition of Sixtus quintus, and Clemens
octauus, the Soph pasuk you urge, is expressed only by a comma, and in some of
the Vulgar, there is not so much as a comma. Wherefore this does rather argue
a relation to that which follows, then to that which went before, and
consequently, these words, He was a Priest of the most High God, cannot be
referred to the bringing forth of the bread and wine, but rather to the
blessing. And that it is so, may appear by the Epistle to the Hebrews, where
the Type of Melchisedec is unfolded: and yet there is no mention at all of
sacrificing, but only of blessing* But if we should suppose, that it were to be
translated by the causall, ( for) and that these words, For he was a Priest of
the most High God, had relation to that which went before, concerning the
bringing out of bread and wine, what should you gain by it?


PHIL. The very point in question. For the latter part shall yield a reason of
the former. Did Melchisedec bring forth bread and wine to Abraham? What moved
him so to do? The reason is rendered, because he was a Priest of the most High
God; Therefore this was a Priestly action.


ORTHOD. He gave entertainment to Abraham, and was thereunto moved by
consideration of his own Office, even because he was not only a professor
of the true Religion, but also a Priest: for as it becomes all that embrace
Religion, to love one another, and rejoice at their good; so this duty
especially belongs to the Priest. And your learned Jesuit And* desens* de
vulg. Edit. p. 637. Colon. 1580.
Andradius hence observes the great lincke of Religion, saying, Who would not
wonder that a man tied by no lincks of acquaintance with Abraham, but to those
whom Abraham conquered* tied by the lincke of neighborhood, and peradventure
of alliance also, (for I hold it very probable, that Melchisedec was a
Canaanite) should prosecute Abraham with presents, and other kind offices, and
for the victory gotten over his own country men, should congratulate Abraham,
not without procuring to himself great envy from his neighbors? but seeing
there are no lincks to be compared with the linkes of religion (Moses) says
that he performed these offices to Abraham because he was a Priest of the most
high God: that all men might understand that he was coupled with greater
lincks of love with Abraham, who excelled for singular commendation of Piety
and religion, then with them to whom he was tied by the Law of nature and
country: therefore there is no necessity, to say, that he sacrificed bread and
wine, for the text even read and pointed as you would have it, may in the
judgment of some of your learned Divines, admit an excellent sense without any
sacrifice.

But let us imagine that he did sacrifice bread and wine, what is this to 5
the purpose?


PHIL. Yes, it proves our Priest hood directly and strongly. For must not the
truth answer to the Type?


ORTHOD. You make the type consist in this, that Melchisedec sacrificed bread
and wine; but stay a little; did Christ sacrifice bread and wine? where find
you that?


PHIL. A Type consists in representation; and representation depends rather
upon the outward accidents, then the inward substance, therefore whereas
Melchisedec sacrificed bread and wine, the truth of that Type must consist in
the outward accidents: that is, in the forms of bread and wine: and the Type
was fulfilled in that Christ offered himself in the forms of bread and wine.


ORTH. Was the sacrifice of Melchisedec bread and wine in substance? or was it
the body and blood of Christ under the forms of bread and wine? if you say the
first, then our communion does better answer to the sacrifice of Melchisedec
then your Mass: and consequently our ministry does better resemble his then
your Priesthood: but if you say that he offered the very body and blood of
Christ in the forms of bread and wine; that would fit your turn well, for
then Melchisedec should be a Mass Priest; but it is so absurd that you dare
not avouch it. For then the very body and blood of Christ should have been
actually and substantially existent, before it was conceived in the womb of
the Virgin Mary. Thus say what you can, you are quite overthrown.


PHIL. If Melchisedec sacrificed bread and wine, then surely he offered an
unbloody sacrifice; and seeing Christ being a Priest after the order of
Melchisedec must needs have the essential properties of that Order; therefore
Christ offered also an unbloody sacrifice.


ORTHOD. Or rather thus, seeing Christ is a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec, he must have all the essential properties belonging to that
Order: but his sacrifice was bloody and not unbloody, for, With his own Heb.
9. 12.
blood has he entered into the most Holy, and has purchased an eternal
redemption for us: therefore to offer an unbloody sacrifice, is no essential
property of the Order of Melchisedec: wherefore if he did so, it follows not
that Christ should do so.


PHIL. It was both bloody and unbloody, bloody upon the Cross, unbloody in
the Eucharist.


ORTHOD. Do you not teach that Christ offered his own body, and blood in the
Eucharist? if he sacrificed his own blood, how can that sacrifice be
unbloody?


PHIL. His blood was shed and sacrificed in the Eucharist in an unbloody
manner; that is, in the form of bread and wine.


ORTHO. The Scripture says that Christ was Once offered, and that with Heb.
10. 14
once offering he has Consecrated for ever them that are sanctified: and this
offering is called the blood of the Colos. 1. 20
Cross, not the blood of the Eucharist, but the blood of the Cross.


PHIL. Will you deny the blood and sacrifice of the Eucharist?


ORTHOD. Christ says, Luke 22. 19
Do this in remembrance of me; therefore in the Eucharist there is a
memorial of Christ, even of his body and blood, which were sacrificed for us
upon the Cross once for all, as has been already proved. Therefore the
blood was shed and sacrificed upon the Cross, properly and substantially: in
the Eucharist improperly and in a mystery, by way of commemoration an
representation, as shall appear more amply, when we come to the point.


PHIL. ANother difference between Aaron and Melchisedec, is thus set 6
down by Bell* quo supra.
Bellarmine: Estetia^ alia differentia inter Sacerdotium Melchisedechi and
Aaronis, quod illud fuit vnius tantu^ hominis qui non successit alteri, and cui
non successit alter: istud autem fuit multorum, qui per mortem sibi inuicem
succedebant, i. There is an other difference between the Priesthood of
Melchisedec, and of Aaron; that the former was only of one man who succeeded
not an other, and to whom no man succeeded, but the latter was of many men
which succeeded one another by death, where we may observe two properties of
the Priesthood of Melchisedec, unity and eternity.


ORTH. The first property belongs most aptly to Christ, who alone has
offered himself a sweet smelling sacrifice to God for us; but to your Popish
Priests it cannot agree; because they are many: for if the Priests should be
many, then this unity of the Priest could not be a property of the Priesthood:
therefore this unity is directly against you: Now let us see what you can
conclude from the eternity.


PHIL. If Christ have an everlasting Priesthood, then he must have an
everlasting sacrifice: for every Priest must have a sacrifice, or else the
Priesthood should be idle: but the sacrifice of the Cross was not everlasting,
for it was but once offered, therefore there must needs be another sacrifice of
the New Testament, that is, the sacrifice of the Mass wherein the sacrifice of
Christ is continued for ever, and so our Priesthood is proved.


ORTHOD. Proved? how is it proved? the scripture says that Christ, because he
Heb. 7. 24.
indureth for ever has an everlasting Priesthood: he indureth for ever; he
even he, in his own person: and therefore has no need of you to continue his
Sacrifice. For Christ is a Priest for ever. First in respect of his own
Sacrifice upon the Cross. Secondly, in respect of his intercession. In respect
of the Sacrifice, which though it were but once offered, yet it is an
everlasting Sacrifice, because the virtue of it is everlasting, and continues
effectual for ever, for as he is the Revel. 13. 8.
lamb slain from the beginning of the world, so he is Jesus Christ Heb. 13.
8.
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever; Heb. 9. 12.
neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood entered he
once into the holy place, and has obtained an eternal redemption for us.


PHIL. As he is a Priest properly for ever, so he must for ever offer a
Sacrifice; But he has no more Sacrifice to offer in his own person: therefore
he must offer it by another.


ORTH. Your own Anglor. in Heb. 5. 6.
Rhemists affirm that Christ was a Priest from the first moment of his
conception. Now what if one should reason thus with you? if he be a Priest, he
must offer a Sacrifice: but in the Virgins womb he offered no Sacrifice,
therefore then he was no Priest. Or thus; till he was thirty three years old
he offered no Sacrifice, therefore all that while he was no Priest, what would
you answer?


PHIL. I would say that Christ was truly then a Priest, in respect of that
Sacrifice of his body and blood which he offered in due time.


ORTHOD. If he were a Priest in the womb of the Virgin, in respect of that
Sacrifice which was then to come; why may he not be called a Priest till the
end of the world, in respect of the same Sacrifice already offered? and as he
is a Priest for ever in respect of his Sacrifice, so he is a Priest for ever in
regard of his intercession. For his Priesthood has two parts, Redemption, and
Intercession. It behooved our high Priest first to purchase our redemption by
his blood, secondly to apply his precious merits unto us by his intercession,
and both these are set down by Saint John: if any man sin, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the
Propitiation for our sins. Who is our advocate? even he that has sacrificed
his blood a propitiation for our sins, he is our advocate, and Heb. 9. 24.
appears in heaven to make intercession for us. Romans 8. 33.
Who shall now lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn us? It is Christ which is dead, yea rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes intercession
for us, And seeing we have a Heb. 7. 26.
high Priest made higher then the heavens, who ever lives to make intercession
for us, In this respect he may well be said to be a Priest for ever, and
needs not your Massemongers to continue his Sacrifice. Wherefore it is
evident that your sacrificing priestood cannot be grounded upon the type of
Melchisedec. Which may yet appear more fully, because the Apostle to the Chap.
7.
Hebrews speaking very particularly of this Type says not one word concerning
his Sacrifice, but vnfouldeth it in these branches following. First,
Melchisedec signifies King of righteousness, therein being a type of Christ
Jesus, who is Ierem. 23. 6.
the Lord our righteousness. Secondly, Melchisedec was King of Salem, that is,
king of peace: So Isa 9 6.
Christ Jesus is the Prince of peace: Ephesians. 2. 14.
for he is our peace which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of
the partition wall, in abrogating through his flesh the hatred, that is, the
law of commandments which stands in ordinances, for to make of twain one
new man in himself, so making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto
God in one body by his Cross, and slay hatred thereby, and came and Preached
peace to you which were a far off, and to them that were near. Thirdly,
Melchisedec was both King and Priest: so was Christ Jesus. Fourthly,
Melchisedec blessed Abraham: and the blessing of God comes through Christ
Jesus upon all the sons of Abraham, that is upon all believers. For we ought
all to say with the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed
us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ. Fifthly,
Melchisedec received tithes of Abraham, and consequently, even Leui being as
yet in the loins of Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedec; Whereby was signified
that the Priesthood of Christ who was after the order of Melchisedec, was far
more excellent then the Priesthood of Aaron. Sixthly, Melchisedec was without
father, without mother, without kindred, not simply, but is said to be so, in
respect of the silence of the Scripture which brings him in suddenly, making
no mention at all of father, mother, or kindred, thereby representing Christ
Jesus, who as he was man, had no father; as he was God had no mother nor
kindred. Seventhly, Melchisedec had neither beginning of days, nor end of life:
That is, the Scripture does not mention the one nor the other, that therein he
might be a representation of the eternity of Christ Jesus, who as he is God,
is from everlasting to everlasting. Thus the Scripture unfolds the type of
Melchisedec, plentifully and particularly, and yet says not one word
concerning his sacrificing, which is an evident argument that it is a mere
devise and imagination of man's brain.


PHIL. The Apostles silence is no sufficient argument against it. For he
renders a reason why he was enforced to omit diverse deep points concerning
Melchisedec. A high Priest, according to the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 5. 11.
of whom we have great speech, and inexplicable to utter: because you are
become weak to hear? Anglor. in Heb. 5. 11.
Among which no doubt (say the Rhemists) the mystery of the Sacrament, and
Sacrifice of the Altar called Mass was a principal and pertinent matter; And
indeed it was not reasonable to talk much to them of that Sacrifice which was
the resemblance of Christ's death, when they thought not right of Christ's death
it self.


ORTHOD. We do not ground upon the silence of the Apostle only, but of the
silence of all the Apostles and Prophets. There is not a word in the whole
Bible to declare that Melchisedec was a type of Christ in offering such an
unbloody Sacrifice in the forms of Bread and Wine, and this very silence is
like the voice of a Trumpet proclaiming unto the world, that Popery is the mere
invention of man, and shall wither in the root from whence it sprung. For every
plant which our heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted out.


PHIL. Do not the Fathers make this a type of the Eucharist? And wherein can
it consist, but in an oblation or sacrifice?


ORTHOD. First, some of the Fathers say not that Melchisedec offered this Bread
and wine to God but to Abraham. Secondly, those which say it was offered unto
God as a Sacrifice* may mean an Eucharisticall Sacrifice, and not a
propitiatory. Thirdly, if any of the Fathers say that he offered a
propitiatory Sacrifice, yet it follows not that because they make the
oblation of Melchisedec a Type of the Eucharist, that therefore in the
Eucharist there is a propitiatory Sacrifice: for those which hold so, must
make a double oblation of this Bread and Wine, by Melchisedec: the first to
God, by way of Sacrifice: the second to Abraham, and the army in the manner of
a banquet: the first might have relation to Christ upon the Cross: the second
to the Eucharist. Fourthly, your Popish massing Sacrifice, presupposes
transubstantiation, which is contrary to Christ's institution of the Eucharist,
as in due place shall be declared: Wherefore those fathers which understand the
Eucharist, according to Christ's institution, cannot refer the type of
Melchisedec to any transubstantiate Sacrifice.


CHAP. III.
Of their argument drawn from the Paschall Lamb.

PHIL. THe Sacrifice of the Mass, and consequently the office of the Priest or
Sacrificer, is proved by an argument drawn from the Paschall Lamb. And first
it is clear by the Scripture, that the Paschal Lamb was a Sacrifice. For we
read in Exodus 12. 21.
Exodus. Take you for every of your houshoulds a lamb, and immolate the
Passover. And again, Exodus 12. 27.
You shall slay it, it is the Victime or Sacrifice of the Lords Passover. And
in the 9. of Numbers, Number. 9. 6.
Certain men were defiled by a dead man, that they might not keep the
Passover the same day, and they came before Moses, and before Aaron the same
day. And those men said unto him, we are defiled by a dead man: Wherefore are we
kept back that we may not offer an offering unto the Lord, in the time thereunto
appointed? And again, Ibid. ^. 13.
But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and is negligent to keep
the Passover, the same person shall be cut off from his people, because he
brought not the Sacrifice of the Lord in his due season. And in the Gospel of
S. Mark. Mar. 14. 12
The first day of the Azyms, when they sacrificed the Passover. And S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Our Passover Christ is immolated.


ORTHOD. Admit it were a Sacrifice, what can you conclude?


PHIL. Ex Bell. de miss. l. 1. cap. 7.
The celebration of the Paschall Lamb was an express figure of the
celebration of the Eucharist: Therefore if the Paschal Lamb, were a Sacrifice,
the Eucharist likewise must be a Sacrifice; that there may be a correspondency
between the figure, and the thing figured.


ORTHOD. As other ceremonies of the Law, so the Paschall Lamb was most
evidently and expressly a figure of Christ, and therefore was fulfilled in the
passion of Christ.


PHIL. The Ibidem.
ceremony of the Paschal Lamb, was more immediately and more principally a
figure of the Eucharist, then of the passion, as may appear by four
circumstances. First, the Paschal Lamb was to be eaten the fourteenth day of
the month at even, and at the same time Christ instituted the Eucharist: but
the passion was deferred until the day following.


ORTHOD. Because the Eucharist was to succeed the passover, therefore the
wisdom of God so disposed that it should be instituted at the celebration of
the passover. But this does not prove that the Passover was more principally
a figure of the Eucharist, then of the passion: for what says the Scripture?
Ioh. ^. ^9.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. How does he
take away the sins of the world? Is it not by his death and passion, as it is
written, Ephe. 1. 7.
we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins,
according to his rich grace: And again, Reu. 13. 8.
He is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, therefore the
substance of the Type consisted in this, that he was slain, which was not in
the Eucharist, but upon the Cross. Which is most evidently set down by the
Evangelist Saint John, who renders this reason, Ioh. 19. 36.
why his legs were not broken, because it is written, there shall not a bone
of him be broken.


PHIL. Secondly, Bell. ibid deinde.
The Lamb was offered in remembrance of the Lords passing over, and the
deliverance of the people: and the Eucharist is celebrated in memory of the
Lords passing out of this world to his father, by his passion, and of our
deliverance from the power of Satan, by the death of Christ.


ORTHOD. If both be memorialls of our deliverance by Christ, then one is not
the body of the other, but the substance of both is Christ.


PHIL. Thirdly, Ex Bell. ibid.
the Lamb was offered that it might be eaten, and so is the Eucharist: but
Christ was not crucified that he might be eaten, neither was there any then
which ate him after he was so Sacrificed.


ORTHOD. If the Lamb were properly offered, then it was more truly a Type of
Christ, then of the Eucharist. For the Scripture witnesses that Christ was
offered upon the Cross, but it witnesses no such thing concerning the
Eucharist: only Christ says, Luc. 22. 19.
do this in remembrance of me. Whereby we learn that the Eucharist is not an
oblation but a memorial of Christ's oblation. Now whereas you say that Christ
was not crucified that he might be eaten: Christ himself says, John 6. 53.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you* Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. And a little
before, John 6. 51*
The bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.


PHIL. That may be meant of his flesh in the Eucharist.


ORTHO. In Ioh. tract. 26.
Saint Austin shows the contrary in these words. De mensa dominica sumitur,
quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: res vero ipsa cutus sacramentum est,
omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque eius particeps fuerit. i.
Some receive the sacrament from the Lords Table unto life, some unto
destruction, but the thing it self whose sacrament it is, is to every one that
is partaker thereof unto life, and to none unto destruction. And so is the flesh
here spoken of. ^. Christ crucified, which is meat not for the body, but for
the soul, to be eaten, not with the teeth, but with the heart, by a lively
faith both in the Eucharist, and without it.


PHIL. Ex Bell. ibid.
Fourthly, the Paschall Lamb could not be eaten, saving only of the
circumcised and clean, and in Jerusalem: so the Eucharist cannot be received,
but only of the baptized, and clean, and in the Church: sed etiam alij
possunt ac debent Christum vt in cruce immolatum fide manducare. i. But others
also may and ought to eat Christ by faith, as he is offered upon the Cross.


ORTHOD. Can the unclean eat Christ by faith? This is contrary to the
Scripture, which teaches, Act. 15. 9.
That God by faith does purify the heart. Again, No unclean thing shall
enter the kingdom of Heaven: but every believer shall have life everlasting;
therefore no sound believer is to be reputed unclean.


PHIL. Ex Bell. ibid. illud autem.
Faith goes before both Baptism and Justification; therefore a man may have
faith before he be clean.


ORTHOD. Faith goes before justification, only in the order of nature, and
not in the order of time: but it may go before Baptism even in order of time,
as the Eunuch believed before he was Baptized. But wheresoever it is found, or
whenever, it purifieth the heart, and makes the party clean. Wherefore
notwithstanding all these frivolous objections, it is most sure and certain,
that the Paschall Lamb was most expressly a Type of Christ's Passion.


PHIL. Was it not a Type of the Eucharist also?


ORTHOD. Because they were both representations of Christ, therefore there is
great similitude and correspondencie between them. And because the Passover
gave place to the Eucharist, therefore though most properly and principally it
was a Type of Christ, yet in this respect it may be called a Type of the
Eucharist. But what then? Must it therefore follow, that Christ is properly
sacrificed in the Eucharist? God commanded not only that the Paschall Lamb
should be slain and immolated, but also that it should be eaten. Now the
mactation and immolation was properly fulfilled upon the Cross, where Christ
our 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Passover was sacrificed for us, and not in the Eucharist; The eating or
manducation may be said to be fulfilled in our Spiritual eating of Christ,
both in the Sacrament and without.


CHAP. IIII.
Of their Argument, drawn from certain places of the Prophets.

PHIL. I Will prove it by other testimonies of the Old Testament; And first by
the Prophecy of that man of God that came to Eli, 1. Sam. 2. 35.
I will stir me up a faithful Priest that shall do according to my heart,
and according to my mind, and he shall walk before mine Anointed for ever.


ORTHOD. This was fulfilled both in Samuel and Sadock: in Samuel who succeeded
Eli; in Sadock who succeeded Abiathar, who was of the race of Eli: For 1 King.
2. 27.
Solomon cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, that the word of
the Lord might be fulfilled which he spoke against the house of Eli in Shilo.


PHIL. Ex Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 9. De ciuitate Dei. l. 17. c. 3.
S. Austine answers to this objection, that this Prophecy was fulfilled in
Samuel or Sadock, insomuch as they did carry the figure of Christian Priests.
And so the casting out of Eli, was a figure of the casting out of the
Aaronicall Priesthood: and the taking in of Samuel and Sadoc, was a figure of
the assuming of the Christian Priesthood; Which he proves, because the
Scripture when it says, that Eli was to be cast out with his fathers,
speaks plainly of Aaron. For it names him, who was appointed of God the
first Priest at their departing out of Egypt.


ORTHOD. Suppose all this were granted: what can you conclude? if the Lord
promised, that he will raise himself up a faithful Priest, and thereby
signified a Christian Priest, does it therefore follow, that he speaks of a
Popish Priest?


PHIL. That the Lord meant a Priest properly, may appear by the Prophet Esaias,
who prophesying of the time of the New Testament, says, Esaias 19. 19.
In that day shall the Altar of the Lord be in the midst of the land of
Egypt. And again, Verse 21.
The Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and do Sacrifice and oblation.
And again, Esaias 61. 6.
Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, and men shall say unto you, the
Ministers of our God.


ORTHOD. These may be expounded by other places of the same Prophet, Esaias 66.
20.
They shall bring all your brethren, for an offering unto the Lord Where it is
clear, that the Prophet speaks of Spiritual offerings, which are offered by
the Ministers of the Gospel, As S. Paul Romans 15. 16.
does testify, That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable to
God, being sanctified by the holy Chost. Which conversion of the Gentiles, the
Prophet describes by allusion to the Leuiticall sacrifices, Esaias 60. 7.
All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee: the Rams of Nebaioth
shall serve thee: they shall come up to be accepted upon mine Altar: and I
will beautify the house of my Glory. Likewise the Prophet David; Psalm. 51. 19.
Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of Righteousness, even the burnt offering
and Oblation: then shall they offer calves upon thine Altar. Where by calves,
he understands the calves of the lips; that is, the sacrifice of Prayer, and
Thanksgiving. The burnt offering also is to be expounded in the like manner,
and therefore he calls them sacrifices of Righteousness. And a little before
he said, Verse 17.
The sacrifices of God, are a contrite spirit. And as our Spiritual sacrifices
are expressed by allusion to the Leuitical: so the Ministers of the Gospel are
by like allusion called Priests and Levites, Esaias 66. 21.
I will take of them for Priests and Leuits, says the Lord. Which cannot be
meant of Priests properly, for then the word Leuite should likewise be taken
properly; but I hope you will not say that your Mass Priests are properly of
the tribe of Leui. By these plain places we may expound the former by you
alleged.


PHIL. NAy, they are Priests properly in regard of an external sacrifice 2
properly so called, which they offer properly, as is evident by the Prophet
Malachie, Mala. 1. 11.
From the rising up of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my Name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered up to my
Name, and a pure offering, for my Name is great among the Gentiles, says the
Lord of Hosts.


ORTHOD. The Priests here spoken of, are called the sons of Leui: are your
Mass Priests properly the sons of Leui?


PHIL. Of Leui? No sir. But they are called so by way of allusion.


ORTHOD. Then may they be called Priests also by way of allusion.


PHIL. Not so: for here is mention of their offering, which is called A pure
offering.


ORTHOD. That is to be expounded of Spiritual offerings in the judgment of
the Fathers. Iren. aduers. haeres. l. 4. c. 33.
Irenaeus says, In omni loco incensum offertur nomini meo, and sacrificium
purum. Incensa autem Ioannes in Apocalypsi, orationes esse ait sanctorum; That
is, In every place incense is offered to my Name, and a pure sacrifice. But
John in the Apocalypse says, Incense is the prayers of Saints. And August.
contr. aduers. Leg. and Proph. l. 1. c. 20.
Austen speaking of this very place of Malachy says, Incensum quod graece
Thymiama sicut exponit Johannes in Apocalypsi Orationes sunt sanctorum, that
is, Incense which in Greek is Thymiama, as John expounds it in the
Apocalypse, is the prayers of the Saints. So H^er in Mal. cap. 1.
Jerome says, Thymiama, hoc est sanctorum orationes; Incense, that is the
prayers of the Saints. Demonst. Euang. l. 1. p. 14. Lutetiae. per. R. Step.
1548.
Eusebius calls it, (...) the incense of prayers. Yea Mal. 3. 3.
Malachy himself says: the Lord shall purify the sons of Leui as gold and
silver, that they may offer an offering to the Lord in righteousness.


PHIL. The words, sacrifice, oblation, and such like, when they are taken
spiritually, are always restrained with some addition: as the sacrifice of
prayer, of thanksgiving etc. But here the Prophet says only a pure offering
without any addition, or limitation. Now Alan. de Euch. sacrif. l. 2. c. 5.
the word so taken by it self without any restraining terms, is always in
the Scripture taken properly for the act of outward sacrifice.


ORTHOD. That rule is not generally true, for the Prophet Esaias Esaias 66. 20
says, They shall bring of their brethren for an offering to the Lord o^t of
all Nations: where he uses the very same word that Malachi here uses, and yet
it is not meant that the Gentiles shall be offered carnally but spiritually.


PHIL. Alan. ibid.
This sacrifice of which the Prophet speaks, is one: but the spiritual
sacrifices are so many as are the good works of Christianity.


ORTHO. Though the word used by the Prophet, be of the singular number, yet by
that offering many offerings may be signified, as when it is said Heb. 10. 8.
Sacrifice and offering thou would not have.


PHIL. Ex Alano, quo supra.
Spiritual sacrifices are common to us with the Jews, but the Prophet
speaks of an oblation not common, but proper to the Gentiles, and the new law.


ORTHOD. They might every where pray and praise God, as well as we, but this
was not a discharge of their duty, unless to these spiritual sacrifices,
they annexed Carnal; to be offered at the time and place appointed; so their
spiritual sacrifices were mixed, but ours are merely spiritual, and these are
proper to the Gospel.


PHIL. The Alanus quo supra.
offering spoken of by Malachi, does succeed the offerings of the Jews, and is
offered in their place: but prayer, fasting and the works of charity succeed
no sacrifices, but are joined with all kinds and sorts of sacrifices.


ORTHO. Though the spiritual sacrifices of the Jews, and of the Christians
were all one in substance; yet they differed in manner, because (as I said)
theirs were mixtly, ours merely spiritual; and the merely succeed the mixed.


PHIL. Our Alanus quo supra.
good works, how beautiful soever they seem, are stained and unclean,
especially in the judgment of heretics, but this prophetical oblation is
clean of it self, and so clean in respect of other sacrifices, that it
cannot be polluted by us, nor by any Priests, how wicked soever they are.


ORTHOD. Are all our spiritual offerings unclean? then all our good works
are imperfect: and if they be imperfect, they cannot justify, they are not
meritorious, nor satisfactory.


PHIL. And if they be clean, as they must be, if they be the pure offering
mentioned in Malachi, then may they justify, then are they meritorious and
satisfactory.


ORTHO. Not so, for they are clean but imperfectly; they are clean because
they proceed from the Chrystalline fountain of the spirit of grace; they are
imperfect, because they are wrought by the will of man, which is regenerate
only in part, and so the pure Water gathers mud, because it runs through
a muddie channel.


PHIL. If they be muddie, how can they be called the pure offering in Malachi?


ORTHOD. Because the denomination is of the worthier part, and the graces of
God in his children are like unto the Pro. 4. 18.
light which shines more and more unto the perfect day: and though the flesh
rebelleth against the spirit, yet at length the spirit shall have the victory,
and the flesh shall be abolished. In the mean time though our good works be
stained with the flesh, yet God looks not upon them as an angry Judge, but as
a loving Father crowning his own graces in us, and pardoning our offenses. Now
because they are imperfect, they cannot justify, merit, nor satisfy, yet
because they are Gods graces, they are the pure offering in Malachi.


PHIL. Christ himself may seem to expound the Prophet Malachi, as we do, and
withal to prophecy of the sacrifice of the mass in these words to the woman
of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 23.
The hour comes, and now it is, when the true adorers shall adore the Father
in spirit and verity, for the Father also seeks such to adore him. Bell. de
miss. l. 1. c. 11.
For in this place by adoration is not meant every adoration, but solemn and
public, which is by sacrifice properly so called, which may be proved because
the Samaritane speaks of adoration tied to a certain place; Ioh. 4. 20.
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship, which cannot be meant but only of adoration
by sacrifice, and therefore if Christ answer the point, he must likewise
speak of adoration by sacrifice.


ORTHOD. Christ answered her question directly, when he said Verse. 22.
You adore that you know not, we adore that we know, for salvation is of the
Jews, thereby teaching, that the Jews which sacrificed at Jerusalem, did
according to knowledge, grounded upon the word of God: but the Samaritanes
which sacrificed in mount Garizim, had not the true knowledge of God: and when
he had thus answered her question, concerning adoration by external
sacrifice, he took occasion to declare the adoration which should be in the
New Testament, not by external sacrifices, but in spirit and truth: as though
he should say the place of solemn worship was Jerusalem, the manner, by
sacrifice; but now approaches the time of the New Testament, wherein true
worshippers, that is, all true Christians shall worship God, both privately
and publikelie, not only at Jerusalem, but every where, not by external
sacrifices, which were corporal and Typical, as in the time of the Law, but
in spirit and truth, every where lifting up holy and pure hands unto the Lord
of heaven. So this place affoards small comfort, either for the Mass or the
Massmonger.


CHAP. V
Of their argument drawn from the words of the institution of the Eucharist.

PHIL. THE words of institution yield invincible proof, that Christ at his
last Supper sacrificed his very body and blood under the forms of bread and
wine, to God the Father, and commanded his Apostles and their successors to
do the same unto the end of the world.


ORTHO. First you must prove that the very body and blood of Christ were under
the forms of bread and wine, or else you will come short of your sacrifice.


PHIL. That is plain by the words of Christ: This is my body; This is my
blood. For he spoke of those things which he had in his hands, and he calls
them his body and blood, but to outward appearance there was only bread and
wine: therefore seeing the words of our Savior must needs be true, it
follows, that the very body and blood of Christ were under the appearance of
bread and wine.


ORTHOD. The words of our Savior are most true, in that sense wherein he meant
them: But it was his will that they should be taken Sacramentally, and not
Substantially; which will appear if Scripture be expounded by Scripture, and
Sacraments by Sacraments. To begin with Circumcision, the Lord said: Genes.
17. 10
This is my Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, and thy seed
after thee: let every man child be circumcised: hoc est foedus meum, this thing
is my Covenant: what thing? that every man child be circumcised: therefore
Circumcision is called the Covenant. But is it the covenant properly? it is
impossible; therefore it is improperly and figuratively: for so God himself
expounds it. Verse. 11.
You shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of the
Covenant between me and you. Therefore Circumcision is called the Covenant,
because it is a sign of the Covenant. But is it a bare and naked sign? not
so, for the Apostle says, Romans 4. 11.
he received the sign of Circumcision as the seal of righteousness of the
faith which he had when he was yet uncircumcised: so circumcision was not only
a sign to signify, but also a seal to confirm unto him the righteousness
of faith, that is, the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, and
imputed to all that believe. Neither was this seal only promissory, but also
exhibitory, delivering unto them Christ Jesus with all his blessings. From
Circumcision let us come to the Passover: Exodus 12. 11.
You shall eat it in have, for it is the Lords Passover. what shall they eat?
was it not a Lamb? there a Lamb is the Lords Passover. But why is it so
called? The Lord himself expounds it, saying, Verse. 13.
the blood shall be a token for you: so the Lamb is called a Passover,
because it was a token, that is, a sign and a seal of the Lords passing over
them. From the ordinary Sacraments of the Old Testament, let us come to the
extraordinary. Saint Paul speaking of the Rock, says, 1. Cor. 10. ^
and this Rock was Christ; g Petra Christus ^n signo* tract. in John. 26*
which Saint Austine expounds truly and learnedly: not in substance but in
signification. From the Sacraments of the Old Testament, let us come to the
new. In the 6. to the Romans it is said, Romans 6. 4.
we are buried with him by baptism into his death: upon which Saint Aug. ep.
23.
Austine says: the Apostle says not we signify the burial, but he says
flatly we are buried together with him: so he called the Sacrament of so
great a thing, no otherwise then by the name of the thing it self. To which
agrees your own Jesuit; Tollet. in Romans c. 6.
Baptizati vna cum Christo sepeliuntur, idest, Christi sepulturam representant.
That is, those that are baptized are buried together with Christ, that is, they
represent the burial of Christ From Baptism let us come to the Lords Supper,
which consists of two courses; the Bread representing his Body, and the Wine
representing his Blood, the former may be expounded by the latter. For Christ
calls Luke 20. 22.
This Cup The new Testament, because it is a sign and seal of the new
Testament. Therefore when it is said this is my Body, and this is my Blood: the
words must likewise be taken, figuratively; and sacramentally; as though it
were said: this Bread and this Wine, is a sign and a seal of my Body and
Blood. Yea these very words, this is my Body, may be expounded by the like
words, signifying the same thing: 1. Cor. 10. 16.
the Bread that we break is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? which
word Communion must of necessity be taken figuratively, and sacramentally,
for a sign and seal of this Communion. The Apostles were well acquainted with
this figure and used it themselves before the institution of the Sacrament; for
they said unto Jesus, Mat. 26. 17.
where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover? by Passover
meaning the Paschall Lamb, which was a sign and memorial of the Passover.
Thus the whole course of Scripture proclaims, that these words this is my
body, must not be expounded Substantially, but Sacramentally. So the meaning
is: this is my body, that is, this Bread is a Sign, Seal, and Sacrament of my
Body.


PHIL. When it is said, hoc est Corpus meum; this is my body, the Bell. de
Euchar. l. 1. c. 10.
opinion of Catholics is, that the word (this) does not demonstrate the Bread.


ORTHOD. Why then says the Mark 14. 12.
Scripture, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he brake it and gave it
to them* saying, take, eat, this is my Body. First, he took; what took he?
he took Bread, material Bread, such as was upon the Table. After he had
taken, he blessed; what did he bless? be blessed that which he took; but
that was material Bread, therefore he blessed the material Bread. After he
had blessed, he brake and gave; what did he break and give? the same which
he had blessed, therefore as he blessed the material Bread, so he brake and
gave the material Bread; when he gave he said, take and eat: what should
they take and eat but that which he gave? therefore seeing he gave material
Bread, he commanded them likewise to take and to eat the material Bread.
When he had said take and eat, he added imediately, this is my Body. This?
what this? this that he had taken, this that he had blessed, this that he had
broken? this that he gave them, this that he commanded them to take and eat.
This, and nothing but this, he calls his Body. But this was material Bread,
as has been proved, and therefore when he said this is my Body, the Pronoune
(this) did demonstrate the material Bread.


2. PHIL. HE Respondes, dominum accepisse ac benedix^sse panem, sed dedisse
pane^, non vulgar^m, vt acceperat, sed benedictum, and benedictione mutatum.
Bell. de Euch. l. 1. c. 11.
took bread, and blessed bread, but after the blessing, it was changed.


ORTHOD. As the Paschall Lamb was changed, when of a common Lamb, it was made
a Type of the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: or as the
water of Baptism is changed, when of common water, it is made a holy
representation of the blood of Christ: So the Bread and Wine are changed in the
Lords Supper, that is, in use, not in substance, for before they be brought to
the Lords Table, they are common Bread and common Wine, for the feeding of the
body, but when they are sanctified according to Christ's institution, then the
God of heaven sets another stamp upon them, and makes them a Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: yet as the lamb still remained a lamb in
substance: as the water even in the action of Baptizing, still remains water
in substance: so the Bread and Wine still retain their former substance, even
after the blessing. For Christ did break the Bread after he had blessed it,
yet still it was Bread, as the Apostle witnesses, saying, the 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Bread that we break. Yea the Communicants do eat it after it is broken, and
still it is Bread, even in the mouths of the Communicants, For S. Paul says,
1. Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of this Bread. Neither is it
called Bread, because it was bread, but because it is Bread, not in name only,
but in nature and properties. For after Consecration it nourishes the body as
before, it is subject to fall upon the ground, to be eaten of Mice, to be
devoured of Beasts, to be burned in the fire, to be turned to ashes, and to
suffer putrefaction: which cannot be affirmed of the body of Christ, because
Psalm. 16. 10. Act. 2. 27.
that holy one shall not see corruption: so the wine after Consecration, does
not only nourish and comfort the heart, but if the Priest drink too much of
it, it will intoxicate his brain, yea and if it be kept too long, it will be
turned to vinegar, and putrify. All which things do argue, that the elements
do still retain the true nature and substance of Bread and Wine, and are not
changed into the body and blood of Christ, in corporal manner by virtue of the
blessing. But that we may understand this the better, I pray you, tell me what
is meant by the blessing.


PHIL. THe blessing is the same with Consecration, and was performed 4
in these words, this is my Body.


ORTHOD. The Scripture expounds blessing by thanksgiving. For Saint Mat. 26.
26.
Matthew, Saint Luke 22. 19
Luke and Saint 1. Cor. 11. 24.
Paul say, that when Christ had given thanks he brake the bread, Saint Mar.
14. 22. (...).
Mark says, that when he had blessed, he brake it. So Matthew, Mark, Luke
and Paul, say that when Christ had given thanks, he gave the Cup, and
mention not the blessing of it: Yet Saint 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Paul elsewhere calls it the Cup of blessing. Likewise whereas Saint Luke
12. 16.
Luke says, that Christ took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looked
up to heaven, and blessed them: Saint Ioh. 6. 11.
John says, that Jesus took the bread, and gave thanks; whereby it is
evident, that the holy Ghost uses the word blessing, and thanksgiving
indifferently. But withal we must observe that under the word thanksgiving,
is comprehended prayer. As when the 1. Tim. 4. 5.
Apostle teaches us to receive the creature with thanksgiving, he renders
this reason, because it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Where it
is plain that thanksgiving in the former place, comprehends prayer, and the
word Prayer used in the latter place, comprehends thanksgiving: as though
the Apostle should have said; we on our part must receive the creature with
prayer and thanksgiving, because it is sanctified as on Gods part, by his word
and ordinance, so on our part, by prayer and thanksgiving. Secondly, we must
observe that the creature may be sanctified to a double use: That is, either
corporal or spiritual, and to both by prayer, and thanksgiving. Thirdly,
that the sanctifying of a creature is in the Scripture called blessing, as when
it is said, the Lord blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Now our Lord
Jesus intending to institute a Sacrament, took the bread and gave thanks, not
only for the bread, but especially for the redemption of the Church, and prayed
that these elements of Bread and Wine, might be everlastingly sanctified to
Sacramental use, thus the Bread and Wine were blessed. And whereas you with
Bell. de Sacr. Euchar. l. 4. c. 13
Bellarmine and others say, that this blessing was performed by these words,
this is my Body, it cannot be; For the blessing was finished, before those
words were uttered. Saint Mark says, that Mark. 14. 22.
when he had blessed the Bread, he brake it, by which it is evident that the
blessing was accomplished before the bread was broken, and it is manifest that
he brake it before he gave it, therefore the blessing was finished before the
Bread was given. But he gave it, saying, take eat, this is my body, therefore
the blessing was finished before he said, this is my body. Now how is it
possible that he should bless by those words seeing the blessing was fully
ended before those words were begun? Wherefore Cardinal In Mat. c. 26
Caietan does rightly call it, benedictionem laudis, non Consecrationis. i. the
blessing of praise, and not of Consecration. But if we should imagine, that he
blessed by saying, this is my body, would not this imagination inuert the order
of the actions of Christ?


PHIL. THere are many Hysterologies in holy Scripture, and therefore 5
no marvel if there be one here. Now the words and actions of Christ, reduced
to their natural Method, are thus to be ordered. Durantus de rit. Eccle.
Cath. l. 2. c. 38. n. 19.
He took the Bread and when he had blessed, saying, this is my body, he
brake it and gave it saying, take and eat.


ORTHOD. Aquinas says, that these words were uttered Aquin. in Ep. 1. ad cor.
c. 11. Lect. 5.
non consequenter sed concomitanter: meaning that he blessed by these words,
this is my body, yet so, that the words were in pronouncing all the while that
he brake and gave the Bread. But this vanishes of it self, because, as has
been proved out of the text, the blessing was finished, before the words were
begun. Cardinal Bessar. de Euchar.
Bessarion orders them thus: he took the bread, and when he had blessed,
saying, take eat, this is my body, he brake it and gave it. But this may also
be confuted by the same reason: and moreover it contains an absurdity; for
so he should bid them take it before he gave it. And thirdly, if he blessed,
saying, take eat, this is my body, then take and eat, are words of blessing
as well as this is my body. Now you with Durantus order them thus: he took the
bread, and when he had blessed, saying, this is my body: he brake it, and gave
it, and said, take and eat: but this is also confuted by the same argument
drawn from the blessing. Secondly, the word ( saying) which is but once in the
Text, by ordering them thus, is used twice. Thirdly, the words, Take, eat,
which Christ used first, are put last. Fourthly, whereas Christ spoke all in
one continual sentence, the sentence is dismembered, and torn into two. These
inconveniences, your own Doctors Sotus and Caietanus did see, and avoid. For
as your learned Christof. Archiep. Caesariensis de cap. fontium in varijs tra^l.
Archbishop affirms, in his Epistle to Pope Sixtus Quintus, Hi tenent eundem
fuisse ordinem rerum, and narrationis Euangelicae; That is, They hold that the
actions of Christ were done in the same order, wherein they are reported by the
Evangelists. But let us feign that the words and actions are to be ordered, as
you would have them: yet notwithstanding, by the word hoc, must needs be meant
the Bread: for if he took the bread and blessed it, saying, Thus is my body,
what can be meant by the Pronoune thus, but only this bread?


PHIL. THe Pronoune this, cannot demonstrate the Bread: Bell. de sacram.
Euch^^. l. 1. c. 10.
for Bread is 6
the Masculine gender, both in Greek and Latin. But the Pronoune, this, is
the Neuter gender (...) in Greek, and hoc in Latin. Which agrees in Gender
with the word body, which both in Greek and Latin, is the Newter gender.


ORTHOD. Indeed if you take it adiectiuely, it cannot concord, and therefore it
is not so to be taken, but substantiuely, and might be Englished, This thing is
my body.


PHIL. If you take it so, you make an absurd Proposition: For a Bell. ibid.
thing that is seen and openly known, cannot be termed this thing, unless
that thing be of the Neuter gender: for no man when he demonstrateth his
brother, will say, this thing is my brother, or demonstrating the Image of
Caesar, will say, This thing is Caesar: therefore neither could it be rightly
said of the Bread, which the disciples did see, This thing is my body. The
reason is, because the subiectum of the Proposition should be better known
then the praedicatum, therefore when the subiectum is known to the hearers in
particular, it ought not to be uttered by a name that is general, but then
only it ought to be uttered by a name that is general, when it is not known,
but only in general. As for example; Certain men see a thing afar of, but
yet they discern not what it is, whether a tree, a stone, or a man, but I see
that it is a man; Wherefore I will say to the rest, that thing is a man, and
not he is a man; But if they see him to be a man, yet do not discern who it
is, Peter or Paul, or some other, I will not say, that thing is Peter, because
they know it already to be a man; But I will say he is Peter. Therefore seeing
the disciples did see the Bread, and were not ignorant that it was Bread, it
had been a most absurd speech, if of that Bread the Lord had said, This thing
is my body, when he should have said, This Bread is my body: therefore it
cannot be that the word hoc, should demonstrate the Bread as the subject of
the Proposition.


ORTHO. A thing that is seen and openly known, may be expressed by a Pronoune
of the Neuter gender, without absurdity, although the thing it self be not
of the Neuter gender. As for example; When the Lord brought the woman unto the
man, he said, Gene. 2. 22.
Hoc nunc est os ex ossibus meis, i. Now this is bone of my bones. For what
think you is meant by hoc?


PHIL. By hoc undoubtedly is meant the woman; and it is as much as though he
should say (to use the words of Comment. in Gene. l. 4.
Pererius,) Domine Deus, quae prius ad me adduxisti animalia, non erant mihi
similia; haec autem mulier quam nunc ad me adduxisti, est plane similis mei;
That is, O Lord God, The beasts which before thou broughtest unto me, were not
like unto me; but this woman which thou have brought unto me, is very like unto
me.


ORTHOD. If hoc in the words of Adam, may and must be taken for haec mulier,
without any absurdity, Why may not the same hoc in the words of Christ be
taken for hic panis, without any absurdity? For in such cases we must not so
much respect the subtilties of Logic, as the use of Grammar.


PHIL. I Bell. quo supra.
Add a most strong Argument out of the Scripture: for if when it is said, 7.
This is my body, the Pronoune this, demonstrate the Bread; Then when it is
said, this is my blood, the Pronoune this, should demonstrate the Wine. But
Luke 22. 20.
S. Luke denies that, when he says, This is the Chalice, the New Testament
in my blood which is shed for you; Where these words (which is shed) are not
joined in construction with these words (in my Blood,) but with these (this
Chalice,) as it appears out of the Greek: therefore S. Luke says, that the
Chalice was shed for us. Now the vessel or Wine was not shed for us, but the
true blood: therefore the Chalice signifies not a Chalice of Wine, but a
Chalice of Blood.


ORTHOD. This Argument, for all the imagined strength, is but a rotten reed,
whereupon if you lean, you will lie in the ditch, and the trunchion of it will
run into your hands. For the better demonstration whereof, let me first ask
you when, and how the bread is changed into the Body, and the wine into the
Blood?


PHIL. The Council of Trent says, Sess. 13. c. 1. Bin. ^. 4 p. 824.
First of all the holy Synod teaches, and professes openly, That in the
Sacrament of the holy Eucharist, after the Consecration of the Bread and Wine,
our Lord Jesus Christ very God and man, is contained under the forms of these
sensible things, truly, really, and substantially. By which we learn, that
the change is made after the words of Consecration.


ORTHOD. Is it made successively, or in an instant?


PHIL. Bell. de Eucharist. l. 3. c. 24.
Cardinal Bellarmine says, That it is, In vltimo instantiterminatiuo illius
prolationis, i. In the last instant which closes up the pronuntiation of the
words.


ORTHOD. If it be in the last instant, then it is not before the last syllable;
and therefore all the while the Priest is saying, Hoc est corpus me - there is
no change, till he come to the end of - um. And so long as there is no
change, it remains bread in substance, and consequently according to your
own doctrine at the pronouncing of hoc, there is bread in substance, and not
the Body of Christ. Wherefore the Pronoune this, must of necessity demonstrate
bread, and not the Body of Christ; So when it is said, This is my blood, the
Pronoune this, does demonstrate the wine, and not the blood of Christ.


PHIL. That which was shed for us, was the true Blood of Christ, but this
Chalice is said to be shed for us, as may appear by the Greek in that place
of Luke; therefore this Chalice, (that is, that which is contained in the
Chalice) was the true blood of Christ. Now, where S. Luke says, This Chalice
is the New Testament in my Blood, S. Matthew, and S. Mark have, This is my
Blood, understanding by the Pronoune this, the same thing that S. Luke does by
this Chalice; but he meant, as I declared, not a Chalice of Wine, but of Blood:
therefore the Pronoune this, does not demonstrate the Wine, but the Blood.


ORTHOD. The foundation of your Argument is, that this Chalice in S. Luke is
said to be shed for us; but this I deny.


PHIL. It appears by the Greek, (...). Where the participle (...) must be
referred to (...), and so it is to be construed, that the Chalice was shed.


ORTHOD. It pleases the spirit of God in the Greek Testament, sometimes to
depart from that phrase and Analogy of speech, which is usual in other Greek
Authors, either to express some Hebraisme, or for some other reason best
known to his heavenly wisdom: therefore though a participle with an article
praepositiue, should regularly be governed of somewhat going before of the same
case number and gender: yet there are sundry examples in Scripture where it is
otherwise, the Article supplying the place of a relative: as for example,
Revel. 1. 4. 5.
(...). Where according to the ordinary Greek, it should be, (...): ab ente,
but it is, (...). Where the Article praepositiue: stands for a relative, as
though he should say in Latin Ab eo qui est: likewise (...), should be
according to the usual Greek, (...)* but it is (...), which concordeth not
with any thing going before, but the Article (...) stands for a relative as
though it were said in Latin, ab eo qui venturus, the like is to be said of
(...) and of (...). By which it is evident, that the spirit of God departs
from the Analogy of the Greek tongue, and uses sometimes the Article for a
relative, and so it may be used in this place, (...), and may be translated
thus, in sanguine meo qui pro vobis effusus est. Therefore though in another
Author which tied himself to the usual Greek, it were requisite to refer
(...) to (...)* yet in the New Testament there is no such necessity. Wherefore
seeing according to the speech of the holy Ghost, the words stand indifferently
to be referred to both constructions, let us now consider the thing it self,
that so we may find the true construction of the words. The holy Ghost in
these words of Saint Luke declares, what Christ said when he delivered the
cup: the same thing is expressed both in Saint Matthew and Saint Mark, and
both of them use the same participle (...), and refer it clearly and
emdently to blood, both in the Greek and your vulgar Latin, and not unto the
Cup. Whereby we are taught that though in Saint Luke the construction stand
indifferently between the blood and the cup, yet by conference of Scripture,
it is restrained unto the blood, and not unto the cup: so the sense of the
place is, this cup, (that is the wine in this cup) is the New Testament, that
is (a sign and seal of the New Testament) in my blood, which blood is shed
for you. And that it must needs be meant of the cup of wine, may appear by
Saint Matthew, saying, And when he had taken the cup and given thanks, he gave
it them saying, Drink ye all of this. For by your own confession before the
words of Consecration it was wine, but Christ said this before the words of
Consecration, and therefore he spoke of wine: but he adds immediately, for
this (which I give you to drink) is my blood: therefore he calls the wine
his blood; so the pronoune ( this) demonstrateth the wine. For how can it be
otherwise? You confess that it was wine, till the words of Consecration were
ended: but when he said ( this) the words were not ended: and therefore then,
according to your own principles it was wine, which is agreeable to the
Fathers. Tertul. l. 4. cont. Marcionem. p. 879.
Tertullian: why (says he) does Christ call Bread his body? De ^nctione Chris.
7. if it be Cyprians as some of our aduer ^ries urge (...).
Cyprian: Our Lord at his table gave Bread and Wine with his own hands, on the
Cross he yielded his body to the soldiers hands to be wounded, that his
Apostles might teach Nations, how Bread and Wine was his flesh and blood.
Huius conditioins quae est secu^^lum not, acc^piens panem suum corpus
confitebatur. l. 5. c. 57.
Irenaeus: the Lord taking bread of this quality and condition, which is usual
among us, confessed it to be his body? Epist. 150. ad Hibid. q. x.
Hierome: Let us hear that the bread which the Lord brake, and gave to his
Disciples is the Lords body, himself saying, Take eat, this is my body: In
1. cor. c. 11.
Athanasius: What is the bread? the body of Christ. Cyril* Hieros. Catechis.
mist. 4. initio quum igitur Christus ipsesic affirmet, atque dicat de pane, hoc
est corpus meum etc.
Cyrill: Christ thus avouches and says of the bread, this is my body: Dial.
1.
Theodoret: In the very giving of the mysteries he calls bread his body.
All these Testimonies and sundry others from time to time have been set before
you by learned Divines sufficient to persuade any reasonable man, that when
Christ said, this is my body, this is my blood, the pronoune ( this) did
demonstrate the bread and the wine: and for mine own part I see no reason,
why you should deny it, for your Church teaches a transubstantiation of the
Bread and Wine, into the body and blood of Christ. Now if the pronoune ( this)
do not demonstrate the bread and the wine, then there is no bread and wine
signified in the words of Christ, and if Christ speak not in those words of
bread and wine, then it is impossible to prove out of these words any
transubstantiation of the bread and wine, and so you have made shipwreck upon
this rock.

NOw if the pronoune ( this) do not demonstrate the bread, what else 8
shall it demonstrate? The Gloss^. in did. 2. de Consecrat. Timore^* dico quod
per hane dictionem (hoc) nihil demonstratur: nam ipsa material^ter ponitur.
Gloss of the Canon law says, The word (hoc) is taken materially and
signifies nothing. How say you? have you not spunne a Fair thread, so to
toss and tumble the words of Christ, that you have brought all to nothing? if
you will say that it must needs signify some thing, then let us consider what
this some thing shall be. In Marco Anton. cited by Bishop Iuel. repl. art. 24.
Stephen Gardener did make it a kind of indiuiduum vagum, as though he should
say somewhat it is, but I know not what, but this cannot stand; because the
pronoune ( hoc) being a demonstratiue must of necessity demonstrate some
certain and sensible thing: what shall be this be? In 4. sent. distinct. 13.
Occam says, Hoc refertur ad corpus Christi: the pronoune (this) is referred
to the body of Christ, but then it is an Identicall proposition, signifying
that the body of Christ is the body of Christ, which were an idle speech and
to no purpose. Yet it would clean overthrow your transubstantiation. Therefore
others think that by ( hoc) should be meant, Hoc ens, as Scotus, or haec
substantia, as Pronomen (hoc) no^demonstrat panem neque corpus Christi sed hanc
substantiam. Ca^etan. in cap. 26. Math.
Caietan; well, what can this ens, or this substantia, be, but only the
Bread, and therefore why should they thus walk in Mistes and Clouds, and not
rather clearly confess the truth? But De forma verb* requisita. c. 4. cited
by Bishop Jewel. reply. art. 24.
Johannes de Burgo will make all cock sure: for he says, Hoc sub hac specie
praesens vel de propinquo futurum est corpus meum: that is, That which is
present under this show, or shortly shall be, is my body. He durst not say
simply (that which is present) for then he must either say the Bread, or the
Body, but if he said Bread he should have said as we say which had been
dangerous, and to expound it of the body, had been against his own
conscience, because the words of Consecration were not yet finished. Therefore
being in a quandary; what to say, he thought he would speak safely, though
thereby he showed himself but slenderly resolved. Behold what it is for men
to leave the written word, and to wander in the wilderness of their own
imaginations. But I hope you have hammerd this point better, and therefore I
pray you let us hear your judgment.


PHIL. THe opinion of Catholics is that (Hoc) does not demonstrate 9.
the bread, but the thing contained under the forms of Bread, which although
it were formerly Bread, tamen tunc iam erat Christi Corpus, (as De sacram.
^^ch. l. 1. c. 10.
Bellarmine says) that is, notwithstanding even then it was the body of Christ.


ORTHOD. What means Bellarmine by tunc iam?


PHIL. His meaning may appear by that which he says of the Wine, by occasion
of these words, Bibite ex hoc omnes: Drink you all of this. For that clause (
of this) does not Cap. 11.
(says he) signify of this Wine, but of that which is contained in the Cup
under the forms of Wine, which verily although it was Wine before
Consecration, yet the words of Consecration being ended, it was not Wine but
Blood: so though there were bread before Consecration, yet tunc iam, then
presently, it was the Body of Christ.


ORTHOD. If there were not the Body and Blood till after Consecration, then he
must confess out of his principles, that the pronoune this does distinctly
demonstrate the Bread and Wine. Therefore he spoke against his own conscience
before when he denied it. But why should you so dally and go about to delude
us with doubtful terms? why do you stagger and stammer in this manner? you
say it is not Bread, but that which is contained under the forms of Bread: as
though that which is contained under the forms of Bread, were not the
substance of Bread. For it must of necessity either be the substance of Bread,
or the substance of Christ's Body, as witnesses your own Archbishop. Arch.
Caesari^ns. tract. par. disp. de necess. cor rect. Theol. s^holast. l. 1. f.
17. B.
Cum scriptura duarum tantum substantiarum quae demonstrari hic queant,
meminerit, viz. panis and Corporis, nescio cur fingant tertiam aliquam, quae
nec panis sit nec Corpus, quae tamen per pronomen demonstretur, in quo magnam
Scripturae vim faciunt, infarcientes illi ex suo cerebro tertiam istam rem
cuius nullam habet mentionem, and qua posita, propositio falsa esset: si autem
nullam tertiam rem ponere se dicunt, quae sit alia a Christi Corpore, cur tot
verba effutiunt ad docendum quod Corpus non demonstretur? cur nudam nobis rem
non proponunt? cur tot illam verborum inuolucris contegunt? in Dei verbo duarum
tantum Substantiarum mentio habetur, and reuera nulla substantia fuit in
Christi manibus post acceptum panem, praeter panem and Corpus, quae per
pronomen demonstrari possit, and tamen solam illam substantiam singularem
demonstrabat, quae erat in suis manibus sub speciebus panis. Tertiam ergo
quaerere a pane and Corpore discretam, vanissimus labor est and absurditate
plenus. i. When the Scripture makes mention only of two substances which can
here be demonstrated, that is of the Bread and the body, I know not why they
should faigne any third, which is neither Bread nor Body, and yet is
demonstrated by the pronoune; Wherein they offer great violence to the
Scripture, stuffing into it out of their own brain this third thing whereof
they have no mention, which being granted, the proposition should be false.
But if they say they put no third thing which is diverse from the Body of
Christ, why do they spend so many words to teach that the Body is not
demonstrated? Why do they not propose to us the naked matter? why do they
hide it with so many folds of words? In the word of God there is only mention
of two Substances, and verily there was no substance in Christ's hands beside
Bread and his Body which can possibly be demonstrated by the Pronoune, and yet
he did demonstrate only that singular substance which was in his hands under
the forms of Bread: therefore to seek a third distinct from the Bread and the
Body is a labor most vain and full of absurdity. For what shall this third
thing be? you say it is Bell. de sacram. euchar. c. 10.
that which is contained under the shapes of Bread and Wine, but what is that?
your own Quo supra.
Archbishop says, quic quid dixerint, semper eo cogendi sunt vt dicant an
Corpus an panis ostendatur in singulari, quia pronomen vice nominis proprij
positum pro solo singulari sumipossit, That is, what soever they shall say,
they are still to be urged to this issue that they tell us whether the Body or
Bread be demonstrated in particular, because a pronoune put in place of a
proper noune, must needs be taken for a particular or singular. One of these
two it must needs be, unless you will speak vainly and absurdly. Now the
Body of Christ it cannot be, for then it should be there before Consecration,
and without Consecration; and consequently it should be the Body of Christ,
before it were the body; and there should be blood in the Chalice before
Consecration, and without Consecration; and consequently it should be blood
before it were blood, and blood without blood: which are intolerable
absurdities. Thus you have forsaken the fountain of living water, and dug
unto your selves broken ceasterns which will hold no water. You have left the
Scripture and the Fathers, you wander in the wilderness of your own
conceits, and loose your selves in the laberynth of your own imaginations.
How much better were it to confess the truth with the Scripture and the
Fathers, and give the glory to God? your own Cardinal Petrus de Aliaco in 4.
s. q. 6. art. 2.
Petrus de Aliaco did see even in the darkness of Popery, that the Bread
remained after Consecration; Patet quod iste modus est possibilis nec repugnat
rationi nec authoritati biblicae, imo est facilior ad intelligendum and
rationabilior. i. It is apparent that this manner is possible, neither is it
repugnant to reason, nor to the authority of the Bible, yea it is more easy
to understand, and more reasonable. Now the Bread in substance cannot be the
Body of Christ in substance, but in signification. And consequently, the
proposition cannot be understood substantially, but sacramentally.


PHIL. Christ did not say, this signifies my Body, or this is a Sacrament of
my Body, or this is my Body sacramentally, but he said absolutely, this is my
Body.


ORTHOD. He spoke the words of wisdom, and that in the most excellent
manner, for which manner of speech two reasons may be rendered. The first
because he was desirous to speak most emphatically: when we see a child
like unto his father, we use to say this child has his fathers face, and yet
we mean only that he is very like unto his father, yet we say not he is
like unto his father, but he has his fathers face, to express a most
wonderful similitude in a most emphaticall manner. So if one should have seen
the image of Alexander made by Phidias, he might have said this is Alexander
himself, not meaning that his words should be taken properly, but to
express the similitude most emphatically. Even so our Lord Jesus willing to
express in how lively manner the Bread and Wine do represent his Body and
Blood, does not say that they signify his Body and Blood, or that they are
signs and Sacraments of his Body and Blood, but speaking most significantly
he says this (Bread) is my Body, this (Wine) is my Blood. Another reason is
because our sweet Savior would seal all his comfortable blessings unto the
soul of the worthy receiver, as if a King bestowing a Castle upon one of his
subjects, and reaching unto him the sealed writing containing the grant,
should say unto him, behold here, take what I give thee, it is such a Castle.
For though he might have said, this writing does signify the gift of such a
Castle, yet it is more significant and more comfortable to say, it is such a
Castle. For so the king does cheer up his heart, and by that writing does put
him into actual possession of the Castle. Even so our Lord Jesus, though he
might have said, this is a sacrament of my body, yet to give us more cordial
comfort, he says, this is my body, assuring us thereby, that in giving us that
Bread, he gives us himself, and puts us in actual possession of his
graces and blessings, purchased unto us by his body and blood.


PHIL. Suppose we should grant that the pronoune (this) did signify the bread,
what could you conclude?


ORTHOD. De Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
Bellarmine may teach you, who declares out of the writings of Luther, that
the words of the Evangelist, this is my body, according to Luther, do carry this
sense, this bread is my body. Which sentence, says Bellarmine, must either be
taken tropically, that the bread may be the body of Christ, by way of
signification, or it is plainly absurd and impossible. For it cannot be, that
bread should be the body of Christ (properly:) wherefore the scholars of
Luther, had rather run back to a trope, then admit a manifest absurdity.
Here is a clear confession that if by ( this) be meant this bread, then the
proposition must needs be taken tropically, that is, as we take it, or
otherwise, it is absurd and impossible. But it were blasphemy to say that
Christ spoke absurdities, and impossibilities, therefore if the pronoune (this)
do demonstrate the bread, the proposition must needs carry that sense which
we make of it, and then the Protestants have gotten the victory by the
confession of your most learned Cardinal. For great is the truth and
prevails. So your carnal presence, and consequently both your sacrifice and
Priesthood do fall to the ground.

ANd if for disputations sake we should feign, (though indeed it be a 11.
mere fiction) that the body of Christ were corporally and carnally in the
Sacrament, yet for all this, you are never able to prove your Sacrifice, upon
which your Priesthood depends, because the Scripture acknowledges no other,
then that upon the Cross. For Heb. 9. 12.
neither by the blood of goats, and calves, but by his own blood, (which the
Scripture elsewhere calls the Col. 1. 20.
blood of the Cross) entered he in once into the holy place and obtained
eternal redemption for us. Ver. 9. 24.
He is entered into the very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us,
Not that he should offer himself often as the high Priest entered into the holy
place, every year with other blood, (for then must he have often suffered
since the foundation of the world) but now in the end of the world, he has
appeared once, to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Ver. 27. 28.
And as it is appointed unto men that they shall once die, and after that
comes the judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time
without sin unto salvation. Heb. 10. 12.
This man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarieth till his enemies be made his
footestoole. For with one offering has he Consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified. If Christ have shed, offered, and sacrificed his blood not often
but once, and that upon the Cross, then can it not be really shed, offered,
and sacrificed in the Eucharist. If by one oblation, he has obtained an
eternal redemption, put away sin, and Consecrated for ever those that are
sanctified; then your sacrificing of him is vain and unprofitable, contrary to
the Scripture, and injurious to the all-sufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ.


PHIL. He was sacrificed once, and not often, in that manner as he was upon the
Cross; yet he was sacrificed in the Eucharist also, as I will prove both by
the words of Christ, and by his actions. First, by his words, for he said,
this is my body which is given for you: or as it is in Saint Paul, which is
broken for you: And again, this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for you. Ex Bell. l. 1. de Missa. c. 12. preter illa.
Is shed, is broken is given, not to you, but to God for you. Do not these
words argue a real, actual, and proper sacrifice?


ORTHOD. They argue a sacrifice to God, not in the Supper, but on the Cross.


PHIL. You must consider that it is not said, which shall be given, shall be
broken, shall be shed, but which is given, is broken, is shed, which argues
that the place is not to be expounded of the sacrifice of the Cross, that was
to come, but of a sacrifice in the Eucharist, which was present.


ORTHOD. The present tense, is used for the future, funditur for fundetur: for
proof whereof, I will produce two witnesses, which with you are most
authentical, the vulgar translation, and the Canon of the Mass, in both which
it is not funditur, is shed, but fundetur shall be shed. Whereby you may learn
b Missale Romanum.
that the present tense used in the Greek, is to be expounded by the future
used in the Latin, and consequently it is to be understood of the sacrifice of
the Cross, which was to come.


PHIL. Bell. quo supra.
Both are true, and neither of the readings ought to be denied, and especially
that of the present tense, because the Evangelists and S. Paul, did write in
the present tense.


ORTHOD. Ex ore tuo serve nequam: Is funditur in the present tense, less to be
denied, because the Evangelists, and S. Paul did write in the present tense? is
it so indeed, albeit the Canon of the Mass, and your vulgar translation which
may not be rejected under any pretense, have fundetur in the future tense? then
it seems that the blessed originalls are to be preferred before a
translation, whatsoever the Counsel of Trent have said to the contrary. O the
force of truth, which breaks out like lightning, and shines in darkness,
though the darkness comprehends it not! but this by the way. Now for the
present point, though the vulgar has not expressed the letter of the text, yet
it has well expressed the sense. For Cardinal Caietan 1. Cor. 11.
Caietan confesses that the Evangelists did use the present tense, in saying
the blood is shed: and S. Paul in saying, the body is broken, and signified the
future shedding and breaking upon the Cross: and the Jesuit Salmeron in 1.
Cor. 11. disp. 19. p. 154.
Salmeron says, Non est negandum morem esse Scripturae, vt ea dicantur fieri
de praesenti, quae confestim esse aut mox fieri debent: that is, it is not to
be denied, that it is the manner of the Scripture, that those things should be
said to be presently done, which ought to be immediately, or to be done by and
by. Yea Cardinal Caiet. ibid.
Caietan goes further, and says, Tempus effus^onis and fractionis erat tum
presens, quoniam inchoatum erat tempus passionis: that is, the time of shedding
and breaking was then present, because the time of his Passion was begun.
Thus you see that this shedding and breaking which the Spirit of God expressed
in the present tense, may aptly be expounded of the sacrifice of the Cross,
and that according to the custom of the Scripture, even in the judgment of
your own men. Therefore you cannot hence conclude any sacrifice in the
Eucharist.


PHIL. YEs, it may be proved by the words of Christ, as they are related by 12.
S. Paul, This is my body which is broken for you. For seeing the Evangelists
do say, ( Given for you,) meaning to God as a sacrifice: therefore this
breaking also must be expounded of a sacrifice. Now, breaking agrees not to
the Body of Christ, but only as it is in the form of bread: therefore S. Paul
speaks of Christ, as he was sacrificed in the Eucharist under the form of
bread.


ORTHOD. The word breaking may properly be applied to Christ upon the Cross.
For the Prophet Esaias speaking of the Passion, says, Esaias 53. 5.
He was broken for our iniquity. And again, Verse 1^.
The Lord would break him, and make him subject to infirmities; And though it
be most true, that there was not a bone of him broken, yet when he was nailed
upon the Cross, his skin, his flesh, his sinews, his veins were properly
broken. Therefore this does not euince any sacrifice in the Eucharist, but
only upon the Cross.


CHAP. VI.
Of their Argument drawn from the Actions of Christ.

PHIL. IT shall be euinced by the Actions of Christ.


ORTHOD. By which of his Actions?


PHIL. By his Consecrating and eating.


ORTHOD. Indeed De Miss^ 1. c. 27. Secun^^ (...).
Bellarmine having anatomized your Mass, and searched every joint and vein of
it to find your sacrifice, pronounces peremptorily, That if the sacrifice
consist not in Consecrating and consuming, then Christ did not sacrifice at
all. Let us therefore ponder these two points, beginning with Consecration.


PHIL. (...) (...). 8.
The Consecration of the Eucharist belongs to the essence of a sacrifice, as
Bellarmine has proved by five Arguments.


ORTHOD. He has produced certain idle Arguments, in reading whereof one may
seek Bellarmine in Bellarmine, and not find him. But let us hear them.


PHIL. First, (...) ex(...)* ^. ^.
The sacrifice of the Mass is offered in the person of Christ: But the Priest
performs nothing so evidently in the person of Christ, as Consecration, in
which he says, This is my Body: Therefore the sacrifice consists in
Consecration, as in an essential part thereof.


ORTHOD. By what authority do you offer this Sacrifice? we have weighed
Christ's words, and can find no such warrant. Therefore look you to it, lest
you be found sacrilegious usurpers of Christ's Office. And what if the Priest
Consecrate in the person of Christ? This does not argue a sacrifice, much
less that the Consecration is any essential part of a sacrifice. And if it
be, then it must either be the matter, or form: The matter it cannot be;
because it is not a thing ^^de Bell. de Missd. ^. c. 2. (...) and (...).
permanent, but a transient action. And (...). (...). (...) (...). (...) (...).
1. c. 27. (...).
Bellarmine himself, when he went disguised in the habit of Tortus, affirmed,
That the words of Consecration do not concur formally, but efficiently to
the oblation.


PHIL. Secondly, h There is no other action of Christ, which can be called a
sacrifice, either before or after Consecration: therefore it must needs consist
in these two proposed.


ORTHOD. Yes, his Oblation upon the Cross was a proper Propitiatory
sacrifice: but in the Eucharist there is no such sacrifice at all.


PHIL. Thirdly, Ibid. tertio.
If the Apostles in the beginning added nothing to the words of Consecration,
but the Lords Prayer, then it must needs be they did sacrifice by Consecrating:
for the Lords Prayer cannot be called a sacrifice.


ORTHOD. You presume there was a sacrifice, Which is to beg the question.


PHIL. Fourthly, Ibid quarto.
The representation of the sacrifice of the Cross, consists in Consecration,
as S. Thomas teaches, but the Real and representative should be both
together.


ORTHOD. And why so? The representative was in the Sacrament, the Real upon
the Cross. In the first institution the representative was before the Real:
In all other celebrations of it, the Real is before the representative.
Neither can you conclude that there is a Real sacrifice properly in the
Sacrament, because there is a representative.


PHIL. Fifthly, Bell. ibid. 5.
This is the judgment* of the Fathers. Lib. 4. c. 32.
Irenaeus says, that Christ did then teach the Oblation of the New Testament,
which the Church throughout all the world does use, when he says, This is my
body. In sermon. de caena Dom.
Cyprian, When the bread is blessed with the words of Consecration, then the
Eucharist is made both a medicine, and a burnt offering. Homil. de prodit. ^ude.
Chrysostom, The words of the Lord, This is my Body, give strength to the
Sacrifice, until the end of the world. Lib. 4. dial. c. 58.
Gregory says, That in the very hour of the immolation at the voice of the
Priest, the Quiers of Angels are present, the Heavens are opened, high and low
are ^oyned together of visible and invisible things is made one; He teaches
evidently, that the Immolation is perfected by the Consecration.


ORTHOD. One place of your master of the Sentences, shall expound them all.
Lib. 4. did. 12 g.
Quaeritur si quod gerit Sacerdos proprie dicatur sacrificium vel immolatio:
and an Christus quotidie immoletur, aut semel tantum immolatus sit. Ad hoc
breuiter dici potest, illud quod offertur and consecratur, vocari sacrificium
and oblationem: quia memoria est and representatio very Sacrificij, and sanct^e
immolationis factae in ara crucis. Et semel Christus mortuus in Cruce est,
ibique immolatus est in semetipso: quotidie autem immolatur in sacrame^to, quia
in sacramento recordatio fit illius quod factum est semel. That is, There is a
question, whether that which the Priest does, be properly called a sacrifice
or an immolation; And whether Christ be daily offered, or were offered only
once. To this may be briefly said, That that which is offered and Consecrated
by the Priest is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memorial and
representation of the true sacrifice, and holy oblation made upon the altar of
the Cross. And Christ dyed once upon the Cross, and there was offered in
himself, and he is daily offered in the sacrament, because in the sacrament
there is a memorial made of that which was done once.


PHIL. Only a memorial? Nay I will prove that there is truly 2.
and properly a sacrifice, for there are three things wherein the essence of a
true and real sacrifice consists. First, of Ibid de miss. l. 1. c. 27. his
igitur.
common it must be made holy. Secondly, being made holy, it must be Ibid.
secund^ in consecratione.
offered to God. Thirdly, That which is Ibid. 3. per consecrationent.
offered, must be ordained to a true real and external mutation and
destruction.


ORTHOD. Then let us consider whether these three things be found in the
Eucharist, and first it is evident, that Bread and Wine of common are made
holy, even the body and blood of Christ Sacramentally: but if Bread and Wine be
the sacrifice, then earthly elements are offered for the redemption of the
Church, which once to imagine were horrible impiety.


PHIL. Bell. de Missa l. 1. c. 27. respondeo.
That which of common is so made holy, that it remains, (and that only)
without doubt is properly sacrificed; but the substance of the Bread and Wine
do not remain, and therefore they are not the sacrifice.


ORTHOD. That they do remain, has been already proved, and therefore if
that be the sacrifice which of common is so made holy, that it remains, then
a piece of bread shall be the sacrifice for the sins of the world. But if we
should faigne that the substance of the elements were taken away, and that the
body and blood of Christ were corporally and carnally under the forms of Bread
and Wine, yet you could not prove your sacrifice, for where do you find the
second point, that is, oblation?


PHIL. Ibid. secundo.
Deo offertur, dum in altari dei collocatur. Nam victimam in altari ponere, est
reipsa illam deo offerre; and quia vi consecrationis fit, vt corpus Christi and
sanguis incipiat reipsa esse super altar, mediante manu Sacerdotis, ideo
verbis consecrationis vera and solennis oblatio celebratur; that is, It is
offered to God, while it is placed upon the Altar of God. For to lay the
sacrifice upon the Altar, is in very deed to offer it unto God; and because it
comes to pass by the force of Consecration, that the body and blood of
Christ begin to be reallie upon the Altar, by the means of the Priests
hand, therefore a true and solemn oblation is celebrated by the words of
Consecration.


ORTHOD. First, if by the words of Consecration the body and blood of Christ,
begin to be really upon the Altar, then it is by means of the Priests
tongue, and not of the Priests hand. Secondly, it is one thing to lay the
sacrifice upon the Altar, and an other thing really to offer it, as may appear
by the words of the Scripture, Genesis 2^. 9
And when they came to the place which God had showed him, Abraham builded an
Altar there, and couched the wood, and bound Izhak his son, and laid him on
the Altar upon the wood: Here the sacrifice was really laid upon the Altar,
but it cannot be said that he was really sacrificed or offered for a burnt
offering, but only in Abraham's intention, and Gods acceptance. Thirdly, if
the sacrifice be the body and blood, then seeing by your own doctrine the
body and blood are not upon the Altar, til the words of Consecration be
finished, it follows, that there is no sacrifice till the Consecration be
finished, and consequently there is no oblation of the sacrifice begun before
the Consecration be finished. Now if the oblation begin after the
Consecration is ended, then is it not celebrated by the words of Consecration,
unless you will say that an oblation may be celebrated before it be, and
that a thing is ended before it begin. But let us faigne, that the body and
blood of Christ, were properly offered to God by the words of Consecration, yet
you cannot thence conclude a sacrifice. For you required a third condition in a
sacrifice, that is, the destruction of the thing sacrificed.


PHIL. De Missa* l. 1. c* 27. Tertio.
The thing which is offered is ordered by Consecration to a true, real, and
external mutation and destruction, which is necessary to the being of a
Sacrifice. De Miss. l. 1. c. 2. 8.
For to a true sacrifice there is required that the thing offered in Sacrifice,
be plainly destroyed, (that is) So changed that it cease to be that which
it was before.


ORTHOD. How were the sacrifices to be destroyed?


PHIL. De Missa. l* 1. c. 2.
If they be living things, by killing; if without life, and solid, as meal,
salt and frankincense, they were to be destroyed by burning; if liquid as
blood, wine and water, they were to be destroyed by effusion or pouring out.


ORTHOD. Then it will follow from your own positions, that if Christ be alive
in the Eucharist, either the Priest does not Sacrifice him, or else he kills
him before he sacrifice him, and consequently either there are no sacrifising
Priests in the New Testament, except Christ only, or if there be any, they
are all murderers and killers of Christ. If you say that Christ is in the
Eucharist, and yet not alive, how can this be? Is not Christ in the Eucharist
now, as he was at the first institution? When Christ said, this is my body,
his body was then alive, and now also is living in Heaven.


PHIL. De sacra. Euchar. l. 3. c. 5.
The whole Church teaches as it appears by the Council of Ses. 13. Can. 1
Trent, that not only the Body and blood, but also the soul and divinity, yea
and whole Christ is in the Eucharist, but it is certain, that the soul and
divinity, are not in the Eucharist, by virtue of the Consecration, but only by
natural concomitance, because where the one is, there the other must needs be
united with it.


ORTHOD. If the soul be united with it, then it is alive, and then it is
either no Sacrifice, or else the former absurdities follow; and if the body
should be without life in the Eucharist, then according to your positions
seeing it is a thing solid, it cannot be a Sacrifice, unless it be plainly
destroyed by burning; if it be capable of burning or destroying, it is not
corporally the body of Christ, Psalm. 16. 10.
For the holy one shall not see corruption, and if it be not destroyed, then
you confess that it is no Sacrifice: so every way you are entangled. But
seeing you hold this to be a Sacrifice, and that every Sacrifice must be
consumed, therefore you must tell us how this is consumed.


PHIL. It is consumed and destroyed by eating.


ORTHOD. The people do eat it as well as the Priests, shall they also be
sacrificers?


PHIL. De Missa. l. 1 c. 27. prop. 7.
As it is performed by the people, it is no part of the Sacrifice, but as it is
performed by the Priest, it is an essential part.


ORTHOD. Do your Priests eat Christ properly, or improperlie? if
improperlie, then how is the sacrifice consumed? For if it be consumed only
by eating, and you do not eat it but improperly, then it is not consumed but
only improperly; and seeing you hold this consuming to be of the essence of
the sacrifice, therefore there is no sacrifice but improperly, and consequently
you are no Priests but improperly.


PHILO. Bellar. de sacra. Eucharist. l. 1. c. 7.
The body of Christ is eaten properly and truly, even with the mouth in the
Eucharist: for to the essence of eating attrition is not necessary, but it is
sufficient, If it be taken and conveyed from the mouth to the stomach by
humane and natural instruments, that is the tongue and the pallat.


ORTHOD. If your Priests eat Christ properly with their body, then are you
not men, but monsters of mankind. For is not this to make the Priest a
Cyclops, or a Caniball, or rather worse then a Caniball? for a Caniball deuours
the flesh only of a mere man, but this is to devour and consume the flesh
and blood of the Son of God.


PHIL. The Canibals do it in bloody manner, so do not we.


ORTHOD. But Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
Saint Austin thinks that to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ
properly, is a wicked deed, and therefore concludes that when Christ wills
us to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, the words must be taken
figuratively, and not properly: whereby it is evident that he condemns all
eating of Christ properly, whether it be in a bloody manner, or an unbloody.
But to proceed, how can the body of Christ be consumed with eating? if it
cannot, then by your confession there is no Sacrifice.


PHIL. Ex Bellar* de Missa l. 1. c. 27. Tertio. Per.
We must consider in the body of Christ a double being, a natural, and a
sacramental. When it is eaten, it loses not the natural, but the
sacramental.


ORTHOD. The destruction required in a sacrifice must be real, for it must
cease really to be that which it was; as for example the lambs which were
daily offered, first they were slain, and so ceased formally to be lambs;
then the flesh was burned, so it ceased materially to be flesh; and when any
part of the sacrifice was eaten, and by eating turned into the substance of
man, then it ceased to be that flesh, which it was before. Now if in the
Eucharist the body of Christ be not really consumed, then according to your
positions it is not really sacrified; and yet for mine own part I do not see,
but that it follows according to your principles, that the very natural
essence and being of Christ is properly destroyed: which is horrible blasphemy.


PHIL. How can you conclude any such things from our principles?


ORTHOD. You teach that the very natural body and blood of Christ, and that
only is contained under the forms of Bread and Wine: but I will prove
inuincibly, out of your principles, that the thing which is contained under the
forms of Bread and Wine is substantially destroyed, and loses the natural
essence that it had before* But first let me ask you a question; Do not the
consecrated elements nourish after Consecration?


PHIL. Add^ v^timo, quod etiam spo^^^s sacraments ^utr^rent, si in magna copia
sumerentur. Bell. de sacram. euchar. l 3. c. 23. ed secundam*
Nourish? yes.


ORTHO. If you doubt of it, it may be proved by experience, for there is no
question but the Priest or any man else may live a long time, though he have no
other sustenance but such Bread and Wine. And therefore it is certain that it
nourishes. But nourishment is, when the substance of the meat is changed into
the substance of the nourished; and therefore if the consecrated elements do
nourish, they must needs have a substance which must be changed into the
substance of the nourished. What substance is this? Bread you say it is not;
for that is vanished by Consecration. And therefore it can be nothing but the
Body and Blood of Christ; whereupon it will follow, that the natural Body and
Blood of Christ are substantially changed into the substance of the nourished,
be it man, bird, or beast, which is out ragious blasphemy. And if it be so
changed, then it has lost the natural being and essence which it had before,
and consequently the Body and Blood of Christ is substantially consumed and
destroyed. If you be ashamed of this, then be ashamed of the fountain from
whence it flows.


PHIL. It is not the Body and Blood of Christ that nourishes, but the Sicut
enim diuino miraculo ma^ent sine subiecto, it a etiam nutriunt, vt Theologi
docent Bell. ibid.
species.


ORTH. The species are accidents: can accidents nourish? then a substance shall
be made of accidents, and then we shall have a world of absurdities.


PHIL. They nourish by divine miracle.


ORTHOD. When ye have nothing to answer, then ye fly to miracles. So if the
Priest drink too much of the wine, he shall be drunk by a miracle, and if
the mouse find the way into the box, it shall grow fat by a miracle, Surely
this is a miraculous answer. For are not all miracles immediately from God?
therefore if your answer be true, God should provide miracles for fatting of
mice, and concur with a miracle to make the Priest druncke. If these things
be absurd, then your carnal presence, your sacrifice and your Priesthood are
all absurd.


CHAP. VII.
Of their argument drawn from the practice of the Church in the time of the
Apostles.

PHIL. THE practice of the Church does show the contrary, for it is said,
Acts 13. 2*
as they were ministering to our Lord, and fasting, the holy Ghost, etc. In
which place Anglor. in hunc locum.
for ministering, we might have translated sacrificing, for so the Greek does
signify; and so Erasmus translated. Yea we might have translated, saying
Mass, for so they did: and the Greek Fathers hereof had the name Liturgy,
which Erasmus translateth Mass, saying, Missa Chrysostomi.


ORTH. This ministering will not prove your Massing. For the Greek word is
applied to the Hebr. 1. 14. (...).
Angels which I hope you will not call Mass Priests. It is likewise applied
to the civil Romans 13. 6 (...)
magistrate, and shall their ministering also be Massing? and though Erasmus
translate it sacrificing, yet there is no necessity to expound it of your
Massing sacrifice. Neither does the word Mass infer any such thing, for it
is not from an Hebrew or Chaldee original, as Bar. an. 34. n. 59.
Baronius would have it, that thereupon he might ground an oblation; but it is
derived from the latin as Bin. t. 3. p. 1. page 110. latinum non he^raeum est,
vt neoterici studiose excogitant.
Binius proves, calling the defendours of the contrary opinion, Nouellistes;
and Bell. de Mis. l. 1 c. 1. sed. non.
Bellarmine confesses that the word Missa is not mentioned of the Grecians,
which use in stead thereof the word (...) which he interprets munus seu
ministerium publicum: a public office or ministry. So the meaning of the
place is that they were publickely performing their ministerial function,
which is plainly set down by Saint Chrysostom. in Act. homil. 27.
Chrysostom: what is ministering? preaching.


PHIL. This cannot be, for the text says, they did minister to the Lord, but
you cannot say they preached to the Lord, or ministered Sacraments to the Lord.


ORTHOD. Very true. But in performing these things to the Church, they did
minister to the Lord, because they did them to the honor of God.


PHIL. This word when it is applied to sacred things, and put absolutely, is
every where taken for the ministry of Sacrifice.


ORTHOD. The contrary may appear, because the same word put absolutely without
any addition, is applied in holy 2. Cor. 9. 12
Scripture unto the ministering of alms unto the Saints.


PHIL. THe sacrifice of the Mass, may be strongly proved out of 3
the first to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 10. 14.
Flee from the serving of idols, I speak as to wise men. Your selves judge
what I say, the chalice of benediction, which we do bless, is it not the
Communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not
the participation of the body of our Lord? For being many, we are one bread,
one body, all that participate of one bread. Behold Israel according to the
flesh: they that eat the hosts, are they not partakers of the Altar? what
then? do I say that that which is immolated unto idols, is any thing? or that
the idol is any thing? But the things that the heathen do immolate, to devils
they do immolate, and not to God. And I will not have you become fellows of the
devils. You cannot drink the chalice of our Lord, and the chalice of devils:
you cannot be partakers of the Table of our Lord, and of the Table of devils.
Ex Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 14. ex his verbis.
Out of these words, are gathered three arguments, the first from the
comparison of the Lords Table, with the altar of the Gentiles, where they
offered to idols, and with the altar of the Jews, where they offered carnal
sacrifice to the true God. For thence it follows that the Lords Table is a
kind of altar; now an altar is erected to sacrifice, and there is no sacrifice
without a Priest. The like reason may be drawn from the comparison of the
Eucharist, with their sacrifice, and from the partaking the one and the other.


ORTHOD. The point of the comparison consists in this, that as those which
receive the Sacraments of Christians, do therein declare themselves to be
partakers of the Christian religion: so those which use the sacrifices and
ceremonies of Jews or Gentiles, do thereby signify that they are partakers
of their religion; and thereupon the Apostle exhorts them to refrain from
the tables and feasts of idols, least thereby they should have fellowshipwith
the devils. Therefore you cannot conclude hence either sacrifice or altar.


PHIL. THe altar is plainly mentioned to the Hebrews, Heb. 13. 10.
We have an altar: 4
whereof they have not power to eat which serve the tabernacle, by which altar
is meant Christ's body in the Eucharist.


ORTHOD. The Apostle speaks not of the Eucharist, but of the suffering of
Christ without the gate: and of the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving:
therefore Thomas Aquinas says well: Thom. in Epist. ad hebraeos. c. 13. ^ect.
2.
Istud altar, etc. that is, This altar is either the Cross of Christ, on
which Christ was offered for us, or else Christ himself in whom and by whom,
we offer up our prayers. And this is the golden altar, of which mention is
made in the Apoc. 8. Of this altar therefore they have not power to eat, that
is, to receive the fruit of Christ's passion, and to be incorporated into him
as to the head, which serve the tabernacle of legal things, for Gal. 5. 2.
if ye be circumcised, Christ profits you nothing: or they serve the
tabernacle of the body, which follow carnal delights, for to such he profits
nothing. Hitherto Thomas, whose authority with others persuades De Missa. ^.
1. c. 14. ex ^^s.
Bellarmine to dismiss this argument out of the field, because says he, there
are some Catholics which understand by the altar, the Cross or Christ
himself: I do not urge that place. Thus have you searched the Scriptures, and
cannot find your sacrifice, much less can you find that it is properly
propitiatory. For that honor belongs only to the sacrifice of the Cross.


PHIL. Did not Job 1. 5.
Job who lived under the law of nature, offer burnt offerings. daily for his
children? Did not God himself Job 42. 8.
command that the friends of Job should sacrifice for their sins? Are there
not many sacrifices for sins appointed in Leuiticus? Wherefore, if the
sacrifice of the Cross did not hinder that these should be propitiatory, why
should it hinder our sacrifice from being propitiatory?


ORTHOD. Though Job and others did offer sacrifice under the law of nature, yet
they did not offer it by instinct of nature, but by the direction of Gods
spirit; and therefore there is the same reason of those sacrifices and of the
other commanded in the law: and all of them were Types of Jesus Christ, and
are said to take away sins; not properly but Typically: for as the Apostle
says, Heb. 10. 4.
It is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins.


CHAP. VIII.
Of their argument drawn from the authority of the Fathers.

PHIL. THe meaning of the Scriptures was well known to the ancient Fathers,
who al with one voice acknowledge both Priest, Altar, oblation, and sacrifice.


ORTHOD. They do so, but not such as you mean. For the oblation and sacrifice
which they defend in the Eucharist, is not properly propitiatory, nor properly
a sacrifice, but only a commemoration, and a representation of the sovereign
sacrifice.


PHIL. Ex Bell. de Missa. l. 1. c. 15. hic igitur.
If the Fathers had meant so, then there was no cause why they should speak
otherwise of the Eucharist, then of Baptism. But they never called Baptism a
sacrifice, or said, that to Baptize, is to sacrifice. Therefore, it is a sign
that when they often call the Eucharist a sacrifice, they name it so properly.


ORTHO. Do the Fathers never call Baptism a sacrifice? Your learned Bishop
Canus confesses the contrary, saying: Canus loc. Theol. l. 12. sol. 424. b.
Sedquaeris, quid causae plerisque antiquorum fuerit, vt Baptismum hostiam
appellauerint, ideoque dixerint non superesse hostiam pro peccato, quia
Baptismus repeti non potest. Sane quia in Baptismo Christo commorimur, and per
hoc Sacramentum applicatur nobis hostia crucis, ad plenam peccati remissionem,
hinc illi Baptisma translatitie hostiam nun cuparunt: that is, But you demand
what cause had many of the ancient Fathers that they called Baptism a
sacrifice, and therefore said, that there remained no sacrifice for sin,
because Baptism cannot be repeated* Truly because in Baptism we die together
with Christ, and by this Sacrament the sacrifice of the Cross is applied unto
us, to the full remission of sin, hence they call Baptism metaphorically a
sacrifice. Here is a clear confession that many Fathers call Baptism a
sacrifice, and among these many, S. Austin is one, Aust. in exposit. Epist. ad
Romans p. 365. Paris. 1586.
Quod (holocaustum dominicae passionis) eo tempore offert quisque pro peccatis
suis, quo eiusdem passionis fide dedicatur and Christianorum fidelium nomine
Baptizatus imbuitur, that is, which burnt offering of the Lords passion, every
one offers for his own sins at such time as he is dedicated (to GOD) by
faith in the Passion of Christ, and being baptized is endued with the Name of
faithful Christians. And no marvel if the Fathers do call it a Sacrifice,
seeing they call it the Passion of Christ. We are dipped in the Passion of
Christ, says Pass^o D^m. (...) Baptism.
Tertullian. Baptism is Christ's Passion, says Chr(...). 16.
Chrysostom; meaning that it is the representation of it. So concerning the
Eucharist, though Christ (says In hom. Pas^hal. apud Great. de^^^s^l^st. 2.
quid ^it ^ang.
S. Gregory) living immortally, now dies not, yet he dies in this mystery,
and his flesh suffers for the salvation of the people; That is, says the
Gloss. ^^^d.
Gloss, his death and Passion is represented. And you heard before out of the
Master of the Sentences, that, that which is offered and Consecrated by the
Priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memorial and
representation of the true sacrifice and holy oblation made upon the Altar of
the Cross. And Be^^de M^^sa. (...).
Bellarmine grants, that Thomas, and other Schoolmen do commonly answer,
that it is called an oblation, because it is a representation of the oblation.


PHIL. Be^^^. ibid. (...).
Peter Lombard, when he asks the question, whether that which the Priest
does, be properly called a sacrifice or an oblation, takes the name of
sacrifice or oblation for occision or killing, as though he had asked, Whether
that which the Priest does, be a killing of Christ: and answers most rightly,
that Christ was truly offered, that is, slain, but once, and that now he is
not properly offered, that is, slain, but only in a Sacrament and
representation.


ORTHOD. First, I refer it to the indifferent Reader to consider whether this
answer of Bellarmine be not a mere shift and cavil. Secondly, neither will
this shift serve his turn: for if the Priest do not so, he cannot be said
properly to sacrifice him: because in a sacrifice there must be the destruction
of the thing sacrificed, as is before declared out of Bellarmine.


PHIL. THe Council of S^^^. 22. (...). 4^. 844
Trent, pronounces a curse against all those which 2.
deny that a true and proper sacrifice is offered in the Mass; And they have
reason: for as the Apostles, so all the Fathers of the Primitive Church, were
Mass Priests. For Am^r^^ ^. ^im. c 4.
S. Ambrose testifies, That imposition of hands, is certain mystical words,
whereby he that is elected into the Priesthood is confirmed, receiving
authority, his conscience bearing him witness, that he may be bold to offer
sacrifice to God in the Lords stead.


ORTHOD. S. Ambrose elsewhere expounds himself, saying, Am(...).
Quid ergo nos? nonne per singulos dies offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed
recordationem facientes mortis eius; That is, What therefore do we? do we not
offer daily? truly we offer, but so, that we make a remembrance of his
death* And again, Ibid^^.
Ipsum semper offerimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur; That
is, We offer him always, or rather, we work a remembrance of his sacrifice.


PHIL. S. Chrysostom says, In E^^st. ad H^b. Hom^l. 17.
In many places there is offered not many Christ's, but one Christ, every where
being full and perfect, both here and there.


ORTHOD. S. Chrysostom expounds himself in the same place, We offer him,
(says he) or rather (...), That is, We work a remembrance of the sacrifice.
Where, by the way you may see, that S. Ambrose did borrow his former speech
from this place of Chrysostom.


PHIL. S. Augustine says, That Christ commanded the Leper to offer a
sacrifice according to the Law of Moses, A(...).
Quia nondum institutum erat hoc sacrificium, sanctum sanctorum, quod corpus
eius est; That is, Because this Sacrifice the Holy of holies, which is his
body, was not yet instituted. And elsewhere, Lib. 4. de Trinit. c. 14.
Quid gratius offerri, aut suscipi posset, quam caro sacrificij nostri, corpus
effectum sacerdotis nostri; That is, What can be offered or accepted more
gratefully, then the body of our Priest, being made the flesh of our Sacrifice?
And Cyrill, Leo, Fulgentius, and other Fathers have commonly the like.


ORTHOD. Then the answering of Austine, will be the answering of all. Now what
his meaning was, let himself declare. Epist. 23.
Was not Christ once offered or sacrificed in himself? And yet he is offered
in a sacrament, not only at all the solemnities at Easter, but every day to
the people; Neither does he lie, that being asked, does answer that he is
offered: For if sacraments have not a certain resemblance of those things
whereof they are sacraments, they should not be sacraments at all. And for this
resemblance, they take the names commonly of the things themselves: therefore,
as after a certain manner the sacrament of the Body of Christ, is the Body of
Christ, the sacrament of the Blood of Christ, is the Blood of Christ; so the
sacrament of faith is faith. And elsewhere, Contra Faust. lib. 20. c. 21.
The flesh and blood of the sacrifice of Christ, was promised by sacrifices of
resemblance before he came, was performed in truth and in deed when he
suffered, is celebrated by a sacrament of remembrance since he asc^nded.


PHIL. YOu cannot so delude the ancient Fathers of the Church, For, Bell. de
Missa l. 1. c. ^5.
the 3.
Nicen Council in that Canon, which Calvin and all other receive, says
plainly, That the Lamb of God offered vnbloodily, is laid upon the holy
Table.


ORTHOD. The Lamb Christ Jesus which was offered upon the Cross for the
sins of the world, is laid upon the holy Table, not substantially, but
Sacramentally.


PHIL. But the Council means substantially: for they say, Can. 14. Bin. t.
1. c. 1. p. 308.
It is come (by relation) to the holy Council, that in certain places and
Cities, the Deacons do reach the sacraments to the Priests. Neither the Canon
nor the custom has delivered this, That those which have not the power to
offer sacrifice, should reach the body of Christ to those that offer it. Where
you may see, that they do not only call it the body of Christ, but they
plainly describe a Priest, by having a power and authority to offer it; and
distinguish him from the Deacons which have no such power.


ORTHOD. Who can better tell the meaning of the Council, then those which were
present, and subscribed unto it? One whereof was Eusebius.


PHIL. Very true, and he tells, how when Constantine dedicated the Temple at
Jerusalem, De vita Constant. l. 4. c. 45.
some did pacify the divine Majesty with unbloody sacrifices, and mystical
Consecrations. Who were these but Mass Priests? and what were the unbloody
sacrifices, but the sacrifice of the Mass? for the Body and Blood of Christ
are there offered vnbloodily.


ORTHOD. Let Eusebius expound Eusebius: Demonst. Euang. l. 1. p. 28. (...).
Christ having offered himself for a sovereign sacrifice unto his Father,
ordained that we should offer a remembrance thereof unto God, in stead of a
sacrifice. Is not this a plain demonstration that in the judgment of
Eusebius, there is not in the Lords Supper a sacrifice properly so called, but
only a remembrance in stead of a sacrifice? And this remembrance he thus
describes; (...). page 27.
Which remembrance we celebrate by the signs of his Body and Blood upon his
Table. He calls it not a sacrifice, but a remembrance, celebrated, not by the
substance of his Body and Blood, but by the signs, and that not upon an Altar,
but upon a Table; and this he calls an unbloody sacrifice, as appears by
his own words; And pleasing God well, we offer unbloody sacrifices, and
reasonable and acceptable to him. So it is as clear as the noone day, that
Eusebius knew not your Massing sacrifice, but expounds the matter of the
Sacrament in all respects, as we do, and he being a part of the Nicen
council, and one that helped to make the Canons and subscribed unto them, must
needs be holden for a sufficient and faithful interpreter of his own, and
their meaning. So in him we have 318. Bishops, the most reverent sages and
Senate of the Christian world after the Apostles days, al denying your
sacrifice, and maintayning a remembrance in stead of a sacrifice. Wherefore
when they describe a Priest by offering of sacrifice, they do not mean a
sacrifice in substance, but in signification and representation. Neither can it
be proved that ever any of the ancient Fathers thought otherwise, nor that any
one of them was a Mass Priest, as may further appear by Jewel. reply. art.
1. Bi^so true difference. part. 4. Reinold. conf^c. 8. diu^s. 4. Morton.
appeal. l. 2. c. 7.
our learned divines, which have handled this point, to whom I refer you.
Wherefore seeing your sacrifising neither can be proved by the scriptures, nor
by the Fathers rightly understood, but is contrary to both: we detest it to the
bottom of hell, as a most blasphemous abomination, derogating from the
sovereign, and all sufficient sacrifice offered once for all by that one
Priest, which with one oblation entered the holy place, and has purchased an
eternal redemption for us. Hitherto of the first function of Popish
Priesthood: Now let us come to the second.


CHAP. IX.
Of the second question which concerns the power of absolution.

PHIL. THe second function of Priesthood, is the power of absolution which God
has given neither to King nor Emperor, to Angel nor Archangell, but only to
the Priest: and in this also Rhem in Ioh. 20. verse. 13.
you are defective in the Church of England.


ORT. What absolution do you mean, and in what manner is it given?


PHIL. There is an absolution in the Consistory, and an absolution in the Court
of Conscience; the former is from excommunication, and other spiritual
censures: the latter (which we mean) is from sin, and is given in Priestly
ordination, even by the words of Christ himself. For Pontif. in ordinat.
Pr^sb. Catechism. Romans de ord. sacram.
the Bishop imposes hands, saying, whose sins you forgive they are forgiven,
and whose sins you retain they are retained. etc.


ORTHOD. The very same words are used in the Church of England as may appear
by the book: The form of ordering of Priests.
The Bishop with the Priests present shall lay there hands severally upon the
head of every one that receives Orders: The receivers humbly kneeling upon
their knees, and the Bishop saying, Receive the holy ghost, whose sins thou
do forgive they are forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain they are
retained, and therefore if the power of absolution be given by these words,
then it is given and received in the Church of England.


PHIL. Not so, for though you have the words, yet you have not the true sense
of the words: and therefore neither do your Bishops give it, nor you receive
it.


ORTHOD. Then let us without all partiallity, examine the true sense and
meaning of them. For as much therefore as our Savior did represent a real
donation both by breathing, and saying, receive; without all controversy
somewhat was really given, and actually received; but what was that?
undoubtedly the holy Ghost; for he said, receive the holy Ghost. But what is
meant by the holy Ghost? It cannot be denied, that they received the presence
of the spirit for their direction, support and assistance, and the Lord has
promised the same spirit to all faithful ministers, when he said, Mat. 28. 20.
Behold I am with you (that is with you and your successors) until the end of
the world. To this purpose it is well spoken of Leo, Leo Sermon. ^ in An^^^ers.
di^. A.
Qui mihioneris est author, ipse fiet administrationis adiutor. that is, He
that is author of my burden, will be the helper in my administration: and
again, Ibid.
Dabit virtutem qui contulit dignitatem, i. He that gave me the dignity, will
give me strength to perform it. But seeing it is evident, that in the book of
God, the holy Ghost does many times signify the gifts of the holy Ghost, to
point out the fountain and welspring of those heavenly graces; the
interpretation of Saint Hieronym. E^. 150 ^d Hedibiam. q. 9.
Jerome may seem most consonant to reason, who by the holy Ghost understands
in this place, a grace of the holy Ghost, in these words, acceperunt spiritus
sancti gratiam, that is, they received a grace of the holy Ghost. It remains
therefore that we consider what grace that was. It was not the grace of
adoption or regeneration, because they had received that already, as appeared
by the fruits thereof Ioh. 6. 69.
We believe and know that thou art the Christ, the son of the living God: nor
the grace of miracles, because they received not that till afterward, Luke 24.
49.
Behold I will send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry in the city of
Jerusalem until you be induced with power from above, which promise was
fulfilled in the fiery tongues; it seems therefore to be some ordinary grace
which should continue with them, and their successors in the Church for ever,
as is confessed on both sides: what can this be but that which Christ himself
does mention in the words following, as it were of set purpose to take away al
ambiguous construction, whose sins you remit they are remitted etc. And this is
expressed likewise by S. Quo supra.
Jerome, who calls it gratiam qua peccata remitterent. i. a grace whereby
they might forgive sins. This is also the judgment of S. Chris. in Ioh. homil.
85.
Chrysostom, saying, a man should not err, if he should say that they then
received a certain power and spiritual grace, not that they should raise
again the dead, or work miracles, but that they might forgive sins. To
these we may join Saint Ambr. d^ paenit. l. 1. ^ 2.
Ambrose, who says, He that has received the holy Ghost, has received power
both to loose sin and to bind it: and a little after, Munus spiritus sancti
est officium Sacerdotis, that is, the gift of the holy Ghost is the Priests
office. Wherefore by (holy Ghost) is meant a ghostly ministerial grace or
power to forgive sins.


PHIL. Thus far we agree as may appear by our learned writers: Cardinal Bell.
de sacra. in genesis l. 1. c. 26. respondeo.
Bellarmine, Michael. de palacio in Ioh. c 20.
Palacius and others, but all the question is in what manner the Minister
forgiueth sins.


ORTHOD. Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
All things are of God, which has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ,
and has given unto us the Ministry of reconciliation. For God was in Christ
and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Whereby it appears
that God reconcileth the world properly, by not imputing their sins, the
Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel, ministerially as Ambassadors of
Christ, to whom is committed the word and ministry of reconciliation. For what
other thing is our forgiveness of sins then a reconciling of men to God? but
we reconcile men to God by preaching and declaring the word of the Gospel,
therefore by preaching and declaring the word of the Gospel we forgive sins.


PHIL. (...).
There is not only required to remission of sins the Preaching of the
Gospel but also baptism and penance. As it is written, (...).
Do penance and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins.


ORTHOD. When we say that the Minister forgiueth sins by preaching, we do
not exclude the Sacraments but include them. As when we refer a pardon to
the Kings letters patents, we do not exclude the seal, but mean the letters
patents with the seal annexed. For (as the Apostle says) to us is committed
the ministry of reconciliation. Which is not a ministry of the word only
but without all controversy of the Sacraments also. Therefore Christ in giving
us authority to forgive sins, has withal given us authority to use the
means thereof, that is, the ministry of the word and Sacraments, and because
we apply these means whereby God forgiueth sins, therefore we are said to
forgive sins. This is well expressed by Ferus one of your own Friars saying,
(...)
Quamuis Dei propriu^ opus sit remittere peccata, dicuntur tamen etiam Apostoli
remittere, non simpliciter, sed quia adhibent media per quae Deus remittit
peccata: haec autem media sunt, verbum Dei and Sacramenta. i. although it be
the proper work of God to forgive sins, yet notwithstanding the Apostles are
said to forgive sins, not simply but because they use the means by the
which God does forgive sins and these means are the word of God and the
Sacraments. Moreover it is a clear case that to this remission there is
required faith and repentance, after which follows ministerial absolution,
by preaching and applying publicly and privately the sweet promises of grace
to the penitent believer, and sealing them by the Sacraments to the soul and
conscience. This absolution in the court of conscience is agreeable to the
Scripture, and is not only practiced in the Church of England by Sermons and
Sacraments, but also solemnly proclaimed in our liturgy, and applied both
publicly in open penance, and privately in the visitation of the sick, as
also to particular penitents, whose wounded consciences require the same.


PHIL. The Council of (...).
Trent pronounces a curse upon such as wrest the words of Christ to the
authority of preaching the Gospel.


ORTHOD. To apply them to preaching in such sense as has been declared is no
wresting, but the true meaning of the Scripture, as you heard out of Saint
Paul, and therefore in cursing us, they curse Saint Paul: wherefore I will say
with the Prophet, (...)
they do curse, but thou (o Lord do bless. But for your better
satisfaction in this point, you shall hear the judgment of sundry principal
men in your own Church expounding this absolution in court of conscience as
we do. The (...).
master of the sentences having long sifted this point to and fro, at last
grows to this resolution: In hac tanta varietate quid ^^nendum? hoc san^,
etc. In this great variety what should we hold? truly (...) may say and
think this; That God only forgiueth and retains sins, and yet he has
given the power of binding and loosing unto the Church: but he binds and
loo^^th one way, and the Church another. For he forgiueth sin by himself
alone, who both cleanses the soul from inward blot, and loses it from the
debt of eternal death, but he has not granted this unto the Priest, to whom
notwithstanding he has given potestatem soluendi and ligandi. i. Ostendendi
homines ligatos vel solutos. i. the power of binding and loosing, that is of
declaring men to be bound or loosed. Whereupon the Lord did first by himself
restore health unto the leper, and then he sent him to the Priests, quorum
iudicio ostenderetur mundatus. i. by whose judgment he might be declared to be
cleansed: so likewise when he had restored Lazarus to life again, he offered
him to his Disciples that they might unbind him. And this he proves by a
place of Hiero^. ^ Mat. ^. 16.
Jerome which he only points at, but we will set it down more largely. In
Leuitico, etc In the book of Leuiticus we read of the lepers where they are
commanded to show themselves to the Priests, and if they shall have the
leprosy, that then they shall be made unclean by the Priests: not that the
Priests should make them lepers and unclean, but that they should have the
knowledge of the leprous, and not leprous: and that they may discern who is
clean, or unclean. Therefore as there the Priests do make the lepers clean
or unclean: so here the Bishop or Priest does bind and loose, etc. Hitherto
Saint Quo supra.
Jerome. Now the master having said that in remitting or retaining sins, the
Evangelical Priests have that authority and office, which in old times the
legal Priests had under the law, in curing of lepers, adds these words; Hi
ergo peccata dimittunt vel retinent, dum dimissa a Deo vel retenta indicant and
ostendunt i. therefore these do forgive sins, or retain them whiles they
show and declare that they are forgiven or retained of God. Hunc modum ligandi
and soluendi Hieron. supra notauit. i. this way of binding and loosing Ierom
has observed above. Thus far the master: who is followed verbatim by Petrus
Parisius, as is to be seen in Sixtus Sixth. Senensis bibl. ^. l 6. (...) 71.
Petrus
Senensis. And (...). (...). 4. s. q. 8 and 9. (...) 1. arg. ^coti.
Occam says, I answer according to the master, that Priests bind and loose,
because they declare men to be bound or loosed. Alexander Hales. Alex. de (...)
(...) part. 4. q. 21. m^^b. ^. ^. 339
Nunquam sacerdos absolueret quenquam de quo non presumeret quod esset
absolutus a deo. i the Priest would never absolve any man of whom he did not
presume that he were already absolved of God. If the Priest absolve none but
whom God has first absolved, the^ what can his absolution be else but a
certificate that the party is already absolved of God? And again, Item
Augustinus and Hugo de sancto victore, etc. Moreover Austin and Hugo de sancto
victore say, that in the raising of Lazarus was signified the raising again of
a sinner. But Lazarus was raised of the Lord before he was delivered to the
Disciples to be loosed, ergo absolutio sacerdotis nihil valet antequam homo
sit iustificatus per gratiam and suscitatus a morte culpae. 1. Therefore the
absolution of the Priest is of no value before a man be justified by grace, and
raised from the death of sin. And this he proves by strong reasons, as
follows, 1. It is a matter of equal power to baptize inwardly, and to
absolve from deadly sin: but it was not requisite that God should communicate
to any man) the power of baptizing inwardly, least our hope should be reposed
in man: therefore by the same reason it was not fit that God should communicate
(to any man) the power of absoluing from actual sin. And again, Nulla fit
remissio culpae nisi per gratiam, sed gratiam dare est potentiae infinitae. i.
There is no remission of sin (properly except only by grace: but to give
grace proceeds from an infinite power (whereof man is not capable) and
therefore no man can forgive sins properly. And if you be not yet persuaded,
how generally this is received I will let you see it by the words of Suarez the
Jesuit. (...) ^. disp. 16. ^. 2.
Fuit grauium doctorum opinio per ^anc potestatem non posse remitti peccatorum
culpas, sed solum declarari remissas, and remitti paenas: and in hoc vltimo est
quaedam diuer sitas. Nam quidam dixerunt hanc potestatem solum esse ad
^^^^ttendam paenam temporalem, alij vero ad aeternam. i. It was the opinion of
grave Doctors, that by this power the sinners offenses are not remitted, but
only declared to be remitted, and that the punishments are remitted; and in
this last point there is some diversity, for some said that this power is
only for the remission of temporal punishment, others for eternal. And he
says, that the former opinion is maintained by the master, Altisiodorensis,
Alex. de Hales, Bonauenture, Gabriel, Mayor, Thomas de Argent. Occam,
Abulensis, and others.

Moreover, Bon^^^. de vita B. Franc.
Bonauenture writing of the miracles which were done 5.
by the intercession of Saint Francis after his death, tells of a certain
woman, which when she was ready to be put into the grave, was by virtue of his
prayers restored from death to life, to that end she might reveal in
confession a certain sin which she never had confessed before. Which Bell.
de pae^it. l. 3 c. 12. idem. auctor.
Bellarmine relates as an argument to prove that auricular confession is
approved by God himself. If you believe this lying Legend, that the woman was
shriuen after her death, then you may like wise believe that the Priest
absolved her. For by what reason could he deny her absolution, if God raised
her by miracle to make confession? Now I would demand whether this woman dyed
in the state of damnation or salvation: if in state of damnation, then the
priest could neither justify her, nor declare her to be justified; because
they which die in their sins, shall perish in their sins: but if she dyed
in the state of salvation, and yet was raised by miracle to confess some sin
for the clearing of others, or for some other reason we know not, then the
Priest did not properly forgive her sins, but only pronounce that they were
forgiven. I will close up this point, with a memorable saying of Fetus in Mat.
c. 9. Editio Mogunt. 1559.
Ferus, upon these words, Whose sins you forgive, etc. Non quod homo proprie
remittit peccatum sed quod ostendat ac certificet a deo remissum: neque enim
aliud est absolutio quam ab homine accipis, quam si dicat, En filt certifico te
tibi remissa esse peccata; annuncio tibi te habere propitium deum, and
quaecunque Christus in Baptismo and Euangelio nobis promisit tibi nunc per me
annunciat and promittit. i. Not that man does properly forgive sin, but that
he shows and certifieth that it is forgiven of God: for the absolution which
thou receiuest from man, is nothing else, then if he should say, Behold my
son, I certify thee that thy sins are forgiven, I declare unto thee that thou
have God favorable, and what thing soever Christ has promised us in baptism,
and in the Gospel, he now declares and promises to thee by me.

WHerefore seeing we have in our ordination these words, receive the 6.
holy Ghost, and take them in the true sense according to the Scripture, the
consciences of our adversaries bearing us witness; we conclude that the Church
of England has such an absolution, as Christ has left unto his spouse,
consisting in the public and private use of the word and Sacraments.


CHAP. X.
An answer to the arguments of Bellarmine, by which he goes about to prove
absolution to be judicial and not declaratory.

PHIL. THat Christ gave unto his Church a true judicial power, to absolve with
authority, and consequently, that Priests are not only as heralds to
proclaim and declare, but also as judges in the Court of conscience, truly
and really to forgive sins, Cardinal Bell. de paenit. l. 3. c. 2.
Bellarmine has proved by seven arguments; five whereof are collected out of
the Scripture, the sixth is drawn from the authority of the Fathers, and the
seventh from reason, all which I will prosecute in order. The first is Ibid.
primum igitur.
collected from the Metaphor of the keys; of which it is said, Mat. 16. 19.
I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven For a key uses not to be
made or given, to signify that the door is open or shut, but to open and shut
it indeed. Now that which was promised by the keys, was performed in that
place of John, and therefore here he gave them power, not only to declare unto
men that their sins are forgiven, but also to forgive them indeed.


ORTHOD. As Adam for his sin was shut out of Paradise, so all his posterity,
proceeding from him by carnal generation, considered in their natural
corruption, are shut and locked out of heaven, into which no unclean thing can
enter. For as the Prophet says, Esai. 59. 2.
Your iniquities have made a separation between you and your God. Neither is
there any hope of salvation, unless the kingdom of heaven be unlocked
again. But what is the key to open this lock? There is a threefold key; the
first of authority, the second of excellency, and the third of Ministry. The
key of authority belongs only to God. For seeing every sin is a
transgression of Divine law, he only has sovereign authority to remit it,
against whom it is committed, and when he does remit it, then he sets open
the gates of heaven. The key of excellency belongs only to Christ, God and
man, who by his most sovereign sacrifice has made satis faction to God the
Father, purchased an eternal redemption for us, and meritoriously opened the
kingdom of heaven to all believers. The key of Ministry was given to the
Apostles, and their successors, to whom was committed the Ministry of
reconciliation: Which is well expressed by S. Amb. de spi^. sanct. l. 3. c. 19.
Ambrose, saying, Homines in remissionem peccatorum ministerium suum exhibent,
non ius alicuius potestatis exercent, neque enim in suo, sed in patris and
filij and spiritus sanctinomine peccata dimittunt: isti rogant, diuinitas
donat, humanum enim obsequium, sed munificentia supernae est potestatis i. Men
do perform a service or Ministry, for the forgiveness of sins, but they
do not exercise the authority of any power for they do not forgive sins in
their own name, but in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. They make request, the dietie bestows the gift: An office or service
is performed by man, but the bountiful gift is from supernal power. This
supernall power is the key of authority: this humane office, is the key of
Ministry. For as a key is made and given to open the door indeed: So God gave
the key of Ministry unto his stewards to open the door of heaven indeed. But
how? not by authority as God the Father, nor by excellency, as God the Son,
but by a ministerial forgiveness of sins, which is not to be restrained only
to the hearing of private confessions, as though in that one point lay all the
virtue and use of the Keys, but consists in revealing and applying the
merits of Christ, publicly and privately to the soul and conscience, and in
assuring those that believe and repent of their eternal salvation. Now whereas
you say, that a Key is not given to signify or declare that the door is open;
it is true. Yet you may know that similitudes must not be extended to every
circumstance; it is sufficient if there be a correspondencie in the maine
point. What though a Key cannot declare that the door is open? Yet it is the
Ministers duty to declare, that heaven is opened to all that believe and
repent; and this very declaring is an effectual means of opening it indeed.
For as when Christ unfolded the Scriptures, the Luke 24. 32.
hearts of the two Disciples did burn within them: so when the Ministers
declare the glad tidings of the Gospel, God kindles faith and repentance in
the hearts of his chosen; and when they do believe and repent, then the
Minister may safely pronounce the forgiveness of their sins, by the Blood of
Jesus Christ. Thus he is Gods effectual instrument to accomplish it, and his
Herald to proclaim it.


PHIL. Bell. quo supra.
Keys use to be given to Magistrates, to signify that they have power to
lock and unlock the gates of the City.


ORTHOD. And Christ gave the Keys to his Ministers, to signify that they have
a Ministerial power to lock and unlock the kingdom of heaven.


PHIL. Bell. Ibidem.
When it is said of Christ, he has the Key of David, he opens and no man
shuts, he shuts and no man opens; all men understand by the Key a true
power, and properly so called, by which Christ may absolve and bind by
judicial authority, and not signify or declare who is bound or loosed.
Wherefore seeing Christ does communicate his Keys with the Apostles and their
successors, they also shall have true power to bind and loose by judicial
authority.


ORTHOD. First, your Fab. Incar^. serut. sacerdot. page 76.
own men distinguish between the Key of excellency, and the Key of
Ministry. Secondly, even those things which are most proper unto Christ, are
ascribed to his Ministers; as for example the salvation of men's souls. For S.
Paul says to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
In doing this, thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear thee. In
like manner they may be said to forgive sins, and open the Kingdom of heaven.
But this is spoken by a figure, whereby that which belongs to the principal
agent, is ascribed to the instrument. And that no marvel, seeing a man by
turning from wickedness, and doing that which is right, is said to Ezech. 18. 27.
save his own soul.


PHIL. Bell. de paenit. lib. 3. c. 2.
A second Argument may be collected from the Metaphor of binding and loosing,
which does not signify to declare that one is bound or loosed, but to lay on
or take off bonds and fetters indeed.


ORTHOD. This is in effect the same with the former: therefore I refer you to
the former answer.


PHIL. Ibidem.
A third Argument may be drawn from this very place of S. John: For Christ
expressly gives them power not only to forgive sins, but also to retain;
Retinere autem quid est nisi nolle remittere? i. What is it to retain, but to
be unwilling to forgive? therefore remission is denied to them, whom the Priest
will not forgive.


ORTHOD. True, if the will of the Priest be guided by the rules of true
Religion. For he should be unwilling to forgive none, but only those that are
unbelieving, and unrepentant; from absoluing of whom he should be so far,
that it is his duty to denounce Gods wrath and judgment against them if they
continue obstinate.


PHIL. Ibidem.
The Lord says not, Whose sins you shall forgive they were forgiven, which
he would have said, if by remission he had meant declaration: but he says,
They are forgiven, because Christ does ratify the sentence, which the Priest
pronounces in his Name.


ORTHOD. But the Priest must absolve no man, saving those whom God has first
absolved, as you heard before, and is plainly delivered by Pope Gregory,
Greg. Hom. 26. in Euang.
Quos omnipotens Deus per compunctionis gratiam visitat, illos pastoris
sententia absoluat. Tunc enim vera est absolutio praeside^tis, cum aeterni
arbitrium sequitur iudicis: i. Let the sentence of the Pastor absolve them
whom Almighty God does visit with the grace of compunction; for then is the
absolution of the Spiritual ruler a true absolution, when he follows the
will of the Eternal Judge. And again, Ibidem.
Nos debemus per Pastoralem authoritatem soluere, quos authorem nostrum
cognoscimus per suscitantem gratiam viuificare, i. We ought absolve those by
our Pastoral authority, whom we know that our Author Christ Jesus has
revived with his quickening grace. Otherwise his absolution is vain. For as
the Legal Priest did not properly cleanse the Leper, yet he is said to Leuit.
14. 11.
cleanse him, because he declared him clean whom the Lord had cleansed: so
the Evangelical Priest, though he do not properly absolve from sins, yet
he is said to absolve, because he declares him absolved, whom the Lord has
absolved. Wherefore the meaning of Christ's words is this, Whose sins you
forgive, that is, whose sins, according to the rules of my Gospel you shall
pronounce to be forgiven, they are forgiven; That is, they are so certainly
forgiven, that the sentence you pronounce in earth, shall be ratified in
Heaven, as it is written, Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be
bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven. So here are three things: First, God the Father for Christ's sake
forgiueth sins: Secondly the Minister declares that God has forgiven them:
Thirdly, this declaratory sentence is ratified in Heaven.


PHIL. Bell ibidem. Qua^t^.
A fourth Argument may be drawn from this word Quorum, in this manner; The
Gospel is preached indefinitely to all men, But it is not the will of God that
this absolution should be given to all men, but to certain persons only, whom
the Priest judges fit: as appears by these words, Quorum peccata, etc. Whose
sins you forgive, etc.


ORTHOD. The Gospel is preached generally and indefinitely, to all men,
Whosoever believes and repents shall be saved; yet so, that in the general
is included this particular, If thou believe and repent, thou shall be saved.
Now a man's conscience sanctified by the Holy Ghost, does say, I believe and
repent: Therefore to him the general promise of the Gospel is made particular,
by particular application, and to such only making a sincere profession of
their faith and repentance, the Minister ought to pronounce forgiveness of
sins.


PHIL. Ibidem. Quinto.
A fifth Argument may be drawn from Christ's breathing: For as in the second of
the Acts, he gave the Spirit in the form of tongues, Because then he gave
them the gift of preaching, so here he gave it by breathing, because he gave
them the gift of forgiving of sins, not by preaching as you dream, but
plainly by quenching and dissoluing them. For as the wind does quench the
fire, and scater the clouds: so the absolution of the Priest does scatter
sins, and makes them to vanish: according to which Metaphor we read in Esaias,
Esaias 44. 22.
I have blotted out thy sins as a cloud.


ORTHOD. Christ did breath, to signify, that this heavenly gift proceeded from
himself, and therefore our Bishops when they utter these words do not breath,
because they are not Authors of this spiritual power, but only Gods delegates
and assigns to give men possession of his graces. Moreover Christ by breathing
did signify, that none was fit for this heavenly function but such as he
enabled with his spirit, and also that this holy spirit should assist his
ministers in the dispelling of sins. Neither is the place of Esaias for your
purpose: when the sky is darkened with clouds and mists, the Lord sends a wind
out of his treasure house, whereby they are scattered, the sky cleared, and
the golden beams of the sun restored: even so, when the poor soul and
conscience is ouercast with clouds of sin, and mists of sorrow, God by his holy
spirit concurring with his blessed word, brings men to faith and repentance,
and so forgiueth their sins, that he will never remember them any more. But
what is this to your Popish absolution?


PHIL. THe Bellarm. Ibide^* (...).
sixth argument is drawn from the authority of the Fathers, 6
and first of Chrysostom, out of whose third book of Priesthood, our learned
Cardinal produces six places, the first, where it is said that God has
given such power to those that are in earth, as it was not his will to give
either to Angels or Archangels, for it was not said unto them, what soever you
bind in earth shall be bound in heaven: but surely the Angels may declare unto
men, that if they believe, their sins are forgiven: therefore in the judgment
of Chrysostom, power is given unto the Priest, truly to bind and loose and
not by way of declaration.


ORTHOD. Act 10. 4.
Though the Angels being ministering spirits, may when it pleases the Lord
declare unto men, that if they believe their sins are forgiven; as well as the
Angel said to Cornelius b Thy prayers and thy alms are come up into
remembrance before God: yet this is rare and extraordinary; but the Priest does
it by his ordinary office: in which regard Chrysostom has reason to say, that
such power is given to Priests, as is neither given to Angels nor Archangels.


PHIL. Bell. Ibidem. pergit.
Chrysostom proceeds, and tells how earthly Princes have power, To bind
the body only, but the Priests bond touches the soul, and reaches unto
heaven. Now earthly Princes do not declare who is bound or loosed, but bind or
loose their bodies indeed, and therefore the Priests in binding and loosing of
souls do not declare who are bound or loosed, but by authority in the room
of Christ do bind or loose them indeed; if the comparison of Chrysostom be of
any value.


ORTHO. He compares them in respect of the objects, not in respect of the
manner: the object of the Princes bond is the body, the object of the Priest,
is the soul: but does follow because the Prince does bind or loose the body
properly, that therefore binding or loosing of the soul is attributed in the
like propriety of speech unto the Priest?


PHIL. (...) (...) (...).
Chrysostom upon these words whose sins you retain they are retained, says,
What power I pray you can be greater then this? but it is no great matter to
declare that sins are forgiven to the believers, and retained to the
unbelievers. For any man may perform it which can read the Gospel, neither
Priests only but the layity also, neither Catholics only but Heretics also,
yea and the devils themselves.


ORTHOD. It is no great matter to pronounce the words, but the excellency of
the Ministry consists in this, that they do it ex officio, and that
according to Gods own ordinance, therefore in the reverend performance thereof
they may expect a comfortable blessing.


PHIL. Ibidem pergit Pater.
Chrysostom says, The Father has given al manner of power to his son, and I
see the same power in all variety given to them by the son, but the Father
did not give to the son a bare ability to declare the Gospel, but by
authority to forgive sins, therefore the like is given to the Priests?


ORTHOD. The power which the Father gave to Christ contains all power in
heaven and in earth, but I hope you will not say that Christ gave all power in
heaven and earth to his disciples, therefore the words of Chrysostom need a
gentle interpretation, and must not be taken literally as they sound, but for
a rhetorical amplification. Again, the power to forgive sins is given to
Christ, and to his Disciples, but not in the same manner, for God the Father
forgiueth sins, by not imputing them, Christ, God and Man meritoriously, the
Ministers only Ministerially as you heard before.


PHIL. Ibidem pergit Chrysostom.
Chrysostom compares a Priest not with the kings Herald, which only declares
what is done, but with one who has power to east into prison, and deliver out
of prison: how could he more openly declare that the Priests power is truly
judicial?


ORTH. The Herald only proclaims the kings pardon, and is no instrument to
effect it; but the minister so proclaims salvation by Jesus Christ that he is
Gods instrument to work it, so the ministerial declaration is not a bare, but
an effectual declaration that men's sins are forgiven. For first the Law must
be effectually preached, to humble the soul, then the Gospel must be
effectually applied to kindle true faith. And as the Minister is Gods
effectual instrument in working: so he is his Ambassador effectually to
minister comfort to the penitent soul. Yet for all this he does not forgive
sins properly, but only ministerially. The like is to be said of his
delivering the souls of men out of prison. For that it cannot be meant
properly may appear by the other branch, because the Minister does not
properly cast any man into the spiritual prison, but the wicked being already
imprisoned and ^ettered with the chain of their own sins, and refusing the
light of the Gospel when it shines unto them and the sweet mercies of God in
Jesus Christ are said to be bound by a Priest, because he retains, that is,
pronounces that they are tied and bound with the chains of darkness, and
denounces the judgments of God against them so long as they remain
impenitent.


PHIL. Ibidem Addit v^tim^.
Chrysostom makes an other comparison between the legal Priests and the
Evangelical; for the Legal did purge the leprosy of the body, or rather not
purge it, but examine those that were purged: But it is granted to our Priests
not to purge the leprosy of the body, but the spots of the soul, I do not
say to examine them being purged, but altogether to purge them. In this place
to use the words of Cardinal Bellarmine, Saint Chrysostom does so plainly
condemn the opinion of our adversaries, that nothing at all can be answered
for them.


ORTHOD. Does the Priest altogether purge the spots of the soul? then it
seems when the penitent is presented before the Priest, his soul is spotted,
but by virtue of the Priests absolution the spots are presently washed away;
but I pray you tell me, whom does the Priest forgive and absolve? him whom the
Lord has absolved? or him whom the Lord has not absolved? if the Priest
absolve him whom the Lord has absolved, then he does not altogether purge the
spot of the soul, no nor properly purge them at all, but only declare that
the Lord has purged them. If you say that the Priest absolueth him whom the
Lord has not absolved, then he shall be forgiven, whom the Lord has not
forgiven: which is most absurd. Again, does the Priest before he pronounce
absolution see any tokens of faith and repentance: If he see none, then how
dare he pronounce absolution? and if he see any then the party is already
purged. Whereby it appears that the absolution of the ministry is only
declaratorie. Therefore the speech of Chrysostom cannot be taken properly,
but his meaning must be this, that the Priest seeing him brought by the
ministry of the Gospel to faith and repentance, and consequently purged,
certifieth his conscience, that he is altogether purged, and his sins washed
away by the blood of Jesus Christ.


PHIL. Bell. ^bid. Sed a^^liamus.
Gregory Naz. In ora^^^^ ad (...) (...) perc^ls^s
Nazianzen says that the law of Christ has subjected 7
temporal governors to his authority and throne, and that his power is more
ample and perfect then theirs.


ORTHOD. The Prince as supreme governor may by his royal authority
establish true religion, command both Priest and people to do their duty, and
punish those which do otherwise by temporal punishments: but the ministration
of the Word and Sacraments, and the exercising of spiritual censures belong to
the Bishop: and as the prelate ought to be subject to the sword in the hand of
the Prince, so a virtuous Prince submits himself to the word of God in the
mouth of the prelate. But does this prove that the Priest forgiueth sins
properly?


PHIL. Bell. Ibidem Sanct* Ambr.
SAint Ambrose proves Ambr. l. 1. (...) pen. cap. 2.
that Christ gave to the Priests, power to forgive 8
sins; and it is plain that he speaks of true power and not of the
ministry of preaching, both because the Nouatians did not deny that the
Gospel might be preached to all men, but they denied that the Priest might
forgive sins by authority: and also because Saint Ambr. ^. 7.
Ambrose says, that Christ has communicated to the Priests that power which
he himself has.


ORTHOD. The Nouatians did think that the Church had authority to bind, but
not to loose, as may appear by S. Ambrose in the same place. And S. Cyp.
(...). 52.
Cyprian being requested by Antonianus to unfold the heresy of Nouatian
shows, that he denied that such as were fallen should be admitted any more
into the Church. Baron. anno 254. n. 107.
Baronius says, that he grew to such rashness as to deny that the remission
of sins (which is in the Apostles Creed) was to be found in the Church.
Therefore as they denied that Priests might forgive sins by authority: so
they denied that they might forgive sins by way of declaration, for they
denied that there was any forgiveness of sins in the Church. Wherefore Saint
Ambrose in confuting the Nouatians, has no more confuted our opinion, then he
has confuted yours.


PHIL. Bell. ibid. S. Hieron.
SAint Ierom speaking of Priests says, Ep. ad Heliodorum.
Claues regni caelorum habentes, 9
quodam modo ante diem iudicij iudicant. i. having the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, they judge after a sort before the day of judgment. S. August. de
C^uit. Dei lib. 20. c. 9.
Austin expounding these words, I saw seats, and them that sat upon them,
and judgment was given them, says thus. We must not think that this is
spoken of the last judgment, but the seats of prelates, and prelates
themselves, by whom the Church is now governed are to be understood, neither
can we better apply it to any judgment given, then to that of which it is
said, whatsoever you bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whereupon the
Apostle says, what is it to me to judge of them that are without? do not you
judge of them that are within?


ORTHOD. According to Saint Ierom the Bishop or Priest does bind or loose as
the Leuitical Priests did make the lepers clean and unclean. Which in his
judgment was not properly, but because they had the knowledge of leprous, and
not leprous: and should discern who was clean and unclean. This is that
which Saint Ierom means, when he says they judge after a sort before the
day of judgment: which kind of judgment we acknowledge.


PHIL. In judgment there are two things, causae cognitio, and sententiae
dictio: the knowledge of the cause, and the pronouncing of the sentence. Have
you these two?


ORTHOD. We have: for first the party makes a profession of his faith and
repentance unto the Minister; here is causae cognitio: and then the Minister by
the authority which Christ has committed unto him, pronounces forgiveness
of his sins; here is sententiae dictio. This is the practice of the Church of
England agreeable to the law of God, and the ancient Fathers. But if by causae
cognitio, you mean a particular enumeration of all their sins, as a matter
necessary to salvation, and by sententiae dictio, understand such a sentence
as imposes works of penance satisfactorie to God; when you can prove them out
of the Scripture we will embrace them* in the mean time we know them not.
Hitherto of Saint Ierom. The same answer also may serve for the place of Saint
Austin, if he mean the same judgment.


PHIL. POpe Bell* abidem S. Inno^ent.
Innocent the first says, Innoc. 1 ^n Epist. 1. ad Decentium. c. 7.
De pondere aestimando delictorum, sacerdotis 10
est iudicare, etc. 1. It is the office of the Priest to judge what sins are
to be esteemed heauiest.


ORTHOD. He must discern the deepenesse of the wound before he can apply the
medicine. But how does this prove the point in question, to wit, that the
Priest forgiueth sins properly?


PHIL. SAint Bell. ibid. S. Gregory.
Gregory says, Hom. 26. in Euangelia.
principatum superni iudicij sortiuntur, vt vice 11
Dei quibusdam peccata retineant, quibusdam relaxent. i. the Disciples obtain
a principality of judgment from above, that they may in Gods stead retain
the sins of some, and release the sins of others.


ORTHOD. They are judges to discern sin, that so they may apply the
medicine according to the quality of the offenders; yea we do not deny but
the Church may enjoin an outward penance for the further mortifying of sin,
testifying their inward remorse, and for the more ample satisfaction both of
the parties offended, and the whole Church of God; and after the performance of
all these things, there may follow a ministerial absolution pronounced by the
Ambassadors of God, but this is only declaratorie, as may appear by Gregory
himself in the same homily, in the places before alleged.


PHIL. THe Bellar^inus Ib^dem. Sep^i^o.
seventh argument is drawn from reasons: and first, if 12.
the Priest absolve not as a judge but only by way of declaration, then no man
should perish for want of a Priest to reconcile him, because if he believe, his
sins are already forgiven although there be none to declare it. But August.
Ep. 180. ad Ho^ra^um.
Austin writes plainly that some desiring to be reconciled, and therefore
believing in Christ do perish everlastingly, because they die before they could
be absolved by a Priest. An non cogitamus, etc. i. Do we not consider when men
are come to the extremity of such dangers, and have no means to fly from
them, what a running together there uses to be in the Church of both sexes of
all ages, some carnestly desiring Baptism, others reconciliation, others the
action of penance it self, all desiring comfort, and the making and
delivering of the Sacraments; where if Ministers be wanting, how great
destruction does follow them which depart out of this world, either not
regenerate or bound? And moreover how great mourning there is of their
faithful friends, which shall not have them with them, in the rest of life
eternal? And Leo writes the like to Theodorus. Out of which places we
understand that sacramental reconciliation has power to justify, and is not
only a declaration of justification already received or hereafter to be
received.


ORTHOD. Austin does not say, that some desiring to be reconciled and therefore
believing in Christ, do perish everlastingly. For he knew very well that this
is contrary to the Scripture, which says, Ioh. 3. 15.
He that believes shall never perish, but have life everlasting. Therefore it
is most certain that the true believer cannot perish for want of a Priest. If
you ground upon these words, some desiring Baptism, others reconciliation,
they are not referred to the parties themselves which were in danger of death
being as yet unbaptized and unreconciled, but to their friends, which flocked
together in respect of their danger: therefore it does not appear that Austin
speaks of such as desired reconciliation; but rather the contrary, for ligati
are such as stand bound with the chains of their sins. You will say, how do
they perish for want of a Priest? I answer that if one were present which by
commission from Christ might display the riches of Gods mercy unto them, who
can tell whether their hearts might be opened to believe and repent unto
salvation, and so their chains might be loosed? but when there is none
present, that can minister a word of comfort unto them, they being known to be
notorious sinners may be thought to perish for want of a Priest, not for want
of a Popish but for want of a preaching Priest. Which may yet appear more
plainly by the other branch of the unbaptized. For these words ( desiring
Baptism) must be either referred to the parties or to their friends. If the
parties desire Baptism, then they do not perish for want of Baptism, for the
Baptism of the spirit does supply the want of the Baptism of water. Bell. de
sacr. bapt. cap. 6. At sint.
Bellarmine himself says, Sine dubio credendum est veram conuersione^
supplere baptismum aquae, cum non ex contemptu sed ex necessitate sine baptismo
aquae aliqui decedunt. i. We must believe without doubt that true conversion
does supply the Baptism of water, when as any depart this life, without the
Baptism of water, not of contempt, but by reason of necessity. And this he
proves first by the Prophet Eze. 18.
Ezekiel, saying, If the wicked repent him of his sins, I will remember his
iniquity no more. Secondly, by S. Amb. in oratione de obit^ Valentiniani.
Ambrose, who says of Valentinian the Emperor. Quem eram regeneraturus amisi,
sed ille gratiam quam sperauerat non amisit. i. I have lost him whom I was
about to regenerate (by Baptism) but he has not lost the grace which he
hoped for. Moreover by Aug. l. 4. de Bap. c. 22.
Austin, Bern. Epistola 77.
Bernard, Pope Cap. Apostolicam, de presb. non Bapt.
Innocent the third, yea by the Council of Sessione. 6. c. 4.
Trent, which expounds the necessity of baptism to be inre, or in voto. i.
either in act or in desire. And Lorin. Ies. Comm. in act. 2.
Lorinus the Jesuit does likewise prove out of S. Aug. Quest. super Leu. l. 3.
que. 84.
Austin, that the invisible sanctification is to some both present and
profitable without the visible Sacraments. Wherefore, if the parties desire
Baptism, they cannot perish for want of a Priest. And if you refer this
desire of baptism not to the parties, but to their friends, then you must
likewise refer the desire of reconciliation; and so you confirm my former
speech, and confute your own; thus much for answer to your first reason, let
us hear the second.


PHIL. Bell. ibidem Deinde.
Secondly, if the Priest did forgive sins only by declaration, then it is
vain and ridiculous, to absolve those that are deaf, and void of senses. But
in the old Church, not only the deaf, but such also as by reason of
sickness were beside themselves, were sometimes reconciled as appears by
Aug. l. 1. de adulter. Coniug. ^^lt.
Austin, Leo in Epistola ad Theoderum.
Leo, the fourth Council of Can. 76.
Carthage, and the Council of Can. 12.
Orange.


ORTHOD. They reconciled not all, that were deaf and dumb, and bereft of
senses, but only those that either before by their words and deeds, or then
presently by their signs did testify their repentance, as may appear by the
places alleged. For Austin says, Si desperati and intra se penitentes
iacuerint, nec pro se respondere potuerint, baptizandos puto. i. If they shall
lie without all hope of recovering their bodily health, having repentance
within themselves, and not able to answer for themselves, in my opinion they
ought to be baptized. And a little after, Quae autem baptismatis, eadem
reconciliationis est causa: i. that cause which moves us to confer baptism,
may move us to give reco^ciliatio^. And Leo says, if by any force of sickness
they shallbe so oppressed, that they are not able to signify in the presence
of the Priest, that thing which a little before they desired, the testimonies
of the faithful, which are about them, shouldbe profitable unto them, that
they may obtain the benefit both of penitence and of reconciliation. And the
4. Council of Carthage says, He that desires penitence in his sickness, if by
chance (while the Priest comes unto him) he shall become dumb, or fall into
a frenzy, let those which heard him give testimony, and let him receive
penite^ce. And the Council of Orange says, he which is suddenly dumb, may be
baptized and receive penitence, if he have testimony of others, that he was
formerly willing, or do manifest his present will by his signs. Now to
reconcile men in these cases, is neither vain nor ridiculous, although it be
done only by way of declaration. For if they understand what is done, it
brings unto the^ a singular comfort: if they be past sense, yet if God shall
restore them, when they hear what was done it will rejoice them: and if they
do not recover, yet it shall bring this benefit to all that shall hear it,
that Gods messenger upon due examination, has pronounced that they dyed in
faith and repentance.


PHIL. Ex bell. ibidem. Yertio.
If absolution be only declaratory, then this declaration is either absolute or
conditional. If it be absolute, then it is either rash or superfluous. For if
the Priest know not whether the party has faith and repentance, and yet
pronounce absolutely that his sins are forgiven, then he cannot be excused
from rashness: and if he know it in some sort, yet because the party knows
it better then he, his declaration shall be superfluous. And if the
declaration be only conditional, then it cannot comfort the conscience; and
consequently it is to no end, and therefore both rash and superfluous.


ORTHOD. The declaration is conditional. For though upon due and special
consideration, we may say privately and particularly to this or that man; i
pronounce that thy sins are forgiven thee: yet this is always to be
understood with a secret condition; and the condition is this, If thou believe
and repent: Neither may we pronounce it otherwise, then upon a charitable
persuasion proceeding upon probable grounds, that this condition is fulfilled.


PHIL. But how can it comfort the conscience, seeing the condition is
uncertain?


ORTHOD. It is certain to the conscience of the party himself?


PHIL. What need is there then of the Ministers absolution?


ORTHOD. Yes, for the party knowing in his own soul that he made a sincere
confession, is comforted by the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, declaring ex
officio, the sweet promises of the Gospel, according to Christ's appointment.


PHIL. Bellar. ibid. Quarto.
If it be only declaratory, then it may be performed by a Layman, by a woman,
a child, an infidel, yea by the devil himself, yea by a Parret if he be
taught to speak, as well as by a Priest.


ORTHOD. Who taught this Parret thus to speak, let wise men judge. But to the
point; A man may be said to pronounce and declare remission of sins two
ways. First, by a narratiue and historical rehearsal out of the general
duty of charity; and so may every Christian. Secondly, by a Ministerial
power given by a special commission from God, adorned and established with a
special promise, and so may every lawful Minister. The commission is given us
in our Ordination, Whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven. The promise was
made in these words, Behold, I am with you until the end of the world. Both
are expressed in these words of Job 33. 23.
Job, If there be an Angel with him, (that is with the man whose soul draws
near unto the grave) or an interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto man
his righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, and will say deliver him
that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation. Here
are two persons to be considered. First, a man lying at the point of death,
distressed and groaning under the burden of his sins; Secondly, the man of
God appointed to comfort those that mourn in Sion. The latter is described
four ways: by his Titles, Office, Commission, and Gods promise unto him. His
Titles are an Angel or interpreter: his Office, to declare unto man his
righteousness; that is, the righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to all
believers, according to the covenant of grace: his Commission, Deliver him that
he go not down into the pit: The promise, Then will God have mercy upon him,
and say, I have received a reconciliation. Such Titles, such Office, by such
special Commission and promise, are not given to any Lay man in the Book of
God. Wherefore, though they are bound by their general calling, to edify and
comfort one another, yet this belongs to the Minister in a special manner.
Neither is there any doubt but God will give a special blessing to his own
Ordinance. Thus have we examined all Bellarmines arguments, and find them to be
nothing else but smoke: He has sown the wind, and reaped the whirlewinde.
Hitherto of Absolution, as it belongs to the Minister. Now the parts of
penance which you require in the penitent, as Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction, may be passed over, because we speak of the Priest, and not of
the penitent. Yet give me leave to tell you, that Auricular confession, as it
is used in the Church of Rome, is a policy to diue into the secrets of men,
not so much to apply salues unto their sores, or to yield true comfort to the
wounded conscience, as to work for your own advantage, and to turn all
things to your own pleasure and profit. If you say, that this may be the fault
of some particular men, and not of the Church: yet to urge it as you do, as a
thing Conc. Trid. sess. 4. Can. 7.
necessary to salvation by Law divine, is the fault of your Church. Surely this
doctrine was not known to Confess. lib. 10. c. 3.
S. Austine, when he said, Quid mihi cum hominibus vt audiant confessiones meas
quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos? i. What have I to do with men
that they should hear my Confessions, as though they should heal all my
diseases? Nor to Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. Hom. 2.
Chrysostom, who says, Art thou ashamed to confess thy sins? rehearse them
daily in thy prayers: for I do not say that thou should disclose them to
thy fellow servant, who may mock thee, but to God who heals them. And as for
your Popish Satisfaction it is a most blasphemous derogation from the all
sufficient Satisfaction of our Savior Jesus Christ. For you do not mean
thereby a satisfaction to the party offended, nor Canonical satisfaction to
the Congregation for the taking away of public scandal, (both which we
willingly embrace) but you teach that after the Priest has forgiven the
penitent his sins, there still remains the very same Poena illa quae luenda
restat, post culpae remissionem, est illa ipsa poena sensus, quam in g^henna
pati debuisset peccator, remota solum aetern tate. Bell* de poenit. l. 4. c. 1.
Quod si.
punishment which the sinner should have suffered in hell fire, excepting only
eternity; for which you enjoin him to make satisfaction to God by works of
Popish penance. Moreover, you teach works of supererogation, and that Bellar.
de indulg l. 1. c. 2. propos. 4.
many holy men have suffered more for God and righteousness sake, then the guilt
of their temporal punishments, to which they were subject by reason of their
sins required; and that this superfluity remains as a treasure in the
Church, to be dispensed by the Prelates in their indulgences, especially by the
Pope in the year of Iubile: which shameless practice, what is it else, but a
devise to get money? Thus you have turned repentance into a Sacrament of
penance, and penance into Mines of silver and gold. Hitherto of our Presbyters.
Now let us come to the Deacons.


CHAP. XI.
Of the third controversy concerning Deacons.

PHIL. THere are no Deacons in the Church of England, and therefore you cannot
be lawful Presbyters.


ORTHOD. Bellar. de sacram. Ord. c. 5. Presbyteratus non includit essentialiter
Diaconatum.
Bellarmine confesses, that the order of a Deacon, is not essential to the
order of Priesthood: and therefore though we had been ordained per saltum, yet
you could not deny us the true order of Priesthood. But we are not ordained per
saltum; Our Church has decreed, that there Constitutions and Canons Eccl^s.
Anno 1603. Canon. 32.
may be ever some time of trial of their behavior in the office of Deacons,
before they be admitted to the order of Priesthood. And for the Ordination,
after due knowledge of the virtuous conversation and examination of the
sufficiency of the person, it is performed with religious prayer by a The
form of making Bishops etc. in the preface.
Bishop, upon a Sunday or holy day in the face of the Church, in these words,
In the ordering of Deacons.
Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon etc.


PHIL. The Ex Bell. de cleric. c 13.
office of a Deacon is, to assist the Priest in saying of Mass. Do your
Deacons so?


ORTHOD. That the Deacon should assist the Priest in the administration of holy
things concerning his office, is granted on both sides; but for your Popish
massing and sacrifising, we have proved, that it is a profaning of Christ's
ordinance, and that it is neither lawful for you to do it, nor for the Deacons
to assist you: wherefore seeing we have already justified both our Bishops
which ordain, and the office or function of our Presbyters or Priests, we
conclude, that as our Bishops and Presbyters, so our Deacons also are lawful
in the Church of England. Thus have we examined your objections against the
ministry of the Church of England, and find them to be mere cauilles. Neither
can you prove that our calling is in any thing, contrary to the Scripture, or
to the practice of reverend antiquity, but your sacrifising Priesthood
appears not only to be the invention of man, but also sacrilegious, and
abominable in the sight of God. Wherefore I beseech you repent of your sins,
renounce your Antichristian practice, return to your dear Country, cease to
be Philodox, and become an Orthodox.


CHAP. XII.
Wherein is declared that though we derive our calling from such Bishops as
were Popish Priests, yet our calling is lawful, and theirs unlawful.

PHIL. WEll, I perceive one thing that howsoever you speak against Popish
Priests, calling them sacrilegious and abominable, yet when your own calling
is put to the trial, you are glad to derive it from such Bishops as were Popish
Priests, which you so disdainefully call sacrilegious and abominable.


ORTHOD. And I perceive another thing, that howsoever you exclaimed against
Cranmer as a Schismaticke, and burned him for an Heriticke: yet when the
glorious succession of your Bishops in Queen Mary's time, is put to the trial,
you are forced to derive it from him whom you so scornefully call a Schismatike
and an Heretic. But if our forefathers derived their orders from such Bishops
as were Popish Priests, what inconvenience will follow?


PHIL. Then either confess your calling to be unlawful, or accknowledge ours
to be lawful, from whence you derive it: You cannot gather figs of thorns,
nor grapes of thistles, neither is it possible for a rose to spring out of a
nettle.


ORTHOD. But a garden of Roses may be ouergrowne with nettles. For the
Ministry planted by Christ, was a sweet rose without any nettle; and so it
continued in the Church for certain ages: but when Antichrist began to reveal
himself in the Temple of God as though he were God, the Romish Priesthood
became a monstrous birth, strangely compounded, half rose, half nettle: the
Church of England in the beginning of reformation did borrow from the Church of
Rome the rose, but left the nettle.


PHIL. What will you make of us? are we Ministers or lay men? if we be
Ministers, then so acknowledge us. If we be lay men, then I pray you what was
Cranmer, who had no Cousecration but in our Church? what were all the Bishops
in Kings Edwards time which were Consecrated by Cranmer? what was Matthew
Parker, Grindall, Sands, Horn, which were all ordained Exempla habemus in
Anglia quam pluri^^, vt Parkeri, Grindalli, Sandesij Horni and aliorum qui
secundum Catholicum ri^um olim Presbyteri ordinati essent. Brist. Antih. motiu.
^. 2. page 266.
Priests in our Church? were they all lay men? what are all the Ministers of
England at this day, which derive their orders from the former? are they all
laymen?


ORTHOD. Your Popish Priests are neither the true ministers of the Gospel, nor
merely laymen. For your ordination consists of two parts; the former in
these words, take thou power to offer sacrifice, and to celebrate mass for the
quick and the dead, which you account the principal function of Christian
Priesthood, but in truth it makes you not the Ministers of Christ, but of
Antichrist: the latter in these words, receive the holy ghost, whose sins thou
forgiuest, they are forgiven, and whose thou retainest, they are retained, in
which Evangelical words, there is delivered a ghostly ministerial power to
forgive sins, which according to the true meaning of Christ is performed by
the ministry of reconciliation, therefore whosoever has received this power,
has withal received the ministry of reconcilation, consisting as was before
declared in the due administration of the word and sacraments.


PHIL. If it be so, then you must confess that the Priesthood of the Church of
Rome has the ministerial function, because these words are used in our
ordination.


ORTHOD. Though these words as they were spoken by Christ, practiced in the
primitive Church, and are used at this day in the Church of England, imply the
substance of this holy function, yet as you abuse them in the Church of Rome,
to maintain Popish shrift, the gold is covered with dross, and the sweet
flower ouershadowed with noisome weeds. Wherefore if we consider your
Priesthood, as it is a totum aggregatum, consisting of sacrifising and
absoluing, it is unlawful and contrary to the Scripture: If we come to the
parts thereof, your massing and sacrifising is simply abominable: the other
part so far as it relieth upon the words of Christ, taken in their true sense
and meaning, is holy, and implies a ministerial power, which notwithstanding,
by your construction and practice is greatly depraved.


PHIL. I will prove our Priesthood to be lawful by the Urged by Brist. Mot.
21. and by Christ. a sacro Bo^co de inuest. Christi Eccles. ^. ^.
practice of your own Church, which against you is as good as a thousand
witnesses. For when any of our Priests forsake the Catholic Church, and join
themselves with you, you do not give the^ new orders, but presently receive
the^ into the bosom of your Church, suffering them to execute the ministerial
function, by virtue of those orders which they received in the Church of Rome.


ORTH. None can be admitted with us to execute the office of a minister,
before he subscribe to the articles of religion, as may appear by this act of
Parliament. 13. Elis. ^. 12.
That the Churches of the Queens Majesty's dominions may be served with
pastors of sound religion, be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that every person under the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall
pretend to be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy word and Sacraments, by reason
of any other form of institution, Consecration, or ordering, then the form
set forth by Parliament, in the time of the late King of most worthy memory
King Edward the sixth, or now used in the reign of our most gracious
sovereign Lady, before the feast of the Nativity of Christ next following
shall in the presence of the Bishop or Guardian of the spiritualties of some one
Diocese where he has or shall have Ecclesiastical living, declare his
assent and subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the
confession of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments
comprised in a Book imprinted, entitled Articles, etc. Among which Articles
this is one, Artic. 31.
The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and
actual: and there is no other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.
Wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said that the
Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain
or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits. By this you may
plainly perceive, that no popish Priest can possibly be admitted in the Church
of England, unless he utterly disclaim and renounce the first function of
your Priesthood, which consists in Massing and Sacrifising, and the latter
also so far as it is contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England. But
whatsoever is in it from God, and according to the true sense of the Scripture,
as for example, the power of forgiving sins by the ministry of
reconciliation that we embrace and acknowledge. It is a Rose which is found in
the Romish wilderness, but the plants thereof were derived from the garden of
God: It is a river which runs in Egypt, but the fountain and spring of it
is in Paradise: it is a beam which is seen in Babylon, but the original of it
is from the sphere of heaven. Wherefore when your Priests return to us. Our
Church paring away their pollutions, suffers them to execute their
ministerial function, according to the true meaning of Christ's words.

THe like moderation is used in other reformed Churches, as witnesses 2.
Prince Greg. princ. An^. f. 66. B.
Anhalt. Hac vtimur moderatione vt ad parochialia munera euocatos, si verbum
posthac pure docere and Sacramenta iuxta Christi institutionem administrare se
velle permittant, recipiamus: horumque contenti vocatione and muneris demandati
commissione ordinationem and manus impositionem non iteremus. i. We use this
moderation, that we receive such as are called to the charge of particular
Parishes, if they promise that they will henceforth teach the word purely, and
administer the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ: and we being
content with their calling, and commission of their function already committed
unto them, do not reiterate their ordination and imposition of hands. This is
agreeable to the judgment of the learned Authors of the Articuli Smalcaldici;
si Artic. Smalcald. part. 3. Artic. 10.
Episcopi suo officio recte fungerentur and curam Ecclesiae and Euangelij
gererent, posset illis nomine charitatis and tranquillitatis, non ex
necessitate permitti, vt nos and nostros concionatores ordinarent and
confirmarent, hac tamen condition vt seponerentur omnes laruae, prestigiae,
deliramenta and spectra pompae Ethnicae. i. If the Bishops would rightly
perform their office, and carry a care of the Church and Gospel, it might be
permitted unto them in regard of love and peace, though not of necessity, that
they should ordain and confirm us and our Preachers, yet upon this condition
that all visards, deceits, all dotages and shows of heathenish pomp should
be set aside. This and the rest of the Articles were subscribed unto by Martin
Luther, Iustus Jonas, Philip Melancthon, vrbanus Regius, Osiander, Brentius,
and many more. To these we may join the judgment of Calvin, Epist. 37 3.
vbi sese ipsi offerunt ad munus illud deinceps praestandum, non mole illis ab
Ecclesia conceditur quod ab ipsis ante minus legitime vsurpatum erat. Duo sunt
in illo statu summa vitia, vnum quod non recta ratione instituti sunt ^d munus
Ecclesiasticum, alterum quod de illo grad^ sese deiecerunt dum nihil eius
praesti^erunt quod ad rem pertineret. Sed illud non facit quo minus agnoscantur
pro ministris ordinariis, vbi sese Ecclesiae coniungere paratos ostendunt:
atque ita de nouo confirmentur demum ad corrigendum praecedentem defectum. When
such as have been popish Priests do offer themselves from henceforth to
perform the ministerial function, that which before was usurped of them
unlawfully, is now not amiss granted unto them by the Church. For there are
two great faults in that state; one that they are not rightly instituted to the
Ecclesiastical office: another that they have deprived themselves from that
degeee by doing nothing belonging to the matter. But this does not hinder that
they may be acknowledged for ordinary ministers when they show themselves
ready to join themselves to the Church, and so may be confirmed again a new,
to correct their former default. And Ibidem.
again, Constat non posse haberi pro Christianis pastoribus* nisi prius
abrenuncient sacerdotio papali ad quod prouecti erant vt Christum
sacrificare^t, quodest blasphemiae genus omnibus modis detestandum. Praeterea
etiam requiritur vt aperte profitea^turse abstinere omnino velle ab omnibus
illis superstitionibus and faeditatibus, quae simplicitati Euangelij repugnant.
i. It is evident that they cannot be esteemed for Christian pastors, unless
first they renounce the Popish Priesthood to which they were promoted that they
might sacrifice Christ which is a kind of blasphemy by all means to be
detested. Moreover there is required, that they make an open profession, that
they will altogether refrain from all those superstitions and impurities which
are repugnant to the simplicity of the Gospel.


PHIL. But one of your Ministers cannot so easily be metamorphised 3
into a Catholic Priest; first the devil must be coniured out of him in
this manner. Pontif. in ord. ad reconci^iand. Apost. Schis. vel Haereticum. p.
649.
Exorcizo te immunde spiritus, etc. I conjure thee, thou foul spirit by God
the Father almighty, and by Jesus Christ his Son, and by the holy Spirit,
that thou depart out of this servant of God, whom God and our Lord vouchsafes
to deliver, from errors and from thy deceits, and to call back to the
Catholic and Apostolic holy Mother Church. Thou cursed and damned spirit,
he commands thee, who having suffered, and being dead and buried for the
salvation of men, has conquered thee and all thy forces, and rising again is
ascended into heaven whence he will come to judge both the quick and the dead,
and the world by fire. This is the form of the Church in reco^ciling all
Apostataes, Heretics and Schismatics.


ORTHOD. Who so duly considers your positions and practices, may very well
think that you are more likely to conjure the devil into a man, then out of
him. Woe to you Seminaries and Jesuits, Hypocrites, you compass sea and land
to make one proselite, and when he is become one, you make him two fould more
the child of Hell, then ye your selves are. But when he is reconciled what is
then to be done.


PHIL. Though now he be a Catholic when the Devil is coniured out of him,
yet before he can be Priest, he must be cast wholly in a new mould. For as I
told you we account your Ministers but merely lay men without orders.


ORTHOD. The more to blame you; and therein you degenerate from your
forefathers, as may appear by the articles sent by Queen Mary to Bishop
Bonner, one whereof was this.

Act^ an^ Monumen^^. vol. 2. p. 1295.
Item touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to any orders after the
new sort and fashion of orders: considering they were not ordered in very
deed: the bishop of the Diocese, finding otherwise sufficiency and ability
in these men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then
according to his discretion, admit them to minister. Here you see that they
did not ordain them a new, but only supply that which they thought to be
wanting, and therefore they misliked not our orders in whole but in part.


PHIL. Yes they wholly misliked them, as you may see by the words: considering
they were not ordered in very deed. If they were not ordered in very deed, then
howsoever they pretended orders, yet they had no orders at all, but were
merely lay men, and so are you. For that which they call the new sort and
fashion of orders, was according to the book established by King Edward, which
is used in England to this very day.


ORTHO. Does not a Bishop ordain when he imposes hands, and says, Receive
the holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, etc.


PHIL. Bell. de Sacram. ord. l. 1. c. 9. ad tertiam respondeo.
I answer that Priests are ordained when it is said unto them, take thou power
to offer sacrifice, but they are also ordained afterward, when it is said unto
them, Receive the holy Ghost. For by the former words they are ordained to the
function of sacrificing, by the latter to the function of absoluing, by both
jointly to the full and perfect order of Priesthood.


ORTHOD. But these words; Receive the holy Ghost, were used in king Edwards
time, and are to this day in the Church of England, in making of Ministers. And
therefore those that are promoted to orders after the new sort and fashion as
you call it, are ordered in very deed, neither did the Penners of the article
mean otherwise.


PHIL. Are not their words plain that they were not ordered in very deed?


ORTHOD. They meant that they were not ordered fully and perfectly, and
therefore advised the Bishops to supply that which wanted, Which they could not
say with reason, if they had thought them to be merely lay men; therefore they
judged them to be Priests in part, and yet part of the office to be wanting,
which needed supply. That which they had, was the power received by these
words, Receive the holy Ghost. That which they supposed to be wanting, was the
power of sacrificing. Therefore their meaning was not to reiterate that which
they had, but to supply that which was wanting in their conceit, even as we on
the contrary side cause such as come from Popery to us to renounce the power of
sacrificing which we hold sacrilegious, but do not reiterate those
Evangelical words, wherein we agree. And this you must needs grant unless you
will allow of reordination.


PHIL. Reordination? God forbid. No sir we will never allow of that. For order
imprinteth a Character, and therefore can never be reiterated.


ORTHOD. But you granted before that a Priest is ordained when the Bishop says
unto him, Receive the holy Ghost. And therefore if the power of remitting
sins given in these words, were reiterated either in Queen Mary's time, or
among you at this day in ordaining your proselytes, then you cannot possibly
defend your Church from Reordination. If you abhor Reordination, then you
must confess that when any Minister reuolteth from us to you, yet in making
him Priest you must not repeat those words, Receive the holy Ghost, which
proves inuincibly, that unless you will be contrary unto your selves, you
cannot esteem us to be merely lay men. Or if you will needs advance your
own orders, and make a nullitie in ours, and order our fugitive Ministers
accordingly, then you must run (there is no remedy) upon the rock of
Reordination by repeating the words wherein we agree.


PHIL. Though we agree in the words, yet we differ in the sense.


ORTHOD. That is no bar to Reordination; for if a child be Baptized in the
true form of words, and an Heretic shall Baptize the same child in the same
words, though in another sense, yet all good Christians will judge it to be
Rebaptisation; and there is the same reason of Reordination. Therefore thus I
reason. When you Metamorphise an English Minister, into a Popish Priest, either
you repeat the words, Receive the holy Ghost, or you do not: if you do repeat
them, then I have made it manifest, that you use Reordination. If you do not,
then you justify not only our practice, but also our orders. For you hold
these words necessary in ordination, to the conferring of one of the principal
functions of Priesthood, and therefore in not repeating them you acknowledge
that they had received that function before, in the Church of England, and
consequently that the ministers of England are not lay men. So your own
practice, does either condemn your selves, or justify us, but our practice
condemns altogether the first part of your Priesthood, that is, your carnal
sacrificing as simply abominable: and the latter part so far as it is
polluted with your popish constructions.


PHIL. If the first part of our Priesthood be simply abominable, and the
latter as it is used by us be polluted, then Cranmer, Ridley, Parker,
Grindall, and the rest of your Coronels, had no other Priesthood, but that
which was partly abominable and partly polluted.


ORTHO. When God opened their eyes, they did utterly renounce your carnal
sacrificing, as derogating from the all-sufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ;
the other part, that is, the power of forgiving sins which they received
corruptly in the Church of Rome, they practiced purely in the Church of
England, renouncing the Pope and all Popish pollutions.


PHIL. But when the question is concerning the validity of orders, we must not
so much respect the practice as the power received in ordination, how Cranmer,
Parker, and such like received both parts of their Priesthood in the Church of
Rome. And as the Church gave them so they received them, in that very sense
which the Church of Rome holds at this day. Wherefore seeing you condemned
both parts, as we use them for nettles, I cannot but marvel how you can be
Roses.


ORTHOD. Let me ask you a question; If one Baptize a Convert in the Element of
water, according to the true form of the Church, yet so, that both the
Baptizer and the baptized have some pernicious error: as for example, If they
deny the Godhead of the Son, or of the holy Ghost, shall this hinder the
validity of the Baptism?


PHIL. No: for you must consider that there is a visible Priest, and an
invisible. It is required to the substance of Baptism, that the visible Priest
apply water to the baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost. If he fail in any of these points, the Baptism is
frustrate. And therefore it was decreed in the great Council of Can. 19.
Nice, that the Paulianists should be rebaptized; where they take the word
rebaptised improperly, meaning that the former was not performed in the true
words, and therefore was in deed no Baptism. But if it were duly performed
in water with such words as Christ has appointed, their private opinions and
misconstruction, cannot hinder the validity of the Baptism. Satis ostendimus
(says Aug. de Baptismo Contra D^natistas. l. 4. cap. 15.
S. Austin) ad Baptismum qui verbis Euangelicis consecratur, non pertinere
cuiusquam vel dantis, vel accipientis errorem sieve de Patre, sieve de Filio,
sieve de Spiritu sancto, aliter sentiat quam coelesiis doctrina insinuat. i. We
have sufficiently declared, that to the Baptism which is consecrated with
Evangelical words, pertains not the error of any man, either of the giver,
or of the receiver, whether he think otherwise, then the heavenly doctrine
teaches of the Father, or of the Son, or of the holy Ghost. For whosoever be
the Minister, Christ the invisible Priest is the principal Baptizer, and
therefore if the right Element and form of words be used, we regard not the
erroneous sense of the servant, but the true sense of the Lord and Master.


ORTHOD. So I say to you, there is a visible Bishop, and an invisible; if the
visible shall impose hands upon a capable person, using those Evangelical
words which Christ has sanctified, his own private opinions cannot hinder the
validity of the Ordination: for so that right and sufficient words be used, we
will not respect the erroneous construction of the servant, but the true sense
and meaning of the Lord and Master. Therefore though Cranmer and Parker were
ordained in the rite of the Church of Rome, though both the ordainers gave the
power, and the ordained received it in the erroneous sense of the Church of
Rome; yet neither the error of the ordainers, nor of the ordained, pertains
to the Ordination. As Christ is the chief Baptizer, so he is the chief
Ordainer: for Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
he gives Pastors and teachers, for the consummation of the Saints.
Wherefore, when God vouchsafed to take away the scales of ignorance from the
eyes of his blessed instruments which he used in the reformation of Religion,
it was their duty not to follow the erroneous sense of the visible Bishop,
but the true meaning of the invisible Bishop, who was the author of these holy
and admirable words, Receive the holy Ghost, etc. In which words of Christ,
that was accomplished, which was promised by the keys, which keys the Sea
Bishop Jewel def. par. 2. c. 7. di^. 1.
Fathers call the knowledge of the Scripture, the interpretation of the Law,
the word of God: And Pope In 4. sent. s^e Tortura Torti. p. 62.
Adrian, the key of ministry: so whosoever is ordained by these words,
receives the keys, and may open the kingdom of heaven, by the Word and
Sacraments. Wherefore seeing these words were retained in the Ordination of
Priests, even in the darkness of Popery, it follows that the Church of
Rome had power by these words, rightly understood according to the Scripture,
to minister the word and Sacraments. But that which in it self was lawful, to
them was made unlawful, by adding the abomination of sacrifising, and by
wresting the words of Christ to their Popish shrift. Thus though the Church of
Rome gave her Priests authority to preach the truth, yet she did not reveal
the truth unto them but plunged them in ignorance and errors. Therefore whereas
those words of Christ (in themselves a Rose) by corruption of time were
ouergrowne with nettles, those heroical spirits which reformed religion, did
weed away the Roman nettles, and so there remained only the sweet Rose of
Jesus Christ. Thus it came to pass that that which was practiced in the Church
of Rome unlawfully, as being polluted with wicked humane inventions, was by
the goodness of God purged and restored to the orient color, and native
purity. To conclude, in the primitive Church, the ministerial power was
received purely, and delivered purely; In the beginning of Popery, it was
received purely, and delivered corruptly: During the sway of Popery it was
received corruptly and delivered corruptly: In the beginning of the reformation
it was received corruptly, and delivered purely: Now in the sun shine of the
Gospel, it is received purely and delivered purely. Thus it appears that
although we received our Orders from such as were Popish Priests, yet our
calling is lawful, which was to be declared. Now the Lord of his mercy so
bless his own ordinance, that we may use this holy function to his glory, and
the winning of many thousand souls. Amen.


LAVS DEO.
AN APPENDIX.
WHen this work had almost passed the Press, there came to my hands certain
scandalous Books made by our Popish adversaries, reproching the Consecrations
of some Bishops of blessed memory; Who in their life time powered out such
precious ointment, as still fills the Church with the sweetness of the odor.
Among which Jewels, Bishop Jewel is first produced, who like another Shammah
stood in the midst of the field, and 2. Sam. 23. 12.
defended it, and slew the Philistims: so the Lord gave great victory: In
regard whereof, they being filled with malice and envy, and not being able
with dint of Argument, to encounter him and the rest of his fellow Soldiers,
those worthies of David which fought the Lords battles, have sought by all
means to disgrace their Calling, disgorging their poison against them without
any respect of conscience or truth, in these opprobrious and scurrilous words.

A Preface to a Book called, A discussion. numb. 135.
Of M. Jewels being Bishop, we have not so much certainty, yea we have no
certainty at all. For who I pray you, made him? who gave him his Jurisdiction?
who imposed hands upon him? what Orders had they? what Bishops were they?

136. True it is that both he, Sands, Scory, Horn, Grindall, and others (if I
Christ. a Sacrabosco de inuest. Christi Eccles. c. 3. He should say. c. 4
mistake not their names) in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
met at the Horse-head in Cheap side, (a fit sign for such a Sacrament,) and
being disappointed of the Catholic Bishop of Landaffe, who should there have
been to Consecrate them, they used the like art that the Sir Thomas Moore.
Lollards once did in another matter, who being desirous to eat flesh on
Good Friday, and yet fearing the penalties of the Laws, in such cases
appointed, took a Pigge, and diu^ng him under the water said, Down Pigge, and
up Pike: And then after, constantly avouched that they had eaten no flesh but
fish: So I say these grave Prelates assembled as before said, seeing the Bishop
whom they expected came not to consecrate them, they dealt with Scory of
Hereford to do it, who when they were all on their knees, caused him who
kneeled down John Jewel, to rise up Bishop of Salisburie: And him that was
Robert Horn before, to rise up Bishop of Winchester: and so forth with all
the rest. Which Horse-head Ordering was after confirmed Synodically by
Parliament, wherein they were acknowledged for true Bishops: And it was further
Enacted, That none should make any doubt, or call in question that Ordination.

137. This was the first ordering of Master Jewel, and the rest as I have
been informed by one that heard it from Master Neale reader of the Hebrew
Lecture in Oxford, who was there present, and an eye witness of what was done
and past* etc.

Now the place of Sacrobosco which he c^teth in the Margent is this, Sacro^^^^.
quo supra. cap. 4.
Principio regni Elizabeth aecreandi erant Episcopi sectarij: Candidat^
conuenerunt Londini in quodam Hospitio plateae Anglice dictae* heapside, ad
insigne capitis Manni, and vna ordines collaturus L^ndauensis Episcopus, homo
senex and simplex; quod vt intellexit Bon^rus tunc decanus Episcoporu^ in
Anglia, misit e turri Londinensi (vbi religionis causa detinebatur) capellanum
suum, qui Landauensi proposita excommunicationis paena prohiberet nouos
candidatos ordinare: ea autem denuntiatione territus Landauensis, p^d^m
retulit, multiplicique tergiuersatione vsus sacril^gam vitauit ordinationem.
Hic furere Candidati; Landauensem contemnere, noua quaerere consilia; quid
plura? Scoreus Monachus (post Herefordensis Pseudo-Episcopus) caeteris;
excaeteris quidam Scoreo manus imponunt, fiuntque sine Patre Filij, and Pater a
Filijs procreatur, res saeculis omnibus inaudita. Quod D. Thomas Neale
Hebraicus Oxoniae lector qui interfuit, antiquis confessoribus, illi mihi
narrarunt, and fidem astruit quod in comitijs postea sancitum fuit, vt pro
legitimis Episcopis haberentur Parlamentarij isti.

These imputations I found first in general, cunningly cast forth by Kellison,
who said, (...) ^. Reply page 31.
He heard credibly reported that some of our new superintendents were made
Bishops at the Nagges-head in Cheap. Whereupon, because I would deal candide
with my adversary, and propose his objection with most probability, I brought
it against the first Bishop, consecrated in the Queens time, that is,
Archbishop Parker, and cleared him from this reproach. For can any man of
reason imagine, that they would go to consecrate one another in a Tau^rne, and
so incur the danger of the Law, after that they had according to their hearts
desire an Archbishop of their own religion, quietly possessed of his Church
and Chair? But now the Author of the Preface affirms in particular, that
Jewel, Sands, Horn and Grindal were there, then, and in that manner
Consecrated by Scory, and Scory by some of them, says Sacroboscus.

To answer briefly (for the glass is almost run,) First, it is a silly
surmise that Bishop Scory should be Consecrated by them, seeing he was See
above page 93.
Consecrated by Archbishop Cranmer and other Bishops in the time of King
Edward. Secondly* those reverend Prelates, See page 134.
Grindall, and See page 135.
Sands, were both Consecrated upon one day by Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury,
assisted by three other Bishops, as you have heard out of the Records. To which
I add moreover, upon a reuiew of the same Records, that the place of their
Consecration was, the Chapel at Lambehith: the time, the Sabbath day in the
forenoone after Morning prayer: the manner, with imposition of hands, and such
form of words and Prayers as are used in the Church. For the better
performance whereof; there was a Sermon Preached by Master Alexander No well,
then the Archbishops Chaplain, upon this Text; Acts 20. 28
Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has
made you overseers; And a Communion reverently ministered by the Archbishop.
Thirdly, Bishop Jewel was See p. 137.
Consecrated the 21. of January following, by Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury,
Edmund London, Richard Ely and John Bedford, in the foresaid Chapel at
Lambehith upon the Sabbath in the forenoone, with Common prayers, Communion,
and a Sermon, preached by Master Andrew Peirson, the Archbishops Chaplain,
upon this Text, Math. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Lastly, Bishop Page 134.
Horn, was Consecrated the year following by Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury,
Thomas Bishop of Saint David's, Edmund Bishop of London, and Thomas Bishop of
Cou^ntry and Lichfield, as was before related. The place of his Consecration
was likewise the Chapel at Lambehith: the time, the Sabbath day in the
fore-noone: and the manner in all respects as the former. Thus all things were
most orderly and reverently performed. Now let the world judge, what is to be
thought of these men, which dare so confidently blaze such untruths, and are
not ashamed to produce an eye witness for that which was never seen by the
eye of man. As for their down Pigge, and up Pike, and such other of the same
stamp, I may say with the Prophet, Esaias 57. 4.
On whomhaue you iested, upon whom have you gaped and thrust out the tongue?
And I advise you to remember the saying of Solomon, Eccles. 7. 8.
As the noise or crackling of the thorns under the pot: so is the laughter of
a fool: As also that of David, Psalm. 1. 1.
Blessed is the man that has not sit in the seat of the scornful. I will
conclude this point with this saying of Solomon, Pro. 12. 22.
The lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are
his delight.

A note of the Editions of some Books cited by page.
ACTS and Monu. Land. 1610. Antiquit. Britt. Hannou. 1605. Antisand. Cantabr.
1593. Anglicar rerum Scriptor. Francof. 1601. Bellarm. apol. and resp. Colon.
1610. Binius. Colon. 1606. Brist. Motiu. Antih. Atrebat. 1608. Eliens. Episc.
Resp. adapol. Bell. Land. 1610. Georg. Princ. Anhalt. Wittenb. 1570. Hollinsh.
Land. 1587. Ioh. de Turrecrem. in G^at. decr. Venet. 1578. Kellison Reply.
1608. Lelandus. Land. 1545. Matthew. Paris. Tigur. 1589. Nauar. Manual^ Mogunt.
1603. Pars. 3. Conuers. 1603. Pollinus. Romae. 1594. Pontificale. Romae. 1595.
Sand. de Schism. Ingolst. 1587. Tortura Torti. Land. 1609. Turr. de Eccles.
Colon. 1674. Vargas de Episc. Iurisd. Romae. 1563. Walfingham. Francof. 1603.
GEntle Readers, the most material mistakings which I have observed, are
these; some whereof notwithstanding are amended in most Copies; for other which
escaped me, I crave your courteous pardons.

-- Hanc veniam petimusque, damusque vicissim. ERRATA.
Page. 57. line. 12. Northumb. Read Part of Northumb. Page 119. line 2. Marco.
Read Mario. Ibid. line 5. Mark. Read Marius. Ibid. line 10. from the law. Read
in the Law. Page 126. line 33. stattorum. Read statutorum. Page 135. line 36.
Anno 1677. Read Anno 1577. Page 178. line 1. Clement. 5. Read Clement 2. P.
213. l. 23 ni the Eucharistim properly Read in the Eucharist improperly. Page
238. line 40. subance. Read substance. In the Margent.
Page 38. lit. b. did. 25. Read did. 14. Page 60. lit. c. lib 4. Read lib.
11. Page 69. lit. e. for 822. Read 322. Page 263. lit. a. 333. Read 373.


