NEW EPIGRAMS, AND A SATYR.

Written by IOS: MARTYN, a wel-wisher to study.

Est quoddam prodire tenus, si non datur vltra. LONDON, Printed by G. ELD,
dwelling in Little-Britaine. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Henry Martyn Knight.
THree things to every Action Luster give;
The Will, Art, Age: All for Acceptance strive:
The Will, presents things weak, but Art supplies them,
Time perfits all, and like a Touchstone tries them:
Of three I challenge one, and that is the Will,
Which I present, for want of Age and Skill:
Desire to please has made me bold to sue
To all for Love, for patronage to You.
Your Worships in all true devotion, Joseph Martyn.

A Poetical insinuation.
MY Muse, that for these six years day was mute,
And unacquainted with those wits acute,
That do frequent Pernassus sacred Hill,
And of that horse-bred Font do drink their fill:
Addressed like others, to avoid suspicion
Of each inuectiue Satyrs disposition,
Stepped forth into the woods, unseen, (desire
Presses on those whom Reason bids retire,)
Twixt doubt, and hope, much fearing, daring more,
At length, resolved some Deity t'implore*
Under Conduct of whose adored protection,
She might have some excuse for imperfection*
And (being of a high aspiring thought*)
Left those Semi-dei, and soared aloft.
And to that great Apollo shepherds God,
She pow'rd her vows* at which he seemed to nod.
Or at the least (poor Muse) she wished so much,
Fond hope, what we desire does promise such,
Yet herewith all content she does proceed,
Fearing no less, then hoped happy speed.
EPIGRAMS.
1. To Time.
Grave Censurer of things long since ore past,
Of present Actions, and what shall be last;
Think not amiss, that my unlearned quill,
Has spent some Minutes of thee, and so ill,
I Will thank thy present patience, and in Time,
My Muse may give thee thanks in better Rhyme.
2. To the Gentle Reader.
MOst welcome Guest to these my homely Cates,
If any thing my barren Muse relates
That may thy Palate or thy Stomach please;
I wished Ambrosia, (though a pulse or pease)
Here is no forced, but voluntary dish,
And should be better, had I but my wish.
3. To the unkind Reader.
AVthors that write, and Readers that survey,
Like Verbs do in their kinds themselves display:
Authors, we Active, Passive, Common call,
They must invent, endure, be read of all.
Readers both wise, and weak of each degree,
In censure must like Verbs Deponent be.
But (fearing, least thy Censure should deprave me)
No Verb (unless a Neuter) I would have thee.
4. To the indifferent Reader.
When as thy leisure (loathing idleness)
From things more serious wills thee to digress;
(Desiring change of fare) vouchsafe a look
On these unpolished lines, which if thou brook,
I joy, yet fear thy expectation's crossed,
Then is thy time, and all thy labor lost.
5. To Opinion.
I like each man's opinion, (those abated,
Who wilful are, and selfe-opinionated,)
Yet ( Epigram) if such thou meet'st with any,
(I fear thou can not escape them, they are so many)
Tell them thine Author had a self Conceit,
And in respect of that, their loves entreat;
Thus having soothed them up, (and they apart)
Tell others that thou hate'st them with thy heart.
6. To Fame.
Swift winged Fame! the Spur of virtuous Acts,
The Scourge of Vice, and mischievous compacts*
The Messenger of Joy, and good Intents;
The true discou'rer of sad Accidents.
I Will beg a Nothing of thee, (to reveal
Were labor to thee) do my lines conceal:
Then if thou ere were it Author of a lie,
I Will say for it thou had authority.
7. To Desteny.
You cursed Fates! that hinder good Intentions,
And smother Goodness with decreed preuentions;
Cease to seduce, set open Virtues Gate
To all that come; be not preiudicate:
And if you needs of things to come will speak,
Decree my Work to perish, it is so weak.
8. Mineruaes Ghost.
Contending once with Beauty and with Might,
I was bereft of both, (though both my right:)
Unhappy Censure! where the Judge was blind,
And could not see the beauty of the Mind:
Yet do not quite neglect your worths (my Muses)
For he is blind that should reform abuses:
And wonder not though Scholars be so poor,
Rich Ignorance is keeper of their store.
9. To Venus Shrine.
Fair Goddess Beauty, fairest of them all,
To whom the Shepherd gave the golden Ball,
We Virgins (laden with that name) salute
Thy Shrine, our selves to Lust we prostitute;
Our Beauties are the fuel, our Desire
The Bellows, that do blow thine Incense fire.
O! knew they, Flowers once plucked can grow no more,
They would not be so lavish of their store.
And yet (I guess) it is done to this intent,
They may the longer time have to repent.
10. A Drunkard. Aenigma.
THe more I swallow, I the lighter am,
the more a Beast, more near a Bacchus.
Deity:
When sober, poor; now wondrous rich I seem;
er'st while I swam in drink, yet now am dry:
Surely, thou art some Monster, or some Fiend,
Some monstrous Devil, or some Devils Friend.
11. To the poor Cobbler.
Divine Artificer! our Soles he mends,
that walked in evil ways, and went amiss,
Confirms their broken states with surer Ends,
sets them upright again: What pity it is,
His peec't estate cannot keep out the Wether?
Surely, he too much liquoreth his Lether.
12. A Roaring Boy.
THou do conjure me, I confess thou art
a Spark, or rather Flash of Chiualry;
If that thou had as good, as great a heart,
or were thy madness mixed with modesty:
Thy best discourses are but complements,
Thy mighty Oaths confirm small arguments;
Thou fearst' no mortal wight, and yet we see,
A silly Watchman often Counters thee.
13. A Player.
AS King, and Subject, now thou do command,
yet now (unfortunate) do Fortune serve;
Erst while, thou did as great as Caesar stand,
now art thou Irus (thus the Fates do swerue)
Yet wonder not, thou art not still so gay,
Of others wits, thou only art the Iay.
14. In Cornutum.
THou do complain of ease, and do neglect
thy wife, because she is kind, yet did thou know
Bonum quo communius, co^ melius.
A good thing common, is of more respect,
thou would be kinder unto her, (I trow.)
Then marvel not (thy wife be'ing free from scorn)
Though thou ( her Head) be subject to the horn.
15. A Carpet Knight.
THou like the Fox, the Ape, the Lion art,
Thy words are wounds, thy tongue it self the dart,
Thou (like the Fox) do tell the Crow he'es white,
To please his ear, and feed thine appetite:
Thou art the Ape of other men's affection,
And to their wills, thy words have still reflection.
Having beguiled them thus (like Fox and Ape)
Thou do devour them, in a Lions shape.
16. Mundus immundus.
Thoroughly fraught with wrack, and woe,
Harboring each mortals foe,
Endless in uncertain End,
Weakness and impatience friend:
Once unspotted, pure within,
Rather now a Sincke of Sin.
Let the mysery of this,
Draw our thoughts to seek true Bliss.
17. An evil Age.
VIrgill, of Mars, and ruthful wars did treat,
Ovid, of Venus love, and peace did write,
Yet Virgill for his strain was compted great,
And Ovid for his Love, was banished quite,
No marvel then, if courtesy grow cold,
When Hate is praised, and Love it self contrould.
18. Venus and Adonis.
WHat is the cause, that Venus (beauties Queen)
Was always with the boy Adonis seen?
I guess the reasons, thus, because she knows
That children cannot women's wills disclose.
She, that with Horns does deck her husbands crest,
For her conuoy, A silly guide is best.
19. Mars and Neptune.
MArs, (God of battle) Neptune (of the Seas)
Falling at Ods, their wrath's naught could appease,
But sought revenge on other each to take,
And by that means, their furies rage to slake,
Mars, (having led his troops into the fields,
Which in the Winter, little comfort yields)
By Neptune was assaulted, who had made
The boistrous winds, and waters, to invade
His Army, (weakly armed, to prevent
Those floods, that do oreflowe the continent)
At which Mars rag'de, And causde that at a sup,
His Zerxean Army, drunk whole rivers up.
20. A Gam'ster.
I Much admir'de, that mong'st all other wights
Compos'de of earthly mould, and heavenly sprights,
Others (of all sorts) plentifully live,
Yet (most unhappy) Gamsters never thrive;
I guest the reason, Others: purchase land,
Their whole estate, on Moueables does stand.
21. Epigram.
EGenus (when his own estate was spent)
To raise his Fortunes did a means invent,
And finding, that by begging, many got
A fair estate, who scarce were worth a groat,
Began to beg, and got so true a vain,
Nothing seemed hard (by begging) to attain.
And where his own desert was wanting found,
Urged others bounty (to bestow) a ground,
But he (that made of misery a sport,)
Was for his boldness, whipped out of the Court.
22. Den Fashionista.
FRench, Spanish, Dutch, Italian, Indian Ape,
A mighty linguist if his Clothes could speak,
A man, (yet of a most inhumane shape)
And wonder not if he his promise break,
For he that has engaged unto so many
His little Faith, has left himself not any.
23. A contented mind.
I Want and stand in need of Craesus store,
Yet I, then he that has the most, have more,
I subject am to grief and sad annoy,
Yet never felt I scarcity in Joy:
He that is blessed with true content of Mind,
No want of wealth, No misery can find.
24. A mere Richman.
OF what the earth, the Aier, the water can,
(In their abundant fulness) yield to man,
I have the full fruition, And of pleasure,
I do partake in most superfluous measure,
Yet do I seem to pine for want of either,
The dropsy of my mind, content with neither.
25. A Citizen and a decayed Gentleman.
Seeing me walk forlorn about the City,
Thou seem to ease my heart with words of pity,
And ask'st me what I lack: yet, when I tell thee,
The very thought of courtesy do'quell thee,
Alas, I want releife, and does implore
Thy help, to lend a mite that have such store,
Thou answer'st me, with Hence, you hinder those
Would buy, and for my wares their coin expose.
I am content with naught, yet say, twere fair,
Thou did not sell thy Conscience with thy ware.
26. A Woman's Tailor.
COmpos'de of many pieces, patch't together,
Iay-like, from every bird he snips a feather,
He does not cut a shred that's out of fashion,
To keep my Ladies woman free from passion,
Yet has she reason for to run ot'h score,
He never makes her loose enough before.
27. The Barbers Office.
A Circumciser of those excrements,
Which are enormous, or extrauagant
On Capital or Barball lineaments,
Or wheresoere they are exorbitant.
And to be plain; be pleased a while t'sit bare,
He will correct your worship to a Hair.
28. In Catum.
A Little beast I am, And do devour,
Contagious vermin to the Welchmens Cates,
A low and loving Creature to my power,
The first of each lines-letter more relates.
29. Painters and Poets.
BEtwixt these two there lately grew dissension,
Whether of twain, excelled in his Invention.
The Painter, sets a good face on the matter,
Though not so true, but it might seem to flatter,
And yet protests, against it, and disgrace,
Saying what he does is before their face.
The Poet, (in a harsh Satyricke vain)
Tells him he dawbes; his own the purest strain;
Yet yields to reason, and (by meerest fortune,
Meeting with me, my judgment did importune,
My answer was; that Painters were confined
Only to mortal shape, and there resigned
But Poets were the Oracles of Fame,
Who long since dead, had living still a name,
To them I therefore did the conquest yield,
Who did remain the longest in the Field:
Yet (gentle Reader) I refer't to thee,
Whether of twain shall have priority.
30. Loves Lunacy.
BEfore I knew what might belong to war,
I was content to suffer many a scarre;
Yet none could hurt me, till at length a Boy,
(Disgrace to manhood!) wrought my sad annoy.
This Lad (though blind) yet did he shoot a dart,
Which pierced my breast, and lighted on my heart,
Yet did I feel no hurt; till from above,
I heard a voice say, Soldier, you must love.
I like't it well, and in this pleasing vein,
I lost my wits, to get my heart again.
31. A Puritan.
HIs name, does show his nature to be pure,
And so it seems indeed, precise, demure;
And yet, (in very deed) he is not the same,
Nor does he brook himself, but in his name.
He loves his neighbor and his neighbors wife,
And hates profaneness in another life.
He will not swear an oath, yet to reprove
Those that do swear, the Spirit does him move;
I dare not say he will deceive his Brother,
Nor were it fitting, when he may another.
32. To Mounsieur Melancholy.
WHat, not a word? what means this sad distraction?
Thou look, as if thy breast were in confractio^,
what have thou lost of late, some friend? some brother?
Or (one that is more dear then both) a Mother?
Faith none of all, but it is my pleasing vein,
I like it well, and would it loath abstain.
Fie purge it: Sir I thank you, yet I fear,
I should be idle then, as often you are.
33. To Romista a Traveler.
O Sir, you are welcome home; what sudden change
Altered your mind, that so did love to range?
Stood on your worth, as if you promised aid
Unto those Giants that did Jove vpbraid:
What means this ragged outsid, inside passion,
Or (whence you came) is this the newest fashion?
If It be, it is old enough. Good sir forbear,
It Is b^d enough, you need it not to tear,
He that can live at home, and thinks it loss,
But must abroad, comes home by weeping Cross.
34. Elementa non alimenta.
Clear springing water, comfortable fire,
All-clensing Air, and fruitful mother Earth,
Against their Ruler (Man) they did conspire,
To punish his ingratitude with dearth.
The water (that did once refresh) does chaok him,
The Fire (that v'sd to warm) does scorch and smother
The Air (wherein he breathed life) infects him.
The Earth denies him food (tho once a Mother)
Then Man repents him of his foul abuses.
And heaven conuerts them to their former uses.
35. Gallen and Morbosus.
MOrbosus does complain of strange effects
Within him; fearing Gallen him neglects,
To Day he feels no pain, is in good case,
Tomorrow he'es as sick as ere he was;
By chance he meets a friend, and him he prays,
To tell him, what he thought of his disease;
Quoth he, thy purse is sick o'th Plurisie,
Gallen must first cure that, and then cure thee;
Morbosus slights his friend, and waxes poor,
And straight is cured of Sickness and of Store.
36. To Iulia.
IVlia, with painting does her self disguise,
She feign would have some color for her vice,
And yet if any (spying it) should flout,
She bids him leave, for fear she paint him out.
37. Iugatus and Liber,
IVugatus by a chance with Liber met,
And counseled him a second self to get;
(Quoth Liber) I am now my self and free,
Would have me seuer'd and in mysery?
No (quoth Iugatus) it is sweet harmony,
Where two affections join in unity:
I, but (said Liber) is there any sense,
That he should suffer, that does no offense?
At last they both agreed, that Libers life,
Had greatest pleasures, and was free'st from strife,
Then he that is free, and liberty does scorn,
Let him endure the Yoke, or (worse) the ()
38. To Lucina.
LVcina, when her lustful days were done,
Desired to live recluse, and like a Nun,
But yet controlling this her rash intent,
She finds her living so, came by descent,
Her mother did to her this state Intaile
Nor dares she cut it off, for fear she fail.
39. To Flaua of her yellow Band.
FLaua, (once pure and white) is now grown yellow,
To show her fruitful Vice is ripe and mellow,
Ready to fall at every blast of wind,
Yet is her wit still green, she naught but rind.
Yet Flaua this excuse has still at hand;
Most brain-sicke men do wear a yellow band.
40. To Verinus a Tobacco taker.
WHen first I saw the Chimney of thy nose
Vent smoke so fast, I then began t'suppose,
Thy Stomach all on fire, which I to quench,
Made have, and was half poisoned with the stench;
Then blame me not, if that I take it in snuff,
Thou should requite my love with stinking stuff.
41. To Iocosa a Nightwalker.
I Wonder much, why she in all things Light,
Should love to do her Business in the night,
The reason; Foul within, without shows fair,
Though she be light her works of darkness are.
42. To the sharking Camelion.
Never the same, yet never out of fashion,
A stranger still, though one of every Nation,
Yet this one thing, I wish he would abhor it,
He always owes his skin, or money for it.
43. Epigram.
AS true as Turtle to her tender mate,
Free in good will, and furthest from debate,
Regardles of each wrong, or false surmise,
Easy to be entreated, sober, wise;
Impatient of delays that hurt his friend,
Noe ways in fault, yet willing to amend,
Discreet, and Constant; Such a one as He,
Each man should wish his nearest Friend to be.
44. To Experience.
When first I knew the easy difference,
Betwixt my right hand, and my left, I thought
Me wise enough to tax Experience,
And gravely to esteem my little naught,
But when I could discern twixt dark and light,
I saw my error, and was sorry too,
And setting weakness opposite to might:
The more I knew the less I seemed to know.
At last, I was content to be a Page,
To grave Experience, perfited by Age.
45. To Silla a Trader.
IF it be true, that Promise is a debt,
Then Silla will her freedom hardly get,
For she has vowed her service to so many,
She Will neither pay them all; nor part from any,
Yet she to satisfy her debts, desires
To yield her Body. (As the Law requires.)
46. In Vrbanum.
VRbanus, long had lived a single life,
And could not thrive. At last he gets a wife,
Yet had he still this care; of evil things
To chose the least, which least annoyance brings,
His little wife, (that had less modesty,)
Soon knew her husbands best Commodity,
And that she vented, at the best increase,
(She needs must thrive, whose trading near did cease.)
Vrbanus glad, with such a wife he would met,
That could by Night or Day their living get.
Neglects his trade, and does himself maintain,
By his wifes Commings in, (unlawful gain)
At last her Trading fails, they both grew poor,
His little Wife, was proved no little (.)
47. To Auarus of his Argument.
WHen as I ask thee money, thou reply,
Believe thou have, thou have it, yet deniest,
What? is to think to be? thou say, I hit,
Then I believe thou (...) more wealth, then wit.
48. Of Arnaldo.
ARnaldo, free from fault, demands his wife,
Why he is burdened with her wicked life,
Quoth she? Good husband do not now repent,
I far more Burdens bear, yet am content.
49. In Prodigum.
HIs father lately dead, has left him all,
(The tallest Cedar to the earth must fall)
This being known, he to the Mercer hies,
And with his Credit new apparel buys,
His Tailor fits him, and he does bethink,
How he may spend his Fathers mass of chinke,
Seeks out Companions, who not curious are,
With him in this his happy lot to share,
Those, of his Fathers Substance, are the Shadows,
(As long as that will last) his near Comradoes.
Fitted with those, his Worth desires a Page,
To light Tobacco for him on the Stage,
(For there he seldom misses,) next it is meet,
He have a Mistres to salute in the street,
He gets a fair one, and I need not feign,
To say, the man the Mistress does maintain,
Yet is he proud o'th office, and does get,
A Coach to keep her Light-heeles from the wet.
This world must have an end, the roaring gallant
Has spent a good part of his fathers Tallent,
And now he wants a Chapman for his land,
And that he sels, (though at the easiest hand)
To serve his present use: He spends apace,
Till all is gone, (excepting his disgrace.)
Now does he borrow, what before he gave,
And when there is nothing left would learn to save,
His Mistrrs does complain, he is grown unkind,
And does his wonted bounty, wanting find;
His tyrant-Tailor, Mercer (merciles)
Do haunt his Ghost, and threaten his distress,
With an abridgement of his liberty,
But he to pay his debts, pleads Poverty.
He is arrested, and insteede of bail
Does yield himself, for suerty to the Iaile,
His Mates, and Mistres, all deny releife,
Only his Page does wait upon his grief.
50. To Nobodie.
THou still art in the fault, though never known,
Because thou art ashamed thy faults to own,
Yet, if thou ere be taken in the fact,
(Till thou confess them all) thou shall be racked
And though Nobody did the fault commit,
Yet, Sombody shall surely pay for it.
51. Rusticus and Thraso.
A Soldier, (for he seemed to be no less,
By wearing of a sword, and Idleness.)
Meeting a Country fellow on the way,
Told him he wanted means, (being out of pay)
And that it stood not with his worth to crave it,
But told him plainly, that of him he would have it.
The Rusticke Swain, (insteede of other Arms,)
Had but a Staff, to shield himself from harms.
Nor would his rudenes suffer him to blush,
But swore he car'de not for his threats a rush,
And bid him do his worst, He would not part
So easily from that which cost him smart.
The soldier (thinking much to be denide,)
Draws out his sword, And wills him to provide,
To yield his purse, Or (if he thought it good
To save his coin) to pay for it with his blood:
The Country lad, (whose plainness did afford,
To use a Staff, as well as he a Sword)
Laid on apace, and sent his blows so fast,
The Soldier had the worst, and at the last,
Was feign to fly. Then give me leave to ask,
Whether of these performed the Soldiers task.
52. A broken Citizen.
A Mercer first, And then (the trade him failing
A Broker, first at whole sale, next retayling,
Yet still he Broke, nor need he on it stand,
For still he was a sauer by the hand:
At length he leaves his Wares, and goes to 'th Wars,
His broken state, changed to skin breaking Scars.
But there he found, the difference to be great,
Between the City fare, and Soldiers meat,
Yet now, it was too late to flinch, or stray,
No man must thence, that once comes under pay:
Nor had he quite forgot his breaking vein,
But from the Camp, he once more broke again, much.
Yet being taken (Martiall-law was such)
He straight was hanged, for Breaking once too
53. Of Hircanus.
HIrcanus (rather Hircius) is of late,
Grown loose, lascivious, and effeminate,
For leaving (what he once delighted) Arms,
He Is drawn to loosenes by lewd women's charms,
And in their Company, all day does lurk,
Studying of naught but Tent, and Image work.
54. Life's Tragedy.
Five Acts, five Actors, (and the world the stage)
Their persons for performance do engage:
The King, whose watchful care does make a crown
Seem heavy, and sleeps hard in beds of Down.
The Aspiring Statesman, whose ambitious Aim,
Does to the highest place in Court lay claim.
The biting Usurer, that grindes the poor,
And does his Idoll-Deuill (Wealth) adore.
The needy Scholar, who himself t'aduance,
Does flatter Greatness, and sooth Ignorance.
The poor neglected Beggar, having got
His Alms, that rests contented with his lot.
But mark the Epilogue; Deaths fatal sting,
Does make the Beggar equal with the King.
55. To Logista.
THough guilty, yet in fault he will not be,
And why? Lo: I Am not in fault, the fault's in me;
He Is taken in the fact, and yet denies,
His Will did act (for who his heart espies)
And yet he is not freed against his will,
His heart and hand, do therefore both act ill.
56. The loving Drunkard.
THe Iuy (wherein Bacchus most delights)
Is consecrate to him, and to his Rights,
Because her loving nature does embrace,
All other trees that grow, but near her place,
And so do those whom Bacchus does infect,
Profess them love, whom (sober) they neglect.
57. Times abuse.
EAch Creature, did complain of some abuse,
Offered by others, void of all excuse,
And unto Man (as Judge) they did complain,
Of Time, who suffered such abuses reign,
Man (an unfitting Judge in such an Act)
Judges Time accessory to the Fact,
And wished him to reform what was amiss,
(Which Time effecting) made as now it is.
Then Time complains of Man's abuses to him,
And for a reformation often did move him,
But Man that past (though past not for Times pleas)
Times Precious hours, does add to wrong delays;
And Time incen'st, sends forth his Sergeant, Death,
Man to arrest, and stop his vital breath,
But Man, (grown old in sin and age) did fail,
To make redress; And Death would take no bail.
58. Of the merry Host.
MIne Host, to entertain his weary Guest,
Would now and then, put forth a merry Jest,
And did so please him, with his jesting vein,
His Guest resolved a while with him t'remaine.
But staid so long, until his merry Host
Had left no room to score upon the post,
And calling for a reckoning, Soon he found,
He Would much out stripped his ordinary bound,
But ere he went, by Jesting this he got;
To leave his horse (in earnest) for the Shot.
59. A Serving man.
It Was said, he still was Idle, but we find,
He did of late his wits apprentice bind,
To study Complements, And can relate,
The newest fashion, which at Courts in date,
And for his grave discourse, the Coachman said,
He Is grown infauour with my Ladies Maid.
He is an Imitator of the best,
But does mistake a little in the rest,
Thinking his Master loves him best of all,
When proved; his Mistress, when fantastical;
Yet, this one Rule, seldom admits a Fallit,
He Is Cast off (being old) to use a Wallet.
60. To Superbus.
THou think no man so good, or great as thee,
Noe mortal, fit for thy society,
Unless thou do vouchsafe to take affection
To one, perchance will sooth thy imperfection:
Yet, but a little strike the swelling sail
Of weak Opinions self conceyling veil,
And see whereon thou stand'st, (Propt up by Clay.)
Thou soon would steer thy Course another way
O; be not of thy shame, or weakness proud,
Which at thy highest pitch, yields but a shroud.
And if thou needs wilt have thy Birth proclaimed,
I Will say, Thou art o'th finest Mortar framed,
TO THE KIND ACCEPTANCE of his loving Kinsman William Martyn of the middle
Temple, Gent.
The Authors Apology for his Satyr.
IF any ask, how I, so young, so raw,
Durst fasten on this headstrong Time a Iaw,
How I, (that scarce can speak) should dare to write:
And that a Satyr too, (in times dispite)
I answer; Love to Virtue (quite defaced)
And hate to Vice, (that in her room is placed).
Then call me Child, or Fool, or both, I care not,
They both do tell the truth, when wiser dare not
A Satyr.
MY Muse (employment wanting) chanced to stray
Out of her beaten path, her common way,
Walked from the wood into the wilderness,
(I mean the world of wiles, and wickedness)
And hating sloth, the Canckerworme of wit,
She did observe what might her turn befit.
First, she espie'd the Great ones, (that should be
So many Loadstarres to vulgarity)
Delight in great offenses; and support
Injurious rapines, with a friend in Court.
Virtue stood bare, whilst Vice sat eminent;
Learned discourse was turned to complement,
Merit was robbed, in seeking of her right,
And Goodness ouerpoys'd with greatest Might.
Religion (chiefest Pillar of the State,
The Square and Rule of things legitimate)
Grew faint for want of zeal and true Professors,
And was not able to resist oppressors.
Valor, (in Court and Country) was neglected,
And homebred Cowardice alone respected:
He, that abroad, knew how to lead a Band,
At home, to Peasants stood, with cap in hand,
And begged an alms; yet went away without,
It Is fit he should (they say) because he is stout.
The Laws, (that are the Cinque Ports of the Realm
Lest Outlawes, by their force should it orewhelm.)
Grew venial, And where the greatest weight
Was put into the Scale, it was judged fgr right.
Yet still reserved a Sting to punish those,
Which should repine, or (being wronged) oppose.
Conscience and Equity, (the helps of Law)
Gave way to Enuies all-deuouring iaw,
And he that could procvrea Great Ones Letter
To color wrong, was sure to fare the better.
But (leaving those, for fear of known delay,)
She went into the City to survey.
Till then, she nere was like to loose her sight,
For every thing was showed her in False-light.
Smooth tongued Deceit, did on her Credit give it,
What ere she soulde, to make the world believe it.
The Master, and the servant, did combine,
Simplicity (with Craft) to undermine.
Conscience, was put to wrack, and Faith was sold,
Whilst Love of Lucre did the ballaunce hold,
And they, that scarce were bound to the occupation,
Had learned (in selling wares) Equivocation,
Plain dealing, was a fashion once in use,
But now was altered by the Times abuse.
Femineall Modesty, (that in the shop,
With her own presence should the absence prop,
Of a kind husband) Was conducted forth,
By a lascivious Courtiers little worth,
And under color to bring custom in,
Gave way to loosenes, (customary sin,)
Hence, Pride (the Cities known Inheritance)
Became a friend in Court, had countenance,
Yet so; That still the man of meanest worth,
Was sure to set the gayest outside forth,
The Tradesman knows, That they most freely spend,
Which do on others worth and wealth depend.
But now the Night drew on, and heaven orespred
Her sable Canopy, Starr-lightned,
And fearing least the Night-owles watchfull-crue,
Should apprehend her, or disturb her view,
And knowing that their Censure does reprove,
(Whilst night Crows escape) the silly harmeles Dove,
She left the City; And her happy lot
Was, to be lodged that night, in Irus Cot.
(A Country Shepherd) who in steed of wealth,
Made Coursest fare, and Sweat, the props of health,
Nor did he much dislike his present state,
Which (though so mean) was free from wrong and rape,
Nor had he bin so poor, But that of late
(He said) his Landlord at higher rate,
Had racked his rent, and threatened to undo him,
Unless (next feast) he brought some Pullen to him;
She thence arrived into a Country town,
Where (once their Joy) the Maypole, was pulled down,
And asking why; It Was told her by a Swain;
The better sort, did hold it was profane,
And yet (he fearde) themselves had often done worse,
In building houses with the poor man's curse.
Hence being got, She chanced to arrive,
Under the goodly roof (the gaudy Hiue.)
Of a Rich Drone, whose tender homebred skin,
Was fed with honey, (Bees had brought him in.)
Whose griping Penny-father by extortion,
And robbing others, raised his son a portion,
But ere she there could entertainment have,
The Beggars Beadle-porter, began to Crave,
What made her homely outside be so bold,
To crave releife, where Charity was cold;
She mildely answear'd, That she was a friend
To Learning, though her self, were forced to spend,
Her time in idleness, for want of that,
Which many only keep to wonder at;
But this reply was made, That none dwelt there,
That knew what learning meant, Nor need they care
For he that knew, Ilgotten goods to spare,
And save, was wise enough to make an Heir.
From hence my Muse (neglected) home does post,
And (in despair to get a kinder Host,)
She left her wandering vein, and did retire,
Again unto the Woods, (with new desire.)
Where she intends to pass her Time in grief,
Till frowning Fortune smile, and send Releife.
To his Dear friend the Author.
THe Martin is turned Nightingale, strange news!
Envy not little birds: his sweet tuned Muse,
Warbles harmonious notes with such true skill,
As if Apollo did direct his quill,
Though young, and scarcely fleg'd, he dares be heard,
Amongst old chanters, that their garlands reard
To Cadmus shaggy woods, be praised by them,
Whom latter times have styled the wittiest men,
And to their number added, as for others
(Whose judgments ranckle toothed envy smothers,)
He cares not, fears not any, no, not those,
Whose Eastern-breaths will blast a budding Rose.
His blooming youth may better things produce,
Though this be good, yet time and longer use,
Will add perfection, Now he has done well,
Then in his next endeavors he will excel.
But hark! he sings, silence the Titmouse fits,
When the shrill Nightingall so near me fits.
Rob: Cook.

The Author in answer to his friend.
WEre I the foul whom thou wold'st have transformd
From a black night bird, to a Nightingale:
Or were my youth with those sweet notes adorned,
Which any censure should delicious call,
I might believe affection would not flatter,
Or that my barren Muse deserved thy praise
But it is thy skill, each ill conformed matter,
So near perfection as thou can to raise,
And herein art thou known a Cook complete,
In making sweet sauce for unsavory meat.
A Postscript.
IF any bleere-eyde Carping Momus, chance,
Hoping his own opinion to advance,
In reading these my lines, to tax my Muse
with want of skill, or (which is worse) Abuse
Of any, who perhaps, deserves worse terms
Then here my want of age, or Art affirms:
First, let him know, that I was never stored,
With those rich helps, which Athens does afford:
Next, let him lay aside his gally-Spleene,
And all things else, will without fault be seen.
FINIS.

