IHS

THE ROMAN MARTYROLOGE, according to the reformed Calendar Faithfully
translated out of Latin into English, by G. K. of the Society of JESUS.

IMPRINTED with License.

M. D C. XXVII.



Guil. du Tielt. fe.

TO THE CATHOLICS Of the Church of England.
FORASMVCH, as the ROMAN MARTYROLOGE is translated, and published in diverse
other vulgar Languages; it has been thought convenient, that our English Nation
also, should be no longer deprived of what others have already inioyed, to
their great Profit: who by hearing the daily Memory of so many and eminent
SAINTS read, and renewed, have made thereby, no small progress, in the
spiritual affairs of their soul.

And having taken upon me the publishing hereof, for the Comfort of many, who
have long wished, and desired to see it in print; I resolved by way of
Dedication, to comme^d the same unto You, the CATHOLICS of my Country; not
doubting but you will receive it with as grateful an Acceptance, as my
Good-VVill, and poor Endeauours have been always ready, to attend on You, in
such like Occasions.

The Work, is so much the more proper unto You, by how much it sets forth
briefly the Sanctity and Praise of those Holy WORTHIES, who in former times
have undergone the like Persecutions, for the selfsame FAITH and RELIGION,
which You endure at this present, in our Country. And as they were most
famous, through the World, for their Constancy and Zeal, in suffering for
Christ, Loss of Goods, yea and of Life it self: so I trust, You shall also be
renowned in future Ages, for the Pressures you now sustain, in, and for the
same Cause, both before God and Man.

The Translatour heerof, has exactly followed the last, and most corrected
Edition, and by comparing diverse Translatio^s together, has endeauored,
faithfully to express the true, and genuine sense of the Authentical ROMAN
Copy; thereby to give as much satisfaction to the Reader, as possibly he could,
as well in the proper Names of Places, as Persons, which are not so obuious to
every one, that is not acquainted with forrayne Countries, nor with the vulgar
denominations thereof in other languages.

For my own part, I acknowledge, that although my Labor heerin has not been
very great; yet my Desire to profit my Country, by publishing the same, has
not been perhaps the least: since the Tra^slatour being many years ago
departed this Life, I have been careful to finish some things thereof, not fully
ended at his death; and to recommend to the common View, what so dear a
Friend, as he was, intended, if God had pleased to have given him longer days.

I had once a determination, to have adjoined unto every Day, in a word or two,
the Saints of our own Nation, as the Translatours into French, Dutch, and
Flemish have done those of their Countries: But, because I did some years ago
publish an English Martyrologe of the said Saints, and which shortly I also
intend to reprint, with some Additions and Change, I hold it needless to add
any thing else heerunto at this present, to avoid prolixity.

And if I shall understand, that these my poor pains, may be grateful unto
You; I will endeavor to express the same hereafter, in some other thing of
better Moment, that may tend also, to the greater advancement of your
spiritual Comfort and Consolation: And shall be ever, most ready to remain,

Your affectionate, and devoted Servant in Christ. I. W.

THE MOVEABLE FEASTS
On Saturday before Septuagesima-Sunday. The Sunday called Septuagesima, on
which day the Church cease to say the Canticle of our Lord, Alleluia, until
Easter. On Tewsday after Quinquagesima-Sunday. Ash Wednesday, and the beginning
of the most holy Fast of Lent. On Saturday before Palme-sunday. Palme-sunday,
on which day our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Prophesy of Zachary,
entered into Jerusalem, sitting upon an Ass, whom the multitude came out to
meet, with bows of palm in their hands. On Wednesday in the holy Week. The
Supper of our Lord, commonly called Maundy-Thursday, when Christ Jesus, the day
before he suffered for our Salvation, instituted the Blessed Sacrament, and
delivered to his disciples, the mysteries of his body and Blood to be
celebrated. On Easter Eve. This is the Day which our Lord has made, the
Solemnity of Sole^nities, and our Easter; on which the Holy Church does
celebrate the Glorious Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, according to
the flesh. On the Eve of the Ascension. Upon the Mount Oliuet, the Ascension of
our Lord Jesus Christ. On the Eve of Pentecost. The Feast of Pentecost,
commonly called Whit-sunday; on which Day, the Holy Ghost descended visibly
upon the Apostles, in the form of fiery tongues, being assembled together in
Jerusalem. On Saturday after Whit-sunday. The Feast of the most Holy, and
undivided Trinity, commonly called Trinity-sunday. On Wednesday after
Trinity-sunday. The Feast of the most Blessed, and Venerable Sacrament of the
Body of our Lord, commonly called Corpus Christi-day, instituted by Pope Viban
the fourth.
THE MONTH OF IANVARY.
A The first Day.
THE Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Octaue of his Nativity. At
Rome of S. Almachius Martyr, who by commaundment of Alipius Governor of the
City, for saying; This is the Octaue of our Lords birth, give over your
superstitious worshipping of Idols, and abstain from your unclean Sacrifices;
was killed by the Gladiatours, or Fencers at sharp. At Rome also, in the way
called Appia, the crowning with Martyrdom of thirty holy Soldiers, under
Diocletian the Emperor. Moreover at Rome of S. Martina Virgin, who under
Alexander the Emperor, having endured diverse kynds of torments, at length
obtained the triumphant palm of Martyrdom, by the sword. At Spoletum of S.
Concordius Priest and Martyr, who under Antoninus the Emperor, being first
beaten with clubbes, then put upon the Rack called Equuleus, afterward
starued in prison, and there comforted by an Angel, finally ended his life by
the sword. The same day of S. Magnus Martyr. At Caesarea in Cappadocia, the
deposition of S. Basil Bishop, whose chief Feast is kept upon the thirtenth
of June, on which day he was ordained Bishop. In Ass^ica of S. Fulgentius
Bishop of Now called Alphaques.
Ruspa, who in the persecution of the Wandalls, suffered much for the
Catholic faith, and for his great learning, by the Arians, and was bannished
into the I Will of Sardinia; but afterward permitted to return to his
Bishopric, renowned for his life and learning, made an holy end. In the
Territory of Lions, in the Monastery of S. Claude upon the Mount Iu^ense.
Iure, of S. Eugendus Abbot, whose life shined with virtues and miracles. At
Silui^n.
Sauuigny of S. Odilo Abbot of Cluny, who was the first that commanded the
Co^memoration of all Souls, should be kept in his Monasteries, the next day
after the feast of all Saints; which custom was afterward received, and
approved by the whole Church. At Alexandria the deposition of S. Euphrosyna
Virgin, who in her Monastery, was renowned for the virtue of Abstinence, and
Miracles.

And in other places, of many other Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors, and Holy
Virgins; to whose prayers and merits, we humbly commend our selves.. Praise be
to God.

In this manner the reading of the Martyrologe, is alvvaies to end.

B The second Day.
THE Octaue of S. Stephen the Protomartyr. At Rome the Commemoration of many
holy Martyrs, who contemning the Edict made by Diocletian the Emperor,
commanding, That such, as had any sacred Books, should deliver them up; made
choice rather to deliver their bodies to the Executioners, then to give Holy
things to dogs. At Antioch the passion of Blessed Isidore Bishop. At Tomis in
Pontus of Asia, of three holy Breethren Argeus, Narcissus, and Marcellinus a
youth, who being taken among the new Soldiers, and refusing to serve, was
under Licinius the Empe^our, beaten almost to death, and for a long time
starued in prison, at last drowned in the sea, finished his Martyrdom; but his
two brethren were beheaded. At Millane of S. Martinianus Bishop. At Nitria in
Aegipt of Blessed Isidore Bishop and Confessor. The same day, of S. Siridon
Bishop. In Thebais of S. Macarius of Alexandria, Abbot.

C. The third Day.
THE Octaue of S. John the Apostle and Evangelist. At Rome in the way called
Appia, the birthday of S. Anterus Pope, who suffered under Julius Maximinus,
and was buried in the Churchyard of Callistus. The same day, of S. Peter, who
at Aulona was crucified. In Hellesponte, of the holy Martyrs Cirinus, Primus,
and Theogenes. At Caesarea in Cappadocia, of S. Gordius a Centurion, in whose
praise is extant an excellent Oration made by S. Basil the Great, upon his
festiual day. In Cilicia of the holy Martyrs Zosimus, Athanasius a Notary,
Theopemptus and Theonas, who suffered a famous Martyrdom in the persecution of
Diocletian. At Padua of S. Daniel Martyr. At Vienna in France, of S. Florentius
Bishop, who in the time of Gallienus the Emperor, was banished, and there
ended his Martyrdom. At Paris of S. Genouefa Virgin, who consecrated to God by
S. Germa^ Bishop of Antisiodoru^.
Auxerre was famous for her wonderful virtues, and miracles.

D. The fourth Day.
THE Octaue of the holy Innocents. In Creta.
Candia, the birthday of S. Titus, who by S. Paul the Apostle was ordained
Bishop of that place; where after he had faithfully performed his office of
preaching made an holy end, and was buried in the Church, of which by the
Blessed Apostle he had been made Bishop. At Rome, of the holy Martyrs Priscus
Priest, and Priscillianus Clarke, and of Benedicta a Religious woman, who in
the reign of the most wicked Julian, were martyred by the sword. Also of
Blessed Dafrosa wife to S. Fabian Martyr, who after the killing of her husband,
being first bannished, was lastly under the same Prince beheaded. At Bolonia of
the Saints Hermes, Aggaeus, and Caius Martyrs, who suffered under Maximian the
Emperor. At Now called Mahometa.
Adrumetum in Africa the Co^memoration of S. Mauilus Martyr, who in the
persecution of Seuerus the Emperor, being by Scapula a most cruel Governor,
condemned to be devoured of beasts, received a Crown of Martyrdom. Moreover
in Africa, of the most famous Martyrs Aquilinus, Geminus, Eugenius, Marcianus,
Quinctus, Theodotus and Triphon. At Lingonae.
Langres of S. Gregory Bishop, famous for miracles. At Rhemes in France of S.
Rigobertus Bishop and Confessor.

E The fifth Day.
THE Vigill of the Epiphany of our Lord. At Rome of S. Telesphorus Pope, who
under Antoninus Pius after many labors obtained a glorious Martyrdom, for the
Confession of Christ. In Egypt the Commemoration of many Holy Martyrs, who in
the persecution of Diocletian were killed in Thebais by diverse kinds of
torments. At Antioch of S. Symeon Monk, who lived many years standing in a
pillar, and was thereof surnamed Stylites, whose life and conversation was
wonderful. In England of S. Edward King, renowned for the virtue of Chastity,
and working of Miracles. At Alexandria of S. Sincletica, whose famous acts S.
Athanasius has left written. At Rome of Aemiliana Virgin, aunt to S. Gregory
Pope, who being called unto God by her sister Tharsilla before departed, went
this day to our Lord. The same day of S. Apollinaris Virgin.

F The sixth Day.
THE Epiphany of our Lord. In the territory of Rhemes the Passion of S. Macra
Virgin, who in the persecution of Diocletian, by commandment of Rictiouarus
Governor, being cast headlong into the fire, and receiving no hurt, had her
breasts cut off, and afterward afflicted with a loathsome imprysonment, being
also rolled up and down upon sharp potsheardes, and burning coals, in prayer
departed to our Lord. In Africa the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who in
the persecution of Seuerus, tied to a stake, where consumed with fire. At
Rhe^dones.
Reins in Britany of France of S. Melanius Bishop and Confessor, who after
innumerable signs of his virtues, having his eyes continually fixed upon
heaven, gloriously departed out of this world. At Ger^.
Geris in Egypt of S. Milamon Anchoret, who whilst he was drawn to have
been made Bishop against his will, in prayer gave up his soul to God.

G The seventh Day.
THE bringing back of the Child Jesus out of Egypt. The same day the birthday
of Blessed Lucian Priest of the Church of Antioch and Martyr, who famous for
learning and eloquence, suffered at Nicomedia for the Confession of Christ, in
the persecution of Maximinus, and lies buried at Helenople in Bithynia; whose
praises are written by S. John Chrysostom. At Antioch, of S. Clerus Deacon,
who for the glory of his Confession being seven times tortured, and pyned long
in prison, at last beheaded, ended his Martyrdom. In the City of Heraclea of
the holy Martyrs Felix and Ianuarius. The same day of S. Julian Martyr. In
Dania.
Denmark of S. Canutus King and Martyr. At Papia.
Pauia of S. Crispin Bishop and Confessor. In Dacia of S. Nicetas Bishop, who
by preaching the Gospel of Christ, made mild and meek, most fierce and
barbarous Nations. In Egypt of S. Theodorus Monk, who was famous for holiness
of life in the time of Constantine the Great, of whom S. Athanasius makes
mention in the life of S. Antony.

A The eight Day.
AT Bellouacum.
Beauuais in France, of the holy Martyrs Lucian Priest, Maximian, and Julian,
of which, the two last were by presently beheaded; but blessed Lucian, who came
with S. Dennis into France, after a great slaughter of his fellows, not
fearing with a stout voice, still to confess the name of Christ, at last
received the same sentence of death, which the former had suffered. Also of
Saint Eugenianus Martyr. In Libya of the holy Martyrs Theophilus Deacon, and
Helladius, who being f^^st most cruelly torn, and then rolled upon sharp
potsheards, at last thrown into the fire, rendered up their souls to God. At
Hierapolis in Asia, of S. Apollinaris Bishop, who under Marcus Antoninus Verus
flourished for sanctity and learning. At Naples in Campania the birthday of S.
Seuerine Bishop, brother to Blessed Victorinus Martyr, who after the exercise
of many virtues, full of holiness went to rest. At Pap^a.
Pauia of S. Maximus Bishop and Confessor. At Metae.
Metz of S. Patiens Bishop. The same day in Norici.
Bauaria of S. Seuerine Abbot, who preached the Gospel to that Nation, and is
called their Apostle; his body being by divine power brought to Lucullanum.
Mont-feltro near Naples, was afterward from thence, translated to the
Monastery of S. Seuerine.

B The nynth Day.
AT Antioch, under Diocletian and Maximian, the birth day of S. Julian Martyr,
and Basilissa Virgin his wife, who with her husband having kept Virginity,
ended her days in peace: but Julian (after he had seen many Priests, and
Ministers of the Church of Christ, who for the cruelty of persecution had fled
unto them, to have been burned) by commandment of Marcian the President, being
diversely tormented, received sentence of death: with whom also Antony a
Priest, and Anastasius (whom raised from death, Julian had made partaker of
the grace of Christ) and Celsus a child, with his mother Marcionilla, and
seven brethren and many others, did suffer. In Mauritania Caesariensis of S.
Marciana Virgin, who devoured by beasts accomplished her Martyrdom. At Smyrna
of the holy Martyrs Vitalis, Reuocatus, and Fortunatus. In Africa of the holy
Martyrs Epictetus, Iucundus, Secundus, Vitalis, Felix, and seven others. At
Sebaste in Armenia of S. Peter Bishop, brother to S. Basil. At Ancona of S.
Marcellinus Bishop, who (as S. Gregory writes) miraculously delivered that
City from burning.

C The tenth Day.
IN Cyprus of Blessed Nicanor, one of the seven first Deacons, who admirable
for his faith and virtue, was most gloriously crowned. At Rome of S. Agatho
Pope, who famous for holiness and learning, dyed a natural death. At Millane of
S. ^ohn surnamed the Good, Bishop and Confessor. In Thebais the birth day of S
Paul the first Hermit who from the sixteenth year of his age, until an
hundred and thirteen, led a solitary life in the wilderness; whose soul S.
Antony saw carried up to Heaven, by Angels, amongst the quiers of Apostles and
Prophets; but his feast is kept the fifteenth of this Month. At Constantinople
of S. Marcian Priest.

D The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Hyginius Pope, who in the persecution of Antoninus
the Emperor, gloriously accomplished his Martyrdom. In Africa of Blessed
Saluius Martyr, in whose feast S. Augustine made a Sermon to the people of
Carthage. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs, Peter, Seuerus, and Leucius. At
Fermo in Marc-Ancona.
Picenum of S. Alexander Bishop and Martyr. At Amiens of S. Saluius Bishop and
Martyr. At Brundusium.
Brindisi of S. Leucius Bishop and Confessor. In Cappadocia in a Village
called Magarisso, of S. Theodosius Abbot, who having suffered much for the
Catholic Faith, died at last a natural death. In Thebais of S. Palaemon
Abbot, master to S. Pachomius. At Suppentonia near the Mount Monte de San
Siluestro.
Soractes of S. Anastasaus Monk, and his fellows, who called by a voice from
heaven went unto our Lord. At Pauia of S. Honorata Virgin.

E The twelfth Day.
AT Rome of S. Tatiana Martyr, who under Alexander the Emperor, being first
torn with iron hooks, and combs, then thowne unto beasts, and cast into the
fire, but receiving no harm, was at last beheaded. In Achaia of S. Satyrus
Martyr, who as he passed before an Idol, and blowing upon it made the sign of
the cross, forthwith the Idol fell to the ground; for which cause he was
beheaded. The same day of S. Arcadius Martyr, famous for noble Extraction, and
Miracles. In Africa of the Martyrdom of Zoticus, Rogatus, Modestus, Castulus,
and of forty soldiers. At Constantinople of the Saints Tigrius Priest, and
Eutropius Reader, who suffered in the days of Arcadius the Emperor. At Tibur.
Tiuoli of S. Zoticus Martyr. At Ephesus the passion of forty and two holy
monks, who for the worshipping of holy Images, under Constantinus Copronymus,
most cruelly tormented, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Rauenna of S. John
Bishop and Confessor. At Verona of S. Probus Bishop. In England of S. Benedict
Abbot and Confessor.

F The thirteenth Day.
THE Octaue of the Epiphanye of our Lord. At Rome in the way called Lanicana,
of forty holy Soldiers, who for the Confession of the true Faith, under
Galienus Emperor deserved to be crowned with Martyrdom. In Sardinia of S.
Potitus Martyr, who having suffered much affliction under Antoninus Emperor,
and Gelasius President, at last finished his Martyrdom by the sword. At Now
called Seme^der
Singidunum in the upper Misia of the holy Martyrs Hermylus, and Stratonicus,
who under Licinius the Emperor, after cruel torments, were drowned in the
river ^ster. At Corduba, of the holy Martyrs Gumesindus Priest, and Serui-deus
monk. At Pictauium.
Poytiers in France the birthday of S. Hilarious Bishop and Confessor, who for
constantly defending the Catholic faith being banished four years into
Phrygia, amongst other miracles raised a dead man to life: but his feast is
kept the day following. At Caesarea in Cappadocia of S. Leontius Bishop, who
under Licinius first, and afterward under Constantine, did valiantly withstand
the Gentiles and Arrians. At Treuers of S. Agritius Bishop. In the monastery of
Versia^um.
Versy of S. Viuentius Confessor. At Amasea in Pontus of S. Glaphyra Virgin.

G The fourtenth Day.
AT Nola in Campania the birthday of S. Felix Priest, who, as S. Paulinus
writes, after many torments being cast into prison by the persecutors, and
laid bound hand and foot upon snayle-shells and pot-sheards, was in the night
loosed, and delivered by an Angel: and the persecution ceasing, after he had
by his holy example of life and learning converted many to the faith of Christ,
famous for miracles, ended his days in peace. In Jury of S. Malachias Prophet.
In Mount Sina of thirty eight holy Monks, slain by the Saracens for the faith
of Christ. In Egypt, in the Country of Raithy, of forty and three holy
monks, who for the Christian Religion were killed of the Blemmyes. At Millane
of S. Datius Bishop and Confessor, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes mention. In
Africa of S. Euphrasius Bishop. In Syria of S. Julian of Saba, the elder, who
in the time of Valens the Emperor, by virtue of miracles restored again the
Catholic faith at Antioch, there almost extinguished. At Neocaesarea of S.
Macrina Disciple of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, and Grandmother to S. Basil, who
brought him up in the Christian faith.

A The fiftenth Day.
IN the territory of Andegauum.
Angiers, of S. Maurus Abbot, disciple of S. Benet, who being instructed by him
from his infancy, how much he profited by his discipline, amongst other
miracles, he declared by walking upon the water (a strange thing, and not used
since the time of S. Peter) and being sent into France, after he had there
erected a famous Monastery, of which he was Abbot forty years, glorious for
miracles, rested in peace. In Jury of the holy Prophets Abacu^, and Michaeas,
whose bodies were found by divine revelation in the days of Theodosius the
Elder. At Anagnia of S. Secundina Virgin and Martyr, who suffered under Decius
the Emperor. At Now called ^al^er.
Caralis in Sardinia of S. Ephisius Martyr, who in the persecution of
Diocletian, under Flauianus Judge, after many torments overcome by divine help,
at last beheaded, went victoriously to heaven. At Nola in Campania of S.
Maximus Bishop. At Clermont in A^^tergne (...)
Auuergne in France, of S. Bonitus Bishop and Confessor. In Egypt of S.
Macarius Abbot, disciple to S. Antony, most famous for life and miracles.
Moreover of Blessed Isidore renowned for holiness of life, faith, and miracles.
At Rome of S. John Calibita, who living for a time, in a corner of his Fathers
house unknown, and afterward in a little cottage in the Island of Tibur, in his
death made known to his Parents, famous for miracles, was buried in the same
place; where afterward was erected a Church in his honor.

B The sixtenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Salaria, the birthday of S. Marcellus Pope and
Martyr, who for confession of the Catholic Faith, by commaundment of
Maxentius the Tyrant, first beaten with clubs, was constrained to serve beasts,
with a public guarde appointed over him, where apparelled in haire-cloath he
ended his life. At Marocco in Africa the passion of five holy Martyrs of the
order of S. Francis, Berardus, Petrus, Accursius, Adiutus, and Otho. At Arelate.
Arles of Saint Honoratus Bishop and Confessor, whose life was famous for
learning and miracles. At Opitergium.
Vderzo of S. Titianus Bishop and Confessor. At Rhinocura in Egypt of S. Melas
Bishop, who under Valens the Emperor, suffering banishment with other
afflictions for the Catholic faith, rested in peace. At Fundi.
Fondi in Campania of S. Honoratus Abbot, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes
mention. In the Monastery of Perone in France, of S. Furseus Confessor. At Rome
of S. Priscilla, who devoted herself wholly to the service of Martyrs.

C The seventeenth Day.
IN Thebais of S. Antony Abbot, who being Father of many monks, lived in great
fame of life and miracles; of whose Acts S. Athanasius has written a worthy
Treatise. His sacred body being found by revelation in the days of Justinian
the Emperor, and brought to Alexandria, was there buried in the Church of S.
John Baptist. At Lingonae.
Langres of the Saints Speusippus, Eleusippus, and Meleusippus, all borne at a
birth, who together with their Graundmother Leonilla were martyred in the
days of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor. At Rome the Invention of the holy
Martyrs Diodorus Priest, Marianus Deacon, and their fellows, who in the time
of S. Stephen Pope, whiles they celebrated the feast of Martyrs, in the place
called Arenarium, the entrance of the Cave being stopped by the persecutours, and
the vault over, broken down upon them, obtained a Crown of Martyrdom: At
Bituricae.
Bourges the deposition of S. Sulpitius Bishop, surnamed Pius, whose life and
death was precious by many glorious miracles. At Rome in the monastery of S.
Andrew, of the holy Monks Antony, Merulus, and John, of whom S. Gregory Pope
makes mention.

D The eighteenth Day.
THE Chair of S. Peter the Apostle, wherein he first sat at Rome. There also,
the Passion of S. Prisca Virgin and Martyr, who under Claudius the Emperor,
after many torments, received a Crown of Martyrdom. In Pontus, the birthday
of the holy Martyrs Moseus, and Ammonius soldiers, who being condemned to
dig in the metal mines, at last were burned. There also of S. Athenogenes
an ancient Divine, who when he was to be burned, song joyfully a Hymn, which
he left in writing to his disciples. At Turones.
Tours in France of S. Volusian Bishop, who taken by the Goths, and banished,
gave up his soul to God. There also of S. Leobardus Anchoret, a man of
wonderful abstinence and humility. In little Britany of S. Deicola Abbot,
disciple to S. Columbane. At Now called Como.
Nouocomum of S. Liberata Virgin.

E The nineteenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Cornelia, of the holy Martyrs Marius, and Martha his
wife, and of their children Audisax, and Abachum Noble Persians, who in the
time of Claudius the Emperor, came to Rome for devotion, and there being
beaten with cudgels, racked, tormented by fire, torn with iron hooks, and
their hands cut off, Martha was at last killed in the place called Nimpha, and
the others beheaded, and their bodies burnt. At Smirna, the birthday of
Blessed Germanic^s Martyr, who in the flower of his youth, under Marcus
Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius, condemned to the beasts, by the force of Gods
grace, without all fear, provoked of his own accord the beast prepared to
devour him; and so torn and ground with his teeth, deserved to be
incorporated into the true bread of Life Christ Jesus, for whom he dyed. In
Africa of the holy Martyrs Paulus, Gerontius, Ianuarius, Saturninus,
Successus, Julius, Catus, Pia and Germana. At Spoletum the passion of S.
Pontianus Martyr, who in the time of Antoninus the Emperor, after he had been
cruelly whipped, by commandment of Fabianus Judge, was compelled to walk upon
hot burning coals barefoote; wherewith receiving no harm, was then tormented
upon the rack called Equuleus, and with Iron hooks; And after all this being
cast into prison, where he was comforted by an Angel; thrown also unto the
Lions, and tormented with boiling lead, was finally beheaded. At Laudum.
Lodi of S. Bassianus Bishop and Confessor, who together with S. Ambrose
valiantly resisted the Heretics.

F The twentieth Day.
AT Rome, the birthday of S. Fabian Pope, who suffered Martyrdom in the time
of Decius, and was buried in the Church yard of Callistus. There also, at the
place called Catacumbae, of S. Sebastian Martyr, who under Diocletian the
Emperor, being Chief Commander of the first Band of soldiers, was for
professing the Christian faith, commanded to be bound in the midst of the
field, and shot with arrows by the soldiers, and finally beaten with clubbes
until he dyed. At Nice in Bithynia of S. Neophytus Martyr, who being but
fifteen years of age, was first cruelly whipped, then cast into a burning
furnace, thrown also unto the beasts, and yet receiving no hurt, still
constantly professing the faith of Christ, was finally beheaded. At Cesena of
S. Maurus Bishop, renowned for virtues and miracles. In Palestine the birthday
of S. Euthymius Abbot, who in the time of Marcian the Emperor was famous in
the Church for zeal of Catholic discipline, and power of working miracles.

G The one and twentieth Day.
AT Rome the Passion of S. Agnes Virgin, who under Symphronius Governor of the
City, being cast into the fire, but extinguished by the virtue of her prayers,
dyed by the sword. Of whom thus writes S. Hierome: Agnes the Virgin, by
consent, of the tongues and pens of all Nations, has borne away the chief
praise throughout all Churches; who surmounting both her Age, and the Tyrants
cruelty, consecrated her Virginity to God by Martyrdom. At Athens, the
birthday of S. Publius Bishop, who after S. Dennis of Areopagita, governed most
laudably the Church of Athens* and renowned for learning and virtue, for the
testimony of Christ received a glorious Crown. At Tarragona in Spain, of the
holy Martyrs Fructuosus Bishop, Augurius, and Eulogius Deacons, who in the
days of Galienus Emperor, first cast into prison, then thrown into the fire,
and their fetters burned, streching out their arms in prayer, in form of a
Cross, accomplished their Martyrdom. Upon whose feast S. Augustine made a
Sermon to the people. At Trec^.
Trois of S. Patroclus Martyr, who under Aurelianus the Emperor, deserved a
Crown of Martyrdom. In France in the Monastery of Augium.
Ewe of S. Meinardus Hermit, who was killed by thieves. At Pauia of S.
Epiphanius Bishop and Confessor.

A The two and twentieth Day.
AT Valentia in Arragon of Spain, of S. Vincent Deacon and Martyr, who under
Dacian the most wicked President, after he had suffered imprisonment, hunger,
the torture Equuleus, disioynting of his members, hoate fiery plates, the
burning gridiron, and other torments, went triumphantly to heaven, there to
receive the reward of his Martyrdom. Whose glorious passion Prudentius has
elegantly set down in verse; and S. Augustine and S. Leo the Pope do
exceedingly commend. At Rome, at the waters called Saluiae, of S. Anastasius a
Persian Monk, who after many torments of imprisonment, stripes and fetters,
which he suffered at Cesaraea in Palestine, was by Cosro^s King of Persia
grievously afflicted, and at last beheaded; having sent before him to
Martyrdom threescore and ten of his fellows, who were drowned in a River. His
head was afterward brought to Rome, together with his Venerable Picture, at
the sight whereof Devils were driven away, and diseases cured, as the acts of
the second Council of Nice do record. At Ebrodunum.
Ambrun in France, of the holy Martyrs Vincentius, Orontius and Victor, who in
the persecution of Diocletian were crowned with Martyrdom. At Nouara of S.
Gaudentius Bishop and Confessor. At Sora of S. Dominicke Abbot, famous for
miracles.

B The three and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Emerentiana Virgin and Martyr, who as yet but a Catechumen, or
unbaptized, praying at the sepulcher of S. Agnes (whose foster-sister she had
been) was stoned to death by the Gentiles. At Philippi in Macedonia of S.
Parmenas, one of the seven first Deacons, who through the grace of God,
faithfully fulfilling the office of preaching committed to his charge, under
Traian, obtained the glory of Martyrdom. At Caesarea in Mauritania of the holy
Martyrs Seuerianus, and Aquila his wife, consumed by fire. At Ant^noum.
Anthios a City in Egypt, of S. Asclas Martyr, who after diverse torments,
being thrown headlong into a river, gave up his precious soul to God. At
Ancyra in Galatia of S. Clement Bishop, who oftentimes tormented, at length
accomplished his Martyrdom under Diocletian. In the same place of S.
Agathangelus, who suffered the same day under Lucius President. At Alexandria
of S. John, surnamed Eleemosynarius, Bishop of the same City, most renowned
for his works of mercy to the poor. At Toletum.
Toledo of S. Ildefonsus Bishop, who for his singular integrity of life, and
defe^ding the Virginity of the mother of God against certain Heretics that
impugned the same, received of her a most white Vestement, and finally famous
for Holiness, was called unto Heaven. In the Province of Valeria, of S. Matyrius
monk, of whom S. Gregory the Pope makes mention.

C The four and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Timothy Disciple to S. Paul the Apostle, who by him
created Bishop of Ephesus, having endured many bitter agonies for Christ, as he
one day reprehended such as offered sacrifice to Diana, was stoned, and a little
after went to rest in our Lord. At Antioch of S. Babylas Bishop, who in the
persecution of Decius, having greatly glorified God by his often sufferings and
torments, ended his life gloriously in chains of iron, with which he
commanded his body to be buried. There are said to have suffered with him,
three children Vrbanus, Prilidianus, and Epolonius, whom he had instructed in
the faith of Christ. At Neocesaraea of the holy Martyrs Mardonius, Musonius,
Eugenius and Metellus, who being all burned, their relics were thrown into
the River. At Fulginium.
Fuligno of S. Felicianus, who created Bishop of the same City by Pope Victor,
after many labors sustained, in his decrepite old age, under Decius, was
crowned with Martyrdom. Moreover, of the holy Martyrs Thyrsus and Proiectus.
At Bolonia of S. Zamas the first Bishop of that City, who consecrated by S.
Dionysius Pope of Rome, did greatly propagate the faith of Christ in those
parts. Also of blessed Suranus Abbot, who in the time of the Lo^bards
flourished for sanctity of life.

D The five and twentieth Day.
THE Conversion of S. Paul the Apostle, which happened the second year after our
Saviors Ascension. At Damascus the birthday of S. Ananias, that baptized the
same Apostle; who having preached the Gospel at Damascus, Eleutherople, and
in other places, was under Licinius judge scourged, and torn with nerves; and
finally stoned to death, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Antioch of the holy
Martyrs Iuuentinus and Maximus martyred under Julian the Apostata: on whose
feast S. Io. Chrysostom made a Sermon to the people. At Aruernu^ now called
Clermont*
Auuergne of the Saints Proiectus Bishop, and Marinus a Blessed man, who
suffered Martyrdom by the Governors of that City. Moreover of the holy
Martyrs Donatus, Sabinus and Agapis. At Tomis in Scythia of S. Bretannion
Bishop, who for holiness of life and zeal of the Catholic faith, under Valens
the Arrian Emperor, whom he stoutly resisted, was renowned in the Church of
Christ. At Atrebatum.
Arras in France, of S. Poppo Abbot, famous for miracles.

E The six and twentieth Day.
AT Smyrna the birthday of S. Polycarpus, Disciple to Saint John the Apostle,
who by him made Bishop of that city, and Primate of all Asia, was afterward
under Marcus Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius Commodus (the Proconsul sitting in
Judgment, and all the people crying out against him in the Amphitheater) cast
into the fire, but nothing hurt thereby, thrust through with a sword, received
the Crown of Martyrdom. With whom also, twelve other coming from
Philadelphia, ended their lives in the same City. At Hippo-regius in Africa,
of the Saints Theogenes Bishop, and thirty six others, who in the persecution
of Valerianus contemning temporal death, obtained a Crown of eternal life.
At Bethleem-Iuda, the Departure of S. Paula Widow, Mother to S. Eustochium
Virgin of Christ, who descended of the noble blood of Senators, forsaking the
world, and distributing her goods to the poor, transported herself to the
Praesepe Domini.
Cribbe of our Lord, where adorned with many virtues, and crowned with long
Martyrdom, she passed to a heavenly Kingdom. Whose life full of wonderful
Virtues, is written by S. Hierome. In the Territory of Paris of S. Bathildes
Queen renowned for holiness of life and miracles.

F The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Constantinople of S. John Bishop (for his goulden vein of Eloquence
sur-named Chrysostom) who by his preaching, and exemplar life much advanced
the Christian Religion; and after many labors ended his life in banishment.
His body upon this day was brought to Constantinople under Theodosius the
younger; and thence translated to Rome, was placed in the Church of S. Peter.
At Sora of Saint Julian Martyr, who in the persecution of Antoninus, for that
an Idolatrous Temple fell to the ground whilst he was tortured, gained a crown
of Martyrdom with the loss of his head. In Africa of S. Auitus Martyr. There
also of the holy Martyrs Datius, Reatrius, and their fellows, who suffered in
the persecution of the Wandals. Moreover of the Saints Datiuus, Iulianus,
Vincentius, and other twenty and seven Martyrs. At Rome of S. Vitalianus Pope.
At C^u^manum.
Man's the deposition of S. Julian the first Bishop of that City, who was sent
thither by S. Peter to preach the Gospel. In the monastery of Bobacum of S.
Maurus Abbot.

G The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Rome the second feast of S. Agnes. There also of S. Flauianus Martyr, who
suffered under Diocletian. At Apollonia of the holy Martyrs Thyrsus, Leucius
and Callinicus, who in the days of Decius the Emperor, having all three
endured diverse torments, Thyrsus and Callinicus were beheaded; and Leucius
called by a voice from heaven, giving up the Ghost, they all accomplished their
Martyrdom. In Thebais of the holy Martyrs Leonides and his fellows, who
obtained the palm of Martyrdom under Diocletian. At Alexandria, the
Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who by the faction of Syrianus an Arrian
Captain, whilst they were at Mass, were this day diversely put to death. There
also of S. Cyrill Bishop of that City, who most valiantly defending the
Catholic faith, famous for learning and sanctity, rested in peace. At
Caesaraugusta.
Saragoza of S. Valerius Bishop. At Con^^a.
Cuenc^ in Spain, the birthday of S. Julian Bishop, who bestowing the goods
of his Church upon the poor, and in Apostolical manner, getting his living by
the labor of his hands, famous for miracles, rested in peace. In the monastery
of Rhemes the deposition of S. John Priest, a man of God. In Palestine of S.
James Hermit, who for that he had fallen from his faith, lay secretly a long
time in a sepulcher doing penance, and full of miracles went unto our Lord.

A The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Rome, in the way called Nomentana, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Papias
and Maurus soldiers, who under Diocletian the Emperor, for the confession of
Christ, by commandment of Laodicius Governor of the City, being cast into
prison, and their mouths bruised with stones, were after beaten with clubbes,
and lastly scourged with leaden whippes, until they gave up the Ghost. At
Perugia of S. Constantius Bishop and Martyr, who under Marcus Aurelius
Emperor, for defense of the faith, together with his fellows, received the
Crown of Martyrdom. At Edessa in Syria of the holy Martyrs Sarbelius and
Barbea his sister, who baptized by blessed Barsimaeus Bishop, were under Lisias
Governor, in the persecution of Traian. crowned with Martyrdom. In the
territory of Tricassinum.
Trois of S. Sabinianus Martyr, who by commaundment of Aurelian the Emperor
was beheaded for the faith of Christ. At Millan of S. Aquilinus Priest, who
thrust thorough the throat, with a sword, by the Arrians, was crowned with
Martyrdom. At Treuers the deposition of Blessed Valerius Bishop, disciple to
S. Peter. At Bituricae.
Bourges of S. Sulpitius Seuerus Bishop, scholar to S. Martin, greatly
renowned for his virtue and learning.

B The thirtith Day.
AT Antioch the Passion of S. Hippolytus Priest, who for a time deceived with
the schism of Nouatus, but afterward by the grace of Christ, returning to the
unity of the Church, and being demanded which was the truer sect, he detesting
the heresy of Nouatus, and affirming that faith which the Chair of Peter did
hold, ought to be embraced, suffered for defense thereof a glorious Martyrdom.
In Africa the passion of the holy Martyrs Felicianus, Philappianus, and an
hundred and twenty four others. At Edessa in Syria of S. Barsimaeus Bishop,
who after he had converted many Gentiles to the true faith of Christ, and sent
them before to be crowned with martyrdom, followed himself in triumphant
manner, under Traian. There also of S. Barsem Bishop, famous for the grace of
curing diseases, who banished into the furthest parts of that Country, for the
Catholic faith, by Valens the Arrian Emperor, there ended his days.
Moreover of S. Alexander, venerable for gravity and years, who for the constant
profession of his faith under Decius, in midst of his tortures gave up the
Ghost. At Jerusalem the birthday of S. Matthias Bishop, of whom many
wonderful things are recounted. This man, under Adrian the Emperor, having
endured much for Christ, at length ended his days in peace. At Rome of S.
Felix Pope, the third of that name, who much labored for the Catholic faith.
At Pauia of S. Armentarius Bishop and Confessor. In the monastery of Malbodium.
Maubeuge in Haynault of S. Aldegunde Virgin, who flourished in the time of King
Dagobert. At Millan of S. Sauina a woman of admirable devotion, who as she
prayed at the tomb of the holy Martyrs Nabor and Felix, departed to our Lord.

C The one and thirtith Day.
AT Rome, in the way Portuensis, of the holy Martyrs Cyrus and John, who after
many torments endured for the Confession of Christ, were beheaded. At
Alexandria the birthday of S. Metranus Martyr, who under Decius the Emperor,
for refusing to utter certain blasphemous words, had by the Pagans his body
all bruised with cudggels, and his face and eyes pierced with sharp reeds; and
after many like torments, being thrust out of the City, was finally stoned to
death. There also, of the holy Martyrs Saturninus, Thirsus, and Victor. In the
same City of the holy Martyrs Tharsicius, Zoticus, Cyriacus, and their
fellows. At Now called Callipolis.
Cizicum in Hellespont of S. Triphenes Martyr, who having overcome diverse
torments, was at last killed by a bull, and so deserved the palm of
Martyrdom. At Modena of S. Geminianus Bishop, renowned for miracles. At Millan
of S. Julius Priest and Confessor, in the days of Theodosius the Emperor. At
Rome of S. Marcella widow, whose worthy praises S. Hierome has left written.
The same day, the Translation of S. Mark the Evangelist, whose body, at the
taking of Alexandria in Egypt by the Barbarians, was brought thence to Venice,
and there most honorably placed in the chief Church, dedicated in his Honor.

THE MONTH OF FEBRVARY.
D The first Day.
THE birthday of S. Ignatius Bishop and Martyr, who was the third after S.
Peter the Apostle that governed the Church of Antioch; and in the persecution
of Traian the Emperor, condemned to the beasts, was sent bound to Rome, where
in the presence of Traian himself, and the whole Senate, being first most
cruelly tormented, and then cast unto the Lions, was torn to pieces in their
teeth, and so became a sacrifice unto Christ. At Smyrna of S. Pio^ius Priest
and Martyr, who after many Apologies written for the Christian faith, being
thrust into a stinking prison, where by exhortations he encouraged many to
suffer Martyrdom, most cruelly tormented, and pierced through with nails,
being laid also upon a hoate burning fire, made a blessed end; with whom
fifteen others were put to death. At Raue^na of S. Seuerus Bishop, who for his
great merits, was elected by the sign of a Dove. At Trecae,
Trois of S. Paul Bishop, who was very famous for holiness of life, and
miracles. The same day, of S. Ephrem Deacon of the Church of Edessa, who after
many labors endured for the faith of Christ, renowned for sanctity and
learning, under Valens Emperor, went to rest in our Lord. In Scotland of S.
Brigide Virgin, who touching the wood of an Altar, in testimony of her
Virginity, the same forth with became green, and budded a fresh.

E The second Day.
THE Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, called by the Greeks Hypapante,
or, the Meeting of our Lord. At Rome in the way called Salaria the passion of
S. Apronianus Notary, who being yet a Ge^till, whilst he brought S. Sisinius
out of prison, and presented him before Laodicius the Governor, hearing this
voice from heaven, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom which
is prepared for you from the beginning of the world, was forth with baptized,
and after received sentence of death for the confession of his faith. Moreover
at Rome, of the holy Martyrs Fortunatus, Felicianus, Firmus, and Candidus. At
Caesarea in Palestine of S. Cornelius Centurion, whom S. Peter the Apostle
baptized, and ordained Bishop of that City. At Orleans of S. Flosculus Bishop.
At Canterbury in England the birthday of S. Laurence Bishop, who next after S.
Augustine governed that Church, and converted K. Edbald of Kent,
the King to the faith of Christ.

F The third Day.
AT Sebaste in Armenia the passion of S. Blase Bishop and Martyr, who after he
had wrought many miracles, under Agricolaus President being cruelly whipped,
and hanged up by the hands, and his flesh all torn with iron Combs; cast also
into a loathsome prison, and plunged into a lake, out of which he came sound
and hole, by commaundment of the same Judge, together with two boys, was
finally beheaded. Before him also, seven Christian women being apprehended for
gathering up the drops of blood, which ran down from his body whilst he was
tortured, after cruel torments were beheaded. In Africa of S. Celerinus
Deacon, who kept in prison ninteene days, laden with fetters, irons, and
otherwise tormented, made a glorious Confession of Christ; and with an
invincible courage ouercomming his Enemy, showed unto others, the way of
conquering. Also of the holy Martyrs Laurentinus and Ignatius his Uncle, and
Celerina his Grandmother, who were all crowned with Martyrdom before him: of
whose renowned praises, there is extant an Epistle written by S. Cyprian. There
also of the holy Martyrs Felix, Symphronius, Hippolytus, and his fellows. In
the Town of Vapinge, of the Saints Tigides, and Remedius Bishops. At Lions of
the Saints Lupicinus and Felix, also Bishops. The same day of S. Anscharius
Bishop of Brema, who converted the Danes and Sueuians to the faith of Christ.

G The fourth Day.
AT Rome of S. Eutychius Martyr, who having endured a glorious Martyrdom, was
buried in the Churchyard of Callistus, whose Sepulcher S. Damasus Pope adorned
with verses. At Forum Sempromj.
Fossan-bruno of the holy Martyrs Aquilinus, Geminus, Gelasius, Magnus, and
Donatus. At Themue in Egypt the Passion of blessed Philaeus Bishop of the same
City, and of Philoromus a Coronel, who under Diocletian, when by no persuasion
of kindred and friends, they could be withdrawn from offering their necks to
the sword, deserved triu^phant Palms: with whom an innumerable number of
Christians in that City, following the example of their Pastor, were crowned
with martyrdom. The same day of S. Rembertus Bishop of Brema. At Tre^*
Trois of S. Auentinus Confessor. At Pelusium in Egypt of S. Isidorus Monk,
^enowned for his merits and learning. The same day of S. Gilbert Confessor.

A The fifth Day.
AT Catana in Sicily the birthday of S. Agatha Virgin and Martyr, who, in the
days of Decius the Emperor, under Quinctianus Judge, after imprisonement,
buffers, racking, cutting off her breasts, and rolling up and down upon
potsheards and hoate coals, at last in prison, whilst he she was praying,
accomplished her Martyrdom. In Pontus the Commemortion of many holy Martyrs,
of which some in the persecution of Maximianus, scalded with burning hot Lead,
others pricked under the nails with sharp reeds, and vexed with many cruel
torments often iterated, deserved triumphant Crowns, by their glorious
passion. At Alexandria of S. Isidorus Martyr who in the persecution of Decius
was beheaded by Numerianus General of the Army, for the faith of Christ. At
Vienna of Blessed Auitus Bishop and Confessor, by whose faith, industry, and
admirable learning, France was defended from the infection of the Arian Heresy.
At Brixino.
Brixen of the holy Bishops Genuinus, and Albinus, whose lives were renowned
for miracles.

B The sixth Day.
AT Caesarea in Cappadocia the birthday of S. Dorothy Virgin and Martyr, who
under Sapricius President of that Province, first racked upon the ^orture
Equuleus, and afterward long beaten with the twigs of Palms, was at last
beheaded; by whose Martyrdom Theophilus a Student, was converted to the Faith
of Christ, who forthwith most cruelly tortured, ended his life by the sword.
The same day of the holy Martyrs Saturninus, Theophilus, and Reuocata. At Now
called Hamza.
Emissa in Phaenicia of S. Siluanus Bishop who after he had governed the
Bishopric of that City for forty years, was with two others cast unto the
beasts, under Maximinus Emperor, and so torn in pieces received the palm of
Martyrdom. At Auuergne in France, of S. Antholianus Martyr. The same day of
the holy Bishops Vedastus and Amandus, whose lives and deaths were glorious
for miracles; of whom the former was Bishop of A^batum.
Arras, and the later of Traiectum.
Mastricke. At Bolonia of S. Guarinus Bishop and Cardinal of Praeneste.
Palestrina, renowned for sanctity of life.

C The seventh Day.
AT Rauenna of S. Romualdus Abbot, Fou^der of the Monks of the Order of
Camaldula, whose chief Festiuity is celebrated upon the nineteenth of June. At
London
Augusta in Britany the birthday of S. Augulus Bishop, who crowned with
Martyrdom, deserved to receive an eternal Reward. In Phrygia of S. Adaucus
Martyr, an Italian of noble Extraction, who advanced to all degrees of Honor
by the Emperors; whilst he was yet Treasurer, was crowned with Martyrdom, for
the defense of his faith. Also of many holy Martyrs, Inhabitants of one City,
and disciples of the same Adaucus, who being all Christians, and constantly
professing their faith, were by Maximinus the Emperor consumed with fire. At
Heraclea of S. Theodorus a Captain, who under Licinius the Emperor, after
many torments being beheaded, went victoriously to heaven. In Egypt of S.
Moses a Venerable Bishop, who having first lead a solitary life in the desert,
and afterward at the intercession of Mauuia. Queen of the Saracens, created
Bishop, converted the greatest part of that wild, and barbarous people to the
faith of Christ, where glorious for merits, he rested in peace. At Luca in
Toscana.
Tuscia the depositio^ of S. Richard King of the English. At Bolonia of S.
Julian Widow.

D The eight Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Paulus, Lucius, and Cyriacus. In the lower
Armenia, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Dionysius, Aemilianus, and
Sebastian. At Alexandria the passion of S. Cointha Martyr in the time of Decius
the Emperor, who apprehended by the Paynims, and led unto the Idols, for that
she refused to adore them, was fettered, and dragged through the streets of
the City, in most horrible manner, until she was torn in pieces. At
Constantinople, the birthday of the holy Martyrs, Monks of the monastery of
Dius, who bringing the Letters of S. Felix Pope, against Acacius, for defense
of the Catholic faith, were most barbarously killed. In Persia the
Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who under Gabades King of the Persians,
were for the Christian faith diversely put to death. At Papia.
Pauia of S. Iuuentius Bishop, who greatly labored in preaching the Gospel of
Christ. At Millane the deposition of S. Honoratus Bishop and Confessor. At
Virodunum.
Verdune in France, of S. Paul Bishop, renowned for miracles.

E The nynth Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of S. Apollonia Virgin, who in the time of Decius
the Emperor, for that she refused to utter impious words, having first all her
teeth strooken out by the persecutors, and after threatened to be cast alive
into a great fire, there prepared; she deliberating a while with herself, and
suddenly breaking from them, inkindled with a greater flame of the holy Ghost,
did voluntarily leap into the fire, to the great astonishment of the Authors
of that cruelty, wondering to see a woman more ready to accept of death, then
they to execute the same. At Rome the passion of the holy Martyrs Alexander,
and eight and thirty others, crowned at the same time. At Soli in Cypus of the
holy Martyrs Ammonius and Alexander. At Antioch of S. Nicephorus Martyr, who
under Valerian Emperor, with loss of his head gained a Crown of Martyrdom.
In Africa, in a Village called Lemlens of the holy Martyrs Primus, and Donatus
Deacons, who defending an Altar in the Church, were killed by the Donatists. In
the Monastery of Fontanelle, of S. Ansbert Bishop of Rotomagum.
Roan. At Canusium.
Canosa in Apulia of S. Sabinus Bishop and Confessor.

F The tenth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Zoticus, Irenaeus, Hyacinthus, and Amantius. There
also in the way Lauicana, of ten holy Soldiers Martyrs. More over in the way
called Appia of S. Soteres Virgin and Martyr, who descended of noble
Extraction, as S. Ambrose writes, and contemning, for the love of Christ, the
honorable Tytles and Honors of her parents, was for refusing to do sacrifice
to the Idols, long and cruelly buffe^ed; and when she had overcome many other
torments, stricken with the sword, she went joyfully to her Spouse. In Campania
of S. Syluianus Bishop, and Confessor. At Stabubulum Rhodis.
Male-uallis in the Territory Senones.
of Sens, of S. William Hermit. At Monte-Cassino of S. Scholastica Virgin,
sister to S. Benet Abbot, who saw her soul fly up to heaven, in lykenes of a
Dove. In the territory of Roan of S. Austreberta Virgin, renowned for miracles.

G The eleauenth Day.
IN Africa the birthday of the holy Martyrs Saturninus Priest, Datiuus,
Felix, Ampelius, and their fellows, who being assembled to pray, according to
the manner of Christians, were in the persecution of Diocletian, apprehended by
the soldiers, and suffered under the Proconsull Anolinus. In Numidia the
Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who in the same persecution, when refusing
to deliver up holy books, according to the Edict of the Emperor. punished
with diverse most cruel torments, were finally slain. At Hadrianople of the
holy Martyrs Lucius Bishop, and his fellows, who greatly vexed by the Arians,
under Constantius, Lucius ended his Martyrdom in prison; but the rest, being
the chief persons of that City, when they refused to admit of the Arians,
condemned in the Council of Sardica, received sentence of death by Count
Philagrius. At Lions of S. Desiderius Bishop of Vienna, and Martyr. At Rauenna
of S. Calocerus Bishop and Confessor. At Millane of S. Lazarus Bishop. At
Capua of S. Castrensis Bishop. In the Village Nantonium.
Landon, of S. Seuerinus Abbot of the Monastery of Now called S* Maurice.
Agaunu^, by whose prayers the devout King Clodoueus of France was delivered
from a long sickness. In Egypt of S. Jonas Monk, renowned for miracles.

A The twelfth Day.
AT Barcelona in Spain of S. Eulalia Virgin, who in the time of Diocletian the
Emperor, being racked upon the torture Equuleus, tormented with iron hooks
and fire, at last crucified, received a glorious crown of Martyrdom. In
Africa of S. Damianus a Soldier, and Martyr. At Carthage of the holy Martyrs
Modestus and Iulianus. At Beneuentum* of S. Modestus Deacon, and Martyr. At
Alexandria of two holy Infants Modestus and Ammonius. At Antioch of S. Meletius
Bishop, who being often banished for the Catholic faith, went finally to rest
at Constantinople; whose renowned Virtues S. John Chrysostom, and Gregory
Nissene have worthily set forth. At Constantinople of S. Antony Bishop, in the
time of Leo the sixth, Emperor. At Verona of S. Gaudentius Bishop and
Confessor.

B The thirtenth Day.
AT Antioch the birthday of S. Agabus Prophet, of whom S. Luke makes mention
in the Acts of the Apostles, At Rauenna of the holy Saints Fusca Virgin and
Maura her nurse, who in the days of Decius the Emper^ur, after many sufferings
for Christ, by commaundment of Quinctianus President, accomplished their
Martyrdom by the sword. At Meletine in Armenia of S. Polieuctus Martyr, who in
the persecution of the same Decius enduring many torments, gained a Crown of
Martyrdom. At Lions of S. Julian Martyr. At Tudertum.
Todi of S. Benignus Martyr. At Rome of S. Gregory Pope, the second of that
Name, who with great courage opposed himself against the impiety of Leo
Isauricus; and sent S. Boniface to preach the Gospel in Germany. At Andegauum.
Angiers the deposition of S. Lucinius Bishop, renowned for his holiness. At
Lions of S. Stephen Bishop, and Confessor. At Reate.
Riete of S. Stephen Abbot, a man of wonderful Patience, at whose death the
holy Angels were present, and seen by all the company, as S. Gregory Pope
relates.

C The fourteenth Day.
AT Rome, in the way Flaminia, the birthday of Blessed Valentinus Priest and
Martyr, who after he had restored many sick persons to their health, and
instructed the Ignorant in the faith of Christ, beaten with clubbes, was
beheaded under Claudius the Emperor. Also at Rome of the holy Martyrs Vitalis,
Felicula and Zeno. At Interamta.
Teramo of S. Valentine Bishop and Martyr, who cruelly whipped, and then
committed to prison would not relent, was about midnight drawn thence, by
commandment of Placidus Governor of that City, and beheaded. There also of
the holy Martyrs Proculus, Ephebus, and Apollonius, who praying by night at the
body of S. Valentine, by commaundment of Leontius a Senator were apprehended,
and put to the sword. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Bassus, Antonius, and
Protolicus, who were drowned in the sea. Also of the holy Martyrs Cyrion
Priest, Bassianus Lector, Agatho Exorcist, and Moses, who all consumed with
fire, departed to heaven. There also of the Saints Dionysius, and Ammonius, who
were beheaded. At Rauenna of S. Eleuchadius Bishop and Confessor. In Bithynia
of S. Auxentius Abbot. At Su^rentum*
Sorrento of S. Antoninus Abbot, who when the monastery of Monte-Cassino was
destroyed by the Lombardes, retired himself into the wilderness near
adjoining, and there renowned for holiness of life went to rest in our Lord:
whose body is daily glorified by miracles, especially in delivering of
possessed persons.

D The fifteenth Day.
AT Brixia.
Brescia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Faustinus and Iouita, who under
Adrianus Emperor, after many famous combats suffered for the faith of Christ,
obtained a victorious Crown of Martyrdom. At Rome of S. Crato Martyr, who
with his wife, and whole family being baptized by S. Valentine Bishop, shortly
after, together with them, ended his life by Martyrdom. At Inter^mna.
Teramo of S. Agapes Virgin and Martyr. Also the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Saturninus, Castulus, Magnus and Lucius. At Vasione.
Vaison in France of S. Quinidius Bishop, whose death was precious in the sight
of God by many renowned miracles. At Capua of S. Decorosus Bishop and
Confessor. In the Province of Valeria, of S. Seuerus Priest who by his tears
revived a dead man, as S. Gregory writes. At Antioch of S. Joseph Deacon. At
Auuergne of S. Georgia Virgin.

E The sixteenth Day.
THE birthday of Blessed Onesimus, of whom S. Paul writes to Philemon, whom
also he ordained Bishop of Ephesus, after S. Timothy, and committed unto him
the preaching of the word of God. This man being brought prisoner to Rome, and
stoned to death for the faith of Christ, was first buried there, and afterward
translated to the place, where he had been Bishop. At Cumae.
Cuma in Campania the translation of S. Iuliana Virgin, and Martyr, who
suffered at Nicomedia under Maximianus Emperor; being first most cruelly
beaten by her own Father Africanus, and after many ways tormented by
Euilasius the Governor (whose marriage she had contemned) was cast into prison,
where she openly encou^tred with the Devil; and at last having ouercomme both
fire, and water, accomplished her Martyrdom, by being beheaded. In Egypt of
S. Julian Martyr, with five thousand more. At Caesarea in Palestine of the holy
Martyrs Elias, Hieremias, Esaias, Samuel, and Daniel Egyptians, who having of
their own accord served the Confessors of Christ, that were condemned to
dig in the metal mines of Cilicia, and returning thence, being apprehended,
and cruelly tormented by Firmilianus President, were under Maximinus Emperor,
lastly beheaded. With whom also S. Porphyrius servant of Pamphilus the Martyr,
and S. Seleucus a Cappadocian, having often suffered many combats, and
torments for Christ; the one by fire, the other by the sword received the
Crown of Martyrdom. At Bri^*
Brescia of S. Faustinus Bishop and Confessor.

F The seventeenth Day.
AT Rome the Passion of S. Faustinus, whom four and forty others followed to
the Crown of Martyrdom. In Persia the birth day of S. Polychronius Bishop of
Babylon, who in the persecution of Decius having his mouth all bruised with
stones, stretching out his hands, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, gave up
his soul to God. At Concordia of the holy Martyrs Denatus, Secundianus, and
Romulus, together with fourscore and six others all partakers of the same
Crown. At Caesarea in Palestine of S. Theodulus an ancient man, of the family
of Firmilianus the President, who moved with the torments of Martyrs, was for
the constant profession of Christ fastened to a Cross, and by so noble a
Triumph, deserved a glorious Crown of Martyrdom. There also of S. Julian a
Cappadocian, who for kissing the bodies of the Martyrs, was accused for a
Christian, and being brought before the Judge was commanded to be burnt with a
slow fire. In the territory of Taruanum.
Teruane of S. Siluinus Bishop of Tolosa. In Scotland of S. Fintanus Priest and
Confessor.

G The eighteenth Day.
AT Jerusalem the birthday of S. Simeo^ Bishop, and Martyr, who by tradition
is said to have been the son of Cleophas, and kinsman to our Savior
according to flesh. He was created Bishop of Jerusalem next after S. James the
brother of our Lord, and in the persecution of Traian having endured many
torments, finished his Martyrdom; all that were present, and the Judge
himself, admiring how a man of six score years of age, could with such
fortitude and consta^cy endure the torment of the Cross. At Ostia of the holy
Martyrs Maximus and Claudius brothers, and Praepedigna wife to Claudius, with
her two sons Alexander and Cutias, who descended of noble Extraction, were by
commaundment of Diocletian first apprehended, and sent into bannishment; but
afterward being consumed with fire, they offered up to our Lord a most sweet
sacrifice of Martyrdom. Their holy Relics being cast into a river, were
found afterward by the Christians, and buried near to the same City. In
Africa of the holy Martyrs Lucius, Syluanus, Rutulus, Classicus, Secundinus,
Fructulus, and Maximus. At Constantinople of S. Flauianus Bishop, who for
constantly defending the Catholic faith at Ephesus, was by the faction of
wicked Dioscorus, after sore beating and buffeting, cast into banishment, where
within three days he ended his life. At Toledo of S. Helladius Bishop and
Confessor.

A The nineteenth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Gabinus Priest and Martyr (brother to blessed
Caius Pope) who cast into prison by Diocletian, and there for a long time pined
and afflicted, purchased the joys of heaven by a precious death. In Africa of
the holy Martyrs Publius, Iulianus, Marcellus, and others, In Palestine the
Commemoration of many holy Monks, and others, Martyrs, who for the faith of
Christ were barbarously slain by the Saracens, under their Captain
Alemundarus. At Jerusalem of S. Zambdas Bishop. At Soli of S. Auxibius Bishop.
At Beneuentum of S. Barbatus Bishop, who renowned for holiness of life,
converted the Lombards, and their Captain to the faith of Christ. At Millan of
S. Mansuetus Bishop and Confessor.

B The twentieth Day.
AT Tyrus in Phoenicia, the Commemoration of the Blessed Martyrs, whose number
only God knows, who under Diocletian the Emperor, were by Veturius General
of the Army, killed one after another by diverse kinds of torments: first they
had their bodies all torn with whippes, then cast unto diverse kinds of beasts
to be devoured, but preserved by divine power from all hurt, and lastly by the
fury of ^yre and sword, they all accomplished their Martyrdom. All which
glorious company were encouraged to this combat, by Tyranio, Siluanus, Peleus,
and Nilus Bishops, and Zenobius Priest; who together with the^ most happily
obtained a tryumphant Palm of Martyrdom. In the Island of Cyprus of the holy
Martyrs Pothamius and Nemesius. At Constantinople of S. Eleutherius Bishop, and
Martyr. In Persia the birthday of S. Sadoth Bishop, and of an hundred and
twenty eight others, who under Sapores King of the Persians, for refusing to
adore the Su^ne, by cruel deaths obtained renowned Crowns. At Catana in
Sicily of S. Le^ Bishop, who shined with virtues, and ^racles. The same day of
S. Eucherius Bishop of Orleans, who the more he was slaundered by envious
tongues, the more famous he became by miracles. At Tournay in France of S.
Eleutherius Bishop and Confessor.

C The one and twentieth Day.
IN Sicily the birthday of seauenty and nine holy Martyrs, who under
Diocletian the Emperor by diverse kinds of torments, deserved Crowns for the
confession of their faith. At Adrumetum.
Mahome^ta in Africa of the holy Martyrs Verulus, Secundinus, Syricius, Felix,
Seruulus, Saturninus, Fortunatus, and sixteen others, who in the persecution
of the Wandalls, were crowned with Martyrdom, for confession of the Catholic
faith. At Now called Bethsan.
Scythopolis in Palestine of S. Seuerianus Bishop and Martyr. At Damascus of S.
Peter surnamed Mauimenus, who for saying to certain Arabians, that came to
visit him being sick (Whosoever does not embrace the Christian Catholic
faith, is damned, as is your false Prophet Mahomet) was by them killed. At
Rauenna of S. Maximianus Bishop and Confessor. At Metae.
Me^^ of S. Felix Bisho^ At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Paterius Bishop.

D The two and twentieth Day.
AT Antioch the Chair of Saint Peter the Apostle, where the Disciples of
Christ were first of all called Christians. At Now called Halep^.
Hierapolis in Phrygia of Blessed Papias Bishop of that City, Disciple of S.
John the Apostle, and Condisciple of S. Polycarpe. At Now Famagost^.
Salamina in Cyprus of S. Aristio, who, at the foresaid Papias witnesses, was
one of the seauenty and two Disciples of Christ. In Arabia the Commemoration of
many holy Martyrs, who were most Tyrannically killed under Maximinus the
Emperor. At Alexandria of S. Abilius Bishop, who succeeded S. Mark the
Evangelist in the same sea, greatly renowned for his virtues. At Vienna of S.
Paschasius Bishop, a man of great Learning and Holiness.

E The three and twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of S. Matthias Apostle. At Sirmium of S. Sirenus Monk and martyr
who being apprehended by commandment of Maximian the Emperor, and confessing
himself to be a Christian, was beheaded. There also the birthday of feaue^ty
two holy Martyrs, who by suffering in the same City, obtained an everlasting
Kingdom. At Rome of S. Polycarpus Priest, who together with S. Sebastian
converted many to the faith of Christ, and by his exhortation brought them to
the glory of Martyrdom. In the City of Austurica.
Astorga of S. Martha Virgin and Martyr, who suffered under Decius the
Emperor, and Paternus Proconsull. At Constantinople of S. Lazarus Monk, who
for paynting holy Images, was put to cruel torments, by commaundment of
Theophilus the Emperor, surnamed Image-breaket.
Iconoclasta. This man having his hand burnt with an hoate iron, but after
miraculously cured, did paynt a new such Images, as were defaced, and at last
dyed a natural death. At Brescia of S. Felix Bishop. At Hispalis.
Seuill in Spain of S. Florentius Confessor. At Tudertum.
Todi of S. Romana Virgin, who baptized by S. Syluester Pope, lead a holy life,
in caves, and dens, renowned for the glory of miracles. In England of S.
Milburge Virgin, daughter to the King of the Mercians.

In the Bissextile (or Leap-yeare,) the four and twentieth Day is to be read
twice, to wit, both upon the 24. and 25. Day. And then upon the 23. Day, is
omitted in the beginning thereof this Clause. The Vigill of S. Matthias Apostle.
going forward with the rest. At Sirmium etc. And upon the 24. Day is read only
as follows: The Vigill of S. Matthias Apostle. Also the Commemoration of many
Saints, Martyrs and Confessors, and holy Virgins. To whose prayers etc. And
upon the 25. Day, is read as follows here upon the 24. In Jury the birthday
of S. Matthias etc.

F The four and twentieth Day (or 25.
IN Jury the birthday of S. Matthias Apostle, who after the Ascension of our
Lord, being by the Apostles chosen in the place of Judas the Traitor, for
preaching of the Gospel suffered Martyrdom. At Rome of S. Primitiua Martyr.
At Caesarea in Cappadocia of S. Sergius Martyr, whose renowned acts are yet
extant. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Montanus, Lucius, Iulianus, Victoricus,
Flauianus, and their follows, who being Disciples of S. Cyprian, under
Valerian the Emperor accomplished their Martyrdom. At Rhotomagum.
Roan the passion of S. Praetextatus Bishop and Martyr. At Treuers of S.
Modestus Bishop and Confessor. In England of S. Ethelbert King of Kent, whom
S. Augustine the Apostle of the English converted to the faith of Christ. At
Jerusalem, the first finding of the head of S. John Baptist, the Precursour of
our Lord.

G The five and twentieth Day. (or 26.
IN Egypt the birthday of the holy Martyrs Victorinus, Victor, Nicephorus,
Claudianus, Dioscorus, Serapion, and Papias, under Numerianus the Emperor. The
two first having constantly endured exquisite torments, were beheaded for the
confession of their faith. Nicephorus, after he had overcome the burning
Gridiron, and the ^yre, was by little and little cut in pieces. Claudianus and
Dioscorus were burned; and Serapion and Papias beheaded. In Africa of the holy
Martyrs Donatus, Iustus, Herena and their fellows. At Rome the birthday of S.
Felix Pope, the fourth of that Name, great Grandfather to S. Gregory the
Great, who writes of him, that he appearing to S. Tharsilla his Near, called
her to the Kingdom of heaven. At Constantinople of S. Tha^asius Bishop, a man
of great learning and holiness, to whom is extant an Epistle written by Pope
Adrian the first, for the defense of holy Images. At Nazianzum of S. Caesarius
brother to S. Gregory surnamed the Divine, who records to have seen him
glorious amongst the troops of Saints.

A The six and twentieth Day. (or 27.
AT Pergen in Pamphylia the birthday of S. Nestor Bishop, who in the
persecution of Decius, praying night and day for preservation of the flock of
Christ, being apprehended, and promptly confessing the Name of our Lord, was by
commaundmet of Pollio President, most cruelly racked on the torture Equuleus;
and still constantly affirming that he would never forsake Christ, crucified on
a Cross, went victoriously to heaven. There also the passion of the Saints
Papias, Diodorus, Conon, and Claudianus, who were all martyred before S.
Nestor. Moreover of the holy Martyrs, Fortunatus, Felix, and seven and twenty
others. At Alexandria of S. Alexander Bishop, a renowned old man, who after S.
Peter Bishop of that City, did cast out of his Church Arius the Priest,
infected, and convinced of heresy, and afterward, together with three hundred
and eighteen Fathers, condemned him in the Nicene Council. At Bolonia of S.
Faustinianus Bishop, who by his preaching did greatly strengthen and increase
that Church which had been fore afflicted, and weakened by the persecution of
Diocletian. At Gaza in Palestine of S. Porphyrius Bishop, who in the days of
Arcadius the Emperor, overthrew the Temple, and Idol Marnas; and after the
suffering of many agonies, went to rest in our Lord. At Florence of S. Andrew
Bishop and Confessor. In the territory of Arch^ of S. Victor Confessor, whose
praises are written by S. Bernard.

B The seven and twentieth Day. (or 28.
AT Rome the birthday of the holy Martyrs Alexander, Abundius, Antigonus, and
Fortunatus. At Alexandria the passion of S. Julian Martyr, who being so
tormented with the Gout, that he could neither go, nor stand, was with two of
his servants, that carried him in a Chair, presented before the Judge, whereof
the one denied his faith, the other called Eunus, together with his master,
perseuering in the confession of Christ, were both set upon Camels, and
commanded to be whipped round about the City, and finally in presence of all
the people were burned. There also of S. Besas a soldier, who for rebuking
those that insolently abused the foresaid Martyrs, was brought before the
Judge, and there constantly professing his faith, was presently beheaded. At
Hispalis.
Seuill in Spain the birthday of S. Leander Bishop of that City, who by his
preaching and industry, and by help of their own King R^^ardus, converted the
West-Gothes from the Arian Heresy, to the Catholic faith. At Constantinople
of the Holy Confessors Basil, and Procopius, who in the time of Leo the
Emperor, did valiantly behave themselves, for vphoulding the worship of holy
Images. At Lions of S. Baldomerus, a man of God, whose Sepulcher is renowned
for often miracles.

C The eight and twentieth Day. (or 29.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Macarius, Rufinus, Iustus, and Theophilus Martyrs.
At Alexandria the passion of the Saints Caerealis, Pupulus, Caius and Serapion.
There also the Commemoration of many holy Priests, Deacons, and others, who in
the days of Valerian the Emperor, in the time of a great Plague, willingly
gave their lives, by serving such as were infected; whom the faithful devout
people were accustomed to honor as Martyrs. In the territory of Lions, in the
Locis I^s.
Mountains of S. Claude, the deposition of S. Romanus Abbot, who there first
lead a solitary life, and famous for Sanctity and Miracles, became afrerward
the Father of many Monks. At Pauia the translation of the body of S. Augustine
Bishop, out of the Island of Sardinia, by the help of Luitprandus King of the
Lombards.

THE MONTH OF MARCH.
D The first Day.
AT Rome of two hundred and threescore holy Martyrs, who for confessing the
Name of Christ, were by co^mandme^t of Claudius the Emperor, condemned first
to dig sand without the gate called Salaria, and afterward to be shot with
arrows by the soldiers in the Amphitheater. There also the birthday of the
holy Martyrs Leo, Donatus, Abundantius, Nicephorus, and nine others. At Man lia.
Marseille of the holy Martyrs Hermes and Adrian. At Heliopolis of S. Eudocia
Martyr, who instructed in the Christian Faith, and baptized by Theodoius
Bishop, was in the persecution of Traian, by commaundment of Vincentius
President, crowned with Martyrdom by the sword. The same day of S. Antonina
Martyr, who in the persecution of Diocletian for deriding the Gods of the
Paynims, after diverse torments, being shut up in a vessel, was drowned in a
Lake by the City of Cea. At Werdt of S. Suibert Bishop, who in the time of
Pope Sergius preached the gospel in Frizeland, Holland, and in other parts of
Germany. At Andegauum.
Angiers of S. Albinus Bishop, and Confessor, a man ^enowned for Virtue and
Holiness. At Cenomani.
Man's of S. Siuiardus Abbot. At Perugia the translation of S. Herculanus
Bishop, and Martyr.

E The second Day.
AT Rome in the way called Latina, of the holy Martyrs Iouinus and Basileus,
who suffered under Valerianus and Gallienus Emperors. Also at Rome of many
holy Martyrs, who under Alexander Emperor, and Vlpianus Judge having been long
and often tormented, at last received sentence of death. At Portus Roman.
Porto of the holy Martyrs Pau^, Heraclius, Secundilla, and Ianuaria. At
Caesarea in Cappadocia of the holy Martyrs Lucius Bishop* Absolon, and Lorgius.
In Campania the Commemoration of fourscore holy Martyrs, who for that they
would neither eat flesh that had been offered up to Idols, nor adore the
head of a Goat, were by the Lo^bards most cruelly killed. At Rome of S.
Simplicius Pope and Confessor. In England of S. Ceadda Bishop of the Mercians
and Lindi^
Northumbers, whose renowned virtues are recorded by S. Bid.

F The third Day.
AT Caesarea in Palestine, of the holy Martyrs Marinus a Soldier, and Asterius
a Senator, the former of whom in the Persecution of Valerian being accused for
a Christian, and examined by the Judge, with a loud voice confessing the same,
with loss of his head purchased a Crown of Martyrdom. Whose body when
Asterius, wrapping it in his own garment, took upon his shoulders to carry
away, was for that fact presently put to death, and so received himself the
same honor, which he had showed to the Martyr. In Spain the birthday of the
holy Martyrs Hemiterius and Cheledonius, who being Soldiers in the Camp at
Legio.
Leon in Galicia, a storm of persecution there arysing, after many torments
endured for the confession of Christ, were brought to Calagurris.
Calahorra, and there crowned with Martyrdom. The same day the passion of the
Saints Felix, Luciolus, Fortunatus, Marcias, and their fellows. Moreover of
the holy soldiers, Cleonicus, Eutropius, and Basiliscus, who in the
persecution of Maximianus under Asclepiades President, happily triu^phed by the
death of the Cross. At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Titianus Bishop and Confessor. At Bamberge of S. Chunegundes
Empress, wife to the Henry the first, Emperor who by his consent preserving
her Virginity, and enriched with the merits of good works* ended her blessed
days, and after her death was renowned for miracles.

G The fourth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Appia, the birthday of S. Lucius Pope and Martyr,
who being sent into banishment for the faith of Christ in the persecution of
Valerianus, and afterward by Gods permission suffered to return again to his
Church, when he had greatly labored against the Nouatian Heretics, by loss
of his head, accomplished his Martyrdom; whom S. Cyprian has highly
commended. At Rome also in the same place, of Nine hundred holy Martyrs, who
lie buried in the Churchyard at S. Cecilyes. The same day of S. Caius a
Courtier, and twenty seven others drowned in the sea. At Nicomedia of S.
Adrian Martyr, together with three and twenty others, who under Diocletian
Emperor having their thighs bruised, accomplished their Martyrdom; but S.
Adri^ feast is kept upon the tenth of September, when his body was translated
to Rome. Moreover, the passion of the Saints Archelaus, Cyrillus, and Photius.
At Chersonesus the passion of the holy Bishops Basilius, Eugenius, Agathodorus,
Elpidius, Aetherius, Capito, Ephraem, Nestor and Arcaedius. At Vilna in
Lituania of Blessed Casimirus, son to King Casimirus, who was canonized for a
Saint by Pope Leo the tenth.

A The fifth Day.
AT Antioch the birthday of S. Phocas Martyr, who after many iniuryes suffered
for the name of Christ, how gloriously he tryumphed over the old Serpent, is
eue^ until this day declared to the world by a miracle; which is, that if any
one be bitten of a serpent, as soon as with a firm faith he touches the gate
of this Martyrs Church, is presently cured. At Caesarea in Palestine of S.
Adrian Martyr, who in the persecution of Diocletian, for the confession of his
faith, by commaundment of Firmilianus President, being first cast unto a Lion,
and afterward slain by the sword, received a Crown of Martyrdom. The same
day the passion of the Saints Eusebius a Courtier, with nine other Martyrs. At
Caesarea in Palestine of S. Theophilus Bishop, who under Seuerus Emperor, was
greatly renowned for wisdom, and holiness of life. Moreover in Palestine upon
the river bank of Jordan, of S. Gerasimus Anchoret, who flourished in the time
of Zeno the Emperor.

B The sixth Day.
AT Nicomedia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Victor and Victorinus, who
together with Claudianus and Bassa his wife, having endured many torments for
three whole years, at last cast into prison, there ended their lives. At
Terdona.
Tortona of S. Marcianus Bishop and Martyr, who under Traian the Emperor,
suffering for the confession of Christ, obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At
Constantinople of S. Euagrius, who chose^ Bishop by the Catholic party in the
days of Valens the Emperor, was by him sent into banishment, where he ended
his days. In Cyprus of S. Conon Martyr, who under Decius the Emperor having
his feet pierced with nails, and commanded to ru^ne before a Chariot,
falling upon his knees in prayer, gave up the ghost. Moreover the passion of
forty and two holy Soldiers Martyrs, who apprehended in Ammorium, and brought
into Syri^, after a glorious combat, as Conquerers received the triumphant
palm of Martyrdom. At Bolonia of S. Basilius Bishop, who consecrated by S.
Syluester Pope, did both by word and example in most godly manner, govern the
Church committed to his charge.

C The seventh Day.
IN the monastery called Fossa-Noua near unto Terracina of S. Thomas of Aquin
Confessor and Doctor, of the Order of S. Dominicke, renowned for holiness of
life, and profound knowledge in divinity. At Tuburbum in Mauritania the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Perpetua and Felici^as, the last of whom (as S.
Augustine records,) being great with child, and her execution, according to
the laws, differred until she was delivered, whilst she was yet in travel,
and in pain thereof, was greatly comforted in being cast unto the wild beasts
to be devoured. There suffered also with them Reuocatus, Saturninus, and
Secundolus, of which the last dyed in prison, but the rest, under Seuerus the
Emperor, were also cast unto the beasts. At Caesarea in Palestine the passion
of S. Eubulus, fellow and companion unto S. Adrian, who two days after him,
being first torn by the Lions, and then slain by the sword, was the last that
received the Crown of Martyrdom in that City. At Nicomedia of S. Theophilus
Bishop, who sent into banishment for the worshipping of holy Images, there
ended his life. At Pelusium in Egypt of S. Paul Bishop, who for the same cause
dyed also in bannishment. At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Gaudiosus Bishop and Confessor. In Thebais of S. Paul, surnamed
the Simple.

D The eight Day*
AT Antinoum.
Anthios a City in Egypt, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Philemon and
Apollonius Deacon, who apprehended, and brought before the Judge, for constant
refusing to sacrifice unto Idols, having their heels boared through, and most
cruelly dragged through the City, at last beheaded, accomplished their
Martyrdom. There also of the Saints, Arianus President, Theoticus, and three
others, whom the Judge commanded to be drowned in the sea, but their bodies
were brought to the shore by Dolphins. At Nicomedia of S. Quinctilis Bishop and
Martyr. At Carthage of S. Pontius, Deacon to S. Cyprian, who enduring
banishment with him, even to his dying day, left written a notable work of his
life, and sufferings; and so continually glorifying God in all his labors,
deserved at last the Crown of eternal Life. Moreover in Africa of the Saints
Cyrillus Bishop, Rogatus, Felix, and another Rogatus; also of Beata, Herenia,
Felicitas, Vrbanus, Siluanus and Mamillus. At Toledo in Spain the deposition
of S. Julian Bishop and Confessor, renowned for holiness, and learning. In
England of S. Felix Bishop, who converted the East Angles to the faith of
Christ.

E The nynth Day.
AT Sebaste in Armenia, the birthday of forty soldiers of Cappadocia, who in
the time of Licinins the Emperor, under Agricolaus President, after they had
endured a most loathsome and stinking prison, and their faces all bruised with
stones, being stripped naked, were in the coldest season of winter, left all
night in the open air, where their bodies, being frozen, fell in pieces;
lastly having their thighs broken, accomplished their Martyrdom. The noblest
amongst them were Cirion and Candidus; of all whose renowned praises S. Basil,
and other Fathers have made honorable mention in their wrytings. At Nyssa the
deposition of S. Gregory Bishop, brother to S. Basil the Great, greatly
renowned for his life and learning, who for defending the Catholic faith,
under Valens the Arian Emperor, was driven out of the City. At Barcelona in
Spain of S. Patianus. Bishop, who famous for life, and grace in preaching dyed
full of venerable old days, in the tym^ Theodosius the Emperor. In Morauia of
the holy Saints Cyrillus and Methodius Bishops, who converted to the faith of
Christ, many Countries, together with their Kings, in those parts. At Rome
of S. Francisca Widow, renowned for her noble Extraction, Holiness of life, and
grace of miracles. At Bolonia of S. Catherine Virgin, of the Order of S. Clare,
famous for sanctimony of life, whose body is there honored with great
Veneration.

F The tenth Day.
AT Apamea in Phrygia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Caius and Alexander,
who in the persecution of Marcus Antoninus, and Lucius Verus, endured a
glorious Martyrdom, as writes Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis in his book
against the Cataphryges Heretics. In Persia the passion of two and forty
holy Martyrs. At Corinth of the holy Martyrs Codratus, Dionysius, Cyprianus,
Anectus, Paulus and Crescens, who in the persecution of Decius and Valerian,
under Jason President were beheaded. In Africa of S. Victor Martyr, on whose
feast S. Augustine made a Sermon to the people. At Jerusalem of S. Macarius
Bishop and Confessor, by whose persuasion the Holy Places there, were purged
by Constantine and Helena, and adorned with sacred, and goodly Churches. At
Paris the deposition of S. Droctoueus Abbot, disciple to S. German Bishop. In
the monastery of Luxouium of S. Attalas abbot, renowned for miracles.

G The eleauenth Day.
AT Carthage of the holy Martyrs Heraclius, and Zozimus. At Alexandria the
passion of the Saints Candidus, Piperion, and twenty others. At Laodicea in
Syria, of the holy Martyrs Trophimus, and Thalus, who in the persecution of
Diocletian, after many cruel torments, obtained a Crown of glory. At Antioch
the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, whereof some by commaundment of
Maximinus the Emperor, were broyled upon hoate gridyrons, and a long time
tormented before they dyed: others, by most cruel, and severe punishments,
received the triumphant palm of Martyrdom. Also, of the Saints Gorgonius and
Firmus. At Corduba.
Cordoua of S. Eulogiue Priest, who in the persecution of the Saracens,
deserved to be made one of the Martyrs of that City, whose glorious Combats
for the faith of Christ, he had written with great zeal. At Sardis of S.
Euthymius Bishop, who for worshipping of holy Images was by Michael the
Imagebreaker.
Iconoclast banished, and under Theophilus Emperor accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Jerusalem of S. Sophronius Bishop. At Millan of S. Benet
Bishop. In the territory of Ambianum.
Amiens of S. Firminus Abbot. At Carthage of S. Constantine Confessor. At
Babucum in Hernici.
Campania of S. Peter Confessor, renowned for miracles.

A The twelfth Day.
AT Rome of S. Gregory Pope, and famous Doctor of the Church, who for many
renowned Acts, and for converting the English to the faith of Christ, is
surnamed the Great, and called the Apostle of the English. Also at Rome of S.
Maximilian Martyr. At Nicomedia, the passion of S. Peter Martyr, who being of
the Chamber to Diocletian the Emperor, for complaining of the too cruel
torments used toward the Martyrs, was by the Emperors commaundment, first
hanged up from the ground, and torn with whippes, then salt and vinegar powered
into his wounds, was at last broyled upon a gridiron with a soft fire, and so
became the true heir of S. Peter's faith, and Name. There also of S. Egdunius
Priest, and seven other Martyrs, who one by one, upon diverse days were
strangled, for the greater terror of others. At Constantinople of S.
Theophanes, who of a very rich man made a poor Monk, was by the wicked
Emperor L^o Armenus, for worshipping of holy Images, two years imprisoned,
and thence banished into Samo-thracia, there renowned for miracles ended his
life in misery. At Capua of S. Bernard Bishop and Confessor.

B The thirtenth Day.
AT Nicomedia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Macedonius, and Patricia his
wife, and Modesta their daughter. At Nice of the holy Martyrs Theusetas and
Horres his son, Theodora, Nimphadora, Marcus, and Arabia, who all for the
confessing of Christ, ended their Martyrdom by fire. At Hermopolis in Egypt
of S. Sabinus Martyr, who after many afflictions, at last drowned in a river,
finished his Martyrdom. In Persia of S. Christina Virgin and Martyr. At
Corduba,
Cordoua of the Saints Rudericus Priest, and Solomon Martyrs. At Constantinople
of S. Nicephorus Bishop who, as a constant defender of his forefathers
Traditions, opposed himself, with great courage, for the defense of holy
Images, against Leo Armenus the Image-breaker.
Iconoclast, by whom being bannished, and enduring a long Martyrdom for
fourteen years, went unto our Lord. At Camerino of S. Ansouinus Bishop and
Confessor. In Thebais the deposition of S. Euphrasia Virgin.

C The fourteenth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of seven and forty holy Martyrs, who baptized by S.
Peter the Apostle, whilst together with S. Paul, he was for nine months kept
prisoner in the place called Namertine, were all for the confession of the
Christian faith martyred in the persecution of Nero. In Africa of the holy
Martyrs Peter and Aphrodisius, who in the persecution of the Wandalls received
the Crown, of Martyrdom. At Now called Os^^.
Carrha in Mesopotamia of S. Eutychius, a Senator, and his fellows, who by
Euelid King of Arabia, were killed for the confession of their faith. In the
Province of Valeria of two holy Monks, whom the Lombards hanged up upon a
tree, and there, though dead, were heard to sing, even of their enemies. In the
same Persecution, also a Deacon of the Church of In ^*
Marsico was beheaded, for confession of his ^ayth. A^ Halberstat in Germany
the departure of S. Mathildes Queen, mother to Otho the Emperor, first of
that name, renowned for Humility, and Patience.

D The fifteenth Day.
AT Caesarea in Cappadocia the passion of S. Longinus a Soldier, who is said
to be the same, that pierced our Saviors side with a spear. The same day of
S. Aristobulus Disciple of the Apostles, who having ended the course of his
preaching, finished his Martyrdom. At Thessalonica of S. Matrona, who being
servant to a certain Jewish Woman, and stealing every day privately to the
Church to pray, at length taken by her Mistress* and many ways afflicted, was
finally with great cudgels beaten to death, giving up her pure soul to God in
the confession of her faith. The same day of S. Menignus a Dyar, who was
martyred under Deoius. In Egypt of S. Nicander Martyr, who as he was
diligently seeking for the relics of holy Martyrs, deserved to be made a
Martyr himself, under Diocletian the Emperor. At Cor^.
Cordoua of S. Leocritia Virgin and Martyr. At Rome the birthday of S.
Zachariat Pope, who with great Vigilance governed the Church of God, and
enriched with merits rested in peace. At Reate.
Riete of S. Probus Bishop, at whose death Iuuenall and Eleutherius Martyrs,
were present. At Rome of S. Speciosus Monk, whose soul his brother saw
carried up to heaven.

E The sixtenth Day.
AT Rome the passion of S. Cyriacus Deacon, who enduring a long and loathsome
imprysonment, scalded with hoate burning pitch, having all his iointes
grievously stretched upon the Rack, and beaten with clubbes, was at last,
together with Largus and Smaragdus, and twenty others, by commaundment of
Maximianus beheaded. But their chief festiuity is kept upon the eight of
August, on which day their bodies were taken up by Pope Marcellus, and
honorably entombed. At Aquileia the birthday of S. Hilarious Bishop, and
Tatianus Deacon, who under Numerianus Emperor, and Beronius President, having
byn^cruelly racked and tormented, together with Felix, Largus, and Dionysius
finished their Martyrdom. In Licaonia of S. Papas Martyr, who for the faith of
Christ being whipped, torn with iron hooks, and forced to go in shoes stuck
full of sparpe nails, was lastly tied to a tree, and so ended his Martyrdom;
whereby that tree, which before was barren, became fruitful. At Anazarbum.
Axara in Cilicia of S. Julian Martyr, who long time tormented by Marcianus the
President, was at last sowed up in a sack with Serpents, and cast into the
sea. At Rauenna of S. Agapitus Bishop and Confessor. At Cullen of S. Heribert
Bishop, renowned for sanctity. At Aruernum.
Auuergne the deposition of S. Patricius Bishop. In Syria of S. Abraham Hermit,
whose famous acts are written by S. Ephrem Deacon.

F The seventeenth Day.
AT Jerusalem of S. Joseph of Arimathia a Senator of Noble Extraction, and
Disciple of our Lord, who taking down his body from the Cross, buried it in a
new sepulcher of his own. At Rome of the Saints Alexander and Theodorus
Martyrs. At Alexandria the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who for constant
refusing to worship the Idol Serapis, were cruelly put to death in the days
of Theodosius the Emperor; who being advertised thereof, gave commandment,
that the Temple of Serapis should be destroyed. At Constantinople of S. Paul
Martyr, who under Constantinus Copronymus for defense of holy Images, was
burned. In Ireland the birthday of S. Patricke Bishop and Confessor, who was
the first that preached Christ there, famous for his wonderful sanctity and
miracles. At Cabillio.
Cauaillon in France of S. Agricola Bishop. At Niuigella.
Niuelle in Brabant of S. Gertrude. Virgin, who descended of noble parentage,
despising the world, and spending all her life in the exercise of pious works,
deserved at last to enjoy her heavenly Spouse.

G The eighteenth Day.
AT Caesarea in Palestine the birthday of S. Alexander who coming out of
Cappadocia where he was Bishop, to visit the holy Places at Jerusalem
(Narcissus Bishop of that City being a very old man) took upon him by divine
Revelation the charge of that Church, and afterward in the persecution of
Decius, being sent to Caesarea, and there shut up in prison for the confession
of Christ, greatly reuere^ced for his venerable years, accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Augusta Rh^^torum.
Ausburge of S. Narcissus Bishop, who first preaching the Gospel in Rh^tia,
went afterward into Spain, and converted many to the Faith of Christ at
Girona, where in the persecution of Aurelian, together with b Gerunda.
Felix Deacon, he received the triumphant palm of Martyrdom. At Nicomedia of
ten thousand holy Martyrs, who for the confession of Christ were put to death
by the sword. Also of the holy Martyrs Trophimus and Eucarpius. In England of
S. Edward King, who killed by the treachery of his Stepmother, was renowned for
many miracles. At Jerusalem of S. Cyril Bishop, who having endured many
iniuryes by the Arrians, for the Catholic faith, and oftentimes driven out of
his Church, famous for Sanctity of life dyed in peace: of whose unspotted faith
a General Council writing to Pope Damasus, gives an honorable testimony. At
Luca in Tuscia the birthday of S. Frigidianus Bishop, renowned for miracles,
whose festiuity is kept upon the eighteenth of November, when his body was
translated. At Mantua of S. Anselmus Bishop and Confessor.

A The ninetenth Day.
IN Jury the birthday of S. Joseph Spouse of the Blessed Virgin Mary. At
Surrentum.
Sorrento of the holy Martyrs Quinctus, Quinctilla, Quartilla, and Marcus, with
nine others. At Nicomedia of S. Pancharius a Roman, who under Diocletian being
beheaded, received the Crown of Martyrdom. The same day of the Saints
Apollonius, and Leontius Bishops. At Gaunt of the Saints Landoaldus Priest, a
Roman, and Amantius Deacon, who sent to preach the Gospel by S. Martin Pope,
became renowned for miracles after their death. At the City of Citt^ di Penna.
Pinna the birthday of S. John a man of great holiness, who coming out of
Syria into Italy, erecting there a Monastery, became Father of many servants of
God; and when he had governed the same four and forty years, renowned for
holiness, rested in peace.

B The twentieth Day.
IN Jury of S. Ioachim Father to the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. In
Asia the birthday of S. Archippus Companion of S. Paul the Apostle, of whom
he makes mention in his Epistle to Philemon, and to the Colossians. In Syria
of the holy Martyrs Paulus, Cyrillus, Eugenius, and four others. The same day
of the Saints Photina a Samaritan, Joseph and Victor her sons, and of
Sebastian a Captain, Anatolius, Photius, Photides, also Parasceues and Cyriaca
systers, who all suffered Martyrdom for the confession of Christ. At Amisus in
Paphlagonia of seven holy Women, Alexandra, Claudia, Euphrasia, Matrona,
Iuliana, Euphemia, and Theodosia, who were slain for the confession of their
faith; after whom Derphuta, and her sister followed. At Apollonia of S.
Nicetas Bishop, who sent into banishment for worshipping of holy Images, gave
up his soul to rest. In the Monastery of Fontanelle of S. Wulfran Bishop of
Senones.
Sens, who resigning his Bishopric, renowned for miracles, there ended his
days in rest. In England the deposition of S. Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne,
who even from his childehood to his dying day, was renowned for his holy works
and miracles. At Siena in Tuscia of Blessed Ambrose of the Order of S.
Dominicke, famous for sanctity of life, preaching, and miracles.

C The one and twentieth Day.
AT Monte-Cassino the birthday of S. Benet Abbot, who restored the Monastical
discipline in the West, almost decayed, and wonderfully propagated the same.
Whose life renowned for sanctity, and miracles S. Gregory Pope has written. At
Alexandria the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who under Constantius the
Emperor, and Philagrius Governor, were slain in the Church upon Good-fryday,
by the Arians and Gentiles, breaking in upon them. The same day of the holy
Martyrs Philemon and Domninus. At Catania of S. Birillus, a Cat^na.
who created Bishop by S. Peter, having converted many Gentiles to the faith of
Christ, in a good old age, rested in our Lord. At Alexandria of Blessed
Serapion Anchoret, and Bishop of Themuis, a man of great Virtue; who banished
by the fury of the Arrians, went unto our Lord. In the Territory of Lions of S.
Lupicinus Abbot, whose life was renowned for sanctity, and miracles.

D The two and twentieth Day.
AT Narbone in France the birthday of S. Paul Bishop and Confessor, Disciple
a Narbona.
of the Apostles, who is held by tradition, to have been Sergius Paulus the
Proconsull, whom S. Paul the Apostle baptized, and left at Narbone, when he
went into Spain; where being made Bishop and carefully performing the office
of preaching, famous for miracles, went unto our Lord. At Terracina of S.
Epaphroditus Disciple of the Apostles, who was ordained Bishop of that City by
S. Peter the Apostle. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Saturninus, and nine
others. The same day of the holy Martvrs Callinica and Basilissa. At Ancyra of
S. Basil Priest and Martyr, who enduring many torments under Julian the
Apostata, gave up his soul to God. At Carthage of S. Octauianus Archdeaco^,
and of many thousand Martyrs, who were killed by the Wandalls for the
Catholic faith. There also of S. Deo-gratias Bishop of Carthage, who redeemed
many of that City, made Captives by the Wandalls, and famous for other pious
works, went to rest in our Lord. At Aux^mum.
Osmo in Picenu^.
Marc-Ancona of S. Benuenutus Bishop. In Suetia of S. Catharin Virgin, daughter
to S. Brigit. At Rome of S. Lea Widow, whose virtues, and death S. Hierome
relates.

E The three and twentieth Day.
IN Africa of the holy Martyrs Victorianus Proconsull of Carthage, and of two
brethren of Aqua-regia: also of Frumentius, and of another Frumentius, both
mercha^ts, who in the persecution of the Wandalls, (as writes Victor Africanus
Bishop) under Hunnericus the Arian King, being most cruelly tormented for their
constancy in the Catholic faith, were famously crowned. Moreover in Africa
of S. Fidelis Martyr. There also of S. Felix and twenty others. At Caesarea in
Palestine of the holy Martyrs Nicon, and ninety nine others. Moreover the
crowning of the holy Martyrs Domitius, Pelagia, Aquila, Eparchius, and
Theodosia. At Antioch of S. Theodulus Priest. At Caesarea of S. Julian
Confessor. In Campania of S. Benet Monk, who being shut up within a burning
furnace by the Goths, the next day was found without any hurt.

F The four and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Mark, and Timothy, who under Antoninus the
Emperor, were crowned with Martyrdom. There also of S. Epigmenius Priest, who
in the persecution of Diocletian, under Turpius the Judge, being beheaded
accomplished his Martyrdom. Moreover at Rome the passion of blessed Pigmenius
Priest, who under Julian the Apostata, for the faith of Christ was cast
headlong into the river of Tybur, and drowned. At Caesarea in Palestine the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Timolaus, Dennis, Pausides Romulus, Agapius,
Alexander, and of another Alexander, and another Dennis, who in the persecution
of Diocletian, under Vrbanus President being beheaded, deserved the Crown of
eternal life. In Mauritania the birthday of two brethren Romulus, and
Secundus, who there suffered for the faith of Christ. At Tride^^m.
Trent the passion of S. Symeon a Child, most cruelly murdered by the Jews,
and afterward renowned by many miracles. At Sinnadis in Phrygia, of S. Agapitus
Bishop. At Brescia of S. Latinus Bishop. In Syria of S. Seleucus Confessor.

G The five and twentieth Day.
THE Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God. At Rome of S.
Quirinus Martyr, who under Claudius the Emperor, after the loss of his goods,
most loathsome imprysonement, and the torment of many strypes, was beheaded,
and cast into the River of Tybur: whom the Christians fynding in the Island of
Lycaonia, buried in the Churchyard of Pontianus. There also of two hundred,
threescore and two holy Martyrs. At Sirmium the passion of S. Irenaeus Bishop
and Martyr, who in the time of Maximianus Emperor, under Probus President,
after most bitter torments, and affliction of many days imprisonement, was at
last beheaded. At Nicomedia of S. Dula mayd-serua^t to a certain Soldier, who
slain for defense of her Chastity, deserved the crown of Martyrdom. At
Jerusalem the Commemoration of the Holy Thief, who confessing Christ upon the
Cross, deserved to hear these words; This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. At Laodicea of S. Pelagius Bishop, who in the time of Valens
suffering banishment, and other afflictions for the Catholic faith, went to
rest in our Lord. At Pistoria of the holy Confessors Barontius, and Desiderius.
In Antri a little Island upon the river of Lig^
Loyre, of S. Hermelandus Abbot, whose holy conversation of life is greatly
commended by the fame of miracles.

A The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Lauicana, of S. Castulus Martyr, Master Z^t^* ^iu^*
of the withdrawing rooms in Diocletians Palace, and a harbourer of Saints;
who being thryce hanged up by the hands, and thrice examined by the
persecutours, perseuering in the faith of our Lord, was thrown into a hole,
and ouerwhelm'd with a great mass of sand cast upon him, ended his Martyrdom.
There also the crowning of the holy Martyrs Peter, Marcian, Iouinus, Thecla,
Cassian, and others. At Pentapolis in Lybia the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Theodorus Bishop, Irenaeus Deacon, Serapion, and Ammonius Lectors. At Sirmium
of the holy Martyrs Montanus Priest, and Maxima, who for the faith of Christ
were drowned in a River. Moreover of the holy Martyrs Quadratus, Theodosius,
Emanuell, and forty others. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Eutychius, and
others, who in the time of Constantius under George the Arrian Bishop, for
defense of the Catholic faith, were beheaded. The same day of S. Ludgerus
Bishop of Monasterium.
Munster, who preached the Gospel of Christ to the Saxons. At Caesaraugusta.
Saragoza in Spain of S. Braulius Bishop and Confessor. At Treuers of S.
Felix Bishop.

B The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Drizipara in Pannonia of S. Alexander a Soldier, who under Maximianus
Emperor, after he had overcome many torments for Christ, and wrought many
miracles, with loss of his head, accomplished his Martyrdom. The same day of
the Saints Philetus a Senator, Lydia his wife, and Macedo and Theoprepides
their children: also of Amphilochius a Captain, and Cronidas a Notary, who
were all killed for confessing of Christ. In Persia of the holy Martyrs
Zanitas, Lazarus, Merotas, Narses and five others, who under Sapores King of
Persia cruelly killed, deserved the palm of Martyrdom. At Salisburgum.
Saltzburg of S. Rupertus Bishop and Confessor, who wonderfully propagated the
Gospel in Bauaria, and No^^ cum.
Styria. In Egypt of S. John Hermit, a man of great Holiness, who amongst other
signs of his virtues, was replenished with the spirit of Prophecy, and
foretold Theodosius the Emperor of his victoryes against the Tyrants Maximus,
and Eugenius.

C The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Caesarea in Palestine the birthday of the holy Martyrs Priscus, Malcus,
and Alexander, who in the persecution of Valerian, dwelling in the suburbs of
the City, and seeing the Crowns of Martyrdom were offered to such, as had the
courage to accept thereof, inflamed with an heavenly ardour of faith, went of
their own accord to the Judge, and rebuked him for his cruel shedding of
innocent blood; whom he caused presently to be cast unto the beasts, for the
name of Christ. At Tharsis in Cilicia of the holy Martyrs Castor and Dorotheus.
Also of the Saints Philetus and his fellows, who were martyred under Adrianus
the Emperor. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Rogatus, Successus, and sixteen
others. At Rome of S. Xystus Pope, the third of that name, and Confessor. At
Nursia of S. Speus Abbot, a man of wonderful patience, whose soul, at his
departure out of this life, was seen by all the Monk, to fly up to heaven, in
form of a Dove. At Cabillio.
Cauaillon in France the deposition of Blessed Guntramnus King of the French,
who giving himself wholly to the exercise of Piety, and contemning the vanities
of the world, distributed his treasure to Churches, and the poor.

D The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Persia of the holy Martyrs Jonas and Barachisius under Sapores King of
Persia, of whom Jonas pressed in a Vice, until his bones were broken, was
divided in the midst; the other having his mouth filled with burning pitch,
was styfeled. At Heliopolis near Mount Libanus of S. Cyrill Deacon and Martyr,
whose liver plucked out of his belly, the Gentiles most brutishly devoured.
under Julian the Apostata. At Nicomedia the passion of the holy Martyrs Pastor,
Victorinus, and his fellows. In Africa of the holy Confessors Armogastes an
Earl, Masculas a Master of Interludes, and Saturus Steward of the Kings
House, who in the persecution of the Wandalls, under Geisericus the Arrian
King, having endured many grievous torments and reproaches for the confession
of the truth, finished the course of their Martyrdom. At Asta Pompei^
Aste in Piemont of S. Secundus Martyr. In the monastery of Luxouium the
deposition of S. Eustasius Abbot, Disciple of S. Columbane, who being Father of
almost six hundred Monks, was famous for holiness of life, and miracles.

E The thirtith Day.
AT Rome in the way Appia, the passion of S. Quirinus Tribune, who having Pope
Alexander prisoner in his house, was by him, with all his family, baptized; and
afterward under Adrian the Emperor, perseuering in the confession of his
faith, having his tongue plucked out, racked upon the torture Equuleus, and his
hands and feere cut off, obtained finally a Crown of Martyrdom, by the loss
of his head. At Thessalonica the birthday of the holy Martyrs Domninus,
Victor, and his fellows. At Constantinople the Commemoration of many holy
Martyrs, who being of the Catholic Communion, were in the time of Constantius
the Emperor, by Macedonius the Archheretike killed by diverse unheard of
torments: For amongst others, pressing Christian woman's breasts between the
couers of chestes, so cut them off, and after seared them with a hot iron. At
Syluanectum.
Senlis the deposition of S. Regulus Bishop Arelatum.
of Arles. At Aurelia number.
Orleans in France of S. Pastor Bishop. At Syracusa of S. Zozimus Bishop and
Confessor. In Mount Sina of S. John Climachus Abbot. At Aquinum.
Aquino of S. Clinus Confessor.

F The one and thirtith Day.
AT Thecue in Palestine of S. Amos Prophet, who being often beaten with stripes
by Amasias the Priest, was at last by his son Ozias thrust through the head
with an iron bar; and so carried half alive into his Country, there gave up
the Ghost, and was buried with his Ancestors. In Africa of the holy Martyrs
Theodulus, Anesius, Felix, Cornelia, and their fellows. In Persia of S.
Benjamin Deacon, who for that he would not cease to preach the word of God, was
by King Isdegerdes pricked under the nails with sharp reeds, and finally
having a thorny stake thrust through his body accomplished his Martyrdom. At
Rome of S. Balbina Virgin, daughter to S. Quirinus Martyr, who baptized by S.
Alexander the Pope, died in all sanctimony of life, and lies buried near to
her Father, in the way called Appia.

THE MONTH OF APRIL.
G The first Day.
AT Rome the passion of S. Theodora sister to the famous Martyr Hermes, who
suffering under Hadrian the Emperor, by Aurelian Judge, lies buried near to
her Brother, in the way called Salaria, not far from the City. The same day
of S. Venantius Bishop and Martyr. In Egypt of the holy Martyrs Victor, an^
Stephen. In Armenia of the holy Martyrs Quinctianus, and Irenaeus. At
Constantinople of S. Macarius Confessor, who under Leo the Emperor for the
defense of holy Images, ended his life in banishment. At Gratianopolis.
Grainoble of S. Hugh Bishop who lived many years a solitary life in the
wilderness, and renowned for miracles went unto our Lord. At Ambianum.
Amiens of S. Wallericus Abbot, whose sepulcher is honored with often miracles.

A The second Day.
OFS. Francis de Paula, the first founder of the Order of the Minims, who
renowned for virtue and miracles, was canonized for a Saint by Pope Leo the
tenth. At Caesarea in Palestine the birthday of S. Amphianus Martyr, who in
the persecution of Maximinus reproouing the President Vrbanus for sacrificing
unto Idols, being most cruelly tormented by having his feet wrapped in flax
and dipped in oil set on fire, was at last drowned in the sea, and so through
fire and water passed to an everlasting repose. There also the passion of S.
Theodosia a Virgin of Tyrus, who in the same persecution, for openly saluting
the holy Confessors, as they stood at the Bar, and craving of them to be
remembered, when they should come before our Lord, apprehended by the soldiers,
and brought before Vrbanus the President, having her sides and breasts by his
commandment torn in pieces, was finally cast into the sea. At Lugdunum.
Lions of S. Nicetius Bishop of the same City renowned for Sanctity and
miracles. At Comum.
Como of S. Abundius Bishop and Confessor. At Lingones.
Langres of S. Vrbanus Bishop. In Palestine the deposition of S. Mary the
Egyptian, surnamed the Sinner.

B The third Day.
AT Tauromeniu^.
Taormina in Sicily of S. Pancratius Bishop, who with the blood of Martyrdom,
sealed the Gospel of Christ, which he had there preached, being sent thither
by S. Peter the Apostle. At Tomis in Scythia the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Euagrius and Benignus. At Thessalonica the passion of the holy Virgins Agapes
and Chionia, under Diocletian the Emperor, who for the confession of Christ,
being first starued in prison, and afterward cast into the fire, but untouched
of the flame, in prayer gave up their souls to God. At Tyrus of S. Vlpian
Martyr, who in the persecution of Maximianus, being sowed up in a sack,
together with a Serpent and a dog, was drowned in the sea. In the Monastery
of Meditz in the East, of S. Nicetas Abbot, who for worshipping of holy Images
suffered much under Leo Armenus. In England of S. Richard Bishop of Chichester,
renowned for holiness and miracles. There also of S. Burgundofora Abbess and
Virgin.

C The fourth Day.
AT Thessalonica of the holy Martyrs Agathopolis Deacon, and Theodulus Lector,
who under Maximianus the Emperor and Faustinus President, for the confession
of Christian faith, having a great stone tied to their necks, were drowned in
the sea. At Millan the deposition of S. Ambrose Bishop and confessor, by whose
endeauours, learning, and miracles, all Italy almost was converted to the
Catholic Faith, in the time of the Arian Heresy. At Hispalis.
Seuill in Spain of S. Isidore Bishop, famous for holiness of life and
learning: who for his zeal of the Catholic faith, and observation of
Ecclesiastical disciplyne was a great ornament unto Spain. At Constantinople
of S. Plato Monk, who with invincible courage opposed himself many years
against Heretics, breakers of holy Images. In Palestine of S. Zozimus
Anchoret, who buried the body of S. Mary the Egyptian.

D The fifth Day.
AT Thessalonica of S. Irenes Virgin, who for hiding holy Books, contrary to
the Edict of Diocletian Emperor, after she had suffered hard imprisonment,
being shot with an arrow, was burned by commandment of Dulcetius President,
under whom also her sisters Agapes, and Chionia had been martyred before. In
the I Will of Now called Mete^^^.
Lesbos the passion of five holy Martyrs. The same day of S. Zeno Martyr, who
having his skin plucked off, and anointed over with pitch, was so cast into
the fire. In Africa the passion of many holy Martyrs, who in the persecution
of Geisericus the Arian King, were killed in the Church upon Easter day; and
whilst the Lector song Alleluia at the de^ke, he was shot through the throat
with an arrow. At Vene^iae.
Vannes in little Brittany of S. Vincent Confessor, surnamed Ferrerius, of the
Order of S. Dominicke, who wonderful both in work and word, converted many
thousands of Infidels to Christ.

E The sixth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Xistus Pope and Martyr, who in the days of
Adrianus the Emperor governing the Church, willingly suffered a temporal
death, to gain an eternal life with Christ, under Antoninus Pius. In
Macedonia of the holy Martyrs Timothy and Diogenes. In Persia of six score holy
Martyrs. At Ascalo^.
Scalona the passion of S. Platonides, and two other holy Martyrs. At Carthage
of S. Marcellinus Martyr, who for defending the Catholic faith, was slain by
the Heretics. At Rome of S. Celestine Pope, who condemned Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople, and chased away Pelagius, both Heretics. By whose authority
also the holy General Council of Ephesus was celebrated, against the said
Nestorius. In Ireland of S. Celsus Bishop, Predecessor to S. Malachy. In
Denmark of S. William Abbot, renowned for sanctity of life, and miracles.

F The seventh Day.
IN Africa the birthday of the holy Martyrs Epiphanius Bishop, Donatus,
Rufinus and thirteen others. At Synope in Pontus of two hundred holy Martyrs.
In Cilicia of S. Calliopius Martyr, who under Maximus Governor, after many
other Torments, being crucified with his head downward, was crowned with a
Noble Martyrdom. At Nicomedia of Saint Cyriacus, and ten other Martyrs. At
Alexandria of S. Peleusius Priest and Martyr. At Rome of S. Hegesippus, who
living near to the Apostles time, came to Rome Pope Anicetus, and there
remained until Pope Eleutherius, recording in a simple style the history of
the Church, from the passion of Christ unto his days, imitating therein the
simplicity of their lives, by the plainness of his stise. At Verona of S.
Saturninus Bishop and Confessor. In Syria of S. Aphraates Anchoret, who in the
time of Valens, defended the Catholic says against the Arians, by the power
of Miracles.

G The eight Day.
AT Alexandria of S. Aedesius Martyr, brother to S. Appianus, who openly
reproouing a wicked Judge, for committing consecrated Virgins to corrupters of
Chastity, being apprehended by the soldiers, and put to most cruel torments,
was finally for Christ our Lord, drowned in the sea. In Africa of the holy
Martyrs Ianuarius, Maxima, and Macaria. At Carthage of S. Concessae Martyr. The
same day, the Commemoration of the Saints Herodion, Asyncritus, and Phlaegon,
of whom S. Paul makes mention in his Epistle to the Romans At Corinth of S.
Dennis Bishop, who by his learning, and grace in preaching, not only instructed
the people of that City and Country, but by his letters, informed also the
Bishops of other Provinces and Cittyes: and he so greatly honored the Bishops
of Rome, that he was accustomed to read their letters publicly upon Sundays
in the Church. He lived in the days of Marcus Antoninus, Verus, and Lucius
Aurelius Commodus. At Turones.
Tours of S. Perpetuus Bishop, a man of wonderful holiness. At Ferentinum.
Fiorentino in Campania of S. Redemptus Bishop, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes
mention. At Como of S. Amantius Bishop and Confessor.

A The nynth Day.
AT Antioch of S. Prochorus, who being one of the seven first Deacons,
renowned for faith and miracles, received the Crown of Martyrdom. At Rome the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Demetrius, Concessus, Hilarious, and their
fellows. At Sirm^uin the passion of seven holy Virgins and Martyrs, who with
the price of their blood, bought unto themselves life everlasting. At Caesarea
in Cappadocia of S. Eupsychius Martyr, who for overthrowing the Temple of
Fortune, under Julian the Apostata accomplished his Martyrdom. In Affricae of
the holy Martyrs of Massilita, upon whose birthday S. Augustine made a Sermon.
At Now called Emet.
Amida in Mesopotamia, of S. Acatius Bishop, who to redeem Captives, melted
and sold the holy vessels of his Church. At Rothomagus.
Roan of S. Hugh Bishop and Confessor. In the City of Ciuitas Di^n^is, sieve
Dia Augusta.
Die, of S. Marcellas Bishop, famous for miracles. In Jury of S. Mary Cleophas,
sister of the most Blessed Mary the mother of God. At Rome the Translation of
the body of S. Monica mother to S. Augustine, which under Pope Martin the
fifth, was brought from Ostia unto the City, and there most honorably placed
in the Church of the same S. Augustine.

B The tenth Day.
OF Ezechiel the Prophet, who by the Judge of Israel, whom he rebuked for
worshipping of Idols, was slain in Babylon, and buried in the sepulcher of Sem
and Arphaxad the Progenitors of Abraham, whereunto many were wont to resort,
there to make their prayers. At Rome the birthday of many holy Martyrs,
baptized by S. Alexander the Pope whilst he was in prison; who being all put
into an old rotten ship, were by commandment of Aurelianus Governor carried
into the deep sea, and there with stones tied to their necks to be drowned.
At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Apollonius Priest, and five others, who in
the persecution of Maximinus were drowned in the sea. In Africa of the holy
Martyrs, Terentius, Africanus, Pompeius, and their fellows, who under Decius
the Emperor, and Fortunianus Governor being whipped, racked and diversely
tormented, at last beheaded, accomplished their Martyrdom. The same day of S.
Macarins Bishop of Antioch, renowned for holiness and miracles.

C The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Leo Pope and Confessor, who for his renowned virtue and Merits
is surnamed the Great. In his days was celebrated the holy Council of
Chalcedon, wherein by his Legates, he condemned Eutyches the Heretic, and
confirmed the Decrees thereof by his authority. And after he had written many
learned books, and decreed many things for the good of the universal Church,
and flock of Christ, departed this life in peace. At Pergamus in Asia of S.
Antipas, a faithful witness of Christ, of whom S. John makes mention in his
Apocalypse; who under Domitian the Emperor being shut up in a hoat-burning Ox
of brass, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Salona in Dalmatia of the holy
Martyrs Domnion, and eight soldiers. At Gortina in Creta.
Candia of S. Philip Bishop, renowned for life and learning, who in the days
of Marcus Antoninus Verus, and Lucius Aurelius Commodus governing the Church
committed to his charge, defended the same from the fury of the Gentiles, and
deceytfull practices of the Heretics. At Nicomedia of S. Eustorgius Priest. At
Spoleto of S. Isaac monk and Confessor, whose virtues are mentioned by S.
Gregory. At Gaza in Palestine of S. Barsanuphius Anchoret, in the days of
Justinian the Emperor.

D The twelfth Day.
AT Verona the passion of S. Zeno Bishop, who in the storms of persecution,
governed that Church with great constancy, and in the days of Galienus was
crowned with Martyrdom. In Cappadocia of S. Sabas a Goth, who under Valens the
Emperor, by Athanaricus King of the Goths having suffered many cruel
torments, was cast into a river. At which time also (as S. Augustine
witnesses) very many Goths, for the Catholic faith, were crowned with
Martyrdom. At Bra^.
Braga in Portugal of S. Victor Martyr, who being yet but a Cathecumen, for
refusing to worship an Idol, and with great constancy confessinge
Jesus Christ, after many torments being beheaded, was baptized in his own
blood. At Fermo in Pi^num.
Marc-Ancona of S. Vissia Virgin and Martyr. At Rome in the way called Aurelia,
the birthday of S. Julius Pope, who having greatly labored in defense of the
Catholic faith against the Arians, and performed many other notable things,
renowned for holiness, rested in peace. At the Town of In France.
Vaping, of S. Constantine Bishop and Confessor. At Pauia of S. Damianus
Bishop*

E The thirteenth Day.
AT Pergamus in Asia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Carpus Bishop of
Thiatyre, Papulus Deacon, and Agathonica his sister, a blessed woman; also of
Agathodorus, their servant, and of many others, who after diverse torments, for
Confession of their faith, were crowned with Martyrdom in the persecution of
Marcus Antoninus Verus, and Lucius Aurelius Commodus. In which persecution also
at Rome suffered that famous man Justinius the Philosopher, who after he had
offered up to the foresaid Emperors, his second Apology for the defense of the
Christian Religion, and there in disputation had stoutly defended the same,
being accused to be a Christian, by the deceytfull means of Crescens the
Cynicke Philosopher (whose wicked life and manners he had rebuked) in
recompense of his faithful Confession, received the reward of Martyrdom. At
Seuill in Spain of S. Hermenigildus Son of Leouigildus, an Arian King of the
West-goathes, who being cast into prison for confession of the Catholic
faith, and refusing to communicate at Easter, at the hands of an Arian Bishop,
by commaundment of his faythles father was beheaded, and so, for the loss of a
temporal Kingdom, entered triumphantly into a Heavenly, both a King and
Martyr. The same day the passion of the Saints Maximus, Quinctilianus, and
Dadas, in the persecution of Diocletian. At Rauenna of S. Vrsus Bishop and
Confessor.

F The fourteenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Appia, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Tiburtius,
Valerianus, and Maximus, under Alexander the Emperor, and Almachius Governor;
of whom the two first being converted unto the faith of Christ by the
exhortation of S. Cecily, and baptized by S. Vrbanus Pope, were for the
confession thereof, beaten with clubbes, and afterward beheaded. But Maximus,
being one of the Governors Chamber, moved with their constancy, and comforted
by an Angel, believing in Christ, was so long beaten with whippes of lead,
until he gave up the Ghost. At Interamua.
Teramo of S. Proculus Bishop and Martyr. Also of S. Domnina Virgin and Martyr,
together with other Virgins her fellows. At Alexandria of S. Thomaides
Martyr. The same day of S. Ardalion a Stageplayer, who whilst upon the stage he
scoffed at the holy Ceremonies of Christians, being changed upon a sudden,
approved the same not only in words, but with the testimony of his blood. At
Lions of S. Lambert Bishop and Confessor. At Alexandria of S. Fronto Abbot,
renowned for holiness of life and miracles. At Rome of S. Abundius Mansioner of
the Church of S. Peter.

G The fiftenth Day.
AT Rome of the Saints Basilissa and Anastasia women of Noble Extraction, and
Disciples of the Apostles, who persisting constant in the confession of their
faith, under Nero the Emperor, having first their tongues and feet cut off,
at last beheaded obtained the crown of Martyrdom. The same day of the holy
Martyrs Maro, Eutyches and Victorinus, who together with S. Fla^ia Domitilla,
for the confession of Christ being first banished into the Island Pontia, and
afterward recalled thence under Nerua the Emperor, after that they had
converted many to the faith of Christ, were in the persecution of Traian, by
commaundment of Valerian the Judge, put to death by diverse kinds of torments.
At Cordula in Persia of the holy Martyrs Maximus and Olimpiades, who under
Decius the Emperor were so long beaten with clubbes, and whippes of lead
until their heads being all bruised, they gave up the Ghost. At Ferentinum in
Hernici^.
Fiorentino in Campania, of S. Eutychius Martyr. At Myra in Lycia of S.
Crescens, who received Martyrdom by fire. Also of the holy Martyrs Theodorus,
and Pausilippus, who suffered under Hadrian the Emperor.

A The sixtenth Day.
AT Corinth the birthday of the holy Martyrs Callistus, Charisius, and seven
others, who all were drowned in the sea. At Casa^. augusta*
Saragoza in Spain the birthday of eighteen holy Martyrs Optatus, Lupercus,
Successus, Marcialis, Vrbanus, Iulia, Quinctilianus, Publius, Fronto, Felix,
Caecilianus, Euentius, Primitiuus, Apodemius, and four others, who are said to
have been called Saturnini: All these under Dacian President of Spain, were
together put to diverse torments, and slain; whose renowned Martyrdom
Prudentius has set forth in verse. There also of S. Encratides Virgin and
Martyr, who after her body all torn, her breasts cut of, her liver plucked
out, and she yet remaining alive, was cast into prison, where putrefying in her
wounds she obtained a Crown of Martyrdom. In the same City of the Saints
Caius and Crementius, who persisting firm the second time, in the confession
of their faith, drank finally of the cup of Martyrdom. There also of S.
Lambert Martyr. At Palentia of S. Turibius Bishop of Asturica.
Astorga, who by the help of S. Leo Pope, drove the heresy of the
Priscillianists quite out of Spain, and famous for miracles rested in peace.
At Bracara.
Braga in Portugal of S. Fructuosus Bishop. The same day of S. Paternus Bishop
of Abrinca.
Aurenches. At Valencene in the lower Germany, of S. Drogo Confessor.

B The seauententh Day.
AT Rome of S. Anicetus Pope and Martyr, who in the persecution of Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, and Lucius Verus received the palm of Martyrdom. In
Africa the birthday of S. Mappalicus Martyr, who (as S. Cyprian writes in
his Epistle to the Martyrs and Confessors) with many others was crowned with
Martyrdom. There also of the holy Martyrs Fortunatus and Marcianus. At Antioch
of the holy Martyrs Peter Deacon, and Hermogenes his servant. At Cordoua of the
holy Martyrs Elias Priest, Paulus and Isidorus monks. At Vienna of S.
Pamagathus Bishop. At Terdona.
Tortona of S. Innocentius Bishop and Confessor. At Ciste^tium.
Cisteaux in Burgundy of S. Stephen Abbot, who was the first that in habited
that solitary place, and joyfully received S. Bernard with his fellows, when
they came thither.

C The eighteenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Apollonius a Senator, who under the Emperor Commodus, and
Perennius Governor, being betrayed by his own servant to be a Christian, was
commanded to give an account of his faith, which he did in a learned Book by
him written, and read in the Senate, yet nevertheless was by the sentence of
the same Senate beheaded. At Messina the birthday of a Messina.
the holy Martyrs Eleutherius Bishop of Sclauonia, and Anthia his mother, who
renowned for holiness of life, and miracles, having endured diverse cruel
torments by fire, boiling oil, pitch, and rasine; being cast also unto the
Lyo^s, but nothing hurt by them, was at last together with his foresaid mother
under Hadrian the Emperor killed. There also of S. Corebus Governor, who
converted to the faith by the said Eleutherius, was slain by the sword. At
Brescia of S. Calocerus Martyr, who being converted to the faith of Christ by
S. Faustinus and Iouita, under the same Hadrian, accomplished his glorious
combat of Martyrdom. At Corduba.
Cordoua of S. Perfectus Priest and Martyr, who was killed by the Mores, for
inueying against the Sect of Mahomet. At Millan of S. Galdinus Bishop, who
having preached a Sermon against the Heretics, at the end thereof, gave up his
soul to God.

D The nineteenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Timon, one of the first seven Deacons: who having
preached the Gospel at Beroea and other places, came at last to Corinth,
where being cast into the fire by the Jews and Gentiles, as it is recorded, but
nothing hurt thereby, at last crucified on a Cross accomplished his Martyrdom.
At Melitine in Armenia of the holy Martyrs Hermogenes, Caius, Expeditus,
Aristonicus, Rufus, and Galata all crowned with Martyrdom on one day. At
Caucoliberis.
Colibre in Catalonia the passion of S. Vincent Martyr. The same day of the
holy Martyrs Socrates and Dennis, who were thrust through with lau^ces. At
Jerusalem of S. Paphnutius Martyr. At Canterbury in England of S. Elphegus
Bishop and Martyr. At Antioch in Pisidia of S. George Bishop, who for
worshipping of holy Images, dyed in banishment. At Rome of S. Leo Pope, the
nynth of that name, renowned for holiness of life and miracles. In the Monastery
of Laub^
Lob, of S. Vrsmarus Bishop. At Florence of S. Cresentius Confessor, Disciple
to S. Zenobius Bishop.

E The twentieth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Sulpitius and Seruilianus, who being converted to
the faith of Christ, by the persuasion, and miracles of S. Domitilla Virgin,
for refusing to sacrifice to the Idols, in the persecution of Traian, was by
Anianus Governor of the City, beheaded. The same day of the holy Martyrs
Victor, Zoticus, Zeno, Acindinus, Caesarius, Seuerianus, Chrysophorus, Theonas,
and Antoninus, who having been diverse ways tried, for the faith of Christ,
under Diocletian accomplished their Martyrdom. At Tomis in Scythia of S.
Theotimus Bishop, who for his great holiness and miracles was honored even of
the very barbarians and Infidels. At Ebredunum.
Ambrun in France of S. Marcellinus the first Bishop of that City, who being
inspired by God, came out of Assrica into France with S. Vincent and Domninus,
and there by works and miracles, converted the greatest part of the In
habitans of the Alps near the sea coast, to the faith of Christ; and is even
to this day glorified by miracles. At Antisiodorum.
Auxerre of S. Marcianus Priest. The same day of S. Theodorus Confessor (who
of the rough hayrygarment which he used to wear, was sur-named Trichinas)
renowned for many miracles, especially against the devils: Out of whose body
there yssueth an ointment which restores health to the sick. At Mons
Politia^us.
Monte Pulciano, of S. Agnes Virgin, renowned for miracles.

F The one and twentieth Day.
IN Persia the birthday of S. Simeon Bishop of Seleucia and Ctesipbon, who by
commaundment of Sapores King of the Persians being apprehended, laden with
iro^s, and presented to the Tribunal, for refusing to adore the Sun, and
professing constantly the Name of Jesus Christ, was together with an hundred
others (amongst whom, some were Bishops, some Priests, and diverse others of
the Clergy) first, along while starued in prison; but afterward when Vsthazanes
the Kings Tutor (who had a little before fallen from the faith, and reduced to
penance by S. Simeon) constantly endured martyrdom, the nextday being the
Anniuersary of our Lords Passion, all the rest being put to the sword before
his face, whom he exhorted to constancy, was himself also at last beheaded.
There suffered with him Abedechalas and Ananias worthy men and Priests;
Pusicius also Master of the Kings Arrificers, who for encouraging Ananias,
that began somewhat to stagger, boared through the neck about the grissle-bone,
and his tongue drawn out, dyed a most cruel death. After whom also his
daughter, a sacred Virgin, was killed. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Arator
Priest, Fortunatus, Felix, Siluius and Vitalis, who dyed in prison. Moreover of
the Saints Apollo, Isacius, and Crotates, who suffered under Diocletian. At
Canterbury in England of S. Anselmus Bishop, famous for holiness of life and
learning. At Antioch of S. Anastasius of Sinai, Bishop and Confessor.

G The two and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Appia, the birthday of S. Sother Pope and Martyr.
There also of S. Caius Pope, who under Diocletian the Emperor was crowned with
Martyrdom. At Smyrna of the Saints Apelles and Lucius, two of the first
Disciples of Christ. The same day, of many holy Martyrs, who the next year
after S. Simeon, upon Good Friday, in diverse Regions of Persia, under Sapores
King, were put to death by the sword for the Name of Christ. In which
persecution also, suffered Azades an Eunuch, dearly beloved of the King:
Milles a Bishop renowned for holiness of life and miracles: Acepsimas a Bishop
also, with his Priest James: Also Aithalas and Joseph Priests, Azadan and
Abdiesus Deacons, with many others of the Clergy: and many Monks also, and
sacred Virgins, amongst whom was Tarbula the sister of S. Simeon, with her
wayting-mayd, who tied unto stakes, sawed in pieces, were most cruelly killed:
Mareas also, and Bicor Bishops, with twenty other Bishops, and almost two
hundred and fifty of the Clergy. At Cordula in Persia of the Saints Parmenius,
Helimenas and Chrysotelus Priests, Lucas and Mucius Deacons, whose triumphant
Martyrdom is written in the passion of the Saints Abdon and Sennen. At
Alexandria the birthday of S. Leonides Martyr, who suffered under Seuerus. At
Lugdunum.
Lions of S. Epipodius, who in the persecution of Antoninus Verus, together
with Alexander his fellow being apprehended, and put to many cruel torments,
finally beheaded, accomplished their Martyrdom. At a Senonae.
Sens of S. Leo Bishop and Confessor. At Anastasiopolis, of S. Theodorus
Bishop, renowned for miracles.

A The three and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. George Martyr, whose glorious passion the Church of God
honors amongst the Crowns of other Saints. At Valence in France, the
passion of the holy Martyrs Felix Priest, Fortunatus and Achilleus Deacons, who
sent thither by Irenaeus Bishop of Lions to preach the word of God, after they
had converted the greatest part of that City to the says of Christ, being
cast into prison by Cornelius the Captain, and sore whipped, having also their
thighs broken upon the wheel, and choked with smoke whilst they were racked
upon the torture Equuleus, were at last beheaded. In Prussia the birthday of
S. Adalbertus Bishop of Prage and Martyr, who preached the Gospel to the
Polonians, and Hungarians. At Millane of Saint Marolus Bishop and Confessor.
At Tullu^.
Toul in Lorayne, of S. Gerard Bishop of the same City.

B The four and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Sabas a Captain, who being accused for visiting the Christians
in prison, and freely before the Judge confessing Christ, was by commandment
of the same Judge, first burned with torches, and then cast into a Caldrone of
boiling pitch, wherein when he received no hurt, threescore and ten others by
that miracle were converted, who all remaining constant in their faith, dyed by
the sword; and himself lastly drowned in a river, accomplished his Martyrdom.
At Lions in France the birthday of S. Alexander Martyr, who in the persecution
of Antoninus Verus, after long imprysonement, was so cruelly torn with
whippes, that, the flesh beaten from his ribs, his bowels were opened, and
his inward parts seen; and finally crucified on a Cross, he yielded vhis
blessed soul. There suffered with him thirty and four more, whose memoryes
are kept upon other days. The same day of the holy Martyrs Eusebius, Neon,
Leontius, Longinus, and four others, who in the persecution of Diocletian
after cruel torments, were beheaded. In England the deposition of S. Mellitus
Bishop, who being sent thither by S. Gregory Pope, converted the East Saxons,
and their King to the faith. At Illiberis.
Colibre in Spain. of S. Gregory Bishop and Confessor. At Brescia of S.
Honorius Bishop. In Ireland of S. Egbert Priest, and monk, a man of wonderful
humility and continency. At Rhemes of the holy Virgins Bona, and Doda.

C The five and twentieth Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of S. Mark Evangelist, the Disciple and
Interpreter of S. Peter, who writing his Gospel at the request of the
Christians at Rome, took it with him, and went into Egypt; where first
preaching Christ at Alexandria, he founded that Church; but afterward
apprehended for the faith of Christ, bound with cords, and dragged upon
stones, endured great torments; then being shut up in prison, where he was
comforted by the vision of an Angel, and also by an apparition of our Lord,
was finally called to the kingdom of heaven, the eight year of Nero. At Rome
in the Church of S. Peter, the Celebrity of the Greater Letanyes, instituted by
S. Gregory Pope. At Syracusae.
Syracosa of the holy martyrs Euodius, Hermogenes, and Callistus. At Antioch of
S. Stephen Bishop and Martyr, who many ways afflicted by the heretics, that
impugned the Council of Chalcedon, was cast headlong into the River Orontes,
in the time of Zeno the Emperor. There also of the Saints Philo and
Agathopodes Deacons. At Alexandria of Anianus Bishop, Disciple to S. Mark, and
his successor in that Bishopric, who greatly renowned for his virtues,
rested in our Lord. At Laubiu^
Lob the birthday of S. Erminus Bishop and Confessor.

D The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Cletus Pope, who next after S. Peter governed the
Church, and was crowned with Martyrdom in the persecution of Domitian. There
also of S. Marcellinus Pope and Martyr, who under Diocletian was beheaded for
the faith of Christ, together with Claudius, Cyrinus, and Antoninus. At which
time the persecution was so great, that in the space of a month seauenteene
thousand Christians suffered Martyrdom. At Amasia in Pontus of S. Basil Bshop
and Martyr, who under Licinius Emperor accomplished a glorious martyrdom. His
body being cast into the sea, and by revelation of an Angel found out by
Elpidiphorus, was very honorably ento^bed. At Braca^
Braga in Portugal of S. Peter Martyr, and first Bishop of that City. At
Vie^na of S. Claren^ius Bishop and Confessor. At Verona of S. Lucidus Bishop.
In the Monastery of Centula of S. Richarius Priest and Confessor. At Tr^.
Troys of S. Exuperantia Virgin.

E The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Nicomedia the birthday of S. Anthimus Bishop and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, for the confession of Christ being beheaded,
obtained the glory of Martyrdom: whose constancy the most part of his flock
following, the Judge commanded some to beheaded, others to be burned, and
others to be put into little boats, and drowned in the sea. At Tharsus in
Cilicia of the Saints Castor and Stephen Martyrs. At Rome the deposition of S.
Anastasius Pope, a man of most rich Poverty, and Apostolical vigilance; whom
as S. Hierome writes, Rome deserved not to have long, That the Head of the
world might not be cut off, under such a Bishop. For shortly after his death
Rome was taken, and sacked by the Goths. At Bolonia of S. Tertullian Bishop
and Confessor. At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Theophilus Bishop. At Constantinople of S. John Abbot, who under
Leo ^^auricus greatly labored for the worship of holy Images.

F The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Rauenna the birthday of S. Vitalis Martyr, father to the Saints Geruasius
and Protasius, who for taking away, and decently burying the body of S.
Vrsicinus, being apprehended by Paulinus the Consul, after he had endured the
rack of Equuleus, was let down into a deep dungeon, and there overwhelmed
with earth and stones, by such a Martyrdom went unto our Lord. At Millan of S.
Valeria Martyr, wife to S. Vitalis. At Atina.
Atino of S. Mark, who ordained Bishop by S. Peter the Apostle, first preached
the Gospel to the Aequ^^olae.
people of Italy bordering upon the Sabines, and in the persecution of
Domitian, under Maximus Governor, received the Crown of Martyrdom. At
Alexandria the passion of S. Theodora virgin, who for refusing to sacrifyce
unto Idols, being carried to the Stews, a certain Christian called Didimus,
suddenly changing apparel with her, through the wonderful favor of God,
delivered her; but afterward in the persecution of Diocletian, under Eustrasius
Governor, they being both taken, and beheaded together, received the crown
of Martyrdom. The same day of the Saints Aphrodisius, Caralippus, Agapius, and
Eusebius Martyrs. In Pannonia of S. Pollio Martyr under Diocletian the
Emperor. At Prusa in Bythinia of the holy Martyrs Patricius Bishop, Acatius,
Menander and Polyenus. At Turi^so.
Tarazona in Spain of S. Prudentius Bishop, and Confessor. At Co^nium.
Pentina in Peligni
Abbruzzo, of S. Pamphilus Bishop of Valua, famous for his charity to the
poor, and working of miracles, whose body lies buried at Sulmona.

G The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Millan of S. Peter Martyr, of the Order of S. Dominicke, who was slain by
the Heretics, for the Catholic faith. At Paphos in Cyprus of S. Tychicus
Disciple to Saint Paul the Apostle, whom in his Epistles he calls a most
dear Brother, a faithful Minister, and his fellowseruant in our Lord. At
Cirtha in Numidia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Agapius, and Secundinus
Bishops, who after a long banishment, in the persecution of Valerianus, in
which the fury of the Gentiles raged most against the Just, were from the high
degree of Priesthood, advanced to the glory of Martyrdom. There suffered in
their company Aemilianus a Soldier, Tertulla, and Antonia Sacred Virgins, and
a certain Christian woman, with her two Twyns. The same day, of seven holy
Thieves, who being converted to Christ by S. Jason, did purchase by Martyrdom
life everlasting. At Brescia of S. Paulinus Bishop and Confessor. In the
Monastery of Cluniacum
Cluny of S. Hugh Abbot. In the Monastery of Molesmes, of S. Robert the first
Abbot b Molismum.
of Cisterce. At Rome of S. Catherine of Siena Virgin, of the Order of S.
Dominicke, renowned for Sanctimony of life and miracles; whom Pope Pius the
second canonized for a Saint.

A The thirtith Day.
AT Lambesis in Numidia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Marianus Lector, and
James Deacon, the former of whom having long suffered many afflictions for the
Confession of Christ, in the persecution of Decius, was the second time
apprehended, together with his said Companion, and after most cruel and
exquisite torments, being twice comforted by a light from heaven, were both at
last, with many other Christians beheaded. At San^^nes.
Saints of S. Eutropius Bishop and Martyr, who being ordained by S. Clement
Pope, and sent into France, after he had there long preached the Gospel,
being bruized in the head, for testimony of Christ, made a glorious end. At
Co^duba.
Cordoua of the holy Martyrs Amator Priest, Peter Monk, and Lewis. At Nouara
of S. Laurence Priest, and many other children Martyrs, of whom he had charge
for their education. At Alexandria of the holy Martors Aphrodisius Priest and
thirty others. At Ephesus of S. Maximus Martyr, who was crowned in the
persecution of Decius. At Fermo in ^ic^^u^.
Marc-Ancona of S. Sophia Virgin and Martyr. At Naples in Campania of S.
Seuerus Bishop, who among other miracles raised a dead man to life, to convince
a lying Creditour of a certain Widow, and Orphans. At Euorea in Epyrus of S.
Donatus Bishop, who lived in great holiness of life in the time of Theodosius
the Emperor. At London in England of S. Erconwald Bishop, renowned for
miracles.

THE MONTH OF MAY.
B The first Day.
THE birthday of the blessed Apostles Philip and James; of whom S. Philip,
after he had converted almost all Scythia to the faith of Christ, at Hierapolis
a City in Asia being fastened to a Cross, and ouerwelmed with stones, made a
glorious end. But S. James, who is called the Brother of our Lord, and was the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, being thrown down from a pinnacle of the Temple,
and his thighs broken, wounded also in the head with a Dyars staff, gave up
the ghost, and was buried near unto the Temple. In Egypt of S. Hieremias
Prophet, who being stoned by the people, dyed at Taphnas, and was there buried;
at whose Sepulcher, as writes Epiphanius, the devout people were wont to
resort, to make their prayers, and taking dust from thence, did therewith heal
the biting of Serpents. In France in the Territory of Viuaria
Viuiers, of S. Andeolus Subdeacon, who with others being sent out of the East
into France by S. Polycarpe, to preach the word of God, was under Seuerus the
Emperor first beaten with cudgells, and then having his head divided into
four parts, with a wooden sword, in the form of a cross, accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Osca.
Huesca in Spain of the holy Martyrs Orentius and Patientia. At Sedune in
France, the passion of S. Sigismund King of the Burgundians, who drowned in a
well, was afterward renowned for miracles. At A^tisiodo^um.
Auxerre of S. Amator Bishop and Confessor. At Aus^iu^
Auch of S. Orientius Bishop. In England of the Saints Asaph Bishop, and
Walburge Virgin. At Bergamo of S. Grata Virgin.

C The second Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of Saint Athanasius Bishop of the same City,
renowned for holiness of life and doctrine, against whom though all the world
almost conspired, he notwithstanding stoutly defended the Catholic faith,
from the time of Constantine unto Valens, against both Emperors, Governors,
and innumerable Arrian Bishops, by whom many deceitful practices to entrap him
were contrived, so that he was forced to fly into most parts of the world,
where finding no place of safe^y, at last returned to his own Church, and
there after many afflictions, and crowns of Patience, the six and fourtith
year of his Priesthood, he departed to our Lord, in the time of Valentinian
and Valens Emperors. At Rome of the holy Martyrs Saturninus, Neopolus,
Germanus, and Caelestinus, who after many afflictions endured, being cast into
prison, there made an holy end. Moreover of the Martyrs Exuperius and Zoes his
wife, Cyriacus, and Theodulus their children, who suffered under Hadrian the
Emperor. At Seuill of S. Felix Deacon and Martyr. The same day of S.
Vindemialis Bishop and Martyr, who together with Eugenius and Longinus
Bishops, resisting the Arrians, both by doctrine, and miracles, by commaundment
of Hunnericus the Arrian King was beheaded. At Abula.
Auila in Spain of S. Secundus Bishop, of whom mention is made afterward on
the fifteenth day of May, together with others. At Florence of S. Antoninus
Bishop, of the Order of S. Dominicke, famous for his holiness of life, and
learning.

D The third Day.
AT Jerusalem the Invention of the holy Cross of our Lord, under Constantine
the Emperor. At Rome in the way called Numentana, the passion of the holy
Martyrs Alexander Pope, Euentius and Theodulus Priests; of whom Alexander,
under Hadrian the Emperor, and Aurelian Judge, after he had endured
imprysonement, fetters, the torture Equuleus, iron Claws, and fire, being at
last pricked with sharp steeles in every part of his body, ended his
Martyrdom. But Euentius and Theodulus, after long imprisonment, being
tormented by fire, were finally beheaded. At Narnia
Narni of S. Iuueuall Bishop and Confessor. At Constantinople of the holy
Martyrs Alexander a Soldier, and Antonina Virgin, who in the persecution of
Maximian the Emperor, under Festus Governor, being condemned to the stews,
was by Alexander secretly delivered thence, by changing apparel with her, and
remaining there in her place; but she being taken again, they were both
together cruelly tormented: and lastly having their hands cut off, and cast
into the fire, after a noble combat endured for the confession of Christ, they
both received a Crown of Martyrdom. In Thebais of the holy Martyrs Timotheus
and Maura his wife: whom Arianus the Governor after many torments, commanded
to be crucified on a Cross, where hanging nine days alive encouraging each
other in their faith, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Aphrodisia in In Asia
minote.
Caria of the holy Martyrs Diodorus and Rodopianus, who in the persecution of
Diocletian were stoned by people of their own City.

E The fourth Day.
AT Ostia in the mouth of the river Tibur, the birthday of S. Monica Mother to
S. Augustine, who has left written her famous life, in the nynth book of his
Confessions. At the Mettle-mynes of Phennes in Palestine, the birthday of S.
Siluanus Bishop of Gaza, who in the persecution of Diocletian, by commaundment
of Maximinus, with many others of the Clergy, received the crown of
Martyrdom. There also of nine and thirty other Marryrs, who being condemned to
the ^ynes, after many torments, and searing with hoat-burning irons endured,
were at last all together beheaded. At Jerusalem of S. Cyriacus Bishop, who
coming thither to visit the holy places, was killed under Iulia^ the Apostata.
In Vmbria of S. Porphyrius Martyr. At Nicomedia of S. Antonia Martyr, who after
many torments being hanged up by one arm three days together, and kept two
years in prison, at last was burned by Priscillianus President, for the
confession of Christ. At Laurcacum No ^icorum.
Laussen in the Duchy of Styria. of S. Florianus Martyr, who under Diocletian
Emperor, by commandment of Aquilinus Governor, having a great stone tied
about his neck was thrown headlong into the river of Anisus. At Tharsis of S.
Pelagia Virgin, who under Diocletian, being shut up in a hoate burning Ox of
brass, accomplished her Martyrdom. At Cullen of S. Paulinus Martyr. At Millan
of S. Venerius Bishop, whose virtues are witnessed by Saint John Chrysostom in
a letter which he wrote unto him. In the Territory of Petragoricum.
Perigueux of S. Sacerdos Bishop of Lemouicum.
Limoges. At Antisiodorum.
Auxerre of S. Curcodomus Deacon.

F The fifth of Day.
AT Rome of Saint Crescentiana Martyr. There also of S. Siluanus Martyr. At
Alexandria of S. Euthymius Deacon, who dyed in prison for the confession of
Christ. At Thessalonica the birthday of the holy Martyrs Irenaeus, Peregrinus,
and Irenes, consumed by fire. At Antisiodorum.
Auxerre the passion of S. Iouin^anus Lector. At Leocata in Sicily, of S.
Angelus Priest, of the Order of Carmelites, who was slain by the Heretics
for defending the Catholic faith. At Hirusalem of S. Maximus Bishop and
Confessor, under Maximinus Emperor, who having one of his eyes plucked out,
and one of his feet seared with a hoate iron, was condemned to the metal
mines. At Edessa in Syria of S. Eulogius Bishop and Confessor. At Arelatum.
Arles in France of S. Hilary Bishop, renowned for sanctity of life and
learning. At Vienna of S. Nicetius Bishop, venerable for holiness of life. At
Bolonia of S. Theodorus Bishop, renowned for merits. The same day of S.
Sacerdos Bishop of Sagun^ia.
Siguenza. At Millan of S. Geruntius Bishop. There also the conversion of S.
Augustine Bishop, and Doctor of the Church, whom S. Ambrose instructed in the
Catholic faith, and baptized on this day.

G The sixth Day.
AT Rome of S. John Evangelist, who by co^maundment of Domitia^, brought
prisoner from Ephesus to Rome, and there by sentence of the Senate, before the
Gate called Latina, being put into a vessel of boiling oil, came out more
pure and lively, then before. At Antioch of S. Euodius, who, as S. Ignatius
writes to the Antiochians, being created the first Bishop of that City by S.
Peter the Apostle, ended his life by a glorious Martyrdom. At Cyrene of S.
Lucius Bishop, of whom S. Luke makes mention in the Acts of the Apostles. In
Africa of the holy Martyrs Heliodorus and Venustus, with threescore and
fifteen others. In Cyprus of S. Theodotus Bishop of Cyrinia, who having
endured most grievous persecution under Licinius the Emperor, at length, in
peace of the Church, gave up his soul to God. At Damasco the birthday of S.
John Damascene, renowned for holiness of life and doctrine, who constantly
opposed himself, both by word and writing against Leo Isauricus, in defense of
holy Images; for which cause having his right Hand cut off, by commaundment of
the said Emperor, and devoutly commending himself, before an Image of our
blessed Lady which he had defended, forth with received the same again sound
and whole. At Carrha in Mesopotamia of S. Protogenes Bishop. In England of S.
Eadbertus Bishop of Lindisfarne famous for learning and piety. At Rome of S.
Benedicta Virgin. At Salerno the translation of S. Matthew Apostle, whose holy
body being brought out of Aethiopia, to diverse other countries, was at last
translated to that City, and there with great honor placed in a Church
dedicated unto his Name, in the time of Pope Gregory the seventh.

A The seventh Day.
AT Crac^uia.
Cracaw in Polonia, the birthday of S. Stani^^aus Bishop and Martyr, who was
slain by the impious King Boleslaus. At Terracina in Campania the birthday of
S. Flauia Domitilla Virgin and Martyr, niece to Flauius Clemens the Consul,
who consecrated to God by S. Clement Pope, was in the persecution of Domitian,
for the testimony of Christ, sent into banishment, into the Island Pontia, with
many others, where she endured a long Martyrdom; but being afterward brought
back to Terracina, after she had by her doctrine and miracles converted many
to the faith of Christ, was at last, together with the Virgins Euphrosin^ and
Theodora, burned in her own house, by commaundment of the Judge, and so
accomplished the course of her Martyrdom. The same day of S. Iuuenal Martyr.
At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Flauius, Augustus, and Augustinus Brothers.
There also of S. Quadratus Martyr, who in the persecution of Decius having been
often tortured, was at last beheaded. At Rome of S. Benedict Pope and
Confessor. At York in England of S. John Bishop, famous for holiness of life
and miracles. At Pauia of S. Peter Bishop. At Rome the Translation of the body
of S. Stephen the Protomartyr, which in the time of Pelagius Pope, was brought
from Constantinople to Rome, and laid in the sepulcher of S. Laurence, without
walls of the City, and is there still honored with great concourse of devout
people.

B The eight Day.
IN the Mount Garganus the apparition of S. Michael the Archangell. At Millan
of S. Victor Martyr, by Nation a More, who in his tender years being made a
Christian, and afterward a Soldier in the Emperors Camp, when Maximianns
would have compelled him to sacrifice unto Idols, perseuering constantly in the
confession of his Faith, was first grievously beaten with clubbs, and afterward
scalded with hot melted lead, but by the protection of God receiving no hurt
thereby, at last by loss of his head, ended his glorious Martyrdom. At
Constantinople of S. Acathius a Centurion, who in the persecution of Diocletian
and Maximianus, being accused by Firmus the Tribune for a Christian, and
cruelly tortured by Bibianus the Judge, was there finally by Flaccinus
Proconfull beheaded; whose body being by divine power brought unto the shore of
Scyllacium, is there kept with very great honor. At Vienna of S. Dennis Bishop
and Confessor. At Anti^ odorum.
Auxerre of S. Helladius Bishop. In the territory of Bisu^tium.
Bezanson of S. Peter Bishop. In Scotland of S. Wiro Bishop.

C The nynth Day.
AT Nazianzum the birthday of S. Gregory Bishop, for his singular knowledge in
Divinity, surnamed The Divine; who restored the Catholic faith decayed at
Constantinople, and suppressed diverse Heresies then arising. At Rome of S.
Hermes, of whom S. Paul the Apostle makes mention in his Epistle to the
Romans; who being made an acceptable sacrifice to God, adorned with many
virtues, obtained an heavenly Crown. In Persia of three hundred and ten holy
Martyrs. At Calli^.
Caglio in the way called Flaminia, the passion of S. Gerontius Bishop of Ficode
Ceruia. In the Castle of Vinde^^num.
Vendome the deposition of S. Beatus Confessor. At Constantinople the
translation of the holy bodies of S. Andrew Apostle, and S. Luke Evangelist out
of Achaia; and of S. Timothy Disciple to S. Paul from Ephesus: but the body of
S. Andrew being afterward brought to Amalfi, is there by concourse of devout
people greatly honored: Out of whose sepulcher flows a liquor continually,
very sovereign for many diseases. Moreover at Rome the translation of S.
Hierome Priest, and Doctor of the Church, from Bethleem Judah, to the Church of
S. Mary, named Ad Praesepe. At (...).
Bari in Apulia the translation also of S. Nicolas Bishop, from Myra a City in
Lycia.

D The tenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Latina the birthday of the holy Martyrs Gordianus
and Epimachus; of whom the former in the time of Julian the Apostata, being
long beaten with leaden whippes, for the confession of the name of Christ, was
at last beheaded: whose body was in the night by the Christians buried in the
same Sepulcher, into which the Relics of S. Epimachus Martyr had been a little
before translated from Alexandria, where for the faith of Christ he had
accomplished his Martyrdom. In the Land of Hus, of S. Job Prophet, a man of
wonderful Patience. At Rome of S. Calepodius Priest and Martyr, who being
beheaded by Alexander the Emperor, his body was drawn through the City, and
cast into the river of Tybur; which being afterward found was by Pope Callistus
buried. In this persecution there suffered also Palmatius a Consul, together
with his wife and children, and forty two others of his Household: Simplicius
also a Senator, with his wife, and threescore and eight of his family: Felix
also, with his wife Blanda: All whose heads were set upon diverse gates of the
City, for a terror to the Christians. Moreover at Rome in the way called
Latina, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Quartus and Quinctus, whose bodies
were translated to Capua. At Leontinum.
Lentini in Sycily of the holy Martyrs Alphius, Philadelphus, and Cyrinus. At
Smyrna of S. Dioscordies Martyr. At Tarencum.
Taranto of S. Cataldus Bishop, renowned for miracles. At Millan the invention
of the holy bodies of Nazarius and Celsus Martyrs, by S. Ambrose Bishop; who
finding the body of S. Nazarius freshly bleeding, translated the same to the
Church of the Apostles, together with the body of S. Celsus a boy, whom the
same Nazarius had brought up, who in the persecution of Nero, together with
Nazarius was beheaded by Anolinus, the 29. Day of July, upon which day the
feast of their Martyrdom is kept.

E The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Salaria, the birthday of S. Anthimus Priest, who
after he had preached the Gospel of Christ most laudably, was in the
persecution of Dio^^etian thrown headlong into the river of Tybur, but
delivered by an Angel, and carried into his own Oratory, afterward beheaded,
ascended victoriously to heaven. The same day of S. Euellius Martyr, who being
one of the household of Nero, by seeing the Martyrdom of S. Torpes, became a
Christian, and for confession of the same was beheaded. Also at Rome of the
holy martyrs Maximus, Bassus, and Fabius, who under Diocletian were slain in
the way called Salaria. At Camerino of the holy Martyrs Anastasius, and his
fellows, who in the persecution of Decius, under Antiochus Governor were
killed. At Auximum.
Osmo in Marc-Ancona of the holy Martyrs Sisi^us Deacon, Diocletius and
Florentius Disciples of S. Anthimus aforesaid, who under Diocletian being
stoned to death, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Varennes of S. Gangulphus
Martyr. At Vienna of S. Mamertus Bishop, who for pacifying the wrath of God,
first instituted in that City, the solemn Letanies, three days before the
Ascension of Christ; which Custom the Universal Church afterward approved.
At Sylu^niacum.
Sauuigni the deposition of Saint Maiolus Abbot of Cluny; whose life was
renowned for merits. At Septempe^a.
San-Seuerino in Marc-Ancona, of S. Illuminatus Confessor.

F The twelfth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Ardeatina of the holy Martyrs Nereus and Achilleus
Brothers, who together with Flauia Domitilla, whose Eunuchs they were, having
endured a long banishment in the Island Pontia, and afterward cruelly whipped,
for refusing to sacrifice unto Idols, and for saying, that having been baptized
by S. Peter the Apostle, they could by no means sacrifyce unto Idols, were
finally by Minutius Rufus the Consul, beheaded. There also in the way called
Aurelia of S. Pancratius Martyr who being but fourtene years old, under
Diocletian beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom. Moreover at Rome of S. Dennis
Uncle to the same Pancratins. In Sicily of S. Philip, surnamed Argyrion, who
being sent into that Island by the Bishop of Rome, converted a great part thereof
to the faith of Christ, whose holiness is famous in delivering of possessed
persons. At Salamina in Cyprus of S. Epiphanius Bishop, who greatly excelling
in Doctrine, especially in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, was renowned
also for his holiness of life, zeal of the Catholic faith, liberallity to the
poor, and power of working miracles. At Constantinople of S. German Bishop,
famous for virtue and learning, who with great courage and constancy reproved
Leo Isauricus for publishing an Edict against holy Images. At Treuers of S.
Modoaldus Bishop. In the City of Calciata of S. Dominicke Confessor.

G The thirteenth Day.
AT Rome the dedication of the Church of S. Mary, called Ad Martyrs, which
having sometimes been an Idolotrous Temple of all the Gods, named Pantheon, Pope
Boniface the fourth consecrated to the Honor of the Blessed, and euer-Virgin
Mary, and of all Martyrs, in the time of Phocas the Emperor. At Constantinople
of S* Mucius Priest and Martyr, who under Diocletian the Emperor, and
Laodicius P^oconsull, having first, at Amphipolis, endured many torments for
the confession of Christ, and afterward brought as far as Bizantium, was
finally beheaded. At Heraclea of S. ^liceria Martyr, a Roman by birth, who
suffered under Antoninus Emperor, and Sabinus Governor. At Alexandria the
Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who for the Catholic faith were killed by
the Arians, in the Church of Theonas. At Traiectum.
Maestricht of Saint Seruatius Bishop of Tungres, whose sepulcher, in testimony
of his great holiness, when in the winter time all places round about were
covered with snow, was never touched therewith, until by the Cittyzens
industry, a goodly Church was built over it. In Palestine of S. John, sur-named
Silenti^rius.

A The fourtenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Bonifacius Martyr, who under Diocletian and Maximian
Emperors suffered at Tharsus in Cilicia; but afterward translated to Rome, was
buried in the way called Latina. In France of S. Pontius Martyr, who by his
preaching and industry, having converted the two philips Emperors, to the
faith of Christ, under Valerianus and Gallienus obtained the palm of
Martyrdom. In Syria of the holy Martyrs Victor, and Corona, under Antoninus
Emperor; of whom Victor, being put to diverse cruel torments by Sebastian the
Judge, when Corona (a Soldiers wife) with a loud voice, highly commended him
for his constant suffering, and affirming that she saw two Crowns falling from
heaven, one for Victor, and another for herself, was tied to the bows of
trees, and torn in pieces by the violent flying back thereof; but Victor was
beheaded. In Sardinia of the holy Martyrs lusta, lustina, and Henedina. At Rome
of S. Paschalis Pope who took up many bodies of holy Martyrs out of caves, and
honorably placed them in diverse Churches. At Ferentum.
Ferento in Tuscany of S. Bonifacius Bishop, who, as S. Gregory Pope
testifies, even from his childhood was renowned for miracles. At N^ples in
Campania of S. Pomponius Bishop. In Egypt of S. Pachomius Abbot, who erected
many Monasteryes there, and wrote a Rule for his Monks, which was dictated
unto him by an Angel.

B The fiftenth Day.
IN Spain of the Saints Torquatus, Ctesiphon, Secundus, Indaletius, Caecilius,
Hesychius and Euphrasius, who being all ordained Bishops at Rome by the holy
Apostles, and sent into Spain to preach the word of God, after they had
brought many Cittyes and people to the subjection of Christ, they rested in our
Lord, in diverse places of the same Kingdom; as Torquatus at Accu^*
Guadix, C^e^^phon at Vergium
Vierzo, Secundus at A^u^a
Auila* Ind^letius at Vrcu^.
Bera, Caecilius at ^berum.
Colibre, Hesychius at Carteia.
Cartagena, and Euphrasius at ^turgum.
And^gar. At E^ora.
Euora in Portugal of S. Mancius Martyr. In the Island of Chio the birthday of
S. Isiodore Martyr, in whose Church there is a Well, whereinto it is recorded
that he was cast, the water of which being often drunk heals the sick. At
Lampsacum in Hellespont the passion of the Saints Peter, Andrew, Paul, and
Dionysia. At Fausi^^.
Terranoua in Sardinia of S. Simplicius Bishop and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian under Barbarus Governor, being thrust through with a
^aunce, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Auu^ergne of the holy Martyrs Cassius,
Victorinus, Maximus, and their fellows. In Brabant of Dympna Virgin and
Martyr, daughter to a King of Ireland, who for the faith of Christ, and
preserving of her virginity, was by her own Fathers commandment beheaded.

C The sixtenth Day.
AT Eugubium.
Eugubio in Italy of S. Vbaldus Bishop, renowned for miracles. In ^sauria the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Aquilinus, and Victorianus. At Antisiodorum.
Auxerre the passsion of S. Peregrinus the first Bishop of that City, who
being sent into France with other of the Clergy by S. Sixtus Pope, after he had
there preached the Gospel of Christ, deserved a Crown of Martyrdom by being
beheaded. At Vzalis in Africa of the holy Martyrs Felix and Gennadius. In
Palestine the passion of many holy Monks, slain by the Saracens in the
Monastery of S. Sabas. In Persia of the holy Martyrs Audas Bishop, seven
Priests, nine Deacons, and seven Virgins, who under King Isdegerdes, enduring
diverse kind of torments, accomplished a most renowned Martyrdom. At Amiens in
France of S. Honoratus Bishop. At C^n^manu^.
Man's of S. Domnolus Bishop. At Trecae.
Troys of S. Fidolus Confessor. In Scotland of S. Brandanus Abbot. At Foru^
Iul^j.
Friuoli of S. Maxima Virgin, who adorned with many virtues rested in our Lord.

D The seauententh Day.
AT Pisa in Tuscany of S. Torpes Martyr, who being an Officer unto Nero the
Emperor, and one of those of whom S. Paul writing from Rome to the
Philippians, mentions, saying: All the Saints salute you, especially those
that are of the house of Caesar: was for the faith of Christ, by commandment
of Satellicus cruelly buffeted, whipped, and cast unto the beasts to be
deuo^red, by whom being nothing hurt, at last beheaded, accomplished his
Martyrdom, upon the 29. Day of April, but his feast is more solemnly kept
this day, for the translation of his Body* In Africa of S. Restituta Virgi^
and Martyr, who in the time of Val^ri^n the Emperor, being many ways
tormented by Proculus Judge, wat at last put into an old ship filled with pitch
and tow, which set on fire, the flame thereof turning upon those that kindled
the same, she there in prayer gave up her soul to God. Her body, together
with the said ship, being miraculously brought to the Island of Aenaria near
Naples, was of the Christians received with great reverence: in whose honor
Constantine the Great caused a goodly Church to be built in Naples. At
Nouiodunum.
Noyon of the holy Martyrs Heradius, Paulus, and Aquilinus, with two others. At
Ch^lcedon of the holy Martyrs Solochanus and his fellow soldiers, under
Maxim^anus Emperor. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Adrianus, Victor, and
Basilla. At Herbipolis.
Wirtzburge of S. Bruno Bishop and Confessor.

E The eightenth Day.
IN Egypt of S. Di^s^orus Lector, who by the President of that Country, being
most cruelly tormented, by plucking of his nails, and scorching his sides (in
so much that the tormentors being terrifyed by the brightness of an heavenly
light, fell to the ground) at last burned with fiery plates accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Camerino in Vmbria of S. Venantius Martyr, who being but fifteen
years of age, was under Decius the Emperor, and Antiochus President,
together with ten others beheaded. At Spoleto of S. Felix Bishop, who under
Maximianus Emperor, obtained the palm of Martyrdom. In Egypt of S. Potamion
Bishop, who being first persecuted under Maximinus, was after in the time of
Constantius Emperor, by Philagrius the Arrian President, crowned with
Martyrdom. At Ancyra in Galatia of S. Theodotus Martyr: also of the Saints
Thecusa his Aunt, Alexandria, Claudia, Fama, Euphrasia, Matrona and Iulitta
Virgins, who being brutishly sent unto the Stews by the President, but
preserved from infamy by the power of God, having stones tied to their necks,
were drowned in a lake; whose relics when Theodotus had gathered together
and honorably enterred, being apprehenhed by the said President, and most
cruelly tormented, at last beheaded, received the crown of Martyrdom. At
Vpsalum.
Opslo in Swetia of S. Ericus King and Martyr.

F The nynetenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Pudentiana Virgin, who after she had endured infinite agonies
and afflictions in the time of persecution, after she had most honorably
buried the bodies of many holy Martyrs, and distributed all her goods to the
poor for the love of Christ, was at length called to receive her reward in
heaven. There also of S. Pudens a Senator father to the said Virgi^, who^
baptized by the Apostles, preserved his innocent Garment unspotted unto the
Crown of life. Moreover at Rome in the way called Appia, the birthday of the
Saints Calocerus, and Parthenius Eunuchs; of whom the former being chief
Chamberlayne to the wife of Decius the Emperor, and the other also a
principal Officer, for refusing to sacrifyce unto Idols, were by the said
Decius put to death. At Nicomedia of S. Philoterus Martyr, son to Pacianus
the Proconsull, who after many afflictions under Diocletian the Emperor,
received the crown of Martyrdom. There also of six holy Virgins and Martyrs,
of whom the chiefest was Cyriaca, who freely rebuking Maximianus the Tyrant
for his impiety, being most cruelly torn with whippes, was finally burned. The
same day of Saint Peter de Morono, who of an Anchoret being created Pope, and
called Celestinus the fifth, resigned his Dignity, and betook himself again
to a contemplative life in the wilderness, where renowned for virtues and
miracles, he went unto our Lord. At Canterbury of S. Dunstan Bishop. In Little
Brittany of S. Iuo Priest and Confessor, who for the love of Christ defended
the causes of Orphans, Widows, and the Poor.

G The twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Salaria, the birthday of S. Basilla Virgin, who
descended of a Royal lineage, and betrothed to a most noble Person, for
refusing his marriage, was by him accused unto Gallienus the Emperor to be a
Christian; of whom it was decreed, that either she should take him for her
husband, or dye by the sword; which when she refused to do, saying, that she
was already espoused to the King of Kings, was presently beheaded. At Nemausus.
Nismes in France of S. Baudelius Martyr, who for refusing to sacrifyce unto
Idols, and persisting constant in the faith of Christ, after he had been cruelly
whipped and otherwise tormented, by a precious death obtained the palm of
Martyrdom. At Edessa in Syria of the holy Martyrs Thalalaeus, Asterius,
Alexander, and their fellows, who suffered under Numerianus Emperor. In
Thebais of S. Aquila Martyr, who was cruelly torn with iron Combs, for the
faith of Christ. At Bituricae.
Bourges in France of S. Austregisilus Bishop and Confessor. At Brescia of S.
Anastasius Bishop. At Pau^a of S. Theodorus Bishop. At Aquila in In Vestinis.
Abbruzzo of S. Bernardine of Siena, of the Order of S. Francis, who by word
and work greatly adorned Italy. At Rome of S. Plautilla, a woman of Noble
Extraction, and mother to Blessed Flauia Domitilla, who baptized by S. Peser
the Apostle, and renowned for all kind of virtues, rested in peace.

A The one and twentieth Day.
AT Caesarea Mauritania Casariensis.
in Africa the birthday of the holy Martys Timotheus, Polius and ^utychius
Deacons, who for preaching the word of God in those parts, deserved to be
crowned together with Martyrdom. At Caesarea in Cappadocia the birthday of
the holy Martyrs Polieuctus, Victorinus, and Dona^us. At Cordoua of S.
Secundinus Martyr. The same day of the holy Martyrs Synesius, and Theopompus.
At Caesarea Philippi the birthday of the holy Martyrs Nicostratus and
Antiochus Tribunes, with diverse other soldiers. The same day of S. Valens
Bishop, who with three children was put to death for the faith of Christ. At
Alexandria the Commemoration of the holy martyrs Secundus Priest, and others,
who in the festival days of Pentecost under Constantius the Emperor were
commanded to be cruelly killed by George the Arian Bishop. Also of other holy
Bishops and Priests, who bannished by the Arrians, deserved to be made
partakers of the glory of Confessors. At Nicla.
Nizza in Sauoy of S. Hospitius Confessor, renowned for the virtue of
abstinence, and spirit of Prophecy.

B The two and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Faustinus, Timotheus, and Venustus. In Africa of
the holy Martyrs Castus, and Aemilius, who finished their Martyrdom by the
fire. These men (as S. Cyprian writes) yielding in the first assault, for
fear of the fire, became Conquerers in the second, by the help of our Lord,
and even more strong then the fire it self. In Corsica of S. Iulia Virgin,
who by the death of the Cross obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At Comana in
Pontus of S. Basiliscus Martyr, who under Maximianus Emperor, and Agrippa
President, being compelled to put on iron shoes, stuck full of hoate fiery
nails, besides the enduring of many other torments, at last beheaded, and cast
into a river, purchased a Crown of Martyrdom. In Spain of S. Quiteria Virgin
and Martyr. At Rauenna of S. Marcianus Bishop and Confessor. In the Territory
of Antisiodorum.
Auxerre of S. Romanus abbot, who served S. Benet in his Cave, and after going
into France, having there erected a Monastery, and left many disciples, and
followers of his virtues went to rest in our Lord. At Aquinum.
Aquino of S. Fulke Confessor. At Auxerre of S. Helena Virgin.

C The three and twentieth Day.
AT Lingonae.
Langres in France the passion of S. Desiderius Bishop, who seeing his flock
vexed by the army of the Vandalls, went to their King to entreat for them, by
whose commaundment he was forthwith slain; and so offeringe his life for the
sheep committed to his charge, by the dint of sword went joyfully unto our
Lord. There suffered also with him many others of his flock which lie buried
in the same City. In Spain of the holy Martyrs Epitacius Bishop, and
Basileus. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Quinctianus, Lucius, and Iulianus, who
in the persecution of the Wandalls, deserved eternal crowns of Martyrdom. In
Cappadocia the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who in the persecution of
Maximinus, having their thighs broken, were killed. Also of many others, who
at the same time in Mesopotamia, hanged up by the feet, with their heads
downward, styfled with smoke, and consumed with a slow fire, accomplished
their Martyrdom. In the territory of Lions of S. Desiderius Bishop of Vienne,
who stoned to death, by commaundment of King Theodoricus, was crowned a Martyr.
At Synnada in Phrygia of S. Michael Bishop. The same day of S. Mercurialis
Bishop. At Naples in Campania of S. Euphebius Bishop. At Nursia, of the Saints
Eutychius and Florentius Monks, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes mention.

D The four and twentieth Day.
AT Antioch the birthday of S. Manahen, Foster-brother to Herod the Tetrarch,
Doctor, and Prophet under the grace of the new Testament, who lies buried in
the same City. Also of S. Ioane wife to Chusas King Herod's Steward, of whom
S. Luke the Evangelist makes mention. At Portus Romanus.
Porto the birthday of S. Vincent Martyr. At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Afra Martyr, who suffered under Hadrian the Emperor. At
N^nnetes.
Nantes in the lesser Brittany of the blessed Martyrs Donatianus and Rogatianus
brothers, who under Diocletian Emperor, for the confession of their faith,
being first cast into prison, then racked upon the torture Equuleus, and
afterward thrust through with a lance, were lastly beheaded. In Istria of the
holy Martyrs Zoellus, Seruilius, Felix, Siluanus and Diocles. The same day of
the holy Martyrs Meletius, a Coronell, together with two hundred and fifty two
of his soldiers, who by diverse kinds of death accomplished their Martyrdom.
Also of the holy Martyrs Susanna, Marciana, and Palladia, wives to three of the
foresaid soldiers, who with their little children were all broken in pieces.
At Millan of S. Robustianus Martyr. In the Monastery of Lyrina of S. Vincent
Priest, renowned for learning and holiness of life. At Bolonia the translation
of S. Dominike Confessor, in the time of Pope Gregory the ninth.

E The five and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Numentana the birthday of S. Vrbanus Pope and
Martyr, by whose exhortations and doctrine many (amongst whom were Tiburtius
and Valerianus) received the faith of Christ, and suffered Martyrdom for the
same. Himself also having endured much for the Church of God, at last
beheaded, obtained the crown of Martyrdom. At Now called Busia.
Dorostorum in Mysia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Passicrates, Valention,
and two others, crowned together. At Millan of S. Dennis Bishop, who by
Constantius the Arian Emperor, banished into Cappadocia for the Catholic
faith, there gave up his soul to God. His holy body was sent to S. Ambrose at
Millan, by Aurelius Bishop, and the assistance of S. Basil the Great, as is
recorded. At Rome of S. Bonifacius Pope, the fourth of that name, who dedicated
the temple of all the Gods, called Pantheon, to the honor of our Blessed Lady,
named ad Martyrs. At Salerno the deposition of Blessed Pope Gregory the
seventh, an earnest protector, and defender of the Churches liberty. At
Flor^nce the birthday of S. Zenobius Bishop of the same City, renowned for
holiness of life and m^racles. In England of S. Aldelmus Bishop of Schi^^^urgum.
Sherborne. In the territory of Tri^assium.
Troys of S. Leo Confessor. At Assisi in Vmbria the translation of S. Francis
Confessor, in the time of Pope Gregory the nynth. At Verulo in He^ni^i.
Campania the translation of S. Mary mother to S. James the younger, whose holy
body, is honored with very many miracles.

F The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. El^utherius Pope and Martyr, who converted many of the Roman
Nobility, to the ^ayth of Christ, and sent the Saints Damianus and Fugatius
into Bri^^any, who baptized King Luci^s with his Queen, and almost all his
people. Also at Rome of the holy Martyrs Simitrius Priest, and two and twenty
others, who suffered under Antoninus Pius. At Athens the birthday of S.
Quadratus Disciple of the Apostles, who by his faith and industry gathering
together the Church, dispersed through the fear of persecution, under Adrian
the Emperor, offered up unto him a Book in defense of Christian Religion,
very necessary, and full of Apostolical doctrine. At Vienna of S. Zacharias
Bishop and Martyr, who suffered under Traian. In Africa of S. Quadratus also
martyr, upon whose feast S. Augustine made a Se^mon. At Tude^tum.
Todi of the holy Martyrs Felicissimus, Heraclius, and Paulinus. In the
Territory of An^siodo^u^.
Auxerre the Passion of S. Priscus Martyr, with a great number more of
Christians. At Canterbury in England, of S. Augustine Bishop, who being sent
thither, together with others, by S. Gregory Pope, preached the Gospel, of
Christ to the English Nation; and there renowned for virtues and miracles, went
to rest in our Lord.

G The seven and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. John Pope and Martyr, who by Theodoricus an Arian King of
Italy being called to Rauenna, after long staruing in prison, for the Faith of
Christ, there ended his life. At Dorostorum in Mysia the passion of S. Julius,
who having been an ancient soldier, and by license given over the wars, was
in the time of Alexander the Emperor, apprehended by the officers, and
presented before Maximus the President; in whose presence detesting the Idols,
and constantly professing the Name of Christ, received the sentence of death*
At Sora of S. Restituta Virgin and Martyr, who under Aurelianus Emperor, and
Agathi^s Proconsull, in a combat for her ^ayth, ouercomming the violence of the
Devil, the flattery of the world, and the ^ruelty of her Tormentors, was at
last together with other Christians beheaded, and crowned with Martyrdom. In
the territory of A^batum.
Arras of S. Ranulphus Marty. At A^ausia.
Orange in France of S. Eutropius Bishop, famous for virtues and miracles. The
same day the deposition of Venerable Bede Priest, renowned for holiness of life
and doctrine.

A The eight and twentieth Day.
IN Sardinia of the holy Martyrs Aemilius, Felix, Priamus, and Lucianus, who
for the faith of Christ were crowned with Martyrdom. At Ca^notum.
Chartres in France of S. Caraunus Martyr, who under Domitian the Emperor, by
loss of his head obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At Corinth of S. Helconides
Martyr, who being first, under Gordianus Emperor, and Perennius President,
afflicted many ways, and then again tormented by Justinius his Successor, but
delivered by an Angel; having also her breasts cut off, cast unto the beasts,
and tried by the fire, was at last beheaded, and so accomplished her
Martyrdom. Also the passion of the Saints Crescens, Dioscorides, Paulus and
Helladius. At The^uis in Palestine of many holy Monks and Martyrs, who were
killed by the Saracens, in the days of Theodosius the Younger; whose sacred
Relics the Inhabitans gathering together, kept with great veneration and
reverence. At Paris in France, of S. German Bishop and Confessor, whose
holiness of life, and miracles how great they were, Fortunatus Bishop has left
written. At Millan of S. Senator Bishop, renowned for virtue and learning. At
Vrgella in Spain of S. Iustus Bishop. At Florence of S. Podius Bishop and
Confessor.

B The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Aurelia, the birthday of S. Restitutus Martyr. At
Now called Cogne.
Iconium a City in Isauria, the passion of the Saints Conon and his Son, of
twelve years old, who under Aurelianus Emperor being broyled upon a Gridiron,
and oil powered upon them, racked upon the torture Equuleus, and burned with
fire, at last having their hands all bruised to pieces with a mallet, gave up
the Ghost. The same day, of the holy Martyrs Sisinius, Martyrius and Alexander,
who in the days of Honorius the Emperor, as S. Paulinus writes, through
persecution of the Gentills obtaytayned the crown of Martyrdom in the Country
of Anaunia. At Caesarea Philippi of the holy Martyrs Theodosia mother to S.
Procopius Martyr, and twelve other noble Matrons who in the persecution of
Diocletian were beheaded. In Vmbria the passion of a thousand five hundred
twenty five holy Martyrs. At Treuers of S. Maximus Bishop and Confessor, who
very honorably entertained S. Athanasius flying the persecution of
Constantius. At Verona of S. Maximus Bishop. At Arcano in Latium, of S.
Eleutherius Confessor.

C The thirtith Day.
AT Rome in the way called Aurelia, the birthday of S. Felix Pope and Martyr,
who under Aurelian Emperor was crowned with Martyrdom. At Turres.
Torre in Sardinia of the holy Martyrs Gabinus and Crispulus. At Antioch of the
Saints Sycus and Palatinus, who for the name of Christ endured many torments.
At Rauenna of S. Exuperantius Bishop and Confessor. At Pauia of S. Anastasius
Bishop. At Caesarea in Cappadocia of the Saints Basilius and Emmelia his wife,
Father and Mother to S. Basil the Great, who in the days of Maximinus being
banished, inhabited the deserts of Pontus; and the persecution afterward
ceasing, leaving their children heirs of their virtue, rested in peace.

D The one and thirtith Day.
AT Rome of S. Petronilla Virgin, daughter to S. Peter the Apostle, who
contemning the marriage of Flaccus a Noblema^, taking three days do
deliberate, in the mean while attending to prayer and fasting, the third day,
after she had received the holy Sacrament of Christ's Body, gave up the ghost.
At Aquileia of the holy Martyrs Cantius, Cantianus brothers, and Cantianilla
their sister, who descended of the noble family of Anicius, under Diocletian
and Maximian Emperors, for constant profession of the Christian faith,
together with their Scholemayster Protus were beheaded. At Turres.
Torre in Sardinia of S. Cresce^tianus Martyr. At Comana in Pontus of S.
^ermias Soldier, who under Antoninus Emperor being miraculously delivered
from many and most cruel torments, converted the Hangman to Christ, and made
him partaker of the same crown of Martyrdom, which himself first obtained by
loss of his head. At Verona of S. Lup^cinus Bishop. At Rome of S. Paschasius
Deacon and Confessor, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes mention.

THE MONTH OF JUNE.
E The first Day.
AT Rome of S. Inuentius Martyr. At Caesarea in Palestine of S. Pamphilus
Priest and Martyr, a man of great holiness and learning, and very liberal to
the poor, who in the persecution of Maximinus, being first tormented under
Vrbanus President and cast into prison, and afterward again by Firmilianus
afflicted for the faith of Christ, together with others, accomplished his
Martyrdom. There suffered at the same time Valens a Deacon, and Paulus, with
nine others, whose memoryes are celebrated upon other days. At Augustodu^um.
Austum of the Saints Reuerianus Bishop and Paul Priest with ten others, who
under Aurelian Emperor were crowned with Martyrdom. In Cappadocia of S.
Thespesius Martyr, who under Alexander the Emperor, and Simplicius Governor,
after other torments was beheaded. In Egypt of the holy Martyrs Ischyrion a
Captain, and of other five soldiers, who under Diocletian the Emperor, were
diversely put to death for the faith of Christ. Moreover of S. Firmus Martyr,
who in the persecution of Maximianus being sore whipped, and stoned, was
finally beheaded. At Perugia of the holy Martyrs Felinus and Gratinianus
Soldiers, who under Decius diversely tormented, by a glorious death received
the Crown of Martyrdom. At Bolonia of S. Proculus Bishop and Martyr, who
suffered under Maximianus Emperor. At Olim Amenia.
Amelia of S. Secundus Martyr, who under Diocletian cast into the River of
Tybur, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Typhernu^.
Castello in Vmbria of S. Crescentianus a Roman soldier crowned a Martyr under
the same Emperor. In Vmbria of S. Fortunatus Priest, renowned for virtues and
miracles. In the Monastery of Lyrina of S. Caprasius Abbot. At Treuers of S.
Simeon Monk, who was canonized for a Saint by Pope Benedict the nynth.

F The second Day.
AT Rome the birthday of the holy Martyrs Marcellinus Priest, and Peter
Exorcist, who for instructing many in the Christian faith under Diocletian,
after cruel imprysonment, and very many torments, were by the commaundment of
Serenus Judge beheaded, in the place which was then called Sylua nigra; but
afterward in honor of the Martyrs, changing the name, was called Sylua
candida. Their bodies were buried in the Cave near to S. Tiburtius, and
afterward Saint Damasus beautifyed their tomb with an Epitaph in verse. In
Campania of S. Erasmus Bishop and Martyr, who under Diocletian the Emperor,
being first beaten with leaden whippes, and then grievously bruised with
cudgels, having also rasine, brimstone, lead, pitch, wax, and oil powered upon
him, and nothing hurt thereby, was afterward at Formiz.
Mola under Maximianus, again put to many and most cruel torments, but still
preserved by God for the confirmation of others in their faith, at last called
by our Lord, famous for Martyrdom, made a holy end: Whose body was afterward
translated unto Caieta. At Lugdunum.
Lions of the holy Martyrs Photinus Bishop, Sanctus Deacon, Vetius, Epagathus,
Maturus, Ponticus, Biblides, Attalus, Alexander, and Blandina, with many
others, whose glorious and often combats, in the time of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, and Lucius Verus, are written in a Letter of the Church of Lions, to
the Churches of Asia and Phrygia: Amongst whom S. Blandina weaker then the
rest in sex, body, and meandness of condition, having endured more long and
grievous torments, and still remaining constant, slain at last by the sword,
followed the rest whom she had encouraged, to the triumphant palm of
Martyrdom. At Rome of S. Eugenius Pope and Confessor.

G The third Day.
AT At^tium.
Arezzo in Tuscany of the holy Martyrs Pergentinus and Laure^tinus Brothers,
who in the persecution of Decius, under Tiburtius President, being yet but
children, after cruel torments endured, and many miracles wrought, dyed by the
sword. At Constantinople of the holy Martyrs Lucilli^nus and four children,
Claudius, Hypatius, Paul, and Dennis; of whom Lucillianus having been an
Idolatrous Priest, and made a Christian, after diverse torments was cast into a
burning furnace together with his fellows, which being miraculously
extinguished by a shower of rain, they all remained without harm: and lastly,
he being nailed to a Cross, and the children beheaded, under Siluanus
Governor, accomplished their Martyrdom. There also of S. Paula Virgin and
Martyr, who for gathering up the blood of the foresaid Martyrs apprehended,
whipped, and cast into the fire, but miraculously delivered, was at last also
beheaded, in the same place where Lucillianus was crucified. At Cordoua in
Spain of S. Isaac Monk, who dyed by the sword, for the faith of Christ. At
Carthage of S. Caecilius Priest, who converted S. Cyprian to the faith of
Christ. In the territory of Orleans of S. Liphardus Priest and Confessor. At
Luca in Tuscany of S. Dauinus Confessor. At Paris of S. Crotildes Queen, by
whose prayers her husband King Clodo^eus was converted to the faith of Christ.
At Anagnia of S. Oliua Virgin.

A The fourth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Aret^ and Dacianus. At Siscia.
Sittis in Sclauon^ of S. Quirinus Bishop, who under Galeri^ President, having
a millstone tied to hi^ neck, was cast into a river, but the ston^ (as
Prudentius writes) swimming about the water, after he had long exhorted the
Christians, not to be terrified with his punishment, nor yet to waver in their
faith by his prayers obtained of God, that (...) might be drowned, thereby to
attain unto the glory of Martyrdom. At Brescia of S* Clateus Bishop and
Martyr, under the Emperor Nero. In Pannonia of the holy Martyrs Rutilus, and
his fellows. At Attrebatum.
Arras (...) S. Saturnina Virgin and Martyr. At Tibur.
Ti^ of S. Quirinus Martyr. At Constantinople of S* Metrophanes Bishop, and
renowned Confessor. At Olim Mileius.
Mela in Numidia of S. Optatu^ Bishop, famous for doctrine and holiness of life.
At Verona of S. Alexander Bishop.

B The fifth Day.
IN Egypt the birthday of the holy Martyrs Marcianus, Nicanor, Apollonius,
and others, who in the persecution of Maximinus accomplished a glorious
Martyrdom. At Perugia of the holy Martyrs Florentius, Iulianus, Cyriacus,
Marcellinus, and Faustinus, who in the persecution of Decius, were beheaded. At
Caesarea in Palestine the passion of the Saints Zenaides, Cyria, Valeria, and
Marcia, who by many torments went joyfully to Martyrdom. At Tyrus of S.
Dorotheus Priest, who suffering many afflictions under Diocletian, and living
until the time of wicked Julian, being an hundred and seven years old,
adorned his venerable age with Martyrdom. The same day of S. Bonifacius Bishop
of Moguntium
Mentz, who coming out of England to Rome, and sent back into Germany, by
Pope Gregory the second, to preach the faith of Christ to that Nation, after he
had converted a great number, specially those of Frizeland, to the Christian
Religion, deserved to be called the Apostle of the Germans. And finally being
put to the sword by the furious Gentiles in Frizeland, together with Eobanus,
and other servants of God, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Cordoua in Spain of
S. Sancius a young man, who though he had been trained up in the Kings Court,
endured notwithstanding a famous Martyrdom, for the faith of Christ, in the
persecution of the Arabians.

C The sixth Day.
AT Caesarea in Palestine, the birthday of S. Philip, one of the first seven
Deacons, who renowned for virtues and miracles, converted the Country of
Samaris to the faith of Christ, and baptized the Eunuch of Candaces Queen of
Aethiopia; and finally ending his blessed days in peace, lies buried at
Caesarea, near unto three of his daughters Prophetesses, for his fourth
daughter, full of the holy Ghost, dyed at Ephesus. At Rome of S. Artemius
together with his wife Candida, and his daughter Paulina, who converted unto
Christ by the preaching and miracles of Saint Peter the Exorcist, and with all
his family baptized by S. Marcellinus Priest, was by co^maundment of Serenus
Judge, cruelly scourged with leaden whippes, and then beheaded. But his said
Wife and Daughter, being thrust into a Cave, were there overwhelmed with stones
and rubbidge. At Tharsus in Cilicia, of twenty holy Martyrs, who in the days
of Diocletian and Maximian, under Simplicius Judge, by diverse torments
glorified God in their bodies. At Noniod^num.
Noyon in France of the holy Martyrs Amantius, Alexander, and their fellows.
At ^aesul^*
Fiesoli in Tuscany of S. Alexander Bishop and Martyr. At Millan the deposition
of S. Eustorgius the second, Bishop and Confessor. At Verona of S. John Bishop.
At Vesontio.
Bezanson in France of S. Claudius Bishop. The same day of S. Norbert Bishop of
Magdeburge, Founder of the Order called Praemonstratensis.

D The seventh Day.
AT Constantinople the birthday of S. Paul Bishop of the same City, who being
often driven thence by the Arians for the Catholic faith, and restored again
by S. Julius Bishop of Rome, at last by Constantius the Arian Emperor, sent
into banishment to Cucusa, a little town in Cappadocia, was there strangled
barbarously by the practices of the Arians, and so went unto our Lord. Whose
body afterward in the time of Theodosius the Emperor, with great honor, was
translated to Constantinople. In Egypt of S. Licarion Martyr, who torn with
whippes of ^ron fiery-hoate, and other most cruel torments, at last beheaded,
accomplished his Martyrdom. At Cordoua of the holy Martyrs Peter Priest,
Walabonsus Deacon, Sabinianus, Wistremundus, Habentius, and Hieremias Monks.
In England of S. Robert Abbot, of the Order Cisterce.

E The eight Day.
AT Aquae.
Aix in France of S. Maximinus the first Bishop of that City, who is said to
have been the Disciple of our Lord. The same day of S. Calliopa Martyr, who
having her breasts cut off for the faith of Christ, and feared with a burning
iron, roled also upon sharp potshards, at last beheaded received the palm of
Martyrdom. At Suessones.
Soissons in France the birthday of S. Medardus Bishop of Nouiomum.
Noyon, whose holy life and death, are memorable by many renowned miracles. At
Rotomagus
Roan of S. Gildardus Bishop, brother to the forsaid Medardus, who both borne
upon on day, and upon one day ordained Bishops, being also upon one and the
self same day taken out of this life, went together to heaven. At Senones.
Sens of S. Heraclius Bishop. At Metis.
Metz in Loraine of S. Clodulphus Bishop. In Olim Picenum
Marc-Ancona of S. Seuerinus Bishop of San-S^u^rino
S^ptempeda. In Sardinia of S. Sallu^^^anus Confessor. At Camerino of S.
Victorinus Confessor.

F The nynth Day.
AT Rome, in Monte Caelio, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Primus and
Felicianus, under Diocletian and Maximian Emperors, who having lived long
together in our Lord, and diverse times, both together and severally, endured
most cruel and exquisite torments, at last by sentence of Promotus President
of Nomento, being beheaded, accomplished the course of their happy Combat. At
Agennum.
Again in France the passion of S. Vincent Deacon and Martyr. At Antioch of S.
Pelagia Virgin and Martyr, whose praises S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom have
left written. At Syrac^ sae.
Syracosa of S. Maximianus Bishop, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes often
mention. In Scotland of S. Columba Priest and Confessor. At Edessa in Syria of
S. Julian Monk, whose worthy deeds S. Ephrem Deacon has left written.

G The tenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Salaria, the passion of S. Getulius a Noble, and
learned man, and of his fellows Caerealis, Amantius, and Primitiuus, who by
commaundme^t of Hadrian the Emperor, being apprehended by Licinius that had
been Consul, first cruelly beaten, then cast into prison, and lastly delivered
up to the fire, but receiving no hurt thereby, having their heads all bruised
with cudgels, accomplished their Martyrdom. Whose bodies Symphor^sa the wife
to S. Getulius gathering together, buried honorably in a place belonging to
her Manor. At Rome in the way called Aurelia, the birthday of S. Basilides,
Tripodes, Mandales, and twenty other Martyrs, under Aurelianus Emperor, and
Plato Governor of the City. At Nicomedia of S. Zacharias Martyr. At Prusias
in Bithynia of S. Timothy Bishop and Martyr, under Julian the Apostata. In
Spain of the holy martyrs Crispulus and Restitutus. In Africa of the holy
martyrs Aresius, Rogatus, and fifteen others. At Cullen of S. Maurinus Abbot
and Martyr. At Pe^ra in Arabia of S. Asterius Bishop, who being greatly vexed
by the Arians for the Catholic faith, and bannished by Constantius the
Emperor into Africa, there dyed a glorious Confessor. At Antisiod^rum.
Auxerre of S. Censurius Bishop. In Scotland of S. Margaret Queen, renowned
for her Charity to the poor, and voluntary Poverty.

A The eleauenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Barnaby Apostle, who borne in Cyprus, and ordained Apostle
of the Gentiles together with S. Paul, traveled with him into many Provinces,
exercising the function of preaching the Gospel committed to his charge; and
lastly going into Cyprus, by a glorious Martyrdom, there adorned his
Apostleship. Whose body (himself revealing the same) was found in the time of
Zeno the Emperor, together with S. Matthewes Gospel written with his own
hand. At Aquileia, the passion of the Saints Felix, and Fortunatus Brothers,
who in the persecution of Diocletian and Maximia^, after they had been racked
upon the torture Equuleus, and burning torches put unto their sides, (which by
divine power were forth with extinguished) and lastly after boiling oil powered
upon their bellyes, perseuering constant in the confession of their faith, were
beheaded. At Bolonia of S. Parisius Confessor, and Monk of the Order of
Camaldulum.
Camaldoli. At Rome the translation of S. Gregory Nazianzen, whose holy Body
having been brought from Constantinople to Rome, and there kept a long time in
the Church of our B. Lady in Campo-Martio, was by Pope Gregory the thirtenth
with great solemnity translated to the Church of S. Peter, and there placed
under the Altar, in a Chapel which for that purpose he had most sumptuously
adorned.

B The twelfth Day.
AT Rome in they way called Aurelia the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and Nazarius Soldiers, who in the persecution of
Diocletian and Maximian, under Aurelius Governor, for the confession of Christ
being cast into prison, and then torn with whippes called Scorpions, were at
last beheaded. At Nice in Bithynia of S. Antonina Martyr, who in the same
persecution, by commandment of Priscillanus President, being sore beaten with
cudgels, racked upon the torture Equulaus, her sides torn and scorched with
fire, was finally beheaded. In Thracia of S. Olympius Bishop, who expelled out
of his Bishopric by the Arians, dyed a Confessor. In Cilicia of S. Amphion
Bishop and renowned Confessor, in the time of Maximinus Emperor. In Egypt of
S. Onuphrius Anchoret, who lead a solitary life in the desert threescore years
together, and famous for virtues and miracles rested in our Lord: whose
memorable acts are written by Paphnutius Abbot.

C The thirteenth Day.
AT Padua of S. Anthony Confessor, borne in Portugal, of the Order of S.
Francis, famous for preaching, holiness of life, and miracles. At Rome in the
way called Ardeatina, the birthday of S. Felicula Virgin and Martyr, who
refusing either to marry, or to sacrifice unto Idols, was conuented before the
Judge, who seeing her remain constant in the confession of Christ, after she
had endured a dark and most loathsome imprysonement, being almost starued with
famine, caused her to be so long racked upon the torture Equuleus, until she
gave up the ghost. Her body being thrown into a Privy, was by S. Nicomedes
taken out, and buried in the same way. In Africa of the holy Martyrs
Fortunatus, and Lucianus. At Biblus in Palestine of S. Aquilinae Virgin and
Martyr, who being but twelve years of age, was under Diocletian the Emperor,
and Volusianus Judge, for the Confession of her faith, first buffeted, the^
whipped, and hot burning bodkins thrust into her body, at last beheaded
consecrated her virginity to God by Martyrdom. In In Pelignis.
Abbruzzo of S. Peregrinus Bishop and Martyr, who by the Lombardes was drowhed
in the river of Olim Aternu^.
Pescara. At Cordoua of S. Fandilas Priest and Monk, who in the persecution of
the Arabians, being beheaded for the faith of Christ obtained Martyrdom. In
Cyprus of S. Tryphillius Bishop.

D The fourtenth Day.
AT Caesarea in Cappadocia the Ordinatio^ of S. Basil Bishop, who in the time
of Valens the Emperor, famous for doctrine, and wisdom, and all virtues,
greatly adorned the Church of God; and with invincible consta^cy defended the
same against the Arian and Macedonian Heretics. At Samaria in Palestine of S.
Elizeus Prophet at whose sepulcher (as S. Hierom writes) the Devils tremble:
where also lies buried the Prophet Abdias. At Syricusae.
Syracosa of S. Marcianus Bishop, who ordained by S. Peter Apostle after he had
laudably preached the gospel, was killed by the Jews. At Suessiones.
Soissons of the holy Martyrs Valerius and Ruffinus, who in the persecution of
Diocletian after many torments by the commaundment of Rictiouarus President
were beheaded. At Cordoua of the holy martyrs Anastasius Priest, Felix monk,
and Digna Virgin. At Constantinople of S. Methodius Bishop. At Vienna of S.
Aetherius Bishop. At Rutenum.
Rodes in France of S. Quinctianus Bishop.

E The fifteenth Day.
IN hodie Calabria
Lucania at the river Silar, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Vitus, Modestus,
and Crescentia, under Diocletian the Emperor, who being brought thither out of
Sicily, after they had endured hot boiling lead, and by the power of God
overcome the beasts, and other cruel torments, ended the course of their
glorious combat. At Do^ostorum in M^sia of S. Hesychius a Soldier, who being
apprehended with S. Julius, was a little after him, under Maximus President,
crowned with Martyrdom. At Cordoua in Spain of S. Benildes Martyr. At
Zephyrus in Cilicia of S. Dulas Martyr, who under Maximus President, for the
name of Christ, being first whipped, the^ laid on a fiery gridiron, and basted
with boiling oil, and otherwise tormented, at last obtained the palm of
Martyrdom. At Palmyra in Syria of the holy Martyrs Libya and Leonides systers,
and Eutropia a girl of twelve years old, who being diversely tormented,
received the crown of Martyrdom. At Valeucene the deposition of S. Landeline
Abbot. At Aruernum.
Auuergne of S. Abraham Confessor, renowned for holiness of life and miracles.

F The sixtenth Day.
AT Vesontio.
Bezanson in France of the holy Martyrs Ferreolus Priest, and Ferrution Deacon,
who being sent by Saint Ire^^us Bishop of Lions, to preach the word of God,
were by Claudius the Judge, after many torments endured, at last beheaded. At
Tharsus in Cilicia, of the holy Martyr^ Quiricus, and Iulitta his mother, under
Di^cletian Emperor, of whom Quiricus being but a child of three years old,
and seeing his mother cruelly beaten in presence of Alexander the President,
pitifully crying, was dashed against the steps of the Iudgment-seat, and so
dyed; but Iulitta his Mother after many most grievous strype, and torments,
ended the course of her Martyrdom, by the loss of her head. At Mog^tiae.
Mentz the passion of the Saints Aureus, and Iustin^ his sister, and other
Martyrs, who being in the Church at Mass, were killed by the Hunnes, in their
incursion of Germany. At Olim Amathu^ta.
^mathusia in Cyprus of S. Tychon Bishop, in the time of Theodosius the younger.
At Lions the deposition of S. Aurelianus Bishop of Arelatum.
Arles. At Na^ne^es
Nants in little Brit^tany of S. Similianus Bishop and Confessor. At Misna.
Miessen in Saxony of S. Benno Bishop. In Brabant of S. Lutgardes Virgin.

G The seauententh Day.
AT Rome the birthday of two hundred, threescore, and two Martyrs, who in the
persecution of Diocletian were put to death for the faith of Christ, and buried
in the old way of Salaria, at the foot of the hill Cucumer. At Terracina of S.
Montanus a Soldier, who under Hadrian the Emperor, and Leontius Consul,
after many torments, received the crown of Martyrdom. At Venafri of the holy
Martyrs Nicander and Marcianus, who in the persecution of Maximian were
beheaded. At Chalcedon of the holy Martyrs Manuel, Sa^el, and Ismael, who being
sent to Julian the Apostata, as Legates from the King of Persia, to treat of
peace, and constan^ly refusing to worship the Idols, as the Emperor
commanded, were beheaded. At Apollonia in Macedonia of the holy Martyrs
Isaurus Deacon, Innocentius, Felix, Jeremy, and Peregrinus Athenians by birth,
who by Tripontius the Tribune put to diverse kind of torments, were lastly
beheaded. At Olim Amenta.
Ameria in Vmbria of S. Himerius Bishop, whose body was translated to Cremona.
In the Territory of Bituricae.
Bourges of S. Gundulphus Bishop. At Orleans of S. Auitus Priest and Confessor.
In Phrigia of S. Hipatius Confessor. Also of S. Bessarion Anchoret. At Pisa in
Tuscany of S. Raynerius Confessor.

A The eightenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Ardeatina, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Marcus
and Marcellianus brothers, who in the persecution of Diocletian being
apprehended by Fabianus Judge, and bound to a post, had sharp nails thrust
into their feet; and when they ceased not, still to praise the name of Christ,
having their sides pierced with lances, they went to the Kingdom of heaven,
with the glory of Martyrdom. At Malaga in Spain of the holy Martyrs Cyriacus,
and Paula virgin, who being stoned to death, rendered up their souls to God. At
Tripoli in Phaenicia of S. Leontius a Soldier, who under Hadrianus President,
together with Hipatius a Tribune, and Theodulus, whom he had converted unto
Christ, by many bitter torments, attained the crown of Martyrdom. The same
day of S. Aetherius Martyr, who in the persecution of Diocletian having endured
fire, and many other torments, was beheaded. At Alexandria the passion of S.
Marina virgin. At Bordeaux of S. Amandus Bishop and Confessor. At Sconaugia.
Sconaw of S. Elizabeth Virgin, famous for observance of monastical discipline.

B The nynetenth Day.
AT Millan of the holy Martyrs Geruasius and Protasius brothers, of whom the
former, by commaundment of Astasius Judge, was so long beaten with leaden
whippes until he gave up the Ghost. The other being all bruised with cudgels,
was at last beheaded. Their bodies by revelation were found by S. Ambrose all
besprinkled with blood, and as fresh, as if they had been martyred the same
day. At whose translation a blind man touching their Cof^in, recovered his
sight, and many vexe^ with evil spirits were delivered. At Rauenna of S.
Vrsicinus Martyr, who under Paulinus Judge, after many torments constantly
endured for the confession of his faith, being beheaded, accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Sozopolis of S. Zosimus Martyr who in the persecution of Traian,
under Domitianus President, after many bitter torments beheaded, went
triumpha^tly to our Lord. At Ar^tium.
Arezzo in Tuscany, of the holy Martyrs Gaudentius Bishop, and Culmatiu^
Deacon, who in the time of Valentinia^ were slain by fury of the Gentiles. The
same day of S. Bonifacius Martyr, Disciple o^ S. Romualdus, who being sent into
Russia by the Bishop of Rome, to preach the ghospe^ of Christ, after he had
passed through fyr^ without harm, and baptized both King and many of his
people, being slain by the Kings furious Brother, received the crown of
Martyrdom. At Rauenna of S. Romualdus Anchoret, Founder of the Monks called
Ca^aldulenses, who restored the heremiticall discipline much decayed in Italy,
and greatly dilated the same.

C The twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Siluerius Pope and Martyr, who refusing to restore
Anthi^us an Heretical Bishop, deposed by his Predecessor Agapitus, was at the
instigation of the wicked Theodora Empress, banished into the Island of Pontia
by Bellisarius, where pined away, through miseries sustained for the Catholic
faith, departed this life. At Rome the deposition of S. Nouatus Son to
blessed Pudens the Senator, and Brother to S. Timothy Priest, and to the holy
Virgins ^udeutiana and Praxedes, who were all instructed in the Christian faith
by the Apostles; and their House being afterward converted into a Church, was
called by the title of Pastor. At Tomis in Pontus of the holy Marty^s Paulus
and Cyriacus. At Petra in Palestine of S. Macarius Bishop, who having suffered
many afflictions by the Arians, and banished into Africa, there rested in our
Lord. At Seuill in Spain of S. Florentia Virgin, sister to the Saints Leander,
and Isidore Bishops.

D The one and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Demetria Virgin, who was crowned with Martyrdom under Julian
the Apostata. At Sy^a^usa.
Siracosa in Sicily, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Rufinus and Martia. In
Africa of the holy Martyrs Cyriacus, and Apollinaris. At Mogu^^ia.
Mentz of S. Alban Martyr, who after many labors and conflicts sustained for
the faith of Christ, was made worthy the crown of life. The same day of S.
Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, who in the time of Constantius the Arian Emperor,
disguysed in a soldiers weed, visited the flock committed to his charge, and
confirmed them in the Catholic faith; but afterward under Valens, being
banished into Thracia, when the persecution ceased in the time of Theodosius,
he returned home to his Bishopric, and as he was one day visiting again his
Diocese, having his head broken with a tyle which an Arian woman let fall upon
him from a window, finally dyed a Martyr. At Now called Cogne.
Iconium in Licaonia of S. Terentius Bishop and Martyr. At Pauia of S.
Vrsisinus Bishop and Confessor. At Tungres of S. Martin Bishop. In the
Territory of Eb^m.
Eureux, of S. Lu^fridus Abbot.

E The two and twentieth Day.
AT Nola in Campania the birthday of S. Paulinus Bishop and Confessor, who of
a most Noble, and Rich man, became poor and humble for Christ, yea, and which
more is, sold himself, to redeem a widows son, whom the Wandals, having
wasted Campania, had led captive into Africa. He was famous, not only for
learning, and holiness of life, but also for his power over Devils; whose great
praises S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory have left written.
His body being translated to Rome, is kept with great honor in the Church of
S. Bartholomew in the Island of Tybur, together with the body of the same
Apostle. In the Mount Ararath, the passion of ten thousand holy Martyrs there
crucified. At Now called S. Alb^*
Verolame in England of S. Alban Martyr, who in the time of Diocletian,
delivering himself to the Persecutors, for the saving a of Priest whom he had
lodged in his house, after many torments was beheaded. There suffered with him
one of the soldiers, which lead him to the place of execution, who by the way
being converted unto Christ, deserved to be baptized in his own blood. In
Samaria of a thousand four hundred and fourscore holy Martyrs under Gosroes
King of Persia. The same day of S. Niceas Bishop of Romatiana, famous for
doctrine, and holy conversation of life. At Naples in Campania of S. John
Bishop, who was called to the Kingdom of heaven, by S. Paulinus Bishop of
Nola. In the monastery of Cluny, of S. Consortia Virgin.

F The three and twentieth Day.
THE Vigil of S. John Baptist. At Rome of S. John Priest, who under Julian the
Apostata was beheaded, in the way called Salaria, before the Idol of the
Sun, and buried by S. Concordius Priest, near to the bodies of other
Martyrs. At Rome also of S. Agrippina Virgin and Martyr, under Valerianus
Emperor, whose body being translated into Sicily, is there honored with many
miracles. At Sutrium.
Sutri in Tuscany of S. Felix Priest, whose mouth by commaundment of Turcius
Governor, was so long beaten with a stone, until he gave up the ghost. At
Nicomedia the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who in the time of Diocletian
the Emperor, lying hidden in mountains and caves, joyfully endured Martyrdom
for the name of Christ. At Ph^ladelphia in Arabia, of the holy Martyrs Ze^on,
and Zenas his servant, who kissing the chains of his Master in prison, and
beseeching him to accept of him for a pa^ten^r in his torments, apprehended by
the soldiers, received with his master the Crown of Martyrdom. In England
of S. Edi^trudes.
Audry Queen, and virgin, who renowned for sanctimony of life and miracles,
went to our Lord: whose body eleauen years after her death was found vncorrupt.

G The four and twentieth Day.
THE Nativity of S. John Baptist Precursour of our Lord, Son to Zacharias and
Elizabeth; who being yet in his mothers womb, was filled with the holy Ghost.
At Rome the commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who under Nero the Emperor
being falsely accused for burning the City, were by his commaundment put to
diverse kinds of death; of whom some put in beasts skins were cast to be
torn of dogs, others were crucified, and others burned to serve, as it were,
for lights in the night. All these were Disciples of the Apostles, and the
first fruits of Martyrs, which the Church of Rome, afterward very fertile in
that kind, sent unto our Lord before the death of the said Apostles. There also
of the holy Martyrs Faustus, and three and twenty others. At Satalis in Armenia
of seven Brothers Martyrs, Orentius, Heroes, Pharnacius, Firminus, Firmus,
Cyriacus, and Longinus soldiers, who for that they were Christians, being by
Maximianus Emperor, first deprived of their military Cincture, and then
separated from each other, were carried into diverse remote places, where in
great misery and affliction they ended the rest of their days. At Cristolium
in the Territory of Paris, the passion of the holy Martyrs Agoardus and
Aglibertus, with innumerable others both men and women. At Augustodunum.
Austum the deposition of S. Simplicius Bishop and Confessor. At Laubium.
Lob of S. Theodulphus Bishop. At Stylo in Calabria of S. John surnamed
Therestus, greatly renowned for sanctity of life.

A The five and twentieth Day.
AT Beroea the birthday of S. Sosipater disciple to S. Paul. At Rome of S.
Lucy Virgin and Martyr, with two and twenty others. At Alexandria of S.
Gallicanus Martyr, sometimes Consul of Rome, who having been honored with
glorious tryumphes, and dear to Constantine the Emperor, being converted to
the Christian faith by the Saints John and Paul, retired himself to Ostia at
the river mouth of Tybur, where together with S. Hilarinus, he gave himself
wholly to Hospitality, and serving of the sick. The fame whereof being spread
through the world, drew many thither from all parts, to see a man that had been
Senator, and Consul, washing the feet of the poor, covering their table,
pouring water on their hands, carefullly serving the sick, and exercysing
other works of piety: But being driven thence by Julian the Apostata, he went
to Alexandria, where by Raucianus Judge, being urged to sacrifice unto Idols,
and contemning his commaundment, by the loss of his head, was made a Martyr of
Christ. At Sibapolis in Syria of S. Febronia Virgin and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, under Lysimachus President, for defense of her faith
and thastity, being first whipped, and then racked upon the torture Equuleus,
torn with iron combs, and tormented by fire; having also her teeth stricken
out, and breasts cut off, at last being beheaded, and adorned with so many
jewels of Martyrdom, went joyfully to her Spouse. At Vesontio.
Bezanson in France of S. Antidius Bishop and Martyr, who was slain by the
Vandalls, for the faith of Christ. At Arhegium.
R^eux of S. Prosper of Aquitane, Bishop of the same City, renowned for
doctrine, and piety* who stoutly defended the Catholic faith against the
Pelagians. At Tautinum.
Turino the birthday of S. Maximus Bishop and Confessor, famous for learning
and holiness. In Holland of S. Adelbert Confessor, disciple to S. Willebrord
Bishop. In the Territory of Gule^^o near Nuscum.
Nosca, of S. William Confessor, founder of the Hermits of Mount-Virgin.

B The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome, in Monte Caelio, of the holy Martyrs John and Paul Brothers, of whom
the former being Steward, the other chief Secretary to Constantia Virgin,
daughter to Constamine the Emperor; were under Julian the Apostata, both
beheaded, and so obtained the triumphant palm of Martyrdom. At Trent of S.
Vigilius Bishop, who whilst he endeavored to root ou^ the relics of
Idolatry, stoned to death by the barbarous people, for the Name of Christ,
accomplished his Martyrdom. At Cordoua in Spain, the birthday of S. Pelagius
a youth, who by commaundment of Abdaramenus King of the Saracens, being pulled
in pieces with tongues of iron, accomplished a glorious Martyrdom. At
Valencenae.
Valencene the passion of the Saints Saluius Bishop of Angolesme, and Superius
Martyrs. Also the Festiuity of S. Anthelmus Bishop of Bellica.
Bellay. At Pictauium.
Poitiers of S. Maxentius Priest and Confessor, famous for miracles. At
Thessaelonica of S. David Hermit. The same day of S. Perseueranda Virgin.

C The seven and twentieth Day.
IN Galatia of S. Crescens disciple to S. Paul the Apostle, who making a iourny
into France, did by his preaching convert many there to the faith of Christ;
but afterward returning back and ordained Bishop of the Galathians, when he
had confirmed that people, in the service of our Lord even to the end of his
life, at last under Traian accomplished his Martyrdom. At Cordoua of the holy
Martyrs Zoilus and nyneteene others. At Caesarea in Palestine of S. Anectus
Martyr, who in the persecution of Diocletian under Vrbanus President, for
exhorting others to Martyrdom, having overthrown certain Idols by virtue of
his prayers, was commanded to be whipped by ten soldiers; and afterward
having his hands and feet cut off, at last be headed received the crown of
Martyrdom. At Constantinople of S. Sampson Priest, a great harbourer of the
poor. In the territory of Turones.
Tours of S. John Priest and Confessor. At Varadin in Hungary of S. Ladislaus
King, who is greatly renowned with miracles, even until this day.

D The eight and twentieth Day.
THE Vigil of the holy Apostles S. Peter and Paul. At Rome of S. Leo Pope, the
second of that name. At Lions in France of S. Irenaeus Bishop and Martyr, who,
as S. Hierome writes, being disciple to S. Polycarpe Bishop of Smirna, and
living near the time of the Apostles, after he had valiantly resisted the
Heretics, both by word and doctrine, was in the persecution of Seuerus,
together with most of the people of his City, crowned with a glorious
Martyrdom. At Alexandria, in the same persecution of Seuerus, of the holy
Martyrs Plut^rch, Serenus, Heraclides a Catechumen, Heron a new made Christian,
and of another Serenus; of Rhades also a Catechumen, of Potamiaena, and
Marcella her mother; amongst whom, the most famous was Potamiaena Virgin, who
having first endured many and grievous conflicts, for the defense of her
virginity, and afterward put unto most exquisite torments, and such as never
had been heard of, for the Christian faith, was lastly together with her
mother, consumed by fire. The same day of S. Papius Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian being sore whipped, and cast into a caldrone of
boiling oil, and tallow, after other most horrible torments endured, was at
last beheaded. At Traiectum.
Maestricht of S. Benignus Bishop and Martyr. At Cordoua of S. Argymirus Monk
and Martyr, who in the persecution of the Arabians, was slain for the faith of
Christ. At Rome of S. Paul Pope and Confessor.

E The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of the holy Apostles S. Peter and Paul, who in the same
year, and same day suffered Martyrdom under Nero the Emperor; of whom S.
Peter being crucified, with his head downward, in the same City, was buried
in the Vatican, near to the Tryumphall Street, where his body is honored of
the whole world: But S. Paul being beheaded, and buried in the high way of
Ostia, is there also visited with Iyke honor. In the Castle of Argentomachum
of S. Marcellus Martyr, who together with Anastasius a Soldier, was beheaded
for the faith of Christ. At Genua the birthday of S. Syru^ Bishop. At Narni of
S. Cassius Bishop of the same City, of whom S. Gregory reports, that scarce
any day of his life passed, in which he did not offer the holy sacrifice of the
Altar, to Allmighty God. And his life agreed well therewith; for giving all he
had to the poor, in the time of his Mass he used to be wholly dissolved into
tears. And at last upon this day, on which every year he was accustomed to
come to Rome, having said mass, and given the body of our Lord, and his
benediction to every one present, he went forth with unto our Lord. In Cyprus
of S. Mary Mother of S. John, surnamed Marcus. In the territory of Senones.
Sens of S. Benedicta Virgin.

F The thirtith Day.
THE Co^memoration of S. Paul the Apostle. At Lem^uices.
Limoges in France of S. Martial Bishop, with two Priests Alpinianus and
Austriclinianus, whose life was very renowned in power of miracles. The same
day of the Saints Caius Priest, and Leo Subdeacon. At Alexandria the passion of
S. Basilides under Seuerus Emperor, who for defending S. Potamiaena Virgin,
from the wantonness of unchaste persons, whilst he lead her to execution,
deserved to receive by her, the reward of that religious deed. For three days
after she appearing unto him, and putting a Crown upon his head, did not only
convert him to Christ, but after a short combat, by her prayers, made him a
glorious Martyr. At Rome of S. Lucina disciple of the Apostles, who with her
goods, relieuing the necessityes of the Saints, visiting the Christians that
were in prison, and burying of Marryrs, rested in our Lord, and lies buried in
a Cave near unto the said Martyrs, which her self had built. There also of S.
Aemiliana Martyr. In the territory of Viuiers of S. Ostianus Priest and
Confessor.

THE MONTH OF IVLY.
G The first Day.
THE Octaue of Saint John Baptist. In the montaine of Her, the deposition of S.
Aaron the first Priest of the Leuiticall Order. In England of the holy Martyrs
Julius and Aaron, who suffered a little after S. Alban in the persecution of
Diocletian. At which time very many also in that Island, suffering diverse and
most cruel torments, by acco^plishing their agonyes, arrived to the joys of
heaven. At Machelin, the passion of S. Rumoldus Martyr, son to the King of
Scotland, and Bishop of Dublin. At Rocca di Mon-Dragone.
Sinuessa, of the holy Martyrs Castus and Secundinus Bishops. At Vienna of S.
Martin Bishop, disciple of the Apostles. At Auuergne of S. Gallus Bishop. In
the territory of Lions the deposition of S. Domitianus Abbot, who there first
lead an Eremiticall life, but afterward gathering together many servants of
God in that place, renowned for virtues, miracles, and venerable old age, went
to rest in our Lord. In the territory of Rhemes of S. Theodoricus Priest,
Disciple to S. Benignus Bishop. At Angolesme of S. Eparchius Abbot. At Emesa of
S. Simeon Confessor surnamed Salus, who being made an Idiot for Christ, God
manifested his high wisdom, by many great miracles.

A The second Day.
THE Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, when she went to S. Elizabeth. At
Rome in the way called Aurelia, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Processus and
Martinianus, who baptized by S. Peter the Apostle in the prison called
Mamer^^n, after they had endured the bruizing of their mouths, the Rack, and
torture Equuleus, beating with cudgells, burning with fire, and other most
cruel torments, under Nero the Emperor at last beheaded, were crowned with
Martyrdom. At Rome the passion o^ three holy Soldiers, who being converted to
Christ by the Martyrdom of S. Pau^ the Apostle, were together with him made
partakers of heavenly glory. The same day of the holy Martyrs Aristo,
Crescentianus. E^^ychianus, Vrbanus, Vitalis, Iustus, Felicissimus, Felix,
Marcia, and Symphorosa, who in the raging persecution of Diocletian the
Emperor, were in Campania cowned with Martyrdom. At Winchester in England of
S. Swithin Bishop, renowned for holiness of life, and grace of miracles. At
Bamberge of S. Otho Bishop, who preaching the Gospel to the people of
Pomerania, converted them to the faith. At Turoues.
Tours the deposition of S. Monegundes, a devout religious woman.

B The third Day.
AT Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Tryphon, and twelve others. At
Constantinople of the holy Martyrs Eulogius, and his fellows. At C^sarea in
Cappad^cia of S. Hiacinthus Chamberlayne unto Traian the Emperor, who accused
for being a Christian, and sorely whipped, was cast into prison, and there
consumed with hunger and famine, gave up the Ghost. At Clusium.
Chiusi in Tuscany, of the holy Martyrs Irenaeus Deacon, and Mustiola a grave
Matrone, who under Aurelian Emperor, enduring sundry and cruel torments,
deserved the crown of Martyrdom. The same day of the holy Martyrs Marcus and
Mucianus, who for the confession of Christ were beheaded, together with a
little child, who with a loud voice having admonished them not ^o sacrifyce
unto Idols, was for that cause commanded to be whipped; but he more earnestly
then before confessing Christ; together with another called Paulus, who in
^yke manner had encouraged the said Martyrs, was put to death. At Laodicea in
Syria of S. Anatolius Bishop, whose wrytings were admyred not only of Religious
persons, but even of Philosophers. At Altinum.
Altino, of S. Heliodorus Bishop, famous for his learning and holiness. At
Rauenna of S. Dathus Bishop and Confessor. At Edessa in Mesopotamia the
translation of S. Thomas the Apostle out of India, whose relics were
afterward brought to Ortona in Apulia.

C The fourth Day.
OF Oseas, and Aggaeus Prophets. In Africa the birthday of S. Iucundianus
Martyr, drowned in the sea for confession of Christ. In the Territory of
Bitu^^cae.
Bourges of S. Laurianus Bishop of Seuill, and Martyr, whose sacred Head was
afterward carried to Seuill in Spain. At Sirmium of the holy Martyrs
Innocentius, and Sebastia, with thirty others. At Madura in Africa of S.
Namphanion Martyr, with diverse others, whom he encouraged to the obtaining to
Martyrdom. At Cyrene in Libya of S. Theodorus Bishop and Confessor, who in
the persecution of Diocletian under Dignianus President, having been sore
scourged with leaden whippes, and his tongue cut out, went at last to rest in
our Lord. The same day the festiuity of S. Flauianus the second Bishop of
Antioch, and of Elias Bishop of Jerusalem, who for defense of the holy
Council of Chalcedon, being sent into banishment by Anastasius Emperor, went
conquerers to our Lord. At Augusta Vindelico^^m.
Ausburge, of S. Vldaricus Bishop, renowned for Abstinence, Liberality,
Vigilance, and grace of working miracles. At Tours, the translation of S.
Martin Bishop and Confessor; and the dedication there of his Church: Upon
which day also some years before, he had been ordained Bishop.

D The fifth Day.
AT Rome of S. Zoa Martyr, wife to S. Nicostratus also a Martyr, who paying at
S. Peter's body, under Diocletian Emperor being apprehended by the persecutors,
and cast into a dark, and filthy prison; being afterward hanged on a tree by
her hair, and neck, and a most loathsome smoke raised under her, in the
confession of her faith, gave up the Ghost. In Syria the birthday of S.
Domitius Martyr, who for his virtues and miracles is greatly honored by the
inhabitants there about. At Cyrene in Libya of S. Cyrilla Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, held a great while hoat-burning coals with Incense
in her hands, least by letting the coals fall, she might seem to offer the
incense to Idols, and afterward most cruelly tormented, garnished with her own
blood, went to her Spouse. At Jerusalem of S. Athanasius Deacon, who for
defense of the holy Council of Chalcedon, having endured all kind of torments
by the Heretics, at last dyed by the sword. In Sicily of the holy Martyrs
Agatho, and Triphina. At Tomis in Scythia of the holy Martyrs. Marinus,
Theodotus, and Sedopha. At Treuers of S. Numerianus Bishop and Confessor. At
Septempeda.
San-Seuerino in Marc-Ancona of S. Philumena Virgin.

E The sixth Day.
THE Octaue of the holy Apostles S. Peter and Paul. In Iudaea of S. Isaias
Prophet, who under King Manasses being sawed in two, so dyed, and was buried
under the Oak Rogel, near to the passage of the Waters. At Rome the birthday
of S. Tranquillinus Martyr, Father of the Saints Marcus and Maroellianus, who
by the preaching of S. Sebastian Martyr, being converted to the Christian
faith, and baptized by S. Polycarpe Priest, was afterward ordained Priest by S.
Caius Pope; and as he was praying at the Tomb of S. Paul, upon the Octaue day
of the said Apostle, under Diocletian Emperor, being apprehended, and stoned
to death by the Pagans, accomplished his Martyrdom. At (...).
Fiesoli in ^soany of S. Romulus Bishop and Martyr, disciple to S. Peter the
Apostle, who by his commandment having preached the Ghospel, of Christ in many
parts of Italy, returning to Fiesoli, was under Domitian Emperor, with diverse
others crowned with Martyrdom. In Campania of S. Dominica virgin and Martyr,
who under Diocletian Emperor, for breaking in pieces certain Idols, being
cast unto the beasts, but not hurt by them, at last beheaded went unto our
Lord: whose body is kept at Tropea in Calabria, with great honor and
veneration. The same day of S. Lucy Martyr, borne in Campania, who being
apprehended by Rixius Lieutenant, and sorely tormented, at last converted him
to Christ: To whom were joined Antoninus, Seuerinus, Diodorus, Dion, and
seauenteen others, who were all made partakers of one and the same Crown of
Martyrdom. In the Territory of Treuers, of S. Goar Priest and Confessor.

F The seventh Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Claudius Notary, Nicostratus Master of Requests,
Castorius, Victorinus and Symphorianus, who being converted to the faith of
Christ by S. Sebastian, and baptized by S. P^li^^rp Priest, were for seeking
out and burying the bodies of holy Martyrs, by Fabianus Judge commanded to be
apprehended, and after ten days trial, both by flattery and threats, when as
he could by no means move them to forsake their faith, after they had been
thryce tortured, were finally thrown headlong into the sea. At Dyr^achiu^.
Durazzo in Macedonia of the holy Martyrs Peregrinus, Lucianus, Pompeius
Hesichius, Papius, Saturninus and Germanus, all Italians by birth, who flying
the persecution of Traian, came to that City, where seeing S. Astius Bishop to
hang upon a Cross for the faith of Christ, openly professed themselves to be
Christians, for which cause they were apprehended by commaundment of the
President and drowned in the sea. At Alexandria the birthday of S. Pantaenus,
an Apostolical man, and adorned with all kind of wisdom; who being inflamed
with the fervor of his faith, and devotion to the word of God, went and
preached the ghospel to those Nations, which lay unknown, in the furthermost
parts of the East, and at last returning to Alexandria, under Antoninus
Caracalla rested in peace. At Brescia of S. Apollonius Bishop and Confessor. In
Saxony of S. Willebald the first Bishop of Eystet, who laboring in preaching
the Gospel with S. Boniface, converted many to the faith of Christ. At
Auuergne of S. Illidius Bishop. At Vrgella in Spain of S. Odo Bishop. In
England of S. Hedda Bishop of the West Saxons. There also of S. Edilburge
Virgin, daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles.

G The eight Day.
IN the lesser Asia, of the Saints Aquila, and Priscilla his wife, of whom
mention is make in the acts of the Apostles. At Portus Romanus.
Porto of fifty holy soldiers, who being converted to the faith of Christ by
the Martyrdom of S. Bonosa, and baptized by S. Felix Pope, were slain in the
persecution of Aurelian. In Palestine of S. Procopius Martyr, who under
Diocletian Emperor, being brought from Scythopolis to Caesarea, was for his
first resolute answer, by Fabianus the Judge, beheaded. At Constantinople the
passion of many holy Monks, called Abrahamits, who for opposing themselves
against Theophilus Emperor, in defense of worshipping holy Images, were
crowned with Martyrdom. At Herbipolis.
Wirtzburge in Germany of S. Kilianus Bishop, who being sent thither by the
Bishop of Rome to preach the ghospel, and having brought many to the faith of
Christ, was there, together with his two companions Colomannus Priest, and
Totnanus Deacon, killed. At Treuers of S. Auspicius Bishop and Confessor.

A The nynth Day.
AT Rome, at the continually-flowing Waters, the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Zeno, and ten thousand, two hundred, and three others. At Gortina in Cr^ta.
Candi^ of S. Cyrill Bishop, who in the persecution of Decius, under Lucius
President, being cast into the fire, and the bands wherewith he was bound
burned, but himself nothing hurt, so moved the Judge by that strange miracle,
that he then dismissed him. But being again apprehended for preaching the
faith of Christ, was nevertheless by the same Judge commanded to be beheaded.
At Thora by the Lake Velino in Vmbria, the passion S. Anatolia Virgin, and
Audax; of whom, Anatolia, after she had cured many, in the Province of
Marc-Ancona, that were sick of diverse infirmities, and brought them to the
faith of Christ, by commaundment of Faustinianus Judge being put to diverse
torments, and delivered from a Serpent that was set upon her, at last
stretching out her hands in prayer, was thrust through with a sword. But Audax,
that was converted by seeing her delivered from the forsaid serpent, being
thereupon taken and committed to prison, was forthwith crowned a Martyr. At
Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Patermutbius, Copretes, and Alexander, who were
slain under Julian the Apostata. At Martula of S. Brictius Bishop, and
Confessor, who having suffered many afflictions for the Confession of his
faith under Marcianus Judge, and afterward converted a great multitude of
people to Christ, rested in peace.

B The tenth Day.
AT Rome the passion of seven holy Brothers, sonns to S. Felicitas Martyr, to
wit, Ianuarius, Felix, Philip, Syluanus, Alexander, Vitalis and Martialis, in
the time of Antoninus Emperor, under Publius Governor of the City; of whom
Ianuarius, after he had been scourged with rods, and pined in prison, was
killed with leaden whippes: Felix and Philip were beaten to death with
cudgells; Syluanus was thrown down headlong from a steepy place; Alexander,
Vitalis and Martialis were beheaded. Also at Rome of the holy virgins and
Martyrs Ruffina and Secunda systers, who in the persecution of Valerian, and
Gallienus, after many torments endured, at last the one having her brains
stricken out, the other beheaded, departed to heaven: whose bodies are kept with
due honor and reverence in the Church of S. John La^eran, near to the Font.
In Africa of the holy Martyrs Ianuarius, Marinus, Nabor, and Felix, who were
all beheaded. At Nicopolis in Armenia of the holy Martyrs Leontius, Mauritius,
Daniel, and their fellows, who under Licinius Emperor, and Lisiaes President,
having endured diverse torments, finally cast into the fire, accomplished their
Martyrdom. In Pisidia of the holy Martyrs Bianor, and Siluanus, who having
endured most cruel torments for the name of Christ, were lastly beheaded. At
Iconium of S. Appollonius Martyr, who by the death of the Cross, obtained a
renowned Martyrdom. At Gaunt of S. Amelberga Virgin.

C The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Pius Pope, who in the persecution of Antoninus, was crowned with
Martyrdom. At Nicopolis in Armenia, the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Ianuarius and Pelagia, who being four days together racked, and tormented
with claws of iron, and sharp potshards, accomplished their Martyrdom. In
the territory of Se^ones.
Sens, of S. Sidronius Martyr. At Iconium of S. Marcianus Martyr, who under
Perennius President, by many torments obtained a triumphant palm of
Martyrdom. At Sida in Pamphylia of S. Cindeus Priest, who under Diocletian
Emperor, and Stratonicus President, after many torments, being cast into the
fire, and nothing hurt, at last gave up his soul to God in prayer. At Brescia
of the holy Martyrs Sauinus and Cyprianus. At Bergomum.
Bergamo of S. John Bishop, who was killed by the Arians, for defense of the
Catholic faith. At Cordoua of S. Abundius Priest, who for inueyghing against
the Sect of Mahomet, was crowned with Martyrdom. In the territory of Pictauium.
Poitiers, of S. Sabinus Confessor.

D The twelfth Day.
AT Millan of the holy Martyrs Nabor and Felix, who suffered in the persecution
of Maximianus. In the monastery of Passiniano near Florence, of S. John
Gualbert Abbot, founder of the Order of (...) In Cyprus of S. Jason, an ancient
Disciple of Christ. At Aquileia the birthday of S. Hermagoras disciple to S.
Mark the Evangelist, and the first Bishop of that City, who for his
miraculous cures, and by diligent preaching, converted many people to the faith
of Christ; and having endured diverse kind of torments, at last together with
his Deacon Fortunatus, by the loss of his life, deserved a perpetual crown.
At Luca in Tuseany o^ S. Paulinus, who being ordained the first Bishop of that
City by S. Peter, after many agonyes, under Nero the Emperor, at the foot of
the hill Pisa, accomplished his Martyrdom, with others of his fellows. The
same day of S. ^roc^us and Hilarion, who under Traian the Emperor and Maximus
President, by most bitter torments attained the tryumphant palm of Martyrdom.
At Leontinum.
Lentini of S. ^pip^ania, who under Diocletian the Emperor, and Tertyllus
President, having her breasts cut off, gave up her soul to God. At Toletum.
Toledo of S. Marciana Virgin and Martyr, who for the faith of Christ being
cast unto the beasts, and torn in pieces by a Bull, was crowned with
Martyrdom. At Lions of S. Viuentiolus Bishop. At Bolonia of S. Patemianus
Bishop.

E The thirteenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Anacletus Pope and Martyr, who after S. Clement governed the
Church of God, and adorned the same by a glorious Martyrdom. The same day of
the Saints Joel and Esdras Prophets. In Macedonia of S. Silas, one of the first
Christians, who being sent by the Apostles with S. Paul and Barnaby to the
Churches of the Gentiles, full of the holy Ghost, diligently performing his
office of preaching, and enduring many afflictions for the glory of Christ,
rested at last in peace. Also of S. Serapion Martyr, who under Seuerus Emperor
and Aquila President, by fire obtained the crown of Martyrdom. In the Island
of Chio of S. Mirop^^ Martyr, who under Decius Emperor, and Numerianus
President being bruised with bars, went unto our Lord. In Africa of the holy
Confessor Eugenius Bishop of Carthag^, renowned for his faith, and other
virtues, who together with above five hundred of the Clergy of that Church, in
the persecution of the Wandalls under Hunnericus the Arrian King, being by
slaughter and famine greatly consumed (amongst which many were Lectors, and
children of the Quyer) rejoicing in our Lord, were sent into a far, and
cruel banishment. Amongst whom, the most noble were Salutaris Archdeacon, and
Murittas, the second in office of the Church, who were now the third time
honored with the title of glorious Confessors, and perseverance in Christ. In
little Brittany of S. Turianus Bishop, and Confessor, a man of great
simplicity, and innocence of life.

F The fourtenth Day.
AT Lions the deposition of S. Bonauenture Cardinal, Bishop of Alba, and
Doctor of the Church, of the Order of S. Francis, much renowned for doctrine
and holiness of life. At Rome of S. Iustus a Soldier, under Claudius the
Tribune, who by the miraculous appearing of a Cross being converted to the
Christian faith, and forth with baptized, bestowed all his goods upon the
poor; and afterward apprehended by Magnetius Governor, and beaten with
sinews, tormented also with a hoatburing helmet put upon his head, and cast
into the fire (but not the least hair of his head touched with the flame) in
the confession of his faith gave up the Ghost. At Synope in Pontus of S. Phocas
Martyr, and Bishop of the same City, who under Traian the Emperor, having
overcome both imprisonment, fetters, iron, and fire, in the confession of
Christ ascended to heaven. Whose holy Relics were translated to Vienne in
France, and there placed in the Church of the Apostles. At Alexandria of S.
Heraclas Bishop, whose fame was so renowned, that Africanus the Historian
writes of himself, how he went of purpose to Alexandria, to see him. At
Carthage of S. Cyrus Bishop, upon whose feast S. Augustine made a Sermon to the
people. At Nouocomum.
Como of S. Felix the first Bishop of that City. At Brescia of S. Optatianus
Bishop. At Dauentry in Gelderland of S. Marcellinus Priest and Confessor. At
Bamberge of S. Henry Emperor, the first of that name, who with his wife
Chunegundes kept perpetual Virginity, and persuaded Stephen King of Hungary,
with almost all his Realm, to receive the faith of Christ.

G The fifteenth Day.
AT Portus Romanus.
Porto the birthday of the holy Martyrs Eutropius, Zosima and Bonosa systers.
At Carthage of S. Catulinus Deacon. (in whose praise S. Augustine made a Sermon
to the people) and of the Saints Ianuarius, Florentius, Iulia, and Iusta
Martyrs, who were buried in the Church of S. Faustus. At Alexandria of the holy
Martyrs Phillip, Zeno, Narsaeus, and ten Children. In the I Will of Tenedos of S.
Abudemius Martyr, who suffered under Diocletian. At Sebasta of S. Antiochus a
Physician, who was beheaded under Hadrian President; and when instee^ of blood
there issued milk from his neck, Cyriacus the executioner being converted by
that miracle, became also a Martyr. A^ Pauia of S. Felix Bishop and Martyr. At
Nisibis of S. James Bishop of that City, who being famous for holiness of life,
learning, and miracles, was one of those Confessors* in the persecution of
Maximinus, who in the Nicene Council, condemned the perverse opinion of Arius,
by opposing against it, the word Homousion; and by whose prayers, and by the
prayers of Alexander Bishop, Arius himself, by voyding out his bowels at
Constantinople, received the worthy reward o^ his iniquity. At Naples in
Campania of S. Athanasius Bishop of that City, who having endured many
afflictions, by his wicked Nephew Sergius, and banished thence to Verulo,
consumed with misery, rested in our Lord, in the days of Carolus Caluus.

A The sixtenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Faustus Martyr, who under Decius Emperor, being crucified
on a Cross, lived five days hanging thereon, and at last shot with arrows,
went unto our Lord. At Sebasta in Armenia of the holy Martyrs Athenogenes
Bishop, and ten of his Disciples, under Diocletian the Emperor. At Antioch in
Syria the birthday of S. Eustathius Bishop and Confessor, renowned for
doctrine and holiness, who under Constantius the Arian Emperor, for defense of
the Catholic faith, banished into Thracia, there rested in our Lord. The same
day of S. Hilarinus Monk, who together with S. Donatus, being apprehended in
the persecution of Julian, and refusing to sacrifyce unto Idols, sore beaten
with cudgels, was finally at Aretium.
Arezzo in Tuscany, made a Martyr: whose body was afterward translated to
Ostia. At Treuers of S. Valentine Bishop and Martyr. At Cordoua in Spain of S.
Sisenandus Deacon and Martyr, who for the faith of Christ was strangled by the
Saracens. At Santone.
Saints in France of the holy Martyrs Raineldes Virgin, and her fellows, who
were slain for the faith of Christ, by the barbarous people. At Bergamo of S.
Domnion Martyr. At Capua of S. Vitalian Bishop and Confessor.

B The seauententh Day.
AT Rome of S. Alexius Confessor, son to Euphemianus a Senator, who the
first night of his Marriage, leaving his Spouse untouched, forsook his house,
and after a long peregrination, returning to the City, was harbored for
seauenteen years together, as a poor beggar, in a corner of his fathers
house unknown; deluding so the world by a new devise: But after his death, by
a voice heard in the Churches of the City, and also by a writing of his own
being known, was in the time of Innocentius Pope, with great honor enterred
in the Church of S. Bonifacius, and there renowned for miracles. At Carthage
the birthday of the holy Martyrs Speratus, Nartalus, Cythinus, Beturius,
Felix, Aquilinus, Letatius, Ianuaria, Generosa, Bessia, Donata, and Secunda,
who by commaundment of Saturninus Governor, for the confession of their faith
being cast into prison, and bound unto stakes, were afterward beheaded. The
relics of S. Speratus, together with the bones of S. Cyprian, and the head
of S. Pantaleon were afterward translated out of Africa into France, and
placed in the Church of S. John Baptist at Lions. At Amastris in Paphlago^a of
S. Hiacynthus Martyr, who having endured many afflictions under Castr^^iu^
President, dyed in prison. At Tibur.
Tiuoli of S. Generosus Martyr. At Constan^^nople of S. Theodo^a Martyr, under
Leo the Imagebreaker.
Iconod^st. At Rome the deposition of S. Leo Pope; the fourth of that name. At
Pauia of S. Ennodius Bishop and Confessor. At Antisio dorum.
Au^erre o^ S. Theodosius Bishop. At Millan of S. Marcellina Virgin, sister to
S. Ambrose, who at Rome in the Church of S. Peter received the holy veyle, at
the hands of Pope Liberius: Whose sanctimony of life the same S. Ambrose in his
writings ha^h witnessed. At Venice, the translation of S. Mar^a Virgin.

C The eightenth Day.
AT Tibur.
Tiuoli of S. Symphorosa wife to S. Getul^u^ Martyr, with her seven sons
Crescens, Julian, Nemesius, Primitiuus, Iustine, Stacteus and Eugenius; whose
mother under Hadrian Emperor, for her invincible constancy in faith, being
sore beaten above the face, and then hanged up by the hair, at last having a
stone tied to her neck, was thrown into the River: But her Sons being
stretched with pulleys upon stakes, by diverse kinds of death, accomplished
their Martyrdom. Their bodies being afterward translated to Rome, were in the
days of Pope Pius the fourth, found in an Oratory of the Church of S. Angelus.
At Carthage of S. Gundenes virgin, who by commaundment of Ruffinus Proconsul,
being four several times racked, and torn with claws of iron, pyned also in
prison, was at last beheaded. At Dorostorum in Mysia of S. Aemilianus Martyr,
who in the time of Julian the Apostata, under Capitolinus President, being cast
into a burning furnace, received the triumphant palm of Martyrdom. At
Traiectum.
Maestricht of S. Frederick Bishop and Martyr. In Galicia of Spain, of S.
Marina virgin and Martyr. At Millan of S. Maternus Bishop, who under Maximian
Emperor for defense of the Church committed to his charge, being cast into
prison, and often whipped, renowned for the many confessions of his faith, went
to rest in our Lord. At Brescia the birthday of S. Philastrius Bishop of the
same City, who by word and writing greatly opposing the Heretics, especially
the Aria^s by whom he was much persecuted, at last famous for miracles dyed a
Confessor. At Metae.
Metz in France of S. Arnulphus Bishop, renowned for holiness and miracles; who
embracing an Eremiticall life, made a blessed end. At Signi^.
Segni of S. Bruno Bishop and Confessor.

D The nynetenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Epaphras, whom S. Paul the Apostle calls his
fellow-prisoner; who by the same Apostle being ordained Bishop of the
Colossians, renowned for virtue, and for stoutly defending the flock committed
to his charge, received the tryumphant palm of Martyrdom. Whose body lies at
Rome, in the Church of (...). Mary Mayor. At Seuill in Spain the passion of
the holy virgins Iusta and Ruffina, who being apprehended by Diogenianus, and
stretched upon the rack, torn with Iron claws, afflicted with long
imprysonment, hunger, and diverse other miseries, at length Iusta died in
prison; but Ruffina in the confessing of her faith was beheaded. At Cordoua of
S. Aurea virgin, who having fallen from her faith, but penitent for the same,
by a new combat overcome her enemies, with the price of her blood. At Treuers
of S. Martin Bishop and Martyr. At Rome of S. Simmachus Pope, who wearied a
long time with the faction of Scismatikes, at last renowned for sanctity went
unto our Lord. At Verona of S. Felix Bishop. At Mount Scetis in Egypt, of S.
Arsenius Deacon of the Roman Church, who in the time of Theodosius retiring
himself into a wilderness, renowned for all kind of virtues, and grace of
tears, gave up his soul to God. In Cappadocia of S. Macrina virgin, sister to
S. Basil the Great, and S. Gregory Nissen.

E The twentieth Day.
AT Antioch the passion of S. Margare^ Virgin and Martyr. In the Mount Carmelus
of S. Elias Prophet. The same day the Festiuity of S. Joseph surnamed the Just,
whom the Apostles appointed to stand in Election with Matthias, to supply the
place of Judas the Traitor: and when the ^ot fell upon Matthias, he
notwithstanding, by preaching and teaching, persisting in the service of our
Lord, having also suffered great persecution of the Jews for the faith of
Christ, in Jury went at last to rest: of whom it is recorded, that having
drunk poison, through his faith in our Lord, received no hurt. At Damasco of
the holy Martyrs Sabinus, Iulianus, Maximus, Macrobiu^, Cassia, and Paula, with
ten others. At Cordoua of S. Paul Deacon and Martyr, who for reprehending
Infidel Princes, for their Mahometicall impiety, and cruelty to Christians,
and for preaching of Christ very constantly, was slain by their commaundment,
and so ascended to heaven for his reward. In Portugal of S. Wilgefort Virgin
and Martyr, who for the defense of her Faith and Virginity, deserved a most
glorious triumph, by the death of the Cross. In the Territory of Bullen in
France, of S. Wulmarus Abbot, a man of wonderful holiness. At Treuers of S.
Seuera Virgin.

F The one and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Praxedes virgin, who being brought up in all Chastity, and
Sanctimony of life, giving herself wholly to prayer, watching, and fasting,
went to rest in our Lord, and was buried near unto her sister Pude^tiana, in
the way called Salaria. At Babylon of S. Daniel Prophet. At Massilia.
Marseille the birthday of S. Victor, who being a soldier, and refusing
either to follow the wars, or to sacrifice unto Idols, first cast into
prison, and there comforted by an Angel, after diverse torments, at last ground
to pieces in a Mill, accomplished his Martyrdom. There suffered with him three
other soldiers Alexander, Felicianus, and Longinus. At Trecae.
Troys of S. Iulia virgin and Martyr. There also the passion of the Saints
Glaudius, Iustus, Iucundinus, and five more of their fellows, under Aurelianus
Emperor. At Comana in Armenia of S. Zoticus Bishop and Martyr^, who fuffered
under Seuerus. At Argentoratum.
Strasburge of S. Arbogastus Bishop, renowned for miracles. In Syria of S. John
Monk, Companion of S. Simeon.

G The two and twentieth Day.
AT Massilia.
Marseille the birthday of S. Mary Magdalen, out of whom our Lord cast seven
Devils, and who deserved first to see our Savior, after he was risen from
death. At Philippi of S. Syntiches, of whom S. Paul the Apostle makes
mention. At Ancyra in Galatia the birthday of S. Plato Martyr, who under
Agrippinus Lieutenant being whipped, torn with iron claws, and vexed with
other most barbarous torments, at last beheaded, rendered up his Soul to God:
whose miracles in helping of Captyues, the Acts of the second Counsel of Nice
do testify. In Cyprus of S. Theophilus Praetor, who apprehended by the Arabians,
when neither by gyfts nor threats, he could be induced to deny Christ, was
beheaded. At Antioch of S. Cyril Bishop, renowned for doctrine and holiness. In
the Territory of Aruernum.
Auuergne of S. Meneleus Abbot. In the Monastery called Blandine, of S.
Wandregesilius Abbot, renowned for miracles. At Scythopolis in Palestine of S.
Joseph Earl.

A The three and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Apollinaris, who being ordained Bishop by S. Peter the
Apostle, and sent to Rauenna, suffered there manifold afflictions for the faith
of Christ: Afterward going into Aemilia, and there preaching the Gospel, and
reducing many from the worship of Idols, at length returning to Rauenna, under
Vespasian Emperor, accomplished a glorious Martyrdom. At Rome of S. Rasyphus
Martyr. There also the passion of S. Primitiua virgin and Martyr. Also of the
holy Martyrs Apollonius and Eugenius. The same day the sestiuity of the holy
Martyrs Trophimus, and Theophilus, who under Diocletian the Emperor being
first stoned, then scorched with fire, at last beheaded, were crowned with
Martyrdom. In Bulgaria of very many holy Martyrs, whom Nicepho^us the impious
Emperor (spoiling the Churches of God) by diverse kinds of death, commanded to
be killed At Cenomani.
Man's in France of S. Liborius Bishop and Confessor. At Rome of the holy,
virgins Romula, Redempta, and Herundines, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes
mention. The same day, the departure out of this life of S. Brigit widow, who
after many peregrinations made to holy places, full of the holy Ghost, finally
reposed at Rome: whose body was after translated into Sueuia. Her principal
festiuity is celebrated upon the seventh of October.

B The four and twentieth Day.
THE Vigil of S. James the Apostle. At Tyro in Tuscany by the lake of Vulsino,
of S. Christina Virgin and Martyr, who believing in Christ, and breaking in
pieces the golden and silver Idols of her father, and giving them to the
poor, was by his commaundment first cruelly whipped, and otherwise most
grievously tormented; then being tied to a weighty stone, and cast into a Lake,
but delivered by an Angel, was after all this, under another Judge, successor
to her Father, again most cruelly tormented; and lastly by Iulianus President
after she had been shut up five days in a burning fornance, without any hurt,
and by the power of Christ overcome Serpents, having also herto^gue cut out,
and shot full of arrows, ended the course of her Martyrdom. At Rome in the
way called Tiburtina of S. Vincent Martyr. At Amiterno in In Vestinis.
Abbruzzo, the passion of four score, and three holy soldiers, Martyrs. At
Em^rit^.
Merida in Spain of S. Victor Soldier, who with his two brothers S^ercatius
and Antinogenes in the persecution of Diocl^tian by diverse kind of torments
accomplished his Martyrdom. In Lycia of the holy Martyrs Niceta and Aquilina,
who being converted to Christ by the preaching of S. Christopher Martyr,
obtained palms of Martyrdom, by loss of their heads. Also of the holy
Martyrs Meneus and Capito. At Sen^nae.
Sens of S. Vrsicinus Bishop and Confessor.

C The five and twentieth Day.
OF S. James the Apostle, brother to S. John the Evangelist, who about the
feast of Easter, was beheaded by Herod Agrippa. His holy Relics, were
translated from Jerusalem to Galicia in Spain, and there are had in great
Veneration of that Nation, and much frequented by the great concourse of people
from all parts, who for devotion and Religion, go thither on pilgrimage. In
Lycia of S. Christopher Martyr, who under Decius being sorely bruised with
rods of iron, and cast in the burning fire, but preserved by the power of
Christ, at last shot full of arrows and beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom.
At Barcino
Barcelona in Spain the birthday of S. Cucuphates Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian under Dacianus President, having overcome many
torments, by the loss of his head went triumphantly to heaven. In Palestine of
S. Paul Martyr, who in the persecution of Maximinus, by Firmilianus President,
being condemned to death, and obteyning a short space to pray, first made
intercession, with all his heart, for his own Countrymen; then for the Jews
and Gentiles, that they might come to the knowledge of the Truth; after for the
whole multitude there present; lastly for the Judge that condemned him, and the
Hangman that was to execute the sentence; and so beheaded, received the crown
of Martyrdom. There also of S. Valentina Virgin, who carried to an Altar to
sacrifice unto the Idols, and overthrowing it with her feet, being sorely
tormented, together with another Virgin her companion, and after cast into the
fire, went joyfully unto her spouse. At Furconium in Vestinis,
Forcono in Abbruzzo of the holy Martyrs Florentius and Felix Citizens of
Siponto. At Cordoua of S. Theodemirus Monk and Martyr. At Treuers of S.
Magnericus Bishop and Confessor.

D The six and twentieth Day.
THE departure out of the life of S. Anne mother of the B. Virgin Mary. At
Philippi in Macedonia the birthday of S. Erastus, who being left Bishop there
by S. Paul the Apostle, was crowned with Martyrdom. At Rome, in the way
Latina, of the holy Martyrs Simphronius, Olympius, Theodulus, and Exuperia;
who, as it is recorded in the acts of S. Stephen Pope, obtained the palm of
Martyrdom by fire. At P^rtu^ Romanus.
Porto of S. Hiacynthus Martyr, who being first cast into the fire, and then
thrown headlong into a river, but escaping without any hurt, was afterward by
Leontius Consul, under Traian the Emperor beheaded; whose body Iulia a noble
Matrone buried in her ma^nour, near to the City. Also at Rome of S. Pastor
Priest, under whose Name there is yet extant a Title, in the Church of S.
Pudentiana, upon the Hill Viminalis. At Verona of S. Valens Bishop and
Confessor. In the monastery of S. Benet near Mantua of S. Simeon Monk and
Hermit, who renowned for many miracles, in a good old age, re^ted in our Lord.

E The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Nicomedia the passion of S. Pantaleon Physician, who being apprehended by
Maximianus Emperor for the faith of Christ, and racked upon the torture
Equuleus, and tormented with burning lamps, in the middst whereof he was
comforted by our Lord appearing unto him, at last by loss of his head,
accomplished his Martyrdom. There also of S. Hermolaus Priest, by whose
doctrine S. Pantaleon was converted. Also of the Saints Hermippus and
Hermocrates Brothers, who after many torments, were by the same Maximianus
beheaded, for the confession of Christ. At Nola of the holy Martyrs Felix,
Iulia and Iucunda. At Vig^
Bisegli ^n Apulia of the holy Martyrs Maurus Bishop. ^antalemon and Sergius,
who suffered under ^raian. In the Country of the Homeritae, the Commemoration
of many holy Martyrs, who were burned under Dunaan the Ty^ant, for the faith of
Christ. At Cordoua in Spain of the holy Martyrs George Deacon, Felix,
Aurelius, Natalia, and Liliosa, in the ^ersecution of the Arabians. At Ephesus
the birthday of the holy Seven Sleepers, Maximianus, Malchus, Martinianus,
Dionysius, John, Serapion, and Constantine. At An^isiodorum
Auxerre the deposition of S. Aetherius Bishop and Confessor. At Constantinople
of S. Anthusa Virgin, who under Constantinus Copronymus, for worshipping of
holy Images being whipped, and sent into banishment, rested in our Lord.

F The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Rome the passion of S. Victor Pope and Martyr. There also of S. Innocentius
Pope and Confessor. At Millan the birthday of the holy Martyrs Nazarius, and
Celsus a boy, who in the fury of persecution under Nero, after long pyning, and
affliction in prison, were by Anolinus beheaded. At Thebais in Egypt, the
Commemotation of many holy Martyrs, who suffered in the persecution of Decius
and Valerianus. At what time, the Christians desiring to dye for the name of
Christ, the crafty enemy of mankind, devised certain slow punishments to put
them to death, whereby he meant rather to kill their souls, then their bodies.
Of which number one, after that he had overcome the torture Equuleus, hoa^^
fiery plates, and other torments, being anointed over with honey, and his hands
bound behind him, was placed in the hot scorching sun, to be stunge of
waspes, and flies. Another being laid among soft flowers, and by an impudent
Harlot provoked to lust, biting off his tongue, did spit it in her face. At
Ancyra in Galatia of S. Eustachius Martyr, who after diverse kind of torments,
being thrown into a river, but delivered by an Angel, was at last by a Dove
descending from heaven, invited to life everlasting. At Milet^^.
Melasso of S. Acatius Martyr who under Licinius Emperor, after diverse
torments being thrown into a burning furnace, but by the help of God preserved
from hurt, accomplished his Martyrdom by loss of his head. In little Brittany
of S. Sampson Bishop and Confessor. At Lions of S. Peregrinus Priest, whose
holiness of life is testified by the glory of miracles.

G The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Tar^scum.
Tarascon in Prouence of France, of S. Martha virgin, Harbourer of our Savior,
and sister to Blessed Mary Magdalen and S. Lazarus. At Rome in the way called
Aurelia of S. Felix the second, Pope and Martyr, who for defending the
Catholic faith, being cast out of his Sea by Constantius the Arian Emperor,
and slain privately at Cera in Tuscany, made a glorious end. His body being
taken thence by the Clergy and buried in the same way, was after translated to
the Church of S. Cosmas and Damianus. And in the time of Pope Gregory the
thirtenth the same was found there under the Altar, together with the relics
of the holy Martyrs Marcus, Marcellianus, and Tranquillinus, and with them,
decently laid again in the same place, the one and thirtith day of July. Under
which Altar, were also found the bodies of the holy Martyrs Abundius Priest,
and Abundantius Deacon, which not long after, were solemnly translated to the
Church of the Society of Jesus, upon the Eve of their Feast. Also at Rome in
the way Portuensis, (...) the holy Martyrs Simplicius Faustinus, and Beatresse,
under Diocletian Emperor, of whom the two former after many torme^^s were
beheaded. But Beatress^ their sister, for the confession of Christ, was
strangled in prison. More^uer at Rome of the holy Martyrs Lucilla and Flora
Virgins, Eugenius, Antoninus, Theodorus, and eighteen others, who suffered a
^amous Martyrdom, under Gallienus Emperor. At Gangra in Paphlagonia of S.
Gallinicus Martyr, who being cruelly whipped with ^oddes of iron, and diverse
other ways tormented, at last cast into a burning furnace, gave up his soul
to God. In Norway of S. Olau^ King and Martyr. At Trecae.
Troys in France of S. Lupus Bishop and Confessor, who went into England with
S. German, to expel the Pelagian Heresy thence; and by his continual prayers
defended the City of Troys from the fury of Attilas, that spoiled all France,
and finally having most venerably executed the function of Priesthood for fifty
two years, rested in our Lord. At Briocu^.
S. Brieu in little Brittany of S. Willyam Bishop and Confessor. Also the
deposition of S. Prosper Bishop of Orleans. At Tud^^^um.
Todi of S. Faustinus Confessor. At Mamia of S. Seraphina.

A The thirtith Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Abdon and Sennen Persians, who under Decius.
Emperor, being brought to Rome bound in chains, were for the faith of Christ,
first whipped with leaden whippes, and afterward beheaded. At Tuburbum in
Africa, of the holy virgins and Martyrs, Maxima, Do^atilla and Secunda, of
whom, the two first ^n the persecution of Valerianus being con^trayned to
drink^ ^inega^ and gall* then truelly beaten, and ^ed upon the torture
Equuleus, broyled also upon a gridiron, and ^ubbed with hoate lime, were
afterward, together with Se^unda a Girl of twelve ^eares old, cast unto the
beasts, who refu^ing to touch the^, they were finally behea^ed. At A^
Assisi in Vmbria of S. Ruffinus Mar^yr. At Caesarea in Cappadocia of S.
Iulitta Martyr, who clayming in Justice, the re^titution of her goods, which
were vniu^^ly detayned from her by a certain noble man, and he taking
exceptions against her ^or that she was a Christian, and therefore ^ot to be
heard; was commanded by the Judge to offer incense to the ^dolls that so her
cause might be heard, which she constantly refusing to do, being cast into the
fire, gave up her soul to God; but her body was nothing at all hurt thereby.
Her renowned praises are celebrated by S. ^sil the Great, with most high
commen^ation. A^ Antisiodorum
Auxerre of S. Vrsu^ Bishop and Confessor.

B The one and thirtith Day.
AT ^aesarea in Palestine the passion of S. Fabiu^ Martyr, who refusing to
carry the Ensign of his ^arrison, was for some few days cast into (...), and
after once of twyce examined, and still persisting in the confessions of his
says, was by the Judge condemned to (...) At Mil^ of S. Calimerius Bishop and
Martyr, who apprehended in the persecution of (...), and ^ast headlong into a
Well, finished the course of his Martyrdom. At Sy^ada in Phrygia of the holy
Martyrs De^itur, S^cundus, and Di^nysius. In Syria of three hundred and fifty
holy Monks Martyrs, who ^^r defending the Council of Chal^^don, were slain
by the Here^iques. At (...) the departure out of this world of S. (...) Bishop
of Auxerre, greatly renowned for his parentage, faith* doctrine, and glorious
miracles, who delivered Britannia.
England from the Heresy of the Pelagians. At Tagasta in Africa of S. Firmus
Bishop, renowned for the glorious confession of his faith. At Siena in Tuscany
the birthday of S. John Columbinus, ^ounder of the Order called I^suati,
renowned for holiness of life, and miracles.

THE MONTH OF AUGUST.
C The first Day.
AT Rome, in the Mount Esquiline, the dedication of the Church of S. Peter ad
Vincula. At Antioch the passion of seaue^ holy Brethren, of the Machabees, with
their mother, who suffered under King Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes. Their
relics being translated to Rome, are kept with great reverence in the foresaid
Church of S. Peter ad Vincula. At Rome the passion of the holy virgins, Fides,
Spes, and Charitas, who under Hadrian Emperor obtained the crown of
Martyrdom. Also at Rome in the way Latina, of the holy Martyrs Bonus Priest,
Faustus, and Maurus, with nine others, recorded in the acts of S. Stephen Pope.
At Philadelphia in Arabia of the holy Martyrs Cyrillus, Aquila, Peter,
Domitianus, Rufus, and Menander, all crowned with Martyrdom upon one day. At
Pergen in Pamphylia, of the holy Martyrs Leontius, Attius, Alexander, and of
six Husbandmen, who in the persecution of Diocletian, under Flauianus President
were beheaded. At Gerunda.
Girona in Spain the birthday of S. Felix Martyr, who by commaundment of
Dacianus President was so long tormented, until he gave up his undaunted Soul
to God. At Vercellae.
Vercelli of S. Eusebius Bishop and Martyr, who for the Confession of the
Catholic faith, being banished first into Scythopolis, and thence into
Cappadocia by Constantius Emperor, and afterward returning home to his own
Church, was by the Arrians that persecuted him, put to death. In the territory
of Paris of S. Justinius Martyr. At Vienna of S. Verus Bishop. At Winchester in
England of S. Ethelwold Bishop. In the Village of Liswin, of S. Nemesius
Confessor.

D The second Day.
AT Rome, in the Churchyard of Callistus, the birthday of S. Stephen Pope and
Martyr, who in the persecution of Valerianus, being at the Altar, and the
soldiers rushing in upon him, with an undaunted courage making an end of his
Mass, was beheaded in his Bishops Seat. At Nice in Bithynia the passion of S.
Theodota, with her three sons, of whom the eldest called Euodius confessing
with great courage, the name of Christ, by commaundment of Nicetius Consul,
being sore beaten with cudgells, was finally, together with his mother, and
his other brothers consumed by the fire. In Africa of S. Rutilius Martyr, who
flying from place to place for fear of persecution, and sometime also
redeeming his present danger with money, being unexpectedly apprehended, and
presented before the President, was put to many torments, and lastly by the
fire obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At Patauiu^
Padua of S. Maximus Bishop of the same City, who renowned for miracles, ended
his blessed days.

E The third Day.
AT Jerusalem the Invention of the body of S. Stephen the Protomartyr, and of
the Saints Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and Abibo, revealed to Lucianus Priest, in the
days of Honorius the Emperor. At Constantinople the birthday of S. Hermellus
Martyr. In India near to the Persians, the passion of many holy Monks, and
other Christians, who by commaundment of King Abenner, persecuting the Church
of God, after they had been afflicted with many torments, were killed: At
Naples in Campania of S. ^spren Bishop, who being cured of a great sickness by
S. Peter the Apostle, and afterward baptized, was ordained Bishop of the same
City. At Augustodunu^.
Austum the deposition of S. Euphronius Bishop and Confessor. At Anagni of S.
Peter Bishop, who first renowned for monastical discipline, and afterward for
his Pastoral Vigilance went to rest in our Lord. At Philippi in Macedonia of
S. Lidia a Seller of Purple, who by the preaching of S. Paul the Apostle, first
of all in that City believed in Christ. At Beroea in Syria, of the holy women,
Marana and Cyra.

F The fourth Day.
AT Bolonia of S. Dominicke Confessor, Founder of the Order of Friars
Preachers, renowned for sanctity and doctrine, who kept his Virginity undefiled
to the end of his life, and by his merits, raised three dead men to life. And
when he had by his preaching, repressed Heresies, and instructed many in
religious, and godly life, the sixth day of this Month he went to rest in
peace. But his feast is kept on this day, by a Constitution of Pope Paulus the
fourth. At Thessalonica the birthday of S. Aristarchus Disciple, and
inseperable Companion to S. Paul the Apostle, of whom in his Epistle to the
Colossians he writes thus: Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you. Being
ordained Bishop of the Thessalonians by the same Apostle, after many long
agonies suffered under Nero, crowned by Christ, rested in peace. At Rome in the
way called Latina, the passion of S. Tertullinus Priest and Martyr, who under
Valerianus Emperor, after he had been most cruelly bruised with cudgels, his
sides burned with fire, and sore buffeted about the face; being racked also
upon the Torture Equuleus, and his synewes cut, accomplished his Martyrdom by
the loss of his head. At Constantinople of S. Eleutherius Senator, who for
the confession of Christ dyed by the sword, in the persecution of Maximianus.
In Persia of the holy Martyrs Ia, and her fellows, who together with nine
thousand Christian Captives, under Sapores King, afflicted with diverse
torments, endured Martyrdom. At Cullen of S. Protasius Martyr. At Verona of S.
Agabius Bishop and Confessor. At Turones.
Toures of S. Euphronius Bishop. At Rome of S. Perpetua, who baptized by S.
Peter the Apostle, converted Nazarius her Son, and Africanus her Husband to
the faith of Christ; and after she had buried the bodies of many holy Martyrs,
laden with merits of good works, went to our Lord.

G. The fifth Day.
AT Rome in the Mount Esquiline, the Dedication of the Church of S. Mary ad
Niues. Also at Rome the passion of three and twenty holy Martyrs, who in the
persecution of Diocletian being beheaded in the old way Salaria, lie there
buried, at the foot of the Hill Cucumer. At Augusta Vinde l^corum.
Ausburge the birthday of S. Afra Martyr, who of an Infidel being made a
Christian by the instruction of S. Nancissus Bishop, and baptized with all her
house, was for the confession of Christ burned. At Asculu^
Ascoli in Marc-Aucona, of S. Emygdius Martyr, who ordained Bishop by S.
Marcellus Pope, and sent thither to preach the gospel of Christ, in the
confession of his faith, under Diocleti^^ Emperor, received the crown of
Martyrdom. At Antioch of S. Eusignius soldier, who being an hundred and ten
years of age, for obiecting to Julian the Apostata the faith of Constantine
the Great, whom he had served in the wars; and reprehending him as a
forsaker of his Ancestors Piety, was by his commaundment beheaded. Also of the
holy Martyrs C^ntidius Cantidianus, and Sobel, Egyptians. At Catal^unum.
Ch^ in France of S. Memmius a Citizen of Rome, who ordained Bishop of that
City by S. Peter the Apostle, reduced the people committed to his charge, to
the truth of the ^oly gospel. At Augustodu^^.
Austum of S. Cassianus. Bishop. At Theanum.
Te^no of S. Parides. Bishop. In Engl^d of S. Os^ld King of the Northumber^,
whose Acts are recou^ted by Venerable (...). The same day of S. Nonna mother to
S. Gr^g^ry Nazianzen. A^ Septe^ pe^a.
San-S^uerino in Mar^Ancona of S. M^rg^ret widow.

A The sixth Day.
IN the Mount Thabor, the Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ. At Rome ^n
the way called Appia, in the Churchyard of Callistus, the birthday of S.
Xistus the se^ond, Pope and Martyr, who in the persecution of Valerianus by
being beheaded, re^eaued the crown of Martyrdom. Also of ^he holy Martyrs
Felicissimus and Agapitus ^eacons, Ianuartus, Magnus, Innocentius, and Stephen
Subdeacons of the same Pope, who were all with him beheaded, and Iye bu^ied in
the Churchyard of Praetextatus. There ^uffered also with them Blessed Quartus,
as writes S. Cyprian. At Complutum.
Alcala in Spain of the holy Martyrs Iustus and Pastor brothers, who being
young youths, and going to School, casting down their books, did of their
own accord run to Martyrdom; and forth with by commaundment of Da^ianus
President, being apprehended and beaten with cudgels, were finally led out of
the City, where exhorting each other with great courage and constancy, they
were stangled by the Hangman. At Rome of S. Hormisda Pope and Confessor. At
Amida of S. James Hermit, renowned for miracles.

B The seventh Day.
AT Aretiu^
Arezzo in Tuscany, the birthday of S. Donatus Bishop and Martyr, wh^ amongst
other of his miracles, as writes S. Gregory Pope, by his prayers made whole
again a sacred Chalice that had bin broken by the Pagans: and in the
persecution of Julian the Apostata being apprehended by Quadratianus Captain
of the Guard for refusing to sacrifyce unto Idols, wa^ beheaded, and so
accomplished his Martyrdom. There suffered also with him S. Hilarinus a Monk,
whose feast is kept upon the sixtenth day of July, when his body was translated
to Ostia. At Rome of the holy Martyrs Peter and Julian, with eighteen others.
At Millan of S. Faustus Soldier, who under Aurelius Commodus, after many
combats for Christ, obtained the crown of Martyrdom. At Nouocomum.
Como the passion of the holy Martyrs Carpophorus, Exanthus, Cassius,
Seaerinus, Secundus, and Licinius, who for the confession of Christ were
beheaded. At Nisibis in Mesopotamia of S. Dometius a Persian Monk, who with
two of his disciples, was stoned to death under Julian the Apostata. At Roan of
S. Victricius Bishop, who having bin a soldier under the forsaid Julian, and
casting away his military Cincture, was by the Tribune put to diverse torments,
and after condemned to be beheaded; but the Executioner being stricken ^lynd,
and he unbound escaped way. And ^fterward being made Bishop, by prea^hing the
Gospel, brought the fierce and ^^rbarous people of Mo^ini
Teruane, and Neruij
Tour^^y to the faith of Christ, and finally ended his days in peace. At
Catalaunum.
Chaeallon in France of S. Donatianus Bishop. At Messina in Sicily of S. Albert
Confessor, of the Order of Carmelits, renowned for miracles.

C The eight Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Cyriacus Deacon, Largus, and Smaragdus, with
twenty others, who in the persecution of Diocletian and Maximian, suffered upon
the sixtenth of March. Their bodies being bu^ied in the way called Salaria, S.
Marcellus Pope, on this day translated into the Man^our of Lucina, in the way
to Ostia; which ^fterward were brought into the City, and placed in the
Oratory of S. Mary, in Via lata. At Anazarbum*
Axara in Cilicia of S. Marinus an old Man, who under D^ocletian Emperor and
Lisias President being whipped, tacked and cruelly tormenced, at last cast unto
the beasts, ended his life. Also of the holy Man^yrs Eleutherius and Leouides,
who by the fire, accomplished their Martyrdom. In Persia of S. Hormisda
Martyr, under King Sapores. At Cizi^us in Hellespo^e of S. Ae^^ai^nus Bishop,
who having suffered much for the worship of holy Images, under Lee the
Emperor, at last ended his life in banishment. In Creta.
Candia of S. Myro Bishop, ^nowned for miracles. At Vienne in France of S.
Seuerus Priest and Consessor, who ^^king upon him a long and paynefull
peregrination from India, to preach the Gospel in France, and coming to the
foresaid City, converted there a great multitude of Pagans, to the faith of
Christ by his doctrine and miracles.

D The nynth Day.
THE Vigill of S. Laure^^e Martyr. At Rome of S. Romanus a Soldier, who
greatly mooned with the ^orments of S. Laurence, desired to be baptized by him;
for which cause being forth with accused, and beaten with eudgels, was finally
beheaded. In Tuscany the birthday of the holy Martyrs Secundianus,
Marcellianus, and Verianus, who in the time of Decius being first whipped by
Promotus Consul, and then racked upon the torture Equ^lous, ^orne with ir^n
claws; and their sides eruelly scorched with fire, at last beheaded, deserved
the (...) ^^phant palm of Martyrdom. At Verona of the holy Martyrs Firmus and
Rusticus in the time of Maximianus Emperor. In Africa, the Commemoration of
many holy Martyrs, who in the persecution of Valerianus being encouraged by S.
Numidious were cast into the fire, and so obtained tryumphant palms. But
Nu^idiens although himself was cast also into the, fire with the rest, and
over whelmed with stones, yet being dug out by his own daughter, and found
half alive, was c^ed, and afterward de^^^ued for his virtue, to be admi^^ed by
S. (...), for a P^iest of the Church of Car^* At Constantinople of the holy
Martyrs Julian, Marcian, and eight others, who for setting up our Saviors
Image; at the brase^ Gate; by co^maundment of wicked Leo the Emperor, after
many torments, were beheaded. At Catalaunu^*
Chaallon in France of S. Domitian Bishop and Confessor.

E The tenth Day.
AT Rome in the way Tiburtina, the birthday of S. Laurence Archdeacon, who in
the persecution of Valerianus, after he had endured many torments for Christ,
as beating with scorpious, cudgels, with leaden whippes, and burning with fiery
plates, at last broyled upon a gridiron, accomplished his Martyrdom: whose
body was buried by Blessed Hippolytus, and Justinius Priest, in the Churchyard
of Cyriaca, in the field Veran^. Also at Rome the passion of one hundred,
threescore, and five holy Soldiers, Martyrs, under Aurelianus Emperor. At
Bergomum
Bergamo of S. Asteria virgin and Martyr, in the persecution of Diocletian and
Maximian Emperors. At Alexandria the Commemoration of many holy Martyrs, who
in the persecution of Valerian. under Aemilianus President, having been long
afflicted with sundry and exquisite torments, at last by diverse kinds of death,
obtained the crown of Martyrdom. At Carthage of the holy virgins and Martyrs
Bassae, Paula, and Agathonica. At Rome of S. Deus-dedit Confessor, who every
Saturday gave unto the poor whatspeuer he gained, by the labor of his hands,
all the week.

F The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome, between the two Bay-trees, the birthday of S. Tyburtius Martyr, who
under Fabianus Judge, in the persecution of Diocletian, being forced to walk
barefoote upon hot burning coals, confessing Christ with greater constancy,
was by the same Judge commanded to be lead three miles out of the City, and
there beheaded. Also at Rome of S. Susanna Virgin who descended of a noble
parentage, and niece to Caius Pope, being beheaded in the time of Diocletian,
deserved the triumphant palm of Martyrdom. At Comana in ^ontus of Saint
Alexander Bishop, surnamed Carbonarius, who of a most learned Philosopher,
having attained to the eminent knowledge of Christian Humility, was by S.
Gregory Thaumaturgus advanced to the Sea of that Church, where famous for
preaching, at last accomplished his Martyrdom by the fire. The same day the
passion of S. Ruffinus Bishop of the Marsi in Italy, and his fellows, under
Maximinus Emperor. At Ebro^^ cum.
Eureux in France of S. Taurinus, who being ordained Bishop of that City by S.
Clement Pope, greatly dilated the Christian faith by his labors and doctrine,
and finally renowned for miracles, went to rest in our Lord. At Cambray in
France of S. Gaugericus Bishop and Confessor. In the Province of Valeria of S.
Equitius Abbot, whose holiness is witnessed by the testimony of S. Gregory Pope.
At Tude^* tum.
Todi of Saint Digna Virgin.

G The twelfth Day.
AT Assisi in Vmbria of S. Clare Virgin, Foundresse of the Order of the poor
Women called Minorits, who renowned for sanctimony of life and miracles, was by
Pope Alexander the fourth canonized for saint. At Catana in Sicily the
birthday of S. Euplius Deacon under Diocletian and Maximian Emperors, who
after he had been long tortured for the confession of our Lord, at last
obtained the palm of Martyrdom by the sword. At Augusta Vinde ^orum.
Ausburge of S. Hilaria mother to S. Afra Martyr, who watching and praying at
the sepulcher of her daughter, was for the faith of Christ by the persecutors
cast into the fire, and burned, together with her mayd-se^uants Digna,
Euprepia, and Eunomia. There suffered also the same day, in the same City,
Quiriacus, Largius, Crescentianus, Nimmia, and Iuliana, with twenty others. In
Syria of the holy Martyrs Macarius and Julian. At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs
Anicetus an Earl, and Photinus his brother, with many others under Diocletian
Emperor. At F^
Falari in Tuscany the passion of the Saints Grascilianus, and Felicissima
Virgin, who for the confession of their faith having their mouths fore bruised
with stones, received the palm of Martyrdom by the sword, which they had long
before desired. The same day, of the holy Martyrs Porcarius Abbot of the
Monastery of Lirina, and of five hundred Monks, who being slain by the
barbarous people for the Catholic faith, were crowned with Martyrdom. At
Millan the deposition of S. Eusebius Bishop and Confessor. At Brescia of S.
Herculanus Bishop.

A The thirteenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Hippolytus Martyr, who for his glorious Confession, under
Valerianus Emperor, after other torments, being tied by the feet, to the
necks of wild horses, and so dragged through briars, and brambles, all torn
to pieces, gave up the ghost. There suffered also the same day S. Concordia his
Nurse, who being beaten before him with leaden whippes, went unto our Lord,
together with nyneten others of his house, who were beheaded without the gate
Tiburtina, and buried with him, in the field V^rano. At Forum Syllae.
^mola the birthday of S. Cassianus Martyr, who for refusing to worship
Idols, was commanded to be killed with penknifes by his own scholars, to
whom he was made hateful for teaching them; whose strength how much the
weaker it was, so much more grievous was the pain of his Martyrdom by a
lingering death. At Tude^tum.
Todi of S. Cassianus Bishop and Martyr, under Di^cletian Emperor. At Burgos
in Spain of the Saints Centolla and Helena Martyrs. At Constantinople of S.
Maximus Monk, renowned for doctrine, and zeal of the Catholic faith, who
for valiantly oppugning the Monothelits, having his hands cut off, and tongue
plucked out by Constans the Heretical Emperor, was finally banished into
Chersonesus, and there ended his life. At what time also two of his Disciples,
both called Anastasius, with many others endured diverse grievous torments, and
banishments. In Germany of S. Wigb^^t Priest and Confessor. At Pict^^ium.
Poitiers of S. Rad^gundes Queen, renowned for Sanctimony of life, and
miracles.

B The fourtenth Day.
THE Vigill of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. At Rome the birthday
of S. Eusebius Priest, who for defending the Catholic faith, being shut up in
a Chamber of his own house, by commandment of Constantius the Arian
Emperor, and there perseuering constantly seven months together in prayer,
went to rest in our Lord: whose body Gregory and Oro^^us Priests buried in the
Churchyard of Callistus, in the way Appia. In Illi^
Sclauonia of S. Vrsicius Martyr, who under Maximianus Emperor, and Aristides
President, after many bitter torments endured for the Name of Christ, was
beheaded. In Africa of S. Demetrius Martyr. At Apamea in Syria of S. Marcellus
Bishop and Martyr, who pulling down the Temple of Jupiter, was killed by the
furious Gentills. At Todi of S. Callistus Bishop and Martyr. In the Island
Aegina, of S. Athanasia Widow, renowned for monastical discipline, and grace
of miracles.

C The fifteenth Day.
THE Assumption of the most holy Mother of God, the Virgin Mary. At Rome in the
way Appia, of S. Tharsicius Acolyte, who being apprehended by the Paynims, as
he was carriyng the holy Sacrament of Christ's body, and examined what he
carried; He judging it an unworthy thing to cast pearls unto swyne, was so
long beaten by them with cudgels and stones until he gave up the Ghost; who
turning and searching his body in every place, no part of the holy Sacrament,
neither in his hands, nor garments, could be found. The Christians taking up
his body, honorably enterred the same in the Churchyard of Callistus. At
Tagasta in Africa of S. Alipius Bishop, who having been sometime scholar to S.
Augustine, and afterward companion with him in his conversion, was made worthy
also of his fellowship, in his Pastoral function, and famous combats against
Heretics, and finally his partaker in celestial glory. At Suessio
Soissons in France of S. Arnulphus Bishop and Confessor.

D The sixtenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Titus Deacon, who when the City was taken by the Goths, for
distributing his money to the poor, by commaundment of a barbarous Tribune,
was killed. At Nice in Bithynia of S. Diomedes Physician, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, for the faith of Christ being beheaded, accomplished
his Martyrdom. Also the same day of thirty three holy Martyrs. At Ferentinum.
Fiorentino in Campania of S. Ambrose Centurion, who in the persecution of
Diocletian being diverse ways tormented, and also cast into the fire without
hurt, was finally drowned, and so brought unto the place of rest. At Millan the
deposition of S. Simplicianus Bishop. At Auxerre of S. Eleutherius Bishop. At
Nicomedia of S. Arsacius Co^fessor, who being a soldier under Licinius the
Persecutour, became an hermit, and was so potent in working miracles, that he
is said to have driven out devils by his prayers, as also to have killed a huge
draggon: And finally foretelling the destruction of that City, which shortly
after was to happen, in prayer gave up his soul to God. At Cracouia in Polonia
of S. Hyathinthus Confessor of the Order of S. Dominicke, who was canonized
for a Saint by Pope Clement the eight. At Mons Pessulanus.
Montpelier in Prouence of France the depositio^ of S. Rochus Confessor, who
by, the sign of the Cross, delivered many Cittyes in Italy from the plague.
His body was afterward translated to Venice. At Rome of S. Serena sometime wife
to Diocletian the Emperor.

E The seauententh Day.
THE Octaue of S. Laurence Martyr At Carthage in Africa of the holy Martyrs
Liberatus Abbot, Bonifacius Deacon, Seruus and Rusticus Subdeacons, Rogatus and
Septi^us Monks, and Maximus a boy, who in the persecution of the Vandalls,
under King Hunnericus, for the confession of the Catholic faith, and defense
of one only Baptism, being put to diverse most cruel and unheard of torments,
at length nailed upon the wood wherewith they were to be burned, and the fire
oftentimes kindled, but always put out again by the power of God, were
finally by his commaundment brayned to death with Oars, and so obtained a
glorious Crown of reward by Martyrdom. At Caesarea in Cappadocia the
birthday of S. Mamas Martyr, who from his childhood to his old age, having
endured a long Martyrdom, at length in the time of Aurelianus Emperor, and
Alexander President happily finished the same. Whose great praises S. Basil,
and S. Gregory Nazianzen have left written. In Acha^a of S. Myro^ Priest and
Martyr, who under Decius Emperor, and Antipater President, after many
torments, was beheaded at Cyzicus. At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Stra^o,
Philip, and Eutychian, who condemned to the beasts, and not touched by them,
accomplished their Martyrdom by fire. At Ptolemais in Palestine of the holy
Martyrs Paul, and Iuliana his sister, who suffered under Valerianus. At
Interamna.
Teramo of S. Anastasius Bishop, and Confessor.

F The eightenth Day.
AT Praenest^.
Palestrina the birthday of S. Agapitus Martyr, who being but fifteen years
of age, and fervent in the love of Christ, was apprehended by commaundment of
Aurelianus Emperor, and cruelly whipped with raw sinews; but afterward under
Antiochus Governor enduring more grievous torments, and cast also unto the
Lions, without any hurt, was finally beheaded, and so crowned. At Rome of the
Saints John and Crispus Priests, who in the persecution of Diocletian, very
carefully enterred many bodies of Saints; to whose merits themselves being
afterward associated, deserved the joys of eternal life. There also of the
holy Martyrs Hermas, Serapion, and Polyaenus, who being dragged through narrow,
stony, and craggy places, gave up their souls to God. In Sclauonia of the holy
Martyrs Florus, and Laurus, Grauers in stone, whose masters Proculus and
Maximus being first martyred, under Licion President, after many torments,
themselves were drowned in a deep Well. At Myra in Lycia of the holy Martyrs
Leo and Iuliana. At Metae.
Metz in France, of S. Firminus Bishop and Confessor. At Rome in the way called
Lauicana, of S. Helen Mother to the most pious Emperor, Constantine the Great,
who gave the first example to other Princes, to maintain, and amplify the holy
Church.

G The nynetenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Julius Senator and Martyr, who delivered unto Vitellius Judge,
and by him thrust into prison, by commaundment of Commodus the Emperor, was so
long beaten with cudgels, until he gave up the Ghost. His body was buried in
the Churchyard of Calepodius, in the way called Aurelia. In Cilicia the
birthday of S. Andrew Coronell, and his fellow soldiers, who having obtained
a miraculous victory against the Persians, were thereby converted to the faith
of Christ; for which cause being accused to Maximianus Emperor, they were
killed by the army of Seleucus President, in the st^aytes of the Mountain
Taurus. In Palestine of S. Timothy Martyr, who in the persecution of
D^ocletian, under Vrbanus President, after he had overcome many torments, was
burned with a slow fire. There also suffered in the same place Tecla, and
Agapius; of whom, Tecla being cast unto the beasts, and torn in pieces with
their teeth, went to her heavenly spouse: But Agapius after he had endured many
torments, his death was differred to a greater Combat. At Anagnia of S. Magnus
Bishop and Martyr, who was killed in the persecution of Decius. In the Castle
of Br^^cola.
Brimoigne in Prouence of France, of S. Lewis Bishop of Tolosa, renowned for
holiness of life and miracles, whose body being translated to Marseille, lies
honorably enterred there, in the Church of the Franciscans. At Sistrique a
village in France, of S. Donatus Priest and Confessor, who even from his
infancy endued with wonderful graces, and favors from God, became an
Anchoret, and finally renowned for miracles went unto our Lord. In the
territory of Bituricae.
Bourges of S. Marianus Confessor. At Mantua of S. Ruffinus Confessor.

A The twentieth Day.
IN the Territory of Lingones.
Langres the deposition of S. Bernard, the first Abbot of Clareuallis, renowned
for sanctity of life, doctrine, and miracles. In Jury of S. Samuel Prophet,
whose holy relics (as writes S. Hierome) were translated to Constantinople
by Arcadius Emperor, and there honorably placed in a Church, near to the
place Septimus. The same day of S. Lucius Senator, who by seeing the constancy
of Theodorus Bishop of Cyrene at his Martyrdom, was converted to the faith of
Christ, whereunto he also brought Dignianus the President; with whom going to
Cyprus, and there seeing other Christians put to death for the confession of
Christ, offered himself also thereunto of his own accord, and being straight
beheaded, deserved the crown of Martyrdom. In Thracia of thirty seven holy
Martyrs, who under Appellianus President, having their hands and feet cut off
for the faith of Christ, were finally cast into a burning furnace. Also of the
holy Martyrs Seuerus, and Memnon a Centurion, who by one, and the same kind of
death, went both Conquerers to heaven. At Cordoua of the holy Martyrs
Leouigildus, and Christopher Monks, who in the persecution of the Arabians
being cast into prison for defense of the Christian faith, were beheaded, and
their bodies burned. At Rome of S. Porphyrius a holy man, who instructed S.
Agapitus the Martyr in the faith, and doctrine of Christ. In the Island Herion,
of S. Philibert Abbot. At Alba in Hungary, of S. Stephen King, who endued with
divine graces, first converted the Hungarians to the faith of Christ. In the
Castle of Chinon of S. Maximus Confessor, disciple of S. Martin Bishop.

B The one and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the Field Veran^, of S. Cyriaca widow and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Valerianus when she had long employed herself, and all her
substance in relieuing poor Christians, gave also at last her life most
willingly, by suffering Martyrdom for Christ. At Salona of S. Anastasius, of
the Military Order called Cornicularij, who seeing S. Agapitus so constantly
endure Martyrdom, and thereby converted to the faith, was for the same put to
death by Aurelianus Emperor, and so went a Martyr to our Lord. In Sardinia the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Luxorius, Cisellus, and Camerinus, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, under Delphius President were beheaded. In the
territory of Gaualita.
Vicarez of S. Priuatus Bishop and Martyr, who suffered in the persecution of
Valerian and Gallienus. The same day of the holy Martyrs Bonosus and
Maximianus. At Fundi in Italy of S. Paternus, who coming from Alexandria to
Rome, to visit the Apostles sepulchers, and thence retiring himself near to
Fundi, after he had buried the bodies of many Martyrs, apprehended by the
Tribune, dyed in prison. At Edessa in Syria of the holy Martyrs Bassa, and her
sons Theogonius, Agapius, and Fidelis, whom their godly mother exhorting to
constancy, in the persecution of Maximianus, sent before her to receive their
Crowns by Martyrdom; and followed herself after joyfully, by being beheaded.
At Verona of S. Euprepius Bishop and Confessor. Also of S. Quadratus Bishop.

C The two and twentieth Day.
THE Octaue of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. At Rome in the way to
Ostia, the birthday of S. Timothy Martyr, who apprehended by Tarquinius
Governor of the City, and pined with long imprysonment, for refusing to
sacrifice unto Idols, being three times whipped, and otherwise grievously
tormented, was at last beheaded. At Portus Romanus.
Porto of S. Hippolytus Bishop, greatly renowned for doctrine, who under
Alexander the Emperor, for the worthy confession of his faith, tied hand and
foot, and cast headlong into a deep ditch, full of water, received the crown
of Martyrdom: whose body was buried by the Christians, in the same place. At
Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. Symphorianus Martyr, who in the time of Aurelianus Emperor, for
refusing also to sacrifyce unto Idols, being first sore whipped, and after cast
into prison, at last beheaded accomplished his Martyrdom. At Rome of S.
Antoninus Martyr, who for freely professing himself a Christian, was condemned
to be beheaded by Vitellius Judge, and lies buried in the way called Aurelia.
Also at Porto aforesaid, of the holy Martyrs Martialis, Saturninus, Epictetus,
Maprilis and Felix, with their fellows. At Nicomedia the passion of the holy
Martyrs Agathonicus, Zoticus, and their fellows, under Maximianus Emperor,
and Euth^lomius President. At Tharsus of the holy Martyrs S. Athanasius Bishop,
also of Anthusa a Noble Woman whom he had baptized, and of two of her
servants, who suffered under Valerianus Emperor. At Rhemes of the holy Martyrs
Maurus, and his fellows. In Spain of the holy Martyrs Fabricianus and
Philibert. At Pau^a of S. Gunifort Martyr.

D The three and twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of S. Bartholomew Apostle. At Antioch the birthday of the holy
Martyrs Restitutus, Donatus, Valerian and Fructuosa, with twelve others, who
were crowned with the honor of a most renow^^d Martyrdom. At Ostia of the
holy Martyrs Quiriac^s Bishop, Maximus Priest* (...) Deacon, and their
fellows, who by Vlpianus Governor, suffered under Alexander Emperor. At
Aegea in Cilicia of the holy Martyrs Claudius, Asterius, and Neon Brothers, who
being accused by their stepmother to be Christians, under Diocletian Emperor,
and Listas President, after many bitter torments, nailed to a Cross, went
tryumphantly to Christ. There suffered also after them Donuina, and Theonilla.
At Rhemes in France the birthday of the Saints Timothy and Apollinaris, who by
suffering Martyrdom, deserved the kingdom of heaven. At Lions of the holy
Martyrs Mineruus, and Eleazarus, with his eight Sons. Also of S. Luppus
Martyr, who from a servile condition, being made partaker of Christian liberty,
was honored also with the crown of Martyrdom. At Jerusalem of the S.
Zacchaeus Bishop, who governed the Church of Jerusalem the fourth after S.
James the Apostle. At Alexandria of S. Thomas Bishop and Confessor. At Vtica in
Affricke of S. Victor Bishop. At Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. Flauianus Bishop. At Aruernum
Auuergne of S. Sidonius Bishop, famous for doctrine and holiness of life. At
Tudertum.
Todi of Blessed Philip, Founder of the Order of the Servants of the Blessed
Virgin Mary.

E The four and twentieth Day.
OF Saint Bartholomew Apostle, who having preached the Gospel of Christ in
India, and passing thence into the Higher Armenia, after he had there converted
many to the faith, was first by the barbarous people fleaed alive; and then
commanded, by Astyages the Kings Brother, to be beheaded, accomplished his
Martyrdom. His holy body being brought first to the Island of Lipara, was
afterward translated to Beneuento, and lastly to Rome, where the same is
greatly honored in the Island of Tibur by the faithful people. At Carthage of
three hundred holy Martyrs, in the days of Valerian and Gallienus, who amongst
other torments, when the President had commanded them to be brought to a
burning Limekill, and coals and frankincense to be brought also to his
presence, he said unto the^: Choose one of these two, Either offer incense upon
these coals to Jupiter, or cast your selves into the burning lyme; they being
armed with faith, and confessing Christ to be the Son of God, with great
speed cast themselves into the fire; where amongst the smoke, and vapors of
the lyme, they were soon turned into dust; whereby, that pure troop of Saints,
deserved to be called Massa Candida. At Ostia of S. Aurea Virgin and Martyr,
who having a great stone tied to her neck, was drowned in the sea. Her body
being cast upon the shore, was buried by S. Nonnus. In Isauria of S. Tation
Martyr, who in the persecution of Diocletian under Vrbanus President, being
beheaded, received the crown of Martyrdom. The same day of S. Eutichius
disciple of S. John the Evangelist, who having preached the ghospel in many
Countries, and also endured both imprysonment, whipping, and fire, at last went
to rest in peace. Also of S. George, surnamed Limniota, Monk, who for
reprehending the wicked Emperor Leo for breaking of holy Images, and burning
the Relics of Saints, having his hands cut off, and head burnt by his
commandment, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Roan of S. Owen Bishop and
Confessor. At Neuers of S. Patricius Abbot.

F The five and twentieth Day.
AT Paris of S. Lewis Confessor, and King of France, renowned for holiness of
life, and miracles. At Rome of the holy Martyrs Eusebius, Pontianus,
Vincentius, and Peregrinus, who under Commodus Emperor, being racked upon the
Equuleus, and otherwise tormented, beaten also with cudgels, and their sides
burned with fiery plates; and still persisting most constant in the faith of
Christ, were so long beaten with leaden whippes, till they all gave up the
Ghost. Also at Rome of S. Genesius a Iester, who on a time upon the stage, in
presence of Diocletian the Emperor, scoffing at the mysteryes of Christians,
being suddenly by Gods holy inspiration, converted to the faith and baptized,
was forth with by commaundment of the said Emperor cruelly beaten with
cudgels, long racked upon the torture Equuleus, torn with claws of iron,
burned with torches, and still persisting constant in his faith, saying: There
is no King but Christ, for whom if I be killed a thousand times, you shall not
be able to take him from my mouth, nor my heart; being beheaded, deserved the
palm of Martyrdom. At Arelatum.
Arles in France of another S. Genesius also, who being a Notary, and refusing
to register the wicked Edicts, by which it was commanded, that Christians
should be tormented, casting down the Records, and professing himself to be a
Christian, was apprehended, and forthwith beheaded; and so being baptized in
his own blood, obtained the glory of Martyrdom. At Hispalis vetus.
Italica in Spain of S. Geruntius Bishop, who in the time of the Apostles
preaching the Gospel of Christ in that Province, after many labors, died in
prison. In Syria of S. Julian Martyr. At Tarragona of S. Maginus Martyr. At
Constantinople of S. Mennas Bishop. At Maestricht of S. Gregory Bishop. At
Naples of S. Patricia Virgin.

G The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Zepherin Pope and Martyr. There also of the holy Martyrs
Irenaeus and Abundius, who in the persecution of Valerian for taking the body
of S. Concordia out of a Privy, were themselves cast into the same, and
drowned: whose bodies being drawn out by Justinius a Priest, were buried in a
Cave near to S. Laurence. At Albintimeliu^.
Vintimiglia a City in Liguria, of S. Secundus Martyr, a man of great renown,
and Captain of the Theban Legion. At Bergamo in Lombardy of S. Alexander
Martyr, who being also one of the same Legion, for the constant confession of
the name of Christ being beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Nicomedia
the passion of S. Adrian Son to Probus Emperor, who reproouing Licinius for
the persecution he had raised against the Christians, was by his commaundment
killed. His body was buried at Agyropolis by his Uncle Domitius Bishop of
Bizantium. In Spain of S. Victor Martyr, who being slain by the Mores for the
faith of Christ, obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At Capua of S. Rufinus Bishop
and Confessor. At Pistoria of S. Felix Priest and Confessor.

A The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Capua in Campania the birthday of S. Rufus Bishop and Martyr, who being a
Senator was baptized by S. Apollinaris disciple of S. Peter, together with all
his family. There also of the holy Martyrs Rufus and Carpophorus, who under
Diocletian and Maximian suffered Martyrdom. At Tomis in Pontus of the holy
Martyrs Marcellinus Tribune, and his wife Manna, and of his sons John,
Serapion, and Peter. At Leontinum.
Lentini in Sicily of S. Euthalia Virgin, who for being a Christian, was by her
own brother Sermilianus killed by the sword, and so went unto her Spouse. The
same day, the passion of S. Anthusa the younger, who for the faith of Christ
being drowned in a Well, received the palm of Martyrdom. At Bergamo of S.
Narnus, who being baptized by S. Barnaby, was by him ordained the first Bishop
of that City. At Arelate.
Arles of S. Caesarius Bishop, a man of wonderful holiness and piety. At
Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. Siagrius Bishop and Confessor. At Pauia of S. John Bishop. At
Ilerda.
Lerida in Spain of S. Licerius Bishop. In Thebais of S. Poemon Anchoret. At
Sept^peda.
San-Seuerino in Marc-Ancona, of S. Margaret widow.

B The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Hippo-Regius in Africa the birthday of S. Augustine Bishop, and famous
Doctor of the Church, who being converted by S. Ambrose to the Catholic
faith, and by him baptized, defended the same most stoutly against the
Manichees, and other Heretics. And after many other labors sustained for the
Church of God, went finally to Heaven for his reward. Whose Relics were
conveyed from his own City first to Sardinia for fear of the barbarous
people; and afterward by Luitprandus King of the Lombards, translated to Tic^.
number.
Pauia, where they are still honorably kept. At Rome the birthday of S.
Hermes a noble man, who (as we read in the acts of Blessed Alexander pope)
being first cast into pryso^, was afterward with many others slain by the
sword, and so accomplished his Martyrdom, under Aurelianus Judge. At Briuas.
Brioude in Auuergne, the passion of S. Julian Martyr, who being companion to
S. Ferreolus Tribune, and secretly serving Christ in a soldiers habit, was
apprehended in the persecution of Diocletian, and having his throat cut, dyed a
cruel death. At Constantia.
Contances in France of S. Pelagius Martyr, who under Numerianus Emperor, and
Euilasius Judge, received the crown of Martyrdom. At Salerno of the holy
Martyrs Fortunatus, Caius, and Anthes, who were beheaded under Diocletian
Emperor, and Leontius Proconsul. At Constantinople of S. Alexander Bishop, a
renowned old man, by whose prayers Arius the Heretic, condemned by the
Judgment of God, burst in the midst, and voyded forth his bowels. At
Santones.
Saints of S. Viuianus Bishop. Also of S. Moses an Ethiopian, who of a famous
Thief became an Anchoret, and converting many thieves, brought them to his
Monastery.

C The nine and twentieth Day.
THE Decollation of Saint John Baptist, whom Herod, about the feast of Easter
beheaded; though his memory be kept on this day with great solemnity, when his
Venerable Head, was found the second time; which being afterward translated to
Rome, is there kept with great devotion of the people, in the Church of S.
Syluester, near unto Campus Martius. At Rome in the Mount Auentine, the
birthday of S. Sabina Martyr, who being beheaded under Hadrian Emperor
obtained the Crown of Martyrdom. Also at Rome of S. Candid^ Virgin and
Martyr, whose holy body Pope Paschalis the first, translated to the Church of
S. Praxedes. At Antioch in Syria the birthday of the holy Martyrs Nicaeas and
Paulus. At Constantinople of the holy Martyrs Hipatius an Asian Bishop, and
Andrew Priest, who for the worshipping of holy Images, under Leo Isauricus,
having their beards besmeared with pitch, and after set on fire, and the skin
of their heads plucked of, were finally killed. At Perugia of S. Euthymius a
Roman, who flying the persecution of Diocletian, together his wife, and
Crescentius his son, there rested in our Lord. At Metae.
Metz of S. Adelphus Bishop and Confessor. At Paris the deposition of S.
Medericus Priest. In England of S. Seb King of the East Saxons. At Smyrna the
birthday of S. Basilla. In the territory of Troys of S. Sabina virgin,
renowned for virtue and miracles.

D The thirtith Day.
AT Rome in the way to Ostia, the passion of S. Felix Priest, under Diocletian
and Maximian Emperors, who having endured the torture of Equuleus, and
condemned to death, as he was lead to execution, being met by a certain man
who professed himself a Christian, was for that cause forthwith beheaded with
him. This man's name the Christians not knowing, called him Adauctus, because he
was added to S. Felix, as partaker of his Crown. Also at Rome of S. Gaudentia
Virgin and Martyr, with three others. There also of S. Pa^machius Priest,
greatly renowned for holiness of life and doctrine. At Colonia Sufetulana in
Affricke of threescore holy Martyrs, slain by the fury of the Gentiles. At
Adrumetum.
Mahomet^a also in Affricke, of the Saints Bonifacius and Th^cl^, who were the
Parents of twelve Sons, all holy Martyrs. At Thessalonica of S. Fantinus
Confessor, who enduring many afflictions by the Saracens, and driven out of
his Monastery, where he lived in great abstinence; after he had brought many to
the true faith, rested at last in a good old age. In the territory of Meld^.
Meaux of S. Fiaker Confessor. At Bolonia of S. Bononius Abbot.

E The one and thirtith Day.
AT Treuers the birthday of S. Paulinus Bishop, who in the time of the Arian
troubles, being banished for the Catholic faith by Constantius the Arian
Emperor, and even, beyond the name of Christendom, wearyed out unto death
with change of bannishments, at last dying in Phrygia, received of our Lord the
Crown of his blessed passion. Also of the holy Martyrs Robustianus and Marcus.
At Transaqua in Italy, near to the Lake of Fuc^num.
Rossiglion, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Cesidius Priest, and his
fellows, who in the persetion of Maximinus, were crowned with Martyrdom. At
Caesarea in Cappadocia of the Saints Theodotus, Ruffina, and Ammia, of whom,
the two first were parents to Mamas the Martyr that was borne in prison, and
Ammia was his nurse. At Athens of S. Aristides renowned for his faith and
wisdom, who gave up a Book to Adrian the Emperor, treating of Christian
Religion, and containing reasons of our doctrine; as also made an Oration in
the presence of the said Emperor, wherein he manifestly proved, that Christ
JESUS was the only true God. At Antisiodoru^.
Auxerre of S. Optatus Bishop and Confessor. In England of S. Aidan Bishop of
Lindisfarne, whose soul when S. Cutbert being then a Shepherd, saw carried
up to heaven, forsaking his sheep, became a Monk. At Nuscum.
Nosca of S. Amatus Bishop.

THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER.
F The first Day.
IN Prouence of France, of S. Giles Abbot and Confessor. At Beneuento of
twelve holy Martyrs Brothers. In Palestine of the Saints Iosue and Gedeon. At
Jerusalem of S. Anna Prophetess, whose Sanctimony the holy Gospel relates.
At Capua in the way called Aquaria, of S. Priscus Martyr, an ancient Disciple
of Christ. At Rhemes in France of S. Xystus Disciple of S. Peter the Apostle,
who being by him ordained the first Bishop of that City, under Nero received
the crown Martyrdom. At Tudertum.
Todi in Vmbria of S. Terentianus Bishop and Martyr, who under Hadrian
Emperor, by commandment of L^tianus Proconsul, being racked upon the torture
Equuleus, and whipped with scorpions, having at last his tongue cut out, and
beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Heraclea of S. Ammon Deacon, and
forty holy Virgins whom he instructed in the faith, who under Licinius the
Tyrant, together with them received the glory of Martyrdom. In Spain of the
holy Martyrs Vincentius and Laetus. At Populonia in Tuscany of S. Regulus
Martyr, who coming thither out of Africa, under Totilas accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Senones.
Sen^ of S. Lupus Bishop and Confessor, of whom it is recorded, that on a
certain day, whilst in presence of the Clergy, he said Mass at the Altar,
there fell from heaven a ^ewell, into his holy Chalice. Also at Capua of
another Priscus Bishop, who was one of those Priests, that in the persecution
of the Vandalls, being diversely tormented for the Catholic faith, and put
into an old ship, came from Afric to the shore of Campania, and there being
dispersed into diverse places, and made Rulers of sundry Churches, greatly
dilated the Christian faith and discipline. His fellows were Castrensis,
Tammarus, Rosius, Heraclius, Secundinus, Adiutor, Marcus, Augustus, Elpidius,
Canion, and Vindonius. At Aquino of S. Constantius Bishop, famous for the gift
of Prophesy, and many other Virtues. At Cenomanum*
Man^ of S. Victorius Bishop. In the Tetritory of Constance at Aqua-dura, of S.
Verena Virgin.

G The second Day.
AT Rome of S. Maxima Martyr, who together with S. Ansanus, for confessing of
Christ, in the persecution of Diocletian being beaten with cudgels, gave up the
Ghost. At Pam^^.
Pamiers in France of S. Antoninus Martyr; whose relics are kep^ with great
veneration in the Church at Palentia. Also of the holy Martyrs Diomedes,
Julian, Philip, Eutychianus, Hesychius, Leonides, Philadelphus, Menalippus, and
Pantagapas, of whom some by fire, some by water, others by the sword, and
Cross, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Zeno,
and of Concordius and Theodorus his Sons. The same day the passion of the
Saints Euodius, Hermogenes, and Callistas brothers. At Lions in France the
birthday of S. Iustus Bishop and Confessor, renowned for holiness of life, and
spirit of Prophesy. This man resigning up his Bishopric, and withdrawing
himself, together with Viator his Lector, into the wilderness of Egypt, after
he had for some years lead there an Angelical life, went unto our Lord, to
receive the crown of Reward, upon the fourtenth day of October, whose holy
body, together with the relics of Blessed Viator his Lector, was on this day
brought unto Lions. There also of S. Elpidius Bishop and Confessor. Also in
Mar^* Ancona of another Elpidius Abbot, whose holy body, with great devotion is
kept in a town of his own Name. In the Mount Soractes, of S. Nonnosus Abbot,
who by his prayers removed a mighty great stone, besides many other miracles.

A The third Day.
AT Rome of S. Serapia Virgin, who under Hadrian Emperor being delivered over
unto two lascivious young men, and could not be corrupted by them, nor yet
burned with flaming torches, by commaundment of Berillus Judge, beaten with
cudgels, was lastly beheaded. She suffered upon the twenty ninth day of July,
and was enterred by S. Sabina, in a monument of hers, joining to the place of
burial called V^ian; but her memory is kept more solemnly on this day, when
both their Sepul^hers were finished, adorned, and the place itself dedicated
to God for prayer. At Co^th the birthday of S. Phoe^es, of whom S. Paul the
Apostle writing to the Romans makes mention. At Aquileia of the holy virgins
and Martyrs Euphemia, Dorothy, Tecla and Erasma, who under Nero, after many
torments, were beheaded, and buried by S. Hermagoras. At Capua of the holy
Martyrs Aristeus Bishop, and Antoninus a youth. At Nicomedia the passion of S.
Basilissa virgin and Martyr, who being but nine years of age, in the
perfecution of Diocletian, under Alexander President, having by the power of
God, overcome strypes, fire, and the beasts, rendered up her pure soul in
prayer. Also of the holy Martyrs Zeno and Chariton, of whom the one was cast
into a ca^drone of boiling lead, the other into a burning furnace. At Cordoua
of S. Sandalus Martyr. The same day of the holy Martyrs Aigulphus Abbot of
Lerina, and of his fellows monks, who having their tongues, and eyes plucked
out, were at last beheaded. At Tu^ lum.
Toul in Lorayne of S. Mansuetus Bishop and Confessor. At Millan the deposition
of S. Auxanus Bishop. The same day of S. Simeon, surnamed Stylita, the younger.
At Rome the Ordination of S. Gregory the Great, a man of incomparable holiness,
when he was created Pope; who being compelled to take upon him that burden, and
seated in a higher throne, spread forth much brighter beams of sanctity to the
world.

B The fourth Day.
AT Mount-Nebo in the la^d of Moab, of S. Moses the Lawgiuer and Prophet. At
Ancyra in Galatia of three holy children Ruffinus, Siluanus, and Vitalicus
Martyrs. At Cabilo.
Cauaillon in France of S. Marcellus Martyr under Antoninus Emperor, who being
invited by Priscus President to an Idolatrous Banquet, and detesting such kind
of meats, reprehe^ded with great liberty all that were present for worshipping
of Idols; for which cause, by an unheard off kind of cruelty being buried in
the ground up to the gyrdle, and remaining in that manner three days
continually praising God, gave up his undefiled soul to God. The same day of
the holy Martyrs Magnus, Castus, and Maximus. A^ Treuers of S. Marcellus Bishop
and Martyr. The same day also of Saint Thameles, who had been sometimes an
Idolatrous Priest, with others of his follows, martyred under Hadrian the
Emperor. Also of the holy Martyrs Theodorus, Oc^anus, Ammianus, and Iulianus,
who under Maximian Emperor, having their feet cut off, and cast into the
fire, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Ariminum.
Rimini of S. Marinus Deacon. At Naples in Campania the birthday of S.
Candida, who first met S. Peter coming to that City, and being baptized by
him, afterward rested in our Lord. There also of S. Candida the younger,
renowned for miracles. At Viterbo of S. Rosa Virgin.

C The fifth Day.
AT Rome in the suburbs, of S. Victorinus Bishop and Martyr, renowned for
holiness and miracles, who by election of all the people, was chosen Bishop of
Ami^rno, but afterward under Nerua-Traian, being banished, with other servants
of God ^o Cutilia, where the stinking brimston-wa^ers do spring forth, was by
commaundment of Aurelianus Judge, hanged up by the feet with his head
downward, which when he had endured for Christ's sake three days together,
went triumphantly crowned to our Lord; Whose body was honorably buried by the
Christians at Amitern^ aforsaid. At Portus Romanus.
Porto the birthday of S. Herculanus Martyr. At Capua of the holy Martyrs
Quinctius, Arcontius, and Donatus. The same day of S. Romulus an Officer in
Traians Court, who for detesting the Emperors cruelty against Christians,
being first whipped with rods, was after beheaded. At Melitine in Armenia the
passion of the holy soldiers Eudoxius, Zeno, Macarius, together with a
thousand one hundred and four of their fellows, who casting off their
military Cincture, in the persecution of Diocletian were killed for the
confession of Christ. At Constantinople of the holy Martyrs Vrba^s, Theodorus,
Menedemus, and seventy seven more of the Clergy, who by the commau^dment of
Valens Emperor being put into an old ship, were drowned in the sea, for the
Catholic faith. At (b) In the territory of Teruane, in the Monastery of
Sithieu of S^ Bertin Abbot. At Toledo of S. Obdulia virgin^

D The sixth Day.
OF S. Zachary Prophet, who in his old age returning from Chaldaea home ^ his
Country, lies buried neereto the Prophet Aggeus. In Hellespont of S.
Onesiphorus Disciple to the Apostles, of whom S. Paul makes mention writing
to Timothy, who together with S. Porphyrius by commaundment of Hadrianus the
Proconsull, being sorely whipped, and drawn a pieces with wild horses, gave up
his soul to God. At Alexandria the passion of the holy Martyrs Faustus Priest,
Macarius, and ten more of their fellows, who under Decius Emperor, and
Valerius President being all beheaded for the name of Christ, accomplished
their Martyrdom. In Cappadocia of the holy Martyrs Cottidus Deacon, Eugenius,
and their* fellows. In Africa of the holy Bishops Donatianus, Praesidius,
Mansuetus, German^s, and Fusculus, who in the persecution of the Vandalls by
commaundment of Hunnericus the Arian King, for defense of the Catholic
Verity, being all most cruelly beaten with cudgels, were afterward sent into
banishment. Amongst whom a Bishop also called Laetus, a worthy and most
learned man, after long and many afflictions endured in prison, was burned. At
Verona of S. Petronius Bishop and Confessor. At Rome of S. Eleutherius Abbot,
a great servant of God, whom S. Gregory Pope writes, to have raised a dead
man to life, by his prayers, and tears.

E The seventh Day.
AT Nicomedia the birthday of S. John Martyr, who seeing the cruel Edicts
against Christians, to hang up in the Marketplace, inflamed with the fervor
of faith, pulled them down, and tore them in pieces; for which fact, being by
commandment of Diocletian and Maximian Emperors, then resident in that City,
put to all kind of cruel torments, endured them with such cheerefulnes of
countenance and mind, as he seemed not to be any whit moved, or sad.
therefore. At Caesarea in Cappadocia of S. Eupsichius Martyr, who under Hadrian
Emperor being accused for a Christian, was first cast into prison; and after a
while being delivered, he sold his patrimony, and gave the price thereof partly
to the poor, and partly to his accusers, as his great benefactors; but after
this being apprehended again, under Sapritius Judge* torn in pieces, and
thrust through with a sword accomplished his Martyrdom. At Pompeiopolis in
Cilicia S. Sozontes Martyr, who under Maximianus Emperor being thrown into
the fire, gave up the Ghost. At Aquileia of S. Anastasius Martyr. In the
territory of Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. Regina Virgin and Martyr, who under Olybrius Proconsul, having
endured imprysonment, the torture of Equuleus, and burning with torches, at
last beheaded, went joyfully to her Spouse. At Tr^
Trois of S. Nemori^s Deacon, and his fellows Martyrs, who were slain by
Attilas King of the Hunnes. At Orleans in France the deposition of S. Euortius
Bishop, who being first Subdeacon of the Church of Rome, was by the sign of a
Dove sent from Heaven, ordained Bishop of that City. In France of S.
Augustalis Bishop and Confessor. At Capua of S. Pamphilus Bishop. In the
territory of Paris of S. Clodoald^ Priest and Confessor.

F The eight Day.
THE Nativity of the most Blessed, and Euer-Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. At
Nicomedia of S. Adrian Martyr, with three and twenty others, who after many
torments under Diocletian and Maximian Emperors, having their thighs broken,
accomplished their Martyrdom, upon the fourth day of March. Their Relics
were by the Christians transported to Bizantium, and there honorably buried;
from whence the body of S. Adrian was upon this day translated to Rome, and his
feast chiefly kept. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Ammon, Theophilus,
Neoterius, and two and twenty others. At Antioch of the holy Martyrs Timothy
and F^stus. At Gaza in Palestine of the holy Martyrs Eusebius, Nestab^, and
Zeno brothers, who under Julian the Apostata, by a multitude of Pagans
violently oppressing them, were hewed in pe^ces and killed. There also of S.
Nestor Martyr, who under the same Julian, being by the said furious Gentiles
most cruelly tormented, gave up the Ghost. At Frisinghen in Bauaria of S. (...)
Frising^.
Corbinianus the first Bishop of that City, who ordained by Pope Gregory the
second, and sent thither to preach the Gospel, reaped a most plentiful
harvest in France and Germany, and finally adorned with many virtues and
miracles, ended his blessed days.

G The nynth Day.
AT Nicomedia the passion of the holy Martyrs Dorotheus, and Gorgo^ius, who
having been advanced by Dioc^an the Emperor to very great Honor, were for
detesting his cruelly against the Christians, commanded to be first hanged up
in his presence, and all torn with whippes, then their skin to be pulled off,
and rubbed over with salt and vinager, to be broyled upon a gridiron, and last
of all to be strangled to death. The Body of S. Gorgonius was afterward brought
to Rome, and laid for a time in the way Latina, and thence translated unto S.
Peter's Church. In Sau^, thirty miles from Rome, of the holy Martyr^ Hi^cynthus,
Alexander, and Tiburtius. At Sebasta of S. Seuerianus a Soldier, under
^^ci^ius Emperor, who for often visiting the forty Martyrs, whilst they were
in prison, by commaundment of Lysias President being hanged up with a great
stone tied at his feet, and cruelly beaten and torn with whipps, in midst of
his torments gave up the Ghost. The same day the passion of S, S^rat^, who for
confessing Christ, being tied to the boughs of two trees, and so drawn in
p^^ces, accomplished his Martyrdom. Also of the holy Martyrs Rufinus and
Rufinianus Brothers. At Rome of S. Sergius Pope and Confessor. In the
territory of Teruane, of S. Aud^ma^us.
Omer Bishop. In Scotland of S. Qu^^anus Abbot.

A The tenth Day.
AT Tolentino in Picenum.
Marc-Ancona the deposition of S. Nicolas Confessor, of the Eremiticall Order
of S. Augustine. In Africa the birthday of the holy Bishops Nemesianus,
Felix, Lucius, and another Felix, Litteus, Polianus, Victor, Iaderes, Datiuus,
and others, who in the furious persecution under Valerian and Gallienus, for
their constant confessing of Christ, being first cruelly beaten with cudgells,
then laid in fetters, and appointed to dig in the metal mines,
accomplished the agony of their glorious Confession. At Chalcedon of the holy
Martyrs Sosthenes and Victor, who in the persecution of Diocletian, under
Priscus Proconsul of Asia, after they had overcome imprisonment, the beasts,
and other torments, were condemned to be burned; but they saluting each other
with a holy kiss, whilst they prayed, gave up the Ghost. In Bithynia of the
holy virgins Menodora, Metrodora, and Nymphodora sisters, who under Maximianus
Emperor, and Fronto President were crowned with Martyrdom. Also of the holy
Martyrs Apellius, Lucas and Clemens. At Liege in the lower Germany of S.
Theodardus Bishop and Martyr, who gave his life for his flock, and after his
death became renowned for miracles At Rome of Saint Hilarious Pope and
Confessor. At ^ompostella in Spain, of S. Peter Bishop, renowned for many
virtues and miracles. In the City of Albiga.
Albi in France, of S. Salutus Bishop and Confessor. At Nouara of S. Agapius
Bishop. At Constantinople of S. Pulcheria Empress, renowned for Religion and
Piety.

B The elcauenth Day.
AT Rome, in the old way of Salaria, in the Churchyard of Basilla, the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Protus and Hyacinthus Eunuchs to blessed
Eugenia, who under Gallienus Emperor, being accused for Christians, and
refusing to sacrifyce unto Idols, were first sore whipped, and afterward
beheaded. At Laodicea in Syria, the passion of the Saints Diodorus, Diomedes,
and Didimus. At Leglo.
Leon in Spain of S. Vincent Abbot and Martyr. In Egypt of S. Paphnutius
Bishop, who was one of those Confessors, which under Maximianus Emperor,
having their right eye pulled out, and maimed in the left leg, were condemned
to dig in the metal mines; and afterward under Constantine the Great
valiantly defending the Catholic Faith against the Aria^s, adorned with many
Crowns rested in peace. At Lions the deposition of S. Patiens Bishop. At
Alexandria of S. Theodora, who having unadvisedly committed a fault, and
becoming truly penitent for the same, in a religious weed, continued unknown,
in wonderful Abstinence, and Patience, until her dying day.

C The twelfth Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of the holy Martyrs H^eronides, Leontius,
Serapion, Sel^sius, Valerian, and Strato, who under Maximinus Emperor were
drowned in the sea for the confession of Christ. In Bithynia of S. Antonomus
Bishop and Martyr, who flying the persecution of Di^cletian, came out of Italy
thither, where having converted very many to the Christian faith, was by the
furious Gentills killed at the Altar whilst he said mass, and so became a
sacrifice of Christ. At Mera in Phrygia, the passion of the holy Martyrs
Macedonius, Theodulus, and T^, who under Julian the Apostata, after other
torments, by commaundment of Almachius president, being laid upon a
hoat-burning gridiron, joyfully accomplished their Martyrdom. At Iconium in
Licaonia of S. Curonotus Bishop, who being beheaded under Perennius President,
received the palm of Martyrdom. At Tic^num*
Pauia of S. Iuuentius Bishop, of whom mention is made upon the eight day of
February, who being sent by S. Hermagoras Disciple to S. Mark the Evangelist,
together with S. Syrus unto that City, they both preached the Gospel there
for many years; and by their holy life, and miracles, spread abroad the light
thereof also to other Cittyes near adjoining; and finally renowned in
Episcopal dignity, they rested in peace. At Lions the deposition of S.
Sacerdos Bishop. At Verona of S. Siluinus Bishop. At Ande^*
Anderlec of S. Guido Confessor.

D The thirteenth Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of S. Philip, Father to S. Eugenia virgin, who
resigning up the Government of Egypt, obtained the grace of baptism; and was
afterward by commaundment of Terentius his successor in that Office, as he was
in prayer beheaded. There also of the holy Martyrs Macrobius, and Julian, who
suffered under Lycinius Emperor. The same day of S. Ligorius Martyr, who
living in the desert, was killed by the Gentills, for the faith of Christ. At
Alexandria of S. Eulogius Bishop renowned for doctrine and holiness of life. At
An^e. gauum.
Angiers in France of S. Maurilius Bishop, famous for innumerable miracles. At
Senones.
Sens of S. Amatus Bishop and Confessor. The same day of S. Venerius Confessor,
a man of wonderful holiness, who lead an Eremiticall life in the Island of
Palmaria. In the monastery of Romaricu^.
Romiemond in Lorayne of S. Amatus Priest and Abbot, greatly renowned for the
virtue of abstinence and miracles.

E The fourtenth Day.
THE Exaltation of the Holy Cross, when Heraclius Emperor having overcome
Cosroes King of Persia, brought the same thence to Jerusalem. At Rome in the
way Appia of S. Cornelius Pope and Martyr, who in the persecution of Decius
being banished, was commanded to be beaten with leaden whippes, and after with
one and twenty others, men and women, beheaded. The same day also were beheaded
Cerealis a soldier, and Salustia his wife, whom the same Cornelius had
instructed in the Christian faith. In Africa the passion of S. Cyprian Bishop
of Carthage, most renowned for holiness of life and doctrine; who under Valerian
and Gallienus, after a hard banishment, was beheaded six miles from Carthage,
near to the sea, and so accomplished his Martyrdom. There suffered also in
the same place the holy Martyrs Crescentianus, Victor, Rosula, and Generalis.
At Rome of S. Crescentius a Child, Son to S. Euthymius, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, under Turpilius Judge, in the way Salaria, ended his
life by the sword. At Treuers of S. Maternus Bishop, Disciple to S. Peter the
Apostles, who converted to the faith of Christ the Inhabitants of Tongres,
Cullen, Treuers, and other people adjoining. Also the same day the birthday of
S. John Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, who by a faction of his
adversaries being sent into banishment, and recalled by a decree of Pope
Innocentius the first, being greatly afflicted by the soldiers that guarded
him, in the way homeward gave up his soul to God. But his feast is kept the
27. of January, upon which day his holy body was, by Theodosius the younger,
translated unto Constantinople.

F The fifteenth Day.
THE Octaue of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary. At Rome in the way
called Numentana, the birthday of S. Nicomedes Priest and Martyr, who for
saying to those that would compel him to sacrifyce: I offer no sacrifice but
to God Allmighty, who reigns in heaven: being a long time beaten with leaden
whippes, went unto our Lord. In the territory of Cabllo.
Cauaillon of S. Valerian Martyr, who by Priscus the President being hanged
up, and torn with iron claws, and persisting immovable in the confession of
Christ, joyfully praising his holy Name was finally beheaded. At Marcianopolis
in Thracia of S. Melitina Martyr, who under Antoninus Emperor, and Antiochus
President, being drawn once or twice to the Idola^^ous Temples of the
Gentills, and the Idols still falling down at her presence, after cruel
torments was at last was beheaded. At Hadrianople of the holy Martyrs Maximus,
Theodorus, and ^sclepiodo^us, who were crowned under Maximianus Emperor. There
also of S. Porphyrius a ^ester, who in presence of Iuli^^ the Apostata, being
on a time baptized in jest, was by the power of God suddenly changed, and
professed himself a Christian; for which being forthwith commanded to be
beheaded, was crowned with Martyrdom. The same day of S. Nicetas a Goth who by
commaundment of Athanaricus King was burned. At Cordoua of the holy Martyrs
Emilas Deacon, and Hieremy, who in the persecution of the Arabians, after long
imprysonment beheaded, accomplished their Martyrdom. At Tullum.
Toul in Lo^aine of S. Aprus Bishop. Also of S. Leobinus Bishop of Carnu^um.
Chartres. At Lions of S. Albin Bishop. The same day the deposition of S.
Aichardus Abbot. In France of S. Eutropia Widow.

G The sixtenth Day.
AT Chalcedon the birthday of S. Euphemia virgin and Martyr, who for the
confession of Christ, under Diocletian Emperor, and Priscus Proconsul, having
overcome the torments of imprisonment, of strypes, wheel, fire, weight of
stones, beasts, whippes, sharp sawes, and burning fiery plates, being again
brought into the Theater and exposed to the beasts, after she had prayed to our
Lord to receive her soul* one of the beasts offering to fasten upon her, and
the rest licking her fe^^e, gave up her unspotted soul to God. At Rome of the
holy Martyrs Lucia a noble Woman, and Geminianus, who under Di^cletian Emperor
after they had been sore afflicted with grievous pains, and long torments, at
length beheaded obtained a renowned victory of Martyrdom. Also at Rome in the
way Flaminia of the holy Martyrs Abundius Priest, and Abundanti^s Deacon, who
under the same Diocletian, together with Marcianus a Noble man, and John his
Son whom by their prayers they had raised from death, were carried ten miles
from the City, and beheaded. At Heraclea in Thracia of S. Sebastiana Martyr,
who converted to the faith of Christ by S. Paul the Apostle under Domitianus
Emperor, and Sergius President, having been diverse ways tormented, was finally
beheaded. At Cordoua of the holy Martyrs Rogellus and Seruid^us, who having
their hands and feet cut off, were beheaded. In Scotland of S. Ninian^s Bishop
and Confessor. In England of S. Editha Virgin daughter to King Egdar, who being
consecrated to God in a Monastery from her tender years, was rather ignorant
of the world, then forsook it.

A The seauententh Day.
AT Rome in the way Tiburtina, the birthday of S. Justin Priest and Martyr,
who in the persecution of Valerian and Gallienus renowned for his glorious
Confession of faith, having buried the bodies of S. Xystus pope, S. Laurence,
Hyppolitus, and of many other Saints, at last under Claudius accomplished his
Martyrdom. Also at Rome of the holy Martyrs Narcissus and Crescention. In
Phrygia of S. Ariadna Martyr under Hadrian Emperor. In England of the holy
Martyrs Socrates and Stephen. At N^ui^d^num.
Neuers of the holy Martyrs Valerianus, Macrinus, and ^ordianus. At Austum of
S. Flocellus a boy, who under Antoninus Emperor, and Valerian Governor, being
sore afflicted, and torn in pieces by wild beasts obtained the crown of
Martyrdom. At Liege of S. Lambers Bishop of Maestricht, who out of zeal
reprehending certain abuses in the King^ Court, being for that cause slain by
wicked men, entered into the Court of heaven, there to live for ever. The same
day of S. Agathoelia maid-seruant to an Infidel woman, who being cruelly
whipped a long time together, and otherwise afflicted to make her deny Christ,
yet perseuering still in the confession of her faith, having her tongue cut
out, was finally cast into the fire. At Cordoua of S. Columba virgin and
Martyr. At Millan the deposition of S. Satyrus Confessor, whose renowned acts
are recounted by his brother S. Ambrose. At Rome of S. Theodora Matrone, who in
the persecution of Diocletian diligently served the holy Martyrs. At Binghen in
the Diocese of Mentz of S. Hildegardes Virgin. The same day the Commemoration
of the holy Marks imprinted by the wonderful favor of God, in the hands,
feet, and side of S. Francis, Fou^der of the Order of Minorits, which happened
in the mountain of Aluerne in Tuscany.

B The eightenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Methodius Bishop of Olympia in Lycia first, and after of
Tyrus, renowned for eloquence and learning, who in the end of the last
persecution, as writes S. Hierome, at Chalcis in Greece was crowned with
Martyrdom. In the territory of Vienne in France of S. Ferreolus Martyr, who
having the Authority of a Tribune, was by commaundment of Crispinus the wicked
President, first apprehended, and cruelly whipped, then laden with a great
weight of chains, and thrust into prison, out of which, his bands being
miraculously loosed, and the doors open, he escaped; but being taken again by
those that pursued him, by loss of his head, receaned finally the palm of
Martyrdom. Also of the holy Martyrs Sophia and Irenes. At Millan of S.
Eustorgius the first Bishop of that City much commended by S. Ambrose. At
Gortina in Candia of S. Eumenus Bishop and Confessor.

C The nynetenth Day.
AT ^li.
Puzzuoli in Campania of the holy Martyrs Ianuarius Bishop of Beneuento, Festus
his Deacon, and Desiderius Lector, together with Sosius Deaco^ of the Church
of Misenas, Proculus Deacon of Puzzuoli, E^^iches and Acutius, who after many
afflictions and long imprysonment were beheaded under Diocletian Emperor. The
body of S. Ianuarius was brought to Naples, and there honorably enterred in
the Church, where his holy blood is kept in a violl of thristall, even until
this day; which being set near to his head, waxes liquid, and bubleth up, as
though it were fresh. At Nuce^.
Nocer^ the birthday of the holy Martyrs Felix and Constantia, who suffered
under Nero. In Palestine of the holy Martyrs Peleus, Nilus, and Elias, all
Bishops of Egypt, who in the cruel persecution of Diocle^^an, with many
others of the Clergy were consumed by fire. The same day of the holy Martyrs
Trophimus, Sabbatius, and Dorimedon a Senator, under Probus Emperor; of whom
Sabbatius by commaundment of Atticus President, was so long whipped at Antioch,
until he gave up the ghost: but Trophimus being sent to the President
Perennius at Synnada, after many torments, together with Dorimedon being
beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Cordoua, in the persecution of the
Arabians, of S. Pomposa virgin and Martyr. At Canterbury in England of S.
Theodorus Bishop, who being sent thither by Vi^alianus Pope, was renowned for
doctrine and holiness of life. At Tu^^^^^.
Tours of S. Eustochius Bishop, a man of great virtue. In the territory of
Lingo^,
Langres of S. Sequanus Priest and Confessor.

D The twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of S. Matthew Apostle and Evangelist. At Rome the passion of the
holy Martyrs, Eustachius and Theopistes his wife, with their two sons Agapius
and Theopistus, who under Hadrian Emperor being condemned to the beasts, but
by the power of God not touched by them, were shut up into a fiery brazen ox,
and so accomplished their Martyrdom. At Cy^icus in Propontis, the birthday of
the holy Martyrs Fausta Virgin, and Euilasius, under Maximianus Emperor, of
whom Fausta having her head shaven, to the horror of the beholders, was
hanged up and tortured by the same Euilasius at that time an Idolatrous Priest,
who when he would have cut her in two, and the Executioners could not hurt her,
being thereat astonished believed in Christ; and whilst by commandment of the
Emperor he was cruelly tortured, Fausta being pierced in the head and body
with sharp nails, and put into a hoate burning pan, called by a voice from
heaven, together with the said Euilasius went unto our Lord. In Phrygia of the
holy Martyr^ D^nnis and Priuatus. Also of S. Priscus Martyr, who being stabbed
into the body with sharp-pointed daggers, was beheaded. At Pergen in Pa^philia
of the Saints Theodorus, Philippa his mother, and their fellows, Martyrs,
under Antoninus Emperor. At Carthage of S. Candida Virgin and Martyr, who
under Maximianus Emperor having her body all torn with whips, was crowned a
Martyr. Also of the holy Mattyrs Susanna daughter to Arthemius an Idolatrous
Priest, and Martha. The same day of S. Agapitus Pope, of whose holiness S.
Gregory the great writes. At Millan of S. Clicerius Bishop and Consessour.

E The one and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Matthew Apostle and Evangelist, who preaching in
Aethiopia, was there Martyred. The Gospel written by him in Hebrew, was by
his own revelation found, together with the body of S. Barnaby Apostle, in
the time of Zeno Emperor. In the Land of Saar of S. Jonas Prophet, who was
buried in Geth. At Rome of S. Pamphilus Martyr. There also in the way called
Claudia, twenty miles from the City, the passion of S. Alexander Bishop, who
under Antoninus Emperor for the Faith of Christ, having overcome fetters,
cudgells, the torture Equuleus, burning with torches, tearing with iron hooks,
beasts, and the fiery furnace, at last beheaded, obtained a glorious crown.
His body was afterward translated into the City, by S. Damasus Pope, upon the
six and twenty day of November, on which day he ordained that his feast should
be kept. In Phoenicia of S. Eusebius Martyr, who going of his own accord to
the Governor, and professing himself a Christian, after many torments was
beheaded. In Cyprus of S. Isacius Bishop and Martyr. There also of S. Meletius
Bishop and Confessor. In Aethiopia of S. Iphigenia Virgin, who baptized, and
consecrated to God by S. Matthew the Apostle, dyed in all Sanctimony.

F The two and twentieth Day.
AT Sedunum.
Sitten in Switzerland the birthday of the Holy Martyrs, Mauri^ius, Ex^perius,
Candidus, Victor, Innocentius and Vitalis, with their fellows of the Thebean
Legion, who being killed for Christ under Maximianus Emperor, adorned the
world with their glorious Martyrdom. At Rome the passion of the holy Virgins
and Martyrs Digna and Emerita, under Val^ri^ and Gallienus, whose relics are
kept ther^ in the Church of S. Marcellus. At Chast^es (...) S. Jonas Priest and
Martyr, who commin^ into France with S. Dennis, by commaundment of Iulianus
Governor being cruelly whipped, accomplished his Martyrdom At Ratisbone in
Bauaria of S. Emeramus Bishop and Martyr, who to save others ^o^ Christ's cause,
endured a most cruel death At Antinople in Egypt of S. Iraides a Virgi^ of
Alexandria, with her fellows Martyn who going forth of the City to draw water
at a fountain, and seeing a ship lade^ with Confessors of Christ to pass by,
leaving her bucket, forthwith joined hersel^ unto them; and being brought with
them to Antinople, first of all, after many torments was beheaded; and after
her, the Priests* Deacons, Virgins, and all the rest of her company dyed the
same death. At Meld^.
Meaux of S. Sanctinus Bishop, disciple to S. D^, who being by him ordained
Bishop of tha^ City, first preached the Gospel there. In the territory of
Constance of S. Lau^^n Bishop. At Pictauium.
Poitiers of S. Florentius Priest. In the territory of Bourges of S. Syluanus
Confessor. At Laudunum.
L^on of S. Salab^rga Abbess.

G The three and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Linus Pope and Martyr, who governed the Church of Rome next
after S. Peter the Apostle, and being there martyred, lies buried in the
Vatican near to the same Apostle. At Iconium in Lycaonia of S. Thecla Virgin
and Martyr who converted to the Faith of Christ by S. Paul the Apostle, under
Nero the Emperor having for the confession of Christ, and instruction of many,
endured the fire, beasts, and many other torments, coming to Seleucia, there
finally rested in peace; whom the holy Fathers in their writings have highly
extolled. In Campania the Comemoration of S. Sosius Deacon of the Church of
Misenas, from whose head the holy Bishop Iannarius seeing a fiery beam to
ascend whilst he ^^ad the Gospel, foretold he should be a Martyr; and not
many days after, at the age of thirty years, together with the said Bishop
he suffered Martyrdom, by being beheaded. In Africa of the holy Martyr^
Andrew, John, Peter, and Anthony. In the territory of Constance of S. Paternus
Bishop and Martyr. At Ancona of S. Constan^* Mansionary of the Church of S.
Stephen, renowned for miracles. In Spain of the holy women Xantippa and
Polyxena, disciples of the Apostles.

A The four and twentieth Day.
AT Augu^^odunu^.
Austum the birthday of the holy Martyrs Andochius Priest, Thyrsis Deacon, and
Felix, who being sent into France by S. Polycarp Bishop of Smirna, out of the
East to preach the Gospel, after they had been sore whipped, and hanged up a
whole day together by the hands, cast also into the fire but not burnt, at
length having their necks broken with bars, ended their Martyrdom. In
Egypt the passion of Saint Paphnutius, and his fellows, Martyrs, who living a
solitary life in the wilderness, and hearing that many Christians were
imprisoned, moved by the spirit of God, voluntarily offered himself to the
Governor, professing the same Christian Faith, by whom being first bound in
iron chains, and long tortured upon the rack Equuleus, was finally with many
others sent prisoner to Diocletian the Emperor, and by his commandme^t being
nailed to a palm tree, and the rest slain, accomplished his Martyrdom. At
Chalcidon of forty and nine holy Martyrs, who after the passion of S.
Euphemia, under Diocletian Emperor being condemned to the beasts, and
miraculously delivered from them, at last beheaded, went to our Lord. In
Pannonia.
Hungary of S. Gerard Bishop and Martyr. At Auuergne the deposition of S.
Rusticus Bishop and Confessor. In the territory of Belouacum.
Beauuais of S. Geremarus Abbot.

B The five and twentieth Day.
IN the Castle of Emmaus, the birthday of S. Cleophas disciple of our Lord,
who by tradition is said to have been killed by the Jews, for the confession of
Christ, in the same house, in which he had entertained him, and was there
honorably buried. At Rome of S. Herculanus Soldier and martyr, who converted
to Christ by the miracles, which he saw at the Martyrdom of S. Alexander
Bishop, after many torme^^s under Antoninus Emperor, dyed by the sword. At
Amiens in France of S. Firminus Bishop, who in the persecution of Diocletian
under Rictiouarus President, after diverse torments was beheaded. At Damasco of
the holy Martyrs Paulus and Tatta his wife, Sahinianus, Maximus, Rufus, and
Eugenius their children, who being accused to be Chr^ stians, and cruelly
whipped, and otherwi^ tormented, gave up their souls to God. I^ Asia the
passion of the holy Martyrs Bard^ ^ianu^, Eucarpus, and six and twenty others
The same day of S. Anathalon Co^fessor, disciple to S. Barnaby the Apostle, and
Bishop^ the Church of Millan. At Lions the deposition of S. Lupus, who of an
Anchoret, was ordained Bishop. At Anti^^odotu^.
Auxerre of S. Anachariu^ Bishop and Confessor. At ^lesae.
Blois o^ S. Solemnius Bishop of Chartres, renowned for miracles. The same day
of S. Princip^u^ Bishop of Soissons, brother to S. Remigius. At Anagnia of the
holy virgins Aurelia and Neomisia.

C The six and twentieth Day.
AT Nicomedia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Cyprian, and Iustina Virgin,
under Diocl^tian Emperor, and Euthol^ President, of whom Iustin^ having
endured many torments for Christ, and converted Cyprian to the faith, who
before was a Magitian, and had his by magical practices attempted to bewitch
her, was finally martyred with him. Their bodies being ^ast out to the beasts,
but taken up by night ^f certain Christian Mariners, and brought ^o Rome,
were honorably placed in the Church of Constantine, near unto the Font. At
Rome of S. Callistratus Martyr, and forty nine other Soldiers, who in the
persecu^ion of Diocletian, by seeing Callistratus sowed up in a sack, and cast
into the sea, to have by the power of God escaped drowning, were converted unto
Christ, and together with him endured Martyrdom. Also at Rome of S. Eusebius
Pope. At Bolonia of S. Eusebius Bishop and Confessor. At (...)*
Brescia of S. Vigilius Bishop. At Albano of S. Senator. At Tusculum.
Frescati of S. Nilus Abbot, Founder of the Monastery of Cripta-ferrata, a man
of great holiness. At Tiphernum.
Cittad^ Castello of S. Amantius Priest, famous for miracles.

D The seven and twentieth Day.
IN Egaea the birthday of the holy Martirs Cosmas and Damianus Brothers, who
in the persecution of Diocletian after many torments, having by the power of
God overcome fetters, prison, dangers of sea, of fire, crosses, stoning, and
arrows, were beheaded; with whom are said to have suffered three of their
brothers, Anthimus, Leontius* and Eupr^pius. At Rome of S. Epicharides (...)
Senators wife who in the same persecution after she had been beaten with
leade^ whippes, was beheaded. At Tudertum.
Todi of the holy Martyrs Fidentius and Terentius, under the same Diocletian.
At Cordoua of the holy Martyrs Adulphus and John Brothers, who in the
persecution of the Arabians, for Christ were crowned with Martyrdom. At
Sedunum.
Sitten in Suitzerland of S. Florentinus Martyr, who together with S. Hilary,
after he had his tongue cut out, dyed by the sword. At Byblus in Phoenicia of
S. Mark Bishop, who is called also John by S. Luke. At Millan of S. Caius
Bishop, disciple to S. Barnaby the Apostle, who baptized the Saints Geruasius
and Protasius, and having suffered many afflictions in the persecution of Nero,
went to rest in peace. At Rauenna of S. Aderitus Bishop and Confessor. At Paris
of S. Eleazarus Earl. In Han^onia.
Hennault of S. Hiltrudes Virgin.

E The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Priuatus Martyr, who being a leaper, and healed by S. Callistus
Pope, was after under Alexander Emperor, beaten with leaden whippes for the
faith of Christ, until he gave up the ghost. There also of S. Stacteus Martyr.
In Africa of the holy Martyrs Martialis, Laurence, and twenty others. At
Antioch in Pisidia of the holy Martyrs Marcus a Shepherd, Alphius, Alexander,
and Zosimus his brothers; also of Nicon, Neon, Heliodorus, and thirty
soldiers, who believing in Christ through the miracles wrought by the forsaid
Marcus, were in sundry places, by diverse torments, crowned Martyrs. The same
day the passion of S. Maximus, under Decius Emperor. In Bohemia of S.
Wenceslaus Duke of the Bohemians and Martyr, renowned for holiness and miracles,
who killed in his brothers house, went triumphantly to heaven. At Tolosa of S.
Exuperius Bishop and Confessor, who how sparing he was in regard of himself,
and how liberal toward others, S. Hierome has left a memorable testimony. At
Genu^ of S. Solomon Bishop and Confessor. At Brescia of S. Siluinus Bishop.
The same day of S. Eustochium Virgin, daughter to Blessed Paula, who being
brought up at the Manger of our Lord with other Virgins, renowned for merits,
went to her Spouse. In Germany of S. Lioba Virgin, famous for miracles.

F The nine and twentieth Day.
IN the Mount Garganus, the famous memory of S. Michael Archangell, at what
time a Church was there consecrated unto his Name; small in respect of the
exterior form, but greatly renowned with heavenly virtues. In Thracia the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Eutychius, Plautus, and Heraclea. In Persia of S.
Gudelia Martyr, who after she had converted very many to the faith of Christ,
and refusing to adore the Sun and the Fire, under Sapores King after many
torments, having the skin plucked off her head, and nailed to a post, deserved
a triumphant Crown. There also of the holy Martyrs Dadas Kinsman to King
Sapores, Casdoa his wife, and Gabdelas their son, who being deprived of their
honor and dignity, and put to diverse torments, after long imprisonment, were
beheaded. In Armenia of the holy virgins Ripsimes, and her fellows, Martyrs,
under King Tiridates. At Auxerre of S. Fraternus Bishop and Martyr. At
Pontecuruo near to Aquino, of S. Grimoaldus Priest and Confessor. In
Palestine of S. Quiriacus Anchoret.

G The thirtith Day.
IN Bethleem-Iuda the deposition of S. Hierome Priest, and Doctor of the
Church, who excelling in all kind of learning, and a dillgent imitatour of the
most approved Monks, having with the sword of his doctrine slain many
monsters of Heresies, at legth in a very old age, went to rest in peace, and
was buried there, at the Manger of our Lord: whose body being afterward
brought to Rome, is kept with due honor and Veneration in the Church of S.
Maria Mayor. The same day of S. Leopardus Martyr, one of Julian the Apostata
his retinew, who being beheaded at Rome, his body was afterward translated to
Aquisgrane. At Solodorum.
Solothurne in Suitzerland the passion of the holy Martyrs Victor and Vrsus,
two of the renowned Thebean Legion, who first under Maximianus Emperor having
been cruelly tormented, were through a bright light shining from heaven, and the
executioners falling to the ground, delivered, but afterward apprehended again
and cast into the fire, without any hurt, were finally beheaded. At Placentia
of S. Antoninus Martyr, one also of the same Legion. The same day of S. Gregory
Bishop of Great Armenia, who suffering very many afflictions under Diocletian,
at last went to rest in peace. At Canterbury in England, of S. Honorius Bishop,
and Confessor. At Rome of S. Sophia Widow, Mother to the holy virgins, Fides,
Spe^, and Charitas.

THE MONTH OF OCTOBER.
A The first Day.
AT Rhemes in France of S. Remigius Bishop and Confessor, who converted the
Frenchmen to the Christian Faith, and baptized Clodoueus their King; and when
he had been Bishop threescore and ten years, renowned for holiness and
miracles, departed this life upon the thirtenth day of January, but his feast
is kept on this day, when his holy body was translated. At Rome of S. Areta
Martyr, and of fine hundred and four others. At Tomis in Pontus of the holy
Martyrs Priscus, Crescens, and Euagrius. At Vlissipo
Lisbone in Portugal of S. Verissimus Martyr, together with Maxima and Iulia
his systers, who suffered in the persecution of Diocletian. At Tournay of S.
Piato Priest and Martyr, who coming from Rome into France with S. Quinctin and
his fellows, to preach the faith of Christ, did afterward in the persecution
of Maximianus accomplish his Martyrdom. At Thessalonica of S. Domninus Martyr
under the same Maximianus. At Gant of S. Bauo Confessor. At Vrbs v^tus.
Oruieto of S. Seuerus Priest and Confessor.

B The second Day.
AT Nicomedia of S. Eleutherius a Soldier, with innumerable others, who being
falsely accused for setting on fire the Palace of Diocletian, were by
commaundment of that most cruel Emperor, killed by heaps; of whom, some
were cut in pieces, others burned in the fire, and some others cast into the
sea; but the chiefest of them Eleutherius being long tortured, and at every
torment found more courageous then before, finally as gold tried in the fire
accomplished his victorious Martyrdom. In the territory of Attrebatum.
Arras the passion of S. Leodegarius Bishop of Augustodunu^.
Austum, whom Ebroinus high Steward to King Theodoricus, after he had been
diversely afflicted and tormented for the truth, commanded to be killed. There
also of S. Gerinus Martyr, Brother to the said S. Leodegarius, who was stoned
to death in the same place. At Antioch of the holy Martyrs Primus, Cyrillus,
and Secundarius. At Constantinople of S. Theophilus Monk, who being cruelly
tormented by Leo Isauricus, for defending holy Images, and cast into
banishment, went to our Lord. At Hereford in England of S. Thomas Bishop and
Confessor.

C The third Day.
AT Rome in the place called Vrsus pileatus, of Saint Candidus Martyr. The same
day of the holy Martyrs Dennis, Faustus, Caius, Peter, Paul, and four others,
who first under Decius having endured great persecution, and afterward under
Valerianus tormented by Aemilianus President, at last received the palm of
Martyrdom. In Westphalia amongst the old Saxons the passion of two holy
Martyrs of the same Name called Ewaldi, Priests, who preaching there the
ghospel of christ were killed by the Pagans: over whose bodies appeared a great
light in the night, showing where they were, and of what merit and favor with
God. In Africa of S. Maximianus Bishop of B^g^ia, who being often, and sorely
vexed by the Donatists, thrown down headlong also from a high tower, and
left for dead, renowned for his glorious confession, went at last to rest in
our Lord. In Palestine of S. Hesichius Confessor, disciple to S. Hilarion, and
his companion in travel. In the lower Germany, in the Diocese of Namur cum.
Namures, of S. Gerard Abbo^.

D The fourth Day.
AT Assisium.
Assisi in Vmbria the birthday of S. Fran^^s Confessor, Founder of the Order
of the Minorits; whose holy life, replenished with sanctity and miracles, is
left written by S. Bonau^^ture. At Corinth the birthday of the Saints Crisp^s
and C^i^s, of whom S. Paul the Apostle makes mention writing to the
Corinthians. In Egypt of the holy Martyrs Marcus and Marcianus Brothers, and
of almost innumerable others of both sexes, and all ages; of whom some after
whipping, and other most horrible torments of diverse kinds, being cast into
the fire, others thrown headlong into the sea, some also beheaded, others
starued, some nailed to gibbe^s, and others hanged up by the feet with their
head down ward, deserved a most glorious Crown of Martyrdom. At Damasco of S.
Peter Bishop and Martyr, who being accused to the Prince of the Saracens, for
preaching the faith of Christ, having his tongue, hands, and feet cut off, and
nailed to a cross, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Alexandria of the holy
Priests and Deacons Caius, Faustus, Eusebius, C^are^^on, Lucius, and their
fellows, of whom some were put to death in the persecution of Valerianus,
others by serving the Martyrs, received the reward of Martyrs. At Athens* of S.
Hierotheus disciple to S. Paul the Apostle. At Bolonia of S. Petronius Bishop
and Confessor, famous for learning, mi^acles, and holiness. At Paris of S. Aurea
Virgin.

E The fifth Day.
AT Mesina in Sicily the birthday of the holy Martyrs Placidus Monk, disciple
to S. Bene^* together with his two brothers E^tychius and Victori^^s, and
Fl^^i^ his sister: Also of Donatus and Fir^a^us Deacons, Faustus and thirty
other Monks, who were killed for the faith of Christ by Manuchas the Pirate.
The same day the birthday of S. Thraseas Bishop of Eumenia, who was martyred
at Smyrna. At Treuers of the holy Martyrs Palmatius, and his fellows, who in
the persecution of Diocletian, under Rictiouarus President, endured Martyrdom.
The same day the passion of S. Charitin^ Virgin, who under Diocletian Emperor,
and Domitius Co^sull being first tortured by fire, and then cast into the sea,
but by the power of God receiving no hurt, having her ha^d^ and feet cut off,
and her teeth beaten out, gave up her soul in prayer. At Auxerre the
deposition of the Saints Firmatus Deacon, and Flauiana Virgin, his sister. At
Rauenna of S. Marcellinus Bishop and Confessor. At Valence in France of S.
Apollinaris Bishop, whose life and death were renowned for virtues and
miracles. The same day of S. Attilanus Bishop of Zamora, who was canonized for
a Saint by Pope Urban the second. At Rome of S. Galla Widow, daughter to
Simmachus the Consul, who after the death of her husband perseuered all the
days of her life at S. Peter's Church in prayer, alms, fasting, and other good
works; whose most happy departure S. Gregory Pope has left written.

F The sixth Day.
IN Calabria of S. Bruno Confessor, Founder of the Order of Carthusians. At
Laodicea of S. Sagares Bishop and Martyr, an ancient disciple of S. Paul the
Apostle. At Capua the birthday of the holy Martyrs Marcellus, Castus,
Aemilius, and Saturninus. At Agennum.
Again in France the birthday of S. Fides Virgin and Martyr, by whose example
Blessed Caprasius encouraged to Martyrdom, happily accomplished his agony.
Also of S. Erotides Martyr, who being inflamed with the love of Christ,
overcame the heat of fire, by Martyrdom. At Treuers the Co^memoration of
almost innumerable holy Martyrs, who in the persecution of Diocletian, under
Rictiouarus President, by diverse kinds of death were killed. At Auxerre of S.
Romanus Bishop and Martyr. At Opit^^ gium.
Vderzo of S. Magnus Bishop, whose body lies buried at Venice.

G The seventh Day.
IN Sueuia of S. Brigit Widow. At Rome in the way Ardeatina, the deposition of
S. Mark Pope and Confessor. In the Province of Augusta Euphratesia, of the
hol^ Martyrs Sergius and Bacchus Noble Romans under Maximianus Emperor, of
whom Bacchus was so long beaten with raw si news for the confession of Christ
until h^ gave up the ghost: But Sergius being forced to wear shoes stuck
full of sharp nails remaining constant in his faith, was finally beheaded.
His body is kept at a place called of his name Sergiopolis, and honored with
frequent conc^rse of Christians, for the famous miracles wrought thereat. At
Rome of the holy Martyrs Marcellus and Apul^ius, who being first disciples of
Simon Magus, and seeing the wonders which God wrought by the Apostle S. Peter,
forsaking Simon, embraced the Apostolical doctrine, and after S. Peter's death
under Aurelianus Consul, obtained a crown of Martyrdom, and were buried
near to the City. Also at Augusta Euphratefia of S. Iulia Virgin, who under
Marcianus President accomplished her Martyrdom. At Pat^^ium.
Padua of S. Iustina Virgin and Martyr, who baptized by S. Prosdocimus disciple
to S. Peter, and persisting constant in the faith of Christ, by commau^dment of
Maximus President, thrust through with a sword, went to our Lord. At Bit^ricae.
Bourges of S. Aug^stus Priest and Confessor. In the territory of Rhemes of S.
Helanus Priest. The same day, the Commemoration of Sancta Maria (...) Victoria,
ordained by Pope Pius V. every year to be observed on this day, in memory of a
famous victory obtained by sea against the Turks, through the help and
^ntercession of the Blessed Mother of God. And Pope Gregory the XIII. ordained
likewise, the annual solemnity of the (...) of the Blessed Virgin, to be kept
upon the first Sunday of this Month, for the ^^me cause.

A The eight Day.
THE birthday of Blessed old Simeon, who in the Gospel is read to have taken
our Lord Jesus in his arms. A Caesarea in Palestine, the passion of S.
Reparata Virgin and Martyr, who for refusing to sacrifyce to Idols, being put
to diverse torments under Decius the Emperor, was finally beheaded; whose
blessed soul was seen to ascend up to heaven in the form of a Dove. At
Thessalonica of S. Demetrius Proconful, who after he had brought many to the
faith of Christ, by commaundment of Maximianus Emperor, being thrust through
the body with a lance, accomplished his Martyrdom. There also of S. N^stor
Martyr. At Hispalis.
Seuill in Spain of S. Pe^ Martyr. At Laodicea of S. Artemon Pries^ who under
Diocletian ended his Marty^dome by fire. In the territory of Lions of (...)
Benedicta Virgin and Martyr. At Ancona (...) the Saints Palatiates and
Laurentia, who i^ the persecution of Diocletian, under Dio^ President, being
sent into banishment, worn^ out with labors and miseries went unto our Lord.
At Roan of S. Euodius Bishop and Confessor. At Jerusalem of S. Pelagia,
sur-named the Penitent.

B The nynth Day.
AT Paris in France, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Denis of Areopagit^
Bishop, Rusticus Priest, and Eleutherius Deacon; of whom, S. Denis being
baptized by S. Paul the Apostle, and ordained the first Bishop of Athens, going
after to Rome was sent thence into France by S. Clement Pope to preach the
gospel; and coming to Paris, when he had for many years faithfully
fulfilled the office committed to his charge, at last, together with his
forsaid fellows, after many grievous torments, by commaundment of Fescennius
being beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom. The same day the commemoration of
S. Abraham Patriarch, and Father of all faithful Belieuers. At Iulia in the
territory of Parma, in the way called Claudia, of S. Domninus Martyr, under
Maximianus Emperor, who whilst he would have fled the fury of persecution,
being killed by those that pursued him, made a glorious end. At Cassino of S.
Deus-dedit Abbot, who being cast into prison by Sicardus the Tyrant, and there
consumed with hunger, and other miseries, rested in peace. In Hannonia.
Hennault of S. Gislen Bishop and Confessor, who resigning up his Bishopric,
and leading a monastical life in a Monastery which himself had built, was
famous for many virtues. At Jerusalem of the Saints Andronicus and Athanasia
his wife. At Antioch of S. Publia Abbess, who singing in the Quire, together
with her systers, that verse of the Psalm, The Idols of the Gentiles, are
silver and gould; and, Let them that make them, become like unto them, as
Julian the Apostata passed by, was by his commaundme^t sorely buffeted, and
checked.

C The tenth Day.
IN the Island of Creta.
Candia, of S. Piny^^ Bishop of Gnossos, who flourished vnde^ Marcus Antouinus
Verus, and Lucius Aureliu^ Commodus, leaving behind him in his wri^tings, as it
were in a glass, the lively Imag^ of his sanctity. At Cullen of S. Gereon
Martyr with three hundred and eighteen others, who in the persecution of
Maximianus, patiently endured the loss of their lives, for defense of the
truth. In the territory of the same City also, of the Saints Victor and hi^
fellows, Martyrs. At Bonna in Germany o^ the holy Martyrs Cassius and
Florentius, with very many others. At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Eulampius,
and Eulampia his sister, who hearing that her Brother was tortured for Christ,
pressing into the midst of the people, and embracing him, joined herself unto
his company, and being both cast into a caldron of boiling oil, but by the
power of God nothing hurt thereby, were together with two hundred others wh^
moved by that miracle believed in Christ, beheaded, and so accomplished their
Martyrdom. At York in England of S. Paulinut Bishop, Disciple to S. Gregory
Pope, who being sent thither, with others, to preach the gospel, converted
King Edwin, and his people to the faith of Christ. At Populonia in Tuscany of
S. Cerbonius Bishop and Confessor, who, as S. Gregory writes, was renowned for
miracles, both alive and dead. At Verona also of another S. Cerbonius Bishop.
At Capua of S. Paulinas Bishop.

D The eleauenth Day.
AT Tharsus in Cilicia the birthday of the holy Martyrs, Tharacus, Probus and
Andronicus, who in the persecution of Diocletian enduring a long and miserable
imprysonment, and thryce tormented for the confession of Christ, at last
beheaded obtained ^yumphant Crown. At Vilcassine a village in France, the
passion of the holy Martyrs Nicasius Bishop of Roan, Quirinus Priest,
Scubiculus Deacon, and Pientia Virgin, under the President Fescenninus. Also
the passion of the Saints Anastasius Priest, Placidus, Gene^^s, and their
fellows. In Thebais of S. Sar^as Disciple to S. Antony Abbot, who was there
killed for Christ, by the Saracens. At Veso^tio.
B^nson in France of S. German Bishop and Martyr. At Vzecia in Africa of S.
Firminus ^hop and Confessor. In Scotland of S. Canicus Abbot. At Lyre in the
lower Germany the deposition of S. Gummarus Confessor* At Rhedones.
Renes in France of S. Aemilianus Confessor. At Tharsus in Cilicia of the
Saints Zenaides, and Philonilla systers, who being kinswomen to S. Paul the
Apostle, were also his Disciples in faith. At Verona of S. Placidia Virgin.

E The twelfth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Euagrius Priscianus, and their fellows. At
Rauenna in the way Lauretina, the birthday o^ S. Edistius Martyr. In Lycia of
S. Donmin^ Martyr, under Diocletian Emperor. In Africa of four thousand,
nine hundred, threescore, and six holy Confessors, and Martyrs, in the
persecution of the Vandall^ under Hunnericus the Arian King; of whom^ some
being Bishops, some Priests, and others Deacons, with great troops of
faithful people joining themselves unto them, were banished into a vast
wilderness for defense of the Catholic Verity; who whilst they were lead
thither by the Mores, many being forced forward with sharp point^ of spears,
and beaten with stones, other^ bound hand and foot and drawn through ^and and
stony places, and their bodies ^ent in pieces, at last by diverse other cruel
^ormentes, obtained a famous Martyrdom. The chiefest of these Priests of our
Lord, were Felix and Cyprian Bishops. At Celena in Pannonia of S. Maximilianus
Bishop of Now called Ens.
Laureacum. At York in England of S. ^ilfride Bishop and Confessor. At Millan
of S. Monas Confessor, who was chose^ Bishop of that Church by a miraculous
light from ^eauen that environed him, whilst they were in consultation who
should be or^ayned. At Verona of S. Saluinus Bishop. In ^yria of S. Eustachius
Priest and Confessor.

F The thirteenth Day.
AT Troas in the lesser Asia, of S. Carpus disciple to Saint Paul the Apostle.
At ^ordoua in Spain the birthday of the holy Martyrs Faustus, Ianuarius and
Martialis, who ^eing first tormented upon the rack Equ^^^s, and after having
their eye-lyds shaven, ^^eir teeth stricken out, their ears and no^s cut off,
at last by fire accomplished their Martyrdom. At Thessalonica of S. Florentius
^artyr, who after diverse torments was bur^ed. In Austria of S. Colmannus
Martyr. At Sept^.
^^uta in the Kingdom of Marocco in Africa, the passion of seven holy
Martyrs, of the Order of S. Francis, Daniel, Samuel, Angel^ Domnus, Leo
Nicolaus, and Hugolinus, who s^ preaching the Gospel of Christ, and confuting
the Sect of Mahomet, after they ha^ suffered many reproaches, ^mprisonmen^ and
torments by the Saracens, at last behe^ded, obtained the palm of Martyrdom^ At
Antioch of S. Theophilus Bishop, the sixth i^ that sea after S. Peter the
Apostle. At Turones.
To^ of S. Venantius Abbot and Confessor. At Sub^acum.
Subiaco in Italy, of S. Cheli^onia Virgin.

G The fourtenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Aurelia, the birthday of S. Callistus Pope and
Mar^tyr, who by commandment of Alexand^^ Emperor, being long starued with
hunge^ in prison, and every day beaten with cud gells, at last thrown headlong
out of (...) window into a well, and drowned, de^serued a triumphant palm of
Martyrdom^ At Caesarea in Palestine of S. Fortunata virgi^ and Martyr, who in
the persecution of Di^letian, after she had overcome the tortur Equuleus, fire,
beasts, and other torments gave up her soul to God; whose body wa^ afterward
translated to N^ples in Camp^ Also of the holy Marryrs Carponius, Euaristus and
Priscianus Brothers to the foresaid Virgin Fortunata, who being beheaded after
^^r, received in like manner the crown o^ Martyrdom. Also of the holy Martyrs
^inus and Lupus. At Ariminum.
Rimini of S. Gaudentius Bishop and Martyr. At Tudertum.
Todi of S. Fortunatus Bishop, who as S. Gregory ^riteth, was most renowned for
casting ^ut of devils. At Herbipolis.
Wirtzburge of S. Bur^ardus the first Bishop of that City. At ^ruges in
Flaunders of S. Donatianus Bishop of Rhemes. At Treuers of S. Rusticus Bishop.
The same day the deposition of S. Dominicke surnamed Loricatus. In Italy of S.
Bernard Confessor.

A The fifteenth Day.
AT Rome in the way called Aurelia, of S. Fortunatus Martyr. At Cullen the
^irth-day of three hundred holy Martyrs, who in the persecution of Maximianus
accomplished the course of Martyrdom. At ^age of S. Agileus Martyr, upon whose
(...) S. Augustine made a Sermon of him to ^he people. In Prussia of S. Bruno
Bishop and Martyr, who preaching the Gospel (...) to the Ruthenians, being
apprehended and his hands and feet cut off, was finally beheaded. At Lions of
S. Antiochus Bishop, who after he had for many years most laudably governed the
flock committed to his charge obtained a heavenly crown* At Treuers of S.
Seuerus Bishop and Confessor. At Argen^o^atum.
Strasburge of S. Aurelia Virgin. At Cracouia of S. Hedwiges Duchess^ of
Polonia, renowned for her charity to the poor, and working of miracles; whom
Pope Clement the fourth canonized for a Saint. In Germany of S. Tecla Abbess.

B The sixtenth Day.
IN Africa of two hundred, and seauenty holy Martyrs, crowned together. There
also of the Saints Martianus and Saturianus* with their two brothers, who in
the persecution of the Wandalls, under Geiser^* the Arian King, being servants
to a certain Wandall, were converted to the faith of Christ, by S. Maxima
Virgin their fellowseruant, and for their constancy therein being every day
beaten for a long time with knotted cudgells, even till the bones appeared, and
still miraculously healed again, were at length sent into banishment; where
after they had converted many barbarous people to the faith of Christ, and
obtained of the Bishop of Rome a Priest, and others of the Clergy, which might
baptize them, at last tied by the feet to the end of swift-running Chariots,
and dragged through a thorny wood, accomplished their Martyrdom. But Maxima,
after she had endured many conflicts for her faith, and by the power of God set
free, being made Mother of many Virgins, in a Monastery, happily rested in our
Lord. There also of the holy Martyrs Saturninus and Nereus, with three hundred,
threescore and five others. At Cullen of S. Eliphius Martyr, under Iu^n the
Apostata. Also of S. Bercharius Abbot and Martyr. In the territory of Bourges
of S. Ambrose Bishop of Ca^u^cum.
Cahors. At Mentz of S. Lullus Bishop and Confessor. At Tre^s of S.
Florentinus Bishop. At Arbone in Germany of S. Gallus Abbot, disciple to S.
Columbane.

C The seauententh Day.
AT Antioch the birthday of S. Heron, disciple to S. Ignatius, who being
ordained Bishop after him, like a dilligent follower of his Masters
foot-stepps, for the love of Christ, gave his life for the flock committed to
his charge. The same day the passion of the Saints Victor, Alexander, and
Marianus. In ^ers^^* of S. Mamelt^* Martyr, who being converted from Idolatry
to the faith of Christ by an Angel, was by the Gentills stoned to death, and
drowned in a deep Lake. At Constantinople of S. Andre^ Monk, who for
worshipping holy Images under Constantinus Copronymus, being oftentimes
tormented, at last having one of his feet cut off, gave up his soul to God.
At Arau^^ca.
Orang^ in France of S. Florentinus Bishop, renowned for many miracles. At
Capua of S. Victor Bishop, famous for sanctity of life and doctrine.

D The eightenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Luke Evangelist, who having endured many afflictions for
the name of Christ, full of the holy Ghost, dyed in Bithynia; whose holy
relics were brought first to Constantinople, and thence translated to Padua.
At Antioch of S. Asclepiades Bishop, one of those renowned Martyrs, that
gloriously suffered under Macrinus. In the Territory of Belua^um.
Beau^ of S. Iuctus Martyr, who being but a child, was killed by Ri^^io^^^^s
Governor in the persecution of Diocletian, for the faith of Christ. At
Neocaesarea in Pontus of S. Atheno^s Bishop, Brother to S. Gregory Thauma^gus,
who in the persecution of Aurelianus renowned for doctrine accomplished his
Martyrdom. In Mesopotamia at the River bank of Euphrates, of S. Julian
Hermit. At Rome of S. Triphonia, sometimes w^fe to Decius Emperor, who lies
buried in the Vault near to S. Hippolytus.

E The nynetenth Day.
AT Rome the birthday of the holy Martyrs Ptolomeus and Lucius, under Marcus
Antoninus; of whom P^olomaeus, as Justinius writes, having converted a lewd
woman to the faith of Christ, and taught her to embrace Chastity, being
therefore accused by a certain shameless fellow before Vr^^cius the Governor,
and cast into a loathsome prison, at last openly professing Christ his master,
received the sentence of death: The which Lucius freely reproving, and
professing himself a Christian also. received the like sentence by the said
Vr^icius. To whom was also joined a third, and condemned to suffer the same
death, At Antioch of the holy Martyrs Beronicus and Pelagia Virgin, and nine
and forty others. In Egypt of S. Varus Soldier, who under Maximinus Emperor
visiting, and relieuing seven holy Monks that lay in prison, and one of them
dying, he would needs succeed in his place; after most cruel torments there
endured, together with them obtained the palm of Martyrdom. At Ebroi^
Eureux of S. Aquilinus Bishop and Confessor. In the territory of Orleans the
deposition of S. Veranus Bishop. At Salerno of S. Eusterius Bishop. In Ireland
of S. Ethbin Abbot. At Oxford in England, of S. Frideswide Virgin.

F The twentieth Day.
AT Au^a.
Abia near Aquila in Abruzzo, the birthday of S. Maximus Deacon and Martyr,
who for the desire he had to suffer, freely offered himself to the persecutors
that sought him, and after a constant confession of his faith, being racked
upon the torture Equuleus, and cruelly beaten with cudgells, at last thrown
headlong from a steepy place, obtained a crown of Martyrdom. At Agennum.
Again in France of S. Capras^is Martyr, who to avoid the fury of persecution
hiding himself in a den, and hearing of the torments which the holy Virgin
Fides had endured for Christ, inflamed therewith, prayed unto God, that if he
thought him worthy of the glory of Martyrdom, a spring of water might flow out
of a stone in the Den where he lay; which God granting, he went confide^tly
to the place of combat, and under Maximianus Emperor, by a renowned conflict
deserved the palm of Martyrdom. At Antioch of S. Artemius Prime-Captaine of
the Emperor, who under Constantine the Great, having had chief Command in
the wars, was by Julian the Apostata, whom he had accused of cruelty toward
Christians, grievously tormented, beaten with cudgells, and finally beheaded.
At Cullen the passion of the holy Virgins Martha and Saula with many others. At
Minden the birthday of S. Felicianus Bishop and Martyr. In Portugal of S.
Irenes Virgin and Martyr. At Paris of the Saints George Deacon, and Aurelius.
In the territory of Rhemes of S. Sindulphus Co^fessor.

G The one and twentieth Day.
IN Cyprus the birthday of S. Hilarion Abbot, whose life full of virtues and
miracles S. Hierome has left written. At Cullen the birthday of the Saints
Vrsula, and her fellows, who for the Christian Faith and defense of their
Virginity, being killed by the barbarous Hunnes, ended their lives by
Martyrdom. Very many of their holy bodies were buried at Cullen. At Ostia of
S. Asterius Priest and Martyr, who, as is recorded in the Martyrdom of S.
Callistus Pope, suffered under Alexander Emperor. At Nicomedia the birthday
of the Saints Dasius, Zoticus, and C^ius, and twelve other soldiers, who after
many torments were drowned in the sea. At Marana in Syria near Antioch, of S.
Malchus Monk. At Lions of S. Viatoy Deacon to S. Justinius Bishop of the same
City. At Laudunum.
(...) of S. Cilinia Mother to S. Remigius Bishop of Rhemes.

A The two and twentieth Day.
AT Jerusalem of S. Mark Bishop, a man of great renown and learning, who
first of all the Gentiles governed the Church of Jerusalem, and not long after
obtained the crown of Martyrdom, under Antoninus Emperor. At Hadrianople in
Thracia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Philip Bishop, Seuerus Priest,
Eusebius and Hermes, who after imprysonment, and other torments under Julian
the Apostata were burned. Also of the holy Martyrs Alexander Bishop, Heraclius
Soldier, and his fellows. At Fermo in Marc-Ancona of S. Philip Bishop and
Martyr. At Osca.
Hilesca in Spain of the holy Virgins Numilon, and Alodia systers, who for
confession of Christ being beheaded by the Saracens, finished their Martyrdom.
At Cullen of S. Cordula Virgin, one of S. Vrsula's Company, who being terrifyed
the first day with the slaughter of her fellows hid herself, but on the
morrow repenting her thereof, discovered herself to the Hunnes, and last of all
received the crown of Martyrdom. At Hierapolis in Phrygia of S. Abercius
Bishop, who flourished under Marcus Antoninus Emperor. At Roan of S. Melanius
Bishop, who being ordained by S. Stephen Pope, was sent thither to preach the
Gospel. At Fiesoli in Tuscany of S. Donatus a Scottish man by birth, and
Bishop of that City. At Verona of S. Verecundus Bishop and Confessor. At
Jerusalem of S. Mary Sal^me, who, as the holy Gospel records, was very
careful about the burial of our Lord.

B The three and twentieth Day.
IN Spain near unto Cales, of the holy Martyrs Seruandus and Germanus, who in
the persecution of Diocletian, under Viator Lieutenant, after torments,
loathsomnes of prison, affliction of hunger and thirst, and the toil of a long
voyage, which they endured being sore laden with irons, finally ended the
course of their Martyrdom, by being beheaded. The holy body of Germanus is
kept at Emerita.
Merida, and that of Seruandus at Seuill. At Antioch in Syria the birthday of
S. Theodorus Priest, who being apprehended in the persecution of wicked Julian,
after he had endured the torture of Equuleus, and many other most cruel
torments, having also his sides burned with fiery lamps, and still persisting
in the confession of Christ, finally ended his Martyrdom by the sword. At
Constantinople of S. Ignatius Bishop, who being many ways injured, and driven
also into banishment by Bardas the Emperor, whom he had reprehended for
putting away his wife, called back again and restored to his Bishopric by
Nicolas Pope of Rome, finally dyed in peace. At Burdi^ela.
Bourdeaux of S. Seuerinus Bishop of Cullen, and Confessor. At Roan of S.
Romanus Bishop. At Salerno of S. Verus Bishop. In the territory of Amiens of S.
Domitius Priest. In the territory of Poitiers of S. Beuet Confessor.

C The four and twentieth Day.
AT Venu^
Venosa in Apulia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Felix an Affrican Bishop,
Audactus and Ianuarius Priests, Fortuna^us and Septimus Lectors, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, having been a long time vexed, and afflicted with
imprisonment and fetters, both in Africa and Sicily, by Magdellianus
Governor, when Felix would by no means deliver up the sacred Books,
according to the Emperors Edict, were all at the length beheaded. At Nagran a
City in the Country of the Homerites, the Martyrdom of the Saints Aretas,
and three hundred and forty of his fellows, in the time of Justinius Emperor,
under Dunaan a Jewish Tyrant. After whom also a Christian woman was burned,
whose little son, being but a child of five years old, and stammeringly
confessing Christ, when neither by fear or flattery, he could be stayed from
running into the fire, was finally burned with his Mother. At Cullen Cullen
(...) S. Euergistus Bishop and Martyr. At Constantinople of S. Pr^c^us Bishop.
In little Brittany the depositio^ of S. Maglorius Bishop, whose body lies
buried at Paris. In the Monastery of Vertan, of S. Martin Abbot. In Campani^ of
S. Marcus Anchoret, whose worthy praises S. Gregory has written.

D The five and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Chrysanthus, and Daria his wyle, who after many
afflictions, which they had endured for Christ under Celerinus Governor, were
commanded by Nameri^^us Emperor to be ca^t into a sandpit, in the way
Salaria, and there to be over whelmed with earth and stones. Also at Rome the
birthday of forty and six holy Soldiers, who being all baptized by S.
D^ony^^as Pope, were by commaundment of Claudius Emperor beheaded, and lie
buried in the forsaid way of Salaria, together with an hundred and one and
twenty other Martyrs, amongst whom were also ^ou^e Christian Soldiers,
The^^^o^sius, Lucius, Marcus and Peter. At Su^sso^es.
So^s in France of the holy Martyrs Crispinus and Crispin^ Noble Romans, who in
the persecution of Diocletian, under. Rictiouarus President, after most cruel
torments being slain, obtained the crown of Martyrdom; whose bodies were
afterward transported to Rome, and there honorably enterred in the Church of
Saint Laurence, in In pane and perna.
Palisperna. At Florence the passion of S. Miniates a Soldier, who under
Decius Emperor striving most valia^tly for the faith of Christ, was crowned
with a famous Martyrdom. At Turr^
Torre in Sardinia of the holy Martyrs Protus Priest, and Ianuarius Deacon, who
being sent by S. Caius Pope into that Island, under Diocletian, by Barba^ius the
President were put to death. At Constantinople the passion of the Saints
Martyrius Subdeacon, and Marcianus Chantor, who under Constantius Emperor,
were slain by the Heretics. At Rome of S. Bonifacius Pope and Confessor. At
Petragoricu^
Perigueux in France, of S. Fronto, who being ordained Bishop by S. Peter the
Apostle, and sent thither with George Priest, after he had converted a great
multitude of that Nation to Christ, famous for miracles rested in peace. At
Brescia the birthday of S. Gaudentius Bishop renowned for doctrine and
holiness. At Gaualo of S. Hilary Bishop.

E The six and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Euaristus Pope and Martyr, who under Hadrian Emperor adorned
the Church of God with his blood. In Assrica of the holy Martyrs Rogatianus
Priest, and Felicissimus, who in the persecution of Valerian and Gallienus were
crowned with a renowned Martyrdom: of whom S. Cyprian also writes in his
Epistle to the Confessors. At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Lucianus, Florius,
and their fellows. The same day of S. Quod-vult-Deus Bishop of Carthage, who
together with his Clergy, being by Geisericus an Arian King, put into broken
ships without oars or sails, and so committed to the sea, beyond all
expectation aryued at Naples, and there in banishment dyed a Confessor. At
Narbone of S. Rusticus Bishop and Confessor, who flourished in the days of
Valentinianus, and Leo Emperors. At Salerno of S. Gaudiosus Bishop. At Papia.
Pauia of S. Fulcus Bishop. Also of S. Quadragesimns Subdeacon, who raised a
dead man to life.

F The seven and twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of the holy Apostles Simon and Jude. At Auila in Spain the passion
of the Saints Vincentius, Sabina and Christeta, who being most cruelly racked
upon the torture Equuleus until all their joints were loosed, and their brayns
beaten out with great bars, accomplished their Martyrdom, under Dacianus
President. At the Castle of Tyle, of S. Florentius Martyr. In Cappadocia of the
holy Martyrs Capito^lina, and Brotheides her handmaid, who suffered under
Diocletian. In India of S. Frumentius Bishop, who being there first a
Bond-slaue, and afterward ordained Bishop by S. Athanasius, did greatly
propagate the Gospel of Christ in those Parts. In Aethiopia of S. Elesbaan
King, who when he had overcome the enemies of Christ, sending his Crown to
Jerusalem, in the time of Justinius Emperor, became a Monk as he had vowed,
and finally in great holiness departed to our Lord.

G The eight and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of the holy Apostles Simon Cananaeus, and Thaddeus, who is also
called Judas; of whom, Simon preached the Gospel in Egypt, and Thaddaeus in
Mesopotamia; and afterward going together into Persia, when they had
converted an infinite multitude of that Nation to the faith of Christ,
accomplished their Martyrdom. At Rome of S. Cyrilla Virgin, daughter to S.
Triphonia, who under Claudius Emperor, was put to death for Christ. There also
of S. Anastasia the Elder, Virgin, and Cyrillus Martyrs, of whom, Anastasia in
the persecution of Valerianus under Probus Governor being bound with chains,
buffetted, tormented with fire, and whippes, and still persisting constant in
the confession of Christ, having her breasts cut off, her nails plucked off,
her teeth broken in pieces, her hands and feet cut off, being finally
beheaded, went triu^phantly to her Spouse adorned with so many jewels of
Martyrdom. Cyrillus also giving her, at her request, a cup of water to drink,
for his reward received a Crown of Martyrdom. At Como of S. Fidelis Martyr,
under Maximianus Emperor. At Mentz of S. Ferrutius Martyr. At Melda.
Meaux of S. Faron Bishop and Confessor. At Naples of S. Gaudiosus, an Affrican
Bishop, who to avoid the persecution of the Vandalls, coming thence into
Campania, in a Monastery at Naples made a holy end. At Vercells of S. Honoratus
Bishop.

A The nine and twentieth Day.
IN Lucania in the Kingdom of Naples, of the holy Martyrs Hyacinthus,
Quinctus, Felicianus and Lucius. At Sidon in Phoenicia of S. Zenobius Priest,
who in the rage of the last persecution exhorting others to Martyrdom, was
himself also made worthy of like honor. The same day of the holy Bishops,
Maximilianus Martyr, and Valentinus Confessor. At Bergomum.
Bergamo of S. Eusebia Virgin and Martyr. At Jerusalem the birthday of S.
Narcissus Bishop, greatly renowned for Holiness, Patience, and Faith, who living
an hundred and sixteen years, departed to our Lord. At Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. John Bishop and Confessor. At Cassiopis in the Island of Corcyra
of S. Donatus, of whom S. Gregory Pope writes. At Vienna the deposition of S.
Theodorus Abbot.

B. The thirtith Day.
IN Africa the birthday of two hundred and twenty holy Martyrs. At Tingis.
Tanger in Mauritania the passion of S. Marcellus a Centurion, who under
Agricolaus Lieutenant to the Governor, being beheaded accomplished his
Martyrdom. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Chronion, Julian, Macarius, and
thirteen others, under Decius Emperor. There also of S. Eutropia Martyr, who
for visiting the holy Martyrs, was with them so long tormented till she gave up
the Ghost. At Caralis.
Callari in Sardinia of S. Saturninus Martyr, who in the persecution of
Diocletian, was beheaded under Barbarus President. At Apamea of S. Maximus
Martyr under the same Diocletian. At Legio.
Leon in Spain of the holy Martyrs Claudius, Lupercus, and Victorius, sons
to S. Marcellus the Centurion, who in the persecution of Diocletian and
Maximian, under Dignianus President, were beheaded. At Aegaea in Cilicia the
passion of the Saints Zenobius Bishop, and Zenobia his sister, under Diocletian
Emperor, and Lysias President. At Altinum.
Altino of S. Theonestus Bishop and Martyr, who was slain by the Arians. At
Paris of S. Lucanu^ Martyr. At Antioch of S. Serapion Bishop, renowned for
learning. At Capua of S. German Bishop and Confessor, a man of great holiness,
whose soul, in the hour of his death, was by S. Benet seen carried up to
heaven. At Potentia.
Potenza in Lucania of S. Gerard Bishop.

C The one and thirtith Day.
THE Vigill of All Saints. At Rome the birthday of S. Nemesius Deacon, and of
Lucilla his daughter a Virgin, who when they could by no means, be brought to
forsake the faith of Christ, were by commandment of Valerianus Emperor,
beheaded upon the five and twentieth day of August: whose bodies being first
buried by S. Stephen Pope, and afterward on this day more decently entombed by
S. Xistus in the way called Appia, Pope Gregory the fifth translated into the
Oratory of the Church of Sancta Maria Noua, together with the Saints
Symphronius, Olimpius a Tribune, Exuperia his wife, and Theodulus his son,
who being all converted by the industry of Symphronius, and baptized by the
same S. Stephen, were crowned with Martyrdom. All whose bodies being there
found in the time of Pope GREGORY the thirtenth, were more honorably placed
under the Altar of the same Church, upon the eight day of December. The same
day of the Saints Ampliatus, Vrbanus, and Narcissus, of whom S. Paul makes
mention, writing to the Romans; who for the faith of Christ were slain by the
Jews and Gentills. At Augusta Veromanduorum.
Saint Quintins in France of S. Quinctinus a Citizen and Senator of Rome,
Martyred under Maximianus Emperor, whose body after fifty five years, was by
the revelation of an Angel found vncorrupt. At Constantinople of S. Stachys
Bishop, who was ordained the first Bishop of that City, by S. Andrew the
Apostle. At Millan of S. Antoninus Bishop, and Confessor. At Ratisbone of S.
Wolfgangus Bishop.

THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER.
D The first Day.
THE Festiuity of All Saints, which in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary the
Mother of God, and of all holy Martyrs, Pope Bonifacius the fourth (having
first dedicated to that use the Temple of Pantheon) ordained to be kept
solemnly, every year in the City of Rome: And afterward Pope Gregory the
fourth decreed, that the same Festiuity which at that time, was diversely kept
in sundry Churches, should on this day perpetually be observed with solemnity
of the Universal Church, in honor of All Saints. At Terracina in Campania the
birthday of S. Caesarius Deacon, who for many days being pyned in prison, was
together with S. Julian Priest, put into a sack^ and cast headlong into the
sea. At Diuio.
Dijon in Burgundy of S. Benignns Priest, who being sent into France by S.
Polycarpe to preach the Gospel of Christ, after he had been diverse ways most
cruelly tormented, vnde^ Marcus Aurelius Emperor, by Terentius Judge, having
his neck broken with an iron bar, and his body thrust through with a Lance,
accomplished his Martyrdom. The same day of Saint Mary a bondwoman, who being
accused for a Christian, under Hadrian Emperor, and first cruelly whipped,
then racked upon the torture Equuleus, and torn with iron hooks accomplished
her Martyrdom. At Damasco the passion of the Saints Caesarius, Dacius, and
five others. In Persia of the holy Martyrs John Bishop, and James Priest, under
Sapores King. At Tharsus of the Saints Syrenia and Iuliana, under Maximianus
Emperor. At Auuergne of S. Austremonius the first Bishop of that City. At
Paris the deposition of S. Marcellus Bishop. At Baio^.
Bayeux of S. Vigor Bishop, who lived in the time of King Childebert of France.
At Tibu^.
Tiuoli of S. Seuerinus Monk. In VVastinum.
Gastinois of S. Mat^^inus Confessor.

E The second Day.
THE Commemoration of all faithful Souls departed out of this life. The same
day, the birthday of S. Victorinus Bishop of Poitiers, who after he had
written many learned books, as witnesses S. Hierome, in the persecution of
Diocletian, was crowned with Martyrdom. At Te^geste.
Trieste the passion of S. Iustus, who in the same persecution accomplished his
Martyrdom, under Manatius President. At Sebasta of the holy Martyrs Carterius,
Styriacus, Tobias, Eudoxius, Agapius, and their fellows, under Licinius
Emperor. In Persia of the holy Martyrs Acyndinus, Pegasius, Aphthonius,
Elpidephorus, and Anempodistus, with many others of their fellows. In Africa
of the holy Martyrs Publius, Victor, Hermes and Papias. At Tharsus in Cilicia
of S. Eustochium Virgin and Martyr, who under Julian the Apostata, after most
cruel torments, gave up her soul in prayer. At Laodicea in Syria of S.
Theodotus Bishop, renowned for many virtues. At Vienna of S. George Bishop. In
the Monastery of Agaunum.
S. Maurice in Suitzerland, of S. Ambrose Abbot. At Cyrus in Syria of S.
Marcianus Confessor.

F The third Day.
THE birthday of S. Quartus Discipl^ of the Apostles. At Caesarea in Cappdocia
of the holy Martyrs Germanus, Theophilus, Caesarius, and Vitalis, who in the
persecution of Decius suffered a famous Martyrdom. At Caesaraugusta.
Saragoza of innumerable holy Martyrs, who under Dacianus President o^ Spain,
with wonderful fervor, gave their lives for Christ. At Viterbo of the holy
Martyrs Valentinus Priest, and Hilarious Deacon, who in the persecution of
Maximianus were for the faith of Christ cast into the river of Tybur, with a
great stone tied to their necks, but being miraculously delivered by an
Angel, finally by being beheaded, received the crown of Martyrdom. In
England of S. Winefride Virgin and Martyr. In the Monastery of Clareuallis the
deposition of S. Malachy Bishop of Connerthen in Ireland, renowned for many
virtues and miracles, whose life is written by S. Bernard Abbot. The same day
of S. Hubert Bishop of Tungres. At Vienna of S. Domnus Bishop and Confessor.
Also the deposition of S. Pirmi^us Bishop of Melda.
Meaux. At Vrgella in Spain of S. Hermengaudius Bishop.

G The fourth Day.
AT Bolonia of the holy Martyrs Vitalis, and Agricola, of whom the former
being servant to the latter, was made worthy to be his fellow in Martyrdom;
upon whom, the Executioners exercysed such cruel kinds of torments, that
there was not left one place in his body without a wound; the which he
suffering most constantly, in prayer gave up his soul to God. But Agricola
being nailed to a Cross with many nails, ended his life. At the translation
of whose bodies S. Ambrose being present, writes that himself gathered up the
Martyrs nails, triumphant blood, and wood of his Cross, and laid them under
the holy Altars. The same day of the Saints Philologus, and Patrobas, disciples
of S. Paul the Apostle. At Augustodu^^.
Austum of S. Proculus Martyr. In the territory of Vilcassine of S. Clarus
Priest and Martyr. At Ephesus of S. Porphyrius Martyr, under Aurelianus
Emperor. At Myra in Lycia of the holy Martyrs Nicander Bishop, and Hermes
Priest, under Libanius President. The same day, the birt^day of S. Pierius
Priest of Alexandria, wh^ being excellently learned in the holy Scriptures, and
renowned for purity of life, (...) like a Christian Philosopher, wholly
di^charged of all worldly impediments, v^der Carus and Diocletian Emperors
(Theon^ then governing the Church of Alexandria, taught the people with great
applause an^ commendation, besides the setting forth (...) diverse books; and
after the persecution en^ded, spending the rest of his life at Rome there
finally rested in peace. At Ruthenum.
Rhodes i^ France of S. Amantius Bishop, renowned for holiness of life and
miracles. In Bithynia of S. Ioannicius Abbot. At Alba-Regalis in Hungary the
deposition of S. Emericus Confessor son to S. Stephen King of Hungary. At
Treuers of S. Modesta Virgin.

A The fifth Day.
OF S. Zachary Priest and Prophet, Father of S. John Baptist. Also of S.
Elizabeth Mother of the same most holy Precursor. At Terracina in Campania the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Felix Priest and Eusebiu* Monk, who having
buried the bodies of the holy Martyrs Iulianus and C^sarius, and converted many
to the faith of Christ, which were baptized by S. Felix, being at length
apprehended together, and both brought to the Tribunal, when they refused to
sacrifice unto Idols, cast into prison, were the same night beheaded. At Nov^
called Hama^*
Emesa in Phoenicia of the holy Martyrs Galatian, and Epistemes his wife, who
in the persecution of Decius being first whipped, and then deprived of their
hands, feet, and tongue, were finally beheaded. Also of the holy Martyrs
Domninus, Theotimus, Philotheus, Siluanus, and their fellows, under Maximi^us
Emperor. Ar Millan of S. Magnus Bishop. At Brescia of S. Dominator Bishop. At
Treuers of S. Fibitius Abbot. At Orleance of S. Latus Priest and Confessor.

B The sixth Day.
AT Thinis in Africa the birthday of S. Felix Martyr, who confessing himself
to be a Christian, and his tormen (...) differed, was the day following (as
relates Saint Augustine, in his exposition of a Psalm upon his Feast Day to
the people) found dead in prison. At Theopolis of ten holy Martyrs, who are
said to have suffered death by the Saracens. At ^.
Barcelona, of S. Seu^rus Bishop and Martyr, who for defense of the Catholic
faith, having (...) nail strocken into his head, received the crown of
Martyrdom. In Phrygia of S. Atticus. At Berges in Flanders of S. Winock*
Abbot, renowned for many virtues and miracles, who in all humility served, for
long time, the Religious of his Monastery being his subjects. At Fundi in
Campania o^ S. Felix Monk. At Lemouica.
Limoges in Aquitan of S. Leonard Confessor, disciple of S. Remigius Bishop,
who being Nobly borne and making choice of a solitary life, was famous for
holiness and miracles, especially in delivering of Captives.

C The seventh Day.
AT Padua the deposition of S. Prosdocimus the first Bishop of that City, wh^
being ordained by S. Peter the Apostle, and sent thither to preach the
Gospel, renowned for many virtues and miracles rested happily in our Lord. At
Perugia of S. Herculanus Bishop and Martyr, who by the commaundment of Totylas
King of the Goths was beheaded: whose body as S. Gregory relates, was found
as whole, and fast united to his head, the fourtith day after i^ was cut off,
as if no edge of sword had touched it. The same day of S. Amarant^us Martyr,
who being buried in the City of A^b^ga.
Albi, after he had ended the course of his faithful agony, lives gloriously
in heaven. At Melitine in Armenia the passion of the Saints Hieron, Nicander,
Hesychius, and thirty others, who were crowned with Martyrdom in the
persecution of Diocletian, under Lycias President. At Amphipolis in Macedonia,
of the holy Martys Auctus, Tautio and Thessalonica. At Ancyra the passion of
the Saints Melasippus, Antonius and Carina, under Iulia^ the Apostata. At
Cullen of S. Engel^ertus Bishop, who for defense of the libertyes of the
Church, and obedience to the Roman sea, doubted not to suffer Martyrdom. At
Alexandria of S. Achillas Bishop, renowned for doctrine, faith, conversation,
and manners. In Frizeland the depotion of S. Willebrordus Bishop of Traiectum.
Mastricht, who being ordained by S. Sergius Pope, preached the Gospel of
Christ in Frizeland and Denmark. At Metz of S. Rufus Bishop and Confessor. At
Argentoratu^*
Strasburge of S. Florentius Bishop.

D The eight Day.
THE Octaue of All Saints. At Rome i^ in the way Lauicana, three miles from the
City, the passion of the holy Martyr^ Claudius, Nicostratus, Symphorianus,
Castori^ and Simplicius, who being first cast into prison, and afterward
grievously beaten with whips called Scorpions, when they could no^ be drawn
from the faith of Christ, were commanded by Diocletian Emperor to be ca^
headlong into the River. There also in the same place, the birthday of four
holy Martyrs Brothers Seuerus, Seuerianus, Carpophorus, and Victorinus, who
under the same Emperor were beaten to death with leaden whippes. The names of
these four (which after many years were miraculously revealed) when they
could not then be known, it was ordained, that their yearly festiuity should
be celebrated upon this day, together with the former five, under the Name of
the four Crowned Martyrs, which custom also still continued in the Church,
after their names were revealed. Also at Rome of S. Deus-dedit Pope, who was of
so great merit with God that with a kiss he cured a leaper. At Brema.
Bremen ^f S. Willehadus the first Bishop of that City, who together with S.
Bonifac^us, whose disciple he was, preached the Gospel in Frizland and
Saxony. At Suessio.
S^issons in France of S. Godfrey Bishop of Amiens, a man of great holiness. At
Verdun of S. Maurus Bishop and Confessor. At Tours of S. Clarus Priest, whose
Epitaph was written by S. Paulinus.

E The nynth Day.
AT Rome the Dedicatio^ of the Church of our Savior. At Amasia in Pontus the
birthday of S. Theodorus a Soldier, who in the time of Maximianus Emperor
being first most cruelly beaten for the conlession of Christ, and then cast
into prison, where he was visited by our Savior himself, who appeared unto
him, and bid him behave himself courageously, and constantly, being afterward
also racked upon the ^orture Equuleus, and torn with iron hooks, even till
his bowels appeared, was finally burned: whose praises S. Gregory Nysen in an
excellent oration has celebrated. At Tyana in Cappadocia the passion of S.
Orestes, under Diocletian Emperor. At Thessalonica of S. Alexander Martyr,
under Maximanus. At Bituricae.
Bourges of S. Vrsinus Confessor, who bei^ ordained at Rome by the successors
of t^ Apostles, was sent first Bishop to that C^ty. At Naples in Campania of S.
Agrippinus Bishop, renowned for miracles. At Constan^nople of the holy Virgins
Eustolia a Roman and Sopatra daughter of Mauritius the E^perour. At Berytus in
Syria the Memory our Blessed Saviors Image, which bei^ crucified by the Jews
in derision, d^ power out such plenty of blood, that bo^ the East and West
Churches received ^bundantly thereof.

F The tenth Day.
THE birthday of the holy Marty^ Triphon, and Respicius, and Nympha Vi^gin. In
the territory of Ag^^ha.
Adge in France of the holy Martyrs Tyberius, Modest^ and Florentia, who in the
time of Diocleti^ having endured diverse torments, end^ their Martyrdom. At
Antioch of the hol^ Martyrs Demetrius Bishop, Anianus Deaco^ Eustosius, and
twenty others. At Rauenna (...) S. Probus Bishop, famous for miracles. (...)
Orleance of S. Monitor Bishop and Confesso^ In England of S. Iustus Bishop, who
toge^ there with S. Augustine, Mellitus, and other ^ing sent into that Island by
S. Gregory ^ope, to peach the Gospel of Christ, re^owned for sanctity of
life, reposed there (...) our Lord. At Mill^dunum^
Mellun of S. Leo Confef^or. At Iconium in Lycaonia of the holy wo^en
Tryphenna, and Tryphosa, who by the ^reaching of S. Paul the Apostle, and
exam^le of S. Thecla Virgin, greatly profited in Christian perfection. In the
Island of Pares.
^sina of S. Theoctistes Virgin.

G The elcauenth Day.
AT Tours in France the birthday of S. Martin Bishop and Confessor, whose
^yfe was so renowned for miracles, that he was made worthy to be the raiser of
three ^ead men. At Cotyaeum in Phrygia the famous passion of S. Mennas an
Egyptian Soldier, who in the persecution of Dicole^n, casting off his
Military Cincture, and ^yring himself into the wilderness, the ^etter there
to serve his heavenly King; ^omming one day abroad, and with a free ^oyce
professing himself a Christian, was ^st most cruelly tormented, and then (...)
length, as he was upon his knees in ^rayer giving thanks to our Lord Jesus
Christ, by being beheaded, accomplished his Martyrdom, and after his death was
renowned for many miracles. At Rauenna of the holy Martyrs Valentinus,
Felicianus, and Victorinus, who suffered in the persecution of Diocletian. In
Mesopotamia of S. Athenodorus Ma^t^r, who under the same Diocletian and
E^eusi^s President, having been tortured with fire, and other most cruel
torments, at last being condemned to be beheaded, when the Executioner fell
down, and no other could be found to cut off his head, in prayer on his knees
he reposed in our Lord. At Lions of S. Veranus Bishop, whose ly^^ was renowned
for faith, and many other virtues. In the Monastery of Cripta-ferrata near
Tusculum.
Frescati, of S. Bartholomew Abbot, companion to Blessed Nilus, whose life he
wrote. In the Province of Olim Samniu^.
Abbruzzo of S. Mennas Anchoret, whose virtues and miracles are renowned by S.
Gregory Pope.

A The twelfth Day.
THE birthday of S. Martin Pope and Martyr, who gathering a Council at Rome,
and therein condemning Sergius, Paulus, and Pyrrhus Heretics, was by the
commaundment of Constans the Heretical Emperor, apprehended by deceypt, and
brought prisoner to Constananti^ople, and thence bannished into Chersonesus,
where for defense of the Catholic Faith pyning away with many miseries;
famous for miracles, he ended his life. His body was afterward translated to
Rome, and buried there in a Church dedicated to S. Siluester, and himself. In
Asia the passion of the Saints Aurelius and Publius Bishops. In the Territory
of Senones.
Sens of S. Paternus martyr. At Gaunt of S. Liuinus Bishop and Martyr. In
Polonia of the holy Martyrs Benedictus, John, Matthew, Isaac, and Christinus
Hermits. At Auignion in France of S. Rufus the first Bishop of that City. At
Cullen the depositio^ of S. Cuni^e^t Bishop. At Tu^ so.
Tarazona in Spain of Blessed Aemilianus Priest, renowned for infinite
miracles, whose marvelous life is written by S. Braulio Bishop of
Caesaraugusta.
Saragoza. At Constantinople of S. Nilus Abbot, who being Governor of a City,
became a Monk, renowned for learning and holiness of life, in the days of
Theodosius the younger. At Complutu^.
Alcala in Spain of S. Didacus Confessor, of the Order of S. Francis, who was
canonized for a Saint by Pope Xystus the fifth.

B The thirtenth Day.
AT Rauenna the birthday of the holy Martyrs Valentinus, Solutor, and Victor,
who suffered under Diocletian Emperor. At Aquae.
Aix in Prouence, of S. Mitrius a most renowned Martyr. At Caesarea in
Palestine the passion of the Saints Antoninus, Zebinas, Germanus, and Ennatha
Virgin, who after that she had been most grievously whipped, was burned under
Maximianus Emperor: but the other three for freely reprehe^ding Aemilianus the
President, whilst he sacrifyced to the Idols, were beheaded. In Africa of the
holy Martyrs Arcadius, Paschasius, Probus, and Eutychianus Spaniards, who in
the persecution of the Wandalls, when they would in no wise yield unto the
Arian Heresy, were by Geisericus the Arian King sent into banishment, and there
after most grievous torments endured, were finally killed by diverse kinds of
death. At which time also appeared the constancy of Paulillus a little boy
brother to the forsaid Paschasius and Eutychianus, who when he could by no
means be drawn from the Catholic faith, being sorely beaten with cudgells,
was finally condemned to most base servitude. At Rome of S. Nicolas Pope and
Confessor. At Turones.
Tours of S. Britius Bishop, disciple to S. Martin. At Toledo of S. Eugenius
Bishop and Confessor. At Auuergne of S. Quinctianus Bishop. At Cremona of S.
Homobonus Confessor, who renowned for miracles was canonized for a Saint by
Pope Innocentius the third.

C The fourtenth Day.
AT Heraclea in Thracia the birthday of the holy Martyrs Clementius,
Theo^otus, and Philomenus. At Alexandria of S. Serapion Martyr, who under
Decius Emperor being so long tormented, until all the joints of his body were
loosed, and then thrown headlong from the top of his own house, ended his
Martyrdom. At Tr^*
Trois in France of S. Venerandus Martyr, under Aurelianus Emperor. Also in
France of S. Veneranda Virgin, who under Antoninus Emperor, and Asclepiades
President, received the crown of Martyrdom. At Gangra in Paphlagonia of S.
Hypatius Bishop, who as he returned from the Great Council of Nice, being
stoned in the way by the Nouatian Heretics, dyed a Martyr. At Now ^aman*
Emesa the passion of many holy women who under M^dy a bloody Captain of the
A^abians, were for the faith of Christ first most cruelly tormented, and then
put to death. At Bolonia of S. Iucundus Bishop and Confessor. In Ireland of S.
Laurence Bishop of Dublin.

D The fiftenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Eugenius Bishop of Toledo and Martyr, disciple to S. Denis
of Areopagita, who in the Territory of Paris received of our Lord a glorious
Crown of Martyrdom. His body was afterward translated to Toledo in Spain. At
Nola in Campania of S. Felix Bishop and Martyr, who from the fiftenth year of
his age being renowned for miracles, at last finished the course of his
Martyrdom, together with thirty others, under Marcianus President. At Edessa
in Syria of the holy Martyrs Gurias and Samonas under Diocletian Empe^, and
Antoninus President. There also the passion of S. Abibus Deacon, who under
^nius Emperor, and Lisanias President, being first torn with iron claws, was
finally cast in to the fire. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Sec^ndus,
Fidentianus, and Varicus. In little Brittany the birthday of S. Machu^us
Bishop, who even from his tender years, was renowned for miracles. At Verona
of S. Luperius Bishop and Confessor. In Austria of S. Leopoldus, Marquis of the
same Province, who was canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocentius the eight.

E The sixtenth Day.
IN Africa of the holy Martyrs Ruffinus, Marcus, Valerius, and their fellows.
The same day of the holy Martyrs Elpidius, Marcellus, Eustochius, and their
companions; of whom, Elpidius being a Senator, and constantly confessing the
name of Christ before Julian the Apostata, was together with his fellows
first dragged at the tails of wild horses, and afterward cast into the fire,
accomplished a glorious Martyrdom. At Lions the birthday of S. Eucherius
Bishop and Confessor, renowned for ^ayth and learning, who being of the Noble
Order of Senators, took a religious habit, and of his own accord shut
himself up in a Cave, where a long time serving Christ in abstinence and
prayer, was at last by revelation of an Angel, solemnly placed in the Bishops
sea of the same City. At Padua of S. Fidentius Bishop. At Canterbury in
England of S. Edmund Bishop, whose holiness of life God testified by the
greatness of his miracles. The same day the deposition of S. Othmarus Abbot.

F The seauententh Day.
AT Neocaesarea in Pontus the birthday of S. Gregory Bishop, renowned for
learning and sanctity; who for the signs and miracles which he has wrought to
the great glory of the Church, is surnamed Thaumaturgus. In Palestine of the
holy Martyrs Alphaeus and Zacchaeus, who in the first year of the persecution
of Diocletian Emperor, after many torments were condemned to death. At Cordoua
of the holy Martyrs Acisclus, and Victoria, who in the same persecution, by
commaundment of Dion the President, being most cruelly tormented, deserved a
glorious crown of Martyrdom. At Alexandria of S. Dionysius Bishop, who
renowned for doctrine, and famous for the many afflictions and torments which
he suffered for the confession of his faith, full of venerable old years died
a Confessor, in the time of Valerianus and Gallienus Emperors. At Orleans of
S. Anianus Bishop, whose death was precious in the sight of our Lord, by many
miracles. In England of S. Hugh Bishop, who of a Charter House Monk being
ordained Bishop of Lincoln, renowned for many miracles, rested in our Lord. At
Turones.
Tours of S. Gregory Bishop. At Florence of S. Eugenius Confessor, and Deacon
to S. Zenobius Bishop of the same City.

G The eightenth Day.
AT Rome the Dedication of the Churches of the holy Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul. At Antioch the birthday of S. Romanus Martyr, who in the time of
Galerius Emperor, exhorting the Christians to withstand Asclepiades the
Governor, that brake violently into the Church, and endeauored to ruin the
same, after most grievous torments, and cutting out of his tongue (without
which nevertheless he vt^ered the praises of God) being finally strangled in the
prison, was crowned with a glorious Martyrdom. There suffered also before him
a little boy named Barulas, who being demanded, whether it were better to
worship one God or many; when he answered that men ought to believe in one God
which the Christians do serve, being first sorely whipped, was afterward
beheaded. Also at Anti^^^ of S. Hesychius Martyr* who being a Soldier, and
hearing it commanded, that whosoever would not sacrifyce to Idols, should put
off his military Cincture, he presently cast away the same; for which cause,
having a great stone tied to his right hand, was commanded to be thrown
headlong into a River. The same day of the Saints Ori^u^us, and his fellows,
who in persecution of the Wandalls suffered for the Catholic faith. At M^ntz
of S. Maximus Bishop, who in the time of C^nstantius having suffered many
afflictions by the Arians, dyed a Confessor. At Tours the deposition of S. Odo
Abbot of Cluny. At Antioch of S. Thomas Monk, whose ^estiuity the people of
Antioch do yearly solemnize, for that by his prayers he ceased a great plague
in the City. At Luca in Tuscany the translation of S. Frigidianus Bishop and
Confessor.

A The nynetenth Day.
THE birthday of S. Pontianus Pope and Martyr, who under Alexander Emperor
being banished into Sardinia, together with Philip his Priest, and there
beaten ^o death with cudgells, finished his Martyrdom: But his body, was
afterward brought back to Rome by S. Fabian Pope, and buried in the
Churchyard of Callistus. At Samaria of S. Abdias Prophet. At Rome in the way
called Appia, the birthday of S. Maxi^us Priest and Martyr, who suffering in
the persecution of Valerianus was buried near to S. Xystus. At Caesarea in
Cappadocia of S. Barlaam Martyr, who although rude and ignorant, yet armed with
the wisdom of Christ, overcame the Tyrant, and vanquished even the fire it
self with the constancy of his faith. Upon whose Festiuity S. Basil the Great,
made a famous Sermon. At Astigis.
Eceia in Spain of S. Crispinus Bishop, who being beheaded, obtained the
Crown of Martyrdom. At Vienne in France of the holy Martyrs Seuerinus,
Exuperius and Felicianus, whose bodies after many years being found out by
revelation, were by the Bishop, Clergy, and people of that City taken up, and
more honorably enterred, as they deserved. The same day of S. Faustus Deacon
of Alexandria, who first in the persecution of Valerianus, being sent into
banishment with S. Dionysius, was afterward under Diocletian, in his old age
beheaded, and so accomplished his Martyrdom. In Isauria the passion of the
Saints Azas, and of an hundred and fifty soldiers his fellowe^ under
Diocletian Emperor, and Aquilin^ Tribune. At Marspurge in Germany the
deposition of S. Elizabeth Widow, daughte^ to Andrew King of Hungary, who
greatly renowned for works of piety, and miracle^ departed to our Lord.

B The twentieth Day.
AT Messina in Sicily of the holy Martyrs Ampelus and Caius. At Tauri^um.
Turino o^ the holy Martyrs Octauius, Solutor, and Aduentor Soldiers of the
Theban Legion, who under Maximianus Emperor, valiantly fighting were crowned
with Martyrdom. At C^sarea in Palestine of S. Agapius Martyr, who under
Maximinus being first condemned to be devoured of the beasts, and nothing at
all hurt by them, was finally cast into the sea, with stones tied to his feet.
In Persia the passion of the Saints Nersas Bishop and his fellows. At
Dorostorum in Misia of S. Dasius Bishop, who for not consenting to uncleanness
in the feast of the God Saturn, was under Bassus President put to death. At
Nice in Bithynia of the holy Martyrs Bassus, Dionysius, Agapitus, and forty
others. In England of S. Edmund King and Martyr. At Constantinople of S.
Gregory of Decapolis, who suffered many afflictions for the worship of holy
Images. At Millan of S. Benignus Bishop, who governed the Church committed to
his charge, with great constancy and piety, in many vexations of barbarous
people. At Ca^^lo.
Cauaillon of S. Syluester Bishop, who in the two and fourtith year of his
priesthood, in all virtue and holiness departed to our Lord. At Verona, of S.
Simplicius Bishop and Confessor.

C The one and twentieth Day.
AT Jerusalem the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, in
the Temple. The same day the birthday of S. Rufus, of whom S. Paul the
Apostle writes to the Romans. At Rome the passion of the Saints Celsus and
Clemens. At Ostia of the holy Martyrs Demetrius and Honorius. At Rhemes of S.
Albert Bishop of Liege, and Martyr, who was killed for defense of the libertyes
of the Church. In Spain of the holy Martyrs Honorius, Eutychius and Stephen.
In Pamphylia of S. Heliodorus Martyr, in the persecution of Aurelianus, under
Aetius President: after whose Martyrdom his Executioners being converted to
the faith, we^ drowned in the sea. At Rome of S. Gelas^ Pope, renowned for
learning and holine^ At Verona of S. Maurus Bishop and Confessor. In the
Monastery of Bobi in Lombardy the deposition of S. Columbanus Abbo^ Founder of
many Monasteryes, and the Father of many Monks, who renowned for virtues and
miracles, in a good old age reposed in our Lord.

D The two and twentieth Day.
AT Rome, of S. Cecily Virgin and Martyr, by whose counsel and exhortation
Valerianus her Spouse, and his brother Tiburtius came to believe in Christ, and
for the same suffered Martyrdom; after whose death Almachius Governor of the
City, caused to be her first apprehended, the^ cruelly tormented by fire, and
finally beheaded, in the time of Marcus Aurelius Seuerus Alexander Emperor. At
Colossus in Phrygia of the Saints Philemon and Apphias Disciples of S. Paul the
Apostle, under Nero Emperor, who upon the feast day of Diana, being by the
Gentills taken in the Church at prayer, were by the commaundment of ^rtocles
first whipped, and then thowne into a pit of earth up to the middle, were there
overwhelmed with stones. Also at Rome of S. Maurus Martyr, who coming out of
Africa to visit the Sepulchers of the Holy Apostles, under Numerianus
Emperor, and Celerinus Governor of the City, was there martyred. At Antioch
in Pisidia the passion of the Saints Marcus and Stephen, under Diocletia^
Emperor. At Antisiodor^.
Austum of S. Pragmatius Bishop and Confessor.

E The three and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Clement Pope, who in the third place after S. Peter the
Apostle, held the sea of Rome, and in the persecution of Traian banished into
Chersonesus, being thrown into the sea with an Anchor tied to his neck, was
crowned with Martyrdom. Whose body under Pope Nicolas the first, being brought
to Rome, was very honorably placed in a Church there built and dedicated in
his honor. At Rome of S. Felicitas the Mother of seven sons Martyrs; who
also after the^, by co^maundment of Marcus Antoninus Emperor, was beheaded for
Christ. At Emerita.
Merida in Spain of S. Lucretia Virgin and Martyr, who in the persecution of
Diocletian under Dacian President, accomplished her Martyrdom. At Cyzicus in
Hellespont of S. Sisinius Martyr, who in the same persecution after many
torments, was beheaded. At Iconium in Licaonia of S. Amphilochius Bishop, who
being companion to S. Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzen, both in the desert, and
Episcopal dignity, after many combats suffered for the Catholic faith,
renowned for learning and holiness of life, reposed in peace. At Agrigentum.
Girgenti the deposition of S. Gregory Bishop. In the Village of Sainct-Trone,
of S. Trudo Priest and Confessor.

F The four and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Chrysogonus Martyr, who having most constantly endured
long imprysonment, fetters, and torments for the confession of Christ, being by
commaundment of Diocletian Emperor brought to Aquileia, and there beheaded,
and his body cast into the sea, finished his Martyrdom. At Rome of S.
Crescentianus Martyr, of whom mention is made in the passion of Blessed
Marcellus Pope. At Ameria in Vmbria of S. Firmina Virgin and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian being hanged up by the hands, and scorched with
burning lamps, and otherways tormented, gave up her soul to God. At Co^th of
S. Alexander Martyr, who under Iu^n the Apostata, and Salustius President,
sought victoriously for the faith of Christ, even till death. At Cordoua of the
holy Virgins and Martyrs Flora and Maria, who after long imprysonment, in the
persecution of the Arabians, were killed by the sword. At Perugia of S.
Felicissimus Martyr. At Millan of S. Protasius Bishop, who both in presence of
the Emperor Constans, and also in the Council of Sardica, stoutly defended
the cause of S. Athanasius; and finally having taken very great pains for the
Faith, and Church committed to his charge, departed happily to our Lord. In the
Castle of Bla^u^um.
Blaie in Gascoigne of S. Romanus Priest, renowned for holiness of life and
miracles. In the territory of Auuergne of S, Portianus Abbot, who in the time
of King Theodoricus was famous for miracles.

G The five and twentieth Day.
THE birthday of S. Catherine Virgin and Martyr, who for confession of the
Christian faith, being first cast into prison at Alexandria, under Maximinus
Emperor, and afterward most cruelly beaten with whippes called Scorpions, at
length beheaded, accomplished her Martyrdom. Whose holy body being
miraculously carried by Angels unto Mount Sinai, is there honored with great
reverence, through the frequent concourse of Christians. At Rome of S. Moses
Priest and Martyr, whom S. Cyprian often comforted by his letters whilst he
was deteyned in prison: and when he had with invincible fortitude and courage,
withstoode not only the Gentills, but the Scismatikes also, and Nouatian
Heretics, was finally (as Pope Cornelius witnesses) in the persecution of
Decius crowned with a famous, and most renowned Martyrdom. At Antioch of S.
Erasmus Martyr. At Caesarea in Cappadocia the passion of S. Mercurius Soldier,
who by protection of his Angell-Keeper, having vanquished the Barbarians, and
also overcome the cruelty of Decius Emperor, enriched with the trophyes of his
many combats, was finally crowned with Martyrdom. In Aemilia a Province of
Italy, of S. Iucunda Virgin.

A The sixth and twentieth Day.
AT Alexandria the birthday of S. Peter Bishop of the same City, who renowned
for all kind of virtues, was by commandment of Maximinus Emperor beheaded.
There suffered also at Alexandria in the same persecution, the holy Martyrs
Faustus Priest, Didius, and Ammonius; and also Phileas, Hesychius, Pachomius,
and Theodorus Bishops of Egypt, with six hundred and threescore others, who by
the sword of the persecutor, were all sent to heaven. At Nicomedia of S.
Marcellus Priest, who in the time of Constantius Emperor, being cast down
headlong from a rock by the Arians, dyed a Martyr. At Padua of S. Bellinus
Bishop and Martyr. At Augustodunu^.
Austum of S. Amator Bishop. At Constans in Germany of S. Conradus Bishop. At
Fabriano in Picenum.
Marc-Ancona of S. Siluester Abbot, Founder of the Congregation of the Monks
called Siluestrines. In the Territory of Rhemes the birthday of S. Basolus
Confessor. At Hadrianople in Paphlagonia of S. Stylianus Anchoret, famous for
miracles. In Armenia of S. Nicon Monk.

B The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Antioch of the holy Martyrs Basil Bishop, Auxilius and Sati^rninus. In
Persia of S. James surnamed Intercisus, a renowned Martyr, who in the time of
Theodosius the younger, having denied Christ to please Isdegerdes King of
Persia, for which cause his Mother, and his wife had with-drawne themselves
from his company; at last by the goodness of God returning to himself, he went
unto the King, and confessed again his faith, who being therewith extremely
offended, commanded him to be presently cut in pieces, and beheaded: at what
time innumerable other Martyrs suffered in the same place. At Sebasta in
Armenia of the Saints Hirenarchus, Acacius Priest, and of seven women
Martyrs, by whose constancy Hirenarchus being converted unto Christ, under
Diocletian Emperor, and Maximus President, was together with Acacius
beheaded. In Gallicia, at the River Caea, of the Saints Facundus, and
Primitiuus, sons to S. Marcellus Martyr, who suffered under Diocletian
Emperor, and Atticus President. At Aquileia of S. Valerianus Bishop. At
Rhegium Galliae Narbonensis.
Ries in Prouence, of S. Maximus Bishop and Confessor, who from his tender
years, being adorned with all kind of virtue, was ordained the first Abbot of
the Monastery of Li^inum, and afterward Bishop of the Church of Ries, where
famous for sanctity and miracles, he finally rested in our Lord. In India near
to the Persians, of the Saints Barlaam and Iosapha^, whose admirable acts S.
John Damascen has left wrirten. At Paris the deposition of S. Seuerinus Monk,
and Anchoret.

C The eight and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Rufus Martyr, who with all his family, under Diocletian
Emperor, was put to death, for the faith of Christ. At Corinth the birthday
of S. Sosthenes disciple to S. Paul the Apostle, of whom he makes mention,
writing to the Corinthians. This man of a Prince of the Synagogue, being
converted unto Christ, and cruelly beaten before the proconsul Gallion, gave
thereby a most renowned testimony of the first fruits of his faith. In Africa
of the holy Martyrs Papinianus and Mansuetus Bishops, who in the persecution of
the Wandalls, under Geisericus the Arian King, having their bodies sore burned
with hot fiery plates* ended a glorious Martyrdom. At what time also the holy
Bishops Valerianus, Vrbanus, Crescens, Eustachius, Cresconius, Crescentianus,
Felix, Hortulanus, and Florentianus being sent into banishment, finished the
course of their lives. At Constantinople of the holy Martyrs Stephen the
younger, Basil, Peter, Andrew, and of three hundred and thirty nine Monks
their fellows, who under Constantinus Copronymus, for worshipping holy Images,
being sundry ways tormented, confirmed the Catholic verity with the effusion
of their blood. At Rome of S. Gregory Pope, the third of that Name, who
renowned for holiness of life, and good works, departed to our Lord.

D The nine and twentieth Day.
THE Vigil of the holy Apostle S. Andrew. At Rome in the way Salaria, the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Saturninus an old man, and Sisinius Deacon, under
Maximinus Emperor, who after they had been long afflicted in prison, were by
the Governor of the City commanded first to be put upon the torture
Equuleus, with a great fire made round about them, and afterward being dragged
and scourged with sinews, beaten also with cudgells, and whips called
Scorpions, were finally beheaded. At Tolosa of S. Saturninus Bishop, who in the
time of Decius Emperor, being apprehended by the Paga^s, and brought to the
Capitol of that City, was thrown down headlong from the highest stairs of
the same, whereby having his brains dashed out, and his body all bruized, he
rendered up his worthy sou^e to God. Also the passion of the Saints Paramon, and
of three hundred seauenty and five more of his fellows, under Decius Emperor,
and Aquilinus President. At Ancyra of S. Philomenus Martyr, who in the
persecution of Aurelianus Emperor, under Felix President being first tried by
fire, and then having his hands, feet, and head pierced with nails, finished
his Martyrdom. At Verulo of the holy Martyrs Blasius and Demetrius. At
Tudertum.
Todi of S. Illuminata Virgin.

E The thirtith Day.
AT Patras in Achaia, the birthday of S. Andrew the Apostle, who having
preached the Gospel of Christ in Thracia and Scythia, was apprehended by
Aegeas the Proconsull, and first cast into prison, afterward most cruelly
beaten, and lastly fastened to a Cross, and hanging thereon for two whole
days together, teaching the people, and praying our Lord that he might not be
taken down from the Cross, being environed with a great light from heaven,
gave up his pure holy soul to God. At Rome the passion of the Saints Castulus
and Euprepi^es. At Constantinople of S. Maura Virgin and Martyr. Also of S.
Iustina Virgin and Martyr. At S^n^ones.
Saints of S. Troianus Bishop, a man of great holiness, who dying here on
earth, does by his many miracles evidently declare he lives in heaven. At Rome
of S. Constantius Confessor, who stoutly resisting the Pelagian Heretics, was
through their factions greatly afflicted, and thereby made partaker of many
merits. In Palestine of S. Zosimus Confessor, who under Justinius Emperor, was
renowned for holiness of life, and miracles.

THE MONTH OF DECEMBER.
F The first Day.
OF Nahum the Prophet, who was buried in Begabar. At Rome of the holy Martyrs
Diodorus Priest, and Marianus Deacon, with many others, who by commandment of
Numerianus Emperor were crowned with Martyrdom. There also the passion of the
Saints Lucius, Rogatus, Cassianus, and Candida. The same day of S. Ansanus
Martyr, who under Diocletian Emperor for the Confession of Christ, being
apprehended, and cast into prison at Rome, was afterward brought to Siena in
Tuscany, an there beheaded, ended the course of his Ma^tyrdome. At Ameria in
Vmbria of S. Olympias who having been sometimes Consul, an^ converted to the
faith by S. Firmina, vnde Diocletian, being racked first upon the torture
Equuleus, finished his Martyrdom. A Arbellis in Persia of S. Ananias Martyr.
At Narni of S. Proculus Bishop and Martyr, who after many famous works of
Charity performed, was commanded by Totilas King of the Goths to be beheaded.
In the City of Casala of S. Euasius Bishop and Martyr. A^ Millan of S.
Castritianus Bishop, who in the greatest troubles of the Church, flourished in
all Virtue, and Religious Piety. At Brescia of S. Vrsicinus Bishop. At Ol^m
Nomomum.
Tournay in Flanders, of S. Eligius Bishop, whose holy life is manifested by
the number of miracles which he wrought. At Verdun of S. Agericus Bishop. The
same day of S. Natalia wife to S. Adrian Martyr, who under Diocletian Emperor,
did a long time serve the holy Martyrs in prison at Nicomedia, and after their
passion, she went to Constantinople, and there peaceably reposed in our Lord.

G The second Day.
AT Rome the passion of S. Bibiana Virgin, who under Julian the wicked Emperor
was so long beaten with leaden whippes, until she gave up the Ghost. There
also of the holy Martyrs Eusebius Priest, Marcellus Deacon, Hippolytus,
Maximus, Adria, Paulina, Neon, Maria, Martana, and Aurelia, who in the
persecution of Valerianus, under Secundianus Judge, finished their Martyrdom.
Also at Rome of S. Pontianus Martyr, with four others. In Africa, the
birthday of the holy Martyrs Seuerus, Securus, Ianuarius, and Victorinus, who
were there crowned with Martyrdom. At Aquileia of S. Cromatius Bishop and
Confessor. At Forum Cornel^^.
Imola of S. Peter Bishop of Rauenna, surnamed Chrysologus, renowned for
doctrine and holiness. At Verona of S. Lupus Bishop and Confessor. At Edessa of
S. Nonnus Bishop, by whose prayers Pelagia the Penitent was converted to
Christ. At Troas in Phrygia of S. Syluanus Bishop, famous for miracles. At
Brescia of S. Euasius Bishop.

A The third Day.
IN Jury of the holy Prophet Sophonias. At Rome of the holy Martyrs Claudius
Tribune, Hilaria his wife, and their sons Ia^o^ and Maurus, with seaue^ty
soldiers, of whom Claudius, under Numerianus Emperor, being tied to a great
stone, was thrown headlo^g into the River; but his sons, together with the
soldiers were beheaded; and lastly Hilaria when she had buried her sons
bodies, praying at their sepulcher, being apprehended by the Infidells,
departed to our Lord. At Tingis*
Tanger in Mauritania the passion of S. Cassianus Martyr, who having been long
time a ^aylour, at length inspired from heaven, esteemed it a detestable thing
to be an instrument, and actor in the slaughter of Christians; whereupon
renouncing his office, and converted to Christ, was finally made worthy of
Martyrdom. Also in Africa of the holy Martyrs Claudius, Crispinus, Maginas,
John and Stephen. In Pa^^onia*
Hungary of S. Agricola Martyr. At Nicomedia the passion of the Saints Ambicus,
Victor, and Julius. At Millan of S. Mirocletes Bishop and Confessor, of whom
S. Ambrose makes mention. In England of S. Birinus the first Bishop of
Dorchester. At Curia in Germany of S. Lucius King of Brittany, who was the
first King of that Island that received the faith of Christ, in the time of Pope
Eleutherius. At Siena in Tuscany of S. Galganus Anchoret.

B The fourth Day.
AT Nicomedia the passion of S. Barbara Virgin and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Maximinus, after sore pyning in prison, burning with lamps,
cutting off her breasts, and other torments, finished her Marryrdome by the
sword. At Constantinople of the Saints Theophanes, and his fellows. In Pontus
of S. Meletius Bishop and Confessor, renowned as well for doctrine as holiness
of life, and other virtues. At Bolonia of S. Felix Bishop, who had been Deacon
before of the Church of Millan, under S. Ambrose. In England of S. Osmund
Bishop and Confessor. At Cullen of S. Annon Bishop. In Mesopotamia of S.
Maruthas Bishop, who restoring the Churches of God sorely ruined in Persia,
through the persecution of King Isdegerdes, famous for many miracles, deserved
also to be honored even amongst his enemies. At Parma of S. Bernard Cardinal,
and Bishop of the same City.

C The fifth Day.
AT Mutala in Cappadocia of S. Sabas Abbot, greatly renowned in Palestine, for
holiness of life, who stoutly labored in defense of the Catholic Faith,
against the impugners of the Holy Council of Chalcedon. At The^esta in
Affricke of S. Crispi^a a Noblewoman, who under Diocletian and Maximian, for
refusing to sacrifice unto Idols, was by commandment of Anolinus Proconsull
beheaded: Of whom S. Augustine often makes mention. At Thagura also in
Affricke, of the holy Martyrs Julius, Potamia, Crispinus, Felix, Gratus, and
seven others. At Nicaea.
Nice in Prouence, upon the river Varu^, of S. Bassus Bishop, who in the
perfecution of Decius and Valerian, being racked upon the torture Equuleus for
the faith of Christ, by Perennius President, burned also with fiery plates,
beaten with cudgels, and whips called Scorpions, and cast into the fire without
any hurt, being finally pierced through the body with two great nails, ended
his glorious Martyrdom. At Pauia of S. Dalmatius Bishop and Martyr, who
suffered in the persecution of Maximianus. At Corfinium.
Pentina in Abbruzzo of S. Pelinus Bishop of Brundusium.
Brindisi, who under Julian the Apostata, when the temple of Mars by the power
of his prayers fell to the ground, being cruelly beaten by the Idolatrous
Priests, upon whom they inflicted fourscore and five wounds, deserved finally
the crown of Martyrdom. Also of Anastasius Martyr, who for the great ^eruor
he had to su^^er for Christ, offered himself voluntarily to the persecutours.
At Treuers of S. Nicetius Bishop, a man of great holiness. At Polybotum in Asia,
of S. John Bishop, sur-named Thaumaturgus.

D The sixth Day.
AT Myra, the chief City of Lycia, the birthday of S. Nicolas Bishop and
Confessor, of whom amongst many miracles this memorable one is recorded, that
being far distant, he dissuaded by admonitions and threats, the Emperor
Constantine in a vision, from putting to death certain persons, who had called
upon him for succor in their necessity. In Africa of the holy women Dio^ysia,
Da^iua, Leontia, and of a religious man called Tertius; also of Aemilianus a
Physician, Bonifacius, and three others, who in the per^ecution of the
Wandalls, under Hunnericus the Arian King, for defense of the Catholic says,
being all most cruelly tormented, deserved the glory of renowned, and holy
Confessors. There also of S. Maioricus, Son to the forsaid Dionysia, who
being a young youth, and trembling at the torments, was so encouraged, and
animated with the words and looks of his mother, that he became more strong
then the rest, and in the midst of his torments gave up his soul to God;
whom his pious mother taking up in her arms, buried in her own house, and
daily used to pray at his sepulcher. The same day of S. Polychronius Priest,
who in the time of Constantius Emperor, whiles he said Mass at the holy
Altar, was killed by the Arians. At Rome of S. Asella Virgin, who (as S.
Hierome writes) being blessed even from her mothers womb, drew on her life,
in fasting, and prayer, until her very old age.

E The seventh Day.
AT Millan the ordination of S. Ambrose Bishop and Doctor of the Church; by
whose holiness and doctrine the universal Church of Christ is greatly adorned.
At Alexandria the birthday of S. Agatho, a Soldier, who in the persecution of
Decius, for hindering certain Pagans from abusing the holy Martyrs bodies, and
a sudden outcry of the common people being raised against him, was
apprehended, and brought before the judge, where persisting constant in the
confession of Christ, he was presently condemned to death. At Antioch of the
holy Martys Polycarpus and Theodorus. At Tuburbum in Africa of S. Seuerus
Marryr, who in the persecution of the Wandals, under Hunnericus the Arian King,
having been very sore beaten with cudgells, and oftentimes lifted up on high
with pullies, and suddenly with the whole weight of his body, let fall upon
hard flin^ stones, and otherwise cruelly tormented, at last obtained the palm
of Martyrdom. At The* number.
Teano in Campania of S. Vrbanus Bishop and Confessor. At Santones.
Saints in France of S. Martin Abbot, at whose Sepulcher by the power of God,
often miracles are wrought. In the territory of Meld^*
Meaux, of S. Phara Virgin.

F The eight Day.
THE Conception of the euer-Glorious Virgin Mary Mother of God. At Rome of S.
Eutychianus Pope, who having buried with his own hands the bodies of three
hundred forty and two Martyrs. was under Numerianus Emperor, made worthy of
Martyrdom himself, and buried in the Churchyard of Callistus. At Alexandria
of S. Macarius Martyr, who in the time of Decius, when the Judge with many
words went about to persuade him to deny Christ, and he with so much the more
constancy did profess his ^ayth, was at last commanded to be burned alive. At
Treuers of S. Eucharius disciple to S. Peter the Apostle, and the first Bishop
of the same City. In Cyprus of S. Sophronius Bishop, a most renowned defender,
and ayder of Pupills, Orphans, Widows, and of all poor and oppressed persons.
In the Monastery of Luxo^.
L^ of S. Romaricus Abbot, who being a chief Nobleman in the Court of King
Theodobertus; renouncing the world, was very famous for monastical discipline.
At Constantinople of S. Pa^apius Hermit, renowned for virtues and miracles. At
Verona the Ordination of S. Ze^o Bishop,

G The nynth Day.
AT Toledo in Spain, the birthday of S. Leocadia Virgin and Martyr, who in
the persecution of Diocletian Emperor, under Dacianus Governor of Spain,
being fore pined in prison, when she heard of the cruel torments of S. Eulalia
and other Martyrs, putting herself vp^ her knees in prayer, gave up her
undefiled soul to God. At Carthage of S. Restitutus Bishop and Martyr, upon
whose feast S. Augustine made a sermon of him to the people. Also in Africa of
the holy Martyrs Peter, Successus, Bassianus, Primitiuus, and twenty others. At
Lemouices.
Limoges in France, of S. Valeria Virgin, and Martyr. At Verona of S. Proculus
Bishop, who in the persecution of Diocletian, being with buffets and cudgells
driven out of the City, at length restored to his Church, reposed in peace. At
Pauia of S. Syrus the first Bishop of that City, renowned for virtues and
miracles. At Apamea in Syria of S. Iulianus Bishop, who in the time of Seuerus
Emperor was very famous for holiness of life. At Petragorici,
Perigueux in France of S. Cyprian Abbot, a man of great sanctity. At Nazianzum
of S. Gorgonia, sister to S. Gregory surnamed the Divine, whose virtues and
miracles himself has written.

A The tenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Melchiades Pope, who having suffered great persecution under
Maximianus, and peace restored to the Church, reposed in our Lord. The same day
of the holy Martyrs Carpophorus Priest, and Abundius Deacon, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, being first most cruelly beaten with cudgells, the^
racked upon the torture Equuleus, and afterward long pyned in prison for want
of meat, were finally beheaded. At Eme^i^a.
Merida in Spain the passion of S. Eulalia Virgin, who under Maximianus
Emperor, and Dacianus President, suffering many torments for the confession of
Christ at twelve years old, at length racked upon the torture Equuleus, rent
with iron claws, and burning torches put to her sides, she gave up her soul
to God. There also of S. Iulia Virgin and Martyr, the inseparable companion of
S. Eulalia, both in life and death. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Mennas,
Hermogenes, and Eugraphus, who suffered under Maximinus. At Leon^inum.
Lentini of the holy Martyrs Mercurius, and his fellows Soldiers, who under
Tertyllus President, and Licinius Emperor were beheaded. At Ancyra in Galatia
of S. Gemellus Martyr, who after most grievous torments under Julian the
Apostata, was crucified on a Cross. At Vienna of S. Sindulphus Bishop and
Co^fessor. At Brescia of S. Deus-dedit Bishop.

B The eleauenth Day.
AT Rome of S. Damasus Pope and Confessor, who condemned Apollinaris the
Arch-hereticke, and restored Peter Bishop of Alexandria, that had been cast
out of his sea. He also found out the bodies of many Saints, and adorned their
tombs with verses. Likewise at Rome the passion of S. Thraso, who nourishing,
and maintayning with his own goods, the Christians that labored in the hoate
Bathes, and other public works, as also those that were in prison, being
apprehended by commaundment of Maximianus, with two others, Pontianus and
Pretextatus, was crowned with Martyrdom. At Amiens of the holy Martyrs
Victoricus and Fuscianus, under the same Emperor, who by commandment of
Rictiouarus President, having their nostrills, and ears first boared with
certain steeles, their temples pierced with burning nails, their eyes pulled
out, and their bodies shot full of arrows, were finally, together with S.
Gentianus their host, beheaded. In Persia of S. Barsabas Martyr. In Spain of
S. Eutychius Martyr. At Placentia.
Piacenza of S. Sabinus Bishop, renowned for miracles. At Constantinople of S.
Daniel, surnamed Styli^a.

C The twelfth Day.
AT Rome of S. Synesius Martyr, who being ordained Lector in the time of S.
Xystus Pope, when he had converted many to the faith of Christ, accused to
Aurelianus Emperor, received the crown of Martyrdom. At Alexandria of the
holy Martyrs Epimachus and Alexander, who under Decius Emperor, after they had
layne a long time in fetters, and been diversely afflicted for the Christian
faith, were at length burned. There also of the holy women Ammonaria Virgin,
Mercuria, Dionysia, and another Ammonaria, of whom, the first in the same
persecution of Decius, having overcome most cruel and unheard of torments, was
finally beheaded: but the three others, for that the Judge being ashamed to be
overcome by women, and fearing least by using the same torments against them,
he should be vanquished by their constancy, they were without more ado
beheaded. At Treuers of the holy Martyrs Maxentius, Constantius, Crescentius,
Justinius, and their fellows, who in the persecution of Diocletian suffered
under the President Rictiouarus. The same day of the holy Martyrs Hermogenes,
Donatus, and two and twenty others.

C The thirtenth Day.
AT Syra^.
Syracosa in Sicilia the birthday of S. Lucy Virgin and Martyr, who in the
persecution of Diocletian being delivered over, by commaundment of Pascha^ that
had been sometimes Consul, to certain naughty fellows, corrupters of
Chastity, thereby to make her in^amous to the people, they were not able in any
wise to move her out of the place where she stood, neither with ropes, nor yet
with many yokes of oxen; whereupon encompassing her round with burning pitch,
rasin, and bolling oil, when by the power of God, she was nothing hurt thereby,
being finally thrust through the throat with a sword, accomplished her
Martyrdom. In Armenia the passion of the holy Martyrs Eustratius, Auxentius,
Eugenius, Mardarius, and Orestes, in the persecution of Diocletian; of whom
Eustratius being there by Lycias first, and afterward at Seb^sta, by
Agricol^us Presidents, together with Orestes, afflicted with exquisite
torments, at length cast into a burning ^ornace, gave up his soul: but Orestes
being laid upon a fiery bed of iron, departed to our Lord. The rest being all
most cruelly tormented, under the forsaid Lysias, by diverse deaths finished
their Martyrdom. Their bodies being translated to Rome, were very honorably
placed in the Church of S. Apoll^. In Sardinia in the Island Sulcitana, the
passion of S. Antiochus, under Hadrian Emperor. At Cambray in France of S.
Au^ber^us Bishop and Confessor. In the Village of Pontinum
Ponthieu of S. Iudocus Confessor. In the territory of Argen ^o^a^um.
Stras^burge of S. Othilia Virgin.

E The fourtenth Day.
AT Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Heron, Arsenius, Isidorus, and Dioscorus a
boy, of whom, the three first in the persecution of Decius being by the Judge
diversely tormented, when he saw them all armed alike with constancy, commanded
them to be burned. But Dioscorus being sorely whipped, was by Gods permission
set free, to the comfort of the Christians. At Antioch the birthday of the holy
martyrs Drusus, Zosimus, and Theodorus. The same day the passion of the Saints
Iustus and Abundius, who under Numerianus Emperor, and Olybrius President,
being cast into the fire, but nothing hurt thereby, were be headed. At Rhemes
the passion of the Saints Nicasius Bishop, Eutropia Virgin his sister, and
their fellows, Martyrs, who were slain by certain barbarous people, enemies
to the faith of Christ. In the I Will of Cyprus, the ^irth-day of S. Spiridion
Bishop, who was ^ne of those Confessors, that under Maxi^inus, having their
right eye pulled out, and their left knee cut, were condemned to the
^tall-mynes. This holy man renowned ^or the gift of Prophesy and miracles,
con^ounded an Ethnicke Philosopher, in the Council of Nice, that scoffed at
Christian Religion, and brought him to the faith of Christ. At Berg^mum.
Bergamo of S. Viator Bishop and Confessor. At Pauia of S. Pompeius Bishop. At
Naples in Campania, of S. Agnellus Abbot, famous for miracles, who has been
often seen with the Standard of the Cross, to deliver that City besieged,
from the enemies. At Millan of S. Matronianus Hermit.

F The fiftenth Day.
AT Rome of the holy Martyrs Irenaens, Antonius, Theodorus, Saturninus',
Victor, and seauenteene others, who in the persecution of Valerianus suffered
for Christ. In Africa the passion of the Saints Faustinus, Lucius, Candidus,
Caelianus, Marcus, Ianuarius, and Fortunatus. There also of S. Valerianus
Bishop, who being above fourscore years of age, in the persecution of the
Wandalls, under Geisericus the Arian King, for not delivering up the goods of
his Church, was commanded to be cast out of the City, and all m^ for bidden to
succor him, either in the houses, or otherwise; who lying a lon^ time in the
common way, in the open ayr^ at last finished the course of his blesse^ ys^ in
the consession, and defense of the ^^tho lique Verity. In the territory of
Orleans (...) S. Maximinus Confessor. In the Countre^ of the Ibe^i.
Georgians, beyond the sea Euxivu^ of S. Christiana a Hand-mayd, who by
mi^racles converted that Nation to the faith (...) Christ, in the time of
Constan^ne the Great^

G The sixtenth Day.
OF the three children Ananias, Azarias^ and Misael, whose bodies were burie^
in Babylon in a certain Cave. At Rauenn^ of the holy M^royrs Valontinus, a
General of Soldiers, ^oncoxdius his son, Naualis and (...), who suffered
for Christ, in the persac^^ion of Maximianus Emperor. At Formi^.
M^l^ in Campania, of S. Albina Virgin and Ma^tyr, under Deaius Emperor. In
Africa the p^ssion of many holy Virgins, who in the persecution of the
Wandalls under Hun^ the (...) King, after many grievous (...), of hanging up by
the ^ands with weights, and hot burning plates, happily accomplished their
Martyrdom. At Vienna of S. Ado Bishop and Confessor. At Aber^ine in Hiber*
nia.
Scotland of S. Beanus Bishop. At Gaza in Palestine of S. Irenion Bishop.

A The seauententh Day.
AT Eleutheropole in Palestine of the holy Martyrs Flauianus, Calanicus, and
fifty eight of their fellows, who in the time of Heraclius Emperor were
slain by the Saracens, for the faith of Christ. At Mas^^lia.
Marseille in France of S. Lazarus Bishop, whom our Lord is said in the
Gospel to have raised from death. At Bigard near Bruxels of S. Viuina
Virgin, whose great sanctimony is testified by her many miracles. At
Constantinople of S. Olympia widow. At Andan, in the Abbey called of the
seven Churches, of S. Begga Widow, sister to S. Gertrude. The same day the
translation of S. Ignatius Bishop and Martyr, who was the third, after S.
Peter, that governed the Church of Antioch. His body being brought from Rome,
where he suffered in the persecution of Traian, to Antioch, was there buried in
the Churchyard of the Church, without the Gate of Daphuis: In which solemnity
S. John Chrysestome made a Sermon to the people. But afterward his holy
Relics were again^ translated to Rome, and with great honor and veneration
placed in the Church of S* Clement, together with the body of tha^ most
Blessed Pope and Martyr.

B The eightenth Day.
AT Philippi in Macedonia, the birthday of the holy Martyrs Rufus and Zosimus,
two of the number of those disciples, by whom the primitive Church was
founded, amongst the Jews and Grecians; of whose happy Martyrdom S. Polycarpe
writes in an Epistle to the Philippians. At Laodicea in Syria, the passion of
the Saints Theotimus, and Basilianus. In Africa of the holy Martyrs Quinctus,
Simplicius, and others, who suffered in the persecution of Decius and Valerian.
There also of S. Moysetes Martyr. Also in Africa of the holy Martyrs Victurus,
Victor, Victorinus, Adiutor, Quartus, and thirty others. At Mopsuestia in
Cilicia of S. Auxentius Bishop who having been sometimes a Soldier, under
Licinius Emperor, chose rather to cast off his military Cincture, then to offer
grapes to Bacchus: and being afterward ordained Bishop, renowned for merits,
reposed in peace. At Turones.
Tours of S. Gatianus Confessor who being ordained the first Bishop of that
City by S. Fabianus Pope, famous for miracles, rested in our Lord.

C The nynetenth Day.
AT Alexandria in Egypt, of S. Nemesius Martyr, who through calumniation being
presented to the Judge as a thief, and ^bsolued from that crime, was shortly
after in the persecution of Decius accused to Aemi^^anus the Judge for a
Christian, by whom being often and cruelly tormented, he was at last
commanded to be burned with ^heeues; herein resembling our Blessed Savior,
who together with thieves was crucified. At Nice of the Saints Darius, Zo^us,
Paulus, and Secundus Martyrs. At Ni^omedia of the holy Martyrs Cyriacus,
Paulil^us, Secundus, Anastasius, Syndimius, and their ^ellowes. In Mauritania
of S. Timotheus Dea^on, who for the faith of Christ after most cruel
imprysonment, being cast into the fire, accomplished his Martyrdom. At Ga^a in
Palestine, the passion of the Saints Meures and Thea. At Antisiodo^^.
Auxerre of S. Gregory Bishop and Confessor. At Orleans of S. Adiutus Ab^ot,
famous for the spirit of Prophesy. At Rome of S. Faucta Mother of S. Anastasia,
renowned for her Noble Birth, and Piety.

D The twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of S. Thomas Apostle. A Rome of the holy Martyrs Liberatus and
Baiulus. At Alexandria of the holy Martyrs Ammon, Zeno, Ptolomaeus, Ingenes and
Theophilu^ Soldiers, who being present at the examination and torments of a
certain Christian, and seeing him afraid, and even ready to deny his faith,
endeavoring with their looks and gestures to encourage him, were exclaymed
against by the people: where fore coming forth into the midst and openly
declaring themselves to be Christians, by a famous combat constantly endured,
they most gloriously triumph in Christ. At Gelduba of S. Julius Martyr. I^
Arabia of the holy Martyrs, Eugenius and M^carius Priests, who by Julian the
Apostata for reprehending his impiety, being fir^ most cruelly beaten, and then
banished into a vast wilderness, were finally beheaded. A Antioch the birthday
of S. Philogonius B^ shop, who of an Advocate being called b^ God, to govern
that Church, did, toge^ther with S. Alexander Bishop, and other^ first enter
into combat for the Catholic faith against Arius the Heretic; and afterward
renowned for miracles, reposed in our Lord; whose yearly festiuity S. John
Chrysostom did use to celebrate, with an excellent sermon, in praise of his
virtues. At Brixia.
Brescia of S. Dominicke Bishop and Confessor.

E The one and twentieth Day.
AT Calamina the birthday of S. Thomas Apostle, who having preached the
Ghospel to the Parthians, Medians, Persians, Hyrcans, and Brachmans, went at
the length into India, where when he had instructed that people in the
Christian Faith, being by the Kings commandment thrust through the body with a
lance, ended his Martyrdom. His holy Relics were first brought to the City
of Edessa, and afterward translated to Ortona in Apulia. In Tuscany of the
holy Martyrs John and Festus. In Lycia of S. Themis^ocles Martyr, who under
Decius Emperor, offering himself to the Persecutours in the place of
Dioscorus, who was sought for to death, being racked upon the torture Equuleus,
dragged, and beaten with cudgells, obtained the crown of Martyrdom. At
Nicomedia of S. Glycerius Priest, who in the persecution of Diocletian, being
many ways tormented, at length cast into the fire, ended his Martyrdom. At
Antioch of S. Anastasius Bishop and Martyr, who in the time of Phocas Emperor,
was most barbarously slain by the Jews. At Treuers of S. Seuerinus Bishop and
Confessor.

F The two and twentieth Day.
AT Rome in the way Lauicana, betwixt the two Bay-trees, the birthday of
thirty holy Martyrs, who suffered all on one day, in the persecution of
Diocletian. In the same place of S. Flauianus, who having been sometime
governor of the City, was by Julian the Apostata, first marked in the face,
and then banished to the Waters called Taurinae, where in prayer he gave up his
soul to God. At Ostia of the holy Martyrs Demetrius, Honoratus, and Florus. At
Alexandria of S. Ischyrion Martyr, who for refusing to sacrifice unto Idols
after many injuries and reproaches, being thrust through the bowels with a
sharp spear, ended his Martyrdom. In Egypt of S. Chaeremon Bishop of
Nilopolis, and very many other Martyrs; of whom, some in the persecution of
Decius, being dispersed abroad by flight, and wandering in the wilderness, were
slain by wild beasts; others consumed with famine, cold and sickness; and
other some also being killed by barbarous people, and thieves, were all crowned
with the glory of Martyrdom. At Nicomedia of S. Zeno a Soldier, who deriding
at Diocletian the Emperor for sacrificing unto Ceres, having his iawbones
broken, and his teeth stricken out, was finally beheaded.

G The three and twentieth Day.
AT Rome of S. Victoria Virgin and Martyr, who in the persecution of Decius
Emperor, being betrothed to Eugenius an Infidel, when she would neither
marry, nor sacrifice unto Idols, after many miracles wroght, by which she
converted many Virgins to Christ, was by commandment of her Spouse, by the hang
man stricken through the heart. At Nicomedia the birthday of twenty holy
Martyrs, who in the persecution of Diocletian, after that they had been
afflicted with most grievous torments, were put to death. In the same place,
the passion of the Saints Migdonius and Mardonius, in the same persecution, of
whom one being burned, and the other thrown into a pit, dyed. At what time
also suffered a Deacon of S. Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, who as he carried
letters to the Martyrs, being apprehended by the Gentiles, and stoned, departed
to our Lord. In Creta.
Candia of the holy Martyrs Thcodulus, Saturninus, Euporus, Gelasius,
Eunicianus, Zeticus, Cleomenes, Agathopus, Basilides, and Euaristus, who in the
persecution of Decius, after many cruel torments, were beheaded. At Rome of S.
Seruulus, of whom S. Gregory Pope writes, that from his tender years, until
the end of his life, lying sick of the palsy, in a Porch near to S. Clements
Church, at length invited by the harmony of Angels, he went thence to the
glory of Paradise. At whose Sepulcher it pleased God to show often miracles.

A The four and twentieth Day.
THE Vigill of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ. At Antioch the birthday
of forty holy Virgins, who in the persecution of Decius ended their Martyrdom
by diverse kinds of torments. At Spoleto of S. Gregory Priest and Martyr, who in
the time of Diocletian, and Maximian Emperors, being first beaten with knotted
cudgels, and then cast into prison, and laid upon a hoate grydiron, having his
knees also broken with iron bars, and his sides scorched with burning lamps,
was finally beheaded. At Tripolis of the holy Martyrs Lucianus, Metrobius,
Paulus, Zenobius, Theotimus, and Drusus. At Nicomedia of S. Euthymius Martyr,
who in the persecution of Diocletian having sent many before him to Martyrdom,
being thrust through with a sword, followed himself to the same crown. At
Burdigala.
Bordeaux of S. Delphinus Bishop, who in the time of Theodosius flourished for
sanctity of life. At Rome the birthday of S. Tharsilla Virgin, Ant to S.
Gregory Pope, of whom he writes that in the hour of her death, she saw JESUS
coming to her. At Treuers of S. Irmina Virgin, daughter to King Dagobertus of
France.

B The five and twentieth Day.
THE year from the Creation of the world, when in the beginning God created
Heaven and Earth, five thousand, one hundred, ninety and nine: from the flood
of Noe, two thousand nine hundred fifty and seven: from the Nativity of
Abraham two thousand and fifteen: from Moses, and the coming forth of the
people of Israel out of Egypt, one thousand, five hundred, and ten: from the
annoynting of David, one thousand, thirty and two; the sixty and five week
according to the Prophesy of Daniel; the hundred, nynety and fourth Olympiade;
from the building of the City of Rome, seven hundred fifty and two; the two
and fourtith year of the Empire of Octauianus Augustus, when the whole world
was in peace, in the sixth age thereof, Jesus Christ, Eternal God, and Son of
the Eternal Father, intending to sanctify the world with his most blessed
Presence, having been conceived of the Holy Ghost, and nine months past after
his Conception, is borne in Bethleem-Iuda of the Virgin Mary, and made man. The
Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the flesh. The same day, the
festiuity of S. Anastasia, who under Diocletian Emperor, first suffering a
harsh and rigorous restraint by her husband Publius (in which nevertheless,
she was greatly comforted, and encouraged by S. Chrysogonus a holy Confessor
of Christ) and afterward by Florus President of Sclauonia a longer
imprisonment, at length having her hands and feet stretched out, and bound to
stakes; with fire kindled about her, accomplished her Martyrdom, in the Island
of Palmaria, into which she had been carried with two hundred men, and seauenty
women; who all by diverse kinds of death there ended their Martyrdom. At Rome
in the Churchyard of Apronianus of S. Eugenia Virgin, who in the time of
Gallienus Emperor after she had wrought very many miracles and gathered
together many holy Virgins in the service of Christ, being along time
afflicted under Nicetius Governor of the City, was finally beheaded. At
Nicomedia the passion of many thousand Martyrs, who when in the Nativity of
Christ they were assembled together in the church, to hear Mass and
Communicate, Diocletian the Emperor commanded the Church-doores to be shut,
and fire to be made round about it; as also a vessel with Incense to be placed
before the doors, and the common Crier to pronounce with a loud voice, that
such as would escape burning, should go forth, and offer Incense to Jupiter;
and when they all with one voice answered, that they would rather, and more
willingly die for Christ, being consumed with fire, deserved to be borne in
heaven, the same day that Christ vouchsafed to be borne in earth for the
salvation of the world.

C The sixth and twentieth Day.
AT Jerusalem the birthday of S. Stephen the first Martyr, who was there
stoned to death by the Jews, not long after the Ascension of Christ. At Rome
of S. Marinus a Senator, who under Carinus Emperor and Marcianus Governor,
being apprehended for the Christian faith, and after a base manner racked upon
the torture Equuleus, torn with iron claws, cast into a frying pan, but the
fire turning into dew and he delivered, thrown also unto wild beasts but
nothing hurt by them, at length brought unto the Altar to sacrifice, when the
Idol by his prayers fell to the ground, being there beheaded obtained the
palm of Martyrdom. Also at Rome in the way Appia, the deposition of S.
Dionysius Pope, greatly renowned for piety, and labors which he su^ained for
the Church. There also of S. Zosimus Pope and Confessor. In Mesopotamia of S.
Archelaus Bishop famous for learning and holiness. At Maiuma in Idum^a of S.
Zen^ Bishop. At Rome of S. Theodorus Ma^sionary of the Church of S. Peter of
whom S. Gregory Pope makes mention.

D The seven and twentieth Day.
AT Ephesus the birthday of S. John Apostle and Evangelist, who after the
writing of his Gospel, being sent into bannishment, where that divine
Revelation was made unto him, perseuering until the time of Traian Emperor,
founded and governed the Churches of all Asia; and finally worn out with old
age, the 68. year after the passion of our Lord rested in peace, and was
buried near the unto same City. At Alexandria of S. Maximus Bishop, greatly
renowned for the confession of his faith. At Constantinople of the holy
Confessors Theodorus and Theophanes Brothers, who being brought up from their
childhood in the Monastery of S. Sabas, and afterward for defense of holy
Images opposing themselves against Leo, and Theophilus Armenus, Emperors, were
by their commaundment first whipped, and then sent into banishment, where
Theodorus died in prison; but Theophanes, when peace at length was restored to
the Church, being made Bishop of Nice, reposed happily in our Lord. There also
of S. Nicerates Virgin, renowned for holiness of life, under Arcadius Emperor.

E The eight and twentieth Day.
IN Bethleem-Iuda the birthday of the holy Innocents, who for Christ were put
t^ death by King Herod. At Ancyra in Galati^ of the holy Martyrs Eutychius
Priest, and Domitianus Deacon. In Africa the birthday of the holy Martyrs
Castor, Victor, and Rogatianus* At Nicomedia of the holy Martyrs Indes an
Eunuch, Domna, Agapes, and Theophila Virgins, with their fellows, who in the
persecution of Diocletian, after many combats for Christ by diverse kinds of
death obtained the crown of Martyrdom. At Neocaesarea in Pontus of S.
Troadius Martyr in the persecution of Decius, to whom S. Gregory surnamed
Thaumaturgus appeared in the midst of his torments, and animated him to suffer
Martyrdom. At Arabissus in the lesser Armenia, of S. Caesarius Martyr, who
suffered under Galerius Maximinus. At Rome of S. Domnion Priest. At Nursia of
the holy Monks Eutychius and Florentius, of whom S. Gregory Pope makes
mention. In Aepypt of S. Theodorus Monk, disciple of S. Pachomius. In the
Monastery of Lyrinum, of Saint Antony Monk, famous for miracles.

F The nine and twentieth Day.
AT Canterbury in England the birthday of S. Thomas Bishop and Martyr, who for
the defense of Justice, and liberty of the Church, being killed by the faction
of certain wicked men in his own Cathedral Church, departed to our Lord. At
Jerusalem of S. David King and Prophet. At Arel^tum.
Arles the birthday of S. Trophimus, of whom S. Paul makes mention writing
to S. Ty^othy, who being by him ordained Bishop was first of all sent unto that
City to preach the Gospel, from the fountain of whose doctrine, as S.
Zosimus Pope writes, all France received streams of Christian faith. At Rome
of the holy Martyrs Callistus, Felix, and Bonifacius. In Africa the passion of
the holy Martyrs Dominicus, Vi^or, Primianus, Lybosus, Saturninus, Crescen^s,
Secundus, and Honoratus. At Vienne in France of S. Crescens, disciple of S.
Paul the Apostle, and the first Bishop of that City. At Constantinople of S.
Marcellus Abbot. At Oxymum.
Hiesnes in Normandy of S. Ebrulphus Abbot, and Confessor, in the time of King
Childebert of France.

G The thirtith Day.
AT Spolet^ the birthday of the hol^ Martyrs Sabinus Bishop, Exuperanti^ and
Marcellus Deacons, and Venust^anus Pr^sident, with his wife and children, vnd^
Maximianus Emperor; of whom Marcell^ and Exuperantius being first racked upon
the torture Equuleus, then cruelly beaten wit^ cudgells, torn with iron
claws, and ro^sted on both sides, ended their Marty^dome* but Venustianus, not
long after, toge^ther with his wife and children was behe^ded: And S. Sabinus,
having his hands c^off, and long pined in prison, was final beaten to death.
Whose Martyrdomes, a^though they happened at sundry times, a^ yet celebrated
upon the same day. At Al^xandria of the Saints Mansuetus, Seuerus, Ap^pianus,
Donatus, Honorius, and their fellows Martyrs. At Thessalonica of S. Anysia
Marty^ There also of S. Anysius Bishop of the sam^ City. At Millan of S.
Eugenius Bishop an^ Confessor. At Rauenna of S. Liberius Bishop. At Aquila in
Oli^ V^i.
Abbruzzo of S. Rain^rius Bishop.

A The one and thirtith Day.
AT Rome the birthday of S. Syluester Pope, who having baptized Constantine
the Great, and confirmed the Council of Nice, after many holy labors and
pains taken for the Church, happily reposed in our Lord. Also at Rome in the
way Salaria, in the Churchyard of Priscilla, of the holy Martyrs Donata,
Paulina, Rustica, Nominanda, Serotina, Hilaria, and their fellows. At Senonae.
Sens of the Saints Sabinianus Bishop, and Potentianus, who being sent thither
by the Bishop of Rome, to preach the Gospel, adorned that Bishoprike with
their Martyrdom. There also of S. Columba Virgin and Martyr, who having
overcome the torments of fire, in the persecution of Aurelianus, was beheaded.
At Rhetiaria of S. Hermes Exorcist. At Catania in Sicily the passion of the
Saints Stephen, Pontianus, Attalus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Sextus, Flores,
Quinctianus, Mineruinus and Simplicianus. The same day of S. Zoticus a Priest
of Rome, who going to Constantinople, took there upon him the care and
protection of Orphans. At Rauenna of S. Barbatianus Priest and Confessor. The
same day of S. Melania the younger, who going from Rome, with her husband
Pinianus to Jerusalem, and there leading a Religious life, she in a Cloister
of holy Virgins, and he in a Monastery of Monks, both ended their happy days.

. And in other places of many other Saints Martyrs, Confessors, and holy
Virgins, to whose prayers and merits, we humbly commend our selves. Resp.
Praise be to God.

FINIS.
End

