A TREATISE OF SCHISM.

Showing, that al Catholics ought in any wise to abstain altogether from
heretical Conuenticles, to wit, their prayers, sermons. etc. divided into
four Chapters, whereof 1. Contains sundry reasons to that purpose, grounded
for the most part upon Scriptures and Fathers. 2. Examples out of holy
Scripture. 3. Examples out of ecclesiastical histories. 4. Answers to the
chief objections.


By Gregory Martin Licentiate in Divinity.

DVACI. Apud Iohannem Foulcrum. 1578.

HIc Tractatus est plane Catholicus, and nostris imprimis hominibus hoc
schismatis tempore pernecessarius.

Ita testor Gulielmus Alanus S. Theologiae Doctor and Professor.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
COnstantius Emperor, father unto Constantine the great, Eus. de vita Constable.
lib. 1. ca. 11.
offered unto his nobility this Condition, That as many as would offer
Sacrifice unto the Idols, should have both access unto his royal person, dwell
in his Court, and have offices and great honor in the common wealth. They that
would not thus do, should have no access unto his person, no familiarity
with him, should bear no office in the common wealth, but should be banished
the Court, and also be deprived of such offices and honors, as presentlye they
did enjoy. Forthwith ye whole Court is divided in two parts, whereby the
Emperor easily might perceue each man's mind, faith, truth, and religion: for
the true Christians were by and by ready humbly to depart, rather the^ by
tarying to violate their faith for world lie honor. Then Constantius opening
his secret purpose, blames the dissembling sort, calls them dastardes,
faint hearted Cowardes, traitors unto their God, and his truth, and flatterers
unto their Emperor, men unworthy to live in his service. For how will ye
keep faith unto me your master (says he) that have violated your faith unto
the eternal God? ye are co^uicted of perjury unto God, how can ye be true
unto man? The others he commended highly for their constancy, piety, and true
faith, he judges the^ worthy to have rule and charge of earthly things, that
had showed the^ selves faithful to God. They are (says he) like to be true
unto their Emperor, that have showed them selves true and faithful to God, he
commits the custody of his own person to them, the charge and government
of the Empire he lays in their hands, the rest he did utterly banishe as
pernicious flatterers, turne-coates, and hipocrites. Verily, the fact was
heroical, and worthy the father of Constantine, it was the very way to try
true men from flatterers, faithful servant from false deceauers. For he that
will not stick to violate his faith, his religion, and his conscience toward
God, for lukers sake, who can think that such will be faithful and trusty unto
man? Great therefore is the oversight of our days, wherein he that can best
dissemble, he that can violate his faith unto God and his Church, for worldly
preferment, is taken for most trusty and faithful: he that will come to the
Church, although it be never so much against his conscience, he that will
receive their what shall I call it, although he wishes it in his belie that
delivers it, is thought to be best to be trusted with the greatest affairs
and weightiest business about the prince. But this good Emperor judged them
unworthy to have charge about men, that made no conscience to violate their
faith unto God. But one will say, 4. Reg. 5. Obiectio.
Naaman the Assirian was permitted by Elizeus the Prophet, to go with the king
into the temple where Idolatry was, and yet never impair his conscience: even
so may we go to the Church for obedience sake without hurting our conscience,
or violating our faith to God. Resp.
If Elizeus gave him leave (as you guess, which yet the text proves not) to
go to do his master temporal service, not in respect of religion, but
according to his office, it was, (as you confess) but by leave of the
prophet, whom God did will then to be obeyed: but he that is Elizeus now, does
give you no such leave, but does command the contrary, whose voice you are
bound to obey, else this example of Naaman will condemn you. For if he durst
not do so much, as his temporal office unto his master in the temple without
the prophets leave, how dare you do an act of religion, to further heresy
against the express commandment of him, Deuteronomy. 24. Math. 19. Marc. 10. Heb.
7. Galat. 3.
who is greater in office then Elizeus? Moses gave the Jews libellu^ repud^,
a letter of divorce, not that it was so from the beginning, but propter
duritia^; because of the hardness of their hearts, because of the imperfection
of the Jews, for the old law brought nothing to perfection, gave no grace,
but was a time of infancy: but now infancy is passed into man's age, and grace
is given more abundantly to men. The time a time of perfection that will admit
no such divorce, no such license (as you seem to say) Naaman thassirian had,
who was but a Proselite or a Catechumene. 1. Cor. 10.
Also there were no such weaklinges to take scandale at his presence in the
Temple of Remmon, as are here in the Sinagoge of heretics. You may not
therefore draw this example of Naaman to color your offense, no more then may
these that now do put away their old wives and take new, use this example of
the old law to cloak their aduoutry. Math. 5.
For unless your righteousness do exceed yt righteousness of ye Scribes and
Pharisees, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Also heresy and
schism are two most grievous sins, yet distinct according to that whereto
they are directlye opposite of them selves: S. Tho. 2.2
as heresy of it self is repugnant unto faith, Schism opposite unto the
unity of ye ecclesiastical charity. And therefore, like as faith and charity
are two diverse virtues, (although whosoever lacks faith, is also void of
charity) So Schism and and heresy are two diverse vices, although who that is
an heretic, is also a schismatike, Hier. super epist. ad Galat.
yet not every Schismatike is an heretic: as teaches S. Hierome. Inter
schisma and haeresim hoc interest, quod haeresis peruersum dogma habet, Schisma
ab ecclesia seperat. etc. Between Schism and heresy these are the odds,
That heresy has always a perverse opinion against an article of faith,
Schism seperateth from the Church: yet like as the losing of charity is the
very high way toward the losing of a man's faith, according to that of S.
Paul, A quibus quidam aberrantes, conuersi sunt in vaniloquium. From which
some wandering (charity and such like) are resolved into brablinges. So is
Schism the high way into heresy, although at first Shisme may be understood
somewhat diverse from heresy it self, yet in the end there is no Schism that
does not coin forthwith some heresy to have a color to revolt from the
Church. And therefore commonly the sin of Schism has been more grievously
punished in the Scriptures then infidelity or Idolatry. Exodus 32.
For we read, that the sin of Idolatry was punished by the sword, by man's
execution, Number. 16.
But of the sin of Schism we read, Si nouam rem fecerit Dominus, vt
aperiens terra os suum deglutiat eos, et omnia quae ad illos pertinent. etc. If
our Lord should do a new thing, that the earth opening her mouth do swalowe
them, and al things that do appertain unto them, and living, they shall
descend to hell, by this you shall know that they have blasphemed our Lord
God. Also the tenn tribes, which through Schism revolted from the kingdom of
David, were most grievously punished, 3. Reg. 12.
and in fine fell from Schism to Idolatrye. Moreover, as long as Abraham abode
among the Chaldeis, who were Idolatrers, Genesis 13.15-17.
it is not found that our Lord appeared much unto him, although, as it may be
thought, he was a good man: but when he departed from thence, we read, that
often God appeared unto him, and as of a benefit most singular, does put him in
remembrance of his delivery. Genesis 33.
Ego dominus qui eduxi vos de terra Hurr Chal deorum. Jacob the beloved did
refuse to go into ye company of reprobate Esau, although by gifts he had
pacified him, neither would suffer any of his servants to be among his
herdmen. Genesis 21.
Ismaels play with Isacke did so offend Sara, that it is called in Scripture
persecution. Hard it was, (although Abraham prostrate besought it) to save Lot
from the wrath of God in Sodoma: yea, his wife for looking once back toward
ye place where the wicked were, Genesis 19.
is eternally punished: Math. 26. Luke 22.
and Peter the prince of thapostles by entering into ye palace of the high
Superintendent, and warming him self at their fire, is driven to deny his
faith: John the beloved could not escape their hands, but by leaving his
gaberdine behind, glad to escape stark naked. These are written for our
instructions, 2 Timothy 2.
that we should beware of false heretics and Schismatikes, whose speech
creeps as does ye disease of a cancar, Ca. Apost. 63.
and infecteth those that it touches. The Church therefore, as a careful
mother, has by Canons of antiquity utterly forbidden her children to come
nere the forsaken company, Con. Laod. can. 9.3^.33.
as by the cotations in the margent may appear. Bruno a learned writer says,
that each prouiso whereby heresies and schisms are to be avoided, do consist in
these: Bruno.
Haereticorum communione, collegiis, conuenticulis, Scholis, praedicationibus,
and doctrinis, libris falsis, ab haereticis, vel compositis, vel deprauatis By
communicating with heretics in their colleges, conuenticles, or prophesying,
prechings, schools, or in books, either by them fally made, or by their notes
corrupted: for as by these things being suffered, heresies and Schisms do
grow, increase, take rooting, and infect: So these occasions being prohibited
and cut off, they are either suppressed or utterly extinguished. To
communicate with heretics in these things, is for three causes forbidden by
the Church, and that upon pain of the censures thereof. The first, because
heretics are cut from the Church, with whom neither the Church, nor they of
the Church ought to have either felowshipp or communion. Secondly, because
Catholics communicating in any of the premises with heretics, little se
peccatis inuoluant, do wrapp them selves (to be guilty) in their sins, as it
is written, Depart from the tabernacles of these wicked men (Schismatikes)
touch nothing that apperteyneth unto them, Romans 12.
least in their sins you wrapp your selves. Thirdly, least in using their
society, you be made one of them. 2. Tim. 2. 1. Cor. 10.
Qui stat videat ne cadat. For their speech and company does infect. An
emulamur dominum? Shall we provoke or try whether God dare punish us? Are we
stronger then he, that we can abide his displeasure? We do every day provoke
him to anger, when we come to the conuenticles of his enemies. It is not good
to sustain his displeasure. And therefore is it forbidden by the Constitutions
of the Apostles. Constable. Apost. lib. 5. ca. 4. Et idem multis in locis. Vide F.
Turria.
Impios haereticos qui impoenitentes fuerint. etc. The wicked heretics that
have separated them selves from the faithful Catholics, cast off, for they are
impenitent, and charge the Catholics to abstain from their felowshipp by all
means, neither let them have any communication with them in speech or
prayers, for they are adversaries and thieues to the Church, they begile the
flock, defile the heritage. We warn you therefore, that ye avoid them, least
they entangle your souls in their snares, for it is not lawful to run with
thieves. No man can serve two masters at once. Thus far the Apostles. We see
what charge they gave to the children of the household: For like as the life of
the body proceeds from the quickening spirit (for until the breath of life
was into the nosethrils of man breathed, Aug. Ser. 186. and in Joan.
the body was senseless, without life, A fit similitude.
for the life of the body is the soul, made after the Image of God: all the
members as long as they remain in the body, have life and strength effectual
to their appointed operation proceeding from the soul, in the same body for
that purpose abiding. But if either leg, arm, ear, or nose be cut off from
the body, the life of the soul follows it not, it is dead, unprofitable,
wretched, and miserable: the life of the soul follows not a divided member:
Even so, look what the soul of man does in the natural body of man, the same
does the holy Ghost in the mistical body of Christ. By Baptism we have put
on Christ. Gal. 3. Romans 6.
Quotquot in Christo baptizati estis, Christum induistis. We are incorporate
into his body, as truly, as ye legs, arms, and head, are by sinews
organically joined to the life of thy soul. So truly are they that have putt
on Christ in Baptism, united unto the mistical body of Christ, which is the
Catholic Church: The soul or life of which body is the holy Ghost, Ioh. 15.
like as the life of man is his soul. As long as we remain in this body
mistical, in this vine, as true members, as true branches, so long have we
life, grace, and gifts proportionable unto the part, that we occupy in the
mistical body. If we cut off our selves by heresy, by schism, by going into
ye Church, where it is, or where any part of the schismatical service thereof is
said or preached, we have no more the life, graces, and gifts of the holy
Ghost, to merit life everlasting, then has the leg or arm, cut off from the
body, the life of ye soul, which only remains in ye body. The graces of the
holy Ghost do not follow a divided member, what good works soever he do, they
help nothing to merit life, but he is a dead member withered to be cast into
ye everlasting fire of hellish pain and woeful misery. Vbi ecclesia, Iren. li.
3. cap. 40.
ibi and spiritus, and vbi spiritus dei, illic ecclesia and omnis gratia,
spiritus autem veritas. Where ye Church is, there is the spirit, and where ye
spirit of God is, there is the Church and al grace, and the spirit is truth.
And S. Augustine says: Qui ecclesia^ relinquit, Aug. tract. 1. in 1, Ep. Ioh.
quomodo est in Christo? How is he in Christ, that forsakes ye church of
Christ? how is he in Christ, that is not in ye body of Christ, which is his
Catholic Church? To try whether thou be a member of this Church (good
reader) peruse this book for thy salvation prepared not by one man, but by the
whole Church, whose voice thou art bound to obey: and if thou find thy
self to lack, use the remedy therein prescribed to save thy save thy soul,
and pray for them that for thy behoof have set it forth. From Remes within
the Octaues of Al Saints. 1578.

By your countriman G. M.

REASONS THAT CATHOLICS ought in any wise to abstain from heretical
Conuenticles.
CAP. I.
Tit. 3.
Haereticum hominem post vnam and alteram admonitione^ deuita. A man that is an
heretic avoid after he is once or twice admonished. And, Nec Aue ei
dixeritis: Ioh. 2.
qui namque dicit illi, Aue, communicate operibus eius malignis. Say not so
much to him as, God save you, for he that says so to him, does communicate
with his wicked works. Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 22.
As S. John did teach other, so him self gave example: Fugiamus hinc, ne
balneum cadat super nos, in quo est Cerinthus veritatis hostis. Let us flee
from hence, least the bathe fall upon us, in the which Cerinthus is, the enemy
of truth. It is a famous history: S. John the Apostle and Evangelist would not
tarry in the place, 2. Tim. 4.
when he heard Cerinthus the heretic was there. Alexander aerarius restitit
verbis nostris, quem and tudeuita. Alexander the Copper-smith withstoode our
words, whom I will that thou also do avoid or shun.

It is dangerous. Romans 16.
Per dulces sermones and benedictiones seducunt corda innocentium. By sweet
words and gaye blessings they seduce the hearts of the simple or good
meaning persons. And therefore, Rogo vos fratres vt obseruetis eos, and
declinate abillis. I beseech you brethren take good heed of them, and turn
aside from them. 2. Tim. 2.
And, Sermo eorum vt cancer serpit, and subuerterunt quorundam fidem, multum
enim proficiunt ad impietatem. Sed firmum fundamentum Dei stat, habens
signaculum hoc, cognouit Dominus qui sunt eius. Their talk creeps like a
canker, and they have subverted the faith of certain, for they prevail much
in ungodliness. But the foundation of God stands sure, our Lord knows who
are his. Only they that flee from such: and therefore it follows: Discedat
abiniquitate omnis qui nominat nomen Domini. Let him depart from wickedness,
every one that names the name of our Lord: every good Catholic. Again, 2.
Pet. 2.
Pellicientes animas instabiles, eos qui paululum effugiunt. Alluring
unconstant souls, such as escape them but a very little. Who are they qui
paululum effugiunt, but such as boldlye communicate with them, and therefore
are in danger to become theirs altogether? Effugiunt, they escape them, because
in heart they consent not: but paululum, very little, because in fact they are
like to them. If they presume upon their constancy or knowledge, that there
can ensue no danger, Qui stat, videat ne cadat. He that stands, let him
beware he fall not. And, Qui tangit picem, Ecclesi. 13.
inquinabitur ab ea. He that touches pitche, shall be defiled with it.

And, Ecclesi. 3.
Qui dormit iuxta sepern, mordebit eum coluber. He that sleeps near the
hedge, a serpent will sting him. And, Qui amat periculum peribit in illo. He
that loves or seeks danger shall perish in it.

For the selfsame cause it is not lawful, Sozom. li. 1. ca. 20. and li. 2. c.
31. de libris Marcelli haeretici.
Constantine the great made it death to him that did not burn the books of
Arrius. Martian also and Justinian made careful decrees to this purpose. This
place is very large. Gregory the great (Bishop of Rome) did not absolve one
Anastasius a priest from suspision of heresy, Li. 5 ep. 64
til he had promised, that he would never read that heretical hook again,
for the which he was suspected. Anastasium prsbiterum promittentem, quod
codicem quendam haereticum nunquam denuo lecturus esset, ita demum absoluit
suspectum haereseos. See Hessels that famous Doctor of Louaine in 1. Tim. 6. ad
illud in graeco, aphistaso apo ton tointon. Dionisius Alexandrinus a most
ancient, learned, Eusebius. ec. li. 7. ca. 6
and virtuous Bishopp confesses to a friend of his who warned him of heretical
books, that he felt himself the worse for them, and had abstained, but that
a heavenly vision gave him, as it were, a privilege, adding this cause: Nam
satis habes virium and firmitatis ad quaeque, tum conuincenda, tum exploranda.
For thou art strong and sure enough, both to confound all that is in them, and
to examine them. He that has not this warrantize from Christ, or from his
vicar, may not presume. It is noted in certain learned Catholics of our time,
that by reading such books they somewhat yielded to error, Albertus Pighius
and Alphonsus: May ignorant men be bolder then these?

It does argue consent, in foro ecclesiae, you are taken for such, although you
be not such, Apoc. 18.
and you shall be punished with them. Exite de illa (Babilone, haeresi) populus
meus, vt ne participes sitis delictorum eius, de plagis eius non accipiatis.
Go out from her (meaning Babylon, which signifies heresy) my people, that
you be not partaker of her sins, and that you receive not of her plages.
Mark: Populus meus, My people, because they were in heart his, Romans 1.
but in conversation joined with his enemy. Digni sunt morte non solum qui ea
faciunt, sed etiam qui consentiunt illa facientibus. They are worthy of death,
not only the doers, but they that consent.

It does dishonor God, Prouer. 14
Honor Regis multitudo populi; paucitas plebis ignominia Principis. It is the
Kings honor to have a multitude of people, to have few is dishonor to the
Prince. The aduersarys knowing this, desires only to make up a number, and is
careless what they think in conscience, so they make a show to be his by any
means. Psalm. 16.
De absconditis tuis adimpletus est venture eorum. Of such as are secret
Catholics, they fill up their heretical Sinagoge: Lutherans, Caluinists,
Puritanes, Anabaptists, al are the adversaries by profession. If he may get
also of them that would otherwise be compted Catholics, to join openly with
them, is it not his honor? He that in secret sootheth his prince, and openly
takes part with his enemve, in heart is his, in fact the others: his in peace,
and the others in time of danger, whether of the two does he most honor? 1.
Reg. 2.
But God says: Honorem meum alteri non dabo. I will not give mine honor to
another. And, Qui me glorificauerit, glorificabo eum: qui autem contemnunt me,
erunt ignobiles. He that shall glorify me, him will I glorify: but will I
glorify: but they that set little by me, shall be of no reputation. And that
voice of our Savior to the Jews what true Christian may abide, when it is
woorthely said to himself also. Ioh. 8.
Vos autem inhonorastis me, But you have dishonored me. And, Sic luceat lux
vestra coram hominibus, vt videant and glorificent Patrem vestru^ qui in coelis
est. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see it and glorify your
Father that is in heaven. Nemo accendit lucernam and ponit eam sub modio, sed
super candelabrum. No man is by Gods grace lightened with Catholic faith and
understanding, to hide it in his bosom. O it is a glorious thing, not only in
mind, but bodily to join with our Lord. A notable example in the Levites,
Exodus 32.
when Moises said: Si quis est Domini, iungatur mihi. If any man be of our
Lords side, let him join with me. They ran from the Schismatical Idolatours,
protesting that they were on their Lords side, and therefore they were Pars
and haereditas Domini, The priestly tribe, and afterward accounted al one with
Judah, under the special protection of Almighty God. Ambros. li. 2. off. cap.
24. Licet tibi silere in negotio pecuniario. etc. In causa autem Dei, vbi
communionis periculum est, etiam dissimulare peccatum est non leave. Thou may
hold thy peace sometime in a money matter, but in Gods cause, where there is
danger of communicating with his enemies, to dissemble only, is no small sin.

It is not only glorious, 6. Luc. 12.
but necessary, to confess our faith openly. Qui negat me coram hominibus,
negabo and ego cum coram Patre meo and Angelis eius. He that denies me before
me^, I will also deny him before my Father and his Angels. And, Romans 10.
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, To be justified we must believe in the heart in
catholic quietness. Ore confessio fit ad salutem. To be saved we must confess
with our mouth in time of heresy. And, Hebr. 10.
Iustus meus ex fide viuit. Quod si subtraxerit se, Subtractio seu
praeuaricatio.
non placebit animae meae. Nos autem non sumus subtractionis filii in,
perditionem, sed fidei in acquisitione^ animae. My just one lives by faith.
But if he secretly reuolte, he shall not please my soul. We are not reuolting
children to perdition, but the children of faithfulness to save our soul.
Subtrahere se, is to shrink from protesting his faith: huposteilasthai
praeuaricari. D. Amb. ep. 3. Ipsis Gentilibus displicere consueuit
praeuaricantis affectus, libere namque debet defendere vnusquisque fidele
mentis suae and seruare propositu^. The Panims them selves were wont to mislike
his behavior that betrayeth his own cause: for every man ought freely to
mainteyne and to keep the faithful purpose of his own mind and conscience.

It argues a neuter, atheon, sine deo in hoc mundo: an Atheiste, one that
acknowledges no God in this world. Apoc. 3. Vtinam frigidus esses aut
calidus, sed quia tepidus es, and nec frigidus nec calidus, incipiam te euomere
ex ore meo. I would thou were cold or hott, that is, no dissembler, but a
plain dealer one way or the other. But because thou art luke warm, and
neither cold nor hott, a neuter, earnest in neither, Mat. 11.
I will begin to spewe thee out of my mouth. Qui non est mecum, contra me est,
and qui mecum non colligit, spargit. He that is not with me is against me, and
he that gathers not with me, scatters.

Or if thou have a conscience toward the Catholic Religion, Romans 14.
that is damnable. Beatus qui se non iudicat in eoquod probat. Blessed is he
that condemns not himself in doing contrary to that he best allows. Quod
enim ex fide non est, peccatum est. that is, according to his conscience: hoc
est secundum conscientiam, 1.2, q 19.
as S. Thomas expounds it: who makes this conclusion so certain and
infallible, that if a man in conscience should err, as it is sin to do
accordingly: so also to do contrary, is to him a damnable sin. For example.
A Caluinist adoring the blessed Sacrament does sin, because he is persuaded
in conscience, he ought not, and that it is Idolatry. Contrary-wise, a
Catholic because of his conscience, that Christ is there present, peccat non
adorando, sins in not adoring, In psalm. 98.
as S. Austin says. Jacob. 4. Scienti bonum facere, and non facienti peccatum
est illi. He that knows to do good, In psa. 54.
and does it not, to him it is sin. S. Austin. Qui nosti esse mala quae
facis, and tamen facis ea, nonne viuus descendis ad inferos? Thou that know
the things that thou do are ill, and yet do them, do thou not go down
into hell quick? Thou art in conscience and knowledge a Catholic, in fact and
demeanor thou would seem an heretic, estne ex fide? is it according to
thy conscience? estne quod probas? Is it that thou do best allow? ergo
peccatum est, quia non ex fide, ergo iudicasti teipsum in co quod probas.
Therefore it is sin, because it is not according to thy conscience. Therefore
thou have condemned thy self, in doing contrary to that thou allowest. But
would thou not seem to allow their doings? Nolite errare, Galat. 6
deus non irridetur. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Why do other incur
displeasure, but by disalowing their proceedinges? how is that known, but by
their absence only? (for many have not occasion to speak their faith) ergo
thou art quiet, because thou do seem to allow it, and that is gathered by
thy presence: to thee therefore is said illud in ep. Cleri. Romans apud Cipr. 31.
Cum totum fidei Sacramentu^ in confessione nominis Christi intelligatur
digestum, qui fallaces in excusatione praestigias quaesiuit, negauit. Et qui
vult videri propositis aduersus Euangelium, vel edictis, vel legibus
satisfecisse, hoc ipso iam paruit, quod videri paruisse se voluit. Whereas the
whole mystery of faith is understood to consist in confessing the name of
Christ, he that has sought false sleightes for excuse thereof, has denied.
And he that will seem to have fulfilled such Statutes and laws as are set
forth against the Ghospel, in so doing he has obeyed them in very deed,
forasmuch as he would have it seem that he has obeyed the^. Who knows not
that cold Catholics come to Church in England upon this false principle: De
Ciuit. dei lib. 6. cap. 10.
We must obey a law? Saint Austen writes of Seneca, one familier with Saint
Paul, but a dissembler for fear of Nero. Eo damnabilius fecit (colendo Idola)
quod ea quae fallaciter egit, sic tamen egit, vt veraciter egisse
existimaretur. He did it (meaning his woorshipping of Idols) so much the more
damnably, because that which he did only for a show, yet so he did it, that
he would be thought to have done it truly, and from his very heart.

Here you may remember old Eleazarus, 2. Match. 5.
that would not seem to break any little point of Gods law, but dye rather a
most cruel death. It is a famous history done before the time of grace, and
therefore shall condemn our dissembling Catholics now in great points, for
fear of small damages. Non namque aetati nostrae dignum est fingere; vt multi
adolescentes arbitrantes Eleazarum transisse ad vitam alienigenarum,
decipiantur. etc. It is a thing unworthy of our age to dissemble, whereby
many young men thinking that Eleazarus is revolted to the life and Religion of
Gentiles, may be deceived through my example.

But it is possible that thy conscience is indifferent to both religions,
Jacob. 3.
Nunquid fons de eodem foramine emanat dulcem and amaram aquam? Does a
fountain out of one and the self-same spring gushe forth sweet and sower
water? truth and heresy? unity and schism? Nemo potest duobus dominis
seruire. 2. Cor. 6.
No man can serve two masters. And, Non potestis bibere calicem Domini and
calicem dmoniorum. Quae participatio iustiti cum iniquitate? aut qu conuentio
Christi ad Belial? aut qu pars fideli cum infideli? You cannot drink of our
Lords cupp and the cupp of devils? What partaking has righteousness with
iniquity? or what agreement is there between Christ and Belial? Or what part
has a faithful man with the faithless or infidel? And what follows? Propter
quod exite de medio eorum, and seperamini, dicit Dominus, and immundum ne
tetigeritis, and ego recipiam vos, and ero vobis in patre^. For the which cause
go out from among them, and separate your selves from them, says our Lord,
and touch not that that is unclean, and I will receue you, and will be to you a
Father. As much to say, if you will follow my religion only, I am your Father,
your God. etc. Otherwise, Esai. 28.
Coangustum est stratum, ita vt alter excidat, and pallium breue non potest
duos tegere. The bed is narowe, so that thou must needs fall out, and a short
blanket cannot cover two. Which Saint Hierome does interpret of Christ, who
is, as it were, Sponsus animae nostrae, The Spouse wedded to our soul: And
therefore can not abide adulterum simul secum in codem strato, an aduoulterer
together with him in the same bed. He will alone have us, or not at al. 3. Reg.
18.
Si Baal sit Deus, sequimini eum; sin Dominus sit Deus, scquimini illum.
Quousque claudicatis in vtramque partem? If Baal be God, follow him. If our
Lord be God, follow him. Ephesians 4.
How long limpe you on both sides? Vna fides, vnus Deus, vnus Dominus. One
faith (says S. Paul) one God, one Lord. 3. Reg. 3
The natural Mother (Catholica Ecclesia) said not to Solomon: Diuidatur. Let
the child be divided, but al or none. The Samaritanes woorshipped the true God
schismatically, and withal their own bables: but it is said (Ioh. 4.) of the
Jews that had the true woorshipp of one God, Catholics, as it were. Non
coutuntur Iudaei Samaritanis. The Jews keep no company with the Samaritanes.
Deuteronomy. 22.
Again, those precepts: Non arabis boue and asino: Non texes vestimenta ex
lino and lana: non miscebis duo semina in agro tuo. Thou shall not plough with
an ox and an Ass together. Thou shall not weaue garments of both linen and
woollen. Thou shall not mingle two diverse seeds in thy field: and the like.
What is the signification, but, Vae duplici cord. Woe be to the double
hearted. And, Vir duplici animo inconstans est in omnibus viis suis. A double
hearted man is unconstant in all his ways. And, Eccl. 3.
Vir ingrediens duas vias non habebit successus. And, Cor prauum
scandalizabitur in eis. A man that goes in two ways, shall not go forward,
and a wicked heart shall stumble in them. And that which is terrible. Sophon. 1.
Disperdam de terra eos, qui iurant in deum and in Melchom. I will destroy the^
that swear by God, and their wicked king. For so Melchom does signify by God
in heart, by their prince in behavior, which serve both, depend upon both.
etc. In malitia sua ltificauerunt regem, Oscae. 7.
and in mendaciis suis principes. They have de lighted the king in their
naughtines, and princes by their lying or dissembling. Of such men as learn to
dissemble of their naughty pastors, S. Austen says: Si indifferentem habuero
errorem tuu^, De pastor. cap. 7.
attendit qui fortis est, putat nihil esse ire in haeresim, quando aliquod
co^modum de seculo reduxerit, vnde mutetur. Statim mihi dicit fortis ille
periturus, and hac, and hac deus est. Quid interest? homines inter se
litigantes hoc fecerunt: vbicunque colendus est deus. If I shall think thy
error indifferent, and that it is al one to do this or that, he that is
otherwise strong, marketh it, and thinks it is nothing to run into
heresy, when some worldly commodity shall appear, whereby he may be altered
and changed, by and by this stout man says unto me, God is both here and
there, what difference is there? men by iangling among them selves have made all this ado. God is to be woorshipped in every place or congregation.

It is scandalous, Vae: Mat. 18.
Vae mundo a scandalis: Vae illi per quem veniunt scandala. Woe be to the world
by reason of stumbling blocks: Woe be to him that makes other men to stumble.
And, Marc. 9.
Qui scandalizauerit vnum ex pusillis istis, credentibus in me, bonum est ei
magis si circundaretur mola asinaria collo eius, and in mare mitteretur. He
that is an occasion why any one of these little ones, that believe in me, do
stumble or sin, it were good for him, if a mil-stone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were cast into the Sea. Pusilli, Little ones, are they that
believe well, and mean well, and gladly would do for the best, but are easilye
moved to relent by authority or example. Here remember once more old
Eleazarus, who therefore chose to dye, 2. Match. 6.
because young men should not be bold to break Gods law, saying: Old
Eleazarus did so, why may not we? but, O worthy Eleazarus, it was required
only of thee to eat lawful meats, so that thou would but seem to have
eaten unlawful: yea (quoth he) therefore let me dye, rather then young persons
by thinking that I did it, offend damnably by occasion of my dissimulation.
This man knew before by inspiration that Vae which Christ afterward
pronounced scandalizantibus. And therefore less marvel (although marvelous)
if S. Paul afterward speak vehemently: 1. Cor. 8.
Si sca scandalizat fratrem meum, non manducabo carnem in aeternum. If meat
offend my brother, or be occasion of his finne, I will not eat flesh for ever:
although the meat of it self was good and lawful. Sic namque peccantes in
fratres, and percutientes conscientiam little infirmam, in Christum peccatis.
For you sinning after that sort against your brethren, and wounding their weak
conscience, sin against Christ: wherein was this dangerous scandal
committed? mark the case like to ours. Si namque quis viderit eum qui habet
scientiam, in idolio recumbente^, nonne conscientia eius cum sit infirma,
aedificabitur ad manducandum idolothita? for if a man shall chance to see him
that has knowledge sit in the temple of idols, shall not his conscience being
weak, be edified and induced to eat idolatrous meats by thy example? if a
weakling see thee (a man of account and estimation) present in the Church of
heretics, or at their sermons, their conscience being not fullye settled to
detest heresy, is he not easily induced to frequent their conuencles with
danger of daily corruption, and either to like the better, or to mislike the
less of their sayings and doings? Aug. epist. 154.
Apparet illud esse prohibitum, (says S. Austen) ne in honorem alienorum
deorum aliqua re vtamur, aut vti existimemur, sic etiam accipiendo, vt quamuis
animo contemnamus, eos tamen qui nostrum animum ignorant, ad haec honoranda
aedificemus. It is evident that this is forbidden, that we use not any thing
in the honor of strange Gods, or to be thought to use, taking it in such
sort, that although in heart we despise it, yet we edify and induce them that
know not our heart, to honor the same things. This case concerns al states,
upon whose example any one Christian soul depends: princes, prelates,
pastors, masters, parents. Of princes let one Ieroboa^ suffice, who is always
mentioned in scripture with this title of his scandalous apostasy. Qui peceare
fecit Israel, that made Israel to sin: which is properlye scandalum, or
scandalizare. S. Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinian, epist. 30. urges the
like inconvenience if he did but yield a little to ye Panims request. Totus hic
Christianorum periclitatur Senatus. etc. This whole be^ch of Christian
Senators is in danger to offend mortally by this means. And (which is much
to be noted contra excusandas excusationes in peccatis: against al blind
excuses to justify ill doings, common now a days to diminish great faults)
whereas the Emperor might have said, I did not sacrifice, nor induce any man
to do it: yet because he permitted that only to be done, whereof Idolatry
followed, paganis vt erigerent aras, the Paynims to set up Idolatrous aultars,
he says: Vox enim tua, manus tua. Thy word is thy hand. Et subscriptio tua
opus est tuum. And to subscribe to the Paynims license, is as much as if thou
had done it thy self. And again: Quisquis hoc suadet, sacrificat, and
quisquis hoc statuit. Whosoever gives council to it, does sacrifice to false
Gods, and whosoever does decree it. See how far this sin (scandalum)
extends, not only to the doers, but to them that council, subscribe, wink
at it, permit and dissemble it. Apoc. 2. Habes illic tenentes doctrinam
Balaam, qui docebat Balac mittere scandalu^ coram filiis Israel, pugnabo cum
illis in gladio oris mei. Thou have there that hold the doctrine of Balaam,
who taught Balac how to give occasion that the children of Israel might sin:
I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. He threatens the masters
and Councellers, qui docebant mittere scandalum, as Balaam, not only the
prince him self and chief doer Balac. Of Vide exemplum Miseni and Vitalis,
qui a To. pont. missi Co^stantinopolim, cum Petro haeretico co^municarunt,
qua^tum scandalum populo dederint, vt putauerit Pontifice^ Romans cum haeretico
co^municasse. Euagr. li. 3. cap. 21.
prelates I will give examples afterward in more convenient plaee, least I dwell
in this reason to long. Of Pastors, S. Austen ( de pastoribus ca. 7. to.9.)
Si forte dixerit aliquis Donatista, non tibi do filiam meam, nisi fueris de
part mea; illi opus est vt attendat et dicat: Si nihil maliesset de part
eorum, non contra illos dicerent tanta pastores nostri, non pro illorum errore
satagerent. If perhaps some Donatist shall say (to a cold Catholic) I give
thee not my daughter unless thou be of my side, it stands this man upon to
take good heed, and to say with him self: If there were no harm on their
side, our Pastors or preachers would not speak so much against them, they would
not be so earnest to confound their error. It follows: Si ergo cessemus et
taceamus, contraria locuturus est: vtique si malu^ esset in part Donati,
loquerentur contra, redarguerent eos, satagerent lucrari illos, si errant
reuocarent illos, si percu^t, quaererent illos. etc. If therefore we cease and
hold our peace, he will say contrary: Verily if there had been any evil in
Donatus faction, our Pastors and Curates would speak against it, would rebuke
them, if they be lost would seek them. etc. Of Parents. Ciprianus de lapsis.
Nonne illi (paruuli) cum iudicii dies venerit, dicent: Nos nihil fecimus, nec
derelicto cibo et poculo domini (the blessed Sacrament) ad profana contagia
sponto properauimus; perdidit nos aliena perfidia, parents sensimus homicidas.
Illi nobis ecclesiam matrem, illi parentem deum negauerunt, vt dum parui et
improuidi, et tanti facinoris ignari, per alios ad consortium criminis
iungimur, aliena fraud caperemur. Will not they (the children) when the day of
judgment shall come, say? We have done nothing of our selves, neither,
forsaking ye meat and the cupp of our Lord (the blessed Sacrament) have we of
our own accord hastened to profane infections, other men's infidelity has
undone us, we have felt our own parents menstears, they have denied us the
Church our Mother, and God our Father, that whiles we being young, and
foreseing no danger, and ignorant that it was so heinous a fault, by the
motion of others are made partakers of ye crime, by other men's policy might
so be intrapped. This place concerns most kind of persons, and were to be
handled at large, because Parents may many ways give their children occasion
to fall into heresy and schism (but I would gladly end this first part
concerning reasons:) briefly, if they give example, by communicating, if they
permit their children, or rather command them, thereby to excuse them
selves, imagining that it is venial in them because of their age: if they do
not forbid them and teach them the contrary, if they send them to schools or
universities, where they must needs hear and see, and do that they should
not. etc.

Nupti cum infidelibus prohibentur, Marriage with Infidels, and with heretics
is forbid, because of the danger in perverting one the other. Et contract
discindi poterunt ac debent, ill quoad vinculum, is it quoad cohabitationem, si
cohabitare non liceat sine iniuria Creatoris. And being contracted may
notwithstanding, and ought to be sundred, the one to be no marriage, the other not
to live together at al, if they cannot live together without injury of their
Maker: that is, if the one will needs make the other offend God. 2. Cor. 6.
Nolite iugum ducere cum infidelibus. Draw not in one yoke with Infidels.
Which is most properly spoken de coniugibus, et. 1. Cor. 7. and Tertullian ad
vxorem, Euscb. li. 4 cap. 16.
and thecclesiastical history of a virtuous godly matrone that departed from
her husband. And our Savior him self. Mat. 19.
Qui reliquerit vxorem propter me, centuplum accipiet. He that forsakes his
wife for my sake, shall receive a hundred fold. Qui non oderit, Luc. 14.
non est me dignus. He that hates her not for my sake, is not worthy of me.
Deuteronomy. 13.
And Moses: Si vxor quae est in sinu ruo. If thy wife that fleepeth in thy
bosom will persuade thee error, cast thou the first stone at her. If the wife
and her husband may not keep company, because the one is a wicked infidel or
heretic, of whom it is said: Et adhrebit vxori sue. And he shall cleave to his
wife. And if the son must upon pain of damnation forsake the Father, and
the daughter her mother, because they are of a contrary belief (for Qui
diligit eos plus me, and, Qui non odit patrem et matrem, non est me dig He that
loves them better then me: yea, he that does not hate father and mother (in
this case) is not worthy of me. Luc. 12.
Putatis quia pacem veni mittere? non dico vobis, sed seperationem. Think you
that I came to send peace upon the earth? no, I tell you truth, but division
and dissension: meaning, that for his sake the son should leave his father, the
daughter her mother, the wife her husband, one friend forsake another. If, I
say, this be so, much more heretical conuenticles are to be abhorred.

Al open professors of heresy or known heretics are ipso facto
excommunicati, et in bulla coen domini. In their prayers and sermons their
profession is manifest, ergo then especially we must abstain from them, quia
participare cum excommunicato in diuinis etiam catholice, grave peccatum est:
because to communicate or to be partaker with an excommunicate person in
things pertaining to Gods service, albeit after a catholic manner (as when the
Pelagiens had al their service and ceremonies catholic) is by the judgment of
learned divines and the consent of the Church a grievous sin, how much more
grievous is it to communicate with them, when their service and manner of prayer
is wholly heretical? Yea, the first case de reseruatis in bulla Coe. Domini,
est hresis, and comprehendit eos qui praesumunt legere libros hreticorum,
quique imprimunt, et domi habent, et demum omnes fautores hreticorum: ergo a
pari, to frequent their conuenticles where they pray and preach is comprehended.

It is excommunication to enter into ye Jews Sinagoge at the time of their
ceremonies, wherein every day, contra Iesum Nazarenu^, against Jesus of
Nazareth, so they call him of contempt and despite. The like is said of
yeschismatical Grecians in Venice: much more is it to be conceued of haunting
heretical conuenticles, where the blessed Sacrament, the vicar of Christ, are
impudently blasphemed: much more, 1. Cor. 5.
I say, as appears by the Apostles distinction, de fornicariis huius mundi,
and, si is qui frater nominatur, est fornicarius. Of them whom he calls
fornicatours of this world, infidels or Paynims: and of christian brethren that
are fornicatours: of the^ he meant not, but of this latter. Ne commisceamini
cum illis, Keep no company with them. etc. but more of this comparison
hereafter. Here comes to hand another reason.

Scripsi vobis non commisceri, 1. Cor. 5 14.
si is qui frater nominatur, est fornicarius, aut auarus, aut maledicus. etc.
cum eiusmodi nec cibum sumere. I wrote to you not to keep company with any
such, as being a Christian man, is a fornicatour, or covetous, or foul
speaker, with such a one I say not to take meat. And 2. Thessal. 3.
generallye: Denunciamus autem vobis, fratres, in nomine Domini Jesus Christi, vt
subtrahatis vos ab omni fratre ambulante inordinate. etc. We earnestly and
precisely declare unto you (brethren) that you withdraw your selves from
every brother that lives unorderly And, Per epistolam hunc notate, and ne
commisceamini cum illo. Give me a note of him by your letters, and keep no
company with him. Why? vt confundatur, to shame him. He talks of less sins
then heresy. And is it the way to shame heretics, and so to reclaim them,
when their sayings and singings are honored with our presence? To absent our
selves is, no doubt, a confusion to them, and does astonish them, although they
be obstinate.

Every Catholic must confess that the Church of Christ upon earth is visible,
aliquo signaculorum vel Sacramentorum visibilium consortio, Li. 19. ca. 11
contra Faustum.
with some society of visible signs or Sacraments, as S. Austen says: ergo
they that secretly in heart are Catholics, and visibly in Sacraments and
ceremonies communicate with heretics, flatly declare ye they are not to be
accounted of Christ's visible and only Church: which place being well urged,
must needs condemn them by their. Catholic opinion of the visible Church.
For if al should hide their faith, how should the Church appear? If others do
(God be thanked) innumerable, and they do not, how are they the children of
one mother, the members of one body? Or what privilege have they, whereas it is
necessary that many always do protest visibly their religion, to be exempted
from that open profession? They cannot possibly cauel against it: for, Reliqui
mihi septem millia qui non curuauerunt genua ante Baal. I have left me seven
thousand that have not bowed their knees before Baal. An heretical objection
for their invisible Church, is meant of them that in Jerusalem even then
served God openly in the Temple, (...)
when Elias complained that in Samaria among the ten Tribes, (...)
Relictus sum ego solus. Or he spoke it of the good men in the ten Tribes.
(S. Austen Collat. contra Donat. cap. 20.) of zeal, because he knew but few.

If nothing else did move, Zelus domus tu comedit me. The zeal of the house of
God has eaten me. And, Odiui ecclesiam malignantium, and cum impiis no^
sedebo. Lauabo inter innocents manus meas, and circundabo altar tuum Domine.
I hate the congregation of wicked men, and with ye ungodly I will not sit. I
will wash my hands among innocents, and compass thy altar, O Lord. That is: I
will embrace it with both hands, not giving one to thee, and the other to thy
aduersarye. Dilexi decorem domus tuae, and locum habitationis gloriae tuae. I
have loved the beauty of thine house, and the place where thy glory dwells.
Has a cold Catholic this zeal to Gods house against Sinagoge? to whom it may
justly be said: Si videbas furem, currebas cum eo: and cum adulteris portionem
tuam ponebas. Existimasti inique quod ero tui similis. If thou saw a thief,
thou did run with him: and with the aduoulterous thou did take part.
Thou had a wicked surmise that I will be like to thy self: a good gentle
God to favor thy sin, as thou do favor heresy. Arguam te, and statuam
contra faciem tuam. I will lay it to thy charge, be thou sure, and call thee to
account for it in the dreadful day.

And because men do flatter them selves many ways in this case, After the
Admirals death Puritans did wear crosses in France.
and yet make a mortal sin. Caietan, in summula, tit. Habitus mutatio. Si
differentia certa distinctiua Christianorum and aliorum est, ita vt quilibet
vtens tali habitu fateatur sua^ fidem, mortale esset peccatum, puta,
Christianum defer super vestes characterem O ex aliquo timore, vbi hoc est
proprium signum Iudorum; quia hoc nihil aliud est, quam ex timore fateri se
Iudaeum. If there be a certain distinct mark, whereby to know Christians and
others a sundre, so that any man by using that habit, thereby does protest his
faith, it were a mortal sin, for example, if a Christian man for fear should
wear upon his outward garment this letter O in that place where it is a
peculier mark of the Jews: The mark of heretics, character bestiae. Apo. 19.
of Catholics signu^ Ezech. 9. If both bear one mark, how shall Christ sai:
Cognosco oues meas I know my sheep.
for that is nothing else but of fear to confess him self a Jew. Or if a
Puritan abhorring from a friars weed, would for fear wear it, being a most
certain badge of a papist, he sins mortally according to S. Thomas
conclusion de ratione errante, in my eight reason. Can there be a more manifest
distinction of Catholics and heretics, then their Churches, their
Sacraments, their prayers, their sermons? In S. Austens time when it was
demanded, Qua itur ad catholica^? Which is the way to the Catholic Church?
were not their Churches plainly so distinct, that to ask the way to either,
was a token of his religion that asked: like as the schismatical Samaritanes
judged Christ to be of the Jews religion, Luc. 9.
Quia facies eius erat euntis in Jerusalem. Because his face looked as if he
were going to Jerusalem. And therefore he could get no interteinment among
them.

It is al one to communicate with the devil and with his ministers. See then
how easily a man may sin in this case, whereas, tollere signum (as they
term it) by that means to help the person bewitched, is, in the opinion of
great learned men, a certain communication with the devil. S. Hierom in vita
S. Hilarionis notes this especially in the cure that he did upon a maid
bewitched per tormenta verboru^, and portentosas figuras subter lime^ domus
puellae defossas, By tormenting words and monstrous figures dug into the
ground under the thresshal of her door. Noluit autem (says he) sanctus
antequam purgaret virginem, signa iubere perquiri, ne solutis incantationibus,
recessisse dmon videretur. The holy man would not bid them look out the
signs or figures, least it might seem that the devil departed by undoing the
inchauntmentes Alas how common is this now adays and many other means,
esteemed very honest ways, by signs, words, ceremonies, yea, unless they
conjure flatly, and of purpose consult with the devil, they think the rest is
no communication with him: right so in our case you may consider, where a man
does communicate with heresy, and deny his faith by many indirect and covert
ways, never without mortal sin, by wilful presence, by Oxforde protestations,
quatenus consentit verbo dei, as far as it agrees with the word of God, by
seeming to receive although he do not: by giving his name to the vicar as
having received: by conceuing a new sense when his words import falsehood, and
must needs sound consent to the hearers, as being asked of an heretic. Is
the body of Christ in the blessed Sacrament? no forsooth, meaning in his
visible quantity. etc. by whatsoever subtle and secret means of seeming to
favor their opinions. So he that in praying for the Queen, used this style,
supreme governor of al persons ecclesiastical and temporal: Although it be
true in his sense, yet his purpose was to have it seem, as though it were al
one with the common style. And so there be writers that think S. Peter saying:
Nescio hominem, spoke it in this sense: Nescio purum hominem: Hieron. in 4.
Math. and Theophilactus in 22. Luc.
but neither did he so mean, and if he did, yet the hearers understood him in
the sense that they urged, and therefore it was so also a flatt denial. Vide
Augustinum varia genera mendaciorum lib. contra mendacium cap. 3. and deinceps.

Another reason may be, because this dissimulation and indifferency pertains
to old heresies. (Niceph. li. 4. cap. 2.) among other monsterous heretics,
res nullo in discrimine ponere docuit, adiaphorein, perinde atque tempore
exigente, absque exceptione omni praecise fidem abiurare liceret. He taught men
to be indifferent to any religion, as if it were lawful (the time so
requiring) preciselye without al exception to abjure the faith. The second
Helcesaitarum. (Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 31. ex Origene) fidem negare indifferens
quiddam esse. Qui enim interiore cogitatione recte de fide sentiat, tametsi ore
cum necessitas illu^ co detruserit, fidem perneget, eum tamen animo firm illi
adhaesuru^. That to deny the faith is an indifferent thing, for he that in his
heart inwardlye has a true belief, although with mouth, when necessity
urges him, he deny his faith, yet in his mind he is ready to stick to it
stedfastlye. These make their ground, necessity, as many cold Catholics
do, thinking so to be excused, and therefore, as S. Ciprian writes de lapsis
in his time: Non expectauerunt saltem vt interrogatinegarent, ante aciem multi
victi. etc. They did not stay so long as to be examined first, and the^ deny
their faith, many yielded before they began to fight. They prevent the law,
least they should be urged to their pain, calling it necessity, when they
must either do it, or incur a little damage of displeasure or liberty. But
let them learn, that it was the persuasion of the profane Count Magnus
servant to Valens the Arrian Emperor, to the Catholic priests and Deacons
of Alexandria. Theodoritus li. 4. cap. 20.
O miseri, obsequimini, Arrianae opinioni assentite. Nam diuinum nume^, licet
illa quam colitis religio vera sit, si non vestra sponte sed necessitate
adducti, ab ea discedatis, veniam vobis daturum est. Etenim in his quae
necessitate peccantur, relinquitur excusationi locus, Sed cum sua sponte
quisquam deliquerit, carere reprehensione non potest. O wretched men, obey a
law, agree to the Arrian religion: for the divine godhead, although your
religion be true, if you revolt from it, not of your own accord, but by
compulsion, will pardon you: for in such offenses as are committed of
necessity, some excuse will be taken: but when a man shall offend wilfully, that
cannot lack blame and reproufe. But how little those glorious Confessors were
moved with this ethnish persuasion, appears in the story. S. Austen to
signify, that no necessity in this case excuses, In lasp. 30
Qui timendo mori mentitur, moritur antequam moriatur, qui ideo mentiebatur vt
viueret. He that fering to dye, lies or dissembleth, is dead before he dye,
who therefore lied or dissembled that he might live. The third heresy is
Priscilianistarum, of whom S. Austen writes, Contra mond. ca. 6
that being demanded their religion, they answered, Catholics, that is of the
contrary to their profession, because they would ye better search what was done
among ye Catholics. Whereupon certain Catholics thinking they might do the
same toward those heretics by dissembling in their conuenticles, to learn
their mysteries, Non in verbis tan tum est mendaciu^ sed factis, vt prophetia.
gave occasion to S. Austen to write contra mendacium, against lying or
dissembling, as him self tells lib. 2. retract. 60. concluding that it was
not lawful in any wise.

To end, and, as it were, to bind fast the conclusion of al these reasons with
the verdit of the Church, and ecclesiastical Fathers of our time, when this
question was moved in the Council of Trent, to satisfy the doubtful
consciences, chiefly of our countryme^, Twelve of the best learned (one Petrus
a Soto) chosen by the Council to decide it, pronounced, omnino non licere, that
it was in no case lawful. Being in England I saw their short discourse in
writing. It is also the judgment of the best learned Fathers and Professors
in Rome, Jesuits. And of so many as are sound Cotholike divines, of upright
judgment, that have no foolish piety, to sooth the fearful humor of their
carnal friends.

The 2. Chapter. Examples out of Scripture.
THe Apostasy of Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes is famous by these words:
Erexit altar contra altar. He set up another altar against the true altar
in Jerusalem. He did sacrifice him self out of Jerusalem, made priests other
then Levites. etc. 3. Reg. 13.
God therefore sending his prophet to rebuke him, gave strait commandment,
that he should not eat nor drink with them, nor tarry among them, which he
dulye and truly observed, although the king him self invited him to his
table. But being departed from thence, and fallen into the company of one
thereaboutes, that would needs interteine him, and cause him to eat, and
because he refused upon Gods commandment, told him that he also was the
prophet of God, and did warrant him against al displesure and offense. This
good meaning man believed him, did eat and communicate with the Samaritane:
and what followed? he was told by and by yt he should dye for it before he came
home. A lion meets him in the way, and not hurting the ass, killed the
credulous and disobedient man, for communicating with schismatikes. A goodly
example for Catholics against the ungodly persuasions of their friends that
say unto them in this sort: Why are you so scrupulous? is it so great a matter
to come to Church? 2. Esdr. 6. is a notable example to resist the persuasion
of false friends.
am not I Catholic as well as you? I warrant you. Let them take heed of these
false Catholics more then of open heretics, remembering that this man of God,
whom Jeroboam the king could not persuade, was persuaded by one that named him
self a prophet. S. Austen. ep. 23. Quam multi volebant esse Catholici
manifesta veritate commoti, and offensionem suorum reuerendo, quotidie
differebant. How many would gladlye have been Catholics, because manifest truth
did move them, and fearing the displeasure of their friends, daily differred
it? Is it not verified here, Psalm. 36.
Amici mei aduersum me appropinquauerunt. My friends approached against me?

Again, Elias and Elizeus, Oseas and Amos lived among the ten schismatical
tribes to preach unto them, but did not communicate with them in their
unlawful Sacrifice, Leuit. 17.
which was lawful only in the Temple of Jerusalem. Oseae. 4. Amos. 5. and
Oseae. 9
Nolite ingredi in Galgala, and ne ascenderitis in Beth-anen. Enter not into
Galgal, and go not up to Beth-anen: that is, domum iniquitatis, the house of
iniquity: or, domu^ Idoli, the Idols house, because of Ierohoams golden
calves, which before was called Bethel. Domus Dei, The house of God. Again, Si
fornicaris tu Israel, If thou play the harlott, that is, if thou run after
false religion, O Israel, Aug. lib. 1. contra Crescon, cap. 32.
you Samaritanes or ten Tribes, manifest heretics and Schismatikes. ( Sunt
enim Samaritani veluti haeretici Iudaeorum: for the Samarithe Samaritanes are
as heretics from the Jews) Non delinquat saltem Judah. Let not the Catholic
Judah offend by communicating with them. Particeps idolorum Ephraim, dimitte
eum. Ephraim (the ten tribes) takes part with Idols, let him go, follow him
not. S. Hierom in his Comment. In cap. 4. Oscae.
Super hreticos prona intelligentia est, ad quos, vel de quibus dicitur. Si
semel fornicaris, haeretice, saltem tu ecclesiastice ne delinquas, ne
ingrediaris in Galgala, haereticorum conciliabula, non est ibi domus dei, sed
domus Idoli. Concerning heretics the understanding of this place is easy, to
whom or of who^ it is said. If thou heretic play the fornicatour from
Christ, and his Church, yet thou that art a Catholic man offend not with
him, enter not into Galgal, that is, heretical Conuenticles. There is not the
house of God, but the house of an Idol. Thus far S. Hierome. Mark now this
brief comparison. The Temple of Jerusalem which only had lawful Sacrifice,
with she Catholic Church, extra qua^ non been offertur, etsi sacrificium
valeat. Out of the which Sacrifice is never well offered, although it self be
always of value. Beth-anen with the heretical Sinagoges which before were
Bethel: the houses of God, Catholic Churches: The ten Tribes with flat
heretics: Judah, or the two Tribes in Jerusalem with Catholics. Consider the
Prophets words and the Doctors interpretation, and for our purpose it is very
plain. Tractat hunc locum Balduinus egregie in historia sua de collatione
Donatistarum and Catholicorum, quam subiunxit Optato, which is much worth the
reading.

The next example may be old Tobie, Qui, cum coeteri omnes irent in Bethel ad
adorandos vitulos, hic solus fugit consortia omnium, and pergebat in Jerusalem
ad templum Domini. etc. Hc and his similia secundum legem dei obseruabat
puerulus. Who, when al others went to Bethel to woorship the calves, he alone
fled their company and went to Jerusalem, the Temple of our Lord. etc. These
and other like things he observed according to the law of God being but a
little one. After when he was in Niniuee, Nunquam contaminatus est in scis
eorum. He was never polluted with their meats forbid by the law. Being
undoubtedly one of that number of whom God said to Elias: Reliqui mihi septem
millia quinon curuauerunt genua ante Baal. I have left to my self seven
thousand that have not bowed their knees before Baal. O what an honor was it
in such an universal Apostasy when Elias said: Relictus sum ego solus. I am
left alone, to have the glorious testimony of Almighty God in the lesser
number of constant men. Reliqui mihi. I have left to me. Such are these few
good Catholics, which either beyond the Seas or at home seek to the
Catholic Church. They shall have Tobyes blessing, an Angel to direct them in all their doings, and the king Sennacherib shall (spite of his teeth) not hurt
them. Heb. 1.
Nolite timere pusille grex, Pater namque meus parauit vobis Regnum. Fear not
little sweet flock, for my Father has prepared you a kingdom.

Judith follows, whose godly and constant wisdom if our Catholic
gentlewomen would follow, they might destroy Holofernes, the master heretic,
and amase al his retinew, and never defile their religion by communicating with
them in any small point. She came to please Holofernes, Judith. 11.
but yet in her religion she would not yield so much as to eat of his
meats, but brought of her own with her, and told him plainelye, that being
in his house, yet she must serve her Lord and God still, desiring for that
purpose liberty once a day to go in and out ye gate. Judith. 12.
Non potero manducare ex his quae praecipis mihi, ne veniat super me offensio.
I may not eat of that which thou commaundest me, least I incur Gods
displesure. Which her constancy (a wonderful thing to tell) was the very means
afterward, whereby she carried away his head safely, the porters presupposing
that she went forth (as before) to pray to her God. He hoped well to have had
the company of her body, and so to possess her altogether: but God did so
direct her religious mind, that she confounded him and al his, not once
touching of his meats: Her good maid waited upon her all this time. And surely
one constant Judith shall easily make many like servant, a thing much to be
wished, for the Catholic bringing up of young gentlewomen, who otherwise are
in danger of Holofernes, and his ungracious ministers.

For all young persons the storye of Daniel, and the other children is
convenient, who refused also to eat of the kings meats, ne communicando
polluerentur, least by communicating with them they might be polluted: which
pleased God so well, that they were in better liking after roots and herbs,
then the rest after flesh and fish. Daniel. 1. and 6.
And concerning prayers, he was so far from joining with Infidels, that he
would not intermitt his own daily prayers toward the temple in Jerusalem,
when he knew it was death by the kings commandment.

The zeal of Matthathias and his sons, 1. Match. 1. and. 2.
ne praeputium adducerent cum Gentilibus, rather then they would become
uncircumcised like the Gentiles: the death of Eleazarus rather then he would
seem to communicate: 2. Match. 6.
the careful diligence of Esdras and the rest in ablegando mulieres
alienigenas, 1. Esdr. 9. and. 2. Esd. 13
in putting away their foreign wives, which signify schisms and heresies, as
in the Proverbs is plain: the death of the seven Machahees and their woorthye
mother rather then they would communicate: 2. Match. 7. Vide Iansenium in ca.
2.5.6.7.9.11.
the wise man's council there so often to inculcate abstaining from the company
mulieris alienae, blandae, pulchrae, sed stultae: of the woman that is a
stranger, and speaks fair, and is beautiful, but a very fool (heresy
undoubtedly) the fall of Solomon so wise, so high in Gods favor, Ex
consuetudine and coniugiis foeminarum alienigenarum, By familiarity and
marriage of foreign women, the express commandment of God to the contrary.
Non inibitis cum illis foedus. You shall neither make nor meddle with them. No^
dabitis filios vestros filiabus eorum. You shall not give your sons to their
daughters, because they will pervert them, the same perilous effect so
certainly ensuing, as ye psalm makes mention, Psalm. 105.
Commisti sunt intergentes, and didicerunt opera eorum, and factum est illis in
scandalu^. They mingled them selves among the Gentiles, and learned their
works, and it was an occasion to them of heinous sin: So many precepts de
non tangendo immundo, not to touch any unclean thing, and if they did, to
be unclean afterward: the zeal of the good Leuite, which would not stay in
Iebus although it was toward night. Iudicu^. 19. verse. 12.
Non ingrediar oppidum gentis alienae. I will not enter into the town of a
foreign Nation, that are not of the sons of Israel. Genes. 34. verse. 1. and. 2.
Dina egressa in vrbem alienigenarum, mox violata. Dina the daughter of Jacob
wandering abroad into Sichem a town of strangers and Infidels, by and by
defloured and corrupted: the answer of Ioseder and Zorobabel to the Gentiles
that offered to help them in building the Temple. Non potestis aedificare
nobiscum, 1. Esdr. 4. verse. 3.
nos soli aedificabimus. You may not build with us, we alone will build: ye
straight charge to take nothing of the Anathema, Iosue 7. v. 13. and. 25.
the death of Acham for the contrary: the commandment to kill old and young,
not to spare the very infant. Beatus qui tenebit and allidet paruulos tuos ad
petram. Deuteronomy. 2.
Blessed is he that shall hold, and shall squise thy young ones against the
rock, the least infant of that harlott Babylon. And, Cantic. 2. verse. 15.
Capite nobis vulpeculas paruulas, quae demoliuntur vineam meam. Catch us
these little foxes that spoil my vineyard, Deuteronomy. 14.
as well the little as the great, for they do much harm also. Qui minima neglig
it, paulatim defluit. He that is negligent in lesser points, by little and
little falls to greater enormities. Deuteronomy. 16.
Again, non rades caput in circulum, no^ incides carnes. Thou shall not shave
thy head in compass, thou shall not cut or hew thy flesh (because it was a
fasshion of the Paynims) the paring of the captive women's nails and cutting
her hear, the great praise of many kings in Judah: veruntamen excelsa non
abstulit, but he took not away sacrifices made upon hills, one point lacking
to a perfect religious prince: that Solomon built a several house for Pharaos
daughter and his wife, 3. Reg. 7.
for reverence to the temple, and ark of God, no Gentile to dwell nighe it:
Exodus 4.
that Moses sent away vxorem Madianitidem, his wife that was a Madianite and
stranger when he became Dux populi Dei in Egypt: Heb. 11.
and that he would not be esteemed the son of Pharao his daughter, but
renouncing all the glory of Egypt, dealt only with the people of God, that the
very name of Incircumcisus was odious and abominable. These and other like
(quae omnia in figura contingebant illis) (Al which chanced to them in figures
(do they not signify that we ought to avoid al society and felowshipp of
error, and not to communicate with them in any small point of religion, nor to
reserve any part thereof as indifferent, yea, rather to forsake wife and al
dearest friends, then to communicate with infidelity?

Last of al, to conclude this part of Scriptural examples, Epi. 76. fig. 3.
S. Ciprian does much amplify the crime of schism by the grievous punishment
of the^ which consented only, and took any part with Chore, Dathan, and
Abyro^. Omnes omnino cum authoribus coniungi, qui fuerint eorum peccato
contaminati. That al are in punishment to be joined with the principal doers
that shall be polluted with partaking their sin. He concludes thus: And when
the sons of Aaron offerentes alienu^ ignem, Leuit. 10.
did so offend, that the very thuribula eorum, their censars were turned into
laminas, and might not be used, but kept for a memorial to the terror of
others: are not we afraid cooperantes alienis oblationibus, precibus,
concionibus, erroribus? Assisting and furthering by our presence heretical
oblations, prayers, sermons, other their errors. Here might be added out of the
new testament the primitive example of the Christians. Act. 1. and. 4
Hi omnes erant perseuerantes vnanimiter in oratione. They continued with one
accord every one of them in prayer to God. And, Multitudinis credentium erat
cor vnu^ and anima vna. Coeterorum autem nemo audebat se coniungere illis. Of
the number that believed there was one heart and one mind. And of the rest
that did not believe none durst join him self with them: according to the
Psalm. Qui inhabitare facis vnius moris in domo. That makes his people to
dwell in his house al of one manner and opinion. Is this observed where heretics
and Catholics meet in prayer together? In. 9. Oseae
Haereticoru^ conciliabula (says S. Hierome) non domus Dei appellantur, sed
speluncae latronum. Heretical conuenticles are not called the house of God, but
dens of strong thieves. But it is very likely, some man here will say, that
these former authorities are against Gentiles and Paynims, not against
heretics. In the third objection and his answer
Of this point I will say more afterward, whether of these are most to be
shunned. In the mean time this I say. That which in the old Testament is
spoken literally of Gentiles and Idolatours, mistically is referred of al
ancient Fathers to heretics in the new law, as shall appear by the
ecclesiastical examples next following, wherein it is manifest, that Christians
did as much abhor from heretics, as the Jews before from Gentiles, and no
marvel, because Christ commanded so in plain words: Mat. 18. verse. 11.1
Si ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus. If he will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnike.

Examples out of ecclesiastical Histories.
The third Chapter.
OF S. John in my first reason. Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 13. ex Irenaeo writes,
Ioanne^ Domini Discipulum, cum Ephesi ad balnea se conferret, intusque videret
Cerinthum haereticum, se mox e balneo illotum proripuisse, and dixisse:
fugiamus ocius, ne balneum in quo est Cerinthus veritatis aduersarius extemplo
corruat. That S. John our Lords Disciple going to the Bathes at Ephesus, and
seeing the heretic Cerinthus within, immediatlye leaped out of the bathe
unwashed, and said: Let us flee hence in all haste, least the bathe wherein
Cerinthus the enemy of truth is, fall presently. In the same place, of S.
Policarpe S. John's scholar, Marcioni in eius conspectum venienti ac roganti,
Nosce nos amabo, Respondit, Noui quidem primogenitu^ Sathanae. When Marcion the
heretic came into his sight, and said ambitiouslye to him: Know us, Sir, I
beseech you. I know thee (quoth he) to be an old babe, or the first begotten
of Satan. And be adds generally of others: Talem namque tum Apostoli, Niceph.
li. 3. ca. 30.
tum illorum discipuli adhibuerunt cautionem, vt ne sermonem quidem cum aliquo
illorum qui veritatem suis commentis adulterare nitebantur, aliquando confer
vellent, sicut Paulus admonet, hreticum hominem deuita. etc. For the Apostles
and their scollers were so warye and circumspect in this case, that they would
not so much as once reason the matter with any of them that endeavored by their
leasinges to corrupt the truth, according to S. Paul's admonition: Shun the
man that is an heretic and avoid him.

And therefore Ignatius the Apostles scholar also, writes, epist. 6. ad
Philadelphenses. Fratres, ne erretis: Si quis eum sectatur qui se absciderit a
veritate, regnum dei non haereditabit. My brethren, be not deceived: If a man
follow his faction that has cut off him self from the truth, he shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. And least they might understand him of consent in
opinion, he adds: Et qui non abscedit a mendaci concionatore, in gehennam
condemnabitur. Nec enim a piis discedendum, nec cum impiis co^mercia habenda.
And he that goes not away from a false preacher, shall be damned into hell, for
neither must we depart from the godly, nor have any dealing with ungodly and
wicked men.

Of Origin Eusebius tells (li. Niceph. li. 5. Cap. 4.
6. ca. 3.) quod necessitate compulsus in eadem familia degere cum Paulo quodam
heretico, tamen per idem tempus, euidentia catholic su opinionis iudicia
ostendere non dubitauit. That although of necessity he was forced to live in
one house with one Paul an heretic, yet at the selfsame time he doubted not
to show evident tokens of his Catholic opinion. Wherein? Nam cum frequens
multitudo, non hreticorum tantummodo, sed nostrorum etiam, propter singularem
dicendi vim qu in Paulo inesse videbatur, ad eum accederent, Origenes tamen
nunquam induci poterat, vt precibus vna cu^ illo interesset. For when a great
multitude, not only of heretics, but of our men also, for a singular grace of
utterance that seemed to be in Paul, came unto him (as our Catholics gladlye
run to fine heretical sermons) yet Origin could never be induced to be present
at prayer and divine service with him. Why so? Quippe qui ab ineunte tate and
ecclesi canonem obnixe obseruasset, and (vt ipse in quoda^ libro loquitur)
erroru^ doctrinas fuisset semper detesta tus. As one who from his youth both
had straightly observed the Canon of the Church, and (as himself speaks in a
certain book) had always detested erroneons doctrine. Two things are here
to be noted, that he had that zeal of a child, and especially that it was the
Canon or rule of the Church so to do: Vide Can 44.45.
which rule is plain in the Canons of the Apostles. Can. 63. Si quis clericus
aut laicus Sinagogam Iudaeorum aut haereticorum conuenticulum ingressus fuerit,
vt preces cum illis coniungat, deponitor, and a communione secluditor. If any
of the Clergy or lay man shall enter into the Jews Sinagoge, or the
conuenticle of heretics, Vide ep. Firmiliani apud Cipr. 75. apertissimu^
testimonium consuetudinis Catholicoru^. nu. 7. frustra iam dubitat. etc.
to prayer among them, let him be deposed and excommunicated. If a Cauiller say
it touches not them that are present only, and say their own prayers: the
greek reads to suneuxasthai to pray with them, or proseuxasthai, to pray
simpliciter without any addition. And Origin following the Canon, induci non
poterat, vt precibus vna cum illo interesset. Could not be induced to be
present only at prayer with the heretic.

Heraclas bishop of Alexandria was Origens chief scholar, and as it were,
Catechist under him. Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 12. Of him Dionisius Alexandrinus having
spoken of heretical books not to be read, but with great judgment, says:
Eusebius. li. 7 cap. 6.
Istum Canonem istudque exemplum a beato Papa nostro Heracla cepi. Ille namque
eos qui ab ecclesia abscessissent, cum essent accusati, quod consuetudine
cuiusdam eorum qui aliena^ a side doctrinam tuebantur, multum vsi fuissent,
Ecclesia eiecit. etc. This Canon or rule (says he) and this example I received
of our holy Father Heraclas: for he excommunicated them that were departed out
of the Catholic Church, when they were accused to have kept company very
much with any of the^ that did mainteyne contrary doctrine to the true faith.

Athanasius that mighty Champio^ against the Arrians coming to Antioche where
one Leontius was bishop, Eum, vt a Catholica fide auersum deuitauit, atque cum
illis qui Eustathiani vocabantur, communicauit, conuentu in dibus priuatis
peracto. Shunned him as one turned from the Catholic faith, and he
communicated with them that were called Eustathians (because they held with
their Catholic Bishop Eustathius deprived) making assemblies in prinate
houses. And Sozomen. lib. 3. ca. 9. of the same, he did rather pray with
Catholics in private houses, then with Leontius in the Church. Of which
Leontius by the way it is not amiss to note what a dissembler and double
dealer he was, that they now a days which are like unto him, Athanas. apud
The od. lib. 2. cap. 24.
may be ashamed. Etenim cum clerum and laicam multitudinem in duas parts
diuisam cerneret, For when he saw that the Clergy and lay multitude were
divided into two parts, (some Arrians, some Catholics, or Homusians) and that
the one company sange Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, Glory be to
the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, to make them equal: the
other per filium in spiritu sancto. Glory be to the Father by the son in the
holy Ghost, to make them unequal. Ipse totam glorificationem tacitus secum
recitauit. He said secretly to him self ye whole Gloria Patri (because he
would offend neither part) and in the end only pronounced In secula seculorum,
so loud, that they which were next him, might hear it.

Eulogius primarius prs biter Edissenorum, a priest of Edessa, Theodorit, li.
4. cap. 16.
one of the chief, whose praise is in the ecclesiastical history, being
exhorted by Modestus that persecuted Catholics under Valens the Arrian
Emperor, in these words: Co^munica cum Imperatore. Communicate with the
Emperor, do as he does, shun him not because he is an Arrian, answered:
Nunquid cum imperio est sacerdotis dignitatem consecutus? I pray you, Sir,
quoth he, has he with the Empire obtained also priestly or bishoply dignity?
mening yt they must follow their Catholic Bishop Barses who was deprived, and
not ye Emperor. The gentleman being offended at this answer, I said not so,
you dolt, quoth he: Sed vos, vti, quibuscum communicet Imperator, cum iisdem
communicetis, adhortatus sum. But I exhorted you al to communicate with them,
with whom the Emperor him self does communicate, meaning with Lupus and other
Arrian Bishops: and so banished four score of them at once. Of whom the two
chief, this Eulogius and Protegines being sent, as God would have it, ad
Antinoen in Thebais, a province in Egypt, after they perceived that the Bishop
of that City was of their religion, they communicated with the Clergy there
in ecclesiastical assemblyes at Church and otherwise. Mark, They did forsake
the ecclesiastical Conuenticles of Arrian Bishops, and being banished for it,
finding there a Catholic Bishopp, straight they communicated with him. Is not
this our case?

The petition of Alexander Bishop of Constantinople is memorable, Theodor. li.
1. cap. 14.
when the Emperor Constantine was seduced by the Arrians to permit that Arius
might be received into the Church, and the Catholic Communion, Ista duo a deo
postulauit, sic loquutus. Si Arius cras in Ecclesia conuentus aget, dimitte me
seruu^ tuu^, and ne simul perdas pium cum impio: sin clemens parces ecclesiae
tuae, considera verba Eusebianorum, and ne des in ruinam haereditatem tuam:
toll Arium de medio, ne illo in ecclesiam ingresso, tum haeresis vna cum eo
ingressa videatur, tum deinceps impietas pietatis locu^ occupet. He requested
these two things of God, speaking thus: If Arius to morrow shall make
conuenticles in the Church, let me thy servant depart, and destroy not the
godly man together with the ungodly: but if thou will mercifullye spare thy
Church, consider the words of the Eusebians (Arrians) and give not over thine
heritage to ruin and decay. Take Arius out of the way, least if he enter
into the Church, both heresy may seem to have entered together with him, and
in time wicked blasphemy against God may possess the place of Gods true
religion. He wished to dye rather then to be in the Church with Arius and his
company. What followed? Arius ingressus latrinas, poscente ventris necessitate,
crepuit medius. Alexander conuentum cum omnibus fratribus celebrare, preces
fundere. etc. Before ye time was come to make their assemblye, Arius going to a
house of office, because he was taken short as he was in the street, there
powered out his bowels. Alexander that Catholic Bishop assembled his brethren
ye Clergy together, prayed and gave thanks.

Paulus praesbiter Eustachii Antiocheni Episcopi hac de re laudatur, quod se
nunquam haereticorum communione polluerat. Paulinus a Priest of Antioche under
the Bishop Eustachius is very famous, and has a singular commendation for this
point, that he never defiled him self by communicating with heretics. Hieron.

To come from the Clergy to the lay multitude, which is nearer to our
purpose. Septimana sacrosancta^ Pentecosten subsequenti, populus (Alexandrinus)
vbi ieiunauerat, in coemiterium propterea ad orationem egreditur, quod omnes
Georgii detestarentur communionem. In Whitsonweeke the people of Alexandria
after they had fasted (as the fashion then was, and now is, in the Church)
goes out into the Churchyard, to pray for this occasion, because al of them
detested communicating or being in the Church with George the heretical
Bishopp: wherein they were so constant, protesting thereby the Catholic faith
against the Arrian Bishop, that they suffered diverse and grievous persecutions,
as Athanasius tells. lib. 2. cap. 14. apud Theodoritum.

De Samosatensibus sic idem Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 14. Posteaquam Ariani gregem
Pastore long optimo (Eusebio) priuarant, and alterum in eius furrogarant locum
(Eunomium,) nemo ex vrbis incolis, vel pressus aegestate, vel diuitiis
affluens, famulus vel artifex, agricola vel consitor, vir vel mulier, iuuenis
vel senex, ad conuentu^ ecclesiasticum accedere voluit, sed episcopus solus
agebat. Quippe nemo aut in eius venit conspectum, aut cum eo sermonem contulit,
licet diceretur vitam apud eos valde modeste instituisse. After that ye Arrians
had deprived ye flock of their excellent and most virtuous Shepperd (Eusebius
their Catholic Bishop) and had stalled another in his room (Eunomius,) none
of the inhabitants there, poor or rich, servant or artificer, husbandman or
grafter, man or woman, young or old, would come to the Church, but the Bishop
was there al alone: for no man would either come into his sight, or talk with
him, albeit he was reported to have used him self very modestly and quietly
among them. This example serves against them that communicate with their
heretical Bishop or vicar, because he is a gentle person forsoothe, and his
wife a very honest woman: such fond reasons foolish Catholics have.

I might add here the zeal of that people that would not wash in ye bathe
where the Bishop washed. Theodor. ibidem.
Sed aquam hereticae nequitie contagione infecta^ esse rati, eam in cloacam
emittunt, nouamque sibi infundi imperant. But supposing the very water was
infected with the filth of heretical wickedness, cast it out into the sink, and
commanded new water to be powered in. And that the very boys and children
playing at the bal in the street, which chanced to fall under the asses feet
whervppon Lucius the Arria^ Bishop did ride, would not play with it again, til
they had sensed it up and down in ye flame of the fire, so to purge it. But I
will add one example more of the multitude abhorring ecclesiastical
conuenticles or coming to Church among such persons.

When Liberius the Bishop of Rome was banished, Theodor. lib. 2. ca. 17.
and one Felix placed for him, Tametsi fidem Niceni Concilij seruauit integram,
tamen quia cum Arianis libere communicauit, nemo ex Romae habitatoribus in
ecclesiam, dum ille intus erat, ingredi voluit. Although he mainteyned every
point of the Nicene Council concerning faith, yet because he freely
communicated with Arrians, none of the Inhabitants of Rome would enter into
the Church so long as he was within. Which was signified to the Emperor
Constantius per praestantes foeminas, by women of good calling, who first
threatened their noble husbands, that unless they did obtain of his grace,
that their Bisshopp Liberius might return, they would forsake them and go
where he was. Afterward by the advice of their fearful husbands, them selves
went to entreat the Emperor, richlye apparelled like unto Judith, the sooner
to move him, as in deed they did, and Liberius was called home. A worthy
example for noble gentlewomen to follow: Note moreover, that al true Catholics
then refused to communicate with Felix, not because he was an heretic, but
because he was content to communicate with them, and to be made Bishopp by
them. And therefore it is written of him thus: Foelix pro Liberio ab Arianis
factus Pontifex, non tam sectae diuersitate, quam communionis and ordinationis
conniuentia maculatur. Felix being made Bishop of Rome by the Arrians in
Liberius place, blotted his estimation, not so much for diversity of sect or
opinie^, as for yielding to communicate with them, and to be consecrated Bishop
of them. By occasion whereof it seems very expedient in this place to add
examples of such glorious Catholics that refused to receive the Sacraments at
heretics hands, for that also pertains to this question, and to the state
of our country.

Sacraments not to be received of heretics or schismatikes.
AFter that Eusebius was first deprived, and after a Martyr, Theodor. li. 4.
ca. 14.
the aforenamed Samosatensis agreed to have Antiochus his sisters son their
Bishop, Virum multis recte factis nobilitatum, and qui praeclate pro diuina
doctrina decertasset. Itaque cum omnes ad vnum Antiocho suffragati essent, and
ad sacram mensam deduxissent, coegissentque genua flectere, simul ac conuersus
vidit Iouianum (qui aliquando co^munioni Arianae adhaeserat) dexteram sibi
imponentem, manum eius repulit, imperauitque vt a numero eorum qui ipsum
consecrarent, segregaretur, dixitque se nullo modo far posse dextra^ illam
sibi imponi, que sacra misteria per blasphemiam consecrata receperat. A man
for^ many good deeds very famous, and one that had woorthelye stood in the
maintenance of Gods divine doctrine. Therefore, when al, with out exception had
given their voices to Antiochus, and had brought him to ye holy table (the
aultare) and made him kneel, casting his head back as soon as he saw Iouian
lay his hand upon him (who sometime had communicated with the Arians) he thrust
away his hand, and willed that he might be separated from the number of them
that should consecrate him, saying that he would by no means suffer, that the
same hand should be laid upon him that had received the blessed Sacrament
consecrated by a tongue that had consented to blasphemy: meaning that he being
otherwise a Catholic, yet had said Mass among the Arrians. It makes against
ignorant Catholics that receive the blessed Sacrament consecrated by our
schismatical priests, Vide exemplum Satiri quod sequitur.
and think it is very well done.

Moses the Eremite a very wonderful man by the means of Mania Queen of the
Saracenes was constrained to be their Bishop, Sozom. li. 6. cap. 38.
much against his will, of humility refusing. Quod si vero mihi hoc munus, cum
sim plane eo indignus, dei voluntate deseratur, eum testor, quod tuas manus
sanguine sanctorum virorum respersas mihi non impones. But if it be the will of
God (quoth he) that this office must needs be put upon me, whereas I am
altogether unworthy of it, I call him to witness, that thou shall not lay thy
hands upon me that art sprinkled with the blood of holy men. He speaks to
Lucius bishopp of Alexandria that persecuted Catholics under Valens the
Arrian. Magistratus igitur Romani, reiecto Lucio, eum ad episcopos qui iam tum
aetatem in exilio degebant, recta deducunt, a quibus factus est episcopus.
Whereupon the Magistrates of Rome rejecting Lucius, bring him straight to the
Catholic Bishops, which at that time lived in banishment, of whom he was
consecrated Bishop.

What a worthy Emperor Theodosius Magnus was, Socrat. li. 5. cap. 6.
who has not heard at the least? Is cum propter morbi grauitatem baptizari
properaret, primu^ sciscitabatur ab episcopo (Thessalonicensi) quam fidem
amplexaretur. At cum episcopus respondisset, opinionem Arij minime per Illyrium
peruasisse, sed omnes illius loci Nicenam fidem semper obseruasse, Imperator ab
Ascholio (episcopo) libentissimo animo baptismum recepit. He, when upon
occasion of dangerous sickness made have to be baptized, first of al he asked
the bishop (of Thessalonica) of what religion he was. And when he had
answered, that Arius opinion had not passed through Illyria, but that al
thereaboutes did always keep the Nicene faith, the Emperor most gladly
receued Baptism of him. Add here by the way, Li. 4. ca. 62 de vita eius.
that Eusebius history of Constantine the great his baptism at Nicomedia by
the Arrian Bishops is not allowed, because it is in no case likely, that so
Catholic an Emperor that made such laws against the Arians and their books,
would be baptized of them, but rather, as the Catholic tradition is, of
Siluester Bishop of Rome, Melch. ^ Canus de histo. li. 11.
where is to be seen to this day Baptisterium Constantini, The Font of
Constantine. But because some man may think that the Baptism of the Arrians
was iustlye refused, and and of necessity, Propter formam verborum mutatam,
albeit I think Theodosius never considered so deeply, but only that they were
heretics, (qurebat enim de fide episcopi, no^ de forma baptismi) let us add
such a Testimony to the former above mentioned as admits no cauel.

Satyrus a virtuous gentleman and brother to S. Ambrose, D. Ambr. de obitu
fratris.
sailing into Afrike, nondum perfectioribus initiatus misteriis, (either
Catechumenus or Neophitus) lately made a Christian, carrying about him a
consecrated host, which other gave him, more ancient Christians, in great
danger of drowning, was by it so miraculously preserved, that he longed to
receive that sacred mystery into his mouth, which before he never had done, as
it seems. Nam qui tantum misterij coelestis inuoluti in orario prsidium
fuisset expertus, quantum arbitrabatur, si ore sumeret, and toto pectoris
hauriet arcano. For he that had tried so great aid of that heavenly mystery,
only wrapped up in a napkin, what did he conceive would be, if he might take it
in his mouth, and suck it with the whole secret of his heart. But
notwithstanding his exceeding desire, would he receive it of every priest trow
you? Sed non ita auidus fuit vt esset incautus. Aduocauit ad se episcopum,
percontatusque est ab eo, vtrumnam cum episcopis Catholicis, hoc est, cum
Romana ecclesia conueniret: and forte in schismate regionis illius ecclesia
erat; Lucifer enim (Episcopus) se a nostra communione diuiserat. Itaque eo
transire maluit, vbi tuto posset exoluere (quod vouerat) etc. But he was not so
greedy, that he would be unadvised or heedlesse. He called the Bishopp to him,
and asked of him, whether he did agree with the Catholic bishops, that is,
with ye Church of Rome or no: Now it happened that the Church of that
country was in schism, because Lucifer their Bishop had divided him self
from communicating with us. And therefore (says S. Ambrose of his brother) he
rather chose to pass over the Seas thither where he might safely perform that
which he had vowed concerning the receiving of the blessed Sacrament. It is
long to tell al, Hier. cont. Lucifer.
but much worth the reading. This Lucifer was a very famous Catholic Bishop
and mainteyner of the Nicene faith, but in the end a Schismatike, and author
of the Luciferians. This gentleman rather then he would receive the blessed
Sacrament of him, adventured the Seas again into Italy, where he received of
Catholics. S. Ambrose makes it a proof summae eius in Dei cultum obseruanti,
of his singular reverence toward the woorshipp of God, qui nulla^ veram putauit
nisi verae fidei gratiam. Who thought that to receue of a schismatike or
heretic had no effect of grace Not as though grace depended of the minister,
but because he that wittinglye co^municateth with such ministers, makes him
self unworthy and unapt to receive sacrame^tal grace. Notandu^.
Note herewithal this sentence of S. Ambrose: Scimus plerosque auiditate studii
praetermittere cautionem. We know that many men for greedy zeal are nothing
wary and circumspect in these cases, as they should be, against such as care
not, so they may be confessed and receive of a priest, Ecclesi. 7.
whether he be schismatical or no. The wise man says: Noli esse iustus nimium:
Be not over just, but in time and place, and other circumstances. S. Epist. 77.
Ciprian does comfort certain Confessors priests, who being condemned ad
fodinas, to dig in mine pittes, and gladlye would have said Mass, but could
not, not to think it any damage, their Confession and Martyrdom to supply the
Sacrifice, or rather to be a sufficient Sacrifice. When it cannot be done, but
by communicating with heretics, solutio diuinae gratiae in affectu and fide
est, says S. Ambrose. Vbi supra
Our good purpose and intent due to God for his grace bestowed upon us, may
be performed in affection and faithful desire, when we cannot do the thing
it self that we purposed. that we purposed. And that young noble gentleman is
much praised, who meeting the blessed Sacrament when an heretic carried it,
would not adore, least so he might seem to communicate with him. So, to hear
Mass is good, but to hear the Mass of a schismatical priest, or of him that
is suspended for keeping a concubine, is expressly forbidden. Psalm. 98.
Honor Regis iudicium diligit. The honor of the prince loves discretion and
judgment. A good thing done indiscreetly, and without due circumstances, does
not honor God nor please him. This by the way: now to our former purpose of
the Sacraments.

Athanasius in epi. ad omnes Orthodoxos. Cum ecclesi ministri persecutionem
patiuntur, populi impietatem Arianorum execrantes, malunt ita morbis
contabescere ac periclitari, qua^ Arianorum manus suis capitibus imponi. When
spiritual men that have cure of souls suffer persecution, the people detesting
the wickedness of the Arians, will rather pine away with sickness, and abide al
danger, then suffer the Arians to lay their hands on their heads. He
seems to speak of the Sacraments of penance and anoyling: for he says: Eos
absque visitationis obsequio infirmari. That they are sick, and that there is
no priest to visit them. And because they were wont also sumere viaticum, to
take their wayfare the blessed Sacrament, the case is like, which they chose
rather to lack undoubtedly at the point of death, then to take it of an Arrian.
One place more to this purpose may not be omitted.

Victor Vticensis li. 2. de Arianorum persecutione Vandalica. When Catholic
Bishops and priests were carried away-into banishment, Innumerabilis populus
occurrentes, and suos infantulos vestigiis martyrum proiicientes, ista voce
clamabant. Quibus nos miseros relinquitis, dum pergitis ad coronas? Qui hos
baptizaturi sunt paruulos fontibus aqu perennis? Qui nobis poenitenti munus
collaturi sunt, and reconciliationis indulgentia obstrictos peccatorum vinculis
soluturi? Qui nos solennibus orationibus sepulturi sunt morientes? A quibus
diuini sacrificij ritus exhibendus est consuetus? etc. An innumerable multitude
of people running to meet them, and casting their infantes at the Martyrs
feet, cried out in this manner: To whom do you leave us poor wretches, whiles
you go to be crowned? who shall christen these little ones in ye fontes of
everlasting water? who shall bestow upon us the benefit of penance and lowsing
us from all the bands of sin by pardoning and reconciling us? who shall burye
us when we dye with solemn prayers? who shall celebrate the accustomed ceremony
of the divine sacrifice? in effect, who shall say Mass. etc. Some man might
have answered, there are other to do it in their rooms. Yea, but they knew
right well, that they were al heretics, and therefore they mourned for want of
the Sacraments, as being determined not to communicate with them.

To conclude with a Canon of the Apostles concerning the Clergy, Can. 45.
especially whose good example is an instruction to the people. Episcopum aut
prs biterum qui hreticorum baptisma aut sacrificium susceperit, deponi
prcipimus. A Bishop or a priest that shall take the Baptism or sacrifice of
heretics, we give express commandment that such a one be deposed: ton
dexamenon him that does allow it by presence, winking at it, not shunning the
parties, not preaching against them, frequenting their conuenticles: for it
follows: Qu etenim conuentio inter Christum and Belial? aut qu particula
fideli cum infideli? For what agreement is there between Christ and Belial? or
what little portion or society has the faithful man with the Infidel? unless
you will understand it of false Baptism and polluted Sacrifice, which may also
be the sense and meaning.

By these few examples instead of other innumerable, does appear how exactly
practice of Christian people has always agreed with scripture and with reason
for avoiding of heretics and their conuenticles.

Aunsweres to the chief objections.
The fourth Chapter.
BUt let us see moreover, for the better satisfying of the^ whom this former
discourse of reason, Scripture and practice does not satisfy what they are
wont to plead for their dissimulation, Psalm. 140.
ad excusandas excusationes in peccatis.

The first Objection.
NAaman Syrus healed of his leper by Elizeus, 4. Reg. 5.
and believing now in one true and living God, desired notwithstanding, that
when his prince did go into the Temple of Remmon to adore, because he was wont
to lean upon his shoulders, he might also be present there to do his king
that accustomed service. To whom the Prophet answered: Vade in pace. Go in
peace. That is (say they) be bold and make no scruple of conscience in that
matter.

The Answer.
THis is a great place with noble me^, that gladly would yield a little to
please their prince, so they might do it by example of scripture, and the
authority of a prophet. Nam quod exemplo fit, iure fieri putatur. That which
is done by some former example, is thought to be done lawfully, as the Orator
says. Is thought to be lawful, not that it is always lawful, because the case
may be altered. Briefly, what the prophet meant by this short answer is not
easily defined. Very probably this may be said: first, that Vade in pace, Go
in peace, is the common hebrewe phrase for Vale, Fare you well. Exo, 4. 1. Reg.
20. 2. Reg. 15. Judith. 8. as we say: God speed you well. And, Genesis 29.
Valetne? Does he well? Valet. very well. In the hebrew. An pax est ei? Is he in
peace? Pax. In good peace. And to our Lady the blessed virgin: Aue Maria.
Hayle Mary. In hebrew, Pax tibi Maria. Peace be to thee Mary. And, Dicite, Pax
huic domui. Say ye, Peace be to this house. So, that Vade in pace, is not to
bid him be bold and fear not, but to wish him to do well. And in this sense
the prophet did not answer to his petition: 4. Reg. 4.
why so? because it was not revealed unto him so far, as when he says:
Anima eius in amaritudine est, and Dominus celauit a me. Her soul is in great
anguish, and our Lord has concealed it from me. And S. Chrisost. in 2. Esa.
Prophetae pro diuersa qualitate temporis, dum minime adspirare^tur, quasdam
enunciabant incisiones. The Prophets as the quality of the time diversely
required, whiles they were inspired with the spirit of God, so far they
uttered certain sentences and pieces of their prophecies. etc. So that they
had not at al times to answer every question, or to grant al requests: Number.
22. and. 23. 3. Reg. 22.
but as Baalam and Micheas said, whatsoever God did put into their mouth, that
they would speak and must speak. But to grant that he did answer him, yet it
is so wisely tempered, that he might neither presume much upon it, as flatly
granted, nor take an occasion to reuolte, as flatly denied so small a request,
as it did seem to him, and was in deed in comparison of his former Idolatrye:
which circumstance with the rest is much to be considered. He was but then
converted from Idalatrye to believe in the true God, he might by that
toleration do much good to the converting of others. He requested only to do
his accustomed service to the Prince. etc. If it had been denied, Nouum hoc
vinum veterem vtrem facile rupisset, linum fumigans extinxisset. Qui nimium
emungit, elicit sanguinem. This new wine might easily have broken the old
bottel, might quickly have put out altogether ye towe that yet soultered, and
was very like in time to burn very clear. He that straineth to much,
fetches blood. And therefore they that plead upon this example, must conceive
the case thus: A vehement heretic lately converted, much depending upon his
Lord or Prince, and requesting that he may for a time attend only upon him in
the Church, especially if his service be peculier to some one thing, to bear
the sword, the mase, the Canapie, Verge, Train, book. etc. to such a one so
likened to Naaman, it might perhaps be said in their sense: Vade in pace. And,
as I remember, Lira upon that place does so define. But this is pappe for
infantes and young Catholics, Hebr. 5.
Perfectorum autem (such as our men ought to be) est solidus cibus: little qui
pro consuetudine exercitatos habent sensus ad discretionem boni and mali. But
for the perfect, strong meat is more convenient: for such, I say, which of
long custom and bringing up have their sense and understanding exercised to
discern between good and evil. They have for the most part been borne and
brought up in Catholic religion, they are no conuertites. If they therefore
claim childrens privilege, you must answer them with S. Paul. Cum
deberetis magistri esse propter tempus, rursum indigetis vt vos doceamini, quae
sint eleme^ta exordii sermonum dei, and facti estis quibus lac opus sit, no^
solido cibo. Omnis namque qui lactis est particeps, expers est sermonis
iustitiae: paruulus namque est. Whereas for your time you ought to be masters
and teachers, you have need to be taught again your selves what are the
principles and first letters of Gods will and commandment. And you are become
such as have need of pappe, rather then strong meat: for whosoever is a
milksopp, he is ignorant of that that should make him a perfect just man, for
he is a very babe. Another answer better then these is, that he meant to
adore ye true God by open protestation in the Idols temple. And so may a
Catholic protesting there, that he defieth their heretical service, and
comes to pray after the Catholic manner, which were to edify rather then to
give offense. But they will say:

The second Objection.
TV fidem habes? Romans 14.
penes teipsum habe coram deo. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before
God. ergo Saint Paul gives them leave, yea, commands them to keep their
conscience to them self.

The Answer.
IT must be told them that it is two faults, to do ill, and to maynteyne it
as well done by the Apostles authority. A great abuse not to consider the
circumstance of scriptures, but as they would wish it to signify, so to
expound it, as the Poet says, Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile credunt.
That which poor wretches are too desirous of, they believe it easily. The
Apostle talks de Idolothytis, meats offered to Idols, defining thus, that
Idolum nihil est, and nihil commune per ipsum, 1. Cor. 8. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 10.
sed omnia munda. An Idol is nothing, and no meat is unclean of it self, but
al meats are clean, and omnia licent, al meats are lawful. Al might be caten
of them that did know thus much: whom he calls habentes scientiam, such as
have knowledge: But because there were other weaklings, not so well instructed
(non in omnibus est scientia, al have not knowledge) yt in conscience thought
the eating of Idolothita to be an honor to the Idol, and yet did eat thereof,
(quidam conscientia vsque nunc Idoli quasi Idolothitum manducant, and
conscientia eorum cum sit infirma polluitur. Qui namque discernit, si
manducauerit, damnatus est, quia non ex fide. Some in conscience making even
yet some account of an Idol, eat it as idolatrous meat, and their conscience
being weak is defiled, for he that makes a difference, if he do eat, is
condemned, because he does not according to his belief and conscience, because
his faith and conscience is, that it honoreth the Idol, and therefore they
should not eat thereof.) And because these me^ would not of them selves have
eaten it, but did it by the example of the^, qui habebant scientiam and fidem,
that did according to their knowledge and conscience, and might do it lawfully
but for scanual to their weak brethren: therefore S. Paul wills them also to
abstain, rather then cause the other by their example to eat also, and so to
sin, Quia existimantes esse commune, and comedentes, ideo peccabant. For they
that thought it unclean, and yet did eat, did therefore sin: whereas the
others, habentes scientiam nihil esse common per se, knowing that nothing is
unclean of it self, did not offend in eating, but in giving the weaker sort
occasion to eat. Omnia sunt munda, sed malum est homini qui per offendiculum
manducat. Al things are clean, but it is ill for the man that eats with
giving offense and scandal, that makes his brother to sin by that means,
whereas the thing is indifferent in it self. Esca enim nos non commendat deo.
Meat does not make us commendable. And therefore if thou be never the better
for eating, vt quid tua libertas ab aliena conscientia iudicatur? why do
thou use this liberty of thine, to wound thy brothers conscience? Sic enim
peccantes in fratres, and percutientes eorum conscientiam infirmam, in Christum
peccatis. For, sinning after that sort against your brethren, and wounding
their weak conscience, you sin against Christ. This is the Apostles whole
drifte de Idolothitis, concerning meats offered to Idols. Now to our purpose,
whereas these habentes scientiam, that have knowledge, did say: We know, Omnia
munda mundis. Al are clean to the clean, we have no such scrupulosities, why
should we abstain as though we were weaklinges? Nay, we will eat rather to
protest our knowledge and our conscience. To this S. Paul answers: Tu fidem
habes? penes teipsum habe coram deo. Have thou a strong faith and perfect
knowledge in these things? it is enough for thee that God does know that thou
art none of these weaklings. But because it is indifferent, and God does not
look for it, nor like thee any thing ye better for eating, (Neque namque si
manducauerimus, abu^dabimus, neque si non manducauerimus, deficiemus. For
neither if we eat shall we gain thereby, neither if we eat not, shall we leese
by it,) abstain from thy brothers conscience, who not having knowledge,
thinks that it is pollutum ex Idolo, and made unclean by being offered to
the Idol, and by thy example eats, and so sins against his conscience. If
thou answer me, let him look to that, what is it to me? I know it is not
unclean, and Idolum nihil est, that an Idol is a thing of nothing, and
therefore I eat with a safe conscience. O (says he) but Si quis dixerit, Hoc
immolatu^ est Idolis, 1. Cor. 10.
noli manducare propter illu^, and propter conscientiam: Conscientiam autem
dico non tuam, sed alterius. If any man shall say, this was offered to Idols,
eat not of it for his sake, and for conscience: conscience I say not thine
own, but that other man's, because he thinks it is unclean and unlawful.
Otherwise if thou boast thy knowledge, to the ruin of thy weak brother,
Scientia haec inflat, 1. Cor. 8.
charitas autem aedificat. This knowledge does puff up and make proud, but it
is charity that edifieth: So that the Apostle briefly says thus: In things
indifferent that may be omitted without sin, although thou know it may
lawfullye be done, yet do it not cum scandalo fratris, to cause thy brother to
fall, that is, if thy doing put him in danger of sinning, or make him to sin:
for example. Thou know that to fast upon Sunday, in many cases, is
indifferent before God, and therefore thou do often use it among other
days. But if any man less skilful, living with thee, D. Aug. cp. 86. ad
Casulanu^.
non habens discretionem boni and mali, having not judgment to discern
between good and evil, as Saint Paul (the Apostle) says, be offended,
thinking that thou do favor manichiesme, and thereby him self is induced to
think their fast lawful, or not to eat by thy example, when in his conscience
it seems unlawful: in this case, Melius non ieiunatur die dominico, It is
better not to fast upon the Sunday. Tu fidem habes? penes teipsum habe coram
deo. Is it thy faith and conscience, that thou may? well, be it between God
and thee. Again, to come nearer our purpose. A very learned Doctor of
Divinity, and sound Catholic may lawfully come to heretical sermons for the
better confuting of them, when he has heard their reasons: and he may also
lawfullye be absent, so that to him it is indifferent. If he know other some of
less knowledge and constancy, that by his so doing thinks he favors
their heresy, or allows their sayings, or does not greatly mislike, or if
he do, yet that he, or any other man may boldly be present, so that they also
either think the better of them, or abstain not from them, he thought to
refrain. So that by this case it appears, that S. Paul's place is to our
purpose altogether, and clean contrary to their purpose that allege it: for
the Apostle in things indifferent wills us to do that which may not be
scandalous to our brother. But neither this point de vitandis haereticis, of
avoiding heretics, is indifferent, as the scriptures aforesaid and examples
declare: and if it were, they choose that which must needs scandalizare magis,
as I have showed before in the tenth reason: for not to come there, cannot
possibly make any other man to sin. And to come there, not only possiblye,
but very likely and in manner certainly makes others to sin by example.

The third Objection.
BEcause some scriptures and reasons before mentioned, Idolaters and heretics
are to be shu^ned alike.
literally concern Idolatry, they will say, it pertains nothing to the case
de vitandis haereticis, of shunning heretics: for if the question were of
communicating with Idolatours, they would dye many deaths rather then yield.

The Answer.
THat which they grant (because they must needs) of avoiding Idolatours
sacrifice and ceremonies, shall flatly convince them, to avoid heretics and
their conuenticles, equally at the least, and peradventure much more. S.
Hierome throughout al his commentaries upon the Prophets, applies that
mistically to heresies and heretics, which literally is spoken of Idols and
Idolatours, using commonly this preface: Oseae. 4.
Super hreticos facilis interpretatio est. The meaning of this place being
referred to heretics is very easy, Amos. 5.
namely to our purpose, that, Nolite ingredi in Galgala. etc. Enter not into
Galgal in any wise, above mentioned at large. 1. Ioh. 5.
Again, he that said: Filioli, custodite vos a simulachris. Children, keep
your selves from Idols, said of an heretic, Ioh. 2.
Nolite recipere eum in domum, nec Aue ei dixeritis: Quinamque dicit illi, Aue,
communicate operibus eius malignis. Receive him not into your house, neither
say unto him so much as God save you, for he that so says, communicates
with his wicked works. And he that said: Fugite ab Idolorum cultura. 1. Cor.
10.
Flee from the woorshipping of Idols, said also of heretics: Declinate ab
illis, hos deuita, Romans 16. 2. Tim. 3. Tit. 3.
haereticum hominem post vnam and secundam correptionem deuita. Turn aside
from them: And again, Audid al such: And again, Shun him that is an
heretic, after he has been once or twice warned. And that he means of
whatsoever communicating and society with either of both, he declares: 2.
Cor. 6.
Quae participatio iustitiae cum iniquitate? aut que societas luci ad tenebras?
Quae conuentio Christi ad Belial? aut quae pars fideli cum infideli? Qui
consensus templo dei cum idolis? vos namque estis templum dei viui, propter
quod exite de medio eorum, and seperamini. etc. What part has righteousness
with iniquity? Or, what felowshipp is between light and darkness? What
agreement between Christ and Belial, what portion has the faithful with the
faithless: how does the temple of God agree with Idols? for you are the
temple of the living God. wherefore depart from among them, and separate your
selves. How many ways does he express, that there ought to be no
communicating inter fidelem and infidelem, between the faithful and the
faithless: which comprehends the heretic as well as the Idolatour. And our
Savior him self most plainelye: Si ecclesiam non audierit, Mat. 18.
sit tibi sicut ethnicus. If he will not hear ye Church, let him be to thee as
an heathen: tibi, to thee, speaking to his disciples that were Jews. Abhor
from him as from a Gentile. Joan. 18.
how is that? Nolebant ingredi praetorium, ne contaminarentur. They would not
enter into Pilates court, who was a Heathen, least they should be defiled. And
Cephas subtrahebat and segregabat se a gentibus. Galat. 2.
Cephas or Peter withdrewe and separated him self from the Gentiles: why?
timens eos qui ex circum cisione erant, for fear of offending the Jews. The
Jews abhorred nothing so much as a Gentile, so we must abhor the
conuenticles of heretics. Epist. 76. figur. 2.
S. Ciprian upon that place (Math. 10.) In viam gentiu^ ne abieritis, and in
Civitates Samaritanorum ne intraueritis. Go not into the way of Gentiles, and
enter not into the Cities of Samaritanes, says, that he would not have added,
of the Samaritanes, but that he made Schismatikes equal with Gentiles. Addendo,
and Civitates Samaritanorum debere omitti, ostendit schismaticos Gentilib us
adaequari. By adding (says he) that they should pass by and leave the Cities
of Samaritanes also, he declares that schismatikes and Gentiles are of equal
account: for the Samaritanes were schismatikes from ye Jews. And, de vnitate
ecclesiae, he declares very excellently, how heresy and schism succeeded
into the very place, and the selfsame degree that Idolatry had before time.
Christi aduentu prostratus inimicus vidensidola derelicta, and per nimium
credentium populum seeds suas ac templa deserta, excogitauit nouam fraudem, vt
sub ipso christiani nominis titulo fallat incautos, haereses inuenit et
schismata, quibus subuerteret fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet vnitatem.
etc. The enemy Satan being overthrown by the coming of Christ, seeing Idols
forsaken, and that his Sees and Temples were left desert, by reason of the
great multitude of faithful people, he devised a new subtlety, under the very
title and name of Christianity to deceive the vnwarye. He found out, I say,
heresies and schisms, whereby he might overthrow faith, corrupt the truth,
divide the unity of the Catholic Church. S. Ambrose to signify, that they
are very Infidels, says: De incarnat. cap. 2.
Quadam nuncupatiua fidei germanitate, parricidialibus gladiis nos cupiunt
vulnerare. With a certain brotherly affinity or likeness of one faith they
covet to wound us, as if one brother should draw his sword against his other
brethren. And praises his brother Satyrus, quod non arbitrabatur fide^ esse in
schismate, because he thought there was not a right and perfect faith in
schism, much less in heresy. S. Austen: In psalm. 88 sub finem
Amemus Dominu^ deum nostrum, amemus Ecclesia^ eius: illum sicut Patrem, istam
sicut matrem: sed matrimonium hoc magna charitate compaginatur: nemo offendit
vnum, et promeretur altera^: nemo dicat, ad idola quidem vado, sed tamen
Ecclesiam dei non relinquo, Catholicus sum: timens matrem, offendis patrem.
Alius item dicit. Absit a me, non consulo sortilegium, non seruio lapidibus,
sed tamen in part Donati sum. Quid tibi prodest non offensus pater, qui
offensus vindicat matrem? Let us love our Lord God, let us love his Church: him
as a father, her as a mother. This Matrimony is knitt together with great
charity. No man offends the one, and has the favor of the other. Let no man
say: I go to Idols in deed, but for all that I do not forsake the Church of
God, I am a Catholic still, although thou stick to the mother, yet thou
offendest against ye Father. Some other says: I ask no council of
Southsayers, (God forbid) I woorship no stocks nor stones, but for all that I
am of Donatus side (a schismatike and an heretic) what does it avail thee not
to offend directly against the father, who is offended notwithstanding, and will
punish the injury done to the mother. To committ Idolatry he makes a sin
against God: to be in schism, a sin against the Church of God. Whether a
man do the one or the other, he says, it offends God al one.

Thus far it seems the case is equal, Heretics more to be shu^ned then
Painims or Jews.
and that they are to be shunned alike. Now, ex abundanti, to prove, that the
heretic and schismatike is worse then the Gentile or the Jew, and therefore
to be more eschewed, these may seem very plain arguments. S. 1. Cor. 5.
Paul: Scripsi vobis in epistola, ne commisceamini fornicariis, non vtique
fornicariis huius mundi, aut idolis feruientibus, sed si is qui frater
nominatur, est fornicarius, aut auarus. etc. cum eiusmodi nec cibum sumere. I
wrote to you in an Epistle, not to keep company with fornicatours, I mean not
the fornicatours of this world (Infidels and Gentiles) or woorshippers of
Idols: but if he that is our Christian brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous,
with such a one that you do not so much as eat and drink. Is it not evident
that he wills them to abstain from a false christened brother, rather then
from a flat Panym, and that for lesser sins then heresy? Again, the Church
permits them to live, and that by the Apostles authority, Quid mihi de iis
qui foris sunt iudicare? What have I to do to judge of them that are without?
meaning all that were not Christians: but the heretic is punished with death.
Whether is more abhorred? Li. 6. ca. 37.
See the ecclesiastical history of Eusebius, where Dionisius the famous
Bishopp says, that to suffer Martyrdom for ye avoiding of schism is more
commendable then for the aauoyding of Idolatry, because in the one is the
safety of our soul, in the other is the salvation of the whole Church. It is
a notable place. And S. Austen proves, that schism offended God more then
Idolatrye by the selfsame reason, because it was more grievously punished, as
in Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, then in Aaron, and them that woorshipped the
calfe. Again, of the Jews and heretics, the same Doctor writes: In ps. 45.
Quod haeretici offendant ad lapidem iam montem factum, miseriores Iudis qui
facilius ad lapidem tum paruum, et paulo ante abscissum offenderunt. Heretics
stu^ble at the stone that is now grown to be a mighty hill, being more
miserable the^ ye Jews, who, no marvel, if they stu^bled more easily at the
stone as then being little, and cut out of the quarrye a little before. He
alludeth to Daniels prophecy of our Savior to be borne of the Virgin. The
Jews stumbled at the beginning when the Church began: but heretics stumble
now at it, when it fills the whole world. If then they be worse then the
Jews, ergo much more then the Panims which are Infidels only negative,
negatiuely, as S. Thomas terms it, because they have not heard of Christ and
his Church, according to those places: Si non fecissem in eis signa, Ioh. 15.
quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum non haberent (nempe obstinatae infidelitatis)
nunc autem viderunt et oderunt. If I had not wrought among them tokens, such as
no other man did, they should not have sinned (to wit, the sin of obstinate
infidelity) but now they have seen, and yet hate me. And, Si coeci essetis,
non haberetis peccatum. Ioh. 9.
If you were blind in deed, and had never heard of me, you should not have
sinned of obstinate infidelity. Nunc vero dicitis, quia vidimus, peccatum
vestru^ manet. But now ye say, that we see very well, therefore your sin
remains. And therefore he says: Math. 11.
Terrae Sodomorum remissius erit in die iudicii quam tibi. There shall be more
favor Sodomites in the day of judgment then to thee. The greater punishment
is always a token of the greater sin, especially after this life. Now it is
certain, that this obstinate infidelity is greater in the heretic, then
either in Jew or Paynim.

Again, al authors of heresies, and Catholics perverted by them, are
Apostates, and reuolters from their first Christian profession, ergo worse
then they that never professed the name of Christ. 2. Pet. 2.
Si refugientes coinquinationes mundi in cognitione Domini Jesus Christi. If
they that fly from worldly uncleanness by the knowledge of Jesus Christ (as
when Painims are christened) hi rursus implicati superantur, facta sunt eis
posteriora deteriora prioribus: melius namque erat illis non cognoscere viam
iustiti, quam post agnitione^ retrorsum conuerti. etc. If they, I say,
entangled again with them, be so overcome, this later revolt makes them in
worse case the^ before they first believed: for they had been better not to
know the way of righteousness, then after they know it to turn back again.
And, Immundus spiritus egressus de homine. etc. An unclean spirit being
departed out of man (when by Baptism the spirit of Infidelity and paganism
is driven out) non inueniens requiem, dicit: Reuertar in domum meam vnde exiui.
Not finding any rest, says: I will return into my house from whence I
departed, and so with seven other spirits worse then him self (to signify
what a heinous offense reuolting heresy is) reentreth, and facta sunt
posteriora illius hominis deteriora prioribus. And the later state of that man
is far worse the^ ye former was. If worse, ergo the more to be avoided.

But the greatest reason is, the greater danger that ensues of communicating
with heretics, that bear the name of Christians, then with Painims which are
manifest Iufidels, as S. Austen deduceth of these scriptures. Si enim inimicus
meus maledixisset mihi, abscondissem me forsitan ab eo: S. Aug. in Psalm. 40.
tu vero notus meus, qui dulces mecum capiebas cibos, veniat mors super illos.
etc. For if mine open enemy had reviled me, I might perhaps have hidd me from
him, but thou art my familier acquaintance, that did eat meat with me
sweetly, let death come to such. And, Homo pacis me in quo speraui,
magnificauit super me supplantationem. The man that seemed to be at peace with
me, in whom I trusted, wrought mightilye to supplant and undermine me. But let
that one place of the same Doctor suffice for a number upon these words: Ab
his qui appropinquant mihi. From them that approach unto me, she says: Ab his
qui long sunt a me, In ps. 54.
facilis cautio est. Non me tam cito fallit, qui dicit, veni Idolum adorare,
multum a me long est. Christianus es? Christianus (inquit) ex propinquo
aduersatur, prope est, redime in pace animam meam ab his qui appropinquant
mihi. I can eastly beware of them that are far off from me. He does not
deceive me so soon that says: Come, woorshipp an Idol, he is very far from
me, a Gentile and Panime. But I say to an other, art thou a Christian? Yea
forsooth, a Christian, says he. This fellow stands very near me, he may
quicklye overthrow me. Redeem and deliver, O Lord, my soul from them that
after this sort approach, and come near unto me. Here it is plain, that he
desires to be delivered from the heretic or schismatike, more then from the
Panim or Idolatour. Ciprianus. Lib. de vnitate ecclesiae.
Non aperta tantum pericula metuenda su^t, facilior cautio est, vbi manifestior
formido est, plus cauendus est inimicus. cum latenter obrepit. etc. Not only
open dangers are to be feared. A man may sooner take heed, when the fear is
more manifest. We must be more circumspect for the enemy, when he creeps
toward us secretly. And therefore, because the case is like in avoiding both,
or more urgent against the heretic, I will conclude this answer with S.
Ambrose, Ferendu^ne istud, Epist. 30.
vt Ge^tilis sacrificet, et Christianpro intersit? Is it to be borne that a
Gentile do sacrifice, and a Christian be present at it? even so is it
tolerable, that an heretic pray or preach, or minister Sacraments, and a
Catholic to be present?

The fourth Objection.
IF they were Arians or the like old famous condemned heretics, if they did
deny the Godhead of Christ his incarnation, or any principal article of the
Creed, I would flee from them as from Infidels.

The Answer.
THis point is much to be considered, because the ignorance of men is such,
Caluinists and Lutheranes are as much to be abhorred as any old condemned
heretics.
that they think it hardly to be heresy, unless it be expreslye against the
Trinity, and the articles of the Creed. First therefore to this out of S.
Austen ad Iulianam viduam, to Julian a widow. Illud optime nouimus, cum
omnibus vestris cultores vos esse and fuisse individuae Trinitatis: Epist. 143.
Sed non hinc solum error humanus obrepit, vt aliquid sentiatur de indiuidua
Trinitate: sunt namque and alia in quibus pernitiosissime erratur, sicut hoc
est. etc. We know that very well, that you and al yours are and have been
woorshippers of the undivided Trinity: But not thereof only creeps in
humane error, if a man be falsely persuaded concerning the Trinity: for there
are other points also wherein error is committed very daungerously, as this is
one, he means pelagianismum contra gratiam dei, The heresy of Pelagius
against ye grace of God. It is plain that this heresy against the grace of
God is against no article of the Creed expressly, and yet I trow they will not
communicate with a Pelagian: who was in his time so abhorred, especially in our
country, that wise men think the name of grace, so often in our English
phrase, begann to the detestation of his heresy, as past grace, he lacks
grace, ungracious, grace and virtue make a man. etc. Again in another place:
Dicent rudiores: Nonne isti quos vocatis haeretici, eandem Trinitatem
confitentur, in eundem Christum credunt? atqui id fecerunt antiqui haeretici,
quorum tame^ opiniones ipsa absurditate sua iacent. The ruder sort will say
(such as our simple Catholics are) These who^ you call heretics, I pray you
do they not confess and acknowledge the self-same Trinity that you do, do
they not believe in the same Christ? yes, but so did very ancient and old
heretics too, whose opinions notwithstanding are come to nothing for the very
absurdity of them. Li. 2. Trinit. cap. 17
S. Austen has the like place. Hoc qui credunt, nec tamen in catholica fide,
sed in schismate aliquo aut haeresi credu^t. etc. Whosoever believes al
articles of the Creed, and is otherwise a schismatike or an heretic, or not
in the Catholic Church, it avails him nothing. And in the end of his book
concerning heresies, having reckoned up al heresies unto his time, Multum
adiuuat cor fidele nosse quid credendum non sit, etiamsi disputandi facultate
id refutare non possit. Omnis itaque Christianus Catholicusista non debet
credere. Sed non omnis qui ista non credit, consequenter debet se Christianum
iam putare vel dicere. It does much help the heart of a faithful man to know
what he ought not to believe, although he ca^ not by the way of disputation
refute it. Every good Christian Catholic man therefore ought not in any case to
believe any of these foresaid heresies: but every one that does not believe
these, may not therefore by and by think or call him self a good Christian. Why
so? If he condemn al old heresies against Christ, and the Trinity, is not
that sufficient? Noe, Possunt enim (says he) and haereses aliae quae in hoc
opere nostro commemoratae non sunt, vel esse. For there may be other heresies
also which are not mentioned in this Treatise, either now be (which he had not
hard of) vel fieri, or be coined hereafter unto ye worlds end, quaru^ aliqua^
quisquis tenuerit, Christianus Catholicus no^ erit. Of ye which whosoever shall
maintain one, he shall not be a Christian Catholic man. Note the same, quarum
aliquam, to maintein any one error stubbornly, is heresy, either of those
opinions there named, or any that might rise afterward. And because it is
heresy, therefore the mainteyner thereof is to be avoided, even as an Arrian,
iuxta illud, Hreticum hominem deuita. Avoid the man that is an heretic.
Whatsoever his error be, as the self same Doctor declares excellently for
this purpose, De fide ad Petrum. cap. 44.
saying: Haec quadraginta capitula fideliter creed, and si quem contraria his
dogmatizare cognoueris, tanquam pestem fuge, and tanquam haereticum abiice. Ita
namque ista quae hic posuimus fidei Catholicae congruunt, vt si quis non solum
omnibus, sed etia^ singulis voluerit contraire, in eo quod singulis horum
contumaciter repugnat, hreticus, atque ex hoc omnibus Catholicis
anathematizandus appareat. etc. These forty articles believe faithfully, and
if thou shall know any man to hold contrary opinions to these, avoid him as a
plague or pestilence, and cast him off for an heretic: for these points which
we have put, do so agree iumpe with ye Catholic faith, yt if a man will
gainsay, not only al, but any one of the^ by it self, in that he does
stubbornly stand against any one of them, it is evident he is an heretic,
and therefore to be abandoned and accursed of al Catholic men.

Let us examine a little those two testimonies. In the first de haeresibus he
says, ye he that holds any one of those points, is no Christian Catholic
man: but there you have Iouinian condemned and Aerius, whose heresies our
Caluenistes mainteyne at this day, ergo they must be abhorred as well as Arrians.
In the second he says, that he which does not believe every one of those
forty articles by him rehearsed, is to be abhorred as an heretic. Read them,
and you shall find that our heretics deny very many of them, albeit he adds
of every one, Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubita. Hold it for a most
assured certainty, and doubt in no wise. It is plain the^ that there may
grow, and daily do, sundry heresies, that are not expressly against the
articles of the Creed: Unless you will say, they are al against that article:
Credo in Ecclesiam catholicam, in this sense, I believe all that the Catholic
Church believes, and so there may be as many heresies, as are verities in ye
Catholic faith: Quicu^que vult.
Quam nisi quis integram inuiolatamque seruauerit, absque du bio in aeternum
peribit. Which faith unless a man do keep whole and without breach, without
doubt he shall perish everlastingly: why? but because he is an heretic. 2, 2.
q. 5. 3.
And S. Thomas conclusion is well known. Qui errat in vno articulo, de nullo
fidem habet. He that erreth or believes not any one article of the Catholic
faith, he in very deed, to speak truly and properlye, beleeueih none:
because the Catholic Church believes as well al as one. And therefore if he did
believe upon that ground, he should believe every one: if that be not his
ground, he believes not, but follows fancy and his own reason. For this
cause Iconoclaster or Image breakers are ancient heretics, because they
denied that article of ye catholic Church de venerandis imaginibus, So
Eunomius, Vigilantius, Iouinianus.
of reverence to be given to Images, and are condemned by the second Council of
Nice, as Arius was by the first: they for their heresy against the Church, he
for his heresy against the person of Christ. So that ye case of both heresies
is equal, of that that is flatly against Christ the head, and that that is
against ye Church the body. Is that possible? yea. Qui vos spernit, me
spernit. He that despises you, despises me. And, Saul! Saul! quid me
persequeris? Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? when he did persecute his
Church. And, Ego sum veritas (says he) I am truth: as of the Church is said:
Firmamentum and columna veritatis, that she is the stay and pillar of truth:
ergo every opinion against the truth, is against Christ and his Church
equallye. And, Spiritus sanctus quem mittet pater in nomine meo, ille docebit
vos omnem veritate^, quia de meo accipiet, and annunciabit vobis. The holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you al truth: for he
shall receive of that that is mine, and declare unto you. If Christ sent the
holy Ghost to direct the Church into al truth from time to time (Habeo namque
multa dicere, sed non potestis omnia portare modo. For I have many things
(says he) to tell you, but presently you cannot bear them al) whosoever
stubbornlye resists one article of the Catholic Church, 1. Ioh. 4.
resists Christ. Omnis spiritus qui soluit Iesum, ex Deo non est. Every
spirit that deuideth Jesus, is not of God. He deuideth him that makes not
account of his body ye Church. Ephesians. 4.
And, Ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos, quosdam prophetas, alios vero
Euangelistas, alios autem Pastores and Doctores, ad consummatione^ sanctorum,
in aedificatione^ corporis Christi. etc. He gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, other some Evangelists, others Pastors and teachers, to make up the
number of Saints, to the edifying of the body of Christ. Why? Vt iam non
scimus paruuli sluctuantes, et circumferamur omni vento doctrinae. etc. That
now we be no more little ones wavering and carried about with every blast of
doctrine. Therefore Christ gave us Councels, Fathers, Popes, Bishops, not to
swerve from ye truth: if we do, is it not a denying of Christ? And therefore
he said: Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi tanquam ethnicus. If he will not
hear ye Church, esteem him as an Heathen or Gentile. As much to say, Si me non
audierit, Luc. 10.
If he will not hear me: for, Qui vos audit, me audit. He that hears you,
hears me. And, Vbicunque duo vel tres congregati sunt in nomine meo, ego su^
in medio eorum. Wheresoever be two or three gathered together in my name, I am
in the mids of them. And whereas S. John writes of the Samaritanes, Ioh. 4.
Multi crediderunt in eu^ propter verbum mulieris testimonium perhibentis. Many
believed in him upon the woman's word, that bare witness, (which woman is a
plain figure of ye Church) he adds: Cum venissent ergo ad illum Samaritani,
dicebant mulieri: Quia iam non propter tua^ loquelam credimus, ipsi namque
audiuimus and scimus. When the Samaritanes were come unto him, they said to
the woman: Now we do not believe upon thy report, for our selves have heard
and do know. So that the testimony of the Church, and the testimony of
Christ always concur and agree upon al truths. In psa. 88.
And therefore S. Austen said very excellently. Matrimonium hoc magna charitate
compaginatur. Nemo offendit vnum, and promeretur alteram. This matrimony is
coupled with great charity and love. No man offends against the one, and
wins the other. Epist. 49.
And S. Ciprian. Confessor Christi nec dici, nec esse iam potest, qui ecclesiam
Christi negauit. Nam cum Paulus dicit, Erunt duo in carne vna, Sacramentum hoc
magnu^ in Christo and ecclesia, quomodo potest esse cum Christo, qui cum sponsa
Christi, atque in eius ecclesia non est? He can neither be called, nor be in
very deed a Confessor of Christ, that has denied the Church of Christ. For
whereas Paul says: They shall be two in one flesh, This is a great Sacrament in
Christ and the Church, how can he be with Christ, that is not with the spouse
of Christ, and in his Church. Ad virginem Demetriade^. He calls it S.
Innocentii and D. Anastasii fidem, the faith of S. Inno centius and B.
Anastasius.
And S. Hierome ad Damasum of the Church of Rome, which he always makes one
with ye catholic Church. Qui tecum no^ colligit, spargit. Hoc est, qui Christi
non est, Antichristi est. He that gathers not with thee, scatters: that is,
He that is not with Christ, pertains to Antichrist. Mark. Qui cum ecclesia
Romana non colligit. He that gathers not with the Church of Rome: what is that
to say? Qui christi non est, He that is not with Christ: see how they run
still together. De obitu fratris.
And S. Ambrose speaking of the Luciferians schismatikes only, no heretics,
says, that they had not fidem in Christum, any true faith in Christ. Ambros.
ibidem. Cuin Catholicis, hoc est, cu^ Romana Ecclesiaconuenire. To agree with
Catholics and to agree with the Church of Rome, is al one.
Quia etsi fidem erga deum tenerent, tamen erga dei ecclesiam non tenerent.
Etenim cum propter ecclesiam Christus passus sit, et Christi corpus ecclesia
sit, non videtur ab eis exhiberi Christo fides, a quibus euacuatur eius passio,
corpusque Christi distrahitur. Because albeit toward God they kept their faith,
toward the Church they did not keep it: For whereas Christ did suffer for
the Church, and the Church is the body of Christ, it seems that they do
not believe in Christ, by whom his passion is made fruitless, and the body of
Christ distracted in pieces. And therefore he praises his brother Satyrus
exceedinglye for not communicating with them. This point is much to be
considered of them, Eusebius. hist li. 6. ca. 37.
that easily abhor such as blaspheme Christ, but think it is a small matter,
or rather know not what it is to resist or discredit yt Church. And therefore
an Arian they would abhor perhaps, a Marcionist, an Ebionite, that held
heresies directlye against Christ, not a Lutheran, a Zuinglian, a Caluenist.
etc. that blaspheme the Church. But hitherto I have proved, that they are to be
avoided alike. In psa. 30. conc. 2.
Now that they are more to be shunned and abhorred, when S. Austen writes thus
in ye former comparison of Christ and his Church: Obscurius dixerunt Prophetae
de Christo quam de ecclesia, puto propterea, quia videbant in spiritu, contra
ecclesiam homines facturos esse particulas, and de Christo non tanta^ litem
habituros, de ecclesia magnas co^tentiones excitaturos. The Prophets spoke
more darkly of Christ then of the Church: therefore I suppose because they
foresaw in spirit, that men would make parts against the Church, and that they
would not strive so bitterlye concerning Christ, but concerning his Church they
would raise great tragedies. Does he not mean, that the heresies against the
Church should be more perilous, then against the person of Christ, because the
prophets arm us against the^ more strongly, and inform us more plainly.
Again, more dangerous, because under the name and profession of Christ they
seduce the sooner, which I handled partly in my answer to the third
objection, and will say more to the objection following: but this one argument
must of force convince. The Aria^ and other ancient heretics, each denied but
one article of Christian faith, being in all other points Catholic: these men,
besides ye renewing of many old condemned errors (which are well known) they
shake most points of Christian Catholic religion, standing al upon negatiues,
scoffing schoolmasters, preachers of al licentious liberty, of who^ may be
said that which Leo magnus writes of ye Manichees, Ser. 5. de iciu. 10. m.
who were always accounted somewhat more then heretics: Cu^ in cunctis
peruersitatibus multiforme^ teneat principatu^ (diabolus) arce^ tame^ sibi in
istoru^ struxit insania, and latissima^ in eis aula^ in qua se exultantius
iactaret, inuenit: vbi no^ vnius prauitatis specie^, sed omniu^ simul erroru^
impietatu^que mixtura^ generaliter possideret. Quod enim in paganis prophanu^,
in Iudis carnalibus coecum. etc. hoc in istos quasi in sentina^ quanda^ cu^
omniu^ sordium concretione confluxit. Whereas in all perverse and wicked
professio^s ye devil bears rule many ways, yet he has built his topp tower
in the madness of these good fellows, and has found in the^ a very large court,
wherein he might make merry, and vaunt him self, as in whom he had possession,
not of one kind of naughtines, but a general mixture of al errors and impieties
together: for that which is profane in ye Gentiles, and blind in the carnal
Jews, that same with all other filth clammed together has run into them like
streams into a sink. And surely for their life and manners, 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet.
2.
read S. Paul and ep. Iudae, foretelling ye nature of later heretics, you
shall see yt al concur in ours. But I had rather prove my conclusion, by ye
multitude of their errors. S. Austen de origin animae ad Vincentium, Li. 3.
ca. 15.
having reckoned up eleven of his false articles, Haec (inquit) si pertinaciter
singula defendantur, tot haereses facere possunt, quot opiniones numerantur.
Quocirca considera quam sit hoc horrendum, vt omnes sint in vno homine, qu
damnabiles essent in singulis singulae. These (says he) each one by it self,
if they be stubbornly defended, may make so many heresies, as there be
opinions in number. And therefore consider what a horrible thing this is, for all
to be in one man, whereas every one in diverse men were damnable. His place
above alleged is like to this. Ca. 44. de fide ad Petrum.
Now if a man would scanne Luthers opinions and Caluines, how many errors
shall he there find in one of the^, that were each one by it self damnable in
diverse men, and very many have been already condemned in others? And
therefore if Arius for one error, by their own confession ought to be abhorred,
let them consider, quam horrendi sunt illi, what horrible heretics they are,
and how much to be abandoned, in whom so many heresies do concur, so many
that it is very like Antichrist himself named ( arnoumai I deny al) is next,
Apoc. 13. de numero bestiae.
whose next foreru^ners these are in denying al, and in omni seductione
iniquitatis (as S. Paul says) iis qui pereunt, in all deceit of iniquity to
them that perish: for of those old single heresies it was said in the
Apostles time, 2. These. 2.
Misterium iam operatur iniquitatis. The mystery of iniquity does work, or
is in woorking even now, as it did in all heresies downewarde, but tum
reuelabitur filius iniquitatis, quando instat dies Domini. Then the son of
iniquity shall be revealed, when the day of our Lord is at hand: then (toward
ye later days) he shall come with his maine force. S. Basil doubted in his
time, Ep. 70. and 71.
Nu^ ecclesias suas prorsus reliquit Dominus? an nouissima hora est. etc. Has
God utterly forsaken his Churches? Is the last hour come? But read him, and
you shall see that the heretics which he complains of, were very tolerable in
respect of ours. So that if equal evils, are equally to be eschewed, and the
greater, the more: it follows, that Caluinistical conuenticles are as much, at
the least, and by all good reason much more to be abhorred then Arians,
Pelagians. etc. But because our question is chiefly of freque^ting their
prayers, understand this, that not only ancient schismatikes, of whom it is
certain, (as Donatistae, Luciferani) but the heretics also Ariani,
Macedoniani, Pelagiani, kept al ecclesiastical service and ceremonies like the
Catholics. And yet what zeal the good Christians then had, not to come into
the Church where such were present, you may remember by the ecclesiastical
examples aforesaid. Cap. 3.
How much more these, where nothing is like, but al of purpose and in despite
made unlike, not without blasphemy, as when they say: From al Papistrie good
Lord deliver us, meaning al Catholic religion. May a Catholic man be present
at this, more then a Christian at the Jews curse pronounced every day in
Nazarenum and Nazarenos? 1. Cor. 10.
against Jesus of Nazareth and the Nazarenes? As they speak in despite of
Christ and Christians, so our heretics in despite of the Church, and
Catholics, vt prudentibus loquor, vos ipsi iudicate quod dico. I speak as to
wise men, Your selves be Judges of that that I say.

The fifth Objection.
THere be many good men of them, godly prayers, Psalms, Scriptures, although
somewhat be lacking, yet that which they have is good, and agreing with the
Catholics.

The Answer.
MAny good men? Are they better then Angels? Gal. 1.
Si Angelus de coelo euangelizet vobis: Si quis vobis euangelizauerit praeter
id quod accepistis, Anathema sit. If an Angel from heaven from heaven preach
unto you, if any whosoever he be shall preach otherwise then that you have
received, be he accursed: Any man or Angel whatsoever he be. And because many
follow their good vicar, which before said Mass, and now preaches the
contrary for advantage, and says the communion, S. Paul adds of him self,
licet nos. If we our selves, and the rest Apostles come and preach contrary to
that we first preached, Anathema sit. Be he accursed. But are they gentle
persons, sweet men? no marvel: Eiusmodi pseudoapostoli sunt operarij
subdoli, 2. Cor. 11.
transsigurantes se in Apostolos Christi, and non mirum: ipse namque Sathanas
transfigurat se in Angelum lucis. Non est ergo magnum si ministri eius
transfigurentur velut ministri Iustitiae. Such false Apostles are crafty
woorkers, transforming them selves into the Apostles of Christ, and no
marvel, for Satan himself transformeth him-self into an Angel of light, and
therefore it is no great matter, if his ministers be misshapen as the ministers
of Justice or righteousness. Such common places are infinite. But Apoc. 9 They
are described excellently under the names of Locustes, similitudines locustarum
similes equis paratis in proelium. The forms of these Locustes were like hor
ses ready to the skirmish, they are hot and vehement. Super capita eorum
tanquam coronae, Upon their heads as it were crowns (not crowns in deed)
similes auro, like to gold (not gold) al their triumph and victory in
pulpets is counterfeit: Facies earum tanquam facies hominum. Their faces are as
it were the faces of men. They seem very sweet men, and habebant capillos
sicut capillos mulierum, and they had hear like to women's hear. They have wife
and children, and live honestlye forsooth in wedlock, and extol Matrimony
wonderfully, which pleases married men exceedingly. Vox alarm sicut vox
curruum equorum multoru^ currentium in bellum. The voice of their wings like
the voice of many chariots and horses running to the camp (their vehemency
in pulpettes) But what follows? Et habebant caudas similes scorpionum, and
aculei erant in caudis earum. And they had tails like to Scorpions, and their
stinges were in their tails. The end and effect is to seduce men to ever
lasting damnation. Romans 16.
Per dulces benedictiones seducunt corda multorum. By sweet blessings they
seduce the hearts of many. Ep. 7. vel 190.
S. Austen. Ab ea (ecclesia) seperati, qua^ diu contra illam sentiunt, boni
esse non possunt, quia etsi aliquos, little bonos videtur ostendere quasi
laudabiliter conuersatio, malos cos ipsa facit diuisio, dicente Domino, Qui
mecum non est, aduersum me est. Being separated and divided from the Church, as
long as they have a contrary opinion to it, they cannot be good: for although
their conversation after a sort laudable make a show that they are good, the
very schism and division makes them naught, according to our Lords saying:
He that is not with me, is against me. S. Ciprian. Epist. 52.
Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque est, Christinus non est, qui in Christi
ecclesia non est etc. Whosoever he be, and what manner of man soever he be, a
Christian man he is not, that is not in ye Church of Christ. See S. Auste^ ep.
120. ca. 27. Nec tales sunt quos facile contemnas They are not such (says he)
as a man may make light of, they appear wonderful Saintlike. etc. S. Ambrose.
Li. 3 de spiritu sancto. Cap. 18.
Etsi multi nominent se Christianos, nomen vsurpant, non omnes mercedem habent.
Et Cain obtulit sacrificium, and Judas osculum, sed audiuit: Judah, osculo
filium hominis tradis? hoc est, amoris pignore scelus imples, and pacis
instrumento odiaseris, et charitatis officio mortem irrogas? non agnosco nomen
meum, vbi non agnosco doctrinam meam. Although many name them selves
Christians, and usurp the name, al have not the reward. Caine offered
Sacrifice, and Judas a kiss, but he heard these words: Judas, do thou
betraye the Son of man with a kiss? that is: Do thou work mischief with
a pledge or token of love? and do thou sow hatred with that which is an
instrument of peace? and by semblance of friendly charity art thou author of
death? I acknowledge not my name, where I do not acknowledge my doctrine.
Mark how they are compared cum osculo Iudae. Ep. 2.
Ignatius. Non Christiani sed Christempori, qui ex nomine Christi qustum
faciunt, erroris venenum alliuentes dulcibus alloquiis. etc. They are not
Christians, but merchants of Christ, that make gain by the name of Christ,
annoynting the poison of error with sweet words. Briefly, what greater show
of virtue and true Christianity may be made in outward apperance, then if
they dye willingly for Christ's sake, not in a false opinion, but in the
maintenance of a truth: as many heretics have in the persecution of Pagan
Emperors. Devnitate ecclesiae
Of whom S. Ciprian writes, that it nothing avails them, no, although they
dye in the honor of Christ against Idols. If they be schismatikes, heretics,
or out of the Church, which is S. Paul's doctrine. 1. Cor. 15.
Who presupposing al other good things to be in man, yet, Si charitatem non
habeam, If I have no charity, although I would be burned for Gods sake, nihil
mihi prodest, it avails me nothing. He has not charity that is not in the
unity of the Catholic Church, as Saint Austen does largely declare. (Ep.
204.) Aug. 204.
Foris ab Ecclesia constitutus, and seperatus a compage vnitatis, and vinculo
charitatis, aeterno supplicio punireris, etiamsi pro Christi nomine viuus
incendereris: hoc est enim quod ait Apostolus. Etsi tradidero corpus. etc. For
as concerning Fores Martirs, wherein they glory most as an argument of their
true confession, S. Austen says: Aug. in Psalm. 68.
Non persecutionem pati, non teneri, non flagellari, non includi, non
proscribi, non occidi laus est: sed habendo causam bonam ista pati, haec laus
est: laus namque est in causae bonitate, non in poenae acerbitate. It is no
praise to suffer persecution, to be taken, to be scourged, to be imprisoned, to
lose goods and lands by proclamation, to be put to death: but for having a
good cause to suffer these things, that is praise worthy: for praise
consists in the goodness of the cause, not in the sharpnes of the punishment.
But if none of these shows may make a man bold to communicate with them as
good Christians, how is it said: Ex fructibus eoru^ cognoscetis eos. How here
tikes are discerned from Catholics. Ex fructibus, By their fruits.
By their fruits you shall know them? Look upon their opinions, and see the
fruit or sequel of them, and from what spirit they proceed, and you shall
easilye prove their spirits, An ex Deo sint. Whether they be of God. To deny
al authority of Councels and Fathers, to follow their own judgment, self-wil
and wisdom. etc. Is it not the most certain fruit of excessive pride? To
preach against merit of Christian works, is it not the mean to neglect al
goodness, by a foolish security of faith? to make chastity impossible, vows
unlawful, and therefore to break them: virginity of no merit before God more
then matrimony, no difference of meats or days, no fasting, etc. Is it not
the fruit of licentious minds, and the ready way to riotous liberty, to
Epicures brutishnes, to Atheism. etc. Contrariwise, look upon al Catholic
articles, every one proceeds from holy inspiration, and tends to perfection
of virtue and godliness.

But they have good prayers, psalms, etc. S. Austen. Quid prodest, In psa. 102
quia hymnum cantat lingua tua, si sacrilegium exhalat vita tua? What avails
it, that thy tongue sings a psalm, if thy life breathe out sacrilege? Al
heretics and Schismatikes are sacrilegi, robbers of al sacred and holy
ordinances. And, Quid prodest si domiuu^ co^fiteris, In psalm. 88
Deum honoras, ipsum praedicas, filium eius agnoscis. etc. et blasphemas
ecclesiam eius? What does it profit, if thou confess our Lord, honor
God, praisest him, acknowledgest his Son, and so forth, and in the mean time
do blaspheme his Church. S. Hierome. Quicquid loquuntur and putauerint se in
laudem dei dicere, vlulatus lu porum and vaccarum insanientiu^ sonitus est.
Whatsoever they speak and think that they say to the praise of God, is the
howling of wolves, and the belowing noise of mad kine: interpreting these
words: Non clamauerunt ad me in cord suo, sed vlulaba^t in cubilibus suis.
They cried not to me in their heart, but they shall howl in their cabbins. That
which they sing or say, In. 8. Oseae, and in 4.
although it be very good, God does abhor it. Nolo per os vestrum nominis
mei fieri mentionem, quod Idolorum recordatione pollutum est. I will have no
mention made of my name by your mouth, which is polluted by often naming of
Idols. Interpreting that, Neque iuraueritis, viuit Dominus. Neither shall you
swear, As the Lord lives. Non est speciosa laus in ore peccatoris. Praise is
nothing seemly or precious in the mouth of a sinner. And, Hic populus labiis me
honorat, cor autem eorum long est a me. This people honoreth me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me. Non omnis qui dicit, Domine! Domine!
Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Many Prophets and virgins shall say in the later day: Domine, domine, aperi
nobis, nonne in nomine tuo prophetauimus, dmonia eiecimus? Lord, Lord, open
to us, have not we prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils? have not we
done many goodly things, and that in thy name? His answer is: Amen dico vobis,
nescio vos. Verily I say to you, I know you not: that is, No^ probo. I do not
allow you. Notwithstanding all this: Discedite a me operarii iniquitatis in
ignem aeternum. Depart from me ye workers of wickedness into everlasting fire.
Modicu^ fermentum totam massam corrumpit. A little leven spilleth all the dowe.
Ad que^ respiciam nisi contritum spiritum, and trementem sermones meos? To whom
shall I have a regard, but to him that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at
my words? Otherwise if virtue and sincerity be wanting, Qui immolat bouem. He
that offreth an ox to me (a good thing) quasi qui interficiat hominem, even as
he that kills a man. he pleases me no better. Esaias. 66.
Qui mactat pecus, quasi qui excerebrat canem. Qui offert oblationem, quasi qui
sanguine^ suillum offerat. Qui recordatur thuris, quasi qui benedicat idolum.
He that does sacrifice a sheep, is al one with him that knocks out the
brains of a dog. He that offers cake-bread, as if one should offer swines
blood. He that burns frankincense, and he that blesses an Idol, both please
me alike. A goodly place to prove, that God does abhor heretics praise, be
their words never so gaie, their prayers, their preachinges, as much as if
they should speak blasphemy. Psalm. 49.
Quare tu enarras iustitias meas, and assumis testamentum meum per os tuum? Why
do thou preach of my justice, and take my testament through thy mouth? If
thou saw a thief, thou did runn with him. etc. Peter for saying, Tues
Christus filius dei viui, Thou art Christ the son of the living God, was made
head of the Church. And, Beatus es Simon bar-iona. Blessed art thou Simo^ son
of Iona: but when the wicked spirit saideeuen as much in the same words, he
was rebuked and commanded to hold his peace. In like manner, although their
prayers and service were al one with ours, (as it is in deed clean contrary)
yet they in opinion and otherwise being not Catholic, al is nothing worth.
Ignatius. Epista.
Nemo bonum dixerit, qui bonum malo admiscet. No man can call him good, that
mingleth good with that which is naught. S. In psa. 54.
Austen of the Donatistes and Catholics, vnum alleluia resonamus, we sing one
Alleluia, and many other things he reckons, wherein they agree: but because
they were schismatiks out of ye Church, it avails not. And super illud ps.
Psalm. 54.
In multis erant mecum. In many things they were with me, he reckons up many
Sacraments and ceremonies, in quibus omnibus (says he) erant mecum, sed non
omnino mecum: in schismate, non mecum: in haeresi, non mecum. Sed in hiis
paucis, in quibus non mecu^, non prosunt eis multa, in quibus mecu^. In all the
which things they agreed with me, but not with me altogether: in schism, not
with me: in heresy, not with me. And for these few wherein they are not with
me, those many do nothing avail them, wherein they are with me. So Luther of
the Zuinglians (whom I allege non ad authoritatem, sed ad confusionem
nostrorum Catholicorum. Cop. dial. 6. cap. 15.
Not for his authority, but that our Catholics may be ashamed to see the
heretics judgment in this point) (better then theirs) frustra illi in deum
Patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum, and Christum seruatorem credunt,
omnia (inquam) haec nihil illis prosunt quando hunc vnum negant articulum,
eumque falsi insimulant, dum de Sacramento Christus ait, Hoc est corpus meum.
They in vain believe in God the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, and
Christ our Savior, all this, I say, does avail them nothing. Whereas they deny
this one article and accuse it as false, De fide cap. 1.
when Christ says of the Sacrament, This is my body. S. Ambrose. Vinci illi
vel facile possunt, vel facile vitari, quorum prima propositione omne consilium
pectoris proditur. At vero hi quibus multa nobiscum paria sunt, facile possunt
innoxias mentes and soli Deo deditas, fraudulenta societate percutere, dum
maloru^ suorum virus per bona nostra defendunt. Nihil enim periculosius his
haereticis esse potest. etc. vnde vehementer nobis cauendum est, ne se vel
sensibus vel auribus nostris huiusmodi aliquid latenter insinuet, quia nihil
tam cogit in mortem, quam sub obtentu fidei fidem violare. They may either be
overcome easily, or easily avoided, by whose first proposition or sentence all the purpose of their heart is disclosed: but they that have many things equal
with us, may easily by false felowshipp wound simple souls that think no
harm, and are given only to please God, whiles they defend the poison of
their own evil by such good things as they borowe of us: for nothing can be
more perilous then such heretics. Whereupon we must be very circumspect, that
no such thing enter in secretly and sweetly into our senses or ears, for
nothing does drive a man so forcibly to death, as under the color of faith to
destroy faith, or by seeming a good Christian man to persuade heresy. Let us
therefore say with David. Cum hominibus operantibus iniquitatem, non communicabo
cum electis eorum. With men that work iniquity, I will not communicate with
their chosen brethren. I will neither make nor meddle with them that seem the
best of them, and most sanctish or Angelical. Oleum peccatoris non impinguet
caput meum. Their sweet oyled words shall not drop upon my head.

The sixth Objection.
TO come to their prayers only seems a small thing, and to forsake Parents,
wife, children. etc. is very much. And therefore, if presence only will excuse
the matter, it seems more expedient to yield.

The Answer.
HEre be two points, the one, whether lesser points of religion may be
neglected, presupposing them to be little or less: the other, how far we may
be affected toward flesh and blood, when they hinder faith and religion. To the
first: The truth is, it is no small point: For if Catholic Christians have
always avoided the company of heretics in every place, and in every thing, by
the Apostles commandment, if the Catholic service, not only of an heretic,
but of a schismatike. etc. as before appears by my examples and scriptures, is
it a small matter to frequent their conuenticles in ye Church, whose service,
Sermons, ministration of Sacraments are as heretical, as them selves are in
most articles heretics? But presupposing it to be so, let us consider of
lesser points generally. De mendac. cap. 13
If a man should tell you out of S. Austen that we ought rather to dye then to
make a venial lie, or to dissemble venially against the truth, you would
wonder. Well, let that be perfection rather then necessity. This is certain,
the lesser the thing is for the which we sustain persecution, D. Greg. in
resp. ad in terrogationes Augustini Angloru^ Apostoli.
propter iustitiam, for righteousness, the more heroical and meritorious the
fact is, S. John Baptist for telling Herod of his unlawful wife (it is a small
thing in respect of death to hold ones peace.) S. Laurence for the Church
goods to the poor. Many for not delivering Church-bookes, See Chrysostom in
Babila, that a prelat ought to dye for the least point of ecclesiastical
privilege and priestly authority Contra Faustum li. 19. ca. 14
Bibles, ornaments in the time of Dioclesian. Chrysostom for rebuking the
pride of Eudoxia the Empress. Babilas before him for excommunicating the
Emperor a murderer. Not as though these were small things, but many so esteem
them, and think it were better to yield, or at the least not meddle, then to
deal in them. S. Auste^ having amplified the glorious martyrdom of Eleazarus
and the Machabees before the time of grace, for refusing swines flesh, not the
greatest point of their law, declares how more necessary it is that we
sustain any death pro Eucharistia, pro Baptismo: for the blessed Sacrament,
for Baptism, for any other article of the new law. As for Images only,
accounted a small point among cold Catholics, how many of al estates,
prelates, nobles, suffered either death or banishment in the time of seven
Emperors that were Imagebreakers? They considered that Quicunque totam lege^
obseruauerit, Jacob. 2.
offendit autem in vno, factus est omniu^ reus. Whosoever keeps all the law
besides, and offends in one point, he is made guilty of al. They remembered
that she was the true mother, which would have the whole child, or no part
thereof, abhorring from the division of it. He that will dye for the blessed
Sacrament, and will not for purgatory or indulgences, divides Christ, and the
law of his Church. He that mainteyneth al Catholic articles to death, and yet
boldly communicates with heretics, he is content to be half a Catholic, and
deuideth the child. But remember what our Solomon threatens by his servant
John. Noui opera tua, and fidem, and charitatem, and patientiam. I know thy
works and faith, Apoc. 2.
and charity, and patience, and many other good things, sed habeo aduersus te
pauca, quia permittis mulierem Iezabel (heresy and heretical conuenticles)
seducere seruos meos. etc. Ecce mittam eam in lectum, to seduce my servants.
Behold, I will cast her into a bed (hell fire) and qui moechantur cum ca, in
persecutione maxima erunt. And they that play the harlottes with her, shall be in
very great tribulation, they that communicate with her. Cap. 3.
And, Esto vigilans, and confirma coetera quae moritura erant. Watch well, and
strengthen other things, which were like to dye, other points which procure
eternal death, for lack of zeal and perfection. Non enim inuenio opera tua
plena coram deo meo. For I do not find thy works full before my God. Sed
habes pauca nomina, qui non inquinauerunt vestimenta sua. Howbeit thou have a
few names which have not defiled their garments, have not by communicating
polluted them selves. Li. 4. ca. 17 Math. 5. Quicu^que solucrit vnum de
mandatis istis minimis, minimus vocabitur in regno coe lorum. Whosoever
breaks one of these least commandments, shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.
Et ambulabunt mecum in albis quia digni sunt. And they shall walk with me in
white, because they are worthy: because they have not omitted any little point
of my pleasure. Such a Champion was S. Basil, of whom Theodoretus writes thus:
Cum Praefectus (Valentis Imp. Ariani Modestus) Coesaream venislet, Basilium
magnum accersitum honorifice excipit, hortatur vt cedat tempori, and ne propter
nimis curiosam dogmatum obseruationem, ea^que paruo aestimanda^, tot tantasque,
ecclesias prodat, pollicetur se Imperatoris amicitia^ ei conciliaturu^. etc.
Cui diuinus ille vir: Pueris quidem haec (inquit) oration co^uenit: At qui sunt
in sacris literis educati, ne vna^ quide^ sillaba^ diuinoru^ dogmatu^ prodi
sinunt, sed pro istorum defensione, si opus sit, nullu^ non mortis genus
libenter amplectuntur. Mat 5. Iota vnu^ aut vnus apex non praeteribit. One
lote, or one title shall not pass.
Quod autem ad Imperatoris amicitiam attinet, eam cum pietate iunctam magni
aestimo: sed si ea careat, pernitiosum esse dico. Ac cum praefectus diceret eum
ame^tem esse, me (inquit) hanc semper ame^tiam opto habere. When the Lieftenant
of Valens the Arian Emperor Modestus, came to Cesarea, he sends for Basil
the great, interteineth him honorably, erhorteth him to yield to the time, and
not to disquiet so many and so great Churches, for an ouercurious precisenes
in opinions, and that little to be accounted of, he promises him to procure him
the Emperors favor. To whom that man of God answered: This talk, in good
soothe, would do well to children, but they that are brought up in holy
Scriptures, and sacred writings, cannot abide that one syllable of any divine
article be betrayed or neglected, but for defense of them, if need be, will
willingly embrace any kind of death. And as for the Emperors frendshipp, if
it be joined with godliness, I esteem it greatly: if not, I say it is
pernicious and hurtful. Now whereas the Lieftenant said he was madd, and not
well advised, I wish (quoth he) to have this madness always. Mark, Ne vnam
quidem sillabam, Not so much as one syllable, notwithstanding the Emperor, and
although he was accounted a mad man for it, as now a days they are that
resist in little points. Again, how wary were the Catholics in not granting
any one word, no not one letter, although of it self indifferent: but that
might be wrested to heresy, as omoiousion of a like substance, to the Arrians
for omousion, and tres hypostases, for tres personas in S. Hierome, which he
calls Litum melle gladium. A sword anointed with honey. Chrisotocos, the
mother of Christ to the Nestorians. Why so? S. Ambrose, In causa Dei, Li 2.
offic. cap. 17.
vbi communionis periculum est, etiam dissimulare peccatum est no^ leave. In
Gods cause, when there is danger of communicating, when we may be thought to
take part with the^, or may in deed be induced to consent after a sort to
their errors, in that case to dissemble or yield never so little is no little
sin, which is a lesson for us to abhor from any one thing that the heretic
would gladly obtain of us, be it never so little, as to come to Church only:
yea, I know them to whom was said of the greatest Potentates, do but say you
will come to Church: which some Eleazarus would never have said: but they did
sinfully yield so far, which would never have yielded, I think, if the
heretic had not tempered his deceit to the least request that may be in that
kind: to whom it is al one, whether they do, or seem to do, when other
ignorant people think they do and may be told, that such and such promised
to do. Which seeming only, what a sin it is, see the eight and tenth reason
out of S. Ciprian, S. Austen, and the example of Eleazarus.

Of carnal affection to wife and children.
THe scriptures are full to the contrary in Gods cause. Qui amat patre^,
matrem, vxorem. etc. plusquam me, no^ est me dignus. He that loves father,
mother, wife. etc. more then me, is not worthy of me. Marc. 9.
Si oculus tuus scandalizat te, eiice eum: si manus dextera, amputa eam. If
thine eye offend theee, cast him out: if thy right hand, cut it off, better
it is to go alone to heaven, vnum oculum habentem, having but one eye, then
with thy wife or children into hell. The reward of the contrary is this. Qui
reliquerit vxorem, vel liberos. etc. Math. 19.
propter nomen meum, centuplum accipiet, et vitam aeternam possidebit. He that
shall forsake wife or children. etc. for my name, shall receive a hundred fold,
and possess everlasting life. Is this a hard case? Math. 10.
Putatis (says Christ) quod pacem veni mittere? non, dico vobis, sed bellu^:
Veni enim seperare filiu^ a patre suo, et nurum a socra sua. etc. mici homines
domestici eius. Think you that I came to send peace? No, I tell you truth, but
war: for I came to separate the son from his Father, and the daughter in
law from her mother in law. etc. The enemies of a man are they of his own
household: not because Christ is the cause of this dissension, but because this
ensued of his coming, whiles one follows him, and the other does not: the one
is a Catholic, the other an heretic: one zealous to forsake al, the other will
keep al to forsake God. Deuteronomy. 13.
And therefore in the old law it is commanded: Si surrexerit pseudopropheta,
and dixerit: Veni, seruiamus diis alienis. etc. If there rise a false precher,
and say: Come, let us go serve or woorshipp strange Gods, (that is, al false
doctrine and error,) cast thou the first stone upon that person, albeit he be
thy father, thy brother, thy sister, thy wife, quae dormit in sinu tuo, that
sleeps in thy bosom. Deuteronomy. 33.
And, Qui dixerit patri suo and matri suae, nescio vos, hic est qui facit
voluntate^ meam. He that shall say in this case to his father, and to his
mother, I know you not: he it is that does my will. Luc. 4.
Qui non odit patrem suum and matrem. etc. He that hates not his father and
mother, is not my Disciple. Epist. ad Heliodor.
S. Hierome not in the case of avoiding sin, but of seeking greater
perfection, says: Licet paruulus ex collo pendeat nepos, Sir Tho. More to his
daughter Margaret.
licet vbera quibus ne nutrierat matter ostendat, licet in limine pater iaceat,
per calcatum perge patrem, siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis euola. Solum
pietatis genus est, in hac re esse crudelem. Although thy little nephewe hang
about thy neck, although thy mother show the breasts wherewith she gave thee
suck, although thy father lie cross thy way in ye door, tread over him and
go forward, melte not once at the matter, but flee courageously to the banner
of the Cross. This is the only case, wherein crudelitie is religious
godliness. This is to be done, if our friends would stay us from entering
religion, much more in the case of professing our faith. Where those sarings
have place, Sine mortuos sepelire mortuos suos. Luc. 9.
Suffer ye dead to burye their dead, to him that would bury his father first,
and afterward follow Christ. Math. 23.
Again, Nolite vocare vobis patrem in terris: vnus est enim pater vester qui
in coelis est. Call ne man father upon earth, for you have but one father, him
that is in heaven. If your earthly father be against your heavenly, then Vnus
sit pater vester qui in coelis est. Let he only be your Father that is in
heaven: otherwise, see the danger, and the consequence of carnal persuasions
proceeding from vnfrendlye friends in S. Austen. In psa. 48
Quid eis fecerunt tentationes soeuientium? What did the temptations of them
that dealt severely prevail with them? Nothing in comparison. Maiorem
violentiam habuerunt oculi flentiu^ suorum, quam persecutiones insectantiu^.
Quam multos etram tenebant filij ne paterentur? quam multoru^ genibus
prouoluebantur vxores. etc? The eyes of their weeping friends had more force
and violence, the^ the persecutions of the hangmen. How many did the children
hold back from suffering? how many were there, at whose knees their wives
cast themselves to that purpose? And, quam multi volebant esse Catholici
manifesta veritate coniuncti, Epist. 48.
et offensionem suorum reuerendo, quotidie differebant? How many would gladly
be Catholics being convicted by manifest truth, and differred it daily,
fearing the displeasure of their friends. To whom al true Catholics must say,
as Christ to Peter, who for unskillful love to his master, would have hindered
the redemption of the world. Vade post me Satana, scandalo mihi es, non sapis
ea quae sunt dei. Come behind me Satan, thou art a block in my way, thou have
no savor or feeling of those things that God would have. This is to be said,
if he persuade us to subscribe, to take the oath, to receive, to come to their
conuenticles, that we may be sound Catholics, that we may neither offend in
hearing, nor in seeing that which we ought not, as it is written in the praise
of Lot. 2. Pet. 2.
Aspectu enim et auditu iustus erat. For he was a just man both for sight and
for hearing. Which I beseech almighty God to grant unto us, who will
undoubtedly well reward us for it: for little, short, and worldly discommodities,
unspeakable joys, everlasting bliss, heaven it self and the holy Trinity,
to which be al glory for ever.

FINIS.
(...)


