A DEFENSE of priests marriages, stablysshed by the imperial laws of the
Realm of England, against a Ciuilian, namyng him self Thomas Martin doctor
of the Civil laws, going about to disprove the said marriages, lawful by the
eternal word of God, and by the high court of parliament, only forbidden by
forayne laws and canons of the Pope, colored with the visour of the Church.
Which laws and canons, were extynguyshed by the said parliament, and so
abrogated by the convocation in their Sinode by their subscriptions.

Herewith is expressed, what moderations and dispensations have been used
heretofore in the same cause, and other like, the canons of the Church
standing in full force. Whereby is proved, these constitutions to be but
positive laws of man temporal.

Let Matrimony be honorable in all persons,
But fornicatours and adulterers God shall judge.
Hebre. xiij. The contents of this book, noted in the pagies of the same, as
in these titles following.
1 A most humble supplication, to the high and most myghtie princes the King
and Queens excellent majesty's. Fol. 1. 2 An humble suite to the right prudent
and most honorable of their council. Fol. 2. facie. 2. 3 A lowly request and
obsecration to the reverent fathers of the Church. Fol. 3. facie. 2. 4 A
tractation to the discrete judgment of the worshipful of the lower house of
parliament, and to the professors of the law. Fol. 7. facie. 2. c. 5 An
admonition to the natural subjects of the Realm, and certain notes for
their aduertisementes. Fol. 8. facie. 2. c. Fol. 9. facie. 2. d. 6 An
expostulation with certain of the Clergy, for lack of charitable
indifferency. Fol. 11. facie. 2. 7 General considerations in the book
following. 8 That Saint Paul's sentences ( for auoydyng of fornication, let
every man have his wife* etc. and, if they can not conteyne, let them marry) be
generally spoken to al persons. page 133. 136. c. 9 To seculer priests, and to
votaries. 140. b. 159. a. 10 And that continency from marriage, is a rare gift.
201. c. 204. a. 247. c. 251. 11 And that it is not like, that the Apostles did
enjoin the same to the Clergy, seeing they them selves and diverse other
Bushoppes and priests, had wives. 32. b. 42. 156. d. 12 That it is only of
man's constitutions, for continency to be annexed to orders. 71. 72. 153. c. 13
And that seculer priests and votaries have been dispensed with, to marry. 230.
14 And that our elders, and the fathers of the Church, have thought it meet
always for laws and canons to be restrained and remitted. 41.85.175.179. c.
196. a. 197. b. 209. a. 210. d. 15 And that the same have been dispensed with,
in matters of greater importau^ce then priests marriages. 204. a. 205. 267 a 16
And have been dispensed to keep their wives. 222. a. 274. a. 17 That seculer
priests ordered in England be no votaries. page 181. d. 181. c 184. a. 18 And
might marry after order, as before. 60.61.76.103.155 d. 253. d. 257.272 a 19
And that they have been before time married in the Realm. Fol. 15. b i 20 And
that it is no dishonor to the order, nor burden to the Realm for priests to
marry. page 69. 70. 59. 21 That maryages of the Clergy, made by force of the
law of the Realm, be good marriages. ^69. 238. b. 22 And that they lie not
upon the danger of the canons, to be impeached or dissolved. 67.65.58.167.171.
b. 200. d. 23 No more then the maryages of the laity, which were made in king
Henry the.viii. his time, by the act concerning precontractes. 170. d. 24 And
that forayne positive laws, with their pains concerning the same, be
abrogated, and not revived, by the act of repeal. 170. c. 25 That scripture
ought to be judge, and is most certain to be sticken unto. 73.74.98. b. 100.
c. 245. b. 26 That D. Martin has rigorously, without all moderation, expended
the cause of these said parties, justly married by law. 83.201. 27 That D.
Martin has wrested and misreported scriptures, in the deprauyng of the said
lawful maryages. 135. b. 147. a. 150 d 28 That D. Martin has perverted and
falsified the scriptures, stories, and councels aleaged by him. 53.54.105. b.
111. b 136. b. 144 a. 146 b. 148.155. a. 156 b 164.182. b. 221. b 238. d. 29
And doctors of the Church, as Origin. Ambrose. 145. b. Austen. 101. c. 104. a.
107. a. 150. b. Jerome. 108. b Isodore. 109. c Eusebius. 144. Ignatius. 118. c.
Nicephorus. 156. 106. a. 30 That D. Martin sclaundereth with evil names, as well
the matrimony of the lay men, as of priests. 66.82.163. a. 31 That D. Martin
has used to many lies, if his cause were good, insparsed in his book, part
whereof be touched. 43.44.45.50.51 52.53.54.55.56.107.115.136.145.151.157. c.
182. b. 216. c.
A preface to the reader.
WHere by chance came into my hands of late, a book sent from beyond the
sea, wherein was highly magnified a treatise written by one Thomas Martin,
doctor of the Civil law, and there much labor bestowed to disprove the
lawful matrimonies of Ecclesiastical Ministers: There came to my remembrance
a certain writing, being in my custody, gathered together, and written, in
the reign of King Philip and Queen Marie, wherein, much of the treatise of
this Ciuilian is reproved. Which said book, was written by a learned man of
that time, who shortly after dyed, meaning, if God had lent him longer life, to
have confuted more of the sandye grounds and principles of the said Ciuilian.
And thynkyng it at these days not unprofitable to be read for this
controversy, I committed it to the Printer, praying thee (good reader) to
bear with the manner of the writing in some parts thereof, being more meryly
penned, then some grave writer would peradventure allow of. In which form of
writing, somewhat he follows, as he says him self, thexample of Sir Thomas
Moore knight, in his book of Dialogues for purgatory. This writer, abstaynyng
yet from unchaste tales, such as be in his (...) book overmuch insparsed, and
partly being in adversity, gave himself to some solace to refreshe his mind
with, and yet vsyng fewer insultations and reprofes, then the unworthiness of
ye said Ciuilian, by his unreasonable challenge might have moved him to. Now,
because I would nether add to another man's writing, neither diminishe ye same,
I have presented unto thee (good reader) the whole book as it is: affirmyng
this, that thou shall find all his allegations truly aduouched by the writers
that he does name, assuring thee also (persuaded by the nature of the man, whom
I have heard well reported) that no malice or corrupt indignation moved him to
write as he does, but pure zeal to the truth of Gods most holy word: to
their instruction who would be taught in this truth: to the amendment of his
adversary in his manifest untruths: to the comfort of the^ who love God and
his verity: and to admonish all such, as be either wylfully ignorant or
malicious, well to expende this cause, which is of God and of his Gospel: and
also depely to consider, with what plagues almighty God reue^ged the contempt
of his holy institution in ye foresaid reign, to much apparaunt, and in to
much fresh remembrance to be denied. The discourse whereof, as it were worthy,
if any indifferent learned man should take in hand to set out in story, with
the circumstaunces thereof, it would rise to a houge volume, to the wonder of
the godly and wise heads of other countries, to see what we felt in these
days here in the Realm: but it is not like that the notabilitie thereof wylbe
forgotten to be transmitted to our posterity hereafter in writing. Surely, the
brief remembrance of things chanced, may appear lamentable to be
considered: as what immoderate raynes and tempests raged in one year, what
intolerable heat and drowghtes in another year, what penury and scarsitie of
corn and vittaile, what hunger and famine thereof followed, what sickness,
what agues, what strange mortalities reigned and raged, wherewith the eldest and
grauest personages of all degrees and conditions, were in great numbers wasted
and consumed, what misfortunes commonly fell to women with child in their
delyuery, what fyers chanced, far above the wont of other years of princes
reigns, in many places wastyng whole vyllages, towns, and churches. Again,
what cruelty was seen executed by fyeryng old men and women, young men, and
maids, without choice, whether the women were with child, or free from
children. What proscriptions and banishmentes of learned men out of the Realm,
and such as tarried within the Realm, how they were driven to corners,
spoiled, and impoueryshed, and such as could be gotten, shamed openly by vile
penancies and shameful recantations. And furthermore, what rapes and vyllanyes
committed, above the common practiced disorder, by strangers and foreyners,
what impunities won and purchased to the unchaste generation, to recourse
again to their old trade of lewd living* after they had confounded the
priests chaste matrimonies, so stablyshed and aucthorised by the high laws of
the Realm. Then at the last, what dishonor and loss the Realm suffered, by
losyng that notable borderer Calyce, aforetymes so valiauntly won and gotten
by king Edward the third, and to these unfortunate days (of resumyng the
great adversary of all christian Realms the Pope of Rome again) politiquely
and chargeably maynteyned and defended in good and sure possession, to the
comfort of the whole Realm, to the terror of all our forayne enemies. I say,
to consider all these particularities as they might deserve, to be set out at
length, what English heart could forbear tears, and not inwardlye sygh and
lament the misery? Which heavy infelicities, the English children yet unborn
shall weep at, and wayle, to consider the same. If these be not severe tokens
and proffes of Gods heavy displeasure toward England, for so vylely despising
his word, his light, his religion, his sacraments, his institutions: what can
be shows of his wrath and indignation? If open contempt of true matrimony
were not thoroughly punyshed and plagued in some certain maryages, which then
were so gloryously begun, so gorgiously set out and advanced, so greatly
rejoiced at, and such wonderful fruit certaynely looked for: and in conclusion
how it succeeded, how it ended, what it brought forth: Here I cease, and
leave it untouched. But let God be honored, who has all power in his hand.
Let his word and religion be reverenced, who is in a gelousie thereof. Let his
institutions be regarded, the contempt whereof he will surely plague in them
all, whatsoever they be, which despise them, as all ages and times, all lands
and dominions, have ever felt, and shall feel the same, from the first
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, until the last day of Gods fearful
judgment, when the son of man shall send his Angels to gather out of his
kingdom all slanders and offendicles: and those which commit iniquity, he
shall send into the hot burning fire, there shall be waylyng and gnashyng of
teeth: where the ryghteous shall then shine as the sun, in the kingdom of
their father.

Math. xiii.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear, says our savior Christ in his
serious warnyng: To whom, with the father and the holy ghost, all kingdom,
power, and glory, be given for ever. Amen.

Correct these faults in the book (good reader) before thou read it, so
shall thou better understand the matter, and less be deceived.
Leaf Page Line. Fault. Correction. 1 1 c. 4 finally floryshed. finally have
floryshed. 4 2 d 7 lo long so long 5 2 a 2 your our 6 1 d 1 have have had 10
1 d 4 ever. never 6 2 a 5 the their 12 2 a 3 lean leave 10 2 marg. ad
pompalianum ad Pompeianum 13 1 a 4 unto not unto 13 1 a 5 clearnes cleanes 15 1
d 3 fifty nine sixty nine 15 1 b 4 wyfes till wives, and were never forbidden
generally till 32 b 6 huc est hinc est 16 1 b 2 chauncelour chauncellours 88 c
7 beonde beyond 22 d 2 speed spyed 27 a 10 tells tolleth 125 a 9 expediently
expeditly 126 b 11 ye see ye fear 130 c 6 add. by this plague of three years.
130 c 7 imports imputes 31 a 4 your you 140 a 10 join enjoin 158 c 3
writing wyuyng 186 c 3 grosser gloser 189 a 10 promise. praise 190 c 2 be they
lay fe be they of the lay fee 193 a 2 hereses heretics ibide^. b 2
opportunity importunity disperarent no^ posse peruenire ad illu^ perfectione^
quas virgins essequibantur. desperarent no^ posse perueniri ad illa^
perfectionem quam virgins assequebantur. 54 b 5 lattuie latter 93 b 10
observation obseruant 214 d 3 in the margent 1502 1102 95 d 6 Dioretus
Theodoretus 102 c 7 in the margent, put 30. q. 5. Aliter 102 a 3 in the
margent, put 27. q. i nuptiarum 104 b 8 contort retort 107 b 5 add to 26. q.
2. Sors. 115 a 6 call can 130 b 3 redounde abound 141 a 5 in the margent, put
lit. EE 3. facie. 2. 146 b 2 in the margent, put lit. EE 3. facie. 2. 148 d 1
ca. 13, f 3 ca. 12. lit. ff 3. facie. 2 150 b 3 ca. 12. f m cap. 12. ff 3 154 a
1 in the margent, add did. 82. proposuisti in glos^ 155 d 3 in the margent,
put ca. 5. f 1 b 162 d 9 in the margent, put out page 139. 165 c 1 in the
margent, put ca. 11. y. iiii. a. ca. 13. kk. iii. ca. 10. S i. U i. ca. 13. L
i. ca. 11. x iii. 204 a 9 in the margent 32. q. 7. Quod proposuisti. 213 a 4 to
consider what To consider once again what 216 b 9 Polidore Fabian. 229 b 4 in
the margent, put did. 27. 243 c 6 innusde immunde. 244 c 10 lenity leuitie
247 b 3 emacultur emaculentur 248 a 4 chaste chastity 248 a 5 chastity chaste
251 b 5 put out That 259 a 1 so not 267 c 1 in clementia^ in elencho 274 a 1
privative primative.

To the most high, most noble and mighty Princes Philip and Marie, by the
grace and providence of God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples,
Jerusalem, and Irelande, defendours of the faith, Princes of Spain* and
Cicill, Archdukes of Austrige, Dukes of Millen, Burgon and Braband, Cou^ties of
Hasbrough, Flanders and Tiroll: Be all grace, joy and felicity, wished from
GOD the father of our Lord Jesus Christ.


the self same families and realms once aduau^ced, to the height show, but in
effect^ mere subtlety without sub^^aunce: wit Amen.

To the most honorable estates of the Counsel.
And you most honorable personages of Counsel, and Nobility of the realm,
in most lolie manner of submission, we require your great wisdoms to
consider, what becomes your high estates and vocations. Sapi. vi.
Your power is given you of GOD, and derived from him, so constituted by his
eternal decree, to Roma. xiii.
Ye hear how in the holy scriptures almighty God speaks: By me does
kings reign, and by me the makers of laws determine the right. Prove. viii.
Psalm. ii.
Be ye learned therefore, bids the holy ghost, and understand you that
quid liceat, and quid expediat, that is, what is lawful, and what expedient,
then to say after to late an experience, non putaram, had I wist. Look not so
much on the persons, whom these matters touches, as upon authority of your
laws passed, your own assuraunces: Look upon your own honors, yea, Gods
honor, in preservation of his just ordinance. Matrimony is his ordinance,
and your comfort: By it ye be acknowledged in blood rightly, to succeed your
ancestors: by that shall ye send your posterity as lawful inheritours and
successors, into your honors i. Peter. v* Ephesians. vi. i. Reg. ii*
For he has care and charge of al, and he regards no man's person.
Remember what the Lord says. Qui honorificant me, honorificabo illos, and
qui contempnunt me, erunt ignobiles: that is. They which honor me, I will make
them honorable, and they which despise me, shall be without honor.

Let your daily seen experience, yet at the last, teach you that be yet left
to fear God, not man, to advance his eternal word, Psalm. ii.
or else give place thereto? Be ye learned therefore, and suspende your sudden
judgment, till ye peruse the cause, lest God be angry, and s^ ye fall from
the right way, when his wrath shall appear, how shortly at hand he only
knows, that knows

To the honorable Prelates of the Church.
To you more over that be the reverend fathers, the honorable head Pastors of
the realm, shall my pen be turned, you that be the light of the world,
Math. v.
the salt of the earth: ye be set as watchemen of the flock, Ezech. iii.
to monishe them of such things, as for lack of knowledge, they might be
endaungered by. You be the Shepherdes appoincted to seek up the straied sheep,
Math. xviii
and to carry them home again into Gods fold, on your necks, Ezech. iii.
and whose blood shall be required at your hands, ye have taken charge of them.
No^ ceu dominium exercentes aduersus cleros, i. Peter. v.
sed sic vt sitis exemplaria gregis. Not to exercise Lordship over the Clergy,
but to be an ensample to the flock, ii. Timo. ii.
in all gentilnesse, mercifulness, and long sufferyng, toward such as be
tractable: and in the furthest of your carefulnes, yet in pitiful discipline
to them that be intractable, til God Pasce, pasce, pasce, is not, tunde, tonde,
pende, Feed, feed, feed, is not, strike, fleise, and hang them: which
precept of Christ, if it should so sound to your ears: Alas, what will your
account be, when the chief Shepherd of all, Math. xviii
shall come to take a rekonyng with his servants of so great a trust, to
whom he has committed his higheste talentes? If then he find any of you, non
dantes in tempore dimensum cibum: sed percutientes conseruos vestros, and
ancillas, edentes cum edacibus, Amos. vi.
bibentes cum ebriosis, non flentes cum flentibus, sed furentes cum furentibus,
incedentes pompatice,: Not geuyng them their duty of meat in due season:
Eze. xxxiiii
but striking your fellow servants and maids, eating with the gluttons, and
gullyng with the dronkers, not sorowyng with them that sorrow, but raging
amongst them that are mad, iettyng after a courtlike Mat. xviii.
december m^lia talentorum, legum and canonum, ten thousand talentes of laws
and Canons, that will not show some like mercy to other of their fellow
servants in debte. Sed december denariorum tantum, but of ten pence only: And
further will, iniecta manu hostili, obtorto collo, laiyng his cruel hands on
him, and hailyng him by the neck, challenge extremity of right and rigor,
with read quod debes, pay that thou oweste, and for no entreatie of knelyng
and weepyng can be moved to mercy, but will vxores and liberos, and omnia que
habent, and fieri solutione^, wife and children, and all that they have, and
payment to be made. What will he say trow you? Is this the learning and
discretion, prescribed unto your fatherly aucthorities, by the Queens highness
in her Commission, that is seen in the order of your executions, against all
learning, without pity to spoil learning? Against all discretion to proceade,
without all order of law, not discernyng man from man, cause from cause, state
from state? You have been judged heretofore in all other realms not
comparable, but far excellyng all other realms for worthiness know the whole
Clergy at this day enjoys the same, without De regia and ecclesiastica
aucthoritate how we should esteem the kings high authority, in his court of
Parliament. There did ye plainly learn us, how to take the Canons of the
Church, and how before time they have been used, allowed, and repelled again
by consent of the people, and curates, that upon your so earnest doctrine,
advisedly obtruded

Furthermore, upon your late assertions, debatementes, and sarta tecta, and our
one only fact in such wise extended, to be so irremissible, that it must
be revenged with all the rigor and extremity, that any Oze. v. Hiere. v.
Quod compleuit dominus furore^ suum, and effudit iram indignationis suae in
nos. Si sacerdotes ipsi laqueus facti sint, speculationi laqueos ponentes and
pedicas ad capiendos viros. That the Lord has accomplished his fury, and
has poured out the wrath of his indignation upon us. If the Priests them
selu^^ are become a snare, setting trappes for the watchemen, and laiyng
grinnes to catch men in. But much more then plantatio dn^i ad glorificandu^:
Esaias. vi. Psalm. xxii. ii. Peter. ii. Jude i. Esaias. x.
virga and baculus consolationis dn^i. The planting of the Lord to glorify
him: the rod and staff of the Lords comfort, now ye should be no other but
Nubes aqua^ non habentes, que a ventis circumaguntur, inescantes ai^as
instabiles, Clouds without water, which are carried about with the winds,
beguilyng inconstante souls, and so finally, ye should be virga furoris
domini, that is, the rod of Gods wrath. If great necessity, which ye
may see in the church of England, Sed qui operit odium, fraudulenter
reuelabitur malicia eius in consilio. Pro. xxvj.
Qui fodit foueam, incidit in eam: and qui voluit lapidem, reuertetur ad ipsum.
But he that covers his hateful mind fraudulently (to do hurt) his malice
shall be showed before the whole congregation. Who so ad edificationem, non ad
destructionem, to edify, and not to destroy, doubtyng nothing of your
wisdoms, that ye mean not De virgininitate.
And yet as plainly affirmyng again with saint Augustine, quod melior est in
scriptura dei veritas dei, quam in cuiusquam me^te and carne virginitas
hominis: That the truth of God, Contra Iouiniam.
contained in the Scripture of God, is better then the virginity of man,
whether it be in the mind, or flesh of any quod non sunt tanti virgins,
quanti necessarij sunt sacerdotes. Nunquid (says he) quia in exercitu
fortissimus quisquis eligendus est, idcirco non assumuntur and infirmiores,
Math. xix,
cum omnes fortes esse non possunt? Si eni^ omnes virgins esse possent,
nunqua^ dominus diceret, qui potest capere capiat. Et Apostolus in suadendo non
trepedaret, and vnusquisque co^sideret vires suas, vtrum possit virginalia, and
pudititie implere precepta, per se enim castitas blanda est, and quemlibet ad
se alliciens, sed co^siderande sunt vires, vt qui potest capere, capiat. That
virgins are not of so great price, as are necessary Priests, or men be
blown with, by the strong breathe of his book, then to sciens infirmitatem,
being skillful what infirmity meante, rebuked the hot spirit of his
disciples, saying. Nescitis cuius spiritus estis. You know not of what spirit
ye are. Filius enim hominis non venit ad perdendum animas hominum, sed ad
serua^das. For the son of man came not to destroy, but to save the souls of
men. In the mean season, Hebr. iiii:
how so ever God shall work. Hunc cum habeamus pontificem magnum, qui possit
affici sensu infirmitatu^ quod contigit ipsum tentatum esse, potest and. ijs
qui tentantur succurrere. Cum fiducia ad thronu^ gratie eius stamus vt
consequamur misericordiam, and gratiam inueniamus ad oportunium auxilium. Cui
sit oi^s honor and imperium. Amen. Sense we have such an high priest, as can
be moved with the sense of our infirmities, and has been tempted in all
things in like manner as we, but yet without sin (for, in as much as it
came to pass that he was tempted, he also can help them that are subject to
temptations) we therefore boldly stand before

To the worshipful lower house of Parliament, and students in law.
And you most worshipful Counsailers, in the honorable lower house of
Parliamente, as all other professors, and students in Laws of this noble
Realm, expende with your selves, what becomes your prudence and learning,
your authority committed unto you in this case and matter, passed and
Lacedaemonians, when a case chanced in their Common wealth, that the
insolency of the fact tended to the open violation of the majesty of the
Law, the poorer and weaker the persons were, whom it touched to prosecute
their right, the more Solon, one of the seven notable wise men of Greece, how
it might be Ius (says Cicero) eiusmodi esse debet, quod neque inflecti
gratia, neque perfringi potentia, The law (says Cicero) must be so
ordered, that it be not released for favor, neither borne down by power, nor
yet corrupted by money: for if it should be not oppressed only, but also
cowrrdly forsaken, or yet more negligently

An admonition to the natural and loving Subjects of the realm.
Among the earnest warnynges, that our savior Christ left behind him, to
admonish his electes to the worlds end (good Christian reader) I read none
in my judgment, to be had in more deep remembrance, then such, as when he
bids us beware of false Prophets, Math. vii.
which come unto us in Shepes clothyng, being inwardly rauishyng Wolves.
Mark. iiii. Luke. viii.
Take heed says Math. xiii.
and false Prophets, and shall show miracles and wonders to deceive, if it
were possible, even the very elect. But take ye head, behold I have showed you
all things Collos. ii.
as in his Epistle to the Collossians, saying: Beware lest any manne come and
spoil you, through Philosophy, and deceiptfull vanity, through the
traditions of men, and ordinances of the world, and not after Christ. Let no
man make you shoot at a wrong mark, which after his own imagination,
walks in the humbleness and holiness of Angels, in things which he never
saw, without cause puffed up with his fleshly mind, ii. Peter. i^ Jude.
and holds not the head. etc. The Other Apostles ii. Timo. iii.
Fathers, Counsels and Canons, wonder of wit, miracle of learning, pretense
of Angelical holiness: the more head ought to be taken, lest such as have
not their senses exercised in Gods word, and grounded upon the stable rock
of the same, by such worldly tentations, begin

The more dangerous the hurt is, that ensues to us of this deceipte, the
more studiously should we look about us, lest unawarely we be caught
therewith: Yea, the more advisedly we be before warned, by no less monitour
then the redeemer of our souls, the son of God, the wisdom of his father,
and the ofter we be put in mind by his Apostles, who in spirit knew what
would follow: the more without excuse must we needs be, if we will be
wilfully led blind and deluded. To the intent therefore, that either the
writer of the late set forth book, to write more advisedly, then he shall be
proved to have done,

Summarie notes and observations, to admonish the Reader of D. M. book, as
after in particularitie shall be showed.
The first note.
M. Doctor, in the allegation of his aucthours, uses violence in the
translation of them, to hurt the sense, and misreporteth them, leauyng out
that might open the truth, and puttyng into the text, that is not in the
aucthour: Or else draws and wresteth them to other senses, then the aucthours
did intend in so Pighius, and one or two such more, who were blinded them
selves, and be leaders of the blind.

The second.
As he ascribes to the procedyng preachers (for so he calls them) such
sayings and assertio^s, as himself pleases to slander them with: so he
makes them to speak in such sort, that it may

The third.
Thirdly, he puts no difference betwixt marriage in a priest, and notoriouse
adultery, or incest. And what so ever any aucthor writes against horedome, he
applies the same against marriage, and makes the aucthors so to speak
untruly, and so applies all his laws and canons to priests marriages, where
in deed a great part of them were made against priests, that lived in
adultery,

The fourth.
Then in process of his book he extends his wit to charge al married
priests without all exception, of heresy, lechery, inceste and treason, to
make them odiouse, and to endau^ger them to the rulers and people: And uses no
moderation to any of them all, but pronounces deprivation to be the least that
they all deserve. And other whiles in hot zeal seems to desire an universal
destruction of them. Sometime notyng them by the multiplication of their
children to pestre the realm, whereby the inhabitants

The fifte.
He in the perusing of the canons and laws, ever forces the rigor of the^
against married priests, and ever wills the self same Canons to be revived
for open fornicators in other priests, nor for

The sixte.
We may also note justly his inconstrancie: for other whiles, to make for his
purpose, he contendeth that the rules and traditions of the primative church,
be of most authority, and must be obeyed before all other ordinances. And
at an other time, he will have it stand for a ground, that the latter laws and
councels, derogate the first, and so ought to way in the discussement of this

The seventh.
His probations and confutations which he brings in, be seldom out of god
his word, except it be contorted: but altogether of humain authority, of
writers, doctors, canons, and decrees, and that commonly where they write
furthest dissonant from god his word and other good writers, and some times
from them selves. And thereupon, he is here confuted and answered by the self
same men in other places of their works, and by other of like authority,
for reason (as saint Hierome says) it is Quod Sup^er Mat. cap. xxiii.
That which has not authority of the word of god, may as easily be
rejected, as received.

The eight.
And in the mean time till this doctor can conciliate their sayings and
writings, either with the scriptures, or betwixt them selves: I advise thee
gentle reader to follow the counsel of Saint Ciprian. Si in aliquo mutauerit
and vacillauerit veritas, ad originem dominicam and euangelicam and apostolicam
traditionem reuertamur, Ad Pompalianum.
and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde and ordo That is: If the truth
should be in doubt, or stagger in any matter, then let us return to the
Lords original, to that which is delivered to us by the evangelists and
apostles, and let the reason of our doing rise thence, whence rose both order
and oryginall. Super cap. ^x* Hie.
For as S. Hierome says, Nec parentum We should not follow the oversight of
our parents, or yet of our elders, but the authority of scriptures, and
supreme rule of god his doctrine. If ever it was needful and necessary to
resort to Chrisostomes rule, writing upon this place of Mathewe the xxiiij
chapter. Tune qui in judea sunt, fugiant ad montes, then they which be in
Jury, let them flee to the mountains: it is more then necessary now,
perceauyng antichriste his hooste, and army of men's Laws and Canons so
fast mustre together, to deface and debell Christ his doctrine de vnitate
Ecclesie, against the Donatistes, who only challenged the catholic Church to
be with them: so may he do now most profitable service against these apishe
catholics, that resemble sorilie the true catholics in face only, and else
in never a part beside.

The ninthe.
Remember this also, good reader, that we do not deny, but

The tenthe.
Know this, that howsoever chastity is annexed or dependyng upon the order of
priesthode: yet it is merely and intierly by by the hands of them that were
present, and so presented

The eleventh.
Expende furthermore, that we be not ignorant, but that the first councels and
canons for the most part, give no liberty to a priest or a Bishop once
consecrated, to mary: And that the latter councelles forbid a priest, married
before his orders, to keep company with his wife: And that the aucthoures of
the Latten Church, require such ministers in the most part of their
writings. But then again, it must be considered that the same Councels and
writers, require a chaste clargie in deed, and makes

The twelft.
Right so, we do not deem, but that vows advisedly made to god with such
circumstaunces as the old fathers require in a vow, be to be observed, and
that it is not lawful for any man of his

An expostulation with certain of the Clergy.
Here I might cease of further excityng any other states of the common
wealth, to the consideration of equity, and moderation in this cause, if I
feared not, that the rest of the Clergy, as yet unspoken to, would be grieved
to be passed over in silence, as either neglected or contempned; by whose
importunity (as the triplici differentia, that is, to be of three sorts.
Some for the brotherly pity that is espied in them, to be only spoken to,
but with interpellation, with many for want of indifferente affection, to be
expostulated with, but the most part so

And as I must in this my writing, desire them which be advanced, or may
be, by the depression of their brethren, to take indifferently that, which I
shall speak confusedly, either here in this my appellation unto them, or in
the body of the book following, distributyng the weight and charge of my
words, upon the said three sorts of the Clergy, as of congruence they may
be seen worthy: so must I also entreat hos fratres meos lugentes, that is,
these my mournyng brethren, thus bereued from their spiritual children, daiely
hearing paruulos suos petentes that is, their little ones crauyng for bread,
where no man is found to break it unto them, I say, I must request of them,
not to be offended with me, though that I do not entreat their cause more
sharply, and egarlie then I do. For as I do know, that to these persons,
musica in luctu sit importuna narratio, mirthe in mournyng, is pastyme out of
time: so the other may chance to judge more obtusiores aculeos, more blunte
pricks in your minds whom it does concern. But let them both yet
remember, quod aliquando etiam holitor valde oportuna loquutus est: that
sometime the poor herb seller, has spoke well to the purpose. How soever it
shall be reputed, my mind was to do good in the cause, which I take to be
gods, and the common wealths, without exasperating either parties, the one
with to much anger, the other with to much heaviness. My desire is, that
they who be grieved in deed, and Omnia quecunque fecisti nobis o domine in
vero iudicio fecisti, quia peccauimus and recessimus a te. Whatsoever thou have
done unto us, O lord, according to thy right judgment haste thou done all
unto us, because we have sinned, and departed from thee. Not yet so much for
conscience in the fact it self, as for some evil circumstaunce, precedyng or
following the fact, partly known to God in the secret of their hearts, partly
perceived to the eyes of the world, in their offendyng. And yet
notwithstanding, upon their meek repentance, inter (secundum deum) lugentes,
quibus tandem retribuetur consolatio. Emo^gest those, who (in the fear of God)
do mourn, who at the length shall receive comfort. So again would I wish,
ii. Cor. vii.
that such as for the success that is grown to them, by this alteration,
where others be cut of, and they graffed in, and so might be inter secundum
mundum ridentes, qui iam gaudent and exultent, amongst them that after the
world do laugh: who now rejoice and triumph, that yet, ne efferantur animo,
sed timeant: potest enim deus denuo inserere illos, that they be not pufte up,
but fear rather, for God can pla^te Luke. xxi.
that they take heed, Ne corda eorum grauentur crapula and ebrietate, and
curis huius mundi: that their hearts be not overcome with surfettyng and
dronkennes, and the cares of this world. And again, even so to confess to
God in their hearts, quod non propter mundiciem manuum suarum, propter
aequitatem Psalm. ixxii.
propter dolos posuisti eis, and deiecisti eos dum alleuarentur. That these
things happened unto them, for the clearness of their own hands, or the
vprightnes of their own hearts, but rather let the^ consider diligently, that
the judgment of the lord is unsearchable, yea, let them rather fear, least
that may truly be verified upon them: For their crafty dealings, have thou
made an end of the^, and whilst they were in the way to prosperity and
honor, thou did clean overthrow Amice, quomodo huc intrasti? Math. xxii.
Friend, how came thou in hither? And again, let them consider what purposes
and intendementes be in their hearts, to do their offices, to walk, in what
faieth, in what charity: that at the last they make their final answer
Luke. xvi.
when God shall call them to an account, with read rationem villicationis
tuae, render an account of thy Stewardship: yea, let both the parties (as we
all ought) have this depely in remembrance, quod mundus transit and
concupiscentia eius, that the world passes away, and the lust thereof. Vt
qui gaudent, sint tanqua^ qui non gaudeant: i. Ihon. ii. i. Cor. vii.
and qui plorant, sint tanqua^ qui non plorant, preterit eni^ figura huius
mu^di. That they which rejoice, be as though they rejoiced not: and they that
lamente, as though they lamented not, for the fashion of this world fleeteth
away. And here I proteste before God, to all the realm, my mind is Phil. ii.
as of the Clergy: Qui in hoc negotio suum penitus negotium agunt: quae sua
sunt querunt, no^ que Jesus Christi, non que ecclesiae, non principis, non
regni. That is, who in this matter, handle their own business, seeking their
M. Richard Wilkes. M. Bradford Nicholas Bullingham Doctor May A great number.
D. Ponnet. D. Tailor. D. Parker.
where some men have been deprived never conuicte, no, never called. Some
called that were Pelagius the second, made this offer to the Subdeacons: that
either they should put away their wives, or else if they would retain them
still, to forgo their benifices. And Polidore writes. Polidorus.
Exemplo post homines natos importunissimo. An example says he, most
insolent and damnable, that Gregory the first, next immediately followyng,
thought to be very unreasonable, and contrary to Christ's precept, and
therefore did eftsoon release it. We read in our Chronicles, and records of
English proceadynges, how that Munkishe Archbishop Dunston, Du^stanus quasi
rex and r^gis imperator, est effectus. etc.
thondered out yet never so boisterously, nor lightened so terriblie, to deprive
the married seculer Priests in Winchester, Worcester, Elie, and such other
places, that he proceeded flatly to deprivation without conditions and respites
offered, or without form of judgment granted, S^premnem ei poenitenciam i^
dixit, vt in toto hoc spatio corona^ regni non gestar^^.

Antoninus in croni^is part ^ titulo. 16. ca. 6. page 3. etc.


though he had king Edgar Aut canonice (inquit) est viuendum, aut de ecclesijs
exeundum. Either (says he) must ye live according to the canons, or else must
ye go out of your churches. And then it follows in the story. Ex quo factum
est, vt complurimi ecclesiarum clerici, dum contemnerent proposita condition
corrigi, authoritate pontificis sunt expulsi, and monachi introducti. Whereupon
followed, that, for that the clerks of very many churches refused, with that
offered condition to be reformed, by authority of the Bishop they were
expulsed and Dunstanus itaque, hijs que rationabiliter postulabantur, contraire
nolens coacto concilio, Ex veteri historia Eliensis ecclesiae, and ex Antonino.
etc Ioannes Capgraue in vita Dunstani.
wintonia^ venit. Vbi ex sententia totius concilij That is to say, Dunstan
therefore, not mindyng to go against this petition, which was so reasonably
requested, gathered a Council, and came to Winchester, where he had the
victory of the adversaries, by the judgment of the whole Council. At the
debatement of which great controversy, Brithnodus the first Abbotte of
Elie, was present with all the other multitude of Polidore) the Monks
retained the unjust possession, Lib. vi.
by the help of God, or rather (says he) by the help of man, and the
Priests put back for that time. But yet thus was not the matter ended. An
other Council was holden at Winchester, and an other miracle there wrought,
that is: the ioystes brake, and the plaunchers fell down suddenly, while the
matter was in examination. But holy Dunstane and all his friends Odo being
Bishop of Winchester, and elected Archbishop of Canterbury, to take that
See the more hololie, professed him self first a Monk, as in Polycronicon is
lib. vi. where Treuisa the translater, reproves that fond superstition, seeing
that neither Christ, neither his Apostles were Monks or Friars, says he.
Yea, we read in story, that Ihon the.xiij. Pope of Rome, granted a decree,
at the request of king Edgar, and by the instigation of the foresaid three
Monkishe Bishops, vidz, Dunstan, Ethelwolde, and Oswold, that no secular
Priest should be eligible to these Sees, but only professed Monks, as by his
decree appears. Thus we see in story, that Dunstan, with the help and
assistaunce of his two sworn brothren, Ethelwolde Bishop of Winchester, and
Oswald of doubt. Beside all this, the stories make no mention of any
separation, Anselmus days, as is aforesaid, who was Archbishop of
Canterbury, eight score years after: Of whose doings Polidore writes thus.
Sed illud in primis non magis just quam pie egit, quod aliquos de religione
male meritos, aut contra fas iusque sacerdotia consequutos partim desecrandos,
partim ipsis sacerdotijs priuandos decreuit. Verum cum bonam illorum partem
postea poenituisset misericordia motus, pari studio apud po^tificem rem egit,
vt ad pristinam dignitatem rite restituti fuerint. that is. But this with the
first did the said Anselme, both justly and godly: Nauclerus story writer,
Nauclerus.
that when that nicromancer Hildebrand, called Gregory the vij. as heady as he
was, and as extreme as he is reported to be, did after long deliberation, put
it ever to the election Mattheus Parisiensis writes. Anno dn^i. 1074.
Sacerdotes vxoratos a diuino officio amouit, nouo exe^plo and vt multis visum
est inconsiderato preuidicio, co^tra that is: he removed married priests from
ministratio^, vsyng therein a strange example, and as many thought an
inconsiderate prejudice, against the judgment of holy fathers: Platina?
Sigibert. Beno.
yet Sigibert, a story writer, shows his holiness full out: And one Beno,
which was a Cardinal, in this said Pope his days, and therefore, a more
trusty witness for his eyes, then Platina for his ears, who followed a good
while after, records how prodigiouse a man he was, in his wilful doings,
all Barnard (says) facitis hec quia potestis: Ad Eugenium
sed vtrum etiam debeatis question est. Shall I say also with him: Ad honorem
quibusque suum, gradumque conseruandum positi estis, non inuidendum, ye do this
says he, because your power serves to do it, but whether you should do it,
there is the question. Ye be placed in your offices to conserve every man in
his honor and degree, not to envy them thereof. But this I must say, for
discharge of my conscience, yet I speak it to no person by name, but to the
wall, that where ye have learned at Grammar school, a verse comprehendyng
four kinds

Clamitat ad dominum vox sanguinis, vox Sodomorum:
Vox oppressorum, merces detenta laborum.
The verse is so terrible, I list not to rhyme it.
The voice of blood, the voice of Sodomites, the voice of the Ecc. xxxiiii
when all these voices be joined together? Ecclesiasticus says, Panis
egentium vita pauperum est, qui defraudat eum homo sanguinis est. The bread of
the neadie, is the life of the poor, he which defraudeth him of it, is a
bloody man. And further, he that bereaueth a man of his bread deserved by his
sweat, is as a man that slaieth his neighbor. Gene. xviii
And again, the cry of the Sodomites and Gomoreans is multiplied, and their
sin is ouermuche increased. Eccl. xxxv.
The Lord will not despise the prayers of the fatherless, nor yet the widow,
when her sigh only speaks

Iudicet ille, Ambro sup psalm. cxviii. 3 q 8. Iudicet.
qui ad pronunciandu^ nullo odio, nulla offensione, nulla leuitate ducatur.
Bonus iudex nihil ex arbitrio suo facit, and proposito domesticae voluntatis,
sed iuxta leges and iura pronunciat, statutis iuris obtemperat, non indulget
propriae voluntati, nihil preparatum and meditatum de domo defert, sed sicut
audiuit, ita iudicat, and sicut se habet natura, decernit. Obsequitur legibus,
non aduersatur, examinat causae merita, non mutat. Let him be a Judge, that
is led with no hatred to give sentence,

Licet non nunquam accidant quae in sacerdotalibus sint, reprehendenda
personis, Did. 45. lice^.
plus tamen erga corrigendos agat beneuolentia quam seueritas, plus exhortatio
quam comminatio, plus charitas quam potestas. Sed ab ijs qui quae sua sunt
quaerunt, non quae Jesus Christi, facile ab hac lege disceditur: and dum
dominari magis quam consulere subditis placet, honor infiat superbiam, and quod
prouisum est ad concordiam, tendit ad noxam. Although there chance many times,
things worthy of blame in puffs them up into pride, so that, that thing
which was Eleutherius Pope, In moralibus.
cuius open Lucius rex Britanniae factus est Cristianus, decreuit i^ter caetera,
neminem de suo gradu dei^ci debere, nisi accusatus reus criminis conuinceretur:
exemplo seruatoris, qui errore^ Iudae licet rei, nondum tamen conuicti, ita
aequo animo tulit, vt quicquid interim egisset pro dignitate apostolatus, ratum
firmumque manserit: Prohibuit etiam ne absente eo quem accusator raeum facit,
vlla in causa decerneretur. Hanc sententiam Damasus Papa co^firmauit. Plat^na.
Martinus in Chronicis. That is. Eleutherius Pope, by whose means Lucius king
of Britain became Damasus the Pope confirmed. Platina. Martinus i^ Chronicis.
Whereupon charge Gregory, that all Ecclesiastical matters be the more
diligently and carefully considered, after long proofs and examinations, that
thereby through the spirit of charity and peace, all matter of slander, all
presumption of envious men, and all oppression of our poor brethren, be
expelled out of the Church. And as no man of the brotherhod would ^e glad, to
be prejudiced by the judgment of other: even so let not himself rashely do to
an other, that he would not have done to him self. Did. 50. ponde
That sentence (says Calixt) which excludes mercy. I require you brethren,
neither to stand Cicero) satis est homines imprudentia lapso^ non erigere,
vrgere vero iacentes aut precipitantes impellere, certe est inhumanum. Sed
illudere etiam quos afflixeris, extrema improbitatis linea est in spiritu
charitatis, in a charitable spirit, be myndfull to repress the rage of
others, and to be sollicitours to save, and not to destroy. Even in like manner
must charity compel men, not to judge evil of many others of the Clergy
beside: as well for their indiffrencie, as also for their continency, who by in
occulta interrogatione tentationis, De virgin. Capi. xlii^^.
i. in secret discusmente of their temptation, (as S. Augustine writes) is
perceived in them selves, and by further assistaunce of the said grace, need
not that remedy, that other were of conscience compelled to resort to: to
which kind of men no worse shall be said of me at this time, but that they
glorify God, in the thankful use of their gift, that they despise not the
poor Publicans, confessyng their infirmities. Nam vnusquisque propriu^ donu^
habet a deo, alius quidam sic, alius autem sic. For every man has a peculiar
gift given unto him of God, some after Cap. xl.
Qua equitate ille faciat alios sic, alios aute^ sic, homini nosse aut
impossible, aut omnino difficile est: and fortasse ideo latet, vt plus
timeatur, and minus superbiatur. With what upright indifferency God has
endued some men, to be of this sort, and some of an other, that is, either
altogether impossible to be known of man, or else very hard: and perhaps it
is therefore hid, that Aug. de virgin.
Sectatores and sectatrices perpetuae continenciae and sacrae virginitatis
admoneo, vt bonum suum ita preferant nuptijs, ne malum iudicent nuptias: neque
fallaciter sed plane veraciter ab apostolo dictu^ nouerint, qui dat nuptum been
facit, qui non dat, melius facit: and si acceperis vxorem non peccasti, and si
nupserit virgo, non peccauit. I admonish them that be continual folowers of
continency, and holy virginity, both men and women, that they so prefer
their good state unto marriage, that they judge not marriage to be evil:
Gregory, Ita preeminere virginitatem coniungio sciant, In pastora. part. in
Ca. xxix
vt tamen se super coniuges non extollant, quatenus dum and virginitatem
praeferunt, and se postponunt, and illud non deserant, quod melius esse
estimant and se custodiant, quo se inaniter non extollant, and ne superioris
ordinis celsitudine, se caeteris praeferant, cum ab inferioribus That they may
know, how virginity does so excel marriage, that yet they do not extol
them selves above the married: so that while they prefer virginity, and bace
them selves, they neither forsake that which they esteem to be better, and for
all that keep them selves so, as they do not vainlie exalte them selves,
neither prefer the^ selves to others, by reason of the excellency of their
higher state, knowing how great things, are better done of their inferiors.
By which humility and charity, they should move God, not only to stablishe
in them that, which he has begun, and to Ceteras virtutes verae
virginitatis pedissequas, Aug. in Psalm. 75.
quae vere ornant ipsam virginitatem, and sine quibus ipsa virginitas vel in se
mortua est, Chri. i. Co. vii.
vel etiam turpis Nam in hoc definita est virginitas, vt sit sancta and corpore
and spiritu, vt adhereat deo absque vlla distractione. other virtues, which as
waityng maids follow virginity, which in deed do beautify virginity, and
without the which virginity her self either is as dead, either is scarce
cleanly. For herein is virginity certainly described, that it be holy both
in body and spirit, that it clean unto God without any separation. Such as
these be, qui ita humiliter de se sentiant, vt supra caeteros se non
extollant, that think so lowly of them selves, that they extolle not them
selves above others: for that they be, docti diuinitus vt diligant inuicem,
taught of God to love one an other: Romans v.
Et quia charitas dei diffusa est in cordibus eorum per and because the love of
God is powered into their hearts through the holy Ghost, which is given to
them, they need no other impulsor to move them, no other sollicitour to
insist upon them, to do good in the turn of their time. Ephe. vi.
Illud scientes, quod vnusquisque quod fecerit boni, hoc reportabit a dn^o.
Knowing this, that what good thing soever any man does, the same shall be
rewarded at the Lords hand.

But as for such other, what name soever they have, that neither have the true
chastity in deed, nor yet have any zeal or desire thereto, and yet make most
boste thereof, which of mere malice ii. Timo. iii.
Homines amantes sui, auari, fastuosi, superbi, maledici, ingrati, carentes
affectu, calumniatores, intemperantes, immites, proditores, praecipites,
inflati, habentes formam pietatis, sed qui vim eius abnegarint. etc. Men that
shall stand highly in their own conceit, covetous, great bosters, proud in
them selves, with the hurt and contempt of yet deniyng the virtue and truth
thereof in effect. Such be they i. Timo. i.
But yet saint Paul writes, neither understanding what they speak, nor what
they affirm: of whom in conclusion, the last part of saint Paul's prophecy,
shall be fulfilled, how finely so ever they counterfete it out: Scz. Because
they resist the truth, as they be men corrupt in heart and mind, and for
that they err in the faith, they shall not prevail at length, for their
madness shall be uttered to all men.

But as the number of good and sincere men has been always the fewer: So at
these days may we see, what swarms there be of ignorant and wilful men, i.
Timo. iiii.
of whom S. Paul makes mention, which have their consciences marked as with
an hot from, in Mat. 24. tract. xiiii.
Duri praeceptores, as Origin says: Qui non solum quae docent non faciant, sed
etiam crudeliter and sine misericordia, and non secundum existimationem viriu^
vniuscuiusque audie^tis: Sed maiora ipsa virtute ipsorum iniungu^t vt puta qui
prohibent nubere, and ab eo quod expedit, ad immoderata^ immunditia^
compellunt. Hard masters, as Origin says, who not only leave those things
undone, which they teach, but also inioigne cruelly, and without any mercy,
greater things then them selves be able to bear: not according to the
expending of the strength of every one of their auditors: namely they Quia
polluta est and men's, and illoru^ conscientia, for both their mind and
^o^science are poluted: of conscience they do not that which they In quest.
noui and vet testamenti.
faith S. Augustine. Sed hoc in hypocrisi, inimicitiarum causa facere
denotantur corrupta mente, aliud scien^es, aliud profitentes. etc. Et quia
sanctitatis and castimoniae amatores esse se simulant, nuptias esse dicunt
damnandas, vt per hoc commende^tur, and populum a veritate auertant. That they
do, they do it in hypocrisy only for enemities sake, of a corrupt mind,
knowing one thing, and professyng an other. etc. And because they would appear
to be lovers of holiness, and chastity, they say marriages be naught, so to
win a praise, and to turn the people from a truth. For that, they be proud
of their false righteousness Sermon de anathe.
furibundi, nugaces, contentiosi qui neque faeiunt quae dicunt, neque de quibus
affirmant: in hoc vno tantum audaces quod Dogmata statuant, and Anathemata
declarant ea quae maxim ignorant. Furious, vain ianglers, contentiouse,
which knows neither what they say, nor forseeth what they do affirm. In
this point only wondrous bold, that they make articles of the faith, and that
they award cursses and excommunication, Multi sacerdotes, says he, pauci
sacerdotes. Multi nomine, pauci opere. Many priests, but yet few priests.
Many in name, but few in work. And yet these be they, which must and will
have the highest rooms in Synodes and Conuocations, which will not be judged
by their faith, De prescri. haere.
but by their persons, contrary to Tertulians rule; ex personis probamus
fidem, an ex fide personas? Do we allow no others then successors of the
Pharisees, says Chrysostom: Prophetas quidem and Martyrs colunt, filios
autem Prophetarum and Martyru^, Homelia. 4 in Matthew.
persequu^tur. Mortuorum sanctorum cultores, and viuoru^ persequutores. Si
autem martyrs colunt, quasi qui veram confessi sunt fidem: quare persequu^tur
eos qui fidem eorundem Prophetarum and Martyrum confite^tur. etc. They honor
the Prophets and Martires, but they persecute the children of both Prophets
and Martires. They reverence the saints that be dead, and persecute such
saints as be a live. If they esteem the Martires, as who confessed the true
faith: why persecute they them, that profess the self same faith, of those
Prophets and Martires? Chrysostom perceived it true in his time: so does
holy Barnard complain of it in his days: Heu, heu, domine deus, quia ipsi
sunt in persequutione tua primi, Sermonede co^uersione Pauli. Et sup Cantic,
sermon. 33.
qui videntur in ecclesia tua primatum diligere, gerere principatum. Misera
eorum conuersatio, plebis tuae miserabilis subuersio est. Copiosissimae
siquidem pietatis inueniuntur in accipie^da animarum cura, and de animarum
salute nouissima cogitatio est. And again, Paucos habemus heu pastores, multos
autem excommunicatores, and vtinam sufficeret vobis lana and lac, sititis enim
sanguinem. Quapropter vae generationi huic, a ferme^to Phariseorum quod est
hypochrisis,

Alas, alas, O Lord God, says Barnard, they be the first in persecutyng
thee, which be seen to love the first rooms in the Church, and to challenge
the primacie. Their miserable conversation, is the miserable ruin of thy
people. They be of a very large devotion to take cure of souls, but as for the
health of souls, is furthest from their thought. Alack few Pastors we
have, but many excommunicators, and would to God that the ad Tit. ca. ^.
and we do, says saint Hierome, not for the love of the Theophilact
writes, they are but praecursores antichristi, in Mat. 24.
and quia multiplicabitur iniquitas per imposturas antichristi, exasperabuntur
and efferi erunt homines, ita vt neque cu^ familiarissimis seruent charitatis
vinculum, sed mutuo se tradent. They be forerunners of Antichrist, and because
wickedness Contra auxentium.
What a Church, says Hilarious, is this: that is terrible by imprisonyng of
others, where the true Church was imprisoned them selves: that will chase
away the Priests and Ministers, which would gladly have lived in their
natural countries, without offendyng of Laws, but yet for the quarrellyng
captious extremity, and ragyng of diverse, are compelled to cast Hierome, by
the search of all stories that I have read, find any other to have divided
the Church, or that have seduced the people out of Gods house, beside them
which were set of God, as Priests and Prophets. These be they, which be
turned into captious snares, and stumbling blocks in all places. Living as
Daniell Prophesied of them in lusts, Ca. 11. Iudae.
burning in concupiscentes Ephe. 4.
Omnis amarulentia, and tumor, and ira, and vociferatio, and maledicentia,
tollatur a vobis cum omni malitia. Let all bitterness, and fearsnesse, and
wrath, and roryng, and cursed speaking be put away from you, with all
maliciousnes. And yet for their further instruction, I will send them to a
sermon of saint Augustines making, sent to the holy brethren, that lived in
holy chaiste life in wilderness: and challenged de condigno, of just
worthiness, to have the name among the people. And lest they might be
deceived, to take one for an other, let them bear in mind, that the Sermon
is the.xlvij. and not the.xxxvij. for this makes not for them. For in this
they may read, that fornication is far more forbidden to a Priest, then is
marriage, and there should they read, that Priests had somewhere wives, and
yet in such an abstinence, as saint Augustine writes, that if these
aforesaid chaste Prelates, went no ofter to their harlottes, then S. Augustine.
Audite nonfratres charissimi, sed principes Sodomitarum, percipite auribus
legem dei vestri populus Gomorrae. Audite, and auditum facite filijs vestris, O
gens plena peccato, grauis i^iquitate, semen nequam, filij scelerati. Ecce
dereliquistis deu^, blasphemastis sanctum Israel, and alienati estis retrorsum.
A planta pedis, vsque ad verticem, non est in vobis sanitas. Ideo terra vestra
deserta, civitates vestrae succe^duntur igni. Harken, O ye, not sweet
brethren, but Sodomiticall Princes, hear the law of your God, ye people of
Gomorra, hear ye, and make known also unto your children, O ye people laden
with iniquity, and full of sin, ye Tu autem, Apoca. 22.
and to all men in general, thus will I say: Qui nocet, noceat adhuc, and qui
in sordibus est, sordescat adhuc, and qui iustus He that does evil, let him
do evil still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he
that is rightuous, let him be more rightuous: and he that is holy, let him be
more holy, until the Lord come shortly, and his reward is with him, to
render unto every man, according as their deeds shall be. Concludyng with the
last words in all scripture, Amen, etiam veni domine Jesus, So be it, even so,
come Lord Jesus. Gratia domini nostri Jesus Christi, cum omnibus vobis. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.

General considerations.
AS it stands all men in hand, to look well Articl. 8.
in the articles of Commission: I say it may appear that many of them, have
neither eye to that, which God in his law requires of them, neither Math.
15. b. Luke. vi.
Si caecus caeco dux fuerit. etc. If the blind lead the blind, both shall
fall into the diche. For if his authority be

Now to give you some taste of his sincerity till we shall expende, how he
handles him self in the body of his book, note his clearkelie dealyng in
his charitable preface, or Epistle written to the Queens highness, wherein
because ye might judge of what here he is of, it pleases him to tread in
Albertus Pighius steps right up and down, as in most of his wrytinges,
reasons, and allegations, and in corruptyng of the same he follows him at the
hard heales. Controuersia. 15.
Pighius in his book of controversies, complains of the common contempt of
Priests, As Mass Priests. Dirige Hriestes. Chaun^t^rie Priests. Sacrificyng
Priests, to the great injury of Christ's blessed sacrifice, once for all
made by his blood, for the renussion of synn.
over many: secondly too the great unworthiness of them for lack of learning
and knowledge: and thirdly to the vile sclaunderous incontinent lie^ they
openly lived in, as this Ciuilian also in like form of words does utter, the
self same grounds out of the which, spring this open contempt of Priests
here in England, saving that it pleases this Ciuilian, not to lay the whole
burden of this matter, in thadmission and choice of the Ordinaries, as Pighius
does, but charge the patrons, from whose corruption patrones of Benefices
for coueteousnesse sake, are in this matter

But sir Ciuilian I pray you, if this matter be worthy so tragicallie to be
cried out on, what means it, that it is not at the most ambitiously? And yet
be not repelled by the Ordinaries? Pighius his leader, and lantern in this
whole cause, tells him not so far: or except he forgotte of purpose, what
great occasion was offered thereby to and perfect virginity, who can not
err, as of the head of your Augusti. de anchona.
and yet not bound, to succeed them in holiness of good life: and that they
make laws of prohibition of marriage, and yet be no Ta^ianistes: and that they
may apply, or rather abuse the textes of Scripture, speaking against the
works of the flesh, Qui i^ carne funt. etc.
contrary to the fruictes of the spirit, to the estate of wedlock, and yet
will not be noted faulty in the condemnation of Matrimony: and that their
Canons be of so high authority, excellyng the scriptures, that the scriptures
do but Leo ye first, who cries out against the^, which commit the Pastoral
dignity, Episto. 44.
to the unworthy. Hear ye what he says. No^ est hoc inquit co^suiere
populis, sed nocere: nec prestare regime^, sed augere discrime^: principatus
que^ aut seditio extorfit, aut ambitus occupauit, ipsius inicij sui est
perniciosus exe^plo, and difficile est, vt bono peraga^tur exitu, quae malo
su^t i^choata principio.

In Acta Apost. con. 3.
And where is the fault to be laid of these unworthy Ministers? upon the
Patrons? or upon the Ordinaries? let Chrysostom be judge, if the Priest or
Deacon do commit any offense, qui se non continet, nubat, and melius est
nubere qua^ vri, he that can not live chaste let him marie, for it is better
to take a wife then for to burn in filthy lusts. When kept they their
vessels in honor and sanctificatione in honor and sanctification, Ad Heb. 13.
who affirms Matrimony to be honorable in all persons, and the bed
undefiled. But yet ye say, that this forsed chastity, was by the counsels
confirmed, by all thauncient writers approved, and that this liberty of
marriage, tends altogether to the contempt of the holy institution, and thereby
also to the overthrow of Christ's religion, and that this teaching of marriage
began with Lechery, continewed with couetise, and ended in treason, these be
your own slanderous words Master Martin. Which how true they be, the
world may sone Judge. Actum esset, (vt inquit Erasmus) in rebus humanis, si
malitiae par animo suppeteret nocendi facultas. It weere the ruin and
overthrow of all men's fortunes, if man had like power, to hurt in deed, as
his malice were ready to wish the same. And thus having rehearsed the
sentence of Erasmus, ye shall hear ex vita sacerdotum palam dedecorosa, palam
co^temnitur eorum doctrina, and inde perit fructus verbi dei. Quod si ijs qui
non continent concederetur matrimonium, and ipsi viuerent quietius, and populo
cum aucthoritate predicare^t verbum dei: Of the open filthy life of priests,
their doctrine is despised, whereby the fruict of Gods word is lost. But if
Matrimony were granted Erasmus judgment. What an impudent boldness, is it
then for a young poor Ciuilian, or to an old indurate Canonist, to affirm
the contrary of that, which so ancient and known learned divine, after his
long deliberation in Ecclesiastical causes, has pronounced. And what a
lewdness is it, to ascribe to the protestants, that they should commonly
hold amongst themselves, that no wight can live chaste, where in deed they
teach with saint Augustine, De virgini. cap. xl.xli.
that, that man may live chaste, to whom God by his secret judgment gives
his gift, and that to some he gives it not: But these lies with such other
many, be the flowers of your virginal preface, in letter wise presented to
Queen Marie a virgin, as ye can flatter her, as your manner is to flatter
Princes, to maintain your own partial causes. Ye profess to dedicate your
book to her highness, because ye have taken upon you the defense of virginitee,
but your book is rather, a bolsterer out of al uncleanness, a defacer of Gods
holy institution of Matrimony, a defense of vnpure living, under the cloak of
virginitee. in opere and veritate, in deed and truth.

Ad Oceanum.
as Hierome names it. And Leo the first faieth, that among the rules and
Canons of the election of a Bushop, such one is to be ordered, who is
certainly known ( fuisse, Ad episcopos Aphricanos Epistola. xlix.ii. ad cor.
11.
aut esse vnius vxoris virum) to have been or that now is, Ambrose, except
Iho^, and Paul had wives. Thus he writes, Virgins vult eos esse in fide,
hu^c est, hij sunt qui cum mulieribus non sunt coinquinati: In mulieribus,
errorem significans, na^ si mulieres, mulieres intelligas, vt ideo putes dictas
virgins, quia corpora sua incontaminata seruauerunt excludes ab hac gloria
sanctos, quia oe^s Apostoli, exceptis Ioanne and Paulo vxores habuerunt: and
That is, he wills them to be virgins in faith, therefore it is said,
these are they which are not defiled with women: by women is signified error,
for if thou should understand by women, women in deed, to think that the
Apostles therefore were called virgins, because they kept their bodies
undefiled, thou shall then exclude holy men from this glory, for all the
Apostles, except Ihon and Paul had wives, and see whether it be convenient to
accuse Peter, the chief amongst the Apostles. Thus far saint Ambrose.

Augustine also writes, In questionibus noui and veteris testamenti ex vtroque
mixtis q.
Natus ex Anna sanctissimus Samuel, filios genuit, non tamen iusticiae suae
merita minuit: and Zacharias sacerdos vir iustus in senectute sua, dei nutu
genuit filium, quo nondum nato, meruit Prophetare. Qua ergo ratione accusatur,
quod minime obesse probat? Et quis neget bonum debere dici* quod neminem ledit?
Et vt hoc loco aliquid de Apostolis dicatur, quod ad robur pertinet causae.
Certe S. Ioannes castimonae The most holy Samuel borne of Anne, did begette
children, and for all that, did not lose thereby the worthy praise of his
righteousness. And Zachary the Priest a righteous man, by Gods Augustine.
So likewise Ignatius does testify, that Peter and Paul, and other of the
Apostles were married men. Qui non libidinis causa, sed posteritatis subrogandae
causa, coniuges habuerunt: which had wives, not for pleasures sake, but for
increase of the posterity. Yea, saint Clement Eusebius affirms) that
defamed marriage, Lib. 3. ca. 30
says. An and Apostolos improbant? Petrus enim and Philippus, and vxores
habuerunt, and filias etiam viris nuptum dederunt. Sed and Paulum non tedit
Apostolum, in quadam Epistola sua, me^tionem vel salutationem facere comparis
suae, quam ideo Do they disallowe the Apostles? Peter and Philip truly had
wives, and married their daughters to husbands. Yea, the Apostle Paul, was not
ashamed to make a certain mention, or salutation of his mate and yokefellowe,
in a certain Epistle of his, and says, that he would not for this cause
lead her about, that he might be the lighter to the preaching of the Gospel.
And this same Clement being with Peter, Lib. vii.
a perpetual companion in his preaching progress, says that Peter's wife was
with him. And some stories says, that he carried his wife and his daughter
Petronell with him to Rome. And the said Clement says: Beatum Petrum cum
vidisset vxorem suam duci ad passionem, gauisum esse electionis gratia, ac
regressionis ad propriam domu^ and exclamasse ad eam cum duceretur, ac proprio
nomine compellantem dixisse, O coniunx, memento domini. etc. When S. Peter saw
his wife led to martyrdom, he reioised for her elections sake, and for her
return again to her own home, and with a loud voice calling her by her
proper name, as she was led, said to her, O wife, remember the Lord. Such
were the marriages (says the story) of holy persons, so perfect was the
Druthmarus an old aucthour, writing upon saint Matthewes Gospel, affirms
of him thus. Cap. xix.
Quod Christus beatum Petrum coniugatum, praeposuit omnibus ordinibus, ne
virgins superbirent, aut coniugati disperarent, non posse peruenire ad illum
perfectionem, quas virgins essequebantur. That is. Christ made Peter in his
marriage, head over all orders and degrees, lest that virgins should be
proud, and married folks should despair, to attain to that perfection,
which the virgins had obtained.

Moreover, if such priests as practice marriage, be heretics Paphnutius, in
Nicene cou^sail (which yet neither had himself the experience of Matrimony)
pronounce with the assent of three hundred Bushops and more, (of which Bushops
Nicephorus writes, that some were Married, though at the first, the most
part were otherwise purposed) that married priests ought not to be divorced,
or yet separated from their wives, affirmyng that wedlock was honorable,
Paphnutius, the Law of Honorius and Theodosius was written. A A.L. eum qui. C.
de episcopis and clericis, which is at this day in the East Church yet
observed.

But here it will be objected paraduenture of this writer, or of some other, that
the Appostles left their wives, after they were called to be Apostles, as not
meet to be with them in progress when they went in preaching into diverse
parts of the world: and farther, they may look to have it resolved, whether
priests already consecrated without wives, may marry after their orders or
no, either by Gods law, or by man's dispensation: and whether there have
been any examples in this realm of

And here we purpose to examine the substance of the first Chapter of his
shameless book. But to follow on particularly all his untruths, were to
tedeous for the hearer. And therefore we will deal the more briefly with some
of his matter in this Chapter, wherein he confidently affirms, that heresy
and lechery be commonly joined together: and in the fourth leaf of his book he
says, that heresy misseth not to keep lechery company.



IN this shameless liyng books first chapter, Martine confidently affirms,
that heresy and lechery be commonly joined together, and farther says, that
heresy misseth not to keep lechery company: minor, or mean proposition:
but the Papists be heretics (as has been at large otherwhere fully
proved, In Doctor Ponnettes Apology and first answer to Martines book, and
the rest of his co^plices.
that they have taken part in the most principal parts, with all the
heretics that have corrupted the true religion of Christ) Ergo, the papists
be lechours. Lo it is often times seen, he that will be busy to cas^e stones
up into the air, may have them light again upon his own pate. For else to what
purpose does he speak of Simon Magus, Basilides, Carpocrates, and such other
heretics, agree with the manners of heretics. If it were to prove that
inquisitio hereticae prauitatis, that is now entered into England, and like
with the Spaniardes to destroy the liberty of Thenglishe nation, whereby no
doubt, shortly the noses of the nobility shall be holden to the grindestone,
and the necks of the commons tied under the priests girdles, from which
misery, I beseech Jesus Christ, save so many as favor from the canina
eloquentia.i. Dogs eloquence, Martines weak kind of reasonyng.
whereby to bring married priests into hatred, in alleging that ye first married
priests in Spain, in Rome, in France, in Italy, and so forth where ye will,
were heretics. And yet if ye had minded that proof, ye should have named no
heretics, but such as were married priests. But seeing al these heretics
whom ye name were unmarried, as it is evident by their opinions conde^pnyng
marriage: Gene. iiii. Sam. xv. Titus Liuius dec. i. lib. 2. Albertus Grang. q.
3. ca^. 18. Ostro gottorum. Poli. in the history of England. The sowers of ye
old heresies in sunderie countries were unmarried priests* that pretended
virginity. 1. The first heretic that ever was after Christ* abhorred the
Godly marriage of priests, and kept a whore. 2. The first heretic i^ persia
abhorred the marriage of Priests. August. epis. 74. Deu^erio. 144. after
Christ. 3. The first Anabaptist was an unmarried priest 4. The.i. heretic i^
Spain abhorred the Marriage of priests. August, de here. 5. The first no table
heretic in England was an unmarried monk Anno do. 400. 6. The first notable
heretic in Africa was an unmarried priest. 7. And ye first in Paphlagonia and
Aemenia we unmarried priests
was a wicked man, Cain by name: the first borne child that Abraham had was
wicked, namely Ismael. The first borne child that Isaac had was wicked,
namely Esau. Ergo the first borne and eldest children of all men be wicked. Or
else this way, Saul was the first king Clodoueus, which when he had overcome
the Persians, occupied the Kingdom of France by tyranny. The first Emperor
was Julius Caesar, who entered by civil war, treason and tyranny. The first
king in England that reigned alone, drove out the other Kings, and occupied
their lands and possessions by tyranny: will you now therefore conclude, that
all kings be naughty men, and tyrants? If this kind of reasonyng seem so
good in your sight, then I pray you harken to this other, like thereunto.

The first heretic that ever was in all the world, after Simon Magus of
Samaria, who having not the gift of sole life, would not enter the holy estate
of Matrimony, but following, or rather beginning the Popish kind of
chastity, kept an harlotte named Selene or Helena, as some do call her. The
first heretic that was in Persia, was Manes, first root of the heretics
called Maniches, who lived in such chastity, as the Popish priests do, not
only refusyng to marie him self, but condemnyng Marriage in the ministers of
his sect, whom they called (as saint Augustine Epist. 72. says) Electos.
The first Anabaptist in Rome was Nouatus the heretic, an

The first heretics that sprang in Spain, were the Priscilianistes (as S.
Augustine says) about the year of our Lord (...). who so much abhorred the
marriage of priests, and of other of their sect, that they caused the same
practice, which now most shamefully is practiced in England, that is to say,
they caused to be deuorsed, viros a nolentibus faeminis, and faeminas a
nolentibus viris.i. Husbands from their unwilling wives, and wives from their
unwilling husbands (as saint Augustine says). Priscillianus, an unmarried
Busshoppe of Abile in Spain. The first notable heretics of England, was
Pellagius a Monk, about.400. years after Christ, who lived such a single
life, as the Papists do now. And about an hundred years before him, in Africa
was Arrius an unmarried priest of Alexandria, as both Epiphanius, Eusebius and
other do witness. The first heritiques in Paphlagonia, and Armenia
Eustachiani, whose chief heresy was the condemnyng of priests marriage, so
that they refused to receive the Communion, at the hands of such Priests as
were married, for the which thing they were condemned, Anno domini.324.
in the counsel holden at Grangris about the time of Nicene Counsel, which
was confirmed by the sixte Sinode in Trullo, holden at Constantinople. And from
whence came the doctrine of Machomet, which now is followed of the Turks and
Sarce^s, and is much largelier spread abroad then is the doctrine of Christ?
Sergius an unmarried Monk, was the first beginner of the Turks law.
Came it not from Sergius an unmarried Monk, and fled for his naughtiness
from Byzans, of Heluidius (if it be true that you say, that Heluidius was the
first married priest in Christendom) were unmarried Priests. Heresy and
Lechery met together in unmarried Priests. S. Ciprian lib. 1. Epis. 3. The
Sophistical reason of the Papists, disclosed* and by ye like confuted.
Yet were some of them Stupratores virginum, and depopulatores Matrimonioru^,
Rauishers of Uirgines, and defilers of Matrimony, as saint Ciprian says,
writing of Nouatus. Some lived in luxuria and voluptatibus, as you testify, as
Carpocrates. etc. Now to conclude, all these of whom I have spoken, were
Priests, and unmarried Priests and heretics: Ergo, all your Popish virgin
Priests (if your reason were ab indefinito, ad universal. If now Marten can
not devise some pretty kind of shift, he has shamed him self with this first
chapter, the sum whereof stands upon this poinct, that Heresy and Lechery
be commonly ioigned together, which saying he proves none otherwise true,
then that the first married priests in some countries were heretics, and by
certain notes. etc. And like as it is a shame for him, in such a weighty
matter, to make such a balde reason, though his grou^des were true: so his
grounds being untrue, his rebuke is S. Peter was a priest, and the Gospel
testifies that he had a wife. The Evangelists say that Christ healed Peter's
wives mother of a Fever. Math. viii. Luke. iiii.
And Clemens Alexandrinus testifies, that he did not put her away, but
continued with her, till she died in Martyrdom for Christ's Stromaton Lib. 7.
Clemens Alex.
which Marten denies. And the same Clement says, that Peter spoke to her
when she was in diyng, saying to her. Vxor memento domini, wife, remember the
Lord. And that this is true, saint Hierome against Iouinian, can not deny.
And I am sure that Martin will not deny, but that Peter dwelt.xxv. years at
Rome (for so you Papists hold). Now if it were true that the first married
priest in Italy (as Martine does allege, for the proof of his purpose)
were an heretic, then by this means should Peter be an heretic, unless
the manne will say, that Rome is not in Italy. For that it was not Heluidius,
it shall be Martine can not prove, yt the first married priest in France was an
heretic, by Turonense consilium as he alleges. To. 2. page ^.
And for further proof of this purpose, he says also that the first married
priest in France, was an heretic, which saying he proves by the second
Counsel, holden at Towers (a worthy Counsel) of eighte French Bushops all
a great, gathered together without the Popes consent (which marreth all the
matter, by the judgment of the Papists) but let it be granted, that it had
been a general Counsel (as it was none) and that the Bushops being all
Papists, had not been so, yet does not the.20. Canon by him alleged prove
his purpose, that the first married priest in France was an heretic. a
quodam presbytero primum surrexit, sprang first of a certain Priest, not
namyng where he dwelte, neither whether he were married or unmarried. But upon
this plac^, (...) notes in the margent of his book. The first married priest
in France was an haeretique, where all men may see, of that place it may
as well be gathered, that it was an unmarried priest. The place serves as well
for the one as for the other. Yea, and it is to be thought, that heresis
presbyterorum, not to be of the marriage of priests of France, but some other
heresy begun by certain Towers, in the time of Leo the first, where the
Counsel found fault, with their forefathers, which had made Laws, whereby
to remove married priests from the Communion, D. xxxiiij. cum in preterito, in
glosa.
and Siritius (a man altogether unlearned in the Scriptures) as by his
reasonyng, hereafter shall appear. By which moderation it is euidente, that
they did condemn the extremity, and ungodly judgment of Siritius, and other
the enemies of priests marriages. The words of the Canon be these. The
straight law of Pope Siritius, against the marriage of priests, condemned by
Consilium Turonense ^ Canon 11.44^. after Christ.
Although it has been ordained by our forefathers, that whatsoever priest or
Deacon were convicted, that he gave him self to the procreation of children, he
should abstain from the Communion of the Lord. Nos tamen huic districtioni
moderationem We notwithstanding that ordinance (says the decree) addyng a
moderation to this rigor, and temperyng it with indifferency, thus have
decreed. That a priest or deacon, which remains in the desire of
Matrimony, or else abstaineth not from procreation of children, let him not
ascend to any higher estate or promotion, neither offer Sacrifices unto God,
or minister to the people. This only may be sufficient for them, that they
be not removed from the Communion, Married priests be not removed from the
Communion. 442. after Christ, it was no here^e for a priest to have a wife
but that they may keep these things, they must cut of drunkenness, the
The papists seem to hold that the uncleanness of the minister h^r^eth the
Sacrament ministered, as do the Anabaptists and Eustachians. Ga^grens.
Consiliu^. ca. 1. e^. 4.
Who can judge a matter of less weight, to receive the Communion, then to
minister it? Belike they were of this opinion, that the uncleanness of the
minister did hurt the thing ministered, which was the opinion of the
heretics, named Eustachiani, as it appears by the first and fourth Gangris,
and is at this day the opinion of the Anabaptists. And Martin with all such
Papists as say, that a Priest may not marry, because of the uncleanness that
should be in the minister, after liyng with his wife, and therefore may not
minister the Sacrament, do declare that it is the plain opinion of the sect
of the Papists, as I have partly before touched. I pass over, that eue^ in
the same second Popish Provincial Counsel of Towers in France, the.xiij.
Canon grants the Bushop to have his wife, as his sister, and so rule the
Ecclesiastical, and his own house, and also that the.xiij. canon Episcopa.
calling her Episcopa, that is to say, the Bushoppes wife, or Busshoppe is,
chargyng all Busshoppes that lack wives, that they shall have no company or
train of women following the^. etc. unless they have wives. And to set one
Papist against an other, and to beat you with your own Doctors: Look in the
book called Manipulus curatorum, Manipulus curatorum,
where the Papiste Guido de Mo^te Rocherij, confesses, speaking of the
Sacrament of Orders, that in the primitive Church priests had wives, and
they were called Presbyterae. Presbyter^.
And these be his very words. Presbytera autem That is to say: The Priests
wife is called Presbytera, because, that according to the fashion of the
primitive churhe, she was the priests wife. And thus ye see, that we do not
only prove by your own Doctors, that priests ha^ wives in the primitive
Church, but we also show how they were then named.

And I will also teach ^artine, that this is written of saint Hillarie, S.
Hillarie Bushoppe of Potiers in France was married.1200. years ago. The words
of Bushoppe Hillarie to his daughter Abram.
Busshoppe of Posters in France (200. years before the second Counsel at
Tow^es, that he alleged) that he was both a Busshoppe, and a married
Busshoppe. And lest Martine Abram, who was so young, that he doubted whether
she could understand his writing, or not, and therefore said unto her. Tu
vero siquid minus, per aetatem in hymno and Epistola intelligis, interroga If
by reason of your tender age, you can not understand the Hymn and the
Epistle, ask your mother, and immediately he calls her his most dear
daughter. Whereby it may appear in saint Hillaries days, it was lawful
for a Bushop in France to have a wife. For otherwise the holy man Hillarie,
would not have used it. And the age of him self, and the youth of his daughter,
seem to prove that she was begotten after he was made Bushop. But, Martine like
him self triu^pheth saying: No Bushoppes had wives, but heretics, wherein his
railyng tongue, Martin condemns S. Hillarie for an heretic.
condemns Hillarie for an heretic, if any man Martin belieth Saint
Hierome.
he alleges out of saint Hierome against Heluidius, that the first married
priest in Italy, yea, in the whole world was an heretic. Mark now good
reader, and thou shall hear a glorious lie of Martins. I call it glorious,
because he has set it forth with such a glory, not here only, but hereafter
in the 118. leaf also. Martines words in his first place are these.

Fol. 3. Martines own words.
In Italy the first Priest that married: was he any better? (Meaning than an
heretic.) Saint Hierome says it was Heluidius the Hierome. For I assure
thee, good reader, that S. Hierom says not in all his book against Heluidius,
that he was (as Martine reports) the first married priest in Italy. No, S.
Hierome says not that Heluidius was married. And how may it then be true,
that saint Hierome says, he was the first married priest in Italy? So now
ye see, that Martine is not contented, to make one lie upon saint Hierome, but
he must also lay one in an others neck, reportyng saint Hierome to say,
that Heluidius was the first priest that married in Italy, because it is a
lie, that he was married at all: and yet says Martine, saint Hierome
reports, that he was not only married, but also the first married priest in
Italy.

And in this poincte also Martine is not a little to be blamed Hierom, Martine
ascribes a lie to S. Hiero^.
but also the thing it self is a lie which he faineth S. Hierom to say. But
you will ask me how I can prove that saint Hierom says not so? Forsooth,
two ways. First I am contented to be judged by the whoole book which
saint Hierom has written against Heluidius. Secondarilie, Martines words.
I am contented to let Marten himself be judge, for these be his words which
immediately follow this lie before written. And (says Marten) he says no.
(meaning by saint Hierome) that he was the first Married Priest in Italy.
Lo good reader, what need I any further condempnation for Martine in Hierom
say so? No verily says Martin, why then for shame suffers he those lines
before in the text, and that note in the Margent to stand in his book
without adding unto it, some such note as this is? Believe not Martine in this
place, A note to be put in yt mergent of Martines book. Note that Martin
turns the word Sacerdos by the English word spiritual.
for here he lies egregiosly. Why, but I pray you is it not enough for
Martine to say that S. Hierom says not so? Yes forsooth, enough to prove the
other saying a lie. But to proceade if saint Hierom say not so, I pray you
what says he? Marry (says Martin) he says not that he was the first
married Priest in Italy: But the first priest that Martine defe^deth one lie
with another
if this also be alie? Think ye not then he were a meet man to lie for the
whetstone? Uerelie good reader, this is no less lie then the other, for this
is not in all S. Hierom neither. Whereby ye may see his tongue so accustomed to
liyng, Hierom of Heluidius? forsooth that which follows in Latin in Martins
own book, these be his words. Solus in vniuerso mundo laicus simul and
sacerdos. Thenglishe whereof is this, he only in the whole world was both at
once a priest and a lay man. In the which words thou may se good, reader,
that there is no mention, neither that he was the first married priest in
Italy, neither that he was the first married priest in the whole world,
neither that he was married, unless ye will say that all lay men be married.
Yea if it were true that al lay men, Hierome neither of (Italy) neither of
(first) nor of (last) nor of marriage. Martins manifest untruth in alledgyng
old aucthours.
Now may you see what credit is to be given to Martin when he alleges old
authors. But it may be, peradventure he will say the Printer deceived him,
and put it in of his own hedde. But Martin ca^ not escape so. For in.118.
lefe.1. G. page 2. he makes the self same lie again, and says also there,
that the Heritique Heluidius was the first married priest that we read of in all Christendom. It is the property of some liars, when they have told a lie
once or twice, or oftener, that by often telling of their lies Hierom, where he
seems to note certain properties and qualities, which he says be commonly
in heritiques, and strives to apply the same to such, as had Raro haeretici
diligunt castitatem, and quicu^que amare puditicia^ se simula^t vt Manichaeus,
Notes piked out of saint Hierom by Martin whereby to know an Heretic.
Martio^, Arrius, Tatianus, and instauratores veteris haereseos, venenato ore
mella promittu^t, caeterum iuxta Apostolum quae secret agunt, turpe est
dicere. The english whereof (as you Martin have handled it) does evidently
prove that you understand not the Latin, or else meant to blind the reader: for
this place does plainly set forth the properties of the Popish virgin
Priests, and of the other papists, that in all saint Hierom there can not
lightly be Hierom. li. 2. in O^c. 9.
Heretics (says S. Hierom) and all such as pretend that they love
chastity, do very seldom love it in deed, as Manichaeus, Martio^, Arrius,
Tatianus, and the renuers of the old heresy. They promise honey with a
poisoned mouth, but according to the saying of thappostle, it is a shame to
speak, what they do in secret. Now mark good reader, S. Hierome in this
place inueigheth sharply against the old Heretics, Hierome makes fully
against such Priests as say, they have the gift of chastity, and have it
not, that live in whoredom and marry not, that pretend holiness in the sight
of the people, but lead a filthy life in corners, and in secret. And for
example, he names a number of heritikes that were unmarried Priests, as the
Popish Priests be, and make a sense of this place. But note his impudency
in his Hierom, that marriage is a Sacrament. Which if it so did, yet were it no
more for his purpose in this place, then any vain talk of the Moon or other
by matter. So in this place, we have also an other testimony of Martins
falshod, and see plainly that the notes, Martines own marks declare him to
be an Heretic.
whereby he minded to have (with the authority of saint Hierome) described
us, do painte himself and his Popish virgin Hierome, deducyng as before his
reason a posteriori. trusting that now he has found out such notes, whereby
to prove us Heretics, as we can not avoid, and his notes be these. They
give them selves to gluttanie, to delicateness, to eating of flesh (whom
therefore Martine calls fleshmongers) to hauntyng of Ba^mes* they smell of
Musk and Perfumes, and with other sundry oyntmentes, they procure themselves
to be beautiful of body.

All men know right well, that as abstainyng does not prove a good Christian
man, so does not eating of flesh prove a man an Heretic. These old
heretics were condemned emongst other opinions, because they dissuaded men
from eating of flesh.
Manichaei, Tatiani, Montani, Cataphriges, Aeriani, Priscilianistae,
Saturninus, Basilidiam, and many other old^ Archeheritiques abstained from
flesh, and taught this doctrine, that the eating of flesh did defile a
Christian man, and yet notwithstanding their doctrine and abstenance, they were
rank Heretics. Wherefore it seameth that saint Hierome did not find fault
with them that eat flesh, but with them that eat it not for the satisfiing
of their hunger, but of their pleasure. And The diet of a christian man.
and the vain pleasure that is increased of eating without necessity, and
without respect of the kind whether it be fish or flesh: knowing that all
creatures of God be good, if they be taken 1. Timo. 4.
for they be sanctified by the word of God and prayer. And also that which
enters into the mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the
mouth defiles the man, that is to say evil thoughts, murder, adultery,
whoredom, theft, Math. 15.
false witness, and slander. And whereas Martine thincketh the other notes, as
smelling of musk, and washing in hawmes, paintyng of faces, etc. be notes
whereby to know Heretics: Then it is an easy matter in Princes courts,
Martin with his notes makes the P^pistes heretics.
and Bushoppes houses, and many other men's houses also, to find out Heritiques
by the nose, without the Popes kind of Inquisitio If I say the savor of
Ciuet, Musk, Perfumes, and Oyntementes be sufficient notes to prove an
Heretic (as Martins divinity out of saint Hierome seems to infer) then
must it also follow, that the greatter and stronger sauoure, shall prove the
greater and stronger Heretic. And then if a man would find out the ranckest
Heretic in a Company, his best way is to get him to a Popish procession
(for sermons be laid aside, which reproved the abuse of such things) or to
Mass, specially upon an high day, and he shall try out by his nose, who is
not only an Heretic, but also who heed how you use bawmes or strong
sauoures. Take heed ye Hierome had lived in our days, trow you that he would
have written less of our married priests? Uerely it might be thought if he
were a live at these days, and saw Martins writhyng of his writing, he would
not judge Martin one of the wisest, appliyng that S. Hierome spoke of the
filthy unmarried Heretics, to the godly married Priests of our days. For
besides all other profes, this one (where S. Hierom says he speaks of them
qui pudi^itiam amare se simula^t, as Martin also alleges, qui pudicitiam
amare se simulant i. which pretend that they love chastity: the Heretics
which saint Hierome rehearses for proof and example were unmarried priests,
and therefore (as thou see) must needs be applied to such a wi^eles
dissemblyng generation, as S. Hierome notes Antechrist Luther, Oecolampadius,
Doctor Capito, Bucer, and Doctor Peter Martyr for the sincerity of their
doctrine, and for that with writing upon the scriptures, they have given such
a light, as S. Hierom Iouinian, and such like as I have noted before. It is
like that you fell into this wish of S. Hieromes life in these days, because
ye would find some way to tell the world (that Oecolampadius, Capito, and
Munster, were Monks or Friars, and afterward married men. No man can judge
otherwise that notes your process, and perceives the desire that your tongue
has to liyng. Well, seeing Capito was no Monk nor Friar (as you report him you
shall not chose but suffer me to say, this Luther, doctor Bucer, and the other
were, it could neither further your matter, nor hurt ours, unless it be to
ease your tongue a little, when it is desirous to rail. And where you say,
their marriage was both against the Law of God, and the Law of man: and also
where in the second Chapter of your book, you say it is an old heresy,
new scoured, I doubt not, before I have done with you, The marriage of
Priests is an old truth newely made heresy by the Papists.
and your fellows, ye shall see it proved before your face, that it is an old
truth, taught by Christ Luther, doctor Martyr. etc. were not the first
founders of this religion (as you sclanderouslie report) but the Patriarchs,
the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles. But seeing Martine brought in this
matter but for a railyng purpose, I will leave it of for this present: And will
tell thee, good reader, of an other solemn lie that Martine has made, whiles
his tongue runs railyng after D. Luther. He says there, that Luther has
written in his book, de captiuitate Babilonica: Si vxor non possit, aut (That
is to say) If the good wife can not, or will not, the good man may take his
maid. Speak again Martine, where says Luther these words? Thou say in
his book, De captiuitate Babilonica. The self same lie, makes Pighius of
Luther. Take that book in thy hand (good reader) and read it over, when thou
find there, as doctor Martine does report, I am content, let it be said
that I have sclandered Pseudoprophetas in populo, i. Peter. ii.
and falsos doctores, qui clam inducent sectas perniciosas. That is, false
Prophets emongst the people, and false liyng Doctors, which shall privily
bring in pernicious sects.

I assure thee (good reader) that is a foul lie, that Martine and Pighius his
fellow makes of Luther: For that saying which they all allege in Latin, as
though it had been so by Luther pe^ned, is not in all that book, where Martine
most shamefullie Luthers judgment in that book, concerning that matter. In
one place there, speaking of the impedimentes of Matrimony, he says, that if
the man be such a one by nature, that is impossible for him to do the duty
of a husband, The papists can not abide Luther when he teaches their own
doctrine.
then his contracte with a Quia error and ignorantia virilis impotentiae, hic
impedit matrimonium. Because, says he, the error and ignorauncie of the
impote^cie of the man, in this case lets the Matrimony, which saying, if
you papists would condemn, ye condemn the doctrine of your own father the
Pope him self. For Gregory Busshop of Rome, writing to the busshop of Rauenna,
says on this wise. Vir and mulier si^se coniunxerint, and dixerit postea
mulier de viro quod coire no^ possit cu^ ea, si possit probare quod verum sit
per iustum iudicium, accipiat alium. If a man and a woman be married Si quis)
these words be plain, and in manner the very same that Luther Impossibilitas
reddendi debitum, soluit vinculum co^iugij, The impossibility of doing the
matrimonicall due^ie, breaks the bond of matrimony: Understandyng the same
defecte to be natural, as Luther by the plain words there declares that he
does. And the self same doctrine is largely set forth and allowed by the
master of the Sentence. Lib. 4. d. 34.

Wherefore, like as for this saying Luther can not be charged with any new
doctrine, for that the same is taught by the Pope himself and the master of the
sentence, Magilier se^^one. lib. 4. D. ^4 read the place and judge.
and Gratianus etc: So can not the same discharge Martine of his former
euidente and Luther, concerning his doctrine of Matrimony in that book, for he
is there so ware of his words, and so circumspect with his pen in that point,
that he will define nothing, as by the very last words there entreatyng upon
matrimony, it is most evident, which for brevity I will omit. Many times it
chances, that Michael Paleologus, if it were truly reported. But his mouth
is so full of lies, that a man can not tell when he may believe him. He
says he has read that history of Michael Paleologus in a greek aucthor.
And that may be true, but it is very unlikely, because the histories do
declare, that there were diverse Emperors of the eas^e, whose names were
Michael, but no more named as (I remember) Michael Paleologus, saving Michael
the seventh, and last of that name Michael, who was.1260. years after Christ,
as Chronicles do witness, that is to say about 300 years ago. But the history
that Martine ascribed to the Emperor Michael Paleologus, was (as he himself
says) when Pope Nicholas, about the year of our Lord.860. sent out an
excommunication against Photius, Patriarche of Constantinople. And so it
follows, that Michael Paleologus the Emperor was (if Martins tale could be
true) An other lie of Martins.
But let it be true that Michael the sixth (between whom and Pope Nicholas the
first, the contention was for Ignatius and Photius) were named Michael
Paleologus, (which I say Martine cannot prove) yet the history that Martine
joins to his matter (that is) that he has read the cause of the contention,
between Pope Nicholas the first and him, was for a pleasure that the said
Emperor should show King henry the viii.
which intent of his appears, when he wishes, that the like had not been
practiced elsewhere. And somewhat this my suspision is increased, by that Martine
refuses to name the Greek aucthour, whom he alleges. And again, whereas in
the books of general Counsels, the earnest Epistles written from Nicholas
the Paleologus, as Martine says) spoke of the puttyng out of Ignatius, and
the puttyng in of Photius, into the office of the Patriarche, no mention is
made of any such matter, which is not like the Pope would have left out,
being (as Martine alleges) the chief cause of their falling out, and speaking
so stoutely to the Emperor, and touching him so vilie, as his Antechristian
boldness does. But how much soever of the history is true, this chief
poincte that Martine alleges the history for, (that is, that the heresy
against the holy ghost, and the An other lie of Martins.
as by sundry substanciall reasons, I will prove plain, to such as have any
knowledge of the doing in general Counsels, Martin falsifieth histories
and be not as Martine is, arrogantly wise, wise I say, in their own
conceit, and not in deed. For proof whereof, Theodoret, Theodo^^^. li. 1. ca.
10.
an old Greek aucthour, by the confession of Pope Damasus (500. years before
the time of that Emperor, whom Martine falsely names Michael Paleologus)
which confession he sent to Paulinus Bushop of Thessalonica in Macedonia,
that anon after the Nicene Counsel, sprang contention, for doctrine against
the holy ghost, and that such a business ensued thereof, that the Fathers
were feign to punish the offenders therein, by excommunication. Whereupon it
followed, that both in Toletano consilio. Toletu^ co^c^^* 1.
1. about.400. years after Nice, the Busshoppes did put into the Creed, the
procedyng of the holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son, as ye may read in
those Counsels.

The Latin vij. Nicen concl. 7.
Nicen Counsel was holden in the time of Pope Hadrian the first, Hadrian was
Anno D. 772. and the Emperor Michael. Anno D. 25^.
100. year before Michael had the contention with Pope Nicholas the first, in
whose time, Martin says, this error first began: and.500. year before Michel
Paleologus was borne, of whom Martine falsely fathered this story. Which saying
of his, if it were true, how could Theodoretus wr^^e of it, Leo the first
Emperor (as Gennadius witnesses) many hundred years before? Will Martine make
men believe, that the first Counsel at Tolet in Spain, and the 7. Counsel
of Nice, amended things so many hundred years before they were amiss? And
that Theodoret could talk of things, that were done about.300. year after he
was dead? You favorers of Martine, behold your own folly.

Furthermore, the decree of Eugenius the fourth, whereby the union of the East
and Weste Churches were declared, does show (as the same Pope Eugenius does
confess) that this dissension Nongentis and amplius annis (that is to say)
more then.900. years before his time. And Eugenius the.4. began his rule in the
year of our Lord.1431. out of the which number, if ye take.900. and more,
according to Pope Eugenius account, it shall appear that Michael Paleologus
(though he were in the time of Nicholas the first as Martine fasly reports)
was above 300. year after Constantinople against Eunomius for deniyng of the
procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, what can Martine
say? Against this Eunomius, Basil and other have written plentifully. Thus
ye see concerning the beginning of this heresy against the holy Ghost,
Martine is found a falsifier of histories, not only by the supputation of
years, but also by the very testimony of the Pope himself his God. Now
concerning the cause of the disention between the Greeks Michaell Paleologus:
The learned man cardinal Bessarion Patriarche of Constantinople and
Archbushoppe of Nicea, writes a whole Chapter for declaration of the cause of
this schism and dissension, showing that the Bushoppe of Rome was the causer
thereof, for that he, Sua vnius authoritate fretus, aduocata synodo generali
particulam illam communi symbolo fidei, non cum communi ascensu, ascripsit.
that is, when he had called a general counsel, he took upon him of his own
private aucthority, to add this parcel (of the proceadyng of the holy Ghost
from the The Pope was ye cause of the dissension between the greek and the
latin Church contrary to Martine.
Behold good reader, a plain proof, that it was the rash and temerouse
boldness of the Busshoppe of Rome that caused this dissension, who of his own
authority would do that tumultuously, which he might have done with others
consent quietly, and that was it, which caused first all that dissension that
ensued, and also the latter ruin, mischief, distructio^, and Turkishe
captivity, which Martin says, is this day lighted upon the church of God
in Grecia. But Martin will say, the thing that he did was good. Yea, but
Michael Paleologus: it is proved, that the Pope the aucthour of all mischief in
the Church of God, was the only match that kindeled this fire. A worthy
matter doubtless, to deprive the Pope for ever after, from bearyng any rule,
though there were nothing else, wherewith to charge him. And thus is Martin once
again overthrown with his own reason, Two lies of Martines at a cast.
and taken with a double lie, as well Michael Paleologus and his uncle, which
proceeded first (as ye see by the testimony of Bessarion) from Gods great
enemy the Pope, the Archeheretique in Christendom.

Now to make answer to that few lines, which remains in Martines first
Chapter, I need not to take farther pains,

And the procedynges of the late Parliament, in the second year of the Queens
reign, wherein all her fathers doings in religion be condemned, seem to
confirm the same. So that the the Queens Father (because he was the beginner
of all this, as

Now if it can be borne of men's ears, to hear that the Apostles

Again, to consider what Paphnutius said and counseled for the priests of
his time: not to be separated, and that it is chastity to company with their
wives, and that to separate them, might be an occasion of great inconueniencie
in them both. If in that holy time, when God was truly honored, his word and
Nicene, were suffered with them in ministratio^? If like peril may be feared
in ye parties now coupled together, why should they be separated more then the
other? If their Sacraments were none other, nor holier then ours, their word
none other then that we have: why may not our order stand with marriage, as
well as

I trust this Ciuilian is not yet so addicte to the Canonical procedynges,
that the matter lies only in this poincte, that if the Bushop of Rome allowed
the matter, all were well: for me think so he can not mean. For if his
assertions be true, he must

But yet I hear this writer obiecte again, such an objection, as was once
made by a Canonist, in the expending of this very Distingue tempora (says
he) and personas, and concordabis leges and Canones. Weye the difference of
time and of persons, and so shall ye make the laws and Canons agree. Then was
then, and now is now. For the case, says he, is far unlike betwixt the
priests of the Greek Church, which were married before they were priests,
and the priests of our Church and time, which he married after their order.
And this he thinks to be an high witty invention, and insoluble: and by this
shifte, he pronounces the victory of the cause, before any stroke be
stricken, standing stoutely in the difference of the time, marriage to go

To answer: if it be true, as he can not deny, but that it was not lawful by
their sayings of the Counsel of Nice to be separated, by Laws and
constrainte: and that it was chastity for the busshoppes and priests, to keep
company still with their wives: yea, when they were ministeryng busshoppes and
priests, in an other manner attendaunce and holiness, then the best chaste
busshoppes and priests of our time practice in their doings: so that by their
judgment, the one state dishonored not the other, nor was impediment to the
other, as hereafter shall be proved by the

Now I say, if the priests of the Greek Church, lived godly in ministration
with their wives, why may not the priests of the Occidentall church, be
judged to live as godly in Matrimony, and as lawfully to in England, having
the highest Law in the realm on their side? But here this doctor will be
offended to have any thing brought in, for declaration of this cause out of
Europe: but ye Asia, and Africa, and bring in Panim priests to set out the
matter. There is nothing in your book, written or unwritten, devised by your
own brain, or surmised by hear say, but ye make strong arguments, for your
own vain and feeble cause. But briefly to answer this witty devise, of the
difference of the time, till a ^uller debatemente of that poincte, I shall
answer, as once saint Hierom was answered, in a matter of Hierome is on the
contrary part, holdyng that to have one wife before Baptism, and a second
wife after, was not therefore an impedimente to be admitted to Priesthode,
Epistola ad Oceanum.
or to a Busshoppes office. Nonne legisti ab Apostolo, vnius vxoris virum,
assumi in sacerdotium, and rem, no^ tempora definiri? that ts. Do thou not
read (says he) that by the Apostles authority, the husband of one wife,
is to be chosen into Priesthode, and that the cause and matter is thereby
Hierom him self writes afterward, that it is rather looked for in a priest or
Busshop, what he is for the time present, then what he has been: why not as
well may saint Paul's text and authority, serve for a priest and a
busshoppe, to be lawfully qualefied, if he

As for the other piece of Nicene Canon where it is said: that according to
thauncient tradition of the Church, such as were not as yet married, and were
partakers of holy order, should from thence for the contracte no marriage: And
as for the Canon of the Apostles, which ye stand so strongly to, or yet for
the saying of Augustine, immediately following the place, which is here before
alleged, lest ye should cavil as ye do, that I left out the pithe of the
matter, and would slide slightly over the whole place of the authority, and
bring them in by patche meals, with violent wrestyng, as ye use to do: I
will heareafter bring them, and put them all together, to the judgment of the
reader, to give sentence betwixt us, how far they weye in this cause.

Yet in the mean time, to make some insinuation to you of saint Augustines
question, note ye well his words, not as a subtle Lawier, but like a Divine:
and wreste not saint Augustines Cap. 4. ha^ E. ii a. Vt notatur. ca. and ^i
Christus. de Iuretura^^o.
and, non licet, out of their nature as ye do. Quaedam illicita sunt in sui
natura, quaedam ciuiliter.i. iure positiuo, vel consuetudinario: quaedam sunt
simoniaca, quia prohibita, quaedam sunt prohibita, quia simoniaca. Quid autem
liceat, aut quid non liceat, pleni sunt libri scripturarum. August. in Psa. 147
qui confirmat vectes portarum. etc. Some things are unlawful of their own
nature, and some by Civil constitution, that is, by positive law: Some
things are Simonicall, because they are forbidden, and some are forbidden
because they are Simonical: but what is lawful, and what not lawful, is fully
set out in the Augustine opens not his mind by the like, licet, and, non
licet? Saying. Antequa^ Ecclesiasticus quis sit, licet ei negotiari, facto iam,
non licet. That is: Before one has taken upon him the state of an
Ecclesiastical person, he may give him self to worldly affairs, but
afterward he may not. In like manner Consilium Aurelianense, says. Episcopum,
presbyterum, aut diaconum, canes ad venandum, aut accipitres, No^ licet (...)
negotiari, int^resse ludis. etc. Distinct. 88 per totum.
aut huiusmodi res, habere non licet. It is not lawful for a Busshop, Priest,
or Deacon, to have hounds, hawks, or such like. Now call to your
remembrance, how your licet, and non licet, till we tell you more in this
matter. In your expendyng, if ye take not quid pro quo: ye shall do the better.

But because the reader may further hear what says S. Hierome, in the
defense of his opinion, as is spread in the process of his said Epistle: and
that the prudent reader may expe^de, whether his Rhetorike might not be
applied against the adversaries Nunquam fili Oceane fore putabam, vt
indulgentia principis, calumniam sustinerer reorum: and de car ceribus
exeuntes, post sordes ac vestigia cathenarum dolere^t alios relaxatos. In
Eua^gelio, audit inuidus salutis alienae: Amice, si ego bonus, quare oculus
tuus nequam est? Conclusit deus omnia sub peccato, vt omnibus misereatur, vt
vbi abundauit peccatum, superabundet and gratia. Caesa sunt Aegypti
primogenita: and A paraphrasis of ye same.

By sweet saint Mary and good saint Martine to, I would never have thought
(gentle master Martine) that it would ever

Surely and without doubt, the virginal chastitee is to high a tower for the
most part of them, and is not fit, but only to such, as specially be
called thereunto, by the rare and singular Sap. iiij.
and bastardly broodes, which do but testify of the wickedness of their
progenitors and fathers, in the interrogation of their consciences, where the
issue of chaste matrimony coupled with godly temperaunce, of them that fear
God, shall be spite of the Devil, i. Timo. iiii.
and all his Tatians, allowed of God, and so approved of men that know the
truth. Where, I say, in the word of the Lord it is testified, that God will
so judge fornicatours be preast down, yet they shall stand upright in a good
conscience Barnarde tells them no less, De contemptu mund^
saying: Esse sine dubio melius nubere qua^ vri, and saluari in humili gradu,
quam in cleri sublimitate, and deterius viuere, and distractius iudicari.
Su^ptuosa quidem (loquitur de caelibatu) turris est, and verbum grande quod non
omnes capere possunt. It is, (says he) without all doubt better to marry then
(not only, not to live in fornication) but to burn. And better it De cura
pastoral^.
Audiant (inquit Gregorius) peccatorum carnis ignari, quam per semetipsum de
hac integritate veritas dicit: Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc. Quod eo innotuit
summu^ esse, quo denegauit omnium. Let them hear (says he) such as be
vne^perte of the sin of the flesh, that the truth it self pronounces, with
his own mouth, of this purity: not all take this Pelagius affirms, whom
saint Augustine confuteth) is of our election.

See how this dead viper, under the grene herbs and fair flowers of
Catholic names, has long lurked, and now begins to hysse out again, and
would lift up his head so ^attred and broken, as saint Austen has vanquished
him: where before time, yet this Papisticall Heresy denied matrimony but in
part, to them that were votaries: and made no secular Priests votaries. Now
this hissyng Hydre comes forth with his monstrous heads, and does deny the
whoole institution to

Now this Goldsmith of S. Martins, sets out his fine polished ware, with
such facing and staryng, that he destroieth the whole ordinance, as well in
votaries, as no votaries, and defaceth these their marriages taken and entered
by the strength and authority of a just law, of the supreme head of the
Church de obedientia) so spiritual matters says he: that though they be the
whoredom of spiritual men, yet his power and authority has incidently in
his princely government, to make laws therefore. Which matter he may see
there debated at large, beginning at my said Lords book prynted by Thomas
Barthelet the.xiiij. leaf: facie.2. and so forth. Yet notwithstanding, this
Ciuilian says, the marriages be so great not purged yet, nor sufficiently
punished, with the deprivations Hieromes inuections. What means this lawier
to forget so many laws, which I am sure he has read? Intelliguntur
legittime contraxisse, qui authoritate legis contraxerunt. Qui peccat Legis
authoritate, 26. di. dei^de 23. q. 4. qui peccat. August. in questi. ex vtroque
mixtim. ca 127. In regul. iuris.
non peccat. Frustra accusatur, qui a iudice laudatur. Ipse sui accusator est,
qui reu^ dicit, quem leges defendunt. Indultum a iure beneficium, non est
alicui auferendum. Quod fit iuris authoritate, non habet calumniam. Quod They
may be said to have lawfully contracted, which have contracted by the
authority of Law. He that offends by authority of a Law, offends not.
He is accused to no purpose, which is allowed of the Judge. Noe, he is rather
an accusar of him self, which calls him faulty, whom the law defends. A
benefit granted by the law, ought not to be taken from any man: It should
not be quarelled with, that is done by the authority of the law. That which
GOD has co^stituted, it is a wicked deed to call it a crime. That which God

Yea, but these laws must be now glosed, and we must now call into question
again (after so pregnaunte a determination, of my lord of Winchesters
obedience, attributyng to a Prince full gouernemente, spiritual, and corporal
to be of his jurisdiction) whether the supremacy may meddle with these
matters. etc. As this Lawier plainly shows his fancy, or rather frenzy in
the end of his.ix. Chapter, where he makes a Prince in his realm to be
luminare minus, and the Pope to be luminare maius, which is a cloudie and
darcke distinction, says my Lord, Qui rescriptum principis maliciose vel
astute interpretatur, infamis est. C. de ligi^* De (...). signi. Ca. Olim. F.
De constable. Leg. vlt.
He that will maliciously or craftily gloss, and interpret the charter and
grant, or writ of a Prince, is made infamous

But this Ciuilian will object again, that it is not his mind alone: there be
good divines, bushops of the best, and other worshipful priests of the
Clergy, which think that married priests, are to easily dealte with, and
shall never be content, till they see them all out of the way, that their
possession may be quite out of quarrel, what world so ever come. Then let
such Divines, 26 97. alligani.
De opere imperfecto: and if they be Canonistes, let them see it in their Law,
that they both together, may hear their part verse out of Christ's mouth:
Alligant onera grauia and importabilia. etc. Tales sunt sacerdotes, etia^ nu^c,
qui omnem iustitiam populo mandant, and ipsi nec modicam servant. Videlicet non
vt faciendo sint, sed vt in dicendo appareant iusti, and so forth there more
at large. They lay heavy burthe^s and importable. etc. Such be the
Priests, says he, of these days: Furthermore, says he, though were go out
of the way, Chrysostom. But now to return again, to report mo Hierome,
beatyng down this Cains heresy, this irremissible faul^e, as he here and
there sprinke^eth his Epistle with, Si omnia, quae in ordinatione queruntur
Episcopi, non praeiudicant* ordinando, licet ea ante baptisma non habuerit
(queritur enimquid sit, and non quid fuerit:) quare solum nomen vxoris
impediat, quod solum peccatum no^ fuit? etc. Omnia scorra and publicae
colluuionis sordes, impietas in deum, parricidium and incaestus in parents.
etc. Christi font purgantur: and vxoris inherebunt maculae? Et lupanaria,
thalamis praeferentur? Audia^t Ethnici, audiant cathecumeni, ne vxores ducant
ante baptisma,

Hierom and have left the weightier matters of the law undone: ye blind

Hierom spend his whole Epistle: whose words the rather I desire to be
expended, because this Doctor and Ciuilian brings him solempnely in for a
great authority, in the parts of his disputation, whom I dare say, this
writer will not allow in this poinct, how vehemently and earnestly soever he
speak. And if he rejected saint Hierom in this opinion, as not to be holden,
as their own law does so condemn him in deed, we may be as bold, to
except against him in his other sayings written against the word of God:
Or at the least way, when saint Hierome is Hierome in this poinct,
co^dempneth all the late catholic church, and calls them Hypocrites and
superstitious to their faces, with the words aforesaid. Ca. 1.
And writing furthermore upon Titus, he says: many supposes more
superstitiously, then truly, that they which in their gentilitie, had one
wife, and after her departure married an other, after they were Christianed, may
not be chosen to Montanus and such as follow the scisme of Nouatus, say that
they have taken presumptuously upon them the name of chastity: which
thinks, that second marriages ought to be forbidden from the Churches
Communion. Where the Apostle charged this thing of Bushops and Priests, and
released it to other, not that he moves to second Hierome. And here again
may we learn what it is to fight in controversies with man's reasons and
human authority, yea though they be not craftily couched together, and
contorted, as the brag of this man's book stands wholly upon that poincte,
and to exclude the scripture, Distinct. 9. Nol^
For so they speak in the book of the decrees. If this be true, then let
Hierome be holden in this point, or else, let them rather force no further man's
sayings and aucthority, then of right the authors themselves would be taken
and red, and as they themselves used to take other men's writings, of what
antiquity and authority soever they were. There is a great difference says
S. Augustine betwixt thaucthoritie of the Canonical scriptures, and the
writings of Bushops, whether it be of our own, or of Hyllarius, or Ciprian,
or any other. And therefore says he to Vincentius the Donatiste: Epistola. 41.
stir up no quarrel of their writings, for they be not so to be read, that
in such wise their testimonies be brought in, Noli ergo frater colligere velle
calumnias ex episcoporum scriptis, sieve nostrorum, sieve Hillarij, sieve
Cipriani, quia hoc genus literarum, ab authoritate Canonis distinguendum est.
Non enim sic leguntur, tanquam ex eis testimonium proferatur vt contra sentire
non liceat, si forte aliter sapuerint, quam veritas postulat. And in an other
book of his, de peccatorum meritis, Libro primo, Ca^itulo. 22.
he says: cedamus and consentiamus authoritati scripturae sanctae, quae
nescit falli nec fallere, hominum est labi, Let us give place, and give our
assente to the authority of holy Scripture, which can not be deceived nor
deceive. It is natural to men to slide, to be Collossians. 2.
to be deceived and to deceive, to err, and to induce to error, as saint
Paul says: take heed lest any man deceive you by philosophy, and witty
reason, and by vain subtilitie, according to men's traditions, according to
the elements and ordinances of the world, and not after Christ. As for the
stabilitie of the scripture, is not subject to such defaute. And therefore
says Cyrill: Ad Reginas de recta fide.
Necessarium nobis est diuinas sequi literas, and in nullo, ab earum
praescripto discedere. It is necessary for us, to follow the holy scriptures,
and in no point to shrincke from that they do prescribe. Yea, let us read
saint Hierom and all other, Mynerius and Alexander he says: Non praeiudicata
doctoris opinio, sed doctrinae ratio ponderanda est, and sciat me illud
apostoli libenter audire: omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete etc. Meum
propositum est antiquos legere, probare singula, retinere quae bona sunt, and a
fide Ecclesiae catholicae non recedere. It is not the opinion of a writer (in
his judgment so before declared) that must be weighed so much as the reason
of his doctrine For I am glad (says he) to follow saint Paul's precept:
prove all things, and hold that is good. And also to give head to the
Caesar, nor is not stricken like the current Money, let it be reproved: and that
which clearly bears the face and Image of Christ, let that be laid up
in the purse of our heart, for further says S. Hierom: I profess this as
well in my youth as in my age, that Origin and Eusebius weere very great
learned men, but yet did err in the truth of doctrine. In the end he
says, it is my constant use and purpose, to read the old writers, to
examine every thing, to hold fast that is good, and not to recede from the of
him to be the catholic church, for his said opinion was ad Heliodorum: ^.q.
7.
Non omnes Episcopi sunt Episcopi, attend Petrum, sed Iudam considera etc. Non
est facile stare in loco Petri and Pauli, scilicet, tenere locum, iam cum
Christo regnantium etc. Al be not Bushops that have the name of Busshoppes,
mark Peter, consider Judas, it is no easy thing to stand in the place of
Peter and Paul, that is, to hold the cheer of them that reigns with
Christ. They be not the children of the saints, which occupies the place
of the saints, but they which perform their works. Infatuatum sal ad The
salt that is unsavory, is good for nothing, but to be cast forth out of the
doors, and to be trodden under foot. And saint Augustine says: Non omnis
qui dicit pax vobis, quasi columba audiendus est, Corui de morte pascuntur. Hoc
Columba non habet etc. Not every one that says, pax vobis, must be hard as a
Dove, for Ravens feed of carreine, the Dove uses not this, she lives of the
fruit of the earth, her feedyng is without hurt. And that Church (says
saint Hierome) is to be counted the catholyke Church, which by the help of
Gods grace, wandereth ^4. q. 3.
Tra^sferunt principes inde terminos, quos posuerunt patres eorum, quando
immutant mendatio veritatem, and aliud predicant quam ab Apostolis acceperunt.
etc. The head men and rulers do remove the marks and dooles, which their
auncetours have laid, when they change the truth into lies, and preach
other things, then such as they have received of the Apostles. Therefore, if
the Church of England, can declare her self to pr^ceade nigher the rules of
the Apostles, then that Chur^he, which of duty chalengeth the only name: it
Cap. ^. lra^ f. 1. Panorm. ^ignifi. de elect. Did. 31. ^^ena
of Ireneus and Origin for his purpose, which subuerteth all his pretense.
Yea, they confess the Laws them selves, that one lay man having scripture,
or a reasonable cause, is more to be received, then a Distinc. 19. Ita dominus.
upon him self, says the Canonistes them selves. This aucthour comes all to
late therefore, what post haste so ever he make, or how so ever he use to
blind this age, with Romish articles of their faith, saying: The Church of
Rome can not err, though they remove the marks of the Apostles precepts. And
that it must be ever presumed, Distinc. 40. N^ (...)
as the murder of Samson, and the felony of the Jews, and as the adultery
of Jacob: For it were a kind of Sacrilege, to call his fact into disputation:
with infinite more such articles, as be every where in his decrees, and
Canonistes writings.

But yet I think this aucthour urge still upon me, for the diversity of
Priests mariyng before order, and after order, and will require, what
Counsel, what Canon, what example I Quid si destituamur exemplo hominum, si
habeamus praeceptum dei? What makes matter, though we had no example of man,
if we have a precepte of God, and a confession of his Apostle, left yet saffe
unto us, as Alfonsus Episcopus Canariensis says? yea, after our orders, and
promise whatsoever for it. Thirdly, I can allege to this English writer,

And I marvel much, what this writer means, being an English man, and
offers his service so ready to the Queens

Moreover, I would wish this professor of Civil to consider, or at the least
the (gentle reader) to note, with what charitee he could so slander his own
country men, the Queens subjects to her grace, in his Preface, with so
odious accusations of inceste, heresy, coueteousnesse: and because he would
leave nothing behind, to promote them to the Queens graces crede^ce, with
treason also and malice to her grace, and that without exception of any one
man, entered into the said state of marriage: who ipse dixit. And where was his
remembrance, to ieoparde the fame of many other of the same coote, whom I am
suer he favors well enough, notyng Heresy and Lechery, so jointly to be
knit together, that where the one is, their is the other, as sisters
inseparable. So that by this man's assertion, being one of the principal and
first articles, whereupon he growndeth all the buyldyng of Simon magus out of
Epiphanius. For Chrysostom writing upon the first to Tymothe the.4. of such
as shall depart, (not from the Bushop I say (but from the faieth: geuyng head
to the spirits of error etc. Hic loquitur (says he) de Manichaeis, and
Encratitis, and Marcionitis, omnique illorum officina. Per hypocrism loquentes
He speaks says Chrysostom of Manichees, Encratites, Marcionites, yea and
of al such artificers and crafts men, that they shall depart from the
faith, yea, he speaks of the Manichees, says he, and also prosecuteth
those things, of such like heads and leaders of error. But what is it,
says he: speaking lies in hypocrisy? Mary says he, the lies which they
speak, they speak them not for lack of knowledge unwittingly, but by
simulatio^. and so of themselves infinitely, confessing it in their private
confessions Justinius the christian Philosopher and martyr, was never the
Cresce^s Cynicus reproved him, ta^que gulosu^ and mortis timidu^, luxuriaeque
and libidinu^ sectatore^. As Hierom writes: that is, a gloton, fearful of
death, an haunter of riote and lechery. But of this matter, is sufficiently
before said. But now this Ciuilian will reply, and appeal to all the world, to
judge upon whom, such auctorities of Epiphanius and Chrysostomus and of others
such, are to be verified: whether upon heretics as the aucthors them selves
terms them, or upon the catholics, who will not be aknowen to depart from
the faieth, but lay that fault altogether to other men's charges and burn
progenies viperaru^t you adders brood, and badde them no more so brag of
their

Though some of such writers as this Ciuilian is, labors with all shifte of
wit, to shift of S. Paul's sentence to Tymothie: of such as in the latter
days departs from the faieth, geuyng head to deceiving spirits, and to the
doctrines of deuelles, Tatianes and Martionistes, and such other: yet they can
not so be discharged, Libr. 1. ca. 3^. Nicephorus l^. 8. cap. 25. Constaminu^
vult Arianos vt suffragatores eius Porphyrianos nominari, vt quoru^ imita^^
su^^ mores, eorum quoqite obimeant appellationes.
For as Ireneus says: Qui quoquo modo adulterat veritatem, and praeconium
ecclesiae ledunt, Simonis Samaritani Magi, discipuli, and successores sunt.
Qua^uis non confiteantur nomen magistri sui ad seductionem reliquoru^,
Whatsoever they be that corrupts the truth, and does deface the
commendation of the Church of Christ, be the disciples and successors of Simon
Magus of Samaria, although they will not acknowledge ye name of their master,
to the seducyng of other, yet they teach his opinion: and though in one sort
they be not found, condemnyng Matrimony as evil in all men, yet they
forbiddyng it to some men, Epiphanius says: Heresi. 67. lib. 2. to.2. of
such. Serpens enim alatus hic est, and Scorpius alas habe^s secundum multos
modos, and volans, and imitans quidem Ecclesiae virginitatem, non habens au^t
puram co^scientiam. De hoc enim and similibus impletur illud, cauterio notatam
habens conscientia^ prohibentium contrahere matrimonium. etc. subsannantur
autem perfectissime propter eas, quas habent singuli, inductas mulieres. etc.
This serpent is winged, and this Scorpion has wings, and flies after many
fashions, and it counterfeteth in deed the virginity of the Church, but has
not a pure conscience: of

Saint Augustine, de vnitate Eccesiae, in a like matter, writing against the
Donatistes, says: If they can first teach us, says he, that we be
sepulchra dealbata, painted sepulchers, as they call us, and lay to our
charge, we can not refuse to be reproved, and beaten back with such words
of the holy scriptures. So that the proof and trial of all the matter,
rests not

Moreover it can not help them, to allege saint Augustine, and other such
old aucthours, in the exposition of these words prohibentes nubere: where
saint Augustine says: Manichei abhorrebant nuptias tanquam malas, etiam
propagationis causa, and damnant creaturas ciborum, quod natura malae, and
immundae sint. Co^^ra faustu^ M^niche. li. 3.
Ideo ij dicuntur prohibere: non qui huic bono, aliud melius anteponit. The
Manichees did abhor Matrimony as evil, even in respect of procreation, and
that they condemn the creatures

Now I appeal to all the counterfete Catholics, wheresoever they dwell. Do
they so prefer single life, and virginitee in Augustines doctrine. Li. 1. Ca.
iii.
Iraeneus aduersus hereses: A Saturnino and Marcione, qui vocantur continentes,
abstinentiam a nuptijs annunciauerunt, frustrantes antiquam plasmationem dei,
and oblique accusantes eum, qui masculum and foeminam ad generationem hominum
fecit. The continentes, so called of Saturnine and Marcion, has Preached the
absteinyng from marriage, so making void the creation of God, and by a subtle
fetch, they Ireneus has oblique, Eusebius has subtiliter accusantes illum*
craftily, not with open condempnation, but by a crafty devise, not apperyng to
every man's eyes. Is it not all one to condemn Matrimony as the Maniches
do, and by laws to forbid it as Papists do? Saint Paul speaks of
forbidders to Mary, and of such as shall be in the latter days. But i^ this
doctor will say, that he follows neither Martian, nor Tartian, but good S.
Hierome, whose sayings he brings in very often, without choice and
discretion: in good faith, I believe him Iouinian, where in some places he
writes thus: Iubet Apostolus vt semper oremus: si semper orandum est, nunquam
ergo coniugio seruiendum. Quoma^ quotiescunque vxori debitum reddo, orare non
possum. Again, puto quod nuptiaru^ finis, mors sit, fructus co^tinentiae, vita
aeterna. Again Nuptiae per se non sunt bonae, and comparantur incendio. Qui in
carne sunt, deo placere non possunt. Again. Nullum periculum Again. Ex quo
ostenditur virginitatem non mori, nec ^ordes nuptiarum ablui cruore martyrij.
And contra Heluidium: Non negamus maritatas sanctas mulieres inueniri, sed quae
vxores esse desierunt. etc.

The Apostle gives a precepte, that we should alwaie pray, if prayer must
alwaie be had, ergo, wedlock is not to be used, Heluidius, thus he
pronounces: we do not deny, says he, but that it is possible to find
married wives, holy women, but such (says he) which cease to be wives. Of
which place, Erasmus could gather no other, but that he should mean, that
marriage is not to be allowed, no not for fruits sake. And such other sayings
innumerable has S. Hierom, whom this manne reports with such authority.
But in the next part of this treatise, all such causes shall be more fully
expended, to see whether the fained Catholics of these days, be not far
fallen from the true Catholics, of five hundredth Tatianes, Manichees, and
such other: how soever they cover them selves close, as they imagine. Sed
omnia dum produntur in lucem, manifesta fient. But all things when they are
showed at the light, be made manifest.

Furthermore, I would wish to have some considerations more, to be waied of
this gentle and courteous Ciuilian, how he could be so rigorous and extreme,
without any moderation, or indifferent equity, so sore to charge Bushops and
Priests for mariyng in this realm: with such inevitable necessity, and

Where, he reads, I am sure, how tenderly and favorably aue, unto in
salutation. And furthermore most unworthy reputed to come to their Tables, to
their presence,

I am suer he cannot be ignorant of the soft gloses, that the Canonistes make
for the excusing of fornicatio^s and adulteries Did. (...)
As for example. Presbiter, si sornicationem fecerit, quanquam fecundum Canones
Apostolorum debeat deponi, tamen iuxta authoritatem beati Siluestri. etc. December
annis poeniteat. Though a priest that commits fornition ought to be
deposed, according to the Canons of the Apostles: nevertheless, by
thaucthoritie of blessed Syluester, let him have, ten years, penance. etc.

The gloss thereupon says: for fornication sake, at these days, no man ought
to be deposed, as is commonly said, except he continue therein. And this is
the reason: because, says he, our bodies be more frail, then before time
they were. And here again, says he, you may see that the Counsel
dispenses against the Apostle, in the pain.

And lest, ten years penance, shall be thought to hard for fasting: the
gloser tells us of two good remedies. The one is, that it may be dispensed
withal. The other is, that a man may fast by an other, and so be delivered,
and for a great need, may Did. 34 Fraternitatis
Also. Quamuis multa sint, quae, in his and huiusmodi casibus obseruare
canonice iubeat sublimitatis auctoritas: tamen quia defectus nostri temporis,
quibus no^ solum merita, sed corpora ipsa hominum, defecerunt, districtionis
illius non patitur manner censuram. Ideo. etc.

Although, says Pelagius (not that heretic, for whose condemnation this
Ciuilian impudently writes, that the English heretics, as he calls them,
be angry with S. Augustine: but the holy father that was Pope of Rome) the hie
excellent authority of the Canons, says he, charge many things to be
straightly observed Micene his wenche: let her be put into some Monastery, to
profess Chastitee. Ecce casus (says the Gloss) vbi plus iuris habet luxuria,
quam castitas. Lo a case, where Lechery Iouinians law the Emperor (making it
death to rauishe a professed virgin) in ure, yet has the Cap. x. Litera. V. i.

Also out of the fourth Tolet Counsel in Spain, Quidam clerici, legittimum
non habentes coniugium, extranearum mulierum, vel ancillarum suarum (quae
interdicta sunt) consortia appetunt. Ideo, quaecunque clericis taliter
coniunctae sunt ab Episcopo auferantur, and venundentur. etc. Some of the
Clergy, for that they have not lawful Matrimony, couette the company of
outward women, or of their maidens, which is utterly forbidden. Therefore,
Glosa corrumpe^s ipsu^ ^^xtum non loquitur de vxoribus sed de mulieribus vt in
concilio Toletano 3 ca. 5 Liquet.
whatsoever women they be, that be so coupled to

The gloser there (to be sold) says he, understand it when they make
contract of Marriage with them, as with wives, for else I will not grant, that
they ought to be sold, or yet to be brought into any bondage for simple
fornication. Did. 81. Cap, Maximianus.
For, says he ( Ca. Maximianus) it is commonly holden, no man should be
deposed, for simple fornication, seeing few can be found without that fault.

Astexanus. lib. vi. titulo. x. Li. 6. titulo 10.
Fornication is a Canonical crime, and a deadly sin, the pain whereof is
deposition: Did. 25. ca. Si. and Did. 83. Si quis and Ca. Romanus. But I
answer (says he) that these Chapiters expresses the rigor: But that Did.
34. Fraternitatis,) contains the equity, which must be far preferred
before the rigor. And therefore the matter of fornication, must be much
more easily handeled, because few can be found clear of it, and the
multitude must be spared, says he.

Also out of an old aunciente Counsel of Neocesar, Did, 28. Pre^biter: Ca^.
1^.
where Ca. primo: Presbyter si vxorem duxerit, ab ordine illum deponi debere:
quod si fornicatus fuerit, vel adulteriu^ comiserit, amplius eu^ pelli. etc. A
Priest if he Mary, let him be deposed from his order, but if he commit
fornication or adultery, let him be more charged and forsed, and put to
penance among the laity.

From his order (says the gloss) that is from his office, not from his
benefice. And by this (says he) following saint Augustines sermon 37. ad
fratres in heremo. The priest should be more punished that commits
fornication, then he, which contracteth lawfully. And this is the reason: for
that he ( sc the fornicator) does against the holy order, and also against the
law: And he ( sc the married priest) does less offe^de that marieth a wife,
because he believes that it is lawful for him so to do.

In the.ix. Canon of the said Counsel, it is said: he that commits a
corporal offense, that is to say, fornication, and yet after takes upon him
thorder of Priesthode, if he confess it, that he has so offended before his
orders taking, let him no more offer

Ex consilio Toletano nono. Cap x. anno. vij. Reccesinulli regis.

The law reports it thus: xv. q. 8 Cu^ multae super innocentia^ ordinis.
which is all one with an easy gloss.
Cum multae, super incontinentiam ordinis clericorum, hactenus emanauerint
sententiae patrum: and nullatenus ipsorum reformari Where as there has passed
before time, many decrees of the fathers, upon the incontinente life of the
Clergy, and yet by no manner ways their correction of manners, could be
brought to stay: whereupon their incorrigible manners, has so far provoked the
fathers, to give sentence and judgment, that not only due punishment should
be executed upon the aucthours themselves for such enormities: but also upon
the issue of these dampnable

Understande, says the gloss, that this rule serves for Priests which do
lawfully marie wives: for such be more grievously punished. But what soever
(says he) is here said, seiyng the church has not used this law, she
loses her right in this point.

Ex Canone Apostolorum. 24.

Presbiter aut Diaconus qui in fornicatione, Did. 8^. Pres^^t^^
aut periurio, aut furto, aut homicidio captus est, deponatur: non tamen
communione A Priest or a Deacon which is taken in fornication, or perjury, or
felony, or murder, let him be desposed. But let him not be excommunicated,
for the scripture says: God judges not twice upon one thing.

Taken, Did. 50 si qui. Ca. Dno^ sanct.
says the gloss: nay by saint Marie, not taken only must suffice. And in the
same Distinction, he says, that though the Canon of the Apostles be the
better, because it is the more ancient then the other canons: According to the
words of the law Clericis Laicos infestos opido, tradit antiquitas, Laici in
accusationem vel testimonium Clericoru^ non sunt adn^^^t^na^ exir, lib. 3. cap.
3.

De immunita te E^^le^iaru^. Mary God forbid one to bewreye an other except it
be in confession. D^st. 81. Cleric^ In glosa.


yet it is prejudiced and derogated by the later. And there he teaches that
though the Canons be

But to the gloss again: Taken. But how shall the lay men prove that, says
he, seeing they can not be witnesses against a Clerk? And when they be so
admitted for witnesses, yet they are not to be credited, except they have seen
the clerk even from the beginning in his adultery. Yea, beside all this, lay
men may not be believed in this poinct. For the laity, says he, is alwaie
utterly against us. The very words of the Canoniste.

But I put you a case, says this good lawier and favorable accused. And here
ye may see, says he, a good authority, that a

Furthermore, be it in case that a Priest do lie with an other man's wife in
the church, the woman confesses the fault, the priest denies it: in this
case commands Pope Alexander the iii. that she be put to penance for a
fool, for bewreiyng confession. The Church must be cleansed with holy water,
the Priest must be put to his purgation of priests of his neighbors, more or
fewer as please the Busshop. If they will depose for him, then let the priest
continue in his office notwithstanding. But what if the matter be so apparent,
that both the mother with her oath,

Marie, after he be examined privily in thordinaries chamber, he is enjoined
penance, but secrette to, for the sclaunder of the Church: For it is decreed
by their Laws. Did. 28. Presbyter. solennem poenitentia^ Clericus facere non
debet. A Clerk may not do open penance. As once I hard of a priest,
examined of a Bushoppe that was a live within these twenty years, in his
inner chamber: which, for such kind of blessyng his spiritual

I trust that if this Bushoppe were alive, he would be more gentle then some
Bushops be now, except he had such conscience as some Bushops have now.

Did. 81. Si qui sunt.
Now comes in Gregory in the same distinction, and thundereth Si qui sunt
presbyteri, Diaconi, vel Subdiaconi, qui in crimine fornicationis iacea^t,
interdicimus eis ex part dei Patris omnipotentis, and sancti Petri
authoritate, Ecclesiae introitu^, vsque dum paenitea^t and emendent etc



Gregory, that will not obey this wholesome precept, they shall incur the
sin of Idolatry etc The gloss there, Did. 81, si quis Understand this yet
but upon married Priests Says the Rubriche, as this learned Lawier co^torteth
it
in the Chapter following, says, that they which be constitute in holy
orders, may not resort or train to their Concubines or wives, for if they
do it continually, they must be deprived of their ministry, and benifice
too.

I marvel that where Ciuilians and Canonistes by such iontly and commonly
procedyng in degree together, and therefore have great agreemente and affinity
together: and that of this Ciuilian it cannot be said, that he, is over seen
in the law Cannone: Tolet counsels out of Spain so often, and so thick, that
they bear the greateste rule, in his great mustre of his strounge laws, and
great Canons: because he would not flater, as ye may be suer: that he would not
yet bring some of these laws, gloses, and divine Canons, where by yet he
might have declared how thoroughly and universally seen he is in the Canon
law, and expositours of the same.

But peradventure he means the advancement again of the Church, to restore
the old purity and chastity of the Clergy and scrape for their wives and
children, and therefore keep no

Now on the other side, he would have good catholic men brought again to
good belief, to thauncient faith of the church, to the good opinion that they
have had of the clergy before time, to Antherius. ^i. q. 3. Absit
Absit, vt quicquam sinistrum de his arbitremur, qui Apostolico God forbid,
that we should think any thing sinisterally of them, which being the
successors of the Apostles in degree, make the body of Christ with their
holy mouth: By whose means, we be Christen people. For they have the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and do judge before the day of judgment. In the
old law, says he, who soever had not obeyed the priests, either he was cast
out of the host, and stoned of the people, or else had his head strike^ of with
a sword, and

Clericus amplectens mulierem, presumitur been agere. Si ergo 96. In
scripturis. quamuis Cano^, solam co^fabulationem interpretatur in deteriorem
partem. etc.

A Clerk embrasyng a woman-muste be presumed that he does well. Some old
peuishe Canon of ye Apostles or of the primative Church.
If therefore a Clerk take a woman by the middle, it must be interpreted, quod
he, that he does it to give her his blessyng: as in the.96. Distinction. Ca.
In scripturis: although, says he, the Canon, will interpret the only talkyng
with her, into the worste part.

Yea, S. Peter is brought in, in the same distinction to speak, Clement to be
his successor. Did. 96. ca. quicunque.
Quicunque contristauerit doctorem veritatis, peccat in Christum, and patrem
omniu^ exacerbat deum: propter quod, and vita carebit aeterna. What soever he
be that will molest, and make sad a doctor of the truth, he offends against
Christ, and does provoke God the father of all, for which cause, he shall
also want eternal life. Thus they would have the people brought again, to
their old faith and credulity: and not to be to suspicious, of them that
profess virginity. But of the married Priests, let them think as evil as
they can devise: for he so desir^th it, and to much punishment, 24 q. ^ Quis
vid^^
belike (whereof they never have hearty repentance) their own Canonistes say:
Quis vidit digne sacerdotem poenitente^? Who ever saw a priest worthily sorry
for his offense? And therefore saint Hierom in that distinction searching the
old stories, says: I can not find any other to have rent the church, and
that have deceived the people, but only those, which are set of God to be the
Priests and Prophets: th^se be they, which Chrysostom agrees to him, de
poenitentia. Did. i. Quis aliquando vidit clericum cito poenitentiam agentem,
and si depraehensus humiliauerit se, non ideo dolet quod peccauit, sed ideo
co^funditur, quia perdidit gloriam suam Who ever saw the spiritual man
tourning from his fault? For though he be taken and humbles him self, yet he
is not heavy, for that he has offended, but for this sc (never to marry)
that is to abjure marriage, and to contain from mariyng: which vow some
Lawiers and Deuines to, do call, votum negatiuum. Now say they, the priest if
he Marry, he surely breaks his vow, and is in great danger: but if he
commit but adultery or fornication, he breaks no vow, for he vowed but
the abiuration of Marriage, and no refusal of fornication, though peradventure
Chastitee may be thought to be annexed to his order, by some scrupulous and
Pope-holy observation: But yet in great disputation among them, whether
single fornication be sin or no, and great arguments, pro and contra, and
long occupied in the Schools: yet at the worste he breaks no vow, nor is
any heretic, as the Priest that takes a wife. Such conclusions being so
openly expressed in summarie books, it is no marvel though they repent so
seldom, and though they them selves can not trust well one an other of chaste
living. For Nicholas Panormitan being an head Lawier, and in chief authority
among them, saw so little cause by his experience, to be out of suspicion
toward the Clergy, that he gives a rule to spiritual judges in this cause,
saying: that an oath may never be given to him, of whom may be taken
Alexander the third, Extra. de cohab. cleri. and mulie: prescribes it, as
Nicene Counsel, and in Ciprians da^es, they were yet contented, that priests
had in their houses, their mothers, their daughters, or sisters, or their
wives, but yet no maid beside. So in the latter days it was decreed, in a
Counsel at Magunce, that they should have neither sister, aunte, nor mother
in their company. Nicholas the first in his rescriptes, Tit. 14. de
presbyteri. distinct. 28 consulendu^.
de presbyteris. Vobis qui laici estis, nec iudicandum est, nec de vita eorum
quicquam inuestigandum. Of the priests, you that be lay people, may not once
Nicephorus tells the story. In scripturis narratur, Constantinum Imperatorem
dixisse: Vere si vidissem proprijs oculis sacerdotem dei. etc. peccantem,
chlamidem meam expoliarem, and cooperirem eum, ne ab aliquo videretur. etc. It
is I think it would be a great while, ere this holy Martin Nice, when he
heard that there should be brought to him co^plaintes of certain Bushoppes,
said openly: Vos a nemine diiudicari potestis, quia ad dei solius iudiciu^
reseruamini. Is may not be judged of any man, for ye be reserved to the
judgment of God a lone: which catholic saying, saint Gregory reports to
Maurice the Emperor, with some further circumstaunce, thus. The
Ecclesiastical story, says he, witnesses, that when there were presented
certain libelles of accusation against certain Busshoppes, to Constantine of
Godly memory: he took Not the Bushoppes, but the L^bels.
and he called the self same bushoppes before him, and castyng them into the
fire, said: go ye and order your own Counsels among your selves. Ego vos
non iudicabo, a quibus debeam ipse iudicari, I will not give judgment over
you, of whom I ought in mine own person to be judged. For it besemeth not our
worthiness, that we should judge Gods. In which sentence, says Gregory, he
wrought him self more honor by his humilitee, then he did to them, to whom he
showed such reverence. Although yet my Lord of Winchester write, quam vocem,
presentis reuerentia virtutis, non potestatis aliqua^do expresserat, Dioretus
lib. i. cap. xx. reports Nicomedia. Si habemus Episcopos castos, orthodoxos,
humanos, gaudemus: and si quis audacter inconsulteque ad memoriam, ac laudem
pestiu^ illarum exarserit, illius statim audatia, ministri dei, hoc est, mea
executione coercebitur. If we find the Bushops chaste, catholic, and
courteous, we will be glad: but it any will boldly and rashely revive again by
his furiousness, the pernicious examples that be paste, his presumption shall
be restrained, by just execution of my self, that am Gods minister. But
these sayings be nothing Paul the third, in his admonition to Charles
Emperor that now is, could repeat again as his predecessors has always
been wont: but the times be changed, and Popes manners be known to well in
these days.

Furthermore, says the said Gregory, seeing GOD in his scripture, gives
them such honor, that he him self calls them Gods or Angels: what
maruaill though you honor them? And thus we constitute, says he, as well
generally, as specially for all Priests. For that excellent Preacher Paul
bids, Consilium Matisconense secundum, about the time of Pope Pelagius the
second, where ye may read a letter of king Guntran, (by whose license and
authority, Guntranus rex (...)
they made that Counsel) what primacie and authority he expressed over that
Clergy, as much as ever was used in this realm yet, as new as men would
make it. The number of bushoppes gathered there, were above forty, which
made a iolie Gaudeamus omnes in domino, between them selves, that they had
won of the king, a liberty ca. xv. If a lay man should meet in the way
some better man of the Clergy, the Lay manne should in the lowest manner of
courtesy stoop reverently, and bow down to him: if the Lay man be on horse
back, and the Priest also, then the Lay man to put of his hoode of his head,
and do his duty of sa^utation. But if the priest be on foot, and the lay
man on horse back, incontinently Qui vero horum quae spirtu scto^ dictante
sancita sunt, transgredi voluerit: ab Ecclesia, quam in suis ministris
dehonorat, qua^diu Episcopus illius ecclesiae voluerit, suspendatur: Whatsoever
he be that shall tra^sgresse these Canons, which be decreed by the
inspiration of the holy ghost: This King was long before King Henry the 8. or
King Edward either, yet had their Judgment.
let him be suspended out of the Church, which he will not honor in her
ministers, even so long as shall please the bushoppe of that See. But now in
the end of that Counsel comes

Thus good reader, though I may be tedious in recityng a few places out of
the church laws, as there be wonderful many pro and conta, to say what ye
will: So stable and constaunt be their determinations and sayings: So
thoroughly may a man build his conscience upon Church laws and Canons, for
suer determination. In so much that it is said by Petrus Cantor Parisiensis,
De verb abbr^u^^o.
that Alexander the Pope, (not he that first devised the holy water for
Spirits, but an other Alexander) should say: that if he were moved with like
reason and probability, he would be as ready to judge for a negative, as he
was before for the affirmative. For which Iuo Carnotensis, of pure indignation
and anger of heart, threw the book of Church decrees at his feet, as vile
and unprofitable. And there he says, that one Canon is derogated, by the
contrariety of an other: Some time by the silent consent of the Rome Church,
And some time by the use of the contrary.

Wherefore says he, the best way is, to recourse, as Esai diddeth, to ye
testimony of God, and to his law: to allege out of that, whose power ca^ no
man's authority withstand or deny: Where Ego pro te rogaui ne deficiat fides
tua. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail. Yet this lawier
takes away al authority from scripture to be a judge in matters of
disputation, though S. Augustine ever more called upon the Donatistes and such
other, De vnitate Ecclesiae ca. ^6.
to stand to the judgment of the scriptures, and said plainly, as bewriteth.
Quia nec oculis videndum, manibus tangendum Corpus suum offerret: For we say
not our selves, that therefore of necessity we must be believed, because we
are in the Church of Christ, because we hold that church which is commended
and approved by Optatus Bushop of Mileuitane, by Ambrosius bushop o^ Millan, or
by other innumerable Bushoppes of our own Communione: or else for that it is so
set forth in the counsels of our brethren in office with us. The Lord
Jesus himself, after he was risen from the dead, and after he had offered his
body to Fallax or deceit, he thought it more convenient, to have them
confirmed by the testimonies of the law, and of the prophets and Psalms.

Yet notwithstanding this assertion of saint Augustine, and o^ many other
such in their writings, this Lawier makes it h^s chief ground to stand on,
and setteh it for one of his first principles: that the church can not err,
and that the determination thereof, is a most sufferaigne remedy against
heresies. Now ye know out of what church he draws his testimonies of laws
Cap. 4. ^ra^. D. iij..i. Really present.
The Counsails says he must needs have the holy Ghost: and that Christ is
reallie present there: and therefore it is the ready mean to abolishe
Heresies. And that as the Church, so must we of necessity be driven to
demand and stand to the sentence of general Counsails: and that the word
of God can not be judge, but is to bear witness only of the matter.

Now if ye will grant him such grounds, in the beginning of his tale, and to
stick to such arguments as he deduceth out of the scriptures: full
substancially be ye sure, he may th^n ^roue what him lists.

Mary, if he happened of one that had answered him as frowardly, as the boy
answered one Cayus, a Poet once at Cambridge, reader of Terence, then might he
seek for other grounds, or else those better chosen and applied, to build up
his strong ga^e buylding, as it is gorgeously erected.

Cayus for his pleasure, plaiyng with a boy of his, being a young sophister,
said that he would prove the boy an Ass. Which when the boy denied: well
quod Caius, thou will grant me this first, that every thing that has two
ears, is an Ass. Naie mary master will I not, quod the boy. No will thou
not quod Caius: Ah wily boy, there thou wenst beyond me, for if thou would
have granted me that, I would have proved thee an Ass anon. Mary master
quod the boy, ye might well, and so might every fool do. Well quod Caius, I
will go an other way to work with thee. Thou will Caius I give thee over,
for thou art to froward a boy for me.

And so if all be granted that ye would, ye might soon then prove, the
parciall reader of your book, that likes all that ye say, as wise a beast as
Caius would have proved his boy.

But yet I must bear with this Ciuilian. For he had it not of his own
invention, but followed a crafty Romaniste, who first Pighius for so saying:
that great divine, the father of all the Sermons and books, that be now a
days written of Papists in matters of religion. For he pronounces: That the
scripture is of noe certain determination to define any thing. But is like a
nose of wax, which ye may wreste to and fro flexibly to what side ye will,
to what sense soever ye will have it agree to, and there to set it. What
though, Athanasius confesses the contrary, saying thus: Fateor ego quod ex
scripturis, exactior est quam ex caeteris veritatis probatio? I do confess,
that there is more exact proof and trial of the truth by the scriptures, In
decretis Nicem sinodi contra Eusebium.
then of any other Pighius nor all his faction, care one halfpenie for
Athanasius or any of them all, for all their loud criyng to have them credited
infallibly in all their writings, but for their own purposes. Is not this
forsaied saying of Pighius an high commendation, think ye, to the scripture,
thus to trifle a way the weight and authority thereof? And yet if ye should
ask him, whether scriptures be commendable: he could

Even so, ask him whether Marriage be honorable and commendable? He will not
say nay: because he would be seen to escape the name of a Tatian. But ask
whether Marriage in an unadvised votarie, or in a priest no votarie, be
Marriage? He could not in his conscience say yea, because he pretends to be
in so saying, a Catholic. But yet in so saying, he shall be a Tatian, and a
ranker heretic then Tatian, to prohibit it to them that

If he say that he has saint Augustine for him, De bono viduitatis: to whom
he appealeth, and so does this counterfeicte Pighius, most untruly and
contortly: in so much, that first I wonder that Pighius pretending to be a
divine, for shame would so falsely corrupt the very text of saint Augustine,
as he does in his book of controversies: And secondely that this Ciuilian
would craftily lay away the first part of S. Augustines text unanswered: and
trainyng the reader to the latter part, falsely expoundyng it, contrary to the
plain words of saint Augustine, That marriages of the very votaries be
Marriages, and not adulteries. And then blow up the trumpette of an high
challenge, Cap. 10. lra^ t.r.a.
whith saying: I demand of all the priests in England, and as well all
unmarried heretics, as married Priests, whether they will stand thoroughly
unto saint Augustines place there cited. etc. Sir, seeing ye use in your book
so often demaundyng therein, and provoke so stoutely all manner of men to answer
your book, whereby if ye be detected, ye must blame your self: Ye shall hear
a short answer, of a man neither heretic, priest married, nor unmarried, but
yet was like to have been a priest married, if the world had Augustine, for
the mistie gloss, which ye cast upon that place. For I pray you, take on
your spectacles even again: And yet look more narrowly upon that place, and
examine whether such matrimonies, eue^ in them that he votaries, Augustine
says these words there. Proinde qui dicunt talium nuptias, non esse nuptias,
sed potius adulteria, non mihi videntur satis acute considerare quid dicant:
fallit enim eos similitudo veritatis. etc. They that do say the marriages of
such, to be no marriages, but rather adulteries, they appear to me, not to
consider wisely enough what they say: for they be deceived with a similitude,
and apparaunce of truth. Chrysostomus ad Theodorum, epistola. Angelorum enim
societati semel iunctum To forsake that state, which is so nearely knitte to
the society and fellowship of Angels, and to be wrapped in the snares of a
wife, is, to incur the fault of adultery: and although you neauer so often
call it Marriage, yet do I aduouche, that it is so much worse then adultery,
by how much an Angel, is greater and better. Ergo by this aucthorie, they
be adulterers: respondeo. The Bushoppe of Winchester in his third book
against Bucer, notes upon this place brought in by Bucer, that he in these
words consents with saint Augustine de bono viduitatis, and so the
manifest form of the words imports. Then be they not by this authority
affirmed adulterours, and no Marriage, what soever blame they be worthy. Also
the form of such words must be interpreted as Pope Euaristus teaches.
Aliter legitimum non sit coniugium, nisi petatur a parentibus, and sponsetur,
legibus dotetur, cum precibus benedicatur and solemniter accipiatur, biduo and
triduo orationibus vacetur. etc. Aliter presumpta, non coniugia sed adulteria,
non continentia, sed vel Let it not otherwise be compted lawful matrimony,
unless it have the parents consent, and the parties be trouthed, and
according to the laws endowed, and blessed with prayers, and solemnly
received, and give them selves ^o prayer two or three days: for if they come
otherwise together, it is not to be doubted, that such are not marriages, but
adulteries, not continency, Astexanus lib. viii. tit. viii. sic interpretatur:
Non sic intelligendum quod non sint legitima, sed quod non habent decorem and
honestatem debitam, and fiunt co^tra prohibitionem, and sic habent culpam: and
hic locum habet quod scribitur. 22. q. 4. Innocen. parag. vnde datur intelligi.
etc. It is not so to be understand, that they are not lawful Marriages, but
that they lack the comeliness and honesty due unto them, and are made
against the prohibition, and so are fautie.

And here now, do I demand once, for your six times demaundyng

Sir, there ye may read, expended so by Erasmus (as well seen in saint
Augustine and Chrysostom and others, Cap. 11.
as ye be:) Solutio voti mala, Cap. 10.
coniugium tamen bonu^: the breach of the vow is evil, nevertheless the
Wedlock is good. And again: Quae voto soluto nubunt, dirimi no^ debent: such
as marry after the breach of their vow, ought not to be separated. And
again: Quae post votum nubunt, verum contrahunt matrimonium, such as Marry
after their vow, contracte true Matrimony.

Now master doctor, is there any man in his right wits, that will say S.
Augustine here defines Priests Marriages, yea, regulars, to be adulteries? As
ye unlearnedly force saint Augustine to speak? What danger and blame soever
it be, that votaries be worthy for the breach of an holy vow: yet their T.
ij. that saint Augustine was demanded whether such virgins as came to
Nunries with a full purpose to live in perpetual chastity, betwixt God and
them, made a vow: if such married, whether their marriages might stand etc.
Where have ye learned that this question was so propounded? Augustine. But we
shall hereafter, put this, and such other places, to the judgment of the
reader: And will discuss your Ba^berie gloss, and vain distinction, of Votum
simplex and Votum solenne. Which, though it may have his place sometime: yet
in this saying of saint Augustine simply it can have no place, how
solempnely soever ye set a face on it. And then he shall judge whether I
refrain not justly my stomach, to contorte again, some such pretty names,
as ye in your hoote zeal sprinkle upon poor men. But it is not the name
that changes the

But sirre, as ye follow Pighius, or some Sorbonicall deuines judgment, and
report his saying blindly, in the expendyng of saint Augustine: So, belike ye
stale away with you, when you came last out of Paris, some of their
spectacles, and never saw the places your self. So truly do ye report the
books name of saint Augustine, in this place. For where ye allege in your x.
Chapter. Litera. T. i. a. this place to be in saint Augustine: de bono
coniugali ad Iulianam, a woman: Master Martine, ye be de bono coniugali, is
in the 6 Tome, written contra Iulianum an obscure man and an heritike: and this
place, which ye report to be de bono co^iugali, is in the.4. Tome, de bono
viduitatis, written as some think, by one Julian a catholic man ad Iuliana^ a
noble and catholic woman, and not as ye say de bono coniugali. But this is a
Common grace in you, untruly to report authors, books,

But now if ye can lay that fault to other men's charges stoutly and lowdlie:
then ye think no man will believe, that you be fawtie therewith.

But here may ye note good readers, how sincerely this man can write of this
controversy: ye may have great trust to his

I could say some thing here, even that same that he obiecteth to other, seeing
he misconstrueth his aucthours, misreporteth his allegations, misnameth the
persons, feignyng a woman to be a man, a man a woman, an Heritike a Catholic,
and a Catholic an Heritike: and all to this only end, that he might frame a
probable argument, in an improbable matter. I trust good reader, thou canste
judge how to credit his honesty. I would desire this Ciuilian (whom I hate
not before God) to be better advised Det Dominus nobis omnibus intellectum, and
illuminet nos, vt cognoscamus in terra viam eius, and sciamus quia omnis caro
faenum, and omnis gloria eius, tanquam flos agri: Vbi verbum Domini manebit
inaeternum. The Lord grant unto us all, understanding, and give us such
light, that we may know his way here upon earth, and have in mind
continually, that all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof, as the
flower of the field: whereas the word of the Lord, endures

But ye will say, it is a small matter to misname one aucthor, or book, for
an other. In deed, the weight of the cause stands not therein. But how then
can ye excuse this by any gloss? When ye allege an aucthors testimony, and
then gloss him, and make Qui nititur mendatijs hic passit ventos prouerbio. 10.
Lra^. ^. i. a. Lra^. k. i. ^. Lra^ ^. a. a.
whereby ye may beware of light credence hereafter, thus it is.

Ye report in your book no less then thrice, in the second, sixth, and
eighte Chapiters thereof, one place of Origin on the Numbers: By the which
words ye note substantiallie diverse worthy matters. First that Origin
writes, that Priests ought to make vows: how from the beginning Priests
could not be married. How the Pristes stands at the a^^er, and therefore must
be girded with chastity. How Orignes place, is a plain place, for the
oblatio^ and sacrifice of the Mass, which ye note the endless sacrifice so
meant by Origin.

Now you desire in the true report of this place, and such like to have all
your credence hang in this cause.

Now good master D. Martin, for all your loud and bold vnshamfaste notyng and
glosyng, your report is nothing true, for the mind and purpose that Origin
utters there. For neither is your Mass sacrifice once meant, nor priest
standing at thaulter rehearsed, neither priest vowyng, nor priests marriages
once dreamed on. If we should now verefie your own law upon your self, which
ye charge upon others in your book, Cap. ^^4.
saying: Semel malus, semper praesumitur And then say to your self in your
own words, where ye have so vnshamefastlie uttered your own untruth,
thrice stumblyng at one stone. Can ye of reason require us, to believe you any
more upon your own bare report: that men say so, that stories tell us so,
others did invent these matters, and so forth.

Now if ye yet list to hear one or two more, till we hereafter detecte unto
your own face a great heap: so many, that if they were all taken out of your
book, with textes wrasted and craftily curtalde: I durst take in hand, to
read over the rest

In the.xiij. Chapter of his book, littera kk. ij. page ij. he raileth on
Ponet, as ignoraunte in Law Canon, and says, he reports and falsifieth the
aucthour of his text, ascribyng it to be of the Bushoppe of Romes saying,
where it is, he says saint Augustines own words, in a book written upon
the.xxx. Gratian in the Decrees: How much more shame is it for a professed
Lawier, to lay it upon saint Augustine, that is not found there in his place
of the.xxx. Psalm alleged, and yet may be clearly perceived by the text it
self, where it is written, that it is not saint Augustines saying, but
Gratians very words, as every blind bussarde may sone epsy, that will see
the text it self. And after a triumph made upon Ponetes ignorance, and
falsifiyng of the aucthoure, to bring in a shameless gloss, to say that
Augustine in that same place says, that priests be bound, by the Law of the
Church, never to marry after Priesthood: which words or sense is not
meante of saint Augustine of the Psalm.xxx. For he speaks only, but of
lottes, how they be not evil. etc. and no more is vouched in the decrees, to
be saint Augustines words, nor yet did Gratian speaking these words, Copula
sacerdotalis. etc. infer any such matter, as doctor Martin would make the
reader believe he does. And again, he belieth S Augustine to refer to him
these words. Antequam Euangeliu^ claresceret. etc. which be Gratians words,
and he also belieth

Lra^. ^. 3.
Look in his eighte Chapter, where he sweateth painfully, to show that
seculare English priests be votaries: and to Nazarees as soon as ever they
had vowed, the shore of straight way their here. Now if ye will not believe
him, except he aduouche authority for his saying, he sends you to S.
Hieromes works, and to Isodore, and there find it, if ye can, and tells
you, that many other old writers so expound it. But yet, there is some
mystery mente, that he nether reports any such, nor yet refers us to the
place, where specially S. Hierome so writes. In deed if he had named the
place, ye should have perceived xii. q. r. Duo sunt.
which had been euidente at the eye: one that he belieth saint Hierom in this
matter, whereby ye should have espied his truth, sc, in aduouchyng his doctor:
and that ye may perceive it, thus says saint Hierom. Priests be kings for
rulyng themselves, and others in virtue: and thus have they a rule and a
kingdom in God. This thing, says he, is tokened by the crounes in their
heads. This croune have they (affirms the said Hierome) by the institution
of the Rome Church, in token of that kingdom that is looked for in Christ. And
by the shauyng of their heads, says he, is meante the deposition,

Lo good reader, if he had reported S. Hieromes words, or would but have
alleged his place where to have seen it, ye should by and by have espied his
liyng, and beside that, have seen an other inconvenience, which I think he
would not wish should be learned of saint Hierome, Intelligendum est a^^
Antoninus lib. 3. tr. 23. ca. 5. secundum illa tempora cu^ viuebant in co^muni
Cleri^^, vel de religiosi^
as eloquent a doctor as he is (nor in good faith were reasonable for Christ's
Religion it should be) that the priests should forgo all their temporalties,
and stand at the courtesy of men's devotions, as it is now adays. But yet
saint Hierom makes that to be the signification blessings of the head
priests: I think verily he is not so gostly, Plati^a says before that ^aie
all the Popes were Martirs and from yt day never one since.
one poor halfpeny, then two of his best blessings. Yea, I dare b^e bold
to say, that both this Ciuilian, and all the Canonistes to in christendom,
had rather suffer the married priests with their wives still, with a very
mischief, rather then upon the occasion of rackyng and writhyng of such textes
of doctors, to prove them votaries, they should be so far imperiled: and
then if to this opinion of saint Hierom, some other new fangled head should
join further matter, Durandus in quarto, did. 24. q. 4. tondentur in signu^
depositionis superflu^e curae, quia vero preperunt ad ministerium dei, ^ui
seruire reg^are est, ideo ^aduntur in modum coronae que est signum regale:
Religiosi vero no^ appli^antur ad ministeriu^ diuinu^. v^de walden ^^ira
witcliffe, ^itu. 7. ca. 64. de Ordinis Sa^^amentalibus Fol. 139.
to report what that heretic, either Platina or Valla writes of good saint
Siluester accepted it: Surely, the more of such matter, the worse. I trust
though this Ciuilian affirms plainly, that all the slepyng Canons of the
Church, be awake again, to bite the married priests, by the Queens graces
statute of repeal: yet he would not wish such slepyng sayings of Doctors,
to be raised up, to bark so odiously as the words pretends. It is an old
saying: Malum, been conditum, ne moueas, that is: Stir not up an old
mischief, once well buried, much like to this English Hierome, as craftily as
he reports his name, and suppresseth where to find it. But what shall we
say to Isodore: peradventure he says that priests crounes, signifies their
vow: here I do say, that Isodore says not so. But if our English
po^tificall had known it so, I think that where it brings in three or four
significatio^s of Priests crowns, it would not have ouerleaped that
signification, especially, for that it should seem, that be reports the Hugo
de sancto victore, or else out of Isodore. For there it is reported, that it is
a sign in the priests, that they be elected into one portion of godly
ministry, and that their here is shorn in manner of a round crown, and
their head shaven a lofte, to express the regalitie in Christ, Petrus
Bercharius, who wrote a great Dictionarie of words in divinity, and there
he writes thus of crowns, saying: Quod corona praelatorum est dignitas
Ecclesiastica: vel etia^ quorumlibet just praesidentium and magnorum. Isti
enim ad litteram portant coronas, que sunt signa dignitatis and excellentiae
The crown of prelates, and all other that bear rule and be great men, is
their Ecclesiastical dignity. For these after the letter do wear crowns,
which are hadges and tokens of the dignitee and excellency of their estate.
The which thing, Nature also her self semes to show: for as the Basiliske,
which is king of serpents, is said to have a crown of a certain round white
circle. etc. But of that signification of vows, he speaks not a word. And
furthermore, where Doctor Martine in the over the Chronicles your self, or else
peruse over the Counsails Tollet in Spain, as there be a good dosen, with the
more that have been kept there, and so reported in the volumes of the
Counsels, having some of them above three score Canons apeece, and some one
of these Canons, as long almost as the whole four score and four Canons that
be ascribed to the Apostles.

But yet here is a prudence. While you that be so slow in credit, except ye
see it proved in deed, truly thus stand in a mameryng of his doctrine: he
wins a good time in the hearts of other gentle readers of his book. And so,
when they be grounded

Well. First note how he says, that as soon as the Nazareans made their vow,
they shore of straight way their he^re. M. Martine, what divine in Paris told
you that? In scripture ye shall find, that all the time of their vow, they
kept on their here still, and did not shave it of. As Sa^pson* was a Nazarean,
of who^ it is written. Iud* 13. es. 16 O^igines in leuiti. ca. 20. ho. 11 De
naz^reis scripta sunt, vt comani ^a^^tis nutrirent nec ascenderet ser^^^uper
caput (...), toto voti sui tempore. Ibid. nazareorum vota non perpetua.
Ferrum nunquam ascendit super caput meum, quia Nazareus, id est, Domino
consecratus sum. There never came Raser upon my head, because I am consecrated
to the Lord. So

Moreover the name of Nazareans, was not given them, for shauyng of their
here: but for the contrary. That is, for the norishyng of their here. For,
Epiphanius ^u^tra (...) li. 3. to. 2, H^r^si. 80. page 317. ho^ testatur de
Nazar^is. Vbi seribit historia Eccesiastica Petri Comestoris, vnde sort quidam
pingant christi^s and Aplo^s crinitos. Idem co^firmat Breuiloquus aegregius
author i^ verbo Nazareus. Ibid. idem Petrus ca. 8. dicit Leuitas rafisse omnes
pilos carnis sue in (...) capill^.
Nezer, signifies in Hebrew, as some men deriueth the word Comam, that is the
here or bushe of a man's head. And, Nazareus, quasi dicas Comatus: A
Nazarean, Nume. 6. Omni tempore consecrationis suae, nouacula non ascendet
super caput eius, etc. Sanctus erit crescente caesarie capitis eius. All the
time of his consecration, there shall no raser pass upon his head, he (...)
redire poter^t.


Then ye see how aptly the Priests of England follows the examples of the
Nazareans in shauyng their littell crowns on their heads. It should be rather
a token (if such trisles should be aduouched for arguments) that priests be
no votaries, and that it is well proved, by the shauyng of their here in their
crowns, following the examples of the Nazareans, which after their vow was
done and performed, did shave their heads.

God commanded the Priest in the Leuiticall law, as appears Leuit. xxi that
they should shave neither head nor beard, Nazareans shave their heads in the
time of their consecration. And that the pagane Priests, did use that rite,
Chap. 6.
it may appear both in the prophet Baruch, as also in the 55. Chapter of the
counsel holden at Liberta. If ye now expende this matter, ye may note, how
much learned divinity Nazareans, except he refers this manner of shauyng to
the fact of Sampson a Nazarean, who because he doted so much upon the
strumpet Dalila, and bewraied Gods counsel to her: she thereupon shaued him in
the crown, as they say, and confounded him, whereby his strength was abated,
and the spirit of God departed from him, and he was afterward one spirit with
an harlot. And so he forsaking the institution of God (by sufferyng his here
of consecration Philistines: who (through his own folly) deluded him most
shamefully, and made a laughyng stock of him, and so by that means, he gave
the occasion, that gods name was spitfullie blasphemed. Whereof yet at the last
he repented, and died constantly, in reuengyng Gods enemies. But peradventure
Nazareans of whom saint Augustine speaks: De heresibus Heresi. 9.
who though they confessed Christ to be the son of God: yet they observed
the Iewishe constitutions of the law carnally, not spiritualy. Whose disciples
yet to be, peradventure would not much mislike those crowned Priests,
forasmuch as that smalie Iewishe fault may be seen in their holy father, of
whom they bear that mark. For Pope Gregory the second, being asked of
Boniface thapostle of the Germans, whether they might eat Horses, yea, or
naie: He answered, that it was unlawful to a christen man, to eat any horse,
either tame or wild, Boniface asking of Pope Zacarie, what fowls and beasts
they should eat, and after what time Lard should be eaten: To the first he
answered, that Pies, Choughes, and Storkes, ought utterly to be eschued, of
christen men, but much more Graies, Hares, and Horses, of the wood, must be
refused. And further, se^deth him in these doubts to the scripture among the
Jews constitutio^s. As for the Lard, he writes to him, although he have no
scripture for it, yet he does advise him, that it be not eaten, before it be
either dried by the smoke, or sudden by fire. And if he lest to eat it raw,
it must Augustine may mean of such constitutions, let M. Martine expende.
But to return, it may chance that this Ciuilian, to aduouche his other
saying, will outface the matter, with the Spanishe stories or counsels in
Spain, to prove the married Priests in England, to be like the Apostatas and
Heretics in Spain. And then ye know, he has soore charged them with an
heinous name, beside the note of dissolute contempt, of good and ancient
orders in the church, and say: that of very like craft and subtlety belike,
they put away their crowns, as other Heretics and Scismatiques, put
Anicetus.xiij. yea, full.xiiij. hundredth year ago, so nigh Christ's time, that
he was the tenth, as saint Hierome records, or the eleventh Bushoppe of Rome
at the furthest, in succession to Peter: He I say, would never have Platina
writes) and so to have a crown fashioned like a little circle, as Petrus de
Natalibus writes, and Cronica Martini aduoucheth the same: If there had been
no mystery in the matter. The priests of the Catholic Church, would not so
often in their Masses, have crossed it and blessed it, with the self same part
of the paten of the Chalesse, where with a little before, they had touched the
Mass cake, which they call the body of Christ: If it were not an holier
token, then master Polidore makes of it, to be but a sign of the Anicetus
days, who died a glorious martyr, and not like to dye for trifles. Good
reader, if I should make no answer, to this weighty conference, but stand
called lieger du Main, this aucthoure being so well skilled in this trope and
figure: I should be espied. For it is hard haltyng before a crepell, they
say, for then straight way, should the victory be proclaimed against the
cause. And therefore I must say somewhat.

First I answer, that this Ciuilian shamefully slaundereth Tolet, the fourth
Counsel and forty Canon, thus. Omnes clerici, vel lectores, sicut Leuitae
and sacerdotes, detonso superius capite toto, inferius solam circuli coronam
relinquant: Catholic priests in England be like Heretic priests in Spain.
Non sicut hucusque in Gallitiae partibus facere

Let all Clerks, or readers, as well the Levites as Priests, shave of the
upper part of their whole head, and leave but only a crown of a little
circle beneathe: not as the readers be seen to do, to this day, in the
parts of Gallitia, which do but shave

Now read the words of this Ciuilian, and compare his truth, and remember
again his own Law: Qui semel malus,: He that once is evil, is supposed ever
to be naught, in that kind of naughtines. And then let him reckon on the
winnyng, to see what he has wo^ne to him self, and what the married priests
have lost thereby.

Ye may also spy good catholic shorn priests in England

But marvel not (good reader) though if he appear not much to care though he
be taken. Taken? Nay, taken only will not suffice. Or else that he thinks,
that he can not be reproved in that thing, which to search for, in the
trial of it, must cost you the reading and looking over all saint Hieroms
works, and Isodore beside: and many other old writers also, yea the Spanish
Libraries too, if we should seek whither he may seem to send us.



In deed to confess a truth: When I had considered the odious and impudent
countenance of his preface, the swingyng tail of his lamentable conclusion,
the monstrous body betwixt both: and then again, meruelyng where and how he
had gotten so much matter, and pregnauncie of wit, far above that Carnis
resurrectionem, and vitam eternam. Uerely if he called me Pighius, or Pogius,
or Porphyrius, Iulianus, he might well do it. And then considering him to be
a young man and a Ciuilian: I could not refrain my pen, but thus sportyngly,
to be a Comentar of his book.

And yet sir, to allege a Poets authority, to a Ciuilian, whose word has
yet no great authority: Ridentem dicere verum quis vetat? and hae nugae
seria ducunt. A wiser man then we both be, may some time ride on a long
reed, and yet keep grauitee of countenance, when he comes where grauitee
should be showed: as some have done here in England before now, in as serious
matters as these be, by open writings, wherewith I Scribimus indocti Which
drew my pen, whether I would or no (as before this day, it never was
occupied for any printed ware) to bungle with you.

But yet for the truth of all that I say: if ye find any thing misreported,
and not truly aduouchyng mine aucthorities: I desire you to tell it in your
next book, as sharply as ye can. And if ye will bear with me, for my mirthe
now, as I bear with yours, which I do interpret, that ye used it to solace
your self, and to hold the reader of your book from weariness, to meddle some

And yet (good reader) I desire thee, impute not this to any arrogancy, as
though I would advance my self so high, of mine own poor readyng and
understanding: but the grave and very Catholic writers, in the first
beginning of the church, shall be my warrant, not as aucthours and iudgers of
the scriptures: Ignatius: wherein is not expressed, that Paul is named for a
married man, to have had a wife, although the Heretics of Germany have
corrupted him in the printed copies, quod you.

If ye be asked who told you so? we may know, that master Ignatius. Sin this
may be true* and yet you may lie to say that Paul's name is not there*
But now, good reader, lest yet thou should take upon thee, to journey so
far thither, to seek and find him how true he is in his tale: he discourageth
thee of going thither, for he tells thee even there, that parhaps some
brother of late years, has stolen the book away out of the Library, and
lo, thus thou might lose thy labor. And therefore search no further,
neither spend any labor Beati qui non viderunt and crediderunt: blessed are
they that have believed, though they never saw it. Yea, ye must think that he
reports all things uprightly in all his allegations, specially in Law
Civil and Canon, wherein he is most skilled: in stories, wherein he is te
ipsum castum custodi, keep thy self chaste: so purely, with such integritee,
that Lyranus, and Hugo Cardinalis (as great bunglers as they be) thought to be
of some (but yet be worthy the praise) be ashamed so to expou^de the places
there. But yet he sets such an earnest gloss of his own head, that ye
would think he must needs be of him self an incomparable divine, and exactly
seen in the Greek tongue, in the Greek commentaries and schoolies, as ye know
by the exposition of Nazareus. He is thoroughly well Cap. xi. littera ^i^. b.
which is but six shetes of paper, whereof three leaves be yet void, and
printed in octauo, in a very great letter, both the Latin text, and
English.

Yet this Rhetorician says, by a color of Rhetorike, that if he should make
but a collection of the untruths of that book only, it might grow to a
just volume, of no small quantitee. Aristotils Elenches, that no man can go
beyond him in Paralogismes Fallacies: for how sone espied he doctor Ponet,
reasonyng a non causa ad causam, in such a cause, causeless quarellyng, that
yet remediless it will appear I fear, in most of the Clergy, a cause in
deed that was alleged for a cause. And for an other proof, see how aptly
(specially for the tracte of his process) forc^ori in his tenth Chapter, Cap.
x^. litera v^ij a.
it is wonderful if ye resolve it by it self, it be^yng to unreasonable
strong. And as for Arithmetike, his wit passes. If ye will see a trial of
it, how connyngly by addition, and subtraction, by division and multiplication,
he shows a proof: look in the thirtene chapter, Lra^. ^. 4. a.
littera L.i. where in the very end of his book, to make the matter quite out
of doubt, that it were nothing expediente for this realm to have priests
marriages suffered, though neither scriptures, Laws, Counsels, and Decrees,
before brought in by him, might fortune not to appear

Furthermore, he put the case, that one with an other, has had three children
a piece: although, he says, many have had four summa summarum.lxiiij.
thousand mouths, that the Realm is charged withal to find. Is not this a
marvelous matter, think ye, and an importable burden, to the little Isle of
England?

Now, further consider what would grow thereof in process

Imagine, says he, four generations of only one man's issue, and every of
them to be married. And see what this will grow to in few years? As for
example, says he, let there be one man that has five children. And let
every one of these five children, have other five children. And lest you
should mistake him, that Pythagoras him self, the first aucthour of this
science, could not more truly have hit it.

Then go now to the fourth generation, still multiplied by v. it must
increase to the number of hundrethes at the least, even six hundredth.xxv
persons. Ye see how precisely he goes on, to bring all with him, leauyng
neither out the odds score, nor yet the little five. All this number, he
says, may grow within the compass of.lx. years. Whereby ye may learn,
that he gives

And again, ye must grant him an other case imaginatiue: nombers. And ye
know, they may not be any such neither, as

But now at the last, when he has brought orderly his accoumpt, to such
plain demonstration of six hundredth and five and twenty: he concludes thus.
If the first manne, says he (yet

And here again note good reader, he means no other generations but of
Priests married. For he accounts not these, that be gotten of priests
unmarried: for it would help his number but little God wotte, though he so did.
And again, ye know most commonly they be not without their fathers, that must
aduouche them, and can not spare them in the tale of his example, He y^ needs
not to learn a poinct of arithmetike, or is to grave to come so low to such
trifli^g triuial s^^ences, let him look over the leaf, and go by.
to make this matter plain (as I warraunte you, he sweatte at the brows, and
was in as cold a study again, sudauit and alsit, before the conclusion was
fully spied) some rude and dull Asseheade would marvel, how his two
principal sums in both his examples comes to pass. Then for a more
familier manner of handlyng the matter, he would have him imagine: that he
goes so to work with him, as if he would first make a rekenyng that every
ass has eight ears. And to prove that to him, he bears him in hand that
every Ass

It is so evident to your eye which he tells you, that you can not be
deceived in this manifest rekening: that is that every ass has undoubtedly
iiii. heads, and eight ears.

But to make an end, for this man's worthy reward, let us put an other
Imaginatiue case, that to this Ciuilian, (though he came of late from Paris, as
poor as Job when he satte on his Archadia, where they be best, or in
Antrothessaliae, where they excel in greatness, all other Asses: either in
Paris, or Padua: and then he should come with every one of these Asses, into
the city of Samaria, when it should be beseged by Benedab the king of the
Syrians, where he might sell all his ass heads, every head for four score
silver pieces readelie, as the market was once so good there, and may chance
to be here nere at home in England,

Then if this man, to make an even account of his asses of.iiij. heads for
every ass, iiij. score siluerlynges for every head, beside the bodies: and if,
to be suer in his account, what it would amou^t to, he would counsel with
Budeus de Ass, what every one of these iewesse pieces drew to in our current
money: what a notable rich man, think ye, would this man be in such
multiplication, by giving every ass four great heads? To sell every
Balaams ass still, to serve for his own ridyng, to carry and recary him, the
faster for his lucre to his Martes: where he

Whereof I doubt not one day, his very ass will tell him, and reprove his
blindness and madness: as true a prophet as he judges himself to be.

But because he is so good in casting, not the dice, but in counters: I remit
him to them, to know his gain, how it shall arrise at lenght to him. For he
can do it straight way in his wit. Ye see how expedie^tly he dispatcheth his
other two cases: whereupon you must needs think, that he is wonderfully seen
in all sciences.

But yet how well seen soever he would be taken to be, in all the seven
sciences, by his former writing and accountyng, I w^ne, wise men, will think
he lacks all his five wits, for such a reckoning. As for any show hereby,
that he should be endued with any of the three theological virtues, faieth,
hope, and charetie: or yet with the four Cardinal virtues, to make up an even
number, to match his said seven arts, I believe all the calculation that is
in his head, will make but a course demo^stration, if he were well searched.

For what remedy, think ye, does he pretelie insinuate, for cui cura est de
omnibus, who has care over all.

If I should construe that he means to instill that policy into Christen
Princes heads, which he says is the use of the great Turk, or the Sultan:
that is, to pick quarrel of wars, to the destruction of their people, and
not for conquest: I dare not judge Now, that is in Queen Mary's ^ares.
under his banner.

King Henry the eight, (of whom now men preach a broad most dishonorable
reports openly in Pulpittes, and yet be reputed In multitudine populi dignitas
regis, and in paucitate plebis, ignominia pri^cipis. In ye multitude of people,
does the dignity of a prince appear, and the fewness of the people, is the
dishonor of the Prince. And that noble king of the Macedonians, Philip by name,
having a tender heart to his people, would say, that he would not loose a man,
for to win a City, to whom when it was vpbreided at a time, because he

But sir, for all your great prudence and policy, in stopping unmarried
priests generation, if ye could bring it about, as ye never shall, ye might
thereby procure to the realm fewer then it has, I fear, by a great meanie in
a few years. And so where

If many a sorry man in England, master Martin, had not better help then at
home: good master Parsone could not have so many Crisoms as he has: Nor yet
ye master doctor, when ye shall be a great man, have so many follow your
tail, as your stomach would wish to have.

As for the victualles of this realm, D. Martine had the oversight of
Denisons, at this time in office.
if ye would not make so many Denizons for your own lucre (although profitable
and gentle strangers, ought to be welcome, and not to be grudged at) and if
ye would not sue out Placardes, for the immoderate for such provision, were so
diligently looked to, that great numbers vinum Theologicum, Theological wine
at Paris.

Yet M. Martin, how glorious so ever ye be now, in pelle Leonis, in your Lions
skin, and though ye be coumpted of some folks, to be never so Catholic:
yet beware you prove not at length Asinus apud Cumanos, to be such an Ass as
was once at Cumae. In the mean season I tell you, that ye be not faithefull to
God in his providence. And for all your high offered service to the Queens
majesty, for reformation of the Realm: I

I trust your words yet mean not, as you purporte: God forbid. But as for
the fartilitie of your own native country, how so ever ye be degenerated into
French nature, to slander the Realm, what plenty and increase has been
before time

It chanced, that there came a French Ambassador to the kings highness,
king Henry the eight (I trust God has his soul) with letters I trow from
the French king, not long before that, sent to him from the holy father of
Rome. This Ambassador sittyng at the Counsel table, began to set up a
stout countenance, with a weak brain, and carped French excedingly fast:
which he thought should have been his only sufficient commendation of them
all, that were at the table, that he could speak so readily. The matter of his
talk was universal mon sire, to report part of their communication, to the
lord Shrewesburie: Made report thereof yet in most courteous

When he heard it, where before his head by great age, was almost grouelyng
on the table: he roused him self up in such wise, that he appeared in length
of body, as much as he was thought ever in all his life before. And knittyng
his brows, he laid his hand on his dagger, and set his countenance in such
sort, that the French hardy Ambassador, turned color

When these words were reported again to this French

Now master studente of Paris, this very noble manne in deed, and worthy to
be had in long remembrance, was of better experience in the fertilitee of
this Realm, then ye would seem to knowledge: And had an other manner of faith
to God, for the continuau^ce then ye have, to fear such a lack and
scarcitee.

And as for the multitude of the people, that of old time has been in the
realm, in comparison that be now, as it is yet at this day, much
replenished, by the spare of Gods hand from plagues, wars, and other
mortalitees, he be praised therefore: yet ye may go into three hundredth
Parish Churches, at this day, and find not on the Sundaies so much people,
that the Churches be pestured with to many. But as for populositie of people
that have been in this Realm, I think some men could say somewhat. I dare
say, for Linne, and Lincoln, not the third man now there, that have dwelt
there some time.

I remember, that being once at a marchaunte man's table in London, which was
in the very last year of Iubilee, so coumpted commonly, I heard a man
rehearse, how that Platina writes, that Pope Boniface the eight, which did
write himself the Lord of all the world, both of Spiritualtees and
Temporaltees Boniface did constitute, every hundred year, for the year of
Iubilee, and did privilege those years of Iubilee, with great indulgence, and
pardon of clean remission. In respect of which great grace, to be gotten in
those years, for such as will dispose them selves thereto, Pope Clemente the
sixte, brought it to fifty years, and Pope Paul the second, changed that
from.l. year to.xxv. year, and that as Fasciculus temporum notes, in fauore^
says he, that is: of great zeal and favor to men's souls, that because
wickedness did redounde, so should grace also abound the more. At which
talk, there was an honest plain manne said: that readyng sometime in the
English Chronicles, he noted, that he read of two recourses of years of
Iubilee, which were not very gracious to men's bodies, within the Realm. The
one he said, was about the thirtene year, in the days of king Henry the
seventh, in which year died in London above.xxx. thousand people: the other
year of Iubilee, was about Platina writes in vita Clementis.vi.) that there
was not left skant ten, of every thousand men. Which Pestilence he
imports to the great confluence of people, that came into Italy this year of
Iubilee for pardon. But in England every where innumerable destroyed, in so
much, that he told it out of Fabia^, that after they had buried in every
Church yard within London, (as he was well remembered thereof) lvij. thousand

And whiles this was in doing, the said prince Edward his son, warred upon
the French men, and lastly came to Bordeaux, with many rich prisoners, and
Pillagies to his great honor. manne is in such wanhope, that if Priests
marriages

I beseech almighty God, keep all such clawbackes, such hoote spurs, from
Princes Counsels. God send us slow Judges, and spedie Batliffes: Not so
hasty masters of the Chauncerie, propter fornicationem vitandam, vnusquisque
vxorem suam habeat, and vnaqueque suum virum. For auoidyng fornication, let
every man have his wife, and every woman her husband: Ye say that. D. Ponet
falsely brings in, to prove thereby that all men have liberty to marie,
for the auoidyng of fornication: for ye say, and that by thaucthoritie of
saint Hierome, Cap. xi.x.1. b.
that all the question of saint Paul, stands in this poinct: whether the
Corinthians, should now (after they had received the faieth of Christ) put a
way their wives that they had married in their paganism? And further, if in
this poinct and nothing else, was the sum of all the whole question, as
Hierome affirms that it was: than has. D. Ponet and all the sects of
Germany, most shamefully alleged this place of. S. Paul for their purpose,
to infer and prove there, that al men and women without exception, either
ought to marie, or may marie. Cap. xi.v.4. a
And these be your own words. And further ye say, that to disprove this, ye
will cite three or four of the most ancient writers, with this further
assurance of credit and warrantise, that there shall not be found any some of
the old fathers or ancient writers of the Church, that dissenteth from them.
And then ye recite Tertulian, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Hierom. Now in this
point of your warantise and credit: let us try Faber stapulensis expendeth,
that there were xiiij. several answers and doctrines set forth by S. Paul,
orderly written to the questions of the Corinthians. First, if a man be not
joined to a wife, it were good if he did not couple him self to a wife, and
utterly not to touch any woman at all. Secondly, lest some occasion of
fornication might steal in upon a man, then it were lawful to every manne to
have his peculiar wife, and to every woman her proper and peculiar husband.
Faber note the residue of the questions and answers. But be it in case, that
we had no scripture to lead us to judge of that matter, yet the very context
of saint Paul shows Hierome himself, and in that place, if ye had not
listed rather to quarrel, and to confound a truth, then to search a truth.
For somewhat before these words, which ye allege so mangled: thus writes
saint Hierome, of the diuersitees of the questions, that were propounded to
him by the Corinthians, being five in number, whereof he makes mention. Inter
caetera, Corinthij per literas quesierant, vtrum post fidem Christi, Contra
Iulianum Libr^ primo.
caelebes esse deberent: and continentiae causa quas

Among other things, the Corinthians enquired by their Hierome, what Paul did
write again to these matters, when he says: Of those things whereof Hierome,
whether married men should leave their wives? Moreover, saint Hierom writing de
virginibus. 31. q. 1. Qua^do says thus. Quomodo virginibus, fornicationis
periculo co^cedit nuptias, and excusabile facit, quod per se non appetitur: ita
eodem fornicationis periculo, co^cedit viduis, secu^da matrimonia co^trahere.
Now expende wherein the chapter is fornicationis periculum named, but in the
first part. Ergo by S. Hierom himself, it is spoken to virgenes, and not married
only. Moreover, S. Hierom as well in that place against Iouinian, as in his
apology to Pa^machius, inferryng this place of them that were unmarried and
widows: Bonum est eis, si manseriut vt ego. Si autem se non continent, nubant:
It were good for them, if they tarried, and were as I am, but if they can not
live co^tinently, let them marry, adds these words, idipsum dicens quod
supra, saying the same he did before, propter fornicatione^ autem, and ne
tentet vos satanas propter incontinentiam vestra^, for fornication, and least
Satan should tempte you for your incontinencie. So that it may appear by
saint Hierome, that though the first question were concerning persons in
Matrimony, propter fornicationem. etc. But ye will say, that it is not like
that he should dissent from himself. I answer, that Pighius, whose pipe ye
follow in all your maskyng and daunsyng, proves in his Hierarchy lib. ii.
cap. x. that in the Erasmus notes no less by him, for the diuersitee of
wres^ing this text of saint Paul. Diuisa est mulier and virgo: and if these
will not serve you, Hierome himself, will not stick to say that he did it for
the advantage of his cause: and writing to Ruffine says thus. If we have
slipped at any time, and may appear to be frivolous to the wise reader, for
that we have written, let him lay the fault upon the aucthour. For we did
write these things, being sick in bed of a long sickness, and did indite
them in haste, to be written by our Secretary. And where ye bring in
Tertulia^, Ambrose, and Chrysostom: they say that Paul was asked that
question, but that not only says saint Hierome (as ye would make him to
speak.) So that saint Hierome, either purges himself of your slander, that
ye make upon him: or else that he writes variously for the commodity of his
cause: As he writes dangerously in the whole cause, if he be taken as his
words sound. But how so ever he agrees with himself, yet if he mean that
saint Paul should have given full liberty to lecherous life, if he had
granted marriage to them that can not sc: Propter fornicationem vitandam,
vnusquisque suam vxorem habeat. etc. Look upon S. Augustine, who exhorts men
to virginity, saying: Illud potius excellentis contine^tiae bonum, qui potest
capere capiat. De nupt^^ and con^^^p. liber. ^ Capitulo. 16.
Qui vero id capere non potest, si acceperit vxorem, non peccat, and faemina,
si se non continet, nubat. Bonum est enim homini, mulierem De bono viduitatis
cap. ^.32 (...) sunt ^i.


They that can receive that better gift of excellent chastitee, let them take
it. But he that can not take it, if he do marry a Augustine.

If now, master Martin, I sought more the victory at your hand, then that ye
should see your own fault, I could say somewhat Augustines words I think be
plain enough. And I trust ye will not deny, but that he is an old father, and
an ancient writer in the Church: which if he be, then be you a young, fond,
and a new starte up wrangeler. But because ye be a Lawier, I shall report you
a Counsel, and a Law to, that uses this proposition universally, and not
within such narrow limittes as ye drive it up, even a counsel of Spain,
holden at Tollet, the second Counsel, the first Chapter, in the v. year of
their king Amalrike, and about the time of Pope Ihon the second, which is a
reasonable Canon, in respect, both for Hijs au^t, quibus voluntas propria,
interrogationis tempore, desiderium nube^di persuaserit, co^cessam ab Apostolo
licentiam (i. Cor. vii.) auferre non possumus. But as from those, who by their
own proper will are persuaded, and have a desire to marry at the time of
their examination, we ca^ not take away from them that libertee that is
granted them by the Apostle. I pray you what other sentence or license is
concluded in the seventh Chapter in the section.a. but this: propter
fornicationem For the aduoydyng of fornication, let every man have his wife.
And in the Law ye shall find the self same again reported, Did. 28. de hijs
where the gloser says thus upon the very place: Quod ergo de iure co^muni
competit, negandum non est. The benefit of the common law, Chrysostom upon
that place: Bonum est homini mulierem non tangere, it were good for a man not
to touch a woman: Where as he says, some would have it applied perticularly
upon Priests, he says upon the consideration of the circumstaunce of the
place, that it is not so particularly to be taken, but universally: and
concludes, non ergo sacerdoti dum taxat hoc dicitur: this is not spoken to the
priests only. Which discourse follows immediately upon that place, brought in
by the said master Martin, upon which words, Theophilact writes thus.
Bonum and eximia res est cuiuis It is a good and an excellent thing, to every
man in the world, not to touch a woman, but to continue Theophilact notes:
thou see the wisdom of Paul, how he shows that continency is better,
and yet notwithstanding, he compels not thereto, if any manne can not, and
that, least worse inconvenience should be committed. For if he suffers
much violence (saiethe he) and brennyng (for surely the tyranny of
concupiscence is great) recede from those labors, least thou get them wives.
Which, whether soever ye grant, is In chroni. abb. vrspergensis.
But will ye hear what Huldaricus Bushoppe of Augusta, writes to Nicholas the
first, of whom ye may here your name. He recites the text: Propter
fornicationem dixit. Vnusquisque suam vxorem habeat, quod specialiter ad laicos
pertinere, mentiuntur hypocritae, qui licet in quouis sanctissimo ordine
constituti, alienis reuerav xoribus non dubitant abuti, and quod flentes
cernimus, omnes in supradictis saeuiunt sceleribus. Hi nimirum no^ recte
scripturam intellexerunt, cuius maxillam, quia durius pressere, sanguinem pro
lacte biberunt.

For fornication he said, let every man have his wife. Which saying and
confession, to perteine specialy and only to the lay folk, is a plain lie
of the Hypocrites: which in what holy order soever they be set, yet without
boubt they force not to abuse other men's wives. And these be they, which do
rage in the forsaied crimes. sc, of abusing their fathers wives, to use the
filthy occupiyng of mankind, and of brute bestes, which filthiness we can not
behold says he, but with weeping tears. These be they, which do not
understand the scriptures aright, whose breasts whiles they press so hard,
they suck out cruel blood, in the stead Chrysostom, and Theoqhilact sayings
before rehearsed: Bonum est mulierem non tangere, it is good for a man not to
touch a woman, to belong as well to the lay man, as to the priest. But this
saying (for avoidyng fornication, let every man have his wife) to pertain to
lay men only: which yet Huldarichus shows the contrary. Sir, if ye be
so hard for nigardshippe, to hold the priests to the strait of the first
sentence, and not to give them the liberty of the sentence followyng: I ween
ye will be answered of the priests married and unmarried, as seruanntes in the
country will answer their nigard masters that will ioygne them to fast on
the vigils in hay Alfonsus tractation, where he holds plainly, that the
priest has yet that indulgence and sentence of S. Paul, to remedy his
infirmity, yea, after his order and promise past, and the reguler also after
his vow. And again, resort ye to Ioannes Genesius in his first leaf, and
there shall ye learn, that he defines, Quod si se non co^tinent, contrahant
matrimoniu^. If they do not contain, let them mary, for it is better to marry
then to burn. But ye will say, it is better for the lay man, but not for him
that is a priest, or a Regular. Why, may man's institution and vow, defeat
this second institution of God of matrimony for incontinentie, that any of his
Sufficit tibi gratia mea, my grace suffices thee. And as Primasius writes.i.
Cor. 7. non oe^s capiunt verbu^ hoc, sed quibus datu^ est: Al do not
comprehend this word, but they to who^ it is given. Nam si generale esset,
quod potest vnus and oe^s possunt. If it were general, ye one might, al might.
And where ye (M. Martin) pronounce in diverse places of your book, that
virginity is in our election, and in our free will: If ye were understood as
ye understand D. Ponette, ye should be rather like to be angry with saint
Augustine for writing against the Pelagia^s, which did hold, that God had
committed the gift of continency to our election, as ye may read it Contra
Iulianum: Lib. ^. Cap. 7.
then english preachers, whom ye call Heretics, that Augustine for writing
against Pelagian, against whose opinion, no men be more leanyng to S.
Augustine, then they be. Yea, some be thought to be to much inclined, etiam
cum imuria liberi arbitrij, in hijs, quos spiritus liberauerit. But yet we
will take your meaning by other places D. Taylior.
both untruly and dishonestlie, as though they should mean, that no Bushop
could be a good Bushop without a wife. And when ye saw his qualefication
aetatem habet, respondeat pro seipso, he is old enough, let him answer for
him self. Peradventure ye will say, why does saint Augustine and other
doctors say and affirm plainly in diverse places: quod non licet nubere ijs
qui vouerunt continentiam. etc. that it is not lawful for them to marry, who
have vowed continency. It is true, that by the Law Augustine, saint Hierome,
and other mo, would not say and affirm in manifest words, that to the
votaries after their profession, if they brenne, it were better even for them
to marry. Saint Hierom writes. Non expedit homini, 33. q. 5. qui (...).
ad coelorum regnu^ tendenti, accipere vxorem, sed difficilis res est, and non
omnes capiunt verbum illud: vbi Glosa: Non expedit: Verum est propter onera
matrimonij, sed expedit propter fornicationem vitandam. It is not expedient for
him that trauaileth toward the kingdom of heaven, to take a wife: but that
is an hard matter, and all can not comprehend that saying, where the Gloss
says: it is not expediente, that is Hierom, Matrimonium, 32. q. 1. quomo.
propter se, no^ est appetendum. Verum est inquit glosa, quia non ducit ad
vitam, sed tamen appetenda est, causa vita^dae fornicationis and propter
prolem. Matrimony is not to be desired for it self: That is true says the
Gloss, for that, it helps not to life: but yet it is to be desired, that
fornication may be aduoided, and for issue sake. Thus upon occasion of your
words, we have straied a little further then we purposed, and yet I trust not
unprofitably to the reader.

But to you master Martin, I write thus much. Your self performed no manner of
sinceritee, in reportyng either your adversaries, or your friends, for all your
assured assurance of credit, and your promised warrantise. As in reportyng
saint Hierome, ye do violently rack him, and leave out that which he did
write a little before, for the chief declaration of the matter: so ye do even
the same, in reportyng the saying of Chrysostom, leauyng out that, Cap. 10. ^.
i
which immediately does follow to open the truth. And yet ye write in your
book thus: that it is the nature ever of the heretics, to take a piece of the
aucthors words, and not the whole sentence. mayor, and then to you the minor
is so manifestly agreeable: what will the indifferente man then knit up, think
you, in the conclusion? How fast soever ye call other men heretics, and your
self catholic, Math. 12.
Ex operibus, says Christ, iudicate, of the fruits and deeds, give
judgment: Ex verbis tuis iustificaberis, and ex verbis condemnaberis: Of thy
words shalt thou be justified, and of thy words shall thou be condemned. And
if ye would yet se this assertion proved an other way and with an other
reason, I would desire the reader to expende, an excellent poinct of his
corrupt wrestyng and wranglyng, to judge whether he in the quae nescit
erubescere, which knows no shamfastnesse: Even to say with the good
Prelates, of whom Esaie writes in his Prophecy: Cap. 28.
Posuimus mendacium spem nostram, and mendatio protecti sumus: we have laid
liyng for our hope Litera. N. 1, Lib. 4. cap. 23.
he reports a story out of Eusebius, of an Epistle, which was written by
Dennis Bushoppe of Corinth, to Pymrus a Busshpppe in Creta, of which story he
marueileth very much, that none of our men, nor the Germans, ever alleged
the place in their writings. But yet he says, when he had thoroughly
considered the story, he left his marueilyng, because he says, it makes
quite against them. First I might retorte his own check, that (...) ^eueth
to the lord of Cauntorburie (in Ca. 5. (...)
that no ancient writer makes sufficient proof, that Clementes Epistles were
al true, and not counterfete) For has M. Martin so read all the Germans,
that he can so say, that it is not alleged of them in their writings? If I
would so spend paper, I could refer him to half a dosen, that do expressly
allege the story for a strong place against him, and al such as will lay
heavy burdens of compelled chastity, as is there written, or as Nicephorus
terms it, Lib. 4. Cap. 8.
onus caelebatus, the burden of sole life, as of necessity, in the necks of
their Disciples, by the which, their infirmity might be in great danger.
Which sentence thus uttered by Dionisius, the said Pynitus, did well accept,
as Dionisius, to write to him after that, some further matter of stronger
meat, to feed his people withal. etc. Now sir, he leaves quite out the
first sentence, written by Dionisius: and also how Pynitus allowed his
counsel for the better, which is the pithe and chief matter of the Epistle
and story: and then violently draws the last words of stronger meat, to
sound to that purpose, that to live in syngle life, and men to renounce
their wives Lawfully Married, should be that strong meat, wherewith he should
feed his people.

Which is so impudentlye wreasted and falsified, that Hierome in catal.
script. Ecclesi. making mention of Dionisius letter and Pynitus answer,
draws no such sense out of the^. And he can not say, that he followed some
man's reportyng the place, or had not seen the place himself. For he says,
that he had througly considered that story, to see Eusebius conclusion, as he
has here uttered it. Is this your through seeing and considering Nicephorus
story, will sufficiently try out the truth of this matter, if there were yet
no other help, to maintain the said story.

If the reader will now take your mayor again, where ye say that it is the
nature of Heretics to take a piece of the authors, words and not the how
might he proceed in problem against you? And that ye may better perceive
how thoroughly he has considered other of his aucthorities and doctors, Lra^.
Ee. iiij. b.
if ye do but only look upon one page in his xij. Chapter, ye shall see how
thoroughly he has belied more of his aucthors, and how negligently he has
considered what he there writes. In the beginning of the page, he would make
you believe that S. Ambrose wrote that whole sentence. Vri est desiderijs agi ac
vinci. Ne vincamur au^t, in nostra potestate est, per dei gratiam. And then he
Englisheth it thus. That is to say. To burn, is to be vexed with
concupiscence, and Ambrose in two points. For first saint Ambrose says:
vri est desiderijs, agi vel vinci. And not: agi ac vinci. To be carried with
desires, or to be ouercomed, and not: to be carried with desiers, and to be
ouercomed. For as well agi desiderijs as vinci desideriis (as other
interpretours expound the place) is, vstionem pati. That is, to burn. And to
avoid either of them, saint Paul grants marriage. For either of them
excedeth Volatiles and Lubricas cogitationes: the soden and transitory
cogitations of lust that is in manne. But he, says S. Ambrose, that sees
himself not able to persevere by the violent motions of his flesh, let him
marry, rather then burn, and so peradventure he may afterward obtain this
thing. So that he which Ambrose words there, though your text and your
translation would so blanch it out. But so does your blind guide, whom ye
followed in this allegation, and in others, that impudente Pelagian Pighius:
who, in his books condemns saint Augustine in that very Catholic
doctrine, which he defends against Pelagius: the taste and suit of which
Augustine, still followyng your master Pighius, which in his xv.
controversy reports this saying upon saint Augustine as ye do, untruly.
Which part of your book ye stale out there verbatim, because ye would be suer
to tread in his steps, like a learned man. Ye auouche, as liyng Pighius
does, that upon this place of the Apostle* eueri person has his own gift,
one after one sort, and an other after a another sort: that S. Augustine should
say further in this manner, vnusquisque iuxta votu^ suu^ etc. That is to say:
every person according (votum) there to signify a vow, as ye speak of vows.
For (votu^) there signifies no more a vow, then it does in this place of S.
Ambrose, writings de virginibus Non enim imperari potest virginitas, sed
optari. Nam quae supra nos sunt, in voto magis qua^ in magisterio sunt.
Uirginitie may not be commanded, but it may be wished. For such things as
be above our nature, be rather in wish then in will. Then Augustine writing
upon this place: every man has his proper gift of God. etc. says thus. Who
then gives these things? Who does distribute to every manne his proper
gift, as it pleases him? Uerely God, in whom there is no wickedness or
parcialitee. And thereupon by what equitee he makes some thus, and some thus,
it is to man either impossible to know, or else very Augustine upon that place,
although that other sentence, so taken as it is meant, and written by the
aucthour thereof, is godly, but not as you and Pighius suspiciously would draw
it.

Also where ye define, that it is in our power and election to live in
virginitee, if ye will do as saint Paul did, ye say, when he said, ter
dominum rogaui. etc. that is: for the which I have prayed thrice to our lord,
that he would take it away from me. etc. Uery well sir, but then in this
request, because saint Paul was not heard, for all his thrice askyng: what
else may we learn by De adulterinis comugijs.

Lib. 2. cap. 18.


Saint Augustine says thus. Qui potest capere capiat. Ergo, qui potest,
capiat, quod no^omnes capiunt. Possunt autem capere, quibus hoc praestat
misericordia dei occulta, sed non iniusta. He that can take it, let him take
it, ergo, he that can, let him take it, which all men take not: but they be
able to take it, to whom God granted it by his secret mercy, but yet
righteous. And again he (of grace and free will) writes Augustine.

Capitulo 12. Latera E^. 1. Lib. de ca^itate dei. Cap. 4.
Also ye say, that the will, must go before in manne for this said
chastitee, and then God will surely follow with his gift and grace. etc.
Saint Augustine says plainly, that God must alioqui, says he: ex illis
essent potentibus, quoru^ infirmatus est arcus, or else they should be of those
strong men, whose bow is to weak. And further he says: it is he that gives
the vow to the vower. For no man can vow rightly any thing to our Lord,
except he do receive Aransican, kept about the days of Leo the first, Cap.
xj.
says thus of the bond of vows: No man can rightly vow to our Lord any
manner of thing, except he receives it from him, as it is written: Such
things as we have received of thy hand, we give it unto thee. etc. And
Ciprian: De baptismo Christ's.
gratias ago tibi Clementissime deus, quia quod quaeris a me, prius ipse
donasti. I give thee thanks, O most merciful God, for thou do first give
me that, which thou requireste at my hand. And Prosper writes in verse.

Optima vota deo, quorum est dator ipse vouentur,

Those vows be best vowed to God, which he gives himself, and that is
worthy to return again, from whence it came. Also ye affirm, Cap. 12.
liter^ Ee. 4
that it is bawdrie doctrine to teach, that the spirit of God must give
testimony to the conscience of man that has so vowed, whether he perceives
by the stirring of his flesh, that God has so called him or no. Saint
Augustine himself then utters bawdrie doctrine. Cap. 44
For writing of holy virginitee, he says thus. What then shall the virgin
think (says he) the secret judgments of God, that is to say: the gifts
of God, which do not bewraie and declare them selves to every Augustines
doctrine, Primasius his own very scholar, writes not much from him. For thus
he says: 1. Cor. 7
Nam si vnusquisque hoc ad carnem suam reuocet, and videat se virginitatem
seruare non posse, nubat, ne fornica^do turpis appareat. that is: for if a man
will fall to a rekonyng with his flesh, and perceives that he has not the
possibilitee to keep virginitee, let him marry, lest by committyng
fornication, he should appear dishonest.

Also ye call it a beastly, Cap. 13. F^^j.
saying, to allege saint James circumstaunce, if GOD will, if we live, of
such men as will make vows, which doctrine ye write, to be reproved by the
next text of saint James that follows. Which ye report thus: Nunc autem
exultatis in labiis vestris, and ye do English it even so: but now ye rejoice
in your lips. But how truly, let the very Cobbler judge what lips ye have.
And as for the conditions aforesaied, the blindest of all the Lawiers and
School men, which If it please GOD, if I may, if I live. etc. In omni voto
(says some) considerari debet, quid liceat, quid deceat, quid expediat. And
again: Sicut iurame^tum factum in materia iuris, recipit omnes limitationes
iuris, sic and votum, cum ambulent pari passu. that is to say: In every vow
must be considered, what ought to be done, what may be done, what becomes
to be done. And as an oath made in form of Law, receives all the
limitations of the Law: even so does the vow, for both of them walk after

But because ye be a lawier, ye may peradventure think, that your self is of
as good authority as these Summaris^es be. I will for your learning, bring
you such a writer, as I think ye will never be so good a Ciuilian, as he is
known to be a Divine. (...) 9. cap. 18.
Cirill by name, who writing upon S. John, and upon Peter's bold promise,
confuteth your unlearned writing in that whole part of your book, which ye
do so boldly bolster out. Quoniam quae priscis acciderunt, ad doctrinam
nostram scribuntur: hoc loco moneri nos arbitror, non oportere quicquam

Forasmuch as such things as chanced to the old fathers, be examples
written to us for our learning: In this place, I judge, that we be put in mind,
that nothing, as certain, ought to be promised of us to God, as though we were
the Lords of If the Lord will. For a will and an endeavor of mind, must be
alwaie in us to do well. But to attribute to us, the way and power to do that
is not in us, is a soolehardie boldness. And so by this means, shall we, as it
is mete for us, refer to God the governance of all matters, and more safely
shall we

Also ye affirm five or six times in your book, Ca. 12. P.M.
that saint Augustine called the marriages of votaries, worse then adulteries,
and ye make him to say thus. Non dubitauerim dicere, tales nuptias esse
peiores adulterio. I doubt not to affirm, that such marriages are worse then
adulteries. Where in very deed saint Augustine proves them to be marriages.
And says in that conference: Non possum dicere quidem, a proposito meliore
lapsas, si nupserint faeminae, adulteria esse, no^ coniugia. Sed plane, no^
dubitauerim dicere lapsus, and ruinas That is: I cannot (says he) call the
marriages, of those women, which be fallen from the better purpose, if they
marie, adulteries and not marriages: but plainly I would not doubt, to call
their slidynges and fallinges from their holy chastity, which is vowed to
God, to be worse then adulteries. S. Augustine confirms this to be his
judgment, writing upon the 75. Psalm. Saying: Quae autem respexit ad nuptias,
non quia uoluit nubere, damnatur, sed quia iam ante recesserat, and fit vxor
Loath, respiciendo retrorsum. She that has looked back to marriage, is not

Also ye teach, Ca. 12. E^. (...) Ca. 2. C. q
that saint Paul exhorted Tymothie not to marie, and make him to say these
words: Oportet Episcopum puduum esse: A Bushoppe must be chaste. Yet
Chrysostom upon the Epistle which he writes to the said Tymothie, says,
that though he wished every manne as himself was, that is to mean, co^tinent:

Cap. xi. y. ij.
Also you teach that the old law is confounded by the new law. Meaning that
this text, crescite and multiplicamini, grow ye and mulplie, is confounded by
the writing of saint Paul: art thou free from a wife? Seek not then to have
one. Where all Deuines hold, that that text stands yet as strongly for the
institution of He that strikes with swoorde, shall perish by swoorde,
stands strongly to maintain the law of the sword to the worlds end. De
habitu virginum.
But Ciprian writes more learnedly and truly, and says, that this first
sentence grow and multiply, commanded generation. The second sentence
counseled to continency. Yet but to them, which be able to attain to
continency, says he.

Cap. 3. D. 1.
Also ye affirm statly without all doubt, that Pope Calixtus, whom ye allege
to be so nighe the Apstles days, that he might have known them (for ye say
that he was within one hundredth Did. 82. proposuisti.
ye had spoken more like, that he might have known him, as Pighius says, but
yet so should ye both lie in so saying. But to go on) he should (as ye say)
decre, that priests, Deacons, Subdeacons and Monks, should neither marry
wives, nor have concubines: and that their marriages should be disseuered, and
committed to penance. And further ye write, that Pope Lucius, which was about
the year of our Lord. CClxv. should decree that none should be received to the
ministry of the altar, but such as would observe Siritius, which was Pope
anno Domini. 388 did first inhibite Priests and Deacons marriages: Gregoriu^
(...) dixi^: Sul atacom^ semel factu, (...) non nubere.
For so among others testifies Polidore. And so writes the gloser of the
Decrees Disti. 84. that Siritius brought in continency to the Priests and
Deacons, as Gregory did to the other ministers, that is, to Subdeacons. And
Gratian himself affirms. Did. 28. De syracusane, that before the Counsel
of Ancyran, which was anno Domini. 308. the continency of ministers Agatense,
under Celestine the first, reports Siritius to be aucthour of this
prohibition. And Innocentius the first, which was nyer those days, in his
Epistle to Exuperius, about the year of our Lord.CCCC. refers the same to
Siritius, saiing: si ad aliquos forma illa Ecclesiasticae vitae pariter and
disciplinae quae ab ipso Siritio ad prouintias commeauit. etc. If the form of
Ecclesiastical life and discipline, which was derived from bushoppe Siritius,
be not yet come to their knowledge. etc. Where if it had been Calixtus or
Lucius discipline, he would rather vt supra) And in other places, with wresting
and violent contortyng, ye would make the Apostles to teach all that you say,
sometime vouchyng their Epistles, sometime their Canons (so coumpted theirs)
making the doctrine of them equal, with the aucthoritee of the Gospel
immutable. But ye will answer, that ye find them in the book of the
Decrees, alleged upon them. Sir, because ye have many obscure copies, look in
some written book of the Decrees, whether one be not named for an other, as
some Gossyprike, to Pascall the first, and some to Pascall the second: which
things may be seen diverse times in the books of the Counsels, so noted by
him that did set them out. And sometimes the Canons of the Counsels were
falsified by heretics, as may be seen in the sixth counsel Constantinople.
And sometime corrupted by the Popes them self, as Pope Zozimus untruly
corrupted the Canons of Nicene Counsel, for the aduauncemente of his usurped
jurisdiction, but it was proved false, by the diligence of the Bushops of
Affricke in their Counsel, where at saint Augustine was present: As my
Lord of Durisme notes his falshoode in this poincte, in his Sermon before
king Henry. And sometime the Romanistes of set purpose, will corrupt the
aucthours for their purpose: as Gratian for the aduauncemente of the Rome See,
and for the aucthoritee of the Decrees, falsifieth a place of saint Augustine
de doctrina Christiana lib. i. Cap. viii, and alleged Did. xix. In canonicis:
which is thus noted by Alphonsus de And how truly the Epistles which be
ascribed to Clement be his, for all your gorgious blau^chyng out of this
matter, against the Lord of Cauntorburie, he that has but half an eye, may
sone judge, as the Decretall Epistles of Anacletus, Euaristus, Sixtus, Victor.
etc. how conyngly they be counterfeted, if the matters therein contained would
not bewraie the reporting of the scriptures in them, out of saint Hieromes
translation (which was a good while after them) may show the falshode. And
therefore it is no evil counsel of saint Paul: Omnia prabate, quod bonum
est tenete: Prove all things, Quia multi seductores exierunt in mundum, and
seducunt, si fieri possit, etia^ electos: For many deceivers are gone forth
into the world, and do deceive (if it were possible) even the elect.

Also ye teach, that all the Priests have married against the Apostles
doctrine: and that Greek priests married, could not be suffered to be made
Priests, except they promised conversion, and no more to keep with their
wives. Also ye affirm, that the prohibition of Priests marriages, was the
teaching of the Apostles: where the Apostle says plainly, that the prohibition
of marriage, Did. 31. Quoniam in. Moreover it is plainly affirmed in the Law,
and saint Augustine is aduouched for it, that the Church has constituted
many things, Did. 84. cu^ in
that the Apostles did never order. That is to say: Of the continency of
ministers, and that they made no institution, of not using marriage already
contracted. For if the Apostles had so done, the Priests of the East Church
would have acknowledged it, and received it. Yea, it is manifestly decreed in
the sixte general Counsel, holden at Constantinople: in these evident
words: Did. 3^. Quonian.
Quonia^ in Romani ordine canonis. etc Whereas we know that it is decreed, by
the order of Rome Canons, that they which take the order of Deacon or
Priesthod: Pond^r these words, the Canons of y^ Apostles, which (...)
answer his w^ighty (...) in his vii Chap. A^. ^* Pondera h^c verba, quod
Aposto^^ do^uerun^. etc.
and the ordinances of holy men: will, that lawful marriages from henceforthe
to be aduailable. Myndyng in no wise, either to separate their companiyng of
wedlock with their wives, or yet to deprive them of their familiaritee,
betwixt them selves in time convenient. And there further is it said, that
neither Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest, if they be diligent in their office,
ought to be repealed from such order, though they keep company with their
wives, and that in Cap. 7. M. iij.
holden at Carthage, wherein ye say was decreed, that Deacons, Priests, and
Busshops should be continent, with these words: vt quod Apostoli docuerunt,
and ipsa seruauit antiquitas. etc. Where ye admonish the reader to ponder those
words: quod Apostoli docueru^t. etc. that is: which thing the Apostles
taught, and the Elders have Constantinople, the contrary. Also this second
Counsel at Carthage, did nothing else but ratify that decree, which was made
in the first Counsel there. And that was no other, but that deacons,
priests, and bushoppes, being single at their admission, should not marry
wives a new, after their orders: and quod Apostoli docuerunt. etc. I pray you
master Martin, where did the Apostles teach such doctrine in all their
Epistles? If ye allege the.xxv. Canon ascribed to the Apostles: then is that a
pleasant Canon for your purpose, to have so many senses contained therein,
sometime to importe that Priests may not marry after order: and now that
Priests married, may not use their wives married before. I perceive ye may
draw what sense it pleases you of that Canon. Did. cum inpraeterito.
But when ye have all done, M. Martin, ye must come to Apostoli docueru^t: id
est, docuerunt exemplo, by example (as the text in the decree says) opere,
and admonitione: non institutione vel constitutione, that is, by deed and
doctrine, not by institution and decree, as the gloss says. And this is the
glosers mind on the Decretalles whom also I do aduouche for this your
confutation, and detertion of your crafty peruertyng the said Cou^sailes. But
yet how sound this gloss is, that the Apostles taught by their example, that
after Apostleship they forsook their wives, the story will impugn it. But thus
I set an old tried and aucthorised Canonist,

Also ye affirm that Clement, the second Pope (as ye contend) after Peter,
made a decree, that Priests and Deacons should not lie with their wives. And
upon this aucthoritee, ye make a great a do, and ask, how can this be avoided
with any Cap. (...)
etc. How truly ye say it, let the Counsel before spoken be judge, and let
Paphnutius also be judge, whom for shame ye can not but aduouche in your
book, who resisted that any such Law should be brought in, who was a good
while after saint Clement was dead, and rotten: And he called such companiyng
of priests with their wives, chastitee: where ye call the self same marriages,
that Paphnutius meant of, licensious living and liberty. And further ye call
such Priests as continued with their Cap 9. Q. ^.
that they had married before their Priesthode, flat heretics. Also ye deny
plainly, Ca. 13. GG. ^.
that Philippe the Apostle was married, or that he had any daughters, where
Eusebius affirms it plainly, that both Philippe the Apostle had three
daughters, and Philippe the Deacon and Euangeliste had four.

Also ye do aduouche it by Nicephorus story, that Philippe the Apostle lived
ever a virgins life, Cap. 13. GG. i
and was never married. Where the self same Nicephorus evidently writes thus.
Lib. 2. ca. 44 How sto^o^th it with this that the Apostles forsook their wives,
and carried other women about with them.
An isti tamen Apostolos quoque reijcient? Petrus sequidem and Philippus,
liberis creandis operam dederunt. Et quod idem Philippus Apostolus, That is to
say, will these (a Gods name) reject the Apostles also? For truly Peter and
Philip did give them selves to begette children, and that the said Philip the
Apostle had three daughters: and where ye say, that Philip carried about with
him his sister Mariamna, and ye report these words upon the said
Nicephorus: Cum ipse caelibem vitam duceret: when he on his part lived a
single life, and was unmarried, and never married. The truth of the story, even
by the same Nicephorus says. Cum ipsa vitam per virginitatem sibi exige^dam
statuisset: when she on her partee, had purposed with her self,

Also ye labor to proof that all the Apostles, except Peter, were without
wives, Cap. 13. (...) Ca. 13. (...). 1. Cor. 11.
where saint Ambrose, as ye allege your self, affirms plainly, that all the
Apostles had wives, except Ihon and Paul. And Orygen says, that some of the
Apostles were in wedlock. And Ignatius testifies in a book printed before
Luther was borne (whom, (...) Epistola ad philadelphien^^.
and the other Germanies ye defame to have corrupted the books, such is your
foul shift) writing thus: Sicut Petrus and Paulus and caeteri Apostoli qui
nuptijs fuerunt sociati. As Peter and Paul, and other the Apostles which were
conjoined in matrimony.

Ca. S.P. ij.
And where ye number S. Luke the Evangelist among them that weere never married:
Platina says, that he lived in Pope Cletus days, and lived four score year
and three, and had a wife at Bithinia. And Platina his report may be true,
though saint Hierome say that he lived four score year and four, then
having Hierome was not very indifferent to marriage, as appears in appliyng
Salomo^s text to married folks: stultorum infinitus est numerus: and
furthermore in the ouermuche praise of virginity, he would say more then
enough. As in his book of Ecclesiastical writers, rehearsyng Lucius Seneca
among them, he writes, that he was vitae continentissimae, that is, of a most
continent living. Yet stories make mention what an excellent woman he had to
wife, which would needs die with him, in the like death that he was Nero. Let
Nauclerus be witness.

Ca. 13. hh. 4.
Also ye affirm boldly that Peter earied not his wife about with him, but might
have some other sober Matrone, to attend upon him, Ca. 12. CC. ij. z. ij.
and that he forsook his wife, and all by avowe. And where in your xi. Chapter
ye seem to doubt, whether Peter had a wife in his Apostleshippe or no:
forgettyng your self in your xiii. Chapter, ^. h. iij.
ye conclude, that she was dead, when Peter was called to be an Apostle,
though Tertulian tell you there the contrary. But ye say, that probable
reason induces this truth. And further ye say, (...). 13. GG. iij
that all other the Apostles, had not their Lib. 7. Recog^it.
Sir, saint Clement (whose Epistles ye labor so earnestly to make autentike)
writes plainly, that she was with him in his peregrination when he preached,
and says thus: that Peter would have no body with him, but that could id est:
that he should not forsake his faithful wife or his Parents etc. And says,
that his mother was with Peter's wife, and iorneied with them, and afterward
aduoucheth her for a witness. In presence, says he, of the wife of my Lord
Peter. And Peter's wife, says he, testified, that it was true. Li* 7. stroma^^
And both Eusebius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Nicephorus tells, that Peter
did put her in mind of the Lord, when she was going to her passion: and that
he rejoiced, that she was called unto martyrdom, and spoke to her by her own
name, Mat. 19.
and by the name of wife. And as for forsaking her, where Origin being nier his
time, then ye be by half a score years, doubts of that matter, and writes
thus. Petrus vxorem forte reliquit. Peter peradventure did leave his wife.
Did. 31. (...) ^^fitemur.
And Pope Leo the nineth, Panormitan, and the gloser of the decrees, be of
opinion with the scripture, that the Apostles carried their wives about with
them, saying thus. Quod Apostoli ducebant vxores secum, vt seruire^t eis in
cibis parandis, and ab eis pascere^tur, cum essent pauperes, de mercede
praedicationis. That is: the Apostles led their wives with them, that they
might serve them in dressyng their meat, and to be fed of them, being Cap. 13.
(...)
and not of writing.

Also ye say, Cap. 13. (...).
that scripture t^acheth us, that prayer and fasting, be the means for us to
live in chastitee. As ye prove it by poetry, and is ye say, a better remedy
to take a way brennyng, then is marriage. For the company of a woman, ye say,
increases the appetite, rather then extinguisheth it. And for this ye bring in
the example of lay men's outrage in this matter. And ye say, before marriage a
man had but only the burning of the flesh: where as after marriage, he S
Paul's wisdom was for this inco^uenie^ce to appoinct marriage if they ca^ not
live chaste, saying, let them marie. And Gods wisdom then belike, both in his
first institution, and second institution, as Ioannes Genesius writes, lacked
your wit and counsel in his ordinance. May not S. Paul worthily speak to
you: O? O thou blether-blowen wise man, To. ^.
what art thou, that thus frowardly and ouer-wharthly bawiest against God? Where
saint Augustine and all other of the holy chaste fathers of the Church,
appoints marriage to be the remedy. Yea, they say to the votaries, that
marriage is better for them, then to burn. And counsel^th them, and all others
to resort to the haven of Wedlock, who does teach, lest the infirmity of man should fall into danger of incontinencie, let it be holden up and stayed
with the honesty of matrimony. That marriage represseth the concupiscence of
the flesh, Damascene says. Damascenus Libr. 4. ca. 25. de orthodoxa fide
etc. Damascene after his praise of virginity, in comparison of Matrimony,
says, Haec enim dicimus, non nuptijs derogantes. Absit enim. Nam scimus
dominum, presentia sua, nuptijs benedixisse, and eum qui dicit, honorabiles
nuptiae. Sed bonis nuptiis meliorem virginitatem agnoscimus. In virtutibus enim
and intensiones and remissiones sunt. That is. While we say these things, we
do not derogate marriages, for God forbide. For we know that the Lord by his
presence has blessed marriage, and we know him that said, honorable is
marriage, but we confess Bona quidem liberorum procreatio, quam nuptiae
constituunt. Et bonae nuptiae ob fornicationes quas prescindunt, rabiem
concupiscentiae, per legitimam commixtionem, non sinentes ad iniquos furere
actus. The procreation of children assuredly is good* which marriage does
ordain, Gregory says: In pasio^ alibis
Peritus medicinae caelestis Apostolus, non tam sanos instituit, quam infirmis
medicamenta monstrauit, dicens: The Apostle being skilled in heavenly medicine,
did not so much ins^ruct such as be whole, as he showed medicines to the
sick, saying: of such things as ye wrote unto me. etc. It were good for a man not to touch a woman: yet for fornication, let every manne have his
wife. etc. In that he puts before the peril of fornication, undoubtedly to
such as do not stand, he

Also ye magnify much, Cap. 13 II. iij.
Innocent the first, for his slaunderyng of Marriage: and ye call him that holy
writer, as ye report Hildebrande, Cap. 12 Ee. 4. Cap. 13. KK
Gregory the seventh, very honorably, and call him in one place, saint
Gregory. And ye say the Emperor Henry the fourth, was most charitably and
courteously rebuked of him. And ye say, that Hildebra^de reformed the priests,
which were in the time of that Scisme newely stolen into Marriage. Where
Nauclerus expressyng the story, reports, that when the Mogunce, sentiens non
parua constare opera, vt tanto tempore inolitam consuetudinem reuelleret. etc.
Understandyng that it would cost him no small labor, to undo and dissolve
that custom (of Mariyng) by so long time rooted, and to reform the whole
world in her old and weak age, agreably to the rules of the primative
Church: determined to deal more moderatly with them. And Cardinal Benno,
which was a Cardinal in his days, declares how cruelly the Emperor was
handeled by him, that when this foresaied saint Gregory's counsel took no
place, where he hired a desperate man is lamentably written by the said Benno.

But as for this said Innocent the first, how holy soever he was, in such
holy decrees, so sone followyng his noble predecessor Siritius, in whose
words and phrase, he treads in, as holily and as nigh, as ye tread in
Pighius steps: yet I think, ye obey not all his decrees. For he decreed,
that Saterdaie should be fasted: because, says he, Christ lay in his grave
on the Saterdaie, and the Apostles fasted the Saterdaie. Which decree of his,
for fasting, is as well kept, as his decree for chastitee among the most part
of his shaue^ subjects, or as Telesphorus statute is by foolish gloses
trifled away in the decrees. Did. 4. statu^^^s.
But how holy soever Marianus Scotus writes, the.xxxix. Pope, where Melciades
was the last Pope martyr, which was in order from Peter, the.xxxiij. which
did shed their blood, says Fasciculus temporum, for the holy Testament of
Christ. And as this Innocente was far from Peter in succession of time, so
was he further from him in succession of life and conversation. For Clement
shows, that he was so far unable to advance the Church of Rome, as this
Innocente did, that he reports these to be Peter's words: Panis (inquit)
mihi solus cum oliuis and raro etiam cum oleribus in vsu est. Indumentum hoc
est mihi Only bread is my usual food, with Olives, and seldom with wortes
and herbs. As for my gramentes, be such as ye see, a coote with a cloak: and
having these, I require no more, says Peter, for this suffices me. And
Christianus an old aucthour, about the year of our Lord. 800. writing upon
Matthewe the tenth Chapter, says, that Peter held his Busshopricke in
Rome.xxv. years, and yet had not for all that in his possession, so much as
five foot of ground of his own. It was great pitee, that good Constantine
was not in these days of the Churches infancy. But yet perhaps Peter would
have taken no such things at his hands, as Siluester was infected with, for
his vow sake. As this Ciuilian makes it an article of doctrine, that Peter by
a vow left all things, house, land, ship, nets, wife, and all. So that
by that example Petronil, made poor Peter to go in a thredbare coote, or else
for scrapyng and purchasyng land for his wife, and to set out his dear
daughter, the better for her marriage, he spoiled the Church patrimony, and
left but bare walls, Page ^33.
neither Cope nor Uestimente, nor Gregory the first writes, De ^ura pastor
part. (...)
that it was then honorable to desire to be a Busshoppe, when he was like to
be the first, to go to martyrdom for his flock. But now the Church is
better confirmed, and coumpteth it honorable for Bushoppes, to brenn^ their
own brethren Bushoppes, if they will take upon them to stand for the holy
Testament of Christ. But let us here what Cap. 13. II. iij
I warrant you. For he calls it in the same Chapter of that decree, that
master Martin calls him an holy writer for, carnal concupiscence,
filthiness, infidelitee, and a life of the flesh, that ca^ not please God.
Whose veigne in holiness, this holy Martin follows right up and down, in his
book. For he calls the second marriage of Lay men, more lawful then
honest, and brings in many aucthoritees of profane auctors, that calls
their twice mariyng, but lawful incontinencie, and names them adulterars by
Law, Ca. 4.
and concludes, that Paul Augustine gave against such bletherblowne wise
men: writing de bono viduitatis: Sicut bonum sanctae virginitatis, quod elegit
filia tua, non damnat vnas nuptias tuas: sic nec viduitas tua, cuiusquam
secundas: hinc enim maxim Cataphrigum ac Nouatianorum haereses tumuerunt: quas
buccinis sonantibus, non sapientibus, etiam Tertullianus inflauit, du^ secundas
nuptias tanquam illicitas dente maledico confudit, quas omnino licitas
Apostolus sobria me^te concedit. Ab hac sanitate doctrinae, nullius indocti,
nullius

Like as the goodness of holy virginitee, which thy daughter has chosen, does
not condemn once mariyng: so neither does thy widowhode, condemn second
marriages. For from hence swelled the heresies of the Cataphriges, and
Nouatians: which heresies Tertullian blowed up with trumpettes, that sounded
greatly, although they were not very wise, when as through his railyng, he
confounded the second marriages, as unlawful, which notwithstanding, the
Apostle very descritly grants as lawful.

Cap. ^.
which I had forgotten, his foresaied holy writer Innocent, in the same
Epistle of Decrees, tells us, that yet it is written in scripture: Vnius
vxoris virum, and iteru^, sacerdotes mei semel nubant. Et alibi, sacerdotes mei
non nubant amplius. That is: an husband of one wife. And again: Let my
priests marry once. And in an other place: Let not my Priests marry
often. Now, whether he wrote thus, that God meant it of his Priests, or Paul
meant it of his priests, or Innocent meant it of his Priests: I wotte not, but
our Romish Busshoppes and Priests of these days, means it of no priests
now. Therefore Hierome, whose aucthoritee is of it self to be had in credit of
every good Christian man, Cap. xi. ^.^^
says master Martin: which Hierome gives so many slanderous names, to
Lay men's marriages: that Tatian never spoke half so many. Whom this master
Martin follows so well, Cap. 13. HH ^
that he says, that marriage is the basest state of life in Christ's church,
yet he says it is very honorable. Lo, ye see how he honoreth it, even as the
Jews honored Christ, when they set a croune of thorn on his head, and put a
purple robe on him, and saluted him with the name of a Aue rabbi: Hail
master. Cap. 13. II.^
Yet he says, that married folks can not come to the feast, and the feast is
no other but eternal life. And says, that upon this place, saint Paul
grounded his saying: scz, he which has a wife, is divided. And says, that
marriage is half dissuaded by saint Paul, Cap. xi. BB. ^
and moreover calls Marriage, but distraction, bondage, a vexation of the
flesh, pentifulnesse, and knitteth up the matter, and says: who can deny,
but that Paul coumpteth him that has a wife, to be tied, bound, troubled,
distracted, and in servitude? Now when this doctor wringeth in Lib. 2. Heresi.
6.^.
he would say that he were distracted of his wit, so to abuse his places and
sayings. Yea, if Epiphanius were alive, he would say no less by him, then he
did by a certain heretic, called Hierax: who to like purpose, and after the
same manner distorted Innupta curat ea quae sunt domini: diuisa est vxor and
virgo: propter fornicationem vnusquisque vxorem suam habeat. etc. The unmarried
virgin cares for the Lords matters: but a wife and a virgin are two: yet
for the aduoidyng of fornication, let every manne have his wife. Upon which
places, he concluded (says Epiphanius) that Paul praised not marriage, but
bare with it, to avoid further mischief. Which said heretic, with his
adherentes, did so rei^cte Matrimony, as also saint Augustine testifies the
same of them, that they would not have any such of their company, that had
wives. Epiphanius) they pretend the pure virginitee of the church, but yet
had no pure conscience, but a conscience marked with an hot iron, forbiddyng
marriage. Nevertheless, they were well and justly scorned, says Epiphanius,
for their dissimulation, seeing they had, notwithstanding, women emongeste them,
whom they colored, under pretense of doing them service. Now compare D. Martin
and his accomplices, with D. Hierax and his disciples, and then consider how
far they disagree.

Marie as for Priests marriages, doctor Martin calls them incestuous, and
detestable enormitees, sacrilege, sin and adultery,

For if I should follow you to note your slaunderouse lies, as Germans and
others, whom ye call the new preachers, to say that they call prayer
liplabour: fasting, hypocrisy: cha^titie and abstinencie, the devils doctrine:
co^tempnyng the sacrament of thalter: calling men from chastitee, to a life
contrary to the same. They call your patteryng praiour, which is at this day
used of your ministers without affection of heart, or sense of understanding, a
very houling into thaire, with Bacchus feasts, and Sacrifices of Venus in
filthy tales and stories, Council. Mog^^tinum cap. 48. Anticio^or. council. cap.
9. Contra Iudeos.
condemned by your own cou^selles. They call your manner of fastings, but mere
hypocrisy, yea, worse then hypocrisy, in such circumstaunces as ye have many
a day used them, and dare pronounce with Chrysostom inueiyng against the
jews fasting: that your fastinges be worse then very drunkenness. They call
your filthy fained chastity, a Sodomiticall careless living. As the practice
declares to manifest to stand in, to prove. They call al such as have not
the gift and by their yearly experience: sees the impossibilitee not from
chastitee, but from filthiness of brutishe buggery and boyly bestlynesse, to
marriage chastitee. Ye never red, or hard, of any such writers, such as ye
would slander to the world, I say of the known, and commonly approved
writers out of Germany: But that does excite the readers, in their books, to
Godly and often prayour: to pure abstinence from all excesses: and to a christian
mortification of all their vices and affections, to continency and untreatable
to remitte that discipline, but when very necessitee Nicene Counsel, and some
Paphnutius was moved in conscience, upon the knowledge he had of them that came
single to the state of order, whom the old traditions of the Church charged so
to live: not to agree to such law, where they would have constituted, that
married priests should abstain from their wives, and so to ieopard a greater
number in this fire of temptation: he was content to save yet some part of the
house from danger of the fire, though he could not save the whoole. Affirmyng,
that it was enough that Lucius, if it be his, or Siricius, or urban the second,
but to leave that liberty Carthage? the.v. Canon of the Council at Tollet, or
the sixth Counsel Augustine was present? Or the three and thirtee Canon of
the Council called Elibertinu^ about Pope Siluesters days? Or the Council
holden in Greece, before Siluesters days, called co^cilium Ancyranum, with many
other more, where they decreed, that such as being subdeacons, deaco^s, or
Priests, that would chose to marry, should not enjoy their Ecclesiastical
livings? But I do not as yet read, that in all of those Counsailles, they
were compelled from Matrimony, whether they would or no, or that they were
separated from their wives after they were so deprived, or their Matrimony
called Augustine was present, I think, I dare boldly say, they were not,
seeing his judgment is in his works, to the contrary. As for the sixth
Council, holden at Constantinople, permitted both wives and liuinges too. And
in other Councelles, their wives and livings, so they would but in time of
their ministration abstain from their wives. But to contend with him in such
causes of Councels, Canons, and Stories, which he contorteth by all shift of
wit, to make them to plie to his gostly purpose, were a long business. But
marvel not, gentle reader, though he take so much upon as used not the
benefit thereof, as at that time (of which number,

Is not he, think you, a trusty gloser, to be so bold in gloses, not only
in his own Laws, but thus to gloss the Laws of Ergo, they ought not to be
troubled or impeched, as this Law commands.

And where this doctor writes, in the end of his.ix. Chapter (full learnedly
be ye suer, R. ij.
specially for a great master of the Chauncerie) that the two acts in King
Edwardes days, aucthorisyng

Anno. xxcij. where it is determined in law, whereof I think, ye cannot show
the like in this realm, since Brute came first into England: and ye know,
that it is a great wonder to your wit, for things to come in law, that few
men has seen the like example before times: I mean I say, for the nature
of precontractes, which by that statute, be utterly void, if a second
contract follows, and be consummated with bodily knowledge. Ye know that
this act for precontractes is repealed again Anno secundo, Edwardi sexti, and
restored force of a statute law too, is in strength again, and debarryng

I pray you consider, whether these rules of the laws following, might not
have place in this cause, where it is said: Factum legitimum, retractari non
debet, licet casus postea eueniat, quo no^ potuit inchoari. A fact that was
once lawful, ought not to be called into question again, although
afterward there happen somethyng, that might hinder the beginning of it. Et
multa prohibentur fieri, que facta tamen tenent. Many things are prohibited to
be done, which when they once be done, must yet stand. Indultum a iure
beneficium, non est alicui auferendum. A benefit granted by law, must be
taken from no man. If any

Moreover, if these marriages aforesaied, ought not to be dissolved, but must
enjoy the benefit of that statute, when it so stood, though it be repealed
for hereafterward: why should that act of repeal, made in the first year of
our sovereign Lady the Queens majesty, Queen Marie, taking a way only but
the liberty for Priests to marry for hereafter, impeache or hinder those
lawful marriages of priests before (aucthorised by as good your slepyng Canons
should thereby be straight way in force, watching and wakyng to show their
face, to byte and bark, as the ordinaries in

And because this Ciuilian deliteth to skoure his wit in lawest I desire his
resolution in one doubt, rising by occasion of his forsaied determination,
which is that all Ecclesiastical persons, lies open to the old Canons of the
Church, by reason of this act of repeal.

King Edward in his first year made a statute repealyng all vt ne pridie
fortasse facia^t, quod pigeat postridie* That they do not that one day,
which they repent the next 6. decrete.
but on the laws of that holy father Bonifacius the eight, of whom Platina
writes, that he entered into his papacy and Busshopricke, like a For, lived
therein like a Lion, and died out thereof like a dog. Upon whose death the
said Platina writes. Afther this sort (says he) dies this Boniface, whose
endeavor was rather to cast a terror upon Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations,
and People, then true Religion. As for gold, he gathered of every hand
beyond all measure. And Platina.

But to return again to this man's assertion, wherein he defines, that the
church Canons be ready, watchyng straightway to fall into men's necks, upon
repeal of such statutes as kept Look in his ix. Chapter. Litera. R. unto the
end of that Chapter and expend it.
to advance all foraine laws whatsoever, far above themperial laws of our
country. For he says, that it is but a poor shifte for an English manne,
to stand to the statute law of the Realm, if the Church Laws ipso iure,
and ipso facto, unlawful, void, and of none effect. And the Spiritual law
must meddle with Spiritual matters: where the kings aucthoritee may go play
him, his Judges what he goes about? Shall this gear be applauded to,
Articles of Commssion in print published.
And in the very front of her graces articles, charge the Ecclesiastical
Ordinaries, to put in execution the Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws, no other,
but such

If a man obiecte, that the states of the Realm, has made Law, and taken
order in this cause, or any other such like, Hue, sent from Rome by Alexander,
Pope then: and notwithstanding his presence, De potestate Regia and
Ecclesiastica: that neither this Ciuilian, nor all the Canonistes in England,
shall ever be able to answer it. For it has hitherto lain unanswered these
twenty years, of all the Romanistes in Christendom. And if this Ciuilian will
read it, and expende it over, and doubts further of any poincte contained
therein: let him consulte with certain of the Bushoppes, that be in most
aucthoritee at this day, by whose learning and collection, the book was
written, and they can further resolve him. And if that Institution of a
Christian man, presented to king Henry the eight, by all the Bushoppes of the
Realm, for stable doctrine to be universally preached, and so assured by the
subscriptions of all their names, as ye may there read their names. Look
over the exposition of the.ix. and.x. article of the Creed, and their doctrine
written in the Sacrament of Order, and consider their judgments. If it be
further objected, that the king could do no more in dispensation, then the
Pope was able, which (as some say) ca^ dispense with the singular case of one
or two in a Realm, but not with a whole Realm, or with the whole state
thereof, as Innocent the viij. as Volateran writes, dispense with the whole
country of Noruegia, to consecrate the Cup without wine, in Ale or Bear,
contrary to the usage of Christ and his Church? How could he dispense with
whole Bohemie, for receiuyng the Communion in both kinds? And how could Paul
the third, offer the same Gregory the first, dispense with all the Realm of
England, for their marriage within the degrees prohibited? Or yet how could he
dispense and give license to Augustine our apostle, not to follow Rome Church
so precisely in form of Spiritual governance, but had him devise a form
him self, of the vsages of other countrees, and to take the best: and so
instill it, and other such things, as he could other where learn, into the
tender minds of the English nation, as many of such nature Extra. de
consang. and affi. non debet. of Innocent the third, which released the
prohibitions of consanguinitee and affinitee, in Counsels before restrained,
yea, in such degrees (as Gregory says) who that dissolve them, believes not
that Gods word will endure for ever. Can. 35. q. 10. Fraternitatis.

Now, if this Ciuilian would have this poinct yet further debated, scilicet,
how far Ecclesiastical Laws are to be admitted: let him go to the statute
of the.xxvij. year of king Henry the eighte, and see what they reserve from the
makers of Ecclesiastical Laws.

Provided alwaie, say they, that no Canons, constitutions, or ordinances,
shall be made and put in execution within this realm, by aucthoritee of the
Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be contrary or repugnaunt, to the kings
prerogative royal, or the customs, laws, or statutes of this realm. And in
the xxv. year, in the like statute, fearyng belike, the dint of these double
Prouiso, although Pope Gregory the leuenth did much repine at, and said,
that to make such a Law, was nothing else, but to divide Christ's church, to
destroy Christian religion, and that it was against all Gods forbode: and
though Martyn the v. of that name, wrote sharper letters to Henry the.vi. to
have it revoked: yet the kings and the nobles aforsaied, would none of it,
they would stand to their Laws which they made in their policy, how contrary
soever Rome laws were against them, or how feign soever the Bushops of Rome
would have had their eyes still bent upon us, as my Lord of Winchester
writes, in that their universal carfulness of Prouiso.

Well, look upon king Henry the eightes Act, in his.xxv. year, and fourtene
Chapter, for the preamble: and then smell, if ye can, what this Ciuilian
means, by this gaie invention of that upon a Statute of Repeal, the Canons
succeadeth by and by, in full force and strength. And here, I much marvel,
that one thing skapeth, not only this farcastyng Ciuilian, but all his chief
doctors of the Civil Law to. For if this device be so great a warraunte, as
he makes it, to the Commissaries, in the married Priests case: how chances
it that (because king Edwardes statute, before rehearsed, of his first year,
repealed al his

Now, how this witty device would be received, and where it would be most
thankefully taken, or whether it would turn to the wealth of the realm? Let
other men expende, and make answer to this Ciuilian, and to other of his chief
doctors: whether

I think, that as in all Kings days sense the conquest, the wise and learned
men of the realm, from time to time, has alwaie moderated the Canons and
laws of the universal church, (as small a member of the same, as the
Romanistes of these days, in contemptuous comparison, would make their own
natural country, to the advancement of a counterfette and unnatural
congregation at Rome) which Church they (full aptly) call the temple of God
and took Canons but as rules of consent, and refused them again as freely by
consent, and extinguished them

When wise men, by the occasion of such cases, have pondered by them selves
what signs and profers be made by this Ciuilian by the case of Priests
marriages, which though the Devil and all his members laboreth by all means
to foil, yet standing as they do, upon the rock of Gods laws (specially for
separation) and that separation being against the judgment of the best and
eldest writers in Christ's Church, standing the aucthoritee of the kings
Imperial croune, and so many laws knitte and combined in such validitee, as
they be made, I doubt Quod non est talis casus in tota lege, and quod est valde
difficilis. That there is not such a case in all the law, and that it is very
hard, as easelye as this lawier passes it over. And then again, rauyng in
this one case, of poor Priests marriages, whom to overcome in their private
case, is no great maistery, nor no great care taken, although yet priests, to
suffer violence of priests, will in thend little advance the whole Clergy: I
say what mire may be raked up, to make a shrewed perfume to their own
nooses, in their own cases and states, I let other men consider. It was
wont to be said: Qui vni iniuriam facit, omnibus facit. He that does wrong
to one, in effect does wrong to all. But what forces this Ciuilian, what laws
soever be against him, so they be no better then statute laws of this poor
outcaste Isle and particular Church of England. And whatsoever be judged of
him, so he may have the victory in this cause, what care takes he, either
what misery and mischeife comes to the priests, who^ he hates so
spitefully:

I marvel, before God, that he is not a shamed so boldly, and irreuerently, to
utter his lies to the Queens highness, to the honorable nobilitee, to all the
learned and wise men in the realm, and is not a shamed in his own conceipte,
or at the least way, stand not in doubt in himself, that he can not so escape
with his Male examinat verum, omnis corruptus iudex. Full evil is a true cause
examined and expended, by the judge that is corrupt.

In his eight Chapter, where he labors to prove that all priests be
votaries, which he shall never be able to prove, of seculers Priests ordered
in this realm of England, do the best he Ta^iturnitie: for there is so much
scilence of

Examine here with me good reader, Cap. 8. lra^ O. ij.
says he, this the Bushops proposition, and thou shall anon see, whether our
priests be not votaries: and thou shall epsy also, what truth is in our
new preachers, that have slau^dered the church. etc. Who would think that
upon such protestation, he would even straight way for all this preamble,
bleere the readers eye with a manifest lie?

Now good reader, as he desires thee to examine this point, even so do I
beseech thee. And then epsy by thy self, what truth is in this new Ciuilian.
And for the trial of his truth and honesty,

But yet good reader, lest he should blind thine eye, with a And if he can
prove that, then upon this poincte, I am content Accipe iugum domini. Iugum
enim eius suaue est, and onus eius leave. and stolam innocentiae induat te
dominus. Take the yoke of the Lord, for his yoke is sweet, and his burden
light. And the lord put upon thee, the stole of innocence. In deed, where in
the end of his xiij. Chapter this Doctor brings in like words as be in the
English pontifical for Bushoppes: L^ra^. LL.^.
but yet even there he uses a violent contorted argument against doctor Ponet,
alledgyng these words: Vis castitatem ac sobrietate^ cum dei auxilio seruare?
Will thou, Vis castitatem and sobrietate^, cum dei auxilio custodire and
docere? Will thou, by the help of God, keep and teach chastitee and
sobrietee? I will not contend with him in this saying for the bushops, but in
his former words of his allegation for Subdeacons of English making, he shall
never make it good to his lives end, that those words be in the English
pontifical. Notwithstanding, he thinks that he has made most strong proof
of his purpose, where ye see, by that that is hitherto perceived in his book,
he has made four Origens aucthoritee, writing upon the Numbers. Secondly, by
the manner of their Orderyng. Thirdly, by the Priests crounes. Fourthly, by an
argument of Taciturnitie. And that once dooen, he spends his eighth Chapter,
in prouyng that vows

The first, the Priests where Origin was borne, or where he did write, were
votaries: Ergo English Priests be votaries. And yet Origin did not write so.
But in that Homily speaking as well to Lay men, as to Priests, says, that
they be most meet to offer up the continual Sacrifice, of Morning and
Euenyng prayer, that will keep continual chastity. And then his argument
holds thus: They which can continually pray, keep continual chastitee:
Ergo, English Priests be votaries. But Ergo, they need not to vow that
chastitee, which ye speak of. Or thus, Origin writes not there any word of
Priests vows: Ergo, in that place he does not prove them votaries.

The second, for the manner of the Busshoppes proposition. The Busshop speaks
such a proposition, to Priests in Spain or Italy: Ergo English priests be
votaries. Now the truth is, no such proposition is spoken, to the English
Subdeacon at Ergo there is no vow in them conceived, and so none begotten or
brought to birth: Ergo, English priests be no votaries by your own
co^cession.

Your third argument hangs thus. Priests crounes in their heads signify
a vow: Ergo, English Priests be votaries. Now I have proved that matter to
be far unlike, that their crounes should be signs of any vow, but rather
of other Ergo, by that sign English Priests be no votaries. Or thus. The
Nazarea^s shaued of their here, when their vow was done and paste, the
Priests be like the Nazareans, as ye say: Ergo, by the shauyng of their
crounes, they be paste their vow, and not under their vow.

Your fourth argument of Taciturnitie, holds thus. Priests Ordered by the
Roman pontifical, keeping their silence at the Bushoppes proposicion, bind
them selves by their Taciturnitie, to a vow of continency: Ergo, English
Priests ordered by their own potificall, wherein no such proposition is
spoken, be v^taries. Furthermore, your own difinition is of a vow, that it
should be a deliberate or advised promise made to God, for a better entente
and purpose. And further ye say, that by reason of the Priests profession and
vow annexed, he is a votarie, and can not Marry. Then thus I argue. English
Priests Ergo, by the manner of their orderyng, English Priests be no
votaries, and therefore without let of any vow, may Marry. And Ioannes
Genesius says, that there is no greater impediment against their marriage, then
their vow, such as it is. And then standing, that no such vow is made by
them, it follows, that the greatest impedimente, is by his aucthoritee well
wiped away: And all these arguments made for the negative, hold as well as
all those, which he brings in for his Ve homini per quem offendiculu^ venit:
and bonu^ erat illi, sinatus no^ fuisset homo ille: Woe be to that man, by whom
offense comes: and it were better for that manne, if he never had been etiam
atque etiam, ne sit non secundum scientiam, lest it be not, according to
knowledge, lest cruelly crucified Christ, and poor stoned Stephen, be not
Nesciunt enim quid faciunt: for they know not what they do. Deus conterat
satanam sub pedibus nostris breui, vt cognoscamus in terra viam suam? The Lord
tread Satan down shortly under our feet, and grant that we may know his
way upon earth? O Anglia: si lumen quod est in te, tenebrae sint, ipsae
tenebrae qua^tae? Sed olim vobis, O patres, dicet dominus: Reddite rationem
villicationis vestrae. Venite ad iudicium.

O England, if the light that is within thee, is become darkness, how great
then is the darkness it self? But the Lord

Truly me think this man's wit, should be as fit to Precipimus, says
he, id est, permittimus Statuimus, id est abrogamus: Did. 4. Statuimus. Vxores
ducere, id est, retinere. In deed this Lawier, can in such sort gloss S.
Paul's words, when he says: vnusquisque p^opter fornicationem vitandam suam
vxorem habeat. Habeat, gloseth he, id est retineat. But how truly: we have in
part before brought in both his Doctors and Counsels, to try this truth.
Praedicare Euangelium (says the said gloser) id est Legere: vir inuita with
infinite such, wherein he wandereth so far from the text, that many times
he destroieth the very text it self. And thereupon the Deuines of Paris, in
articulis condemnatis, after the master of Sentence, detecteth this gloser, as
a corruptor of the text self, with his perverse gloses, and bids beware of
him, and all such Lawiers, and gloses, yet the pretense of this gloser is, to
save all the old Ca. 9. R. ij.
Canons, and Counsels.

Marie, when they be to good, to pure, and to plain, to cauils away, then he
runs to this man's shift, to say that the first Canons be abrogated, by
the later, that is: the better, by a great deal the worse. For he forces all
his wit and labor (as this manne does even the same) to frustrate the
word of God, to make it of no effect, that the traditions of man, may
come in the place thereof. And does euacuate all old good Laws, and Decrees
of the fathers, to stablishe the Laws present, to temper all our religion, in
faith and manners, to the present state of vna sancta catholica, and Apostolica
Ecclesia. That is, one holy, catholic and Apostolic church. God give grace
that the book of Sapience, prove them not one day Insipientes: Sapi. 12.
saying, haec cogitauerunt and errauerunt: execauit Such things do the
ungodly imagine, and wa^der out of the way, for their own wickedness has
blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they understand them not.

Alas, what shall it avail to win the stinkyng glory of the world, and
loose our souls? Give ear therefore ye that draw the multitude after you,
ye that have Lands, Rentes, and Possessions, ye that sit in the place of
aucthoritee and power, occupiyng the Benches of right and justice, your power
is given you of God, who shall examine your hearts and acts. For when ye
should have been Ministers of his Kingdom, ye judged not aright, nor kept the
law of righteousness, nor worked not after the Sap. ^.
and their end to be without honor. Therefore we have erred from the way of
truth, the light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of
understanding rose not upon us. We have weried our selves in the way of
wickedness and destruction. Tedious ways have we gone, but as for the way of
the Lord, we have not known. What good has our pride done unto us? Or what
profitte has the pomp of riches brought us? All these things are passed
away like a shadow. etc. such words (says the wise man) shall

Good reader, judge not that I utter these things of stomach or evil will, but
of pure conscience, before God, howsoever it shall be derided of carnal
Epicures, belie worldlynges, seruyng the turn of the time. God forbid I should
defame the true catholic church, to be a member whereof, is so my study, that
else I look not to be saved* I mean Peter's ship, not Judas Carricke: I mean
not Peter's person, but Peter's confession, against which, not his cou^terfetted
successors, not all the gates of hell, shall ever prevail. The stone is laid,
the rock is suer, ipse fundauit eam altissimus: Sed Dominns custodit veritatem
in saeculu^ seculi: The Lord does maintain the truth for ever and ever. I
envy not, nor do malign, at the aucthoritee of Busshops and the spiritual
fathers of the realm, but much lament, that the true preaching and fatherly
procedyng in their vocations, is no better among some exersised and regarded.
Ambrose toward Theodocius. And wishyng for noe less obedient Princes, Nobles,
and Commons, and no less liberalitee in them neither, then is reported by
themselves to have been in Constantine, Theodocius, Justinius, or Iustinianus,
and such other. So that they again were Ambrosis in most things, and
Siluester in many things reported to be done by them: for in all, God alone
must have that promise reserved to himself.

Furthermore I speak nothing of grudge against this writer,

If he would have showed his learning in such a cause, could he not have
otherwise handeled it, but to utter his own corrupt stomach so detestably?
Could not he have so entreated the question, but that his adversaries
(peradventure his best friends to Godward) must be thus imperilled by his
unbridled language? It is pity that wit and youth should be knit together,
and that wit and learning, should take so evil a part. Marie if he had
authority, how far would he go? God save the realm from such hot
spirits. But yet God is strong enough to answer 1. Cor. 1.
He can make foolish, the wit of the wise of the world, he threateneth to
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and reprove the understanding of the learned,
that no flesh should glory in his sight.

As for the intent of this man, I judge by his handlyng of the Prauum, prauum
est cor hominis says Hierome: and quis scrutabitur illud? Wicked, wicked, I
say, is the heart of man: and who shall search it to the bottom? Well, there
is a God that can

Furthermore good reader, my labor tends not to this end, that I would
express only a grieffe and doloure in compassion of the strange handlyng of
the busshops and priests so ordered as they be, although I think, that
offendyng in mercy, is sooner pardoned and amended, and more borne with to,
then offendyng in extremitee and rigor, in all reasonable common wealths. Nor
yet I mean not to justify the universal sort of the married Busshoppes and
Priests in all their light and dissolute behauyour, whatsoever it has been in
any of them, from the hiest to the lowest. Ezechel. 34.
The weak have ye not holden up, the sick have ye not healed, the broken
have ye not bound together, the outcastes have ye not brought again, the
lost have ye not sought, but churlishely and cruellye have ye ruled them.
Thus are they scattered hear and there without a Shephearde. etc. my Sheep
wandereth abroad in Mountains and Fields, and no man there is that cares
for them, or seeks after them. And so forth,

I would wish, that such as be strong, should bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please them selves. For Christ the head Shepherd, sought
not his own will, power, and glory. He came not into the world to destroy,
but to save. I would wish, that if any one in the whole body, be entangled or
accombred, spiritu humilitatis, considering that they may be tempted. As if he
should say, writes saint Gregory: Cu^ displicet ex aliena infirmitate quod
conspicis, pensa quod es, vt increpationis zelo se spiritus temperet, dum sibi
quoque quod increpat timet. Cum enim increpatio immoderate accenditur, corda
delinquentium in desperatione deprimuntur. When the infirmitee of other men
displeases thee, for that thou see at thine eye, ponder what thou art thy
self, whereby thy inward spirit may temper it self, in the zeal Gregory in
his Pastorals. Yea, let them all indifferently expende as well one as an other,
that they have been, or be, or may be, out of the way, and in danger of
Canons, if any man had his utter right, and extreme deseruyng. I think that I
may speak it, of the conscience of some married Busshoppes and Priests in
England, that they do as much lament the light behauior, showed and escaped
by some of them,

When they have dooen all the crueltee, and dispite they can, they shall be as
able to keep down the light, that is now by Gods great benefit set upon the
Candelsticke to shine to all men that will have the light thereof: as the
blind dreamyng knights of the sepulcher, were able to keep Christ from
risyng and walkyng abroad, as costly as they were hired, and as warely as they
watched. They be not words and stout affirmations, not exclamations in the
Palpit applauded to, by the higher powers of the world, that can make wise
men so blind, not to see a Cassiodorus tells in his Ecclesiastical story
tripartite, Li. ^2. Ca. 4. Li. 14. ca. ^1.
and Nicephorus in his story: where it is registered, that when one Sisinnius
Busshoppe of Constantinople was dead, the Emperor thought it not good to chose
any of their own to the room, because they were commonly so full of
vainglorie, and so arrogant and hautee. And therefore sent to Antioche for one
there, to come to the^ to enjoy this Patriarchs dignitee. At last he came,
Nestorius by name: which had both a good voice, and was also therewith
eloquente, and was reputed to be one of the chiefest of them that Da mihi O
Imperator terram ab hereticis, liberam and puram: and ego tibi coelos reddam.
Tu mihi haereticos extirpa, and ego tibi Persis delendis adero. O Caesar,
grant to Parsians. When he had spoken these words, says the story, though
in deed many hated the heretics, yet the lightness of his brain, the
hautinesse of his entry, and unworthiness of his beginning, the pride of his
vaineglorie, did very much dislike them, for that he could not abide a little
convenient time, to utter his opinion, taking upon him to speak so high
words, yea, before he had skant tasted of the water of the City, so to
prefer him self, to be so fervent a persecutour. Paul a Busshop of the
Nouatians (for whose worthiness, he heard, they gave him much commendation)
he went about to have spoiled them, for his sake: but the nobilitee restrained
his hasty and unruly violence and attemptes. Of whose doings, in diverse
countrees, what hurt came unto them by his hot spirit, how many thousands
were destroyed in seditions for his sake, and what fury he showed, even to
some simple folks, that erred of simplicitee, in a mattter of no great
importance, for the precise day of keepyng the Easter (which quarto
decimani) it were to long to write of. But in the end, this Nestorius for his
unworthy behavior, in pride and insolent extremitee, woorkyng altogether
contrary to the custom of the Church, says the history, against such
heretics: God forsook him with his grace, so that him self was Anastasius
(who was in great estimation with him) was the first deviser. Which he held
strongly, because he saw his glory and estimation hang thereon. But yet
afterward at an other time, perceiuyng danger to be at hand, if he had not
turned Catte in the pan, even, in an hour space, as earnestly with it, and
as earnestly against it, in pretense and in word only revolted: whereupon
God, I say, for so daliyng and foltryng in his conscience, did revenge it at
the last, most worthily in him. But first it was the occasion of a great
scisme, that could not be pacified, Ephesine Counsel, which was specially
for the condempnation of his error, gathered together under Celestine. And
finally, after his tongue was eaten with worms, died most miserably by Gods
hand, as Nicephorus tells. Where he began in the catholic faith, but
subtelly, and not simplye weiyng the principles of the faith, proceadyng not
fatherly, but tirannically in his doing, died in heresy: and is now regestred
for an Arche heretic, and shall be so taken to the worlds end. Which story,
yet I do not rehearse, as though I would insinuate an immunitee to heretics,
that troubles the quiet of the common Augustine was (but by experience
recanted his opinion) that heretics should be suffered to do and say what
they lusted: 48. Epistola ad vincentuo^,
and so by a little and little, kendle the fire of intestine sedition, to
peril the whole body: But I report it, partly to note that extremitees of
proceadynges does hurt, and that sudden alterations in Realms, makes
perturbations. And yet my opinion is, as the opinion of diverse old and new
learned men be, that it may be borne with such a man, which quietly
living in his state, and in his own conscience, tariyng upon Gods workyng in
breathe out both hot and cold, allow and condemn the self Lybanius, that
inconstant Sophist, or rather Sophister, which with his eloquence, praised the
Emperor Constantius by his life time, and when he was once dead, dispraised
him again as fast. Inconstaunte flatterers, tournyng like Weathercockes, not
of conscience, from the worse, to the better, but as the winds blow, so set
up the sail. Which manner of men, must needs stand in fear, that the
vengeance of God hangs nigh over their heads, if they repent not of their
saying, and vnsaiyng. He can not but be Sapi. 17.
Formidolosa res est malitia, proprio test conuicta, and in conscientia
delitescens, mala semper praesagit. It is an heavy thing, when a man's own
conscience bears record of his own wickedness, and condemns him. For a
vexed and a wounded conscience, takes ever cruel things in hand, and
drives himself to an end: As we read in the Ecclesiastical story, Tripert.
Lib. Cap. 38.
reported by Socrates, who tells of a certain Sophister, called Hecebolus,
among diverse others, which, he says, bearyng in pretense only the
Christian name, of a corrupt mind, for that they prefer their treasure, and
present Hecebolus says he, following and attemperyng him self to the manners
of the Emperors, fained him self in the days of Constantius, to be a most
fervent Christian. But when Julian the Apostata, was Julian a God. And when
Julian was dead, in Iouinians time he would have been a Christian again.
Whereupon, for the mutabilitee and lightness of his religion, his conscience
drove him to the Church gates, and there cast him self flat down, and
cried out with a loud voice: Conculcate me sal infatuatu^: come (says he)
and tread me under your feet, unsavory Salt that I am. From which tournsicke
spirit, God preserve us all.

Now to finishe that was promised, to declare what moderations and tollerations
has been used before time, and be at this Interim, written and published, I
think, with the allowaunce of more heads then them shall move them thereto.
And because this man is a Ciuilian, Perangaria. Whereby he may fortune epsy
that their marriages, were not only thought tolerable, but also judged
honorable, being so priuileged with such prerogative. And if he will look
further, let him search whether Justinian the Emperor, commended not a
certain Bushop, specially in respect that he had priests and Busshops to his
ancestors. In nouellis constitut. iii. That prudente and Christian

The kings majesty understanding that a few in number of this his Realm,
being Priests, as well religious as other, have taken wives and married
themselves etc. his highness in no Datu^ xvi. Nouembris, anno regni sui. xxx.

Here it may be considered what moderation this wise Prince thought mete to be
used, in such marriages as were passed without common consent: of which he knew
by information, a good number from time to time, and yet did both tolerate the
same which were used secretly, and such as were openly known did not separate
them, but commanded them to be reputed, as lay persons. And his highness was
not ignorant, how necessary it had been to have granted the libertee in his
days, which but

If such moderation as kings and Emperors have made in this matter, will not
serve to move this master of Chauncery to temper his extremity: we will lay
before him some such potentates, which paraduenture he accoumpteth to be of
hier aucthoritee in such matters, and will sooner be persuaded by them: as
Popes, Cou^sailes, and Bushops decrees. To satisfy his Platina: that Pius,
Pope of Rome, the second of that name, was wont to speak these words: Quod
magna ratione sublatae sunt nuptiae a sacerdotibus, sed tamen sibi videri,
maiori ratione restituendas. He affirmed that the cause was great, which took
a way marriage from priests, but yet there was greater cause, why they should
be restored to them again. This was this Popes opinion and judgment. And
further he writes: Epistola. 130. contra Bohemos, that in the primative
church, the Clergy had wives, and that the communion was distributed in both
kinds. This Pope, called before, Aeneas Siluius, a man of learning as his
books does testify, could upon his own experience (to be fidelis Pontifex,
that is, a faithful Busshop) bear better with the infirmities of others, then
our holy virgins, maiden priests, can now at these days. For in the time
that he was Cardinal, he was not without his remedy. For he had one himself,
and whether he was werye of her, and would have a new, or that for age he
listed now to be

These head fathers at Rome, have been before now, and be at this day, I doubt
not, more gentle, then we be in this particular Church. For we read, in the
life of Franciscus Petrarcha, who was a prebendarie at Padua, and Archedeacon
of Parma, that Lawreate was in such amorous love with a certain wenche called
Laureta, peradventure his sisters brothers daughter, that he could never dream
and speak to much of her worthiness, in his sonettes and sounges of poetry.
And lest the said Archedeacon should be overcome with to much heavy love,
and lose the full fruition of her, says the story: he granted him of his
gracious pardon, to take her to his wife: and ex vberiore gratia, Platina,
Fasciculus temporum: and the said life of Petrarcha.

Yet, good reader, here tread warely in the iudgyng of this Did. 79. ^i quis
Gloss.
For some say, if a man be chosen Pope, whose wife is thought to be dead, and
yet she afterward return again and ask of him due benevolence, if it be
certain Sergius hogsnowte, who was accused for begettyng of a child: and because
he could not be purged by his neighbors at home, for that they would not, or
else could not: was purged by the holy prayer of a country man of ours, named
Aldelme, first Monk, and then Abbotte of Malmesburie, where lastly he was
Busshop. Which Aldelme for that he was soore stirred to the vice of the
flesh, the Chronicle says, to do the more torment to Sergius Busshoppe of
Rome, to send for him. In which season of his there being, the said accusation
was in handlyng: what time the child, being but.ix. days old, was brought to
the holy Bushop Aldelme to be christened, by virtue of whose praiours, the
said child answered unto certain questions, and cleared the Busshop of Rome of
that crime, Deo gratias.

29. (...).
Sunt qui dicunt religionis gratia, Coniugia deberi dissolui. Verum sciendum
est, si hoc lex humana co^cessit, lex tamen diuina prohibuit, per se enim
veritas dicit, quos deus coniunxit homo ne separet. Qui etiam ait, non licet
dimittere vxorem excepta causa fornicationis. Quis ergo huius latori legis
contradicat? There be, says he, which hold that wedlock is Did. 31. Cap.
ante trienniu^.
Quod mihi durum, atque incompetens Tell him, that it is thought to me to be to
sore, and nothing agreeable, that such Ministers as have not had the use of
continency, nor have made promise of chastitee, should be compelled to be
separated from their wives, whereby they might fall to worse, as God forbid.
Show him what Innocent the third in his Lateran Counsel (Cap. 52) writes.
Tolerabilius est enim aliquos contra statuta hominum copulatos dimittere, quam
coniugatos legitime, contra statuta domini separare. It is Gregory, De cura
past. part. 3. ca. 28. and 29.
that such as live in sole life, should be often warned by the good and godly
shepherdes of the church, that if they bear the storms of temptation, with
peril and difficultee of their souls health, that they resort to the port
of Matrimony. And let them hear which be ignorant of the frailtee of the
flesh (say I there) that Christ himself which is the truth, speaks of
this perfection, affirmyng, that not all takes this word. Gregory,
Hieldaricus Epis^opus Augustae*
what heavy repentance I took once my self, for decreyng such a Law of
separation. Upon the experience whereof, were found in a Mote of mine at Rome,
six thousand infantes S Paul's words: Melius est nubere quam vri: It is
better to marry, then to burn in lust: and further added of mine own,
saying: Melius est nubere, quam mortis occasionem prebere: Better it is to
marry, then to give occasion of murder. But if this doubtyng and dreamyng
Thomas Martin (beleuyng nothing, but that he gropeth with his hands) will
stay at the number of so many, that might perish at Rome: Show him, to ease
his incrudelitee, that Rome is no grange: that is resembled to great Marcus
Aurelius (Capi. xxxvi.) at what time Pope Anicetus was father there, which was
in the year after Christ's incarnation.Clxiiij. which was full. CC year before
Pope Siritius replenished Rome with curtisans, by his Sodomiticall Law: that
the said Emperor caused an accoumpt of the people in the City, at a plague
time, to be brought him, whereupon he found therein of good women; the number
of.Cxl.M. whereof died of the plague.lxxx.M. and of evil women openly known
naught, the number of ten thousand, This Gregory was CC. years and od after
S^ricius in which time the number might be well increased over that it was CCC
year before his days.
that Huldarichus Busshop of Augusta, reportyng this my fact, to Nicholas the
first, which was about to make the like Law, did call this decree of mine,
worthily, Haeresis decretum, a decree of heresy: and therefore bid him
read, that same free Epistle of that Huldarichus, and let him reform his
judgment. And furthermore, seeing he is an English Doctor, tell him that he is
to scrupulose, and to sore an exacter in that his own country. Let him
read, what I said in my Epistle, to Augustine their Apostle, that it was a
nation, where rather temperate moderation, Inter decreta euisdem.
then sharpness of Ecclesiastical Censures. And let him further read in that
same Epistle, how I tempered the matter in causes of matrimony, and degrees of
consanguinitee, how much I thought it by Apostolical prudence, to grant
unto them to contracte marriage at the fourth degree, if they listed: even so
remittyng the rigor of the Church Laws then in strength: And moreover show
him, what was Inter decret. Gregorij primi and Gregorij Iumoris.
which Augustine propounded unto me, sc: when the wife is stricken with some
infirmitee, and can not render due benevolence to her husband. He asked me,
what shall her mate do in this case? Let him hear my answer, which I made
for the consideration of that time. But first tell him by the way, a poinct of
his hypocrisy. For where in his iiij. Chapter, he would seem to advance my
estimation among the English nation, for that I sent them certain learned
men, to return them to the faith: and pretends in his sixth Chapter, to be
displeased with the proceadyng Preachers, as though Augustine the English
Apostle, although he refers it to an other Gregory, writing to Busshoppe
Boniface, a country man of ours, who was sent by Gregory the second, Anno
domini.720. into Germany, to win them to the faith, and was their Apostle.
Who followyng my example of dispensation, to the nation of England, granted
the like to the nation of Germany, so that in deprauyng this moderation, he
condemns us both: and therefore he takes to much upon him, though Gratian
Leo the 4 ( Disti. xx. Cap. i.) allows the decrees of the said Gregory
without exception: where the gloser yet vsyng more reverence to the Sea
Apostolic, makes it good by his interpretation, and not to be against either
Canon or scripture. But makes Summa Antonim. part.iii. titulo primo. Cap.
xii. parag. prima: and there good reader, if thy chaste ears can bear that
catholic doctrine, expende what it is. But what subteltee was in his head, so
to condemn this dispensation, where he had condemned Luther before, for the
like doctrine, ascribing to him to say: Si vxor nolit, aut no^ possit, ancilla
venito. Which pretee story, he learned of his master Pighius, let his own
head judge. But this was his resolution: Bonum esset, si sic permaneret, vt
abstinentiae vacaret. Sed quia hoc magnorum est, ille qui se That is: Good it
were if he would remain so, and to give him self to abstainyng. But because
this is for them that be great, and strong in deed, he that can not keep
himself in continency, let him rather marry, yet let him not withdraw his
help of relief from her, being rather excluded from him for her impedimente of
infirmitee, then for any detestable crime. And if this Ciuilian will more
diligently search, he shall find that the said Gregory the third, named
the younger, gave dispensation Zacharias (who next succeeded him) did not much
allow the said former dispe^sation (as it is commonly used in the Papacy, for
one to annull and repel the decrees and pardons of the other) yet he did not
dissolve the said marriage, but wrote to Bonifacius, to Gregory aforsaid. But
what, O father Gregory, if this English Doctor, alleges in the same place,
where you counsel such as be molested with the storms of temptation, to
resort to the port of marriage: that you declare your mind further there, and
say: Sine culpa quippe ad coniugium venitur, si tamen nec dum that without
blame do such come to marriage at the least wise, if they have not before made
a vow of some better thing. If he straineth these my words, says Gregory,
which were for the time spoken, or if he will be still displeased with my
former indulgentie, tell him again that I say: Quod regulae sanctorum patrum,
pro tempore, loco, and persona, and negotio, instante necessitate traditae
sunt: That the rules of the holy fathers, be made for the consideration of the
time, place, person, and matter, and for the necessitee present. Yea, let him
well expende Pope Innocent the third his saying: Non debet reprehensibile 50.
It ought not to be judged blame worthy, if according to the diuersitee of the
times, man's decrees be diverse, specially when urgent necessitee, or evident
vtilitee require the same: for GOD him self has changed many things in the
new Testament, which he decreed in the old. etc. And what equitee is it to
force these times, when votaries be so young made, to bear the rigor of the
Canons, which were made for them, which were not professed before thirtee
year of age, and not without great deliberation In. 4. contra Gentile^.
Quamuis vniuersaliter dicatur, homini melius esse continentiam seruare, quam
matrimonio vti: tame^ alicui hoc melius Although it be said universally, that
it is better to a man to live in single chastitee, then in marriage: yet, to
some manne, marriage is better. Whereupon the Lord him self, upon mention made
of Thomas de Aquino, tell him that he counsaileth the A colyt which is in
fear to leese his benefice for his wiuyng, secretly to keep his wife, and to
deceive the eyes of the Busshop, though he call him farther to higher holy
orders. For we think (says he) that that man's ghostly father (if he be
discrete) does not much offend, if he give that clarke libertee in secret
confession, to live with one in secret Matrimony: for we judge (says he) it
to be less offense to retain his benefice, and to live in Matrimony
unknown, Capi. xxiii. and rather to have a wife, then to commit fornication
with any other.

Furthermore, Thomas in su^m^. Ca. 165.
if it should so chance, that after this deliberate vow and promise, the
votarie perceives, that he is in peril of brennyng, or fornication: tell this
Ciuilian, by aucthoritee of saint Paul, or if he would captiously gloss his
words, by aucthoritee of saint Augustine, whom he can not without shame
wreaste, that it were better, even for such, to marry, then to brenne:
writing De virginitate. Multas earum reuocat a nubendo, That is: Many of these
professed virgins, be holden back from marriage, not by the love of so
excellent a purpose, but for the fear of open shame, which comes of very
pride, wherein they be more afraied to displease manne, then GOD. These women
therefore that have a will to Marry, and Marry not, because they can not do
it without blame, ( which women should do better, says he, to Marry) that
is: Then that they should with the secret flame of concupiscence, be consumed
in the said concupiscence: who, for that they repent them of their profession,
and be weary of that they have confessed: except they reform their heart,
and better direct it, and in Gods fear again, overcome this lecherous
affection of theirs, they are to be coumpted as dead, whether they live in
pleasures, or yet in labors and fastings, doing all that they do, for
ostentation and outward prete^se, rather then for amendment of life in deed.
Thus bring this Ciuilian to Augustine: which should do better to Marry, then
to brenne: and see what he can say. And show him an other place of saint
Augustine de bono viduitatis. Capi. viii. Where he says the same in these
words: Melius esset illis posse continere quam nubere. Sed melius nubere qua^
retro post sathanam ire. id est, ab illo excellenti virginalis vel vidualis
castitatis proposito in posteriora respicie^do cadere and interire. It were
better for them they could contain, then to marry, but yet better to marry,
then to go back after the devil, that is to say, to fall from that excellent
purpose and vow of virgins, and widows continency, Augustine says there,
that such as do not perform their promise, be justly condemned. And if S.
Augustine will not co^tente him, bring in Cyprian, writing of virgins
professed in chastitee, which afterward, nevertheless were found to live
unchastly with certain deacons, not as with husbands openly, as Pighius
writes the words, but as with lecherous Deacons secretly: Si au^t
perseuerare nolunt aut non possunt, (...) Epistola^on.x^.
melius est vt nubant, quam vt in ignem delitijs suis cadant. If they will not
abide, or can not persevere, better it is, says he, that they did marry, then
Cyprian can not content this manne, who of all writers in the Church, could
not abide this Iackanapes pretensed and colored chastitee in the Clergy,
against the which he did write an whole book, De singularitate And says thus.
Peius est quam moechari, continentiam ducere criminosam, and infamem far
sanctimoniam. It is worse then adultery, to live in chastitee that is faultee,
and to pretend holiness, that is defamed in it self. And in the process of
that book, against such as refuses wives, and receive women into their
houses, vt quid sibi adhibuit mulierem, qui ducere co^tempsit vxorem? Why a
Devil does he take a woman in to him, says he, that disdained to marry a
wife? And says moreover, that such: Here might as good an argument be made
that the Clergies susspected chastity is worse then adultery and incest, as D.
Martine makes, in saying that votaries marriages be worse then adulteries and
incestes for breakyng their vow. Ad demetriadem virgin^^.
Ingerunt blasphemiam religioni: Et quod huiusmodi coniunctio suspecta, etiam
si adulteros non possit facere, facit Such, says he, that refuse wives, and
yet will have women, they bespot our religion with blasphemy: and how soever
they pretend, that honestee is not hurt by such familiaritee, says he, and
that they can live in their company, without committyng any adultery: yet,
says he, they be worse then adulterers, and incest persons, in so doing.

But if S. Ciprian can not stop his mouth: then says saint Gregory, bring
him in his own very doctor, so often alleged by him: S. Hierome, to whose
aucthoritee he recourseth so ernestly for his defense, writing that for himself
he must be believed Sanctum virginis propositum, and caelestis angelorumque
familiae gloriam, quarundam non been agentium, nomen infamat, quibus aperte
dicendum est: vt aut nubant, si se non possunt continere, aut contineant si
nolunt nubere. The report of some certain virgins, which uses them selves not
well, diffameth the holy purpose and vow of virgins, and the glory of this
heavenly and angelike company, to whom it must be plainly and openly said,
that either let them marry, if they can not keep them selves in chastitee:
or else let them keep themselves in chastitee, if they will not marry.

S. Hierom means of holy virgin* tell him that Erasmus notes upon this
place, that Hierom is like to mean so. But if he will not yet be reformed,
adhibe adhuc vnum, aut duos, vt in ore duorum vel trium testiu^, stet omne
verbum. Take one or two witnesses mo, that in the mouth of two or three, the
truth may stand. Bring him to one of our predecessors, Gelasius the first,
which lived about the year of our lord 184 speaking of widows that had made
their vows of Chastitee. Si propria voluntate professam, In decretis Gelatij.
Ca. 23
pristini coniugij castitatem, mutabili mente calcauerint, periculi eorum
intererit, quali deum satisfactione placare voluerint: quia iuxta Apostolum,
primam fide^ irritam fecerunt. Sicut enim si se forsitan continere non
potera^t, secundum Apostolum nullatenus nubere vetabantur: sic habita secum
deliberatione, promissam deo pudicitiae fidem, debent custodire. Nos autem
talibus, nullum laqueum debemus inijcere, sed solum adhortationes premij
sempiterni, paenasque proponere diuini iudicij, vt and nostra sit absoluta
conscientia, and illarum prose, rationem Deo reddat intentio.

If after they have professed voluntarily of themselves, chastitee, after their
former matrimony, and yet by mutabilitie of mind tread it under their feet
again, at their own peril be it, by what amends they shall pacify God
again, in as much as they have, as the Apostle says, made their first
faieth void. For as if peradventure they could not live chaste, they were not
forbidden any manner of ways by the Apostle to marie: even so, after so good
deliberation taken with themselves, they ought to Gelasius. And yet further to
satisfy him, ^idde him expende that decree, In decretis Leonis. 1. Ca. 12.
of an other predecessor of ours, Leo the first, who intreatyng of such
votaries as do relinquishe their profession, and betake them to warfare, or to
marriage, whom though he commend not, yet he charge them not with Augustine
charge Bonifacius the Captain, Epistol^^. 70
after his vow, to be separate from his wife) but only inioyneth them
penance, for breakyng such vow and profession so deliberatly taken in good
age, on their own free will unconstrained. Now, says saint Gregory, if
this will Ca. 4. D. iij.
and Christ is really (as he himself defines) present. And if he will be yet
obstinate, and will not hear that, then spend no more labor about him, but
count him as an Heathen and Publican. And then follow saint Paul's precept of
him for his pertinacie, as never thinkyng to have good of him: sciens quia
euersus est, qui est huiusmodi, and peccet per se damnatus. Arelate^se, holden
under Siluestre about the year of our lord.326. where it is written: Cap. 33.
De puellis quae se vouerunt deo, and preclari nominis decore floruerunt, si
post viginti and quinque annos aetatis, ad terrenas nuptias sponte transierunt,
id custodiendum esse, decreuimus, vt cum hijs cum quibus se obligarunt,
communione priuentur, ita vt eis postulantibus, paenitentia non negetur. etc.
Of such virgins which have vowed themselves to God, and have been very
notable by the worship of so excellent a name: If they Chalcedon Counsel. Ca.
16. it was decreed. Si qua virgo se dedicauerit deo: fimiliter and Monachus,
non licere eis iungi nuptijs. Si vero inue^ti fuerunt etc. If any virgin has
consecrated her self to God, as also the Monk, it is not lawful to them to
contract matrimony: but if they be found so to do, let them remain
excommunicated. Tire, about the time of Leo the first, or else under Hilarious,
about the year of our Lord.444 whereat was a Busshoppe of our nation:
Mansuetus by name, Licet a patribus nostris e commissa authoritate, id fuerit
constitutem, vt quicunque Sacerdos vel Leuita filiorum procreationi Although it
has been decreed of our fathers, by aucthoritee committed unto them, that what
soever Priest or Leuite, being convict, to give him self to generation of
children, should abstain from the Lords Communion: Nevertheless, to attempre
some moderation of this Law, and easyng it with some more reasonable
constitution: we have decreed that a Priest or a Leuite that will hold him to
matrimonial desire, or yet will not cease from generation of Tollet, kept
under Anastatius, ye may read, that Deacons, if they will contain, though
they have wives, yet may be in the Ministry. If they will use their wives,
the^ they shall go no higher. And if they be priests and beget children, then
they shall not for that cause be promoted to any Bushopricke. And in the fourth
counsel at Tollet the 43. Chap. it is said, quod Clerici qui sine consultu
Such clerks as without license of their Bushop have married wives, must be
separated. Such then as have married, with consent and assent, of not only
their own Diocessantes, but of all the Busshops in England, should be
extremely dealt with, if they should be separated. But if I should here report
all such Counsels, as makes this the only and most pain for married
priests, if they will so continue, to be sequestered from their Ministrations
or Benefices, Epistola ad Oceanum.
I might say with S. Hierom: quod tantus numerus congregabitur, vt Ariminensis
synodi multitudo superetur. So Ariminum. And here if ye be desirous, Master
Martine, for some suspicion that is in your head, to know in what conference
saint Hierom speaks this foresaied comparison: Well, it will be little to
your advantage Carterius Hispaniae Episcopus, homo and etate vetus and
Sacerdotio, vna^ antequa^ baptizaretur, altera^, post lauachrum, priore mortua
duxit vxoremt and arbitraris eum contra Apostoli fecisse sententiam, qui in
Catalogo virtutum, Episcopum vnius vxoris virum preceperit ordinandum. Miror
autem te vnum protraxisse in medium, cum omnis mundus, his ordinationibus
plenus sit, non dico de Presbyteris, non de inferiore gradu, ad Episcopos
venio, quos si figillatim voluero nominare, tantus numerus congregabitur, vt
Ariminensis Synodi multitudo superetur. Carterius, a Busshop S. Hierome, that
thou have brought forth for example, but one only man ( Carterius) seeing all
the world is full of such, as be in this wise ordered. I mean not of
Priests only, or of ministers of the lower degree: Arymyne. What has the
recityng of this saying of saint Hierome helped your whole cause, if ye stick
to his aucthoritee? For he says, that all the world is full of priests, and
Busshops which were married men, of two wives, one after an others death.
Secondly, that he understands saint Paul, a Busshoppe, to be the husband
of one wife, not as ye expound it, of him that had never but one in all his
life, but so he have but one at the time of his

If ye will, master Martin, indifferently expende the moderations before
rehearsed, ye shall perceive that ye be to sore and rigorous, to pronounce that
English Priests, already married by law of the realm, beside the
deprivations of their livings, and sequestration from ministryng, should not
be able to satisfy, Interim, for Germany where he found the whole estate of
the Clergy giving them selves to marriage, without any public or common
consent of the law Imperial. For though in that order of doctrine he expressed
his desire, wisshyng that there could be found many in the Clergy which would
live a sole life, and perform a true chastity in deed: yet bearyng with the^
that had done to the contrary: nether Leo the first, when he went about to
reform certain abuses crepte into the churches of Afrike concerning the Quia
circumstant nos hinc mansuetudo clementiae, In operibus Clementis Epistola 49.
and in Libris concilio^um Capi. 85.
hinc censura iustitiae. etc. Because that on the one side stands favor and
clemency: on the other side execution of justice, and because all the ways of
the Lord, be mercy and truth: we be compelled (agreablie to pity, that is
in the Apostolic See) so to temper our sentence by expe^dyng the difference of
offenses, that some things we must tolerate, Lucifer, and Antechriste to, and
my lord of London and others, calls him somewhat. Ca. 13. ^atera KK. 1. B.
But I pray you, what came into your head, master Martin, so shamefully to
slander Doctor Ponet, Anselmus archiepiscopus, ad festum sancti Michaelis
concilium tenuit apud Londonia^, in quo prohibuit vxores sacerdotibus Anglorum
(antea non prohibitas) quod quibusdam mundissimum visum est, Li. 7. Chro.
Iorenalli Nicho. Trucet.
quibusda^ periculosum, ne dum munditias viribus maiores appeterent, in
immunditias That is: Anselmus Archbusshoppe, at the feast of S. Michael, held
a Counsel at London, in the which he forbade priests to have wives ( which
were never before forbidden) the which thing seemed to some, to be most pure,
to some others dangerous, least that whiles they seek puritee, more then
strength is able to bear, they fall into horrible impuritee, to the great
dishonor of their Christian name. Lo, thus writes Huntyngton of Anselmus
Counsel, a Busshop more severe and Anno domini 1502. Cola^tes culi^^^^ and
Cameli^n de glutien:
if it be true that Willya^ of Malmesburie writes of him: sc, that he never
uttered any word, the remembrance whereof did grieve his conscience, where
yet he remembryng that about supper time, he did eat a raw Herryng, he
knocked himself on the breast, and bewailed his sin, for that he had taken
raw meat against the Law. Dunstane before the Conqueste, with Ethelwolde of
Winchester, and Oswolde of Worcester, all three Monkishe Busshoppes, expelled
Secular Ranulph says of Ethelwolde (being commonly called the father of
Monks) that he was a good manne in other deeds, though he were badde in that
dooyng, Li. 7.
and brought thereto, by counsel of whisperers and titifilles. And
certainly, it could be no great good deed of charitee, so much to injury
the Secular priests, and to advance the Monks, such as they were in those de
Pontificibus
as Willyam of Malmesburie writes, De pontificibus: whose words be these.
Monachi Cantuarienses (sicut oe^s tunc temporis in Anglia, secularibus haud
absimiles erant, nisi quod pudicitiam no^ facile proderent) canum cursibus
auocari: auium praedam raptu aliorumque volucrum per mane sequi: Spumanti^ equi
tergum promere: tesseras quatere: potibus indulgere: delicatiori victu and
accuratiori cultu, frugalitatem nescire, parsimoniam abnuere: and caetera id
genus: vt magis illos Co^sules, qua^ Monachos frequentia famulantium diceres.
That is: The Monks of Canterbury, as also at that time, all the rest in
England, Lanfrancke the Archbusshoppe beholding, held his patience for a time,
and would not utterly discharge their daintee minds, with any sharp
discipline. For he knew, as he was most skillful in the art of arts, that
is, in gouernyng of soul, Polidore writes in this great matter, of expeliyng
Secular Priests out of their churches. That is (as it Mendace^ memorem esse
oportet. A liar had need to have a good remembrance. Now sir, because you
would hold your pen still in slaunderyng, immediately after, you fall to an
other slanderous lie: where you be not ashamed to say, that the tale written
of Ioannes Cremensis Presbyter Cardinalis, is forged of some heretic: and that
it is like to be one Litera. KK. a.
having more lies then lives. Wherein ye say, is neither honesty of words,
nor truth in matter. O master Martin, if your self, and those which framed
your book, had seen so much in history, as Ihon Bale had done, ye would
neither have slaundered his writing, neither belyed historical antiquitee. Ye
would rather have inwardly lamented, Cremensis, to some heretic, ye make many
fat heretics: and where you say, it is but a tale forged, and one of Bales
counterfette stories, Lib. 7.
ye shall hear what Henry Huntington records thereof. Ad Pascha, Cremensis,
Cardinalis Romanus, descendit in Angliam, peregrinatusque per episcopatus and
abbatias,

At Easter Ihon Cremensis, Cardinal of Rome, came down into England, and
making his progresses through Busshoprickes, and Abbatees, not without great
rewards, about the Natiuitee of our Lady, held a solemn Counsel at
London. But because Moises, Gods secretary, in the holy story, as he
Cremensis in words and deeds. He therefore, when he had made grievous
process, in that Counsel, against Priests wives, saying, that it was a
foul sin and a great, to rise from a strumpettes side, to make Christ's
body: when he him self, the same very day had said Mass, was taken with a
strumpet after Euensong: the fact being most open, could not be denied, nor
ought to be hidden. That high honor had every where to him before, was
turned to high shame and rebuke. Whereupon

Here you se, master Martin, an ancient writer, no heretic, Archdeacon of
Huntyngton, four hundred years paste and an half, to have told this story
of this good holy ympe of Rome Church, being warned yet before by Pope Honorius,
whose letters to him and others, Simon of Duresme, does recite in his book,
wherein he names him Praesbiterum Cardinalem, priest Cardinal, and prays
him, as being sent before into England Calixtus, that he would behave himself
in his Legation, as a wise and a discrete child of the Rome church, and as may
appartaine to the honor of God and the honesty of the Apostolic See. The
same Honorius, writing to the Archebusshops, and Busshops, Abbattes and nobles
(suppressyng yet the kings name) charged thus: we pray you, admonish you,
and commau^de you, that you would reverently receive him, as the vicar of holy
S. Peter, humbly to hear him, and at his call to hold solemnly, with him,
conuocations, so that by his and your diligence, all things may be reformed
in your realm, which

Now if neitheir Secular Priest, nor religious Monks testimony, Polydore in
his stories the tenthe book (how craftily soever for the honor of Rome
Church he suppresseth his name, as belike you would have the lay people to
take it for a lie, to save the honor of your wiueles church, how leude soever
Lib. 7. Cap. 16 Anno. 1125.
to his open shame and rebuke. From whose testimony differs not Ranulph of
Chichester in his Polichronico^. Further Matheus westmonasteriensis, otherwise
named Florilegus writing of the said Ihon Cardinal, thus says. Dictus
Ioannes qui in concilio, omnes concubinarios Sacerdotes maxim damnauerat, in
eodem vitio deprehensus est: The said Ihon, which in his counsel, had very
greatly blamed Priests that used concubines, was taken himself in the same
crime. Also Matthew Parise, in his Chronicle in that very year, records the
Hierax an heretic, of whom Epiphanius writes in his story, of whom some
mention is made before. And if yet none of all these will serve to discharge
Ihon Bale, to make him the first aucthor thereof, or to disprove it to be a
forged or counterfeit story, ye may look further in other histories, both in
French and Latin, and find, almost all that write of those days, to speak
of the same Cardinal to like effect. And therefore M. Martine, is it reason
that ye write, that it was some heretic, that forged spiritu impostoris, with
a spirit of error, that ye can within so few lines, write two so notable lies
and errors. It is to true that the wise man says Quod frequentur prae
occupent pessima, Sap. 17.
redarguente conscientia: They often take upon them matters of the worste, to the
condemnation of their own conscience. For where wickedness is always
doubtful in it self, it gives testimony to his own shame. For ever does a
spiced conscience, take upon him to attempt matters of crueltee. Whereupon, I
may conclude with your own words in the self same place, that he may well
Lucian him self, when he wrote his book, De veris narrationibus, had half so
good a bouget, to the vtteraunce of his veritees: as this manne has brought
away, belike out of Paris, from among the Sorbonistes. So that I may sair:
Totus quantus, quantus est, a vertice ad vltimum vsque calcaneum, ex mendacijs
meris, and dolis confictus est and conflatus: In like manner, to note a poincte
or two, how he handeleth him self in his Counsels, alledgyng and wreastyng,
in the x. Chapter of his book, prouyng that Priests married in England,
^ora^. R. iiij.
are not only to began. 30.
out of Concilium Epaunense: Incestis coniunctionibus nihil prorsus venie
reseruamus, nisi cum adulterium separatione sanauerint. Incaestus vero nec vllo
co^iugij nomine pallietur. We do reserve no pardon at all (says the holy
Counsel) for Incestuous copulations, except they amend their aduoutrie and
filthy life, by separatyng them selves a sunder. Neither let Incests be
colored or covered, with the cloked pretense of Matrimony. Here, master
doctor, ye do most impudently, both curtall the Canon, and also as untruly
wreste it. For, that it might be known, Quos vt a presenti tempore prohibemus,
ita ea quae sunt anterius instituta, no^ soluimus. Which marriages, as for
hereafter we do forbid: so those which be already made, we will not
disseuer. After which words, the Canon rehearses the rest, and defines of
them thus. Sanc quibus coniunctio illicita interdicitur, habebunt ineundi
melioris coniugij libertatem. That is: To whom such unlawful copulations be
forbidden, shall be granted libertee, to get them better marriages. Which
latter Peter Quintell. Anno. 1538. though it has, Non habebunt: yet the text
is purged in the second Counsel at Towers, in the two and twenty Chapter,
where it is at large set out.

Furthermore, the self same degrees of blood, whereof these incestuous
marriages be made, are also recited in the Counsel Agatensi, holden under Pope
Celestine the first. Anno domini. 428. and there the Counsel, after
dissolution, gives them libertee to marry a new. Here, master Martin, ye
may see, that in none of these three Counsels, Priests copulations be
either Macon: and as he writes in the fourtene Canon, as, forbiddyng Priests,
Deacons, and Subdeacons former wives ever to marry again, after their
husbands decease: where in deed no such matter is in the fouretene Canon. In
the sixtene Canon there is mention made, that the wife of a Subdeacon,
Exorciste, or Acolite, should no more Vt omnibus dominicis diebus altaris
oblatio ab omnibus viris and mulieribus offeratur, tam panis, quam vini: vt per
has immolationes peccatorum suorum fastibus careant. etc. Which Canon, M.
Martin may English at his leisure. And because he forces so much separation,
he may read, that in the first Counsel of Macon, Canon.xj. Bushoppes and
Priests, and all the better of the Concilio Aruermesi. Cap. xii.

In like manner, he does violently wrest in the self same leaf a decree of
Calixtus, if it be his, as there be great reasons and aucthoritees, to prove
that it is but feined upon him: But so much the more apt for Doctor Martin,
to aduouche it among his other such stuff: the words be these.
Presbiteris, Diaconis, Upon which words, beside that he untruly avouches,
in slaunderyng the Apostles and primative Church, that it was their doctrine,
that they should be separated: He notes three notable poinctes. First, that
he puts no difference betwixt them that be bound by their consecration,
and them that be bound by their solemn profession: betwixt an inclusiue,
and an open vow: betwixt Priests, and Monks: Thus far doctor Martin. I
report this note, good reader, but to thine own judgment, whether thou
may not ^xtra de voto quod voti re^emptione.
so far against the here: as though both al men's reasons were not against
his note, and as though the Law it self said not: quod alia est causa monachi
alia clerici* And further plura profitendo promittit Monachus, qua^ recipiendo
sacrum ordinem clericus. And for diffrence, it is written in the Extrau. of
Ihon, the.xxij. Chapter. Antiquae. Coniugatus ante copulam, sacrum ordine^
suscipiens, cogitur ne ad co^iugem: sed habitum monachi suscipiens, Ex^t. de
co^uers. comugas Cap. verum ^^vobas qui transgredimi mandatum Dei. propter
traditione^ vestram Math.
potest inuita vxore, ire ad religionem, and cogendus ibi manner and vinculum
coniugii inefficax redditur: The married manne, that undertakes holy orders,
before carnal knowledge of his wife, is enforced to go to his wife: but he that
becomes a Monk, may against his wives will go forward to his Religious
profession, and ought to be compelled Caietane writes, which Thomas
also.2.2. affirms. Quod votum per se solemn, est indespensabile (per illud
decretale cum ad Monaste.) Quod est regularium: sed votum per accidens, quod
est annexum ordini sacro, quod est secularium, est dispensabile.4o.
sententiarum. Ergo alia est causa Monachi and alia Presbyteri. That a vow,
which of it self is solemn, is not to be dispensed with, if it be of
Regulers. But a vow of a secular, not annexed to his holy order (called a vow
per accidens) may be dispensed with well enough, Antonine in Summa, part.iii.
and Bonau^nture.iiii. sententiarum Distin.xxxvii. do agree. Whereupon your
three notable poinctes being well waied, are not worth three agglettes. It is
a true law to be verified of him self, that he reports in his fifth
Chapter: L^a^ G.iiij.
Semel malus semper presumitur malus, in eodem genere mali. If it be true that
your self pronounce in your tenth Chapter, that it is the nature of heretics,
ever to take a piece of the aucthours words, and not the whole sentence: I
would desire the indifferent reader, by expendyng misnameth his doctors,
seinyng Ambrose to be Augustine, Cirill, Origin: and yet corrupts them all,
and all to this end, that he might frame a probable argument, in an
improbable matter. I trust good reader, thou will credit no further his
stout bold assertions, and glorious processes, then the truth of the matter
will bear his cause. But because I will not be over tedious, I let diverse
other such foul shameless lies and deprauynges, untouched.

But as for the aucthoritee of saint Augustine de bono viduitatis, where he
proves the marriages good, even of votaries, though their promise breaking be
condemned: he took the next 17. q. 1. Nuptiarum bonum In glosa.
as doctor Martin has: yet to the indifferent reader that will expend the very
text in S* Augustine, and the process he goes about, it must needs purge it
self of all the dross they can cast upon it, though Pighius falsifieth the
text, and Petrus Lombardus leaves out the words of the most pithe, to
blind the reader. And some there be, that to play it a way, expound all the
whole treatise of saint Augustine, in that poynct, to be meant of a sc, plane
non dubitauerim dicere etc. to be meant of solemn vowers. And these two
shifts has this doctor Martin of those glosers, beside his own peculiar
devise, of mangling and manifest corruptyng the text. Some glosers, affirm it
to be wholly meant of solemn vowers: and some glosers are so bold to deny
saint Augustine, and affirm that here he slept, and that he did not well
reason in this matter: As the common gloser of the decrees. Gardine^us contra
Buceru^ Lib, 3.
And some shifteth of the matter after a new sort, and Augustine did write
this his opinion, before the church had otherwise defined this cause, vz. that
marriages after the vow, should be no marriages: whereby he means that saint
Augustine speaks of solemn vows. For the church at these days, does not
yet decree, that marriages after simple vows be Augustines age, and so in his
time thought good (how naught soever they were to break their advised vows)
whether we may not better stick to saint Augustines aucthoritee, and to the
common faith that was before his time: rather then to that definition which
has been made since, contrary to the faith of those writers: Specially seeing
the Busshops of England, many

Thomas, Albertus, Stotus, Orbellensis, Bonauenture, Durande, Abbas
Panormitanus, Petrus d^ Palude, Astexanus, Prepositus, Gratian, and the common
gloser, Cardinalis Caietanus: whose words be these. Nec ratione, nec
authoritate probatur, quod absolute loquendo, Sacerdos peccet contrahendo
matrimonium. Nec ordo, in quantu^ ordo, nec ordo, in qua^tum sacer, est
impeditiuus matrimonij. and quod Sacerdotium non dirimit matrimonium
co^tractum, sieve ante, sieve post, seclusis omnibus legibus Ecclesiasticis,
stando tantum in hijs quae a Christo and ab Apostolis habemus. It can not be
proved neither by reason or auctoritee, that (to speak precisely) a priest
should offend in contractyng matrimonye. For neither

If then, by the doctrine of the Clergy of England, the kynkes aucthoritee
may do as much in positive Laws, as ever the Busshoppe of Rome was able to
do: And it is the consent of all divines and Canonistes universally holden,
that the Busshop of Rome has full aucthoritee to make and to unmake, to
dispense Ephe. 2. Coll. 2.
which was contained in the laws of the decrees written, has put out the
hand writing that was against us, and so discharged us, of all manner
condempnation, under which we were holden thereby: why in Alfonsus plainly
Philippica.xix. that yet after their promise, this libertee of the Apostle is
still wholly remainyng to them, sc, propter fornicationem vitandam, vnusquisque
vxorem suam habeat. etc. For auoydyng of fornication, let every votum and
iuramentum pari passu ambulant, says the Lawiers, and an oath may not be a
bond of wickedness. Furthermore, Did. 27. Diaconus.
For it is written in the Decrees by Gratia^. Si diaconus a ministerio cessare
voluerit, contracto matrimonio licite potest vti. Nam, and si in ordinatione
sua castitatis votum obtulerit: tamen tanta est vis in sacramento coniugij,
quod, nec ex violatione voti, potest dissolui ipsum co^iugium. If the deacon
will cease from his ministry, he may lawfully use matrimony Gratian,
grounded upon saint Augustines aucthoritee. Cum quispiam post votum castitatis
ducit vxorem, iuramento firmans, nunquam ab ea discessurum quod 22. q. 4.
^unocens.
When any manne, after the vow of Chastitee, marieth a wife, bindyng it fast
with his oath, that he will never depart from her, which although it be
unlawful, for as much as it is evident, that righteousness and justice wanted
in the act: yet nevertheless, by the aucthoritee of saint Augustine, it is
commanded to be conserved still. And there Gratian proves, that this thing
stands upon the strength of the oath: where he says, other men's opinions
be, that it is by the prerogative of Matrimony. And whether Gratian mente
Augustine, De bono viduitatis, or whether, that which he reports in the
Law, in these words, to be saint Augustine: Did. 17. quidam.
Let the reader judge. Quidam, nubentes post votum, asserunt, adulteros esse:
Ego autem dico, quod grauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt. Some affirm, says
he, that such as do marri^ after their vow, be adulterers: but I say, that
thee offend grievously, which do separate such. Which form of words, in
such as^eueration, may sone make us understand, how earnestly saint
Augustine was in this opinion. And lest it should be taken, that saint
Augustine did write this his sentence, Quae autem respexit ad nuptias, non quia
voluit nubere da^natur, sed quia iam ante recesserat, and fit vxor Loath
respiciendo retrorsum. She that has looked back to marriage, is not dampened
because she would marry, but because she had gone back before, and is made
like to Lothes wife, by her lookyng behind her. But if ye yet desire to know
a reason of this strong assertion of saint Augustine, so reported in the
Decrees, the Law shows it plainly: Voti solemnitas ex sola constitutione
ecclesiae est inuenta: matrimonij vero vinculum, ab ipso ecclesiae The
solempnitee of the vow, was devised only by the Churches constitution: but
the bond of Matrimony, took his inseparable unity and knotte, of him that is
creator of all things,

And here I would ask this Lawier a question, by occasion of the words that
there further follows, of that extrauagant: whether English secular
priests, have made a simple vow, or a solemn vow, in the taking of their
orders? If it be a simple vow: then though it be never so seriously made,
before never so many witnesses, never so advisedly made, earnestly promised,
yea, sworn in the face of the Church: yet it dissolueth not matrimony once
made, says the law. Ergo, in this vow, if it were that Priests were
ordered, yet their marriages be not to be broken. Ergo, it stands but upon
man's constitution, Ergo, dispensable by manne: and manne has dispensed with
them, by open constitution of Law, here in England. What binds them then in
their order? Yea, why be they not free of all hands? And their marriages good,
and indissoluble from all laws of man? For this bond, which this Lawier
urges so importunatly, must stand either of the nature and substance of
order, either of the nature and bond of the Panormitane, in whose Priests,
stands Order and Matrimony jointly together: betwixt which Priests and
their own wives, is Chastitee of Marriage, says the said Panormitan. And
further, he says, Ex^ra (...).
that it is not long of their custom, that they be excused: for that is
naught worth against the Law God. And further, it can not stand of the
nature of order, seeing that in the Apostolic Siricius days, they might
contracte, as the gloser of the decrees avouches plainly the opinion of
certain aucthoures in the Law: whose opinion he does not disprove, saying:
quod olim sacerdotes poterant contrahere ante Siricium, Did. 84. cum in
pretenio
vnde and Moses contraxit. In times paste Priests might marry before
Siricius, whereupon Moses did contracte. And there he reports, that the
Apostles Moses presbyter apud Ciprianum Li. 2. Epistola. 4. I^st 82.
propos^^^^^.
For if the Apostles had made any such Canons: The Oriental church would
have admitted it. And further he writes, that by Gratians opinion, the Church
has constituted certain things, which were not so decreed of the Apostles.
And there names in his examples, the continency of the ministers: and
aduoucheth S. Augustine for him, Can. 35. q. 2. Cum igitur.
De ciuitate dei. li. xv. Cap. xvi. which said Gratian also writes, that
before the Counsel of Ancirane, which was about the year of our Lord. 308.
continency was not yet co^stituted upon the ministers of the altar. 2.6. q.
2. Ca. Sors.
Copula sacerdotalis, nec legali, nec Eua^gelica, vel Apostolica authoritate
prohibetur: tamen lege penitus interdicitur. The marriage of Priests, is
neither forbidden by the aucthoritee of the old Law, neither of the
Evangelists nor of the Apostles: but by the Law it is utterly forbidden.

Secondly, it stands not of the nature and bond of the vow: for the said
expositour of the Law says. 27. q. 1. S^ quis.
quod votum, de sui natura non obligat, sed co^stitutio circa votu^emissa. A
vow of his own nature binds not, but the constitution, which is made and
diuulged about the vow. And further he writes in the same cause Voueo
continentian, I vow chastitee. Yet by this, is no solemn vow made. And Pope
Celestine the third ^
quod simplex votum, apud deum non minus obliget, qua^ solennis. That is: A
simple vow byndeth no less before God, then a solemn vow. And in these
poinctes does the schole Divines agree with the Canonistes. Antoninus.
Saying: quod vinculu^ vito solennis and solutio eius, est ex statuto
ecclesiae. The bond of a solemn no^ esse^tialiter sed accide^taliter, is
annexed thereto but by the church co^stitutio^. Thirdly, as for the promise or
vow made by the priest at his orders, it is manifest that the priests ordered
in England make none, as is before said: and though they did, yet write the
said Divines and Canonistes, that howsoever a man byndeth him self, either by
oath or by vow: yet alwaie is understood the exception of the aucthoritee of
the superior. And the band of the vow does cease, either by dispensation,
commutation, Antoninus: he that is so dispensed with, is not to be charged as
a liar to God, Part. 2. Titulo. xi. Ca. 2.
for not performyng his vow. For a man must have of things to come, Godly
conditions, which be alwaie annexed, either implied or expressed. S. Thomas
defines, that to the essentialnesse of a vow, 2.2. q. 88. Extrauag. de
regularib. Ca. ad nostra^glosa. Page 11^.
must three things concur. An advised deliberation of mind, a fast purpose
of the will, and a promise made to God. And if there be not, says he, a full
intention of the professor to bind himself, Bucere, supposes not, that any
man pleases God in his vowyng, if he be not brought thereunto by a godly
inclination. And further, the said scole divines, hold, that he, who is so
dispensed with, either for respect of the common wealth, or yet in respect of
his own salvation: in his obedience he meriteth more, then if he kept his
vow. For in this case, say they, this obedience is a more worthy virtue, and
more meritoriouse, then is chastitee: Quantum ad premium substantiale. And the
said Antonine, holds, yt if the Pope should dispense, without Quantum ad
vtrunque quia claudicare non potest. That is, on both sides, for it may not
halt on the one leg. But seeing, as I have said, that the said seculer
Priests make no such profession, nor the Busshop speaks the said
proposition, to the English priests under such condition: then it stands
only but of the decrees

Furthermore, upon that devise that is allege to defeat saint Augustines
sentence and judgment, affirming that the church, as then, had not defined
votaries marriages to be adulteries, or to be dissolved. If the matter stands
but upon the definition of the Church: then thus I reason. The Church has
defined of old, precontractes to make Matrimony, and the second contractes to
Augustine, and with that age wherein he was, in this matter: as to be a
catholic with doctor Martin, and such other of his affinitee. Who by pleasure
and displeasure, by gain of promotio^s, and lucres fallen to them, by their
opinion, hold the contrary.

Ioannes Genesius, deritu nuptiaru^, how universal it is. And if ye miscredit
him, ask the whole number of the Canonistes: who some of them, stand in more
doubt, whether the Pope can dispense with Regulers, to have propriety and
seculer promotion for the particular state of the Clergy of the same. And as
Germany, to be temperally beneficed, against the Canons of the Church? Extrae
de consiguinitate and affinit. Can. 35. q. 10. Fraternitatis.
or as could Innocent the third release to al realms of christendom, the
prohibitions of consanguynitee, and affinitee, Concilium Constant. vi.
And some not separating the ministers from their wives, but in time of their
ministration: And depriuyng the ordinaries, which would separate them,
contrary to the Canons of the Apostles. Council. ga^grense.
And some accursyng all such, as would abstain from the Priests prayers and
oblation, for their Chrysostom writing in his Epistle to Theodore, a relapsed
Monk, does grievously reprehende them, which after their vow, resorted to
marriage. Basilius de vera virginitate, does the same. Saint Augustine de
gratia and libero arbitrio, agrees with them. Shortly to make answer. There
is a great difference betwixt the vows, and the manner: and the causes of
vowyng that was used in Chrysostomus vehement declamyng in that kind of
speaking, ought to be brought against all manner of breakyng vows: nor
Basilius austeritee, is not to be applied, but to such vows, as he used to
make, and for his times. Distingu^ temp. and causas: and Co^cordabis Leges and
Canones. questi. 15.
with such deliberation and examination, as Basil requires in his questions:
where he writes, that if any man be entered into a profession of co^tinencie,
and feels that he can not be^re it, to attend wholly upon God, and heavenly
things: he would have such released again, before those witn^sses, with which
he came in: and further says these words. Caeteru^ qui professione^ facturus
est* post multam deliberationem and considerationem, q per plures dies ipsi ad
seipsum permittere co^uenit, vt ne videatur aliquid secundum He that will make
his profession, after much deliberation and consideration, which must needs
be granted to him many days, lest it might appear, that we did it by
stealthe that we do: and so thereupon let him take on his purpose. etc. So
likewise saint Augustine De fide ad petrum, Ca. q,
uses these circumstances: Qui statuit in cord suo firmus, non habens
necessitatem, potestatem habens suae voluntatis, and vouerit continentiam deo:
debet eam vsque ad finem tota mentis solicitudine custodire, ne da^nationem
habeat, si primam fidem irritam fecerit. He that has Tolet cap. primo, the
case were far other, then D. Martin handeleth it, and otherwise to be
expended, and answered. And yet, al be it such votaries were so advisedly made
by the circumstaunces aforesaied: though they deserved much Augustines
judgment is plainly, upon those, that their marriages be not to be dissolved.
Let them that fear God, and be addicte to a truth, judge this matter.
Beside all this, there is a great difference betwixt a consultation, what is
lawful and expedient to be done, before it be done and what is to be
tolerated, after it is so done. Multa prohibentur says the Law. If it be
further objected, though it were granted to be lawful, that the Clergy
might have that libertee, yet it may be thought of some men, that it were
not expediente. To answer this objection, there have been before times right
wise and prudent men (As be at these days.) Which upon their experience,
thought it not only to be lawful, but also expedient and profitable in
diverse respects. Of which judgment, beside Pius the second, and
Panormitane the great Lawier (whose opinions and testimonies I have showed
before) Erasmus also, a man of some wit ad Episcopum Basiliensem, wondereth
what it means, where that as neither Christ, nor his Apostles, have
prescribed any such Law: And where that the Church dispenses with diverse
causes, as occasion rises, why men should urge this human constitution so
obstinately, seeing there be so many causes, that might persuade the
alteration. But after all this, when cauillyng wits are by good and
sufficient proofs, overthrown and vanquished: then because they will ever
seem to have somewhat for them selves, Sapien. 1. In^^th. 13.
And to appear to them, that have their faith stayed in him. As though we be
not taught thus much non des^rit sperantes in se, and non permisit me dominus
ancillam suam coinquinari. That God forsakes not them, which trust in him, as
he has not suffered me his handmaiden to be defiled. So it is before in the
sixth Chapter confessed in prayer, saying: Non derelinquis Thou do not, O
Lord, says Judith, forsake them that presume of thee, where such as presume
of them selves, gloriyng of their own power, thou bryngest them low. And
further, as though there were no difference betwixt him that in the fear of
God, uses his remedy, and if that, by Gods will and pleasure be taken from
him, then makes his refuge to God: And such a one as refuses Gods remedy,
that is needful for him, and will work maisteries in such temptation.
Psalm. 9.
For God will help in necessitees, says a certain

But now to stay this Doctor from any further wonderyng why priests marriages,
especially Seculars, and of the Church of England, yea, or yet the marriages of
votaries in England ought not to be dissolved, as of co^pulsion. The answer
is, first and foremost, because they be marriages, if no other impediment of Vae
vobis qui transgredimini precepta Dei, propter traditiones vestras, ideo, Quod
deus coniunxit, homo non separet. When he says homo: he means all the
Artilarie and Canons that manne can by his witty brain forge with all the
power he has. But how prove you (he will object) that such copulations be
marriages? De bon^ vtdicitatis. Ca. 10.11.
Saint Augustine says so, and stands in disputation to prove it with
instant reasons. And professes in the end of his xv, Chapter, Hierome,
Chrysostom and Basyll, say, that they be incestes and adulteries, such as
be made of votaries. Sir, yet that Seculer Priests marriages be not so reputed
of them, for they be not vo^aries. And where they say, that votaries marriages be
adulteries: saint Augustine stands strongly against them all, and says
Expende S. Augustines very words.
says saint Augustine, they that so reason, and thereupon conclude they be
adulteries and no marriages: I say and affirm it, they do not consider
neitheir wisely nor diligently, as

When ye have well answered the conference of these reasons, master Martin,
then shall we give you leave, with your distinction of votum simplex, and votum
solenne, to do as Pighius your guide does: that is, to steal secretly
away, inuisibly as ye trust, covered under that captious net, and so
childishely and unlearnedly to play away the manifest and euidente places of
S. Cyprian, and saint Augustine, with your fond gloses, imaginyng that they
both should have two sundry and diverse respects, in the prosecution and
debatemente of one and the self same sentence: by which craftee and shameless
shift, your craft

Sir, in the mean season, what call you a solemn vow, that you would have
of such a force? Can there be any more solemn Augustine, Cyprian, Basile,
ascribes that dampnation, which saint Paul ascribes to the breach
thereof, which if it be such dampnation, as ye mean, is not that dampnation
solemn enough, and dangerous to? Is there any more solemn vow, or advised
vows to bind before God, in foro conscientiae, where the true Canons in deed
be so graven, that they can not be derogated, or antiquated, but will be still
firmly fixed: in cogitationibus, inter se accusantibus, aut etiam
excusantibus, in eo die cum iudicabit dominus occulta hominum. etc. That is, in
the thoughts and hearts Bonifacius the captain, made of good age, a grown
manne, after his wives death, before two notable Bushoppes ( omni exceptione
maiores) Augustine and Alipius, which vow as Gratian says Causa. 17. q. 2.
Nos nouimus. he conceived in his heart, and pronounced it with his mouth, and
yet was not compelled to perform it. And does not yet S. Augustine permit
this his second marriage contracted after his vow, to remain Celestine the
third, Extra: Qui clerici, etc. say quod simplex votum apud deum non minus
obliget quam solenne: that a simple vow byndeth no less before God, then a
solemn vow. Sir, ye shall have prooffes enough, of the Canonistes
themselves, partly in the same law late rehearsed, that the solempnitees
adds no further strength to the vows, but that the note is greater, and the
condempnation is more apparaunt to open sight, to the show of his faith
breakyng, when more circumstaunces concurreth together with his promises. And
yet for all this, his promise and faith, so called, may not be Augustine: the
case is then the worse, De bono co^ugque.
Nisi cum propterea mala fides deseritur, vt ad fidem veram legitimamque
redeatur. Except it be therefore, that an evil says being forsaken, there
may be a return again, to true and lawful full faith, that is to say,
that the offense be amended, by reformyng De obedientia, in the last^ leaf,
and somewhat shall ye there learn. But if ye will se it more largely, and
piththily expe^ded at the full, to sati^fie any wise and indifferent learned
manne: Recourse ye to the eight Counsel that was kept at Tolette, being then
present.52. Bushoppes, under that good Bushoppe of Rome, Martin the first, in
whose faith, master Martin, if ye had been Christened, ye would have been of
an other manner of judgment, in your rigorous opinion, ad Amandu^. But surely,
master doctor Martin, when ye have done all that ye can, yet it shall be
justified, that Secular Priests be not so bound as ye dream, and that with
such testimonies of aucthors (because ye do so much delight in number of
aucthoritees) that ye shall be found among them and others, in that opinion, a
very singular at length. Yet be not angry, though I put no substantive to this
adjective, for though I did, yet should it not be pernicious to Spiritus
immside, Apostata, Heretic, Scismatike, Incest, Traitor. etc. Iwis, M.
Martin, your mouth has uttered the goodness of your heart, what treasure lies
there. Your book has declared what you be. He that brent Dianas temple, to
get him a name, shall not be more famously registered in the book of fame,
then you for your so excellent endeavor, in fieryng the poor temples

But here, good reader, I perceive that I forget my self, and I am (I can not
tell how) unevenly carried and tossed, in the ship I row in, thus in my skape
ouersea: I would feign soberly go on as the grauitee of the cause requires.
And when I purpose so, and then again have this ridiculum caput in mine eye and
mind, to resort to any of his said handeled matters: I forgette my self
again, and abase my pen, almost to the lenity of his writing Ne respondeas
stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, Proverb. ^ ^.
ne efficiaris ei similis. And even there again: Responde stulto iuxta
stultitiam suam, ne sibi sapiens esse videatur. Answer not a fool, according
to his foolishenesse, lest thou be made like unto him.

To bring in Laws and Canos, and man's aucthorities, in like sort as he
reports them for his strongest holds, I was thereto carried by secret
instinct so to answer him again, ne sibi sapiens esse videatur, lest he should
seem to him self, he were wise. And yet not to answer him so agreably with
these, as stickyng more to them, then to the scriptures (as he does) for so is
not my mind to answer him, ne videar illi similis, lest I might seem like
to him. For when all man's aucthoritee in his word is inconstant Moses and
Maximus (of whom Cyprian makes metion, Li. 2. Epistola 4. praising them for
their constancy in their long imprisonment) perceived in their cogitations,
wherewith they were diversely tossed to and fro in prison: that there was no suer
stay and refuge for conscience, but Gods word only: In like manner upon their
experience, they did advertise other thereof, as the same Cyprian reports
Moses and Maximus, Lib. 4. Epistolarum Epistola. 3.
saying. Solicita admonitione insistitis, vt euangelij sa^cta precepta, and
tradita nobis semel mandata vitalia, forti and stabili obseruatione teneantur:
hoc est esse confessorem domini, hoc est esse Martyrem Christi, seruare vocis
suae inuiolatam, circa omnia and solidam firmitatem. Ye have sent instantly to
us by most careful advertisement, that the holy precepts of the Gospel,
and those commandments of life, once delivered unto us, should be holden of
us, with strong and stable observation. While ye do this, says Ciprian: Oh
this it is to be a Martyr

If we were at this poinct, that we would reverence the scripture, as says
saint Augustine, as placed in the supreme and Epistola. 1^.
Velut in summo and caelesti authoritatis culmine collocatam. (For how much
soever a man shall excel in knowledge, yet shall he find himself far under
the aucthoritee of scripture, which almighty God has appointed to be a
stable pillar far passing all men's inventions: Quantu^ enim quisque sciendo
profecerit, infra illas literas se inueniet, Ad Orosium Cap. 11.
quas Deus tanquam firmamentum supra omnia humana corda constituit.) If in our
controversies, we would appeal as he does, to the scriptures, where he
writes against an heritike: this controversy asks a judge, Ergo let Christ
be judge, and let him De nuptijs and con. li. 2. ca. 33 Co^tra preseri.
heretie.
Ista controuersia iudicem querit, iudicet ergo christus: and cui rei mors eius
profecerit ipse dicat. If with Tertulian: whatsoever is ye first that is right,
whatsoever is latter, that is counterfette: Rectum est quodcunque primum est,
adulterinum quodcu^q, posterius. And thereupon we would as gods priests,
recourse with Cyprian to the Lords orriginall, to the Gospel, and Apostles
tradition: ad originem Dominicam and Euangelicam and Apostolicam traditionem.
Ad pompeium
If we would suffer that to sincke in our hearts* which Leo the first charge,
where he says: this do we forfend to you, Did. xi. hoc. vestris.
hoc vestrae indicimus charitati, vt ab apostolicis institutis nullo vlterius
recedatis excessu, quia inultu^ post hoc esse no^ poterit, si quisqua^
Apostolicas regulas, in aliquo crediderit esse neglige^das: then surely would
these and such like controversies, be sone at an end. Where now says
Cyprian: while me^ will stick stubburnely rather to that which they have first
taken up in opinion, it comes to pass, that they will defend their own
devises, though Fit studio presumptionis and contumaciae, vt quis magis sua
praua and falsa defendat, quam ad alterius facta and verba consentiat. Hereupon
all things be now so full of man's presumptions and opinions, Augus.
Epistola. 119.
that the christian religion is more burdened with servile bondage and harder
yokes, then ever the Jews religion was with the obserua^cis and precepts
Abbas Panormitane, able I doubt not in all the universities of Christendom, to
counterpeise the weight of this Ciuilians wit and learning. Clerici no^
tenentur co^tinere iure diuino, neque continentia est in clericis secularibus
de substantia ordinis, De clericis con^ugatis. Cap. (...).
quia alias graeci peccarent, nec excusat consuetudo, quia illa non valet
contra lege^ dei. Item, melius foret, and pro bono ac salute animarum
salubrius, fi and vniuscuiusque voluntati relinqueretur, ita vt non valentes,
aut non volentes continere, possint contrahere. Quia experie^tia docente

Clerks be not bound to live in continency by the Law of God, and
continency is not in the secular Priests of the substance of the order, for
then the Grecians should offend, and it may not be said that the custom
excuses them: for custom is of no value against the Law of GOD.
Furthermore, it were better, he says, and more wholesome for the profette and
salvation Priests of the Latin church: living with their wives live in
chastity
wc their own wives, it should be chastitee. Note here good reader, that
chastitee of single state is not chargeable upon seculer priests by gods law,
nor is included in the substance of priesthode. S. Ambrose writes de
virginitate: O mysteria, O mores, Lib. primo.
vbi necessitas imponitur castitati, authoritas datur Oh what means this
mystery? Oh what be these manners? where necessity is laid to chaste, there
is aucthoritee granted to lechery. And therefore she is not chastitee, that is
constrained by dread, nor honest, which for meede will be hired thereto, nor
chaste is she that is so retained by Law. It was not without good cause that
Dionisius busshop of Corinth, Li. 4. tripert. hist. cap. 23
writ in his letter to Busshoppe Pynitus: Ne grauia onera discipulorum
ceruicibus superponat,

That he should not lay heavy burdens upon the backs of the disciples, and
that he should not inioyne his brethren necessitee of forced and compelled
chastitee, whereby the infirmitee of very many might stand in ieoperdie.
Whereunto Pynitus writing his answer, assenteth to his opinion, as to the
better Counsel. Furthermore note, that the said Abbas wishes such Priests
as could not, or would not, live sole, to marie. Lo, here no great Origin
writes, saying: Incorruptionis and virginitatis gratia, in Exodus Hom. 13.
apud rarum quemque i^ueniri potest, sicut and dominus dicit: non oe^s capiunt
verbum hoc, sed quibus datu^ est: the grace of purity and virginity, can be
found but with very few, as the Lord himself said: not all men takes
this word, but to whom it is given. And as saint Hierom confirms the same:
difficilis est virginitas, and ideo rara, Contra Iouinianum.
Incipere plurimorum, perseuerare paucorum. Uirginitee is a very hard thing,
and therefore it is rare, because it is hard. To begin, may be in many men's
power, but to persevere, is but in a few. Upon which considerations, I doubt
not this Panormitane moved, and by experience of his days thought good, De
bono viduitatis De nupiijs and concupiscentijs. Li. 1 Ca. 16.
to conclude with saint Augustine: Ne infirmitas incontinentiae cadat in
ruinam flagitiorum, excipiatur honestate nuptiarum. Lest the infirmitee of
unchaste living, should fall into the overthrow of enormitees: let it be
holden up with the honesty of marriage. Which, as it was some time granted to
man in Chrysostom bids: Qui potest, Super. 1. ad Timothi. 4.
habeat secum aurum hoc virginitatis. Qui minus, nuptiarum argentum excipiat:
He that can, let him have this gold of virginitee, and he that can not, let
him take up the silver of matrimony. And again S. Hierom: Si quis in statu
virginitatis viderit lasciuie^tem, and ebulliente^ carnem suam in libidine^,
ita vt refrenare non possit, ideoque se agnoscat in duplici necessitate
constitutum, vt aut scortetur, aut vxore^ ducat: tunc faciat quod vult, si
vxorem duxerit non peccauit. If a man feleth his wanto^ S. Hierom sending the
frail man to the succor of marriage, is not of Doctor Martins opinion, who
says that the company of women, rather increases, then extinguisheth the
appetite. Litera EE. 3. or that, as he says. Litera ee. 4. that a man shall
by marriage, have both the burning of the flesh and the burning of the
conscience for ever. Which Augustines judgment, we should doubt whether
Martine be a catholic or no. For saint Augustine writes this ( Lib. 2.
co^tra secundam Epistola^, Pelagij. Cap. 8) Concupiscentiam pudendam carnis
inuonerunt in hominibus nuptiae, non fecerunt. Et iterum. Nuptijs, quas
laudamus a marriage did find in man's nature the shameful lust of the flesh,
it caused it not. And again. We do not say (and ye catholikely) that the
concupiscence of the flesh, should be imputed unto marriage, which we commend
as ordained and instituted of the Lord. Chrysostom thus writes, in opere
imperfecto. Ca. 19. Quod in matrimonio mox castitas delectat, libido autem,
quasi vinculo coniugii colligata, torquetur. That in Matrimony, forthwith
chastitee does delight, but lust of the flesh is vexed as tied in, with the
bound of marriage. Sic and ibide^. The second degree of virginitee, is the chaste
love of matrimony. And the deuines hold, as Antoninus part. 3. titulo. 1.
Cap. 14. Quod matrimoniu^ ordinatur ad repressionem concupiscentie. Quia est
frenu^ concupiscentiae, and hec est gratia (says he) quae co^fertur in
matrimonio, quod munit and refrenat concupiscentia^. That matrimony is
ordained to repress concupiscence, because it is the bridle of concupiscence.
And this is the grace that is conferred in matrimony, that it shildeth us from
lust, and bridleth concupiscence. Now you may see, master Martin, what good
diuinitee you while since the conquest, makes to the contrary against priests
S. Hierom wrote of, was sometime in the fathers: as Epiphanius shows what was
in his time, writing against the^ that would not permit second marriages.
Lib. 2. tom. 1.
Nos vero non necessitatem imponimus, verum cum bono concilio admonemus,
exhortantes eum qui potest, non autem necessitate^ imponimus non potenti. As
for us, says he, we do not force on them any necessitee, but with good
counsel we admonish them, exhortyng him that can, but yet not charging any
man with necessitee that can not. Such indifferency speaks Chrisostomus of,
Chrysostom upon the same place of Paul, where a Busshoppes qualities be
described. Cur non ait (Apostolus] Why does not he say, that a bushop must be
an angel, subject to no affection or infirmitee of man? Why does he not say,
he must get him out of the world? And must climb hie, far above Theophilacte
says, competent virtue, not that hie excellent and heavenly virtue. And
because he would have him without rebuke of any body, therefore he says, the
husband of one wife. Where yet in an other place he said, I would have al
men, as I my self am, that is to say, for continency. Therefore lest he
should drive the state into a narrow straight, if he had prescribed most exact
virtue, therefore he chose rather to moderate his counsel, lest else, upon
mistrust that men might have, to reach to so hie virtue, the church should
be without Busshops. Thus far Chrysostom. If such fathers as were head and
most excellent Epiphanius says, that in Thessalia no man was compelled, but
of their own will they performed that chastitee: ye should have an other manner
Clergy in England shortly, to Gods glory and honor, and wealth of the
realm, then ye be like this way, do the best you can, with all the straint ye
can use. I tell you M. Martin, the world is to far past the calling of your
pipe. If ye fear that insolency and dissolute behavior Synodes, your
Busshoppes and archdeacons visitations, only but to gather up their money? why
might not the old Godly Canons be reduced again to expel the^ out of the
Clergy that are incorrigible? To depose Haukers, Hunters, Dycers, Cardars,
Dronkerds, Buyers and Sellers, Horehunters, Usurers, and Symoniackes? Let these
Canons be revived, if ever ye will have your Clergy of good fame before God,
and of good name before man. Yea, with less law of compelled chastitee,
peradventure ye might have the more number of Genesius de ritu nuptiarum: Hic
enim non quid factum sit fiat ve querimus, sed omnino quid fieri possit in tam
varia tamque inconstante rerum humanarum And with the like words of an other
new writer. Non est scriptum, Ergo, non est factum? Non est factu^, Ergo, non
licet facere? Vt factum sit, vel non factum, hominum facta non debent
praeiudicare verbo dei* and quid si destitueremur exemplo hominum, cum habeamus
verbum dei. That is to say. Our question is not in this poinct, what has been
done, but determinatlie, what may be done, specially standing the variable
and inconstant nature of things that parteine to man. For what argument is
it? It was never written, Ergo, it was never done? It was never done, Ergo it
is not lawful to be done? Howsoever

And yet, if this Ciuilian would so feign know, where to see or read some
examples, of such as married after their orders and vow: I will tell him at
this time (lest he should lose his calfe) Volateranus, Lib. 4. Geograph.
because I will send you no further, there ye may read that one Nicholaus
Iustinianus, a Monk, married Anne to wife, which was the daughter of Vitalis,
Duke of the Uenetians. And Munster in his Cosmographie writes: that Ramirus
Monk and Priest, was taken out of his Monkrie and Priesthode, and for lack of
issue of his Peter, and Alfonsus, was made king of Aragon and Spain, and
called Ramirus the fourth of that name. And because we have made mention of
Spain, ye may resort to a late Spanishe writer, Ioannes Genesius: and he
will be my witness, for one of these two that I have rehearsed. And for that
ye shall think your labor well bestowed, to search it out of him, he will
tell you of a third votarie: called Constantia, daughter of Rogerus king of
Naples, or Cicile, as some writers say, which was taken out of her
Monastery, to be married to Henry Emperor, the first of that name, and that
after she had made a solemn Celestine the.iij. and highly blessed: and it was
as highly rewarded. And if we should judge the fact by Platina his story, the
dispe^sation was not given, neither in respect of soul health, nor common
wealth, but even with as covert words, bought and sold: as any was said, Quid
vultis mihi dare etc. but because we have named you a noble woman, that was
taken out of her Abbeye, after her vow, and that a kings daughter: we shall
name, among our nation a kings son to match her, and was heir apparent, to
king Constantine the second, about the year of our Lord. 444 who was in like
manner no more charged with inconstancy, for forsakyng his vow, as she forsook
hers, then he differs from her in name. For he was called Constantius, and
was Monk in the Monastery of saint Amphibolus at Winchester, which of late
was called saint Swithunes: and has now the holy Trinitee for patron, which
I trust shall keep still his possession, doubting Amphibolus or Swithune, will
take upon them, to intrude the^ selves again. As for this Constantius that was
taken out of his Abbeye, and made king of the land, our own Chronicles will
tell you: as for Constantia and Ramirus, I do auouche the aucthour aforesaied,
de ritu nuptiarum: where ye may most redily see it testified. And here master
Martin, I wonder, that where I think ye have seen that book (for it is
printed with you of late in England) ye consider not the tracte of that
writing: whereby ye might learn, many necessary points of learning. As in his
second book of the vtilitee and necessitee Plato: whence peradventure Terence
fetched out his saying: Homine imperito nihil quicquam iniustius: qui nisi quod
ipse facit, nihil rectum esse putat. that is: There ca^ be nothing worse, then
an unskillful man, who thinks nothing well done but that which he does him
self. But the saying is this: Legem (Plato) simile^ esse ait homini pertinaci
and imperito, praeterque suu^ says that law is like unto a froward and
ignorant man, that will suffer nothing to be done, but as he appoincteth it,
and will not let his devise to be altered: although some because should happen,
in respect whereof it were berter to be done otherwise, then as he in his reason
had once determined it. I^ this sentence had been well pondered of you, master
Martin, before ye began your book, either would you have holden your hand
from the book, to have

Et dic te stultu^ and intus dic, and sapiens eris. Ye might have furthermore
there learned, that it is affirmed: quod condere leges munus sit regiae
facultatis: So to dispense with them in necessitee of time and place, is so
belongyng to the prudence of a king, that else his subjects should by extreme
right, be oppressed with extreme wrong. And this is an other sentence, which
would do well to be expended in the defense of the cause, that ye have taken
in hand, where ye say, that this matter of marriages, perteined Platos glass,
before spoken, and advise you in time, or else all the world will wonder master
Martin, stones will speak, and blocks will write: yea, God will be angry,
and that is worste of all. Happy is he that has a trusty friend, to tell
him good counsel: yet happier is he, that has it of him self, if he should
want him. happy is he that has a good nature, but yet more happy is he,
whose nature, grace has reformed, to have GOD alone always in his eye. Also
ye might vtcunque, after a certain manner, says he of them in their orderyng.
I dare timide, vtcu^que, of the priests of Spain: he would have said that our
priests makes no manner of vow, in no manner of manner.

But to go forward and discharge my promise of that other two priests, married
after they were priests, if ye look in the story Tripartite: Lib. 5. Ca. 44.
consider whether Socrates reports not of one there, named Apollinaris, a
Priest, that married after his priesthode, and begatte a child, called by his
own name Apollinaris. Hierome does affirm that he was a Priests son in
Catalogo script. Ecclesiastic. If that will not serve you, yet I will be suer
to make up my.iiij. promised, by one that is written of, in the said book,
Eupsichius a Busshop. Lib. 6. cap. 14.
Who alitle before his martyrdom, married his wife, where he was reputed till
that time but ha^dfasted. As I was writing this, in came, Genius quidam: and
sittyng at mine elbow, told me plainly that these placis were like to be
bulted, and sifted to the branne. And that now the greek books should be sent
for, to understand some startyng hole, to crepe out Clementes works of
recognitio^, of the records of the Counsails, yea in all antiquities, to chop
in and out at their pleasure for their purposes. Blessed be God, that he yet
preserved his holy Testamentes clean from their sophistications, for the text
self, which shall be able evermore in

Well it will be meruaill if Magdalen College in Oxford be not brought forth,
or some other text other where searched out. And here, I am sure, their heads
must be set a work, that ca^ say Cassiodorus plain writing may be defaced,
and made ^o speak and strike what hour pleases my Lady. For he that will so
violentlye contort so evident places, as he does, throughout all his book, he
may have a great advantage in an old greek author, which as is thought, and
is like to be justified, has been paraduenture corruptly set forth in diverse
places.

But yet, Master Martin, I admonish you, that ye be not to impudent in
glosing or vouchyng your obscure greek copies in your studies, for ye shall not
bring a more sufficient Greek aucthor, Plato pinned on your sleue of late: and
rather for our instruction, fall to the glosing of some such laws and gloses,
as be within the compass of your study. As where the gloser of the decrees,
says by the Did. 84. cum Inpreterito.
Quod olim sacerdotes poterant contrahere ante Syricium, vnde and Moses
contraxit. and quod Apostoli non instituerint de non vtendo iam contracto, quia
si Apostoli hoc instituissent, Orientales hoc admisissent. Et quod Gregorius
introduxit continentiam subdiaconis, Did. 82. proposiusti.
sed presbyteris and diaconis Siricius introduxit. Et quod Apostoli nihil
constituerunt de continentia. Et quod Ecclesia, quedam constituit, quae non
fuerunt statuta ab Apostolis, vt de continentia ministrorum.

Some time, says he, Priests might contract matrimony, before Syricius
days, whereupon, says he, Moses did contract. How stand these saiyngs with
the.25. Canon of the Apostles, as it is forced.
And that Gregory brought in continency to the su^deacons, as Siricius
brought it in for priests and deacons. And that the Apostles made nothing in
constitution for continency. And that the Church has decreed some things,
which were so decreed by the Apostles, as of the continency Augustine de
ciuitate dei, who holds the same. Furthermore, we would gladly hear how ye
could discharge yourself, with all your gloses from the heresy of Eustachius,
who as Nicephorus writes, by the reason of his ouermuche exact and nice
observing of virginitee, impelled his disciples into many great absurdities,
in despisyng the prayers of all them that were married, though they were of the
Priests, says he, that were married. Further, they said, that such Priests
ought to be despised, that had contracted Matrimony, and that men ought not
to receive those Gangrense Counsel, gathered together to suppress this
heresy, about the year of our Lord. 324: decreed in these words following.
Cap. 4. Si quis discernit presbyteru^ coniugatum tanquam occasion nuptiarum,
quod offerre non debeat, and ab eius oblatione ideo se abstinet: anathema sit.
If any man makes difference in a married Priest, as though by occasion of his
marriage, that he ought not to offer, or to minister, and in this respect will
forbear to take the Communion that he ministers: accursed be he. Now master
Martin, if ye can assoyle Gangrense. And where it is said there, that no man
should put away his wife, for religions sake: that is to understand, of
force, say ye. Then it follows, that both the husband, which sundreth him
self from Montanus) that of force diuorseth them, as they do now adays
offend against those Canons, be heretics accursed.

Thus master doctor, if your Clientes will give you respite and leisure in
their matters, to take these Gloses, Textes, and Counsels in hand, ye have
here to exercise your wit and learning. And by your gloses we shall see, how
ye can frame al these matters to join with your assertions, and conclusions in
your book. In the mean season, I pray you, while ye ruffle in your textes,
Canons and gloses, give the poor reader license, to believe

And where this doctor of Law, seems to command his judgment and
sentence, to be admitted of so high aucthoritee, as neither any learned man
were of other opinion: or else if they were, yet that they should not be
comparable to his wit and learning: I will say no more in answer for
comparison in this matter, but put it to your sentence (good readers) what ye
shall think meet in this comparison. Beside all such men, as we have
recited both of aucthoritee for their roumes, and estimation Erasmus
Roterodamus, Polidorus Virgilius, Alfonsus, episcopus Canariensis, Michael
Vehe: and diverse other, not unlearned, nor I trust, greatly behynd this
Ciuilian, for all the brag he makes: which men be writers of these days.

Erasmus, whom ye aduouche your self, master Martin, for his aucthoritee: Cap.
v. lit. I. 3. writing of this cause in diverse parts of his works, Ad
Episcopa^ Bafiliense^.
utters his opinion in such words: Ad episcopu^ Basilie^sem. De caelibatu,
neque christus, neque Apostoli lege^ aliqua^ in sacris literis prefixerunt. Cum
ecclesia, nocturnas vigilias, ieiunium ob vitam palam dedecorosam, a populo
contemnitur illoru^ doctrina. As for the state of single life, neither Christ,
neither yet his Apostles have prescribed any Law in holy Scripture. And where
as the Church has altered Uigills used to be kept in the night, the manner
of fasting, used to be continued till the Euenyng: and such other things
many, as occasion has risen from time to time: why force we men's
constitution so stiffly here in this poincte, seeing

^
Thus ye see, how that Erasmus wondereth, what men mean to be stiff, in this
constitution of the Church, seeing there be so many reasons, that might move
them to grant to Priests to marry. This Ciuilian says, that it would
turn to the decaie of the estimation of the Clergy, and so to the contempt
of the religion of Christ. Erasmus says, that if they lived in Matrimony
such as could not contain, they should have a better name, then they have,
and therefore a better estimation. They should with more aucthoritee preach
Gods word, and the people would believe benedictions be turned into
maledictions, says Gregory: and the mummyng of their Masses, says I.
Pecham in his constitutions, be rather worthy to be called execrations, then
celebrations. Let not this Ciuilian think, that suspected and evident evil
life in corruption, defilyng men's wives and their daughters, will win a
credence to the Clergy, as much as honest and chaste matrimony should, if it
were by law permitted. And if it were left at libertee, there would be in
the Clergy, that willyngly would live chaste, to win this estimation, that
this man speaks of. And better to have a few such, that Lib. 5. Cap. ^.
and wedlock chastitee, speaks Polidore in his book de inuentoribus rerum.
Illud dixerim, tantum abfuisse, vt ista coacta castitas illum coniugalem
vicerit, vt etiam nullius delecti crimen, maius ordini dedecus, plus mali
religioni, plus doloris omnibus bonis impresserit, i^usserit, attulerit, qua^
sacerdotum libidinis labes. Proinde fortassis tam e repub. Christiana But this
I will say, that it is so far of, that this compelled chastitee, has
excelled that Wedlock chastitee, that no crime or enormitee has imprinted,
either more hatered to the state of Priesthode, or has more defaced Christ's
holy religion, or yet has stirred up more grief in all good men's hearts,
then the slander of the unchaste life of priests: whereupon perhaps it
should be as honorable to Christendom, as commendable

Here ye see that this Clerk is of the same judgment with Erasmus, to think
that it should be as well for the profette of the Polidore, that shameth the
order, destroieth the estimation

Before times, when the lay man saw his wife abused before his face, or his
daughter ravished, or maid defloured: he was feign to make the best of it, for
fear of accusation, in some other respect, that should as well pynche him, as
the parish priest. I Eckius, Cocleus, Murnerus, and such other filthy
draffe sackes, I make noe tale of them, whose lives were known well enough to
be to beastly. Yea Pighius himself the God of this Ciuilian, uses yet a
moderation, such as it is, where this man for curste heart will use none at al.
Alfonsus a catholic busshop does so learnedly and christianly handle the
matter, that although he wissheth, Philippica. 19.
as it is to be wished, that all the Clergy could live in perpetual
continency: yet he wishes for them that can not so live, that marriage
vnusquisque propter fornicationem vitandam suam vxorem habeat. etc. That is, to
avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, may every man claim his
interest and right to marye, if he can not otherwise live. And propter
fornicationem vitandam Which general proposition, this Ciuilian would needs
strain to a particular, contrary to the circumstaunce of the context it self,
yea, contrary to the vsyng of diverse Doctors of the church, as we have proved
before. And further, we there brought in. S. Hieromes manifest words to prove
it, against his own manifest words, wherein he denies it. And here I require
this S. Hierom agree with others, to see what it is to brabble with men's
words, and not to stick to the words of the holy ghost evident in them
selves, to them that of mere frowardnes listed not to wrangle and to be
contentious, to make vprores in common wealths, to nosell the unlearned still
in palpable blindness, to recover their old honor of the church, to do as
they lusted in all matters both of God and man, and then we should have a merry
world again, and all should be plentious: neither wars nor commotions, but
such as they Pighius, Eckius, and this Ciuilian does, of a set purpose only,
and of a froward and proud nature, that will in no respect give over, or will
condition indifferently of that which is once beaten and setteled in his
stubborn head, but must win all, or lose all, come of it whatsoever will: I
will show you what moderation Arragon: But peradventure not alludyng to this
story in this matter, he says these words. At omnia^ pregnantissima causa
est animarum periculu^, cui nec vna totius mundi precio estimari possit. etc.
What cause soever may appear to dispense in positive Laws, for the weal of
a whole Realm: surely, says he, there can be no greater or more pregnant
cause, then the peril of men's souls, wherein the loss but of, one is not
estimable, by the price and value of all the world. This man Epiphanius was
affected, to the continency of the Clergy, and for the defense thereof,
unadvisedly did write, that it was the institution of the Apostles, for them to
contain, that yet him self was compelled for necessitee of ministers, to
permit them in marriage, as otherwhere he tells, that they did so, although
not altogether agreeable to the prescripte of the Canons. Yea, Epiphaniuis Lib.
2. To. 1. Hero. 61.
he confesses plainly of those, and also of votaries to, that it were better
for them, fallen from their race of their runnyng in virginitee, openly to
marry a wife by the Law, rather then to Cupido, by the importune temptation
of the Devil. And better for them to run into judgment of penance,
sufferable for a time, then by cou^terfettyng chastitee, to fall into
condempnation, to be excluded from the kingdom of heaven. For he condempneth
even there such of the Clergy, because they would not abide the shame of the
world, belike for marriage, yet secretly committed whoredom, and that under
the pretense of solitary living, and continency, practiced uncleanness with
them selves: to aduoyde which inconvenience, he is feign to remitte of his
Canons, how Tract. 7. in mas.


This divine before said, I say Michael Vehe, was not ignoraunte, how that in
Origens time, the Busshoppes in those days, for the releuyng of a woman in her
frailtee were conten^ed to despence with her to marry again, though her
husband was a live. Peradventure says he, they did suffer it, for the
infirmitee of such incontinente persons, and in comparison of worse, Origin
disalowed not their prudence in dispensation, not to tolerate it ones dooen,
but to give license before it was begun, even in that matter, which be judged
to be against the Law of God: If Pope Martin the v. as the aucthour of Summa
Angelica, reports, did after great deliberation and consultation, with
diverse learned in Diuinitee and Law, despence with him that had taken his
sister germain to wife, to keep her still: and if the Pope, despensyng with a
man to marry her to wife, whose mother or sister, he had defiled before by
corporal fornication, be not to be blamed, nor this marriage Antonine says,
part. 3. tit. I. cap. II. para. christiana infine. And if Antoninus, auditor
generalis causaru^ Palatij dn^i Pape testifies, that he saw very many
despensed with, in this matter. in Summa lib. 3. tit. 6. ca. 3. li. 2. ca. 2.
tit. xi. If Martin Peresius thus writes: Si sacerdotes non matura
deliberatione se astrinxerunt, videat Romanus po^tifex, qui circa haec solet
dispe^sare, quid sit agendum in particularibus. If the Priest have bound him
self, not by due deliberation, let the Roman busshop, who is wont to dispense
in such cases, take heed what he ought to do in such particularitees. Yea,
Erasmus in clementiam Alberti Pij 40. says, that the Pope does well to
dispense in solemn vows, and alleges Cardinal Caietanes aucthoritee for
him. What reasonableness then, ca^ there be thought in this Ciuilia^, not to
suffer these marriages, that be done and made already: not by stealth, or of
private head: but by aucthoritee of his Sovereigns law, with the assent of
all the body of the realm, not one word of Gods Law against it, but many
words of Gods Law bearyng with it, and approuyng it. I marvel what this
Lawier means. Has he never read what Pope Nicholas did answer to Busshoppe
Osbalde upon his question, Did. 50. studeas
what should Lo here the (...) of the church so provided for by the canons
Nothwithstandyng (says he) if he be very necessary for your purpose, let him
have out of his benefice, for the comfort of his sustenaunce. Lo sir, the
canons and the law plainly deprive him of his benefice, which is sequestered
from his ministration. And yet says the lawyers upon this place, He was
reasonably dispensed with, to keep his benefice still, lest else for necessity
of his living, he should turn him self to fylthy and unlawful occupying.

If ye say true master Martin, your clergy should not have all the benefices
they have. But ye must understand his rule against married priests only. As
for others do they never so little a nothing, yet be they worth^ to have all, as
they have a^. Cau 1. q. 7. Requiritis.
shall for the necessity of his living, and to avoid further inconvenience,
be advanced to living out of his benefice against the canons, though he
ministers not: and yet as ye write, The benefice is given for the office sake
And shall marriage be thus dealt with, in your very fine charity? Did ye never
read what is written upon that epistle that Leo the fourth did write to the
bishops here in England, setting out what great authority bishops only
have, not restrained, nor in case reserved to the bishop of Rome, how

and superfluous dignities of the best of the clergy, and

Is this the churches merciful lap in receauyng her own begotten children
to ministration again, that yet first they must speak their own shame in
bylles of their penance, lying against them selves, most vylely and most
shamefully disablyng their credit and estimation for ever? As they find such
fytte malt horses in diverse places of the realm, which for a little prouender
sake, and for curryng Leo the first, writing to the Busshops of Aphrica,
hearing tell that there were diverse among them, which were admitted to the
dignities of the church, not only lay married men, but also men of.ij. wives at
once, yea and that lay men that had married lay widows (for concerning
priests widows: it is plainly spoken by the Prophet Ezechiel in his.44.
Chapter, in the new translation, that a priest may: in the old translation
that a priest must, take that widow to wife, that was a Priests wife before)
why I pray you, though he would not dispense with some of these forsaied
persons so promoted, yet Caeteros vero quoru^ prouectio hoc tantum
reprehensionis incurrit, quod ex laicis ad officium Episcopale delecti sunt
(neque ex hoc quod vxores habeant, possunt esse culpabiles) susceptum
sacerdotium tenere permittimus. etc. As for others in whose promotion this
blame is only espied, that they were chosen forth of the lay men, to that
dignitee and office of a Busshppe (for they can not be blame worthy of this

Doubt not master Martin, but his wisdom thought it no inconuenie^ce to
suffer them so still, nor was not so angry in his days with married Busshops
and priests, as ye be. For Prosper Aquitanicus himself (who peradventure did
both write and endite this Epistle in his name, as many other things he did,
testifies Gennadius, for he was his Secretary, and afterward was episcopus
Reginensis, about the year of our Lord.460. in a very evil time, a very good
Busshoppe, as the stories make Carmine Iambico. Age iam praecor mearum
Comes irremota rerum,
Trepidam breuemque vitam
Domino deo dicemus. etc.
Where yet ye may epsy peradventure, a subteltee in that good Father, that
set out his works in printe. For where all other of his Epigrames have
titles, to show the content, that has none at all: Lest ye should smell, to
readily at the eye, that Prosper being in so good estimation, and so often
alleged, both of Divines and Lawiers, should be known to have a wife. But
yet good brethren, though ye know that he had a wife in deed, Cred^, lieue it
who will. Yet because Beati quorum, Ad oceanum.
in their Mattens, to follow saint Hieromes words and counsel, and in
steed of Beatus vir cui non imputauit dominus peccatum: to turn it and say:
Beatus vir cui dominus non imputauit vxorem: as a greater offense then any can
be committed, in the judgment of such Romish penitenciaries, as ye be. And
then shall the Lawiers solemn case come Ecce casus vbi plus iuris habet
luxuria quam castitas. Did. 54. fraternitatis.
Behold a case, where fair Lechery, has more right and law, then soul
Chastitee.

Thus drawyng to a conclusion, I will report unto you, what an other Leo, the
fourth of that name, has written, concerning this prudente necessitee of
moderation, and dispensation in matters as they arise: even that Leo which, as
some say, preceaded next to that holy Popesse our country woman (worship may
she be) Pope Johan: who was so in deed, affirms constantly, Marianus Scotus,
and diverse other of good credit in writing* being about the year of our
Lord.848. what time Adeulphus otherwise Etheluolphus, reigned here in one part
of the realm Which manne had a love in his youth to be a Priest, and was
entered the order of Subdeacon, and by some writers was busshoppe of Winchester
(whereof may be reasonably doubted) but after dispensed with, by the Bushoppe
of Rome, of his order, and married a wife. Which king was by some men's
opinion the first founder of the Uniuersitee at Oxforde. Which should
Aluredus who succeeded well nigh.lx. years after him. For whose sake, yet I
trust master Martin, will be better to orders that be vowed: Which said Leo
is noted in story, to be of such wisdom and virtue, that he had according
to the Gospel, both the prudence of the Serpente, and the simplicitee of the
Dove: of so modeste a nature and clemency, that where in the end of a victory,
against the cruel Sarazens, some would have had diverse of them hanged up at
Rome gates, for the terror of others, he would not suffer it. And yet again,
in preseruyng the discipline Anastasius, Cardinal of S. Marcelles, Not
specially because he had been absent from his cure and parish, 1. Q. 7. Rigor.
five year space together. Thus yet the said Leo writes to the Bisshoppes of
England. Nisi rigor disciplinae quandoque relaxetur ex dispensatione
misericordiae: (multorum enim crimina sunt damnabilia) quae tamen ecclesia
tolerat pro tempore, pro persona, intuitu pietatis vel necessitatis sieve
vtilitatis, and pro euentu rei: pro tempore, sicut Gelasius qui cum necessitate
temporis Except the rigor of the Churches discipline, were some time released
by dispensation of mercy. For many men's crimes be dampnable, which yet be
tolerated by the Church, for consideration of the time and person, in respect
of mercy, of necessitee, or of commoditee, and upon the chance of the matter
as may fall. As for example in respect of the time: we read that Gelasius,
when he saw by the necessitee Millane, Nicephorus Lib. 11. ca. 32.
with ye approbatio^ of Valentinian the emperor, did chose Ambrose to be their
archbishop, being a mere lay man, in lay office, and that before he was
baptized. So was Nectarius a lay senator, occupied al his life long Lib. 12. ca
12.
suddenly elected to be bishop of Constantinople, Theodosius the emperor being
there present, and assentyng thereto: and yet the said Nectarius was not as the^
a christian man, by receauyng the sacrament of baptism. And Synesius a
platonicall philosopher, brought up in the study of profane learning, Li. 14.
ca. 55.
addict to the decrees and principles thereof, not as yet won and converted to
Christ's religion, was preferred by that learned bishop Theophilus Alexandrinus
to priesthood, and by the holy hands of Theophilus to a bishopric,
immediately after his baptism. And before Ptolemais where he should be
bishop, that except they would freely permit him to reteyne his
philosophical opinions (of not beleuyng the resurrection of men's bodies, or
that the world should have an end) he would not accept their offer. Yea, he
further conditioned with them, that where God and the laws had given him a
wife, he would not forsake her in any wise, and that he would now have
secret familiarity with her as a fornicator. For the one he said was not godly,
and the other nothing lawful: but rather (says he) I Gelasius, in the first,
second, and third: how he (as I have written before) Nos magno reatu
innecteremur, si tanto coarta^te periculo, no^ aliquatenus consulamus. We
should (says he) be worthyly charged as much guilty, if in so great perilous
constraint Amen. And here master Martin, I will take occasion to rest in a
suspense of further commentyng your book, till at my next leisure, when by
gods Ioannes Genesius, for the novelty of the matter, thus printed with good
luck in England. Si quis non quod optimu^ factu sit quaerat, sed studiose
captet occasiones errandi, cuius erit aequitatis non potius eius pernitiosam
malitiam If any man will set his mind to ensue, not that which were best to be
done, but will more gladly and captiously seek occasions to lie and to err: of
what equity and indifferency should it proceed, not to defy his pernicious
malice, rather then to be displeased with us, for that we simply declare
without color the truth of our belief?

Aduersus Iouimanu^. lib. 1. Chrisost, in Paul. 1. T^. 3. Sup. pa. 251.
Quod non sunt tanti virgins, quanti necessari^ sunt sacerdotes, There is not
so great necessity of having virgins, as having priests and ministers to the
buyldyng and repayryng of Christ's Church. And therefore says Chrysostom:
Thapostie writing that the Bishop should be the husband of one wife: in that
his canon ecclesiastical exhorted men to that office, and used to

Now as these fathers were led with a good and godly spirit to move men to
this state, to take it who can take it, and used no further force or violence
of compulsed chastity: So again there were other fathers and writers mouyng
1. Tim 4.
Spiritus manifest dicit, quod in nouissimis temporibus discedent quidam a
fide, attendentes spiritibus erroris and doctrinis demoniorum, in hypochrisi
loquentium mendatium, et cauteriatam habentes suam conscientiam, prohibentium
nubere, et iubentium abstinere a cibis, quos deus creauit ad percipiendum cum
gratiarum action, fidelibus and iis qui cognouerunt veritatem. Quia omnis
creatura dei bona est, and nihil reiiciendu^ quod cum gratiaru^ The spirit
speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
and shall give heed unto spirits of error and doctrines of deuyls, which
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot
iron, forbyddyng to marry, and commaundynge to abstain from meats which God
has created to be received with geuyng thanks, of them that be faithful and
know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be
refused, if it be received H^ldibrande did so rage in his boisterous laws and
precepts for this page 214.
what mischiefs rose and followed of such his spirit and conscience marked
with an hot iron? let the common records of stories be searched, and then
shall it appear what good came to the christian religion by this his doctrine
demonycall, forbyddyng marriage, and dissoluing matrimonies that were perfected,
and in good quiet. Let Sigebertus story be expended, and one other writer of
our own country Radulphus de diceto, for all other be Gregorius papa 7.
Hildibrandus. Celebrato synodo symoniacos anathematizauit, vxoratos sacerdotes
a diuino remouit officio, De anno. 1017.
and laicis missam eorum audire interdixit, nouo exemplo, and vt multis visum
est inconsiderato preiudicio, contra sanctorum patrum sententiam. etc. Gregory
pope the seventh of that name, called Hildibrand, in a council kept did
accurse such as committed symony, and removed married priests from divine
service, and did forbid the lay people to hear their masses, which was done
in example altogether new, Supra page 2.15.
and as it appeared to Eusebius speaks of the Montane heritiques, under the
name of oblations, they can craftyly the lay people did foully entreat the
holy mysteries, Sigebertus and Radulphus: Lo the tragidie of that time. This
holy father Hildibrand little belyke considered the canon of the council at
Gangrense, the which inuolued him in the sentence of excommunication for his
doing. Si quis discernit presbiteru^ coniugatum tanquam occasion nuptiarum,
Celeb. an. 324. sup. page 259.
quod offerre non debeat, and ab eius oblatione ideo se If any man makes such
difference that he thinks a married priest by reason of his marriage ought not
to say mass, and therefore does abstain from his oblation, accursed be he.
This vehement spirit of pope Hildibrand (speaking lies in hypocrysie) so
universally flowed over, not only other christian Realms to their great
disquiet, but also began somewhat sharply to be executed shortly after the
conquest time by Archbishop Lanfranc, at whose first coming for good luck he
found the Church of Canterbury most miserably brent. Which Lanfranc labored
An. 1076. indictione. 14.
though he forbad Prebendaries in their cathedral Churches to have wives, yet
did constitute freely, that priests dwelling in vyllages and towns, having
wives, should not be compelled to forsake them, and they which had none,
should be Hildibrande would none of it. And surely Lanfranc was more modest
in this matter, how rudely soever friar Dominik Stubbes in his Catologe of
York Archbushops calls him the minister of the devil, in contryuyng the
subjection of the Archbishop of York, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and so
to make division betwixt those two sees. For peradventure Lanfranc esteemed
other by his own infirmity: Paulus, whom he so glad made Abbot of S. Albons,
to be very nigh him in kynrede, as Matthew Paris writes, Paulus monachus
Cadomensis Archiepiscopi Lanfranci nepos, De anno. 1077.
imo aliquorum relationibus consanguinitate propinquior, Paul a muncke, and
nephewe of Archbishop Lanfranc, howebeit by the report of some others he was
more nigh to him in blood. And no marvel of such a matter in Lanfranc,
sometime being a muncke: For it is playnelye Anselme against the lawfulness of
priests maryages, in an old hand to be showed, entitled, Contra
offendiculum sacerdotum, that munckes professed, understanding those reasons
which were made against the marriage of church men to be so slender, were married
and forsook their professed votarie state a great many of them, to live in
honest matrimony, as it is declared in their London council, against whom
they had a constitution anno. 1102.
which cause Anselme does labor by reasons much to condemn. Whereupon being
blown with Hildibrandes spirit, he did in an open Synod decree the
abrogation of marriage from all priests, deacons, and subdeacons, and wylled
them also under great pains to be separated, which were conjoined in
matrimony before, anno. 1102. 3. Henr. 1.
and decreed yet by Lanfranc not to be compelled to leave their wives. He was
the more bold (says the story of Rochester) and confident to govern the
Church so rigorously, for the favor and love he thought he had both of
Anselme (says the story) refused to do the kings commandment, though he
alleged it to appertain to his crown. Anselme labored the matter in his
bronded conscience: yet contrary to all his extreme thundryng, the priests
regarded not that his constitution, nor kept it: for the priests kept still
their wives 200. years after. And though in certain of his successors days,
there was constitution upon constitution, law upon law, and decree upon
decree: yet were they no more holden and kept, then Calixtus canon long before
that was kept: which as Polidore writes, De rerum invent.
was by a common consent abrogated, as was also (says he) Gregory's decree:
and as Hugo writes, that Siritius days, who did renew it, Did. 84. Quod olim.
and were by non use abrogated and defeated. And although that both Lanfranc
first began, and Anselme more severely followed, for he separated priests which
were already married, and included subdeacons also, and made constitution that no
priest, deacon, or subdeacon, should be Anselme, from Girardus second
Archbishop of York after the conquest. Sitio clericorum meorum integritate^,
sed praeter in paucis admodum, vel aspidis surditatem, vel fabulosi cuiusdam
Prothei mutabilitatem inuenio: Variis linguarum aculeis modo minas, modo
conuitia infligunt: sed hoc facilius in iis qui remotiores sunt tolero. Illud
omnino grave genus mali est, quod hii qui quasi in sinu meo sunt, qui
canonicorum nomine I do much desire the purity of my clerks (says Girarde)
howebeit, except in very few, I find to reign either Protheus, of whom the
poets speak: with their manyfolde styngyng tongues they do ouerlade me
sometime with threats, sometime with tauntes: but it is more easy to bear
this in them which be farther of. But this is a more hard grief, for that
they (which as it were) be in my very bosom who glory in the name of canons,
do despise canons, and against the decrees of our council (as Sophistes use)
epistol. 78. centuria 2. that he will release nothing of his decree, Fabian.
as he writes the same to Herebert, bishop of Thetford, he being the begotten
son of Robert, intruded into the abbacie of Winchester, who bought the
abbacie for money, and he the byshopricke of Thetforde for Filius est praesull,
pater abba, Simon vterque, being a very hot enemy in all his time against
priests maryages, as commonly personages of such honesty shows them selves.
It is much to be marueyled, that this man with other of his suite would have
their decrees and constitutions so rigorously observed, and they them selves no
folowers of them, how seriously soever they were made of late by Hildibrand,
Primum ex auctoritate sanctorum patrum, symoniacae heresis surreptio in eodem
concilio damnata est. First by the authority of the holy fathers, the crime of
the symoniack heresy, in that same council is condemned. In which crime
Anselmus archiepiscopus pro episcopis et abbatibus degradatis, multa precu^
Anselme the archbishop began to entreat the pope with much instaunce of
supplication for the bishops and the abbottes so degraded, that he would
mercyfully dispense with them, that they should receive again the dignities
that they had lost. Then the most merciful sea, which is not wont to deny
act. viii.
as it was once said, Pecunia tua tecum sit in perditionem, rather then
vnrepentauntly doubling symonie upon symonie to have light pardon, and Anselme
so wylfully Lanfranc stablyshed, wherein was also constituted that they should
not be separated? Besides these (says the council) were removed from their
Abbacie others, every

Good reader, if a man should expende the great heat of this father Anselme
and his brethren ( in hypocrisi loquentium mendacium prohibentium nubere) may
not a man maruayle ex doctrina demoniorum in hypochrisi loquentium mendacium,
and cauteriatam habentium conscientiam? O consciences marked and scarred with
an hot iron of Antichrists stamp, Dani. xi.
whose notes be, Quod O blyndnes of hypocrisy, which would lead us out of the
right way walkyng in the holiness of angels, Coloss. ii.
counterfaytyng things which he never saw him self, causeless puffed up in
the judgment of his flesh. Merciful God what meant this rigorous Anselme as
at this time to urge so importunely this doctrine of Satan, when he knew and
confessed in his epistle written to Wylliam his Archdeacon thus. Considerandum
etiam est, quia hactenus ita fuit publicum hoc peccatum sodomiticum, Epistol.
78. cent. 2.
vt vix aliquis pro eo erubesceret, et ideo multi magnitudinem It is to be
considered that hitherto this sin has been so public, that scant any man
was ashamed thereof, and therefore many ignorant of the greatness thereof, fell
headlong thereto. Whereupon the said Anselme on a time when king Wylliam was
going over sea to Normandy, Edmer.
he made earnest suite to him Edmer. li.i.
yea among the laity who had liberty of marriage: Sup. Cant. sermon. 66.
Toll de ecclesia honorabile connubium, and thorum immaculatum, nonne reples
eam concubinariis, incestuosis, seminisluis, mollibus, masculorum
concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum? Take away from the Church
honorable marriage and the holy ghost did prophecy before, by illusion and
fraud of deuyls Note this contemplative Barnardes spirit in these so sharp
words.
except that they be either so beastly that they do not perceive how they give
over the bridle to all uncleanness in condempnyng maryages, or else be so full
of wickedness and swallowed up in deuyllyshe Quid manum dei abbreuias? quid
largam benedictionem nuptiaru^ restringis? etc. Why do thou abridge the
hand of God? why do thou restrain the large and liberal benediction of
marriages? why do thou challenge that to be only appertayning to the Ergo he
grants it because it is lawful, and he wylleth it also, because it is
expedient. And does the heretic (says he) forbid that which is both lawful
and expedient? He shall prove nothing by this his prohibition but that he is an
heretic. And thus far Barnarde against these hypocrites and condempners of
maryagies in diverse persons, writing even about the very same Page 81. a.
Serpens alatus hic est, and scorpius alas habens secundum multos modos, and
volans and imitans quidem ecclesiae virginitate^, non habens autem puram
conscientiam. This serpent flees abroad, this scorpion has wings after
diverse fashyons, Pathnutius, and other of the fathers in the Nicene council,
and Lanfranckes spirit in his prohibityng married priests to be separated? Or
the spirit of Gregory the great, Sup page 201
who did write against a like decree of Pelagius his predecessor, and
dissolved it, saying: Quod mihi Did. 31. ca. ante trien
vt qui vsum continenciae non inuenit neque castitate^ promisit, compellatur a
sua vxore separari, atque per hoc (quod absit) in deterius cadat. That is
thought to me to be very hard and also importable, that they which have not
the use of continence nor have promised chastity, should be compelled to be
separated from their wives, whereupon they may (as God forbid) fall into worse.
It is not without good cause, that the Bishops in king Henry's time the
first, after the departure of Radulph archbishop of Canterbury, next successor
to Anselme, of a further Chro. saxo. Petriburge^. in anno. 1123
Canon of the minster of Chichester. And though the Prior of Canterbury and
other munckes there, with the help of Henry an Abbot of Amely and legate of
Rome, told the king that it was against right to set a clarke over the
munckes: yet these munckes at this Rome, that overcame the whole world, that
is, gold and

It is a wonder to see how the order of munckes in those days were stern and
stout, yea checkmate with the king and nobles of the Realm, and how they
labored to deface all others, to the setting up of their own estimation, how
holy they advanced their own order, their religion, and the estimation of
their holy vows: which to blase out to the simple credit of the people, they
cared not what lies they made of the greatest personages, no what lies they
made openly Anno. 1101.
sometime muncke of Canterbury, who was a continual associate to Anselme in
all his doings and iourneyes, and avouches upon his credence this to be true.
Yet comes in the said muncke (in magnifiyng the virtue of their monastical
vows) and writes, that she utterly abhorred anno. 1201.
where Henry Huntyngton and others do ascribe it to the just wrath of God, for
the sin of Sodomie, wherewith all or almost all were infected. Which extreme
plague of God so was sent for that vice of which Anselme gave the occasion by
his Sodomitical decree. But thus was their estimation in munckery labored for
by them: As it is also wonder to consider how Munckes were conspired togethers
to advance them selves, their houses and lands, him to exclude the seculer
prebendaries at Winchester, Oddo, whose surname was Seuerus, called to the
Archbishop sea anno 934. anno 1184. after he had taken his pall and
intronizated, by and by he took upon him the habit of profession at Mereton,
and declared (says Nubergensis) the purpose of his religious mind in outward
habit: Lib. 4. ca. 33.
and so did his next successor Reginalde Treuisa of Oddo, that he was lewdelye
moved therefore to make him a muncke, for Christ ne none of his apostles was
never muncke ne friar.

Lo, after this sort did diverse of them magnify the virtue of their vows and
habites, to blind the world with pretending holiness outwardly, but inwardly
(I fear) were even such as Wylliam Malmesburie before does testify of them,
Page 215.
and recited again by Wylliam Thorn, a muncke de anno 1005.) saying further
his old schole vearse. Qnia, quod noua testa capit, inueterata sapit. Addyng
moreover, Proh dolor, iste modus viuendi inter religiosos pessimus, ita a
primaeuis temporibus monachis inoleuit, quod vsque ad hoc tempus succidi non
possit. Vtinam faeditatis exemplo, vicinos non inficiant. Alas, this Rabanus
Maurus, such a one as he says, Quod nec Italita similem, nec Germania peperit
aequalem, That neither Italy had his like, nor Germany brought forth his
match. And he living in perpetual studiyng of scriptures, gouernyng

as they did in Lanfranckes days: for him self testifies in Epist. 77. cent.
3.
though yet in his rigor he contempned the kings commandments, as he ever
used ouermuche severity against the kings of his time in other matters the
most part of his life: not only standing ouerthwartlye in the matter of
inuestitures, Edm. lib. 4.
and for the Bishops homage making for their temporalties, as always
frowardly resistyng the kings reasonable requests. As where he desired to
consecrate one Richard elect of London, at Chichester nigh at hand where they
were, and for more speed in the considerations of the Lib. 4.
would for none of them all be moved from his severe determination, but would
needs consecrate him at Lamhith where he was at hostage. So wylfull a man in
all his doings (saving the reverence of his learning) that Epist. 31. cent. 4.
Edm. lib. 4.
whereby the Church might have been better served, and the more souls saved by
an infinite number. In which epistle, Pascall the pope wylled yet to consider
the necessity of the time, and commodity of the Church: and Magnis vtrinque
motibus, magnis consultationibus actum, eratque ratiocinatio regis huiusmodi.
Consuetudo regni mei est, a patre meo instituta, vt nullus preter licentiam
regis appelletur papa. Qui consuetudines regni tollit, potestatem quoque, and
coronam regni violat: qui coronam mihi aufert, inimicitias and infidelitate^ in
me agit. This matter was done with great sturres me. Whereupon Anselme reasoned
to the contrary, with tu es Petrus. etc.) concludyng that he would so show
his duty to the king, as he might perform his obedience to the pope, In his
exequendis (says the story) omnes episcopi Angliae, primati suo suffragium
negarunt. But in perfourmyng these things attempted by Anselme, all the
bishops of England did deny to join with their primate. Which sturryng
nature of Anselme, no maruayle though it displeased both the bishops and the
nobility, whose desire and suite was after Anselmes death, that the king
should chose any bishop of the seculer state, or any clarke of the kings
chapel Edm. fo 187.
that he went away, sponte, nullo paenitus cogente, neither feared with
imprisonment, nor otherwise tormented, nor that his sea was denied unto him:
but only for one poor word, VVilli. warewaste.
spoken by one certain man, named William, he determined to flee, and so by
his fleeyng gave the adventure, that there followed (says his friend) hereof
innumerable inconveniences, the unmerciful tirannie of the prince, the spoylyng
of the poor, the damages of the Churches, the lamentation of wydowes, the
bewaylynges of old men for losyng Edm. lib. 5.
without any humanity, not not showing his loyal affection unto his prince in
his requests how reasonable soever they were, not to his own brothers
requests. For when he had decreed determinatly to go to Rome to complain, his
brothers requesting him that the kings ambassador, who should likewise go to
Rome, prayed that he might go in company with him, he utterly denied the same,
and was vnremouable, saying, Quod dixi, dixi, which yet pretended holiness,
constancy, and discipline of the Church, for his defense. In which
extremity yet he continued unto his lives end. About which time, when the
king did request him for Thomas the younger, new elected Archbishop of York,
to respyte his profession, whereat the said Thomas did stand doubtful: he
severely answered the kings messengers, that he would the king to
understand, that he would rather suffer him Tibi quoque Thoma, sub eodem
anathemate ex part dei interdico, vt nunquam benedictione^ episcopatus
Eboracensis suscipias, nisi prius professione^ facias. etc. And to thee Thomas
also I forbid under the same curse on gods behalf, that thou never take upon
thee to be consecrated into the Byshopricke of York, before thou make first
thy profession. etc. The copy of which said epistle sealed with his seal, he
sent to every bishop of his province, chargyng and commaundyng, that they upon
their obedience Edmer.
thus answered. Licet hunc qui in pontificatum Eboracense^ electus est, olim
ex coniuge silium susceperim, eique iuxta seculum et carnis naturam, honoris ac
dignitatis prouectu ius aequissime debeam, multo maxim tamen id matri meae
ecclesiae Cantuar. debeo. etc. Although this elect of York be my son, in
time past had by my wife, and therefore owe unto him according to the course of
the world and conjunction of blood, to wyshe the preferment of his honor and
dignity: yet I owe that thing most chiefly to my mother Church of
Canterbury: and thereupon I judge that Lanfranc then archbishop of Canterbury,
and his successors. Which sentence yet of his father, though the king and the
bishops did well allow, and with expendyng the records of the same: yet the
said Thomas the younger elect, would not so submit him self. Thomas stobues
in catologo Ebor. ca. 52.
Whereupon the king being moved, pronounced, that either he should else
renouncyng their former, took others, and freely married In hypocrisi loquencium
mendatium, and cauteriatam habentium suam conscientiam prohibentium nubere.
etc. Forsooth his ready good will and access to the holy father of Rome, the
supportation that he found there, the spiced conscience he had in his wrong
obedience unto that sea, esteemyng him so hyghly ( supra id quod colitur) made
him to esteem his prince the less, ii. These. ii.
and from time to time Quid mihi de meis cum papa? quae antecessores mei, hoc
in regno possiderunt, mea sunt, hec si quis auferre mihi voluerit, quod
inimicus meus sit, omnis qui me diligit, certissime nouerit. What have I to do
with the pope concerning mine own? That which mine ancestors have possessed
in this Realm be Edmer.
wherein Pascall the pope complayneth, that he did in his Realm all as pleased
him, Calixtus after his council holden at Remis, anno dn^i. 1119. came unto
Gisortiu^, Edmer.
to speak with the king, and had conference with him. When the king had
obtained of that pope to have all such customs which his father had in England
and in Normandy, and especially of all other, that he should not suffer any
man to use the office of a legate at any time in England, except him self did
require the same for such matters which could not be ended by the bishop of
Canterbury and the other bishops of the Realm. All which things (says the
story) being thus determined, the pope does make request to ye king for his
love, to be friendly unto Thurstone Archbishop Calixtus did answer. Ego
apostolicus sum, and si feceris quod postulo, ab hac te fidei sponsione
absoluam. I am in the apostles sea, and if thou wylt do that which I request, I
will absolve thee from this promise of thy fidelity. Well says the king, I
will entreat of this hereafter: and shortly sent unto him his messengers, to
signify that it is not for the kings honor to consent to such absolutions
against Gisors aforesaid his own person to speak with the king, it may so be
objected by some Romanistes, who labor so hye to advance his deity: but to
such as be indifferently read in story, it is not Qui dicebant, quod satis,
imo nimiu^ iam suorum caursinorum vsuris, and Romanorum ac Italicorum rapinis,
and simoniis Angliae puritas maculatur, quamuis non presentialiter bona
ecclesiae, and regni dissipet and predetur. Which said, that the purity of
the Realm of England was already enough, yea to much defiled by the vsuries of
his cormorantes, and by the extortions and simonies of Infamia enim curiae
papalis id promeruerat, cuius fetor vsque ad nubes fuma^ teterrima^ exhalabat.
The infamy of the papal court had deserved this repulse, the stinche whereof
did breathe out even up to the clouds Edm. lib. 6.
And as concerning any coming of any legate into the Realm, he would never
admit one as long as he lived. And though that pope Calixt sent into the Realm
afterward his most solemn legate Petrus Romanus, monachus Cluniacensis,
coming in a more portly glory then ever any did before, the king so disposed
the matter, that after he was come into England, wylled that he should
neither visit church nor monastery, and commanded Calixtus promised him.
Whereupon, after some liberality bestowed upon him on the kings behalf, the
king sent him over again ye way he came, out of England, though his coming
was to have exercised his office of legatship thorough the hole Realm. If the
reader will know ye cause why that Thurstone fell into the kings displeasure,
was for that he askyng license of the king to go to this council of the bishop

Thus far out of the common written stories have been alleged, the rather by
the occasion of entreatyng of bishop Anselmes tumultuous doings, who was the
first that ever in England took upon him to divorce lawful matrimonies in all
priests, so many hundred years used in quiet possession Lanfranckes
constitution: and as he the first, so the most extreme against all right and
conscience, until the reign of Queen Marie, in whose days Hildibrandes
spirit was raised up again, and Anselmes whot Munckyshe zeal in like sort
prosecuted, as it was in his time.

Rodulph.
first an Abbot in Normandy, after that, bishop of Rochester, and in
conclusion archbishop of Canterbury, of whose days no great record is
extant, of making or forcyng any decrees or constitutions against married
priests, although it is reported of Edmer that he was very severe against the
said Henry the first, Ioannes Hagustaldensis
being a prince of such godlynes, that one Cronicle writes so much to his
commendation, that he says. Post quem princeps non surrexit alius, qui sic
iniustas regni exactiones interdiceret, subditos in pacae and modestia
sapientius After whose death, there followed no prince like him, in repressyng
the wrong exactions used in the Realm, and that governed his subjects more
wyselye in peace and quietness, none that did more reverence ecclesiastical
persons, and that better maynteyned the poor or the religious by his expenses,
and that after his death (he says) by and by sprung up all wicked men,
disturbers of peace, murderers and robbers, with all kind of mischiefs. Which
princely qualities, says Wylliam of Malmesburie, he got by his education,
brought up and instructed in all the seven Scala chron.
and therefore caused him to be instructed in learning, which turned as much
to the commendation of the father, for that he judged a Bishop ought to VVil.
Mal.
and found the fruit thereof so necessary in government, that he was wont to
say, Rex illiteratus, Asinus coronatus, a King unlearned, is an Ass crowned.
This man so well vsyng his government to Gods pleasure, that Henry Huntyngton
who lived in his days testified, that God caused his fame to be spread through
the whole Edm. lib. 6.
Some proof of his graces and good qualities may be considered, partly
occasioned to be remembered by this foresaid archbishop Rodulph, who at a
certain coronation of the kings new wife Atheleida, daughter to Godefride
duke of Lorayne, in the xxi. year of his rain, the said Rodulphus being
thexecutor of the solempnitie at mass, and at the alter in his pontificalibus,
castyng his eyes behind him, and seeing the said king syttyng Gloria in
excelsis, the quyer following, he afterward retyryng to the altar again.
Further to amplify the quiet spirit, wisdom, and modesty of this king in
this fact, I shall not need, but leave it to the reader to judge what benefit
this king had by his learning. Rodulphus, what his wisdom or wylfulnes was, I
also leave it to the readers judgment: but I would the reader specially to
bear in remembrance, whether (as it is said before) after Anselmes death,
the bishops after Rodulphes death were not justly moved to be suitors to the
king, to have their Archbishop otherwise chosen then out of the munckes coat:
whose words be these, as the Saxon chronicle does report them. Anno. 1123.
Then spoke the bishops between them selves, and said: that they never more
would have any man of munkes order to be Archbishop over them, for they never
allowed nor loved munckes rulyng: and the king granted that to them. Now to
end the story of this time, to set out before your eyes the marvelous
wisdom that this king gathered by which escaped to tell the misfortune. Which
heavy casualtie

Thus far have we enlarged the matter upon reheasyng William. Chro. Ceno
Mart. an. 1132
After this Rodulph, followed William aforesaid, in whose days almost all
London was brent by the fire of Gilbert Becket. This William renewed the same
like constitution of Anselme in his time, Page 217.
by the help of the popes legate Ioannes Cremensis a priest Cardinal, who
after he had been very costly and chargeably enterteyned Chro. Saxo. Pet Burge^s.
from abbey to abbey, and coming after that about the nativity of our Lady
to London, kept his council there: in which the legate did command that
Anselmes decree should be observed better then it was: but all prevailed not
(says the Saxonicall story) and he afterward departed home to Rome with
shame enough. In this man's days, Chro. Ioren. in anno. 1135.
Robert Bloet muncke of Euesham, bishop Hen. Hunt. li. 8 ca. 2.


Now though the said William Archbishop attempted the matter again at
Michaelmas tide, and would give the Chr Saxon. anno 1129.
This did bid the archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishops which were in
England. And yet all these decrees and byddynges stood not, al held their
wives by the kings a^^^. 25. Henry.
Whereupon he decreed that the priests should continue with their wives
still: Of whom for that the kings officers took pencions, the bishops began
to repent them of their committyng so the cause, whereof they would have had
the orderyng them selves to some other purpose. For which pentionarie matter,
Anselme had certain years before by his epistle well chydden the king:
Calixtus him self. For if he had thought it to have been against the precept of
God, he would never have suff^ed so many years the continuance of the same by
anno. 11^8. (...) Chro. Aug. Chro. (...).
After William, followed Theobaldus, in whose days the house of saint Gregory's
in Canterbury was brent anno 1145. the church and almost the whole city of
Rochester was first brent, the chathedrall church of York was brent, and
without that city the church of saint Marie, where was an Abbey, with the
goodly Hospital founded by the archbishop Thurstone, brent for good rule ye
may be sure, their chastity deserved no less. That Thurstone archbishop
Chro. Peter 1070. annal. eiusd. 1113.1114. VValterus weeks. 1116.1121.1112.
Houenden. 1184. Houenden. 1188. Gualter Covent. 1212. Fabian. 1261.1370.
besides these that are already spoken

How the abbey of Peterborowe was once brent,

How the monastery of Worceter was brent,

How the abbey of Chichester was brent,

How the abbey of Peterborowe was brent once again,

How the church of Powles with many other cathedral churches were brent,

How the abbey of Gloucester was brent,

How the abbey of Glastenburie was brent,

How the church of Beuerlay was brent,

How saint Mary's church of the Chanons in Southwark was brent,

How the steeple of Euesham was set on fire by lyghtnyng,

How the Abbacie of saint Edmundes was brent, with diverse more, as hereafter
partly does follow. The rather may these examples thus so generally and
universally and so thick executed upon these munckes houses, be a more proof
of gods plague against their munckyshe life and order, as nothing pleased with
the most of them, then the adversaries can justly charge the universal
religion of the Gospel received, Neuber. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Well, these houses were not brent for other men's faults: Where the cronicle
of Peterborow ascribes this plague of God in burning their church and all
that was therein, to their retchlesse life, and wretchedness and dronkennes they
used. And William Thorn muncke of S. anno. 1168.
ascribes the burning of their church and abbey, to the foul abuse of taking
infantes (scant weaned from their nurses) to be munckes professed among them. A
pretty age for a perpetual vow, and a worthy cause to make such subject to
the austeritie of archbishop Pecchams constitution: Apud Lamhith anno. 1281.
ca. Item moniales.
where he orders, that if the Nun tarry one year in the habit, before she
have taken the bishops benediction, must yet be reputed for professed, and
may not return to the world again: for if she do, she must be accounted and
used as an apostata. Although (says he) the religious have not received
Polidore writes, who gate his Bishopric of pope Eugenius by suite and craft,
by the disprouyng of William, elected thereunto: Which Abbey was founded, or
rather restored by Gilbert, a priest of Semplingam. Which story is expressed
at large by Ethelrede, a Cister muncke in Rhieuall in the dioces of York
abbote, a man eloquent in his time. Which young girl when she came to age, he
writes how maruelouslye she was delivered, her child Miracula domini and
manifesta diuinae pietatis indicia scire, and tegere, portio sacrilegii est. To
know the miracles of God, and the manifest examples of his divine mercy, and
to suppress them, is a spice of sacrilege. etc. Further the said auctour does
auouche the matter to be very true, who coming from his own monastery at the
request of the father of the house, did see with his own eyes this young
maiden in the straw where she lay newely and miraculously delivered, hearing
all the rest of this tragidie Voce frenatica, capite inquiunt, capite rebels,
apprehendite proditores. etc. as they had been mad: Lay hands (say they) upon
them, lay hands upon them, attach these rebels, and apprehend these
traitors. So with much a do, to the great wonder of the people abroad, the
Archbishop was feign to return Theobalde. This said Archbishop belyke had no
great conscience for bishops and priests to have wives, and their children
to be preferred to ecclesiastical living. For as Iuo Carnotensis did judge by
the report of Radulphus de diceto, anno. 1161.
in anno 1161: This Theobalde did consecrate Richard Archdeacon of Couentree,
and son of Robert Pech Bishop of the sea of Chester, to be Bishop of Non
igitur vel a sacris ordinibus, vel a parochialibus curis, vel ab ecclesiis
cathedralibus, vel etiam ab ipso papatu silii sacerdotum (si probalilis vitae
fuerint) sunt arcendi etc Priests sons are not therefore to be kept back,
either from holy orders, or from the cures of paryshes, or from cathedral
churches, no not from the papacy it self, if they be of good conversation.
And by and by in the story he reports: that Felix the third being a
priests son, was after made pope, and Agapitus the son of Gordian a priest
Gelasius the son of Valerius a bishop, was made pope, Siluerius the son of
Hormisda a Roman bishop was made pope, Deusdedit the son of Stephen a
Subdeacon was made pope, Theodorus a greek borne son to Theodorus a bishop
was made pope, VVylliam Neuber. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Nicholaus an English man, son of a priest, was made pope, after called
Adrianus quartus. Thus far the said Radulph in story. Which said bishops
of Rome, so written in number by pope Damasus to Hierom, Distinc. 56. Osius.
are not to be understand to be borne in fornication, as Gratian does avouch
there, but were Oriental church be proved even unto this day lawful unto
them. His words therein be these. Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos
pontifices dicuntur esse promoti, non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de
legittimis coniugiis And pope Vrbane says there, Ca. Lenomansem.
that priests children are not to be kept from a Byshopricke, if other virtues
be found in them, as a priests son was elected bishop of Cenomannia, and so
admitted by him. And but for tediousnes, I might rehearse many more, as Adrian
the second, John the eleventh, John the fourtenth, John the sixtenth, sons
of popes and bishops. So honorable says Paul is wedlock amongste all,
Hebre. 11.
and the bed undefiled: Whereas adulterers God shall De bono coniugal. cap. 24.
through all nations and all sorts of men, for cause of procreation, and in
the faith of chastity. And here I do appeal to the consciences of such as
name them selves catholyke men, whether that it had not ben more honorable to
God, more agreeable to his word, and more commendable to the Church, for that
spiritual blinded bishop Hugh, sometime bishop of Dunelme in this Theobaldus
time, and with more honesty, have followed the example of this Richard of
Chichester in his matrimony: VVylliam Nubri. lib. 5. cap. 9.
then to be a notorious Henry deputiaco to be one of his hostagies, for
delyueryng up the castle of Wyndsor to the kings chauncelour, to ryd^e him
self out of prison at Southwell, who by his fylthy life deserved to be
destitute of Gods grace, Houenden anno 2. Ric. primi.
and so to spend his longer: but God cut him up, as he was huntyng for more
Justinian avouches his judgment in In nouellis constable. 3. Saucimus.
esteemyng Epiphanius the archbishop of Constantinople so much the more, Quod
ex sacerdotibus genus and originem duxerit. And if ye the testimony of Reymund
in his son may be taken, he writes agreablie to this: and says farther,
that the priests of Greece regard not any vow of chastity in their holy
orders, and celebrate divine service having Fol. 85. in Glosa. Floriger. anno.
1160. Mat. Par. 1161.
Marie the Abbess of Ramesey, of some infamy noted in her Abbey, daughter to
king Stephen, was married to Matthue, Earl of Bollon, with the kings favor
and the nobility, and had two daughters by him: at which marriage Thomas
Becket, then the kings chauncelour, had great indignation at the unlawfulness
thereof. Wherewith the king was offended, and for his earnestness in the matter
says the story, suffered many great displeasures and persecutions of the
earl. Belyke he was Chro. Roff. anno. 1155. VVylliam Thorn. anno. 1168.
was proved to have been delivered of three children. And the like systers in
her house were likewise dispearsed and driven out of their cloisters Founte
Euerarde. And further, the king having pity yet on that good Abbess being
thus degraded, and thereby might perish by hunger and need, promised her
yearly twenty nobles, and did suffer her to go whyther she would at her own
liberty. This permission and discharge of their vows and profession, belyke
would have much displeased the said Thomas, Thomas Becket.
being so angry with the Abbess of Ramsey for her lawful matrimony. Now
this man aforesaid was elect archbishop of Canterbury, next the said
Theobaldus, M Pa 1161. M. West. 1161. Lib. Roff.
with the Abbey of saint Augustine, as their story does declare. He made no
great a do by any constitution against priests maryages, because he was
otherwise fully occupied. Then after him came into the sea the Prior of Dover,
sometime munke and supprior of Canterbury, Richard, in whose first Richard.
1184. Chron S. Augustine. Geruasius. anno. 1177. Chro. Roff.
and within four years after that, was brent with fire the church of
Rochester the second time, with all the offices of the whole city, as well
without the walls as within. To which Richard was come from heaven a voice
in these words. Tu quis es? tu es qui dissipasti bona ecclesiae tibi commissa,
and ego dissipabo to de terra. Thou what art? thou art he whichh have wasted ye
goods of the church committed unto thee, Gualte. Covent.
therefore will I waste thee out from the earth. And so at the town of
Halynges, says Rochester story, he was suddenly anno 1175. v. kl. Iulii, where
he a fresh renewed the old prohibitions and decrees against priests
concubines, Roger Houenden and Geruasius. anno 1174. Chro. Ierouallensis.
who yet of his fatherly pity did consecrate one Galfride Ridel archdeacon of
Canterbury, to be bishop of Elye, who was the third in order of the first
erection, as the catologes of the bishops of Elye does record. Which said
Galfride should have gone to Rome with the said Richard elect of Canterbury,
vidz. elect of Winchester, Herforde, Chichester, and of Elye. Which pope did
more earnestly ask why the elect of Elye came not with them? The bishop of
Orleans answered. Forsooth said he, Habet excusationem Euangelicam, He has
the excuse of the Gospel. What is that says the pope? Sir says he, he has
married a wife, and therefore can not come. And though there was then much
altercation anno 1174. pridie nonas October. anno regni Hen. 2 xxi. who lived
bishop there, until he dyed, though he ended his life at Winchester intestate
anno 1189. the first year anno 1175. Hen. 2.21.
to chose a bishop for the bishopric of Norwich, and for chosyng of abbottes
which were many vacant: Amongst which their election, they did elect Galfride
the kings son, to the bishopric of Lyncolne, after that it was void xvij.
years almost, by reason VVil. Neu. lib. 2. cap. 22.
and therefore the king sent him to Towers to have some exercise in the schools
there, until he was thought worthy that he might take the dignity of such
honor. Though yet his son answered not his expectation, and thereupon for his
unworthiness compelled him to resign it again, Nubrigen. lib. 4. cap. 2.
whom notwithstanding king Stephen his brother next succeedyng chargeable and
worthy office of the cure of man's soul. And Rog. Houeden. anno. 1177. Rex.
Hen. 2 23.
for the remission of his sins (as the story says) And so was the church
of seculer prebendaries in Waltham turned out: they expulsed for their wives
belyke, and reguler chanons brought in. That is, vi. chanons from the abbey of
Circester, and vi. of Osney, and iiij. of S. Oses, and of some of them made
officers, and replenyshed the house with chanons, about the number of an
hundred, or fourscore at the least, besides their externe officers of the
house. Thus Walter Couentriensis.
Nevertheless, the king gave to the Deane in recompense, a manor of his,
during his life, and gave the prebendaries according to the value of their
prebendes: and such prebendaries as would not receive such recompense, that
they should hold their prebendes during their lives, at the discretion and
estimation yet of archbishop Richard, who was present, with other bishops,
Fabian. ann. Henr. 2.28.
for such alteryng the house of Waltham abbey is to be considered, the ground
whereof was, as it is told by story, that the king had vowed and sworn before
two cardinals, to go in his own proper person to war against Christ's
enemies in the holy land, they so devising to bereue the realm of their
prince, and to ieoperde his person, to the revenge of Thomas Beckets death,
which was laid to his charge. Lucius the third, was well contented when one
Heracleus patriarch of Jerusalem came into the Realm, to move him to travail
against the Sarasens, and was very instant upon him to take that journey,
puttyng him in mind of the Psalm. 2.
Et nunc reges intelligite, erudimini qui iudicatis terram. etc. If kings and
princes will suffer them selves quietlye to be thus shamefully abused, in their
own realms, to their own faces, by such externe comers, whose vocation
ought of most congruence to have driven them to the reverence of kings and
princes: who may have pity of them if they be deluded? Although this noble
Baldwinus archbishop, Baldwine.
of whom we read of no constitution that he made, nor of his next successors,
till the year of our Lord 1222. when Stephen Langton kept his council at
Oxforde, which Stephen was the cause of all the broyle between the pope and
king John, for his admission to the Archbishopricke, against the kings will and
pleasure, to the intolerable injury of the crown, and sclaunder of the
Realm, besides the innumerable hurtes that came thereof. He made in his
constitutions a decree against priests concubines, of whom the world swarmed
full after the open Edmund.
For his second successor from him Edmunde, in his constitutions tempered the
matter Mat. Par. anno. 1226.
or publicly out of their houses, and then should afterward be delivered to
the seculer power. After which Edmundes departure, Boniface.
came into the sea Bonifacius of Sauoye, uncle to Mat. Par. 1245.
partly for that buyldyng, more then xv. thousand marks (though some records
speak of a more sum) which he was feign to pay to redeem the bishopric
clear: although some writers refer a greater part of that debt to anno. 1120.
in the translation of Thomas Becket from under the shrowdes, to a more
glorious shrine above. At which translation, he procured the presence of the
king, and of the most part of the nobles of the Realm, with an infinite
concourse of people to be present, and gave to all that would ask it both hay
and prouender, all the way from London to Canterbury. At which time he made
such cheer, that the story says, he made the wine to run plenteouslye out
of diverse places in the city in conduites all the whole day, to glad the
Ranulphus, he spent so much, that his fourth successor Bonifacius was scant
able to pay the expenses. It may be that they were very merry that day: for the
writer of that translation, almost spent his whole matter in setting forth the
joy that was made amongst them, and how the people were inebriated wonderfully,
and much he speaks of inebriations: but lest the posterity should grossly
take these inebriations, he turns it up and Bonifacius, though he made
certain constitutions, yet he suffered that matter of priests maryages alone.
Yea Othobone keeping a synod in his time, decreed nothing against priests
wives, Othos constitution, but not so his constitution de clericis coniugatis,
and yet had priests after wives. For John Peccham in his constitutions,
following the next successor of Bonifacius, made his law De filiis sacerdotum.
And this sparyng of laws making against maryages in Bonifacius time, not
unlike to be done of favor he bare to the state: For in the year of our
Lord.1250. he purposyng to make his visitation in diverse places of his
province, Mat. Paris in hist. maioai.
as by his legantine right he well might do, and being at London, came to the
cathedral church anno 1252. one of the chanons Procerae staturae, eleganti
corpore, auunculum dominae Alienorae Reginae, qui de nobilissimo sanguine
natus, and regnorum vtrorumque principibus, ipse procerus and fatis sufficiens
fuerit. etc. Of a comely stature, and a decent Bonifacius evil entreated and
expelled in his jurisdiction metropoliticall, made his repair to the king at
Westminster, and so did certain of the chanons that were hurt, to complain:
but the king would give them neither sight nor audience. After that time, the
prebendaries of Powles, with diverse other of their learned council, with
certain of the chanons and their interloquuters, Bonifacius, and made his
answer, in such wise, that both the prebendaries with their lawyers, and the
chanons with their council (after some money spent) returned home again
without any profit or glory in their attemptes. Now this Bonifacius having a
wife himself, no marvel though he made no constitution for prohibition of
maryages, except he had followed some men's examples, who to cloak their own
incontinencie, be very rigorous to make laws against others, so to set out a
countenance to Othos constitution legantine, who departed but three years
before that Bonifacius came to the sea, Chro. Cant.
was sent from Gregory the ninth, and received as a legate: And for that the
same was (says some stories) that he decreed certain constitutions not very
grateful to the clergy, Fabian.
which he did utter in a synod at London in the octaues of saint Martin, in
saint Powles church, he was not much Otho (says Florigerus) left he should
be thought to have done nothing, or not to have come into England for any
reformation, he commanded under a dreadful pain, that the churches unhallowed
should be hallowed. After which council, the legate wandryng about the
Florigerus) the whole family and retinue of the legate, anno. 1238.
and many mortally wounded, and in conclusion the legate him self besieged,
and driven for his succor Though Fabian names Othobone, yet in this year it
must needs be of Otho.
The cause of all this broyle at Oxforde (says Fabian) rose of such his
constitutions as he decreed against the liberties of the clergy, in his
articles v. in number: among which, other writers affirm for one, scilz. the
prohibition of marriage from the priests. As for the manner of the entertainment
of Otho the legate had of English men, it shall not need to declare what he
had in the whole: For of one only, bishop of Winchester, when he knew he
would keep house at London the winter following, he sent him fifty fat oxen,
Math. Paris 1237.
an hundred quarters of wheat of the finest, Rex autem ei vsque ad confinium
maris occurrit, et inclinato ad genua eius capite, vsque ad interiora regni
deduxit officiose. The king did meet him at Matthew) vt decuit, more then was
meet and convenient: and therefore may be soon judged who were like to be
councellers to the king, who in their dryftes then doubtyng nothing but by the
means of a legate sent from Rome by the pope himself, that what he would
constitute, should be terrible, and set out for a good countenance to the
world, and kept notwithstanding some of his constitutions at leisure. For
these zealous men concerning this pretensed holiness of the clergy, rather
meant to make a show to the world of a perfect chastity (in refourmyng the
state thereof, as it was then thought, decayed much their estimation among
Othos constitution (ca. licet ad profligandum) that by some lawyers
judgments, as John Andrew, though Hostiensis and him self holds the
contrary, Quod crimen meretricii 32. q. 1. non est culpandus. That the church
onght to pass over by dissimulation the crime of open harlottes, because the
popes marshall in deed at this present (says he) exacteth tribute of
harlottes, and that peradventure for auoydyng a greater mischief, writes the
gloss. If ye ask, what should sound to such a guess that most of them meant
to make many decrees from time to time, but never meant or thought to have them
Otho the legate now constituted, so that they make it but a shypmans hose, and
so trauesable that it can never be executed, meaning in deed to show rather
outwardly a chastity to bleare the eyes of the world, then hopyng to have it
so in deed. For even in that very chapter is recorded, and well brought to
remembrance the watchword they had among them (si non cast, tamen caute) for
that was their principal care, to go closely away, to carry Pecham. anno. 1281.
they (after Othos decree of the same) still provided against priests
children, that they should not next and immediately succeed their fathers in
their benefices without (si non cast, tamen caute) was secretelye delivered
from hand to hand, to them which were the wyser and of more experience, and so
lived secretelye with their friends, not openly vouched for wives. But in
affectu sororio, amore vxorio, and fide coniugali, as they use the terms. In
which kind of life, there be no small arguments, that some bishops and the
best of the clergy, living within the memory of man, did continue. etc.
Where the poor simple priests and ignorant idiotes, having little skyll of
such mysteries, and having as (si non cast, tamen caute) But if it chanced
that they were taken to manifestlye in the crime, that there could be no
excuse for them, then were they (be ye sure) extremely punyshed, but yet
seldom with open punyshement, for it is against the law. Quia clerici
solennem paenitentiam agere non debent. And further for to comfort the
concubinarie priests Guilermus upon the title de constitutionibus ca.
Distinct. 28. Presbiter.
Quod incontinencie, moves a question. An contraueniens constitutioni peccet
mortaliter, he says. Qui voluntary, sieve contemptabiliter sine rationabili
causa transgrediuntur praeceptum legis, sieve constitutionis aut canonis
peccant, nam tales impediunt finem, quem legislator intendit. Vbi tamen non 76.
did. vtinam. etc. And to help forth the matter, De habitu clericorum constable.
Otho. ca. Quonia^ de habitu.
John Aton the gloser of Othos constitutions, mouyng the question, whether a
constitution or council which the subjects never accepted or obeyed, do
constrayne or bind to the observation thereof? After many constitutions and
alegations of laws, and contrary determinations of lawyers and glosers of the
popes laws (in tanta Papalardia) as he does use the term: he Which term of
a Papalard Gaulfride Chauser does use, for a dissemblyng hypocrite, pretending
one thing, and meaning another. Fol. 154.
Howebeit, in the discusment of this question he says, that if of the behalf
of the law, there might follow either sclaunder or more harm, then should
the common custom observed prevail, concerning the excusation from temporal
punishment. Yet says he, in fact this is very seldom observed, when by the
obseruyng of the constitution, the purses of the prelates should be made
empty thereby. But (says he) all other constitutions which be (Bursales
prelatis) auaylable to the prelates purses, such be well commended to Otho
should be to sharp for the concubinarie priests, or they to soon
condemned, the gloser thus handeleth the matter upon those terrible words of
Otho. Statuimus et statuendo precipimus, vt clerici et maxim in sacris
ordinibus constituti, De concub. clericoru^ ca. licz, at pro-
qui in domibus suis vel alienis DETINENT PVBLICE CONCVBINAS, eas prorsus a se
remoueant infra mensem, et ipsas vel ahas de cetero nullatenus detenturi
alioqui ab officio and beneficio sint suspensi etc. vsque digne satis fecerint,
and de beneficiis se nullatenus intromittant, We decree, and by decreeing do
command, that clerks, specially such as be in holy orders, which in their
own houses or other men's do deteyne openly concubines, that they remove those
from them utterly within a month, and that they in no wise deteyne them or
other from henceforth, or else be they suspended from ipso iure. And we will
and straytely command, that the archbishops and bishops make diligent search
hereof. etc. Now comes in this favorable gloser to temper all the matter
more gently, in favor of the concubinarie priests, and says that these three
words detinent public concubinas, that do deteyne openly concubines, must
concur jointly together, so that this term openly must as well determine
this detention, as this A favorable gloss upon an hard text.
yet it is to be taken secret, and for this may not he be compelled to void
publicly, except it can be proved otherwise. Again, this word deteynyng,
is to be taken when these concubines be deteyned by the priests proper
VVilhelmus Lynwood, that though these things ought not to be done publicly,
yet belyke they may do them secretly as the doctors say. Yet says he, this
is true to theffect of escapyng the pain: which though it be inflicted to them
that do these forbidden things publicly, yet it is not extended to them that
do them secretly, and so be they excused si non cast, tamen caute. And again
to note the devotion of these good men, to work an immunitie to their
concubinarie priests, De habitati. clericorum. li. 3. ca. vt clericalis.
where as Stephen in his constitution in the ancient written copies and
books, forbyddeth them to keep their concubines both public and occulte, and
that they have no access unto them either publicum or occultum: They have put
out these two words occulte and occultum out of their books of constitutions
provincial, as also in their common printed per Franciscum Iouerium, wherein
the same council holden at Oxforde by Steven is inserted. Again, to minse
this matter, to make the pillowe more soft to put under the elbowes of these
concubinarie priests, he writes, ye it must be considered what perseueraunce
he uses in this crime, for it must be taken for a continual perseueraunce
proved, if it should charge him. And furthermore it must be a full month, and
this month must stand of no fewer days then xxxi. says he. And where it is
decreed that within a month deteynyng, that it must be continual and long
used. For if upon any sudden deteynyng of his possession of her, he should
fall into non est inuentus. May it here have place that VV. Nubergensis
writes. li. 2. ca 16. Episcopi dum defendendis magis clericorum libertatibus
vel dignitatibus quam eorum vitus corigendis resecandisque inuigilant,
arbitrantur obsequiu^ se prestare deo and ecclesiae, si facinorosos clericos
quos pro officii debito canonicae vigore censure coercere, vel nolunt, vel
negligunt, contra publica^ tueantur disciplinam, et episcopalis While the
bishops be more busy to defend the liberties or dignities of the priests,
then to correct and cut of their vices, then they think they do good service
to God and to the church, if they may maintain the wicked priests against
the churches discipline, which priests they either will not or neglecte to
restrain, as their duty is, by the sharp censures of the church: so that
the bishops care is now become very cold and dead. As this lawyer
aforesaid uses favorable expositions in priests concubines: so in the
chapter before Romans 14.
Tu fidem habes, penes temetipsum sit, habe And following again his council,
Videte ne bonum vestrum hominum malidicenciae sit obnoxium, and vnusquisque in
suo sensu abundet. Qui sapit diem dn^o sapit. Thou have faith, have it to thy
self before God, and take heed that your liberty be not subject to the evil
tongues of men, and let every man abound in his own sense. He that is wise,
and can discern the day, let him discern it to God. In which contemplation,
not unlike that not only this archbishop Bonifacius, and other bishops of old
days, but some of late days did live, though all the world did how
unadvised be they which write checkyngly, that of all Sarum that now is, and
others: If it be evidently testified by history, that the pope had no such
claim quia faenum habent in cornu, they may have such boldness and trust in
their slypper pens, to drive all men under the hatch, to discredit all men
whom they dislyke, yea to overthrow and to turn over the imperial state of
their natural country, to the shamyng of the prince, to the chargyng of all
the nobility with scisme and error, to the defacyng and disablyng (if they
could) the honesty, learning, and estimation of the better sort of the
clergy, so declaryng what spirit they still show them Vt auferat omnia
scandala, and omnes iniquitates, qui reddet vnicu^que secundum opera sua,
iustus iudex. But a gods name, why should they make this their doctrine of
transubstantiation and gross presence, to be so new that Berengarius must be
the first auctour, most untruly so faced out? Where ancient records prove so
far the contrary, and sets out such the true doctrine, so to be urged
and appointed, both for priests in their synodes, for religious in their
collations, for the common people in their orderlye exhortations, Beringarius
was borne or heard of. So that the bishops of old may as well be charged to
be Caluanistes, if the assertion be so considered, as well as the bishop of
Sarum, or any bishop at these days. And as well may that learned archbishop
Rabanus Maurus, be charged to be a Caluanist, being in the year of Rabanus
judgment, is so aduouched by the auctour who did abridge Amalarius book,
writing de ordine Romanae ecclesiae. Which Amalarius in the beginning of
Amalarius may be witness, that in the old time the lessons of the scriptures
were so read in the Church, as by the readyng the people Rabanus, it is not
unlike that he had received his judgment from his master Alcquine, an old
English writer, whose auditor he was, and Alcquine again sometime auditor of
Bid, as Tritemius testifies. Whereupon to consider the just computation of
years, it is not incredible but that such faith toward the sacrament which we
now profess, was in the Realm before the conquest, and so continued till
Lanfranckes days. And for all the examinations and executions which were done
in the English Church by the liberty of the Gospel, as all other creatures
of time 1. Cor. 7.
He that is syngle, To answer such, it is good to hear the saying of one
godly divine, where he says: they must understand that S. Paul's words must
be taken in such sort as he meant them. For he meant not utterly to sequester
from all married persons a care and desire of heavenly things, and to discharge
them by all manner means to please the Lord, and to attribute to them the
only care of Genesis 2.
must needs stand in strength, where he said: It is not good for a man to be
alone, let us make an helper which may be with him, like unto him self. Which
words, the Lord understood not but of such an helper as might serve a man
toward a godly and heavenly life: for whatsoever does not help thereto, can
not be called of the Lord an helper of man, but an impediment or hynderaunce.
It is manifest and evident to all men, that as S. Paul did not pronounce this
sentence ghost, Ad Heb. 13.
which is only the spirit of truth, only holy and pure, Luke 1.
in the ministry of the priesthood. And the mother of Gregory Naziazene did
also help her husband in the episcopal office, of whom Naziazene in the
funeral sermon of his said father, writes, that she was not only a notable
and excellent help of his father in godlynes, but also a teacher and defender
of his cure, with many other words of hye commendations Gregory Naziazene
does tell that Basil a priest, was father of three bishops: of Basil the
great of Cesaria, of Peter of Sebastia, and of Gregory of Nize. Which Basil
(says he) though he bound him self in matrimony, yet he lived so therein,
that he had no impediment thereby to attain both perfect virtue and perfect
knowledge: So that in his conjugal state he kept his life and De virg. cap. 33.
No Saint Austen doubts not to say: Quia fancta sunt etiam corpora
coniugatoru^ fidem sibi and domino seruientium, that the bodies even of the
married folk be holy, of such as preserve their faith to them selves one to
the other, and their faith to god. And there in that discourse Cap. 21.
who never had a do with marriage, and in Abraham who had children: so that the
chastity of the one, and the matrimony of the other, came to one end to
serve the Lord. Again, it may not be thought, that for the worldly cares
which may be in matrimony priests be more charged, than for other cares and
turmoyle of the world. For such carefulnes may as soon defyle the purity of
the mind, as the cares which be in matrimony. As Well be these careful
trauayles of the world forbidden to the priests, as cares which De bono
viduitatis. cap. 23.
God forbid (says S. Austen to the wydows) that ye should be entangled with
the desire of riches, in steed of the cares of matrimony, that in your
hearts money should bear the chief rule, and so love of money should be your
husbands. Whereupon Chrysostom writes. Audiant hoc virgins, Hom 19. 1. Cor
7.
quod non in hoc definita est virginitas, corpore solum virgins esse. etc. Let
virgins hear, that virginity is not in this point so concluded, for the
bodies Theophilact says: 1. Cor. 7.
When thou shall behold any virgin which has vowed, carefully inclined to
worldly matters, know thou certainly that she differs nothing from a married
woman. And saint Hierome says: It will profit nothing to have the body of a
virgin, if the mind have inwardlye married. This affirm I (says Athanasius)
that every virgin, wydowe, or woman continent, if she have the cares of this
world, De virg.
those very cares be her husband. Whervppon Desinant isti contra scripturas
loqui. Epist. 89. quest 4.
Let these cease to speak against the scriptures. And let them in their
exhortations excite men's minds to the more perfect state, that yet they do not
condemn the inferior gifts. For some (says he) in their exhortations, can
not otherwise persuade virginity, but that therewith they condemn the
matrimonial estate, forasmuch as S. Paul says plainly, every man has his
gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that. Thus far S.
Austen. Better (says he) is meke matrimony, then vauntyng In Psalm. 99.
And therefore the said saint Austen exhorts virgins, that they conioyne
other agreeable virtues, as handmaydes which in deed do most beautify the
true virginity, In Psalm. 75.
without which (says he) the virginal life either is dead in it self, or else
defourmed in it self, and let the state be holy both in body and spirit,
seruyng God without separation at all. Of such minds were the fathers in old
time, so exhortyng to the single state of life, as men's frayleties might bear
the perfection, and used no condempnation or compulsion, but left it
indifferent to the conscience of Aelfricus (afterward as some affirm
archbishop of Canterbury) prescrybyng a synodal sermon to be spoken by the
bishops to the priests, after his reasons and swasions to the sole life,
used these words. Non cogimus violenter vos dimittere vxores vestras, sed
dicimus vobis quales esse debetis, and si non vultis, We do not compel you by
violence to forsake your wives, but we declare to you what ye should be: and
if ye will not, we shall be clear and free from your offenses, for we have
showed unto you the canons of holy fathers. This writer in all his whole
sermon, never charge the English priests with any vow, but only stands
upon the constraynt of canons ecclesiastical. For before the conquest was
never matrimony once forbidden, nor vows of seculer priests once received.
Nor Gildas that Girardus Cambrensis
The pope in his rescripte did well commend his good zeal, and councelled him
to go forward: but with this prouiso, that (because says he) all Islands that
be turned to the faith, belong to the right of S. Peter, and the most holy
church of Rome, the land should pay yearly to S. Peter for every house a
penye, as till the king took the reformation. Upon which letters sent Walter
Covent.
and did constitute them kings thereof for ever. And further, in the letters of
ye said king Henry sent to the pope, he professed to refourme their abuses,
and to put Christ's religion better amongst the^. Shortly after, the king sent
his learned men to the archbishops and bishops there, who kept a great
council at the city of Cassalense, wherein they did constitute, that where
before the Iryshe used to baptize the children of the greater men in milk, and
of the poorer sort in water, and that where the Irishe laity Iure
ecclesiastico, according to the ecclesiastical law. If ye will now know in
what state the priests were in that land: it may be understand of a canon of
the council kept there by certain bishops, Lib. Sinodal. Ecclesie VVigoru^.
under the names of Patricius, Auxilius, Iserninus, and this did they
constitute. Quicunque clericus, ab hostiario vsque ad sacerdotem, sine tunica
visus fuerit, atque turpitudinem ventris and nuditatem non tegat, and si non
more What clarke soever, from the door keeper to the priest, be seen without a
coat, and does not cover the unseemly parts and nakedness of his body: and
again, if his hears be not shorn after the roman fashion, and if his wife
shall walk abroad without any cover upon her head: let them be both
contempned of the laity, and sequestered from the church. Lo thus (as John
Auentine says) priests had at that time wives publicly, Lib. 5.
as other christian Presbyterissae. Thus priests were not forbidden, so they
had but one wife Vnius vxoris vir. Tim. iii.
Nor saint Ambrose him self does deny this truth: but plainly affirms,
that it is lawful and not prohibited, no not for bishops to have a second
wife, after the death of the first. Although (says he) that he may be worthy
to be a bishop, he must refuse those things which be lawful for the dignity
of his order. Which holy Ambrose bishop of Millane, did permit in his church
priests freely to be married, and so testified by Barnardinus Corius, in his
sub anno 1387. and so aduouched by Johannes Neuisanus professor of law, in his
book entitled Silua nuptialis. Thus was marriages free at al seasons, for a
priest to have one only wife at once, and was neither then worthy blame, nor
was a great while after in the Saxons time forbidden, as in books of rules and
canons set out for the gouernyng of ye seculer priests it may appear: De
regulis clericorum.
which be testified in these old English words. (...); Be (...).


But to stand in rehearsal of such records, what have been used by the
ancient good fathers of the church, to set out their judgments so practiced
in diverse old churches, who considering the infirmity of man, would not keep
that liberty in bondage, which God had made free: whereby they vices reigning
amongst the religious, there has Cuncti qui abstinent a coniugibus spontanea
voluntate, Tripart. li. 3. cap. 38.
and non aliqua necessitate, etiam episcopi seipsos abstinent, and plurimi
eorum etiam episcopatus tempore, ex legittima vxore filios habuerunt. De virg.
li. 1.
as once Ambrose did cry out against the painims religion, for their vestall
virgins and Pallas priests. O misteria, o mores, vbi necessitas imponitur
castitate, authoritas O marvelous mysteries, O strange manners, where
necessity (by vows) is imposed upon chastity, authority (by laws
immunities) is given to lechery. Therefore (says he) she is not chaste which
is compelled by fear, nor honest which is induced by hyre and reward.

Which kind of constrained professed chastity (to satisfy the eyes of the
world) many times proves not aunswerablie, as it well was seen in that
bishop Genebaldus, he married the niece of Remigius, who made him bishop of
Laudune. This Remigius was chosen archbishop when he was but religionis causa,
Remigius monach^s claruit. 880.
says the book, and therefore contrary to the Apostles vi. canon) yea though
they discharged one another from mutual company ad nolens volens, so that
this man might well say, that he could neither live with her nor without her:
yet they had such mutual Antoninus. lib. 2. tit. 11. cap. 18. In Chron.
Vincentius in speculo hist.
he wylled that the child should be named Latro, because (says he) he was
begotten in stealth. Which Latro afterward proved an holy man, and succeeded
his father in his bishopric, says the archbishop Antonine. Now he did
permit his wife to resort to him as before, lest else thereby might rise abroad
some suspection. And thereafter followed that she was again with child, and
brought forth a gyrle, whom he commanded to be called Vulpecula, Genebaldus
remembryng him self, went to archbishop Remigius her uncle, and fell at his
feet, and would have resigned up his habit and profession, but Remigius
would not permit him so to do: and hearing the case, he did comfort him very
amiablie says the story, but kept him in a cell for vij. years together, and
in the mean time did govern his bishopric, till an angel from heaven
appeared to fetch him out, commaundyng him to come forth: who told him that
his offense was forgeuen him, and that heaven was Remigius by the commandment
of the said angel restored him to his bishopric again, and there he
continued till he dyed. And if we should credit stories that be written: Some
does write says Antonine, that because S. John was called from his marriage
(that same that was in Cana Galileae, In summa part. 3. tit. 1. cap. 21.
whereat Christ and his mother were present by some men's opinion) unto the
Apostleship, against his wives will Marie Magdalen, if it be true that some
affirm: she upon indignation hereof, fell Genebaldus with his wife living in
forced professed chastity, by stealth did as their kind did lead them, but
yet kept all things close from the eyes of the world, and then all was well.
Had it not have been more honorable for this bishop to have followed the
example of RESTITVTVS sometime bishop of London, Restitutus.
who to the eyes of the world manifestlye lived with his wife: or to Phileas
bishop of Thmuis, whom Eusebius so hyghly does commend for his eloquence,
testifiyng that he did write a notable martiriloge a book of martirs, of the
number of such christian folk which suffered at Alexandria, who^ Ensebius also
prayseth much for his constancy, who having a wife and children to the
knowledge of all the world, Eccle. hist. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 8.
would not forsake his faith, when he was led before the president, and
toward his martyrdom for his faith to Christ, though his kynsfolkes moved
him to save him self, Hilarious floruit. anno Dom 350
and to have respect of his wife HYLARIVS bishop of Poyters, who in his
bishopric avouched both wife and children openly, which the said archbishop
of Florens affirms was not against his order. Quia (says he) episcopatus ex
sui natura, non habet opponi ad matrimonium. Lib. 3 tit. 1. cap. 21. in summa.
A bishopric of his own nature, has no contradiction to wedlock. This
Hylarie in his days did sore lament the order of discipline of the church to
be then Baptist Mantuan, who writing of the said bishop Hylarius, testifies
thus: and there improueth the law of forced chastity more at large. Lib. 1
fast.
Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta thoro. Non horruit illa
Tempestate deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas.
Sola erat in precio, quae nunc incognita virtus
Sordet, et attrito viuit cum plebe cucullo. etc.
Thy progeny was no shame to thee, thy wife coupled in Polidorus. Lanquet.
anno. 17. ante Christ.
Insomuch that their king Ewinus (having an hundred concubines at once) made it
lawful by law that a man might have a plurality of wives: and further
provided by law, that the wives of the poor commoners, should be common to
the nobility, and that the Lord of the soil Polidore did Christ's religion
abolyshe, Lib. 10. hist.
the last was long continued amongst them, till king Malcolyne (at the request
of that virtuous Queen Margarete, mother to Mawde the first wife of king
Henry the first) did abrogate that foul pencion. Which king then did decree,
that the virgin after her marriage should pay to the lord of the fee but one
piece of gold for her redemption: Which statute says Polidore is at this day
kept. In deed Aduersus Iouin. lib 2.
Quod Scotorum natio vxores proprias non habet, that the nation of the Scotts
had no wives peculiar. De prepa. euangelica. lib 6 cap. 8. Ab vrsper. De
antiqui. Iudaica. lib. 17. ca. 2. and lib 4. cad 6. De bello iud. lib 1. cap.
18. Aduer. iud. Tripartit. lib. 8. cap. 11.
Of some such disorder writes Eusebius. Multi apud Britannos. etc. In
Britanie many men have one woman to wife. Among the Parthians, and in Thrasia
contrary, many women have but one husband, and live all chaste in obeying the
laws. Josephus records, that it was an ancient usage among them to have
many wives at once. For Herod (says he) had nine wives. As the Jews had by
permission two wives at once, as he testifies, where Justinius martyr inueyeth
against the Jews, that their insolence grew so great, that their teachers did
permit every one of them to have four or five wives according to their
desires, though Valentinian brought it by law to only a couple, a good
emperor if he had had good counsel, and nothing says the story he wanted
to the perfection of all honor, but godly counsel of his faithful
servants. This was it not without good ground, in so much corruption of In
catalogo. Cesareum. 6
when all nations did what they lysted. If Paul required of a bishop in his
perfection, to be content with one wife: Which prudence says Hierom, Paul did
justly use, for that he knew it granted by law, and so practiced by the
examples of the patriarchs and of Moses, Ad Ocean. lib 2.
to this effect that the people might have large issue by their many wives. And
for that the election of this liberty was open to priests also, he gave
commandment that priests should not challenge such license in the church, to
have two or three matrimonies at once: but that they might have every one of
vnius vxoris virum, to be the husband of one wife, that is of one church
only: and there he does reiecte that exposition for to much violent. In
conclusion, these matters aforesaid, with many others, well and advisedly
pondered by that noble prince king Edward, his nobles and clergy, somewhat
to stay the foul abuse so long time without remedy used in that state of the
Realm, which should by duty express (for example) most purity of life:
thought it good

If ye list to understand what was done and subscribed unto, ye shall hear
what the lower house did affirm in this case of continency, John Tailor
doctor of divinity being then prolocutor, and William Say being register, to
accept the voices and subscriptions of them that were present, to whose
consciences was this proposition propounded, either to be freely affirmed, or
to be freely denied by them. vidz.

That all such Canons, Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Vsages, and customs
heretofore made, had or used, that forbid any person to contract matrimony, or
condemn matrimony by any person alredie contracted for any vow of
priesthood,

The affirmantes of this proposition, were almost treble so many as were the
negantes. Amongst which affirmantes, diverse were then unmarried, and never did
afterward take the liberty of marriage, as doctor Tailor the bishop, doctor
Benson, doctor Redman, doctor Hugh Weston, master Wotton. etc. Of them that
denied it (notwithstanding their superscriptions to the contrary) as few as
they were, yet some of them took upon them the liberty of marriage not

I think, that although the word of God, do exhort and counsel priests to
live in chastity,

And I think, that forasmuch as Canons and Rules made in this behalf, be
neither universal, John Redmayn.

Thus this learned man, in such credit universally in decidyng questions of
conscience, does in a great sort of respects, condemn the universal tract of
the bold assertions inspersed through D. Martins whole book: and therefore if
any man will not be resolved by his judgment to recante such his opinion, yet
shall he never be able with all the glystryng floryshe of that book to
discredit him, or to win credit thereto. Now further to enlarge his
conclusions or Non recipit (quidam) verba prudentiae, nisi ea dixeris, quae
versantur in cord eius. Prouer. 18.
Some men be of such nature, that they will never receive any wisdom or
persuasion, except ye tell him such things which be tossed in his own brain,
and soncken into his own heart. It is not therefore without good cause, Tit. 3.
that S. Paul gives precept not to have long ado with such as be sectaries,
thus saying. Foolyshe questions, genealogies, contentions, and braulynges
rysyng of the

And now finally to make an end, if Christ, whom the Math. 17.
in his doctrine made no prohibition or restraynt in his fathers ordinance of
matrimony, John. 2. Math. 19.
but honored it with his presence, and commanded it to be indissoluble,
forbyddyng all men to separate whom God has coopled, wyllyng but for the cause
of fornication no seperations to be made: if the apostles all, Ambrosius.
except John and Paul, were in the married state, and did not forsake their
wives after their apostleship, which the xij. canon of the vi. general
counsel at Constantinople does plainly affirm. Where also beside is the vi.
canon of the Apostles, by what boldness I can not tell abolyshed.vz. Quod
episcopus aut presbiter vxorem propriam, nequaqua^ sub obtectu religionis
abiiciat. etc. The bishop or priest ought not to put from him his own wife
under pretense of religion, which if he do, let him be excommunicate, and if he
so continue, let him be deposed. Which is so noted in the sum of counsels. If
the fathers in the primative church at liberty used the same, the clergy in
Greece, in Antioche, and in Alexandria, retained the liberty still in their
orderyng: Paul being very fearful to cast any snares Richard wykes.
as was never greater in the church: If for all the multiplication of decrees
against concubinaries, the sore could never be healed, but that the notorietie
of such lewd life was universally abhorred as it well deserved: If the kings
authority, by the consent of his parliament, with the subscription of the
whole clergy, enacted the thing to be lawful, abrogated

If the fathers of Rome Church, diverse of the best learned, by their prudence
thought it meet to release the rigor of canons and rules of the church,
whereupon they sometime did dispense in diverse cases of great importance,
geuyng their assent before they were done, sometime bearyng and tolleratyng
many things passed without authority after they were done: If their scribes
and registers, expositors of their law, leaned always to the equity of the
laws, favorably expoundyng them to the most benefit and sauegarde of such
as were offenders against Gods moral laws: Ambrose and Nectarius (contrary
to the rule of the apostle) as not yet christened, as is before rehearsed. And
if that said holy bishop Ambrose did in his church permit priests to be
married, as Barnardinus Corius in his chronicle makes report, and says further
that one Henribaldus Cotta, a lawyer by profession, being one of the first that
would forbid priests to marry wives, was slain of them for his importune
extremity. Which thing is reported of Ioannes Neuisanus doctor of law, in
his book entitled Silua nuptialis, where he aleageth how the canonistes and
schole men rack violently the laws, scriptures and gospels in this cause
against the true sense of the words: and aduoucheth further, that these
canonistes make large thonges of other men's leather: even like (says he) as
the strumpet did of an other bodies child, and that because they have no wives
them selves: Who when they have any, be above al other men burning in the fire
of gelosie, as he brings his authority therefore. But now thus they speak
(says he) because them selves having not only one paramour, but have
Panormitan, but that notable man Felinus also, with others. And furthermore he
affirms, that the reasons of the canonistes of these days, do prove that
priests after they be ordered may not marry, be to no purpose: because (says
he) they be grounded in covetousness, which is not convenient to the true
folowers of Christ. And there in that his disputation Ptolomais attempted so
much against Christ's religion and his apostles, consentyng to elect^ a
platonicall philosopher, miscredityng the principal articles of our faith, and
that after his open protestation, that he would not as then either relinquishe
his opinion or yet his

If the uniform assent and consent of writers, have attributed so large
authority to counselles and bishops decrees, to dispense so universally,
that they say a bishop a mere diocesan

If the Canons of one council be drawn commonly to expound an other, as one
law to declare an other: then where it is decreed in the fourth council at
Tollet, Quod: That clerks that without council or consent of their bishops
have married wives. etc. must be separated by their own bishop again: How
reasonably then do these men cry for separation Diosesant: but with the
consent and authority of the whole order of all the Metropolitanes and
Diocesantes in England, in their deliberat consultation, first among them
selves, and after so exhibited to the state of the Parliament: afterward in
their private diocesses commendyng the statutes passed, and sendyng their
Chaplaynes abroad in their diocesses to declare the commendations and
necessity of the same: as be yet at this day ancient Bishops still

Last of all, where that noble prince of famous memori^ king Henry the eight,
used so much prudencie in reducyng and reposyng his Realm in such godly
knowledge and christian peace, as the measure of Gods gifts granted unto him,
did move him to the same, where in this case what clemency he used, it is not
unknown, and yet under sharp laws so tempred the rigor of them, that of his
own disposition, a very few felt the extremite of the execution, though such,
as of conscience and godly zeal, wishes the advancement of Gods glory, the
truth of his word, the honor of the Church, and quiet of this our natural
country. Amen.

Aug*. de nup et concupis.
Ista controuersia iudicem querit, iudicet ergo Christus.

Iudicet cu^ eo et apostolus, quia et in apostolo ipse loquitur Christus.

This controversy requires a judge, let Christ therefore be judge.

And let thapostle judge with him, for in thapostle also Christ speaks.

Non afferamus stateras dolosas, vbi appendamus quod volumus, et quomodo
volumus pro arbitrio nostro dicentes, Aug. contra donatist. li 2 ca 6.
Hieronim. 24. q. 1. cap. non afferamus.
hoc grave est, hoc leave est: sed afferamus diuinam stateram de scripturis
sacris tanquam de thesauris dominicis, et in illa quid sit grauius appendamus,
immo non appendamus, sed a domino appensa recognoscamus.

Let us not bring forth deceytfull balaunces, wherein we may waygh what we
will, and how we will, saying after our own opinion this is heavy, this is
light: But let us bring forth Gods balaunces out of the holy scriptures, as
out of the treasures of the Lord, and in that let us waygh what is more
wayghtie: nay I say not let us not waygh, but let us acknowledge the things
already wayghed of the Lord.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this book.
A
Abbess of Ramsey married.316. Abbess of Amesburie deprived for
incontiuencie.316. Abbottes deprived by Anselme.285. Alphonsus upon the place,
propter fornicationem vitandam 140 228. a. 264. a. 235.103.206. Aldelme purged
pope Sergius.200. b. Ambrose chosen bishop before he was baptized.267.274.
writes upon melius est nubere. etc. 145. a. Amalarius testimony for church
service.337. Anselme entreated the pope for priests.15. b. first separated
priests marriages in England.214. b. his superstition.214.281. his book contra
offendiculum sacerdotum.280. entreats for simoniackes.284. resorteth to the
pope.294. whose authority he defended.294. his intreatable
severity.293.295.296 against Thomas of york.298. his decre how it
succeeded.298.299 Antonine witness of priests dispensations.267. b. Apostles
all had wives. page 32. b. 33. d. 156. b. 157. a. they did not constitute sole
life.258. c. 260. c. Appollinaris a priest married after order.157. b.
Ariminensis sinodus.212. Augustine preferryng scriptures before councels and
doctors.98. d. proves votaries marriages to be good.101. b. 102. a. 225. a. not
calling their marriages adulteries.150. b. 229. b. Augustine corrupted by
Gratian.153. a. he reproves the Nouatians for second maryages.163. b. in
whose time the church had not defined vows to be indispensable.233. a.
Aethelwolfus subdeacon married.272. Alfricus ^^dgement of priests maryages.243.
Auent^^^ John, of priests maryages.345. Apostles canon against priests
leauyng their wives.354.
B
Barnardus against restraynt of maryages.287. Brennyng of diverse abbeys and
churches.308.309. Boniface archbishop resisted in his visitation.323. charged
to have a wife.323. his ability and qualities.324. Boniface pope the eight
terrible to princes.173. a. Bishops charge. Fo. 3. page 2. a. their right
stablyshed by parliament. Fol. 5. page 2. d. they are charged. Fol. 6. page 1.
b. not enjoined to conteyne of necessity.251. their slacknes to refourme
priests.333. Bishop of Ely Galfride married.317. Bishops married before bishop
Cranmer.355. Books de potestate Regia, and institution of a christian man,
never answered.176. b. Barnardinus Corius.346.356.
C
Calixtus decree not observed.151. c. Canon of Gangrense council.259. a. Canon
of Matiscone council for honoryng of priests.96. c. Canons of the church
how allowed. Fol. 4. page 2. b. Canons of the church be not revived upon the
repeal of a statute, to empeache that was done by force of the statute.172. b.
and they do not disable the laws of the Realm.174. b. 180. and be received as
they make to the policy of the realm.176. a. Convocation abolished laws of
continency.351. Canons of another jurisdiction not allegeable.60. b. Canons
rehearsed which do but deprive, and not separate married persons.168. a.
Canonistes reasons against marriage of priests vain.356. Canterbury munckes
described by William Malmesbury.215.291. Cardinal legates returned home
again.303. Cardinals delecte bewray errors of the Church.187. b. Cardinal
Caietane, of orderyng.227. a. Carnal reasons against marriage.237.239.
Carterius Hispanus named by S. Hierom.212. a. Catholic name abused.79. c.
Cayns boy of Cambridge.99. d. Chastity a rare gift.148.251. a. Chastity less
favored then lechery.272. Chastity is not to be charged by
necessity.248.347. Church builded on Peter's confession, not on his person.76.
a. Church of England has defined votaries marriage to be good.233. c. Church
of England a catholic church.355. Church of the pope cruel.269. a. Church
tollerateth the crime of open harlottes.328. Chrysostom of votaries
marriage.102. b. Chrysostom councelleth to avoid the danger of fornication,
by going to marriage.138. d. Chrysostom exacteth not of a bishop to be
unmarried.276. d. Clergy some of them expostulated with. Fol. 11. page 2. d.
Clerks married do open penance.89. b. Concilium Agathen^e.222. b. Concilium
Epaunense.221. c. Councelles has Christ really present, says Martin.210. a.
Concu^mate must needs follow after prohibition of marriage.286. Constitutions
ecclesiastical how to be obeyed.329. Constantines favor in hydyng priests
incontinencie.94. c. Constantine sharply threatens the clergy.96. a.
Cremensis Cardinal.217.307.
D
Deacons at their orders not renouncyng marriage, may take wives after.196. b.
228. c. Deacon being a murderer dispensed with.267. d. Dionisius epistle to
Pinitus.144. a. Dispensatio^ of the pope for Norwegia, to consecrate in (...)
or beer.176 Dispensation of the popes are mutable.177. b. Dispensations and
moderations for maryages by Emperors.196. b. Dispensations how to be
made.253. a. Dispensations necessary.255. c. 265. d. Dispensation of bishops
how large they be.268. c. Druthmarus.34. c. Dunstanes words in his decree.14.
pa. 1. a. not seperating marriage.21^
E
Earl of Shrewesburies answer.127.128. a. Edmer aduouched.289. Edward the
third his victories.131. Epaunense concilium.221. c. Epiphanius
authority.266. b. 287. Erasmus judgment of single life.260. c. Ethelwolde of
winchester father of munkes.215. b. Euaristus canon of lawful matrimony.102.
c. Eupsychius a bishop married after order.157. b. Eustachius an heretic
taught married priests to be despised.259. a. Ewinus laws of Scotland.350.
F
Factes lawful are not to be revoked upon repeal of a statute.171. c. False
prophets must be taken heed of. Fol. 8. page 2. c. Franciscus Petrarcha
dispensed with for his concubine.199. b.
G
Gangrense concilium.259. b. 279. Gelasius pope his moderation.274. Girarde
archbishop of york his epistle.28^. Girarde his simonie.288. Glosers of Othos
constitution.331.332. God helps in necessity, vsyng his remedy, not
temptyng him.237. d. Gods precepts transgressed for man's tradition.238. c.
Gregory's moderations for contractes.202. b. 288. Genesius John.275. Glosers
diverse of lawyers, vain.186. c. Greek priests marriages good.230. c. Gregory
against dissolution of maryages.200. d. 201. v. and his repentance for
deuorcyng.201. d. Gregory appoynteth marriage for a remedy against
incontinencie.160. a. 204. d. Gildas of Vnius vxoris vir. 344. Genebaldus a
bishop married.347.
H
Henry Beuclarke the king restrained the popes authority.299. Heraclius the
patriarch abused the king.320. Herebert bishop of Norwiche.283. Heretics
daintiness.47. c. Heretics and lechers whether they be separable. page 36. b.
78. ^. Henry Beuclarke king learned.340. Hesebolus changyng with the time.195.
c. Hierax an heretic condemned by Epiphanius.165. a. Hieromes counsel to a
frail man.249. Hieromes deprauations of marriage.82. c. Hierom upon Vnius
vxoris vir. Hieroms discourse to Ocean.63. a. Hieromes treatise of the
ornaments of a bishop.69. b. Histories most written by munckes.304. Hilarie a
married bishop.43. b. 349. Hildebrande pope what he was. Fol. 16. page 1. a. his
decree.89. d. 278. Hildebrande extremely ordered Henry the Emperor.160. c.
Hugh bishop of Durham a concubinarie.314. Huldericus epistle.202. c. Hypocrisy
charged by Chrysostom.78. b. Hypocrites counterfaytyng chastity. Fol. 19.
page 2. c. 49. c.
I
James saying corrupted.148. d. Iewyshe constitutions followed of the pope.113.
a. I^o Carnotensis judgment toward the decrees.98. b. Innocent pope
slaundereth marriage.163. a. Interim tollerateth priests marriage.196. c. Incest
marriages what they be.221. c. Innocent the third did abridge the prohibitions
of marriage.235. a. Inuestitures much defended.293. Iuo Carnotensis of priests
children to succeed their fathers.313. Johannes Genesius.185. b. 140. b. 175.
c. Johannes Cremensis.217. Judges ecclesiastical what they ought to be. Fol.
17. page 1. a. Justinian of bishops marriages.197. a. Irishe religion.344.
Ireland, king Henry the second reformed.345. Irelandes counsel.345.
K
Kings authority. leaf.4. page 1. c. King Henry sclaundered by Martin.53. b.
King Henry dissolved not priests marriages.197. c. Kings authority in
dispensyng.234. King Ethelwolfus first subdeacon and after married.272. b.
Kings son elect to the bishopric of Lincoln.318.
L
Lanfranckes constitution.279. d. Lanfranckes nephewe abbot of S. Albons.280.
Leo pope his dispensation.213. his moderation.270. c. 273. Licet, et non licet,
how to be taken.62. b. Libanius mutable in doctrine.195. a. Luther belyed by
Martin.50. c. Lechery sometime more priuileged then chastity.272 Latro
succeedyng in his fathers bishopric.348.
M
Matrimony the ordinance of God.1. a. Fol. 2. page 2. Fol. 3. page 1. b. the
root of man's felicity.1. c. forbidden diversely.81. a. abhorde by the
Maniches.81. c. falsely accused to increase concupiscense.158. c. it is blessed
with procreation of children.159. b. sclaundered by foul names.164. c. but
priests maryages worse named.165. b. and only forbidden by humane law.251. b.
Marriage permitted makes fewer concubinaries.339. honorable in priests by
Justinian.315. which gives no liberty to lewdnes.339 second marriages of lay
men more lawful then honest.163. a. 250. c Married priests recanted in Queen
Mary's time.169. b. Martin extreme. Fol. b. page 2. b. his sclaunders. page 28.
a. his skyll in stories, Rhethorike, and Arithmaticke.190. b. 120. his fond
accomptyng.123. his arguments vain.184. a. Martine Poresius aloweth the popes
dispensation to those that cannot conteyne.267. b. Magdalen college library
has Ignatius.118. b. Mawde king Henry his first wife sclaundered.290. Michael
Paleologus belyed.52. c. 56. b. Michael U^e.265. Miracles forged.311. Montanus
and Nouatus condempnyng second maryages.72. c. Munkes and priests do differ
in profession.224. a. Munkes gouernyng dislyked.288.306. who wholly advance
them selves, and deprave their princes.289.290. who only by pope John are to be
bishops. 290. which first profess before consecration.291. Munkes why they did
bewray their own abuses.311. Munkes how disordered against their
archbishop.312. Moses and Maximus married.245. b. Marie Magdalen married.348.
N
Nauclerus writing of Hildebrande. Fol. 15. page 2. b. Nazaries shauyng of
their here.111. b. Nestorius arrogancy.192. d. Notes of doctor Martins book.
Fol. 5. page 2. b. Nubrigensis testimony.333. Nestorius mutabilitie.194. b.
Nazianzene Gregory.341.
O
Orders taking defeateth not marriage.227. a. Order how it has vow
annexed.232. Origin bare with dispensations against scripture.266. d. Origin
corrupted for priests marriages.106. a. Oath after orders taking, dissolueth not
matrimony following.229. a. Otho Cardinal coming into the Realm.325. Othoes
constitution.330. Otho how he was entertained.326. Oxforde first builded by
Alured.273. a.
P
Paul's place interpreted, qui celebs est. 339. d. Pastors few.20. page 2. b.
Paphnutius sentence.34. d. 156. a. 58. a. 133. b. Paul's place Propter
fornicationem etc. 138. a. 133. b. Paul's place, bonum est mulierem non
tangere.138. a. Paul's place, Ter dominu^ Rogaui. 147. Pastors reprehended.190.
c. and charged to bear other men's infirmity.191. a. Panormitans
opinion.237.247. a. Paul's place, de doctrinis demoniorum.277. Pecchams
constitution against priests children.328. Peter's wife.34. b. whom he did not
put away.39. b. but had her about with him.157.158. Petrus Cantor parisiensis
of positive justice.98. a. Peter's penury.161. his daughter Petronel.162. b.
Philosophers before baptime admitted to bishoprics.274. Pighius leader to
Martin.27. b. compares the scripture to a nose of wax.100. c. Pius pope his
opinion of priests marriages.198. c. Plagues notable.130. Popes decrees not
above princes laws. Fol. 5. page 1. a. the causer of dissension between the
Greek Church and Latin.55. c. he is Luminare maius.67 d bound to acknowledge
his wife.200. a. one disanulles, the other does grant.204. c. called
Antichrist by the bishop of Duresine.214. diverse of them bishops and priests
sons.313. Pope Sergius purged by Aldelme of his fornication.200. b. Popes
matters.33. page 158. Pontifical of Rome falsely brought in for the
Pontifical of England.183. a. 185. a Polidorus judgment of forced
chastity.262. b. Pontifical books.282. Pretense of Martins book. Fol. 2.
page 1. b. Prelates discretion in time of the pope. Fol. 4. page 1. b. Priests
married, unjustly entreated.2. a. leaf. 4. page 1. a. Fol. 13. page 2. a. their
marriages to be defended as a cause public. Fol. 7. page 2. b. continued
married.1000. years. Fol. 15. page 1. b. massyng priests. page 25. b. have
ordered.26. d. married priests in estimation.30. a. 60. a. married in the
Primative Church.42. b. vncontinent priests, a shame to the Clergy.31. a.
Priests had wives and said Mass.41. c. married, not to be separated.59. c.
their contractes, justifiable by law.67. a. and some married after order.76. c.
their incontinencie excused.84. b. 85. b. 86. a. not reformable by laws.87. c.
whose maryages yet more punished then fornication.88. a. and clerks
incontinent may not be put to open penance.89. b. nor their immunities to be
judged of.91. c. priests lay heavy burdens on other men's necks.68. c.
Priests offendyng, seldom repentyng.82. d. who by vow renounce marriage, not
fornication.93. d. and being incontinent, may not by oath abjure
incontinencie.93. d. forbidden certain women in their houses.94. a. their
crowns.108. a 110. priests children slaundered to bring famine into the
Realm.125. c. 133. a. their marriages honorable by Justinian.197. the
forbiddyng whereof was not before Siritius time.230. d. 258. yet after resumed
their wives again.194. for in orderyng they make no promise to renounce
marriage.182. b. the prohibition of it, was not the Apostles doctrine.153. c.
Prayer, fasting, holyday, and chastity, not forbidden, but the hypocrisy of
them.166. a. Primatius denies that all may take the gift generally.141. c.
Profession of priests denied by them to be made.282. Profession of religious
in young age.310. Prosper a bishop married.271. Phileas bishop married.349.
Priests marying without consent of their bishops depriuable.357. Pascall pope
complayneth of king Henry.300. Pascall offers to dispense with the kings
promises 301. Pope meetyng with the king at Gisors.301. Popes craft toward
the king for coming into England.301. Papal court burdenous to the Realm,
and infamous.302.
Q
Queen Marie in her Commission, charged the ordinary to execute no canons
against the laws of the Realm.175. a.
R
Rabanus fled out of his order.292. Richard Archb. of Cant. decrees against
concubines.317. Richard the king taken prisoner.321. Rome what store of
harlottes it has.202. b. Rigor of discipline to be moderated.273. Remigius
Archbishop at.xxij. years.347. Restitutus bishop of London married.348. Redmayn
John, Doctour^ opinion.352. Rodulph Archbishop of Cantorburie.304. Robert
bishop of Lincoln married.307.
S
Sampsom bishop of worceter, his testimony against his son.298. Separations
of maryages hurtful to the common wealth.181. a. Scriptures and Doctors
compared.73. b. Scripture ought to have preeminence.74. a. Scripture most
certain judge by Athanasius.100. c. Scriptures and Christ must be judge.246.
a. Simon Magus disciples.80. c. Semel malus semper presumiter malus.106. c.
Seritius pope first decreed continency.152. a. Seritius first forbad
marriage.230. d. 258. c. Sinesius bishop elect, would not consent to leave his
wife.274. b. Simonie.283. Si non cast, tamen caute.329. b. Sole life a rare
gift which all can not take.65. b. 136. d. Sodomiticall sin public.285.
Spanishe heretics.115. a. Statutes of the Realm corrupted by Martin.169. a.
Statute of Queen Marie or repeal, but for afterward.171. d. Statutes made by
kings, not to be revoked by popes.178. a. Statutes chaungeable for time and
place.205. a. Single life, why so much forced.276. Saxon rules of priests.346.
Scottishe laws.350.
T
Tertullian of second maryages.163. d. Things never done, are not therefore
unlawful to be done.253. a. Thomas de Aquino his counsel to a clarke y^
cannot co^tayne.206. a. Thurstone Archbishop of york, repelled of the
munckes.312. Theophilact counsayleth to mary for auoydyng fornication.138. b.
Thurstone Archbishop brake his faith with the king.303.
V
Virginity not so necessary as the ministry. Fol. 7. page 1. a. 276.
Uirginitie compared with Matrimony. Fol. 18. page 1. c. Fol. 18. pa. 2. c. d.
Uirginitie above our reach.146. c. Uirginitie urged by the fathers.276. Votum
simplex et solemn.104. c. 231. c. 242. Votaries not to mary, how it is
lawful, or unlawful, or expedient.142. v. Vnius vxoris vir, expounded. page
32. a. page 61. a. Uotaries marriages allowed by Austen.207.209. d. by Cyprian.
ibidem. by Hierome.208. c. by Gelasius.209. a. by the counsel at Orleans.210.
b. Uowes perfourmable must come from the gift of God.147. d. 148. a. what
circumstaunce they should have.149. how they should be made.236. Uowes
solemn be of the Churches constitution.229. d. Uirginitie how it is
defined.342. Uirginitie ought to be otherwise qualified.343.
W
William Archbishop of Canterbury.289.307. Williams decree against married
priests held not.308. Wattune Abbey.310. Waltham Abbey turned to reguler
chanons.319. Writers of Louane to Malapart.335. Wives many to one man.350.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


