Youths Jnstruction.

COMPOSED AND WRITTEN by WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire.

Recorder of the honorable City of EXETER.

Praestat non nasci;
Quam male viuere.
LONDON, Printed by John Beale. 1612.

To my dearly honored Father in law WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire.
IF it be true, that Opposites together
Being compared, seem cleerer each by other:
Then my defects (coming from true affection)
Shall not detract, but add to your perfection.
It Were to gild gold, your labors to commend;
Few men can equal them, none reprehend:
Yet some (no doubt) will cast an envious glance,
For Art has one sworn Foe, called Ignorance.
P. B.

TO MY SON NICHOLAS MARTYN, NOW A^STVDENT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
AS none but a faithful friend, can perfectly conceive of those requisites,
which truly belong unto his friend: So none but a Father, can rightly
conjecture of that surpassing love, which a father bears to his own child.

This love of mine (my Son,) has made me ouer-bold with mine own business,
and with mine own convenient pleasures; in borrowing some hours (which were
indeed owing to my public employments and to my necessary recreation) to
compose, and to write this ensuing Discourse; not to please my self, (if it
were praiseworthie) but to do you good: and (by such Motives, and by such
Instructions, as are therein comprised) to enrich your understanding and
behavior, with those selected virtues, and most commended qualities, whose
discourse it does contain.

For like as the fairest building, wants her chiefest beauty, except it be
exactlie flourished, and bountifully furnished within: so the outward
lineaments of the body, are deprived of their choicest, and of their chiefest
luster, if the inward parts and mind be not adorned, with such splendent
virtues, and with such Gentleman-like qualities, as do make a man to be
complete, and consequently, a profitable member in the Commonweal.

J say, a profitable member in the Commonweal; because it suffices not, that
a man does know much, and can do well, by means of that knowledge; except he
also do produce into action, such effects as his virtues and his knowledge
have enabled him to perform. For, otherwise, such a man may fitly be
compared, to a rare and perfect Diamond, which being unpolished, serves for
no use. Or to a fair Ship, laden with Silks, with Spices, and with Gold,
being swallowed up into the Seas mawe, whereby it is made of no value or
esteem. For a recompense therefore, of these my labors, and in
thankfulness, for my love toward you, I wish and do advise you, to employ
some times, not only to read this discourse often, but also with diligence to
meditate, and publikelie to exercise those virtues, and those qualities, which
herein are deservedly praised, and commended.

Especially and above the rest, those two, which cannot too much be applauded:
I mean Religion, and honesty of life: which (as good Salt) will season,
whatsoever you take in hand: And will (as the South and the North Pole Stars)
direct your course aright, wheresoever you chance to sail, in the troublesome
Ocean of this your worldly and transitory pilgrimage: So shall your life be
profitable unto others, and pleasing to your quiet conscience: And so shall
your death be crowned with merited praise and commendation; and both your
life, and your death shall be precious in the sight of God: Who will reward
every man according to his works, be they good or evil.

Your loving Father William Martyn.

YOVTHS INSTRVCTION: WHEREIN ARE BRIEFLY SET FORTH ALL NECESSARY Rules, for the
ordering of a man's whole life.
MY Son, seeing it has pleased the Almighty, to make you (who by creation
are his own) by generation to be mine, I hold it to be a principal part of my
duty unto God, and of my love toward you, both by Religion, and also by
education in virtue, so to direct you, that you may ever continue to be his.

For he has not placed you on the Theater of this world, that (like to a
foolish actor) you should fulfill the lusts thereof; nor to embrace these
earthly vanities, as chains of pearl, and of gold, do men's necks, which make
them proud: but because you should duly serve him, in true obedience, and by
your best endeavors set forth his glory.

Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, Man must serve God.
are (together with men) the workmanship of one, and of the same divine
Majesty, and power: but the end, for which they were by him made, is not one
and the same. For those unreasonable creatures were fashioned to serve man; but
man himself to serve God.

So pleasing was this service unto David, the kingly Prophet, Psalm. 84.10.
and the anointed of the Lord; that he affirmed (with a most constant
resolution) that it was better to be a dorekeeper in the house of his God, then
to dwell in the Tabernacles of the wicked.

If Jacob for a double term served his uncle Laban, Genesis 29.28.
that thereby he might obtain Rahel for his wife (who being enjoyed but a
season, shortly after died,) how much more ought you to dedicate your self to
the serving of God all the days of your life? that at the length you may
thereby attain to those heavenly blessings, which in goodness, are
inestimable, and in number endless. 1. Reg. cap. 10
You may read in Holy writ, that the Queen of Sheba said unto Solomon (when
she had heard him, and had seen the greatness of his honor, and of his
riches, and of his strength, and had viewed his Court, and considered the
rareness of his government) happy are thy men, and happy are these thy
servants, which stand ever before thee, and hear thy wisdom: but much more
truly may we conclude, that they are (indeed) blessed, who stand before, and do
serve, not Solomon but their God.

The service which is to be performed to the Kings, and Princes of the world,
cannot be freed from servitude, and subjection, but that service, which is by
us due unto God, is liberty it self; and no man is so free, as he, who
sincerely serves him.

There are but two masters (God and the devil) whom men can serve: and who so
adhereth to one of them, is an enemy to the other.

The devil wageth war against God, and against his chosen children: and
(because he is faithless) he trusts none: but being the muster-master of his
own army) he presses forth all such for his service, as are not soldiers
under Gods banner. And having levied huge troops, and infinite numbers of
desperate, and forlorn people, he marches into the field of this world, and
(striving in vain to obtain a victory, which no possibility can afford him)
like to the practice of the Turkish Emperor, he makes havoc of his
followers, and (by multitudes) mercilesly he destroys them: whereas (on the
contrary part) God so graciously protecteth, and defends his elected, that
not one of them can perish, or come to an untimely end.

Seeing then, that God is so powerful, that he can, and so careful, that he
will, and does preserve all such, as unfeignedly do serve him, 2. Reg. cap. 5.
you must not (as Naaman the Assyrian did) content your self in part to serve
God, and in part to serve an earthly master, or a mortal king: but following
the good example of David's worthies, and of Gedeons three hundred valiant men
of war, 1. Chron. cap. 11. Judge. 7.3.
you must neglect your own safety, nay your life, and engage your self wholly
to do him service.

So did Moses, when with ten grievous plagues he corrected the hard heart of
Pharaoh King of Egypt, who would not suffer the children of Israel to depart
out of his land. So did Sadrach, Mishael, and Abednago, Dan. 3.
who (being the servants of the great God of heaven) made choice rather to be
thrown into a burning furnace, then to worship the golden Image, which
Nebuchadnezar (the great king of Babel) had set up.

And so did Daniel, Dan. 6.
who refused not to be cast into the Lions den, rather then by prayer and
worshipping he would yield unto Darius that service and that honor nor which he
owed only to the Lord his God.

As you may observe, that when plants and trees, by storms and by tempests,
are robbed of their leaves, such canckers are then discovered, as do blemish
the comeliness of their beauty: so you may plainly see, that when men are
exiled from Gods service, through the peruersenes of their own natures, their
wickedness is spread abroad, to their shame; and is made an object to the eyes
of them, who (being more virtuous) do loath their sin.

You see then (my Son) how behoofefull it is for you to serve God; that by
means thereof, you may be truly happy, and enjoy that liberty, and that
freedom, which is incident unto none, but to such only, as do unfeignedly serve
him.

It is therefore very requisite, Man must fear God.
and fit that you be carefully instructed, concerning the performance, and
execution of this duty, which must be by a reverent fear of his deity, and
power, according to the direction of King David, Psalm. 2.11.
who exhorts all men to serve the Lord in fear, not in such a timorous
fear, as is abased by seruility, Job. 28.28. Prou. 1.7. Prou. 9.10. Prou.
15.33. Psalm 111.10. Psalm 25.9.
and bondage: but in such a fear, as is mingled, and impalled with love: This
filial, and lovely fear, is the beginning of wisdom, and of knowledge: and
as ( David says) the secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him,
and his covenant to give them understanding.

It is a welspring of life, Prou. 14.27. Prou. 19.23. Prou. 16.6.
to avoid the snares of death: it leads unto life; and he that is filled
therewith, shall continue; and not be visited with evil. It makes his heart
(by imputation, and by grace) clean, and pure in the sight of God; Psalm. 19.9.
Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist) that fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.2.
Psalm. 128. Psalm. 115.13. Psalm. 147.11. Luk 1.50.
his seed shall be mighty upon the earth: The Lord will bless all such as
fear him: both small, and great, his delight is in them that do fear him: And
his mercy shall be upon them, from generation to generation. The reward of
humility, Prou. 22.4.
and of the fear of the Lord (as Solomon does testify) is riches, Eccles.
12.13.
and glory, and life: And in fearing of him, and in keeping of his
commandments, does consist the whole duty of man. The Lions do lack, and
suffer hunger, but such as do fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good.
Psalm. 34.10.
Such was the lovely fear, Genesis 22.12.
that Abraham expressed toward his God; that (being so commanded by him) he
would have sacrificed Isaac his only son, whose seed (by Gods promise) was
to be multiplied as the stars in heaven, and as the sands on the sea shore,
Genesis 26.4.24.
which are innumerable: And such was the lovely fear, which Joseph expressed
toward his God, Genesis 39.
that he rather chose to be maligned, and reproched, by means of the untrue,
and false accusements of his Mistress, and to be cast into prison, then he
would be disloiall, and unfaithful unto Putiphar his master. And such was the
lovely fear, 2. Sam. 66.
and reverence, which David expressed before his God, that he ceased not (for
the joy of his spirit) to dance before the Arc of Covenant, though for so
doing, he were derided, skorned, and mocked by Michal his own wife.

And such (my Son) must be your daily care, and constant resolution, that you
fear nothing which may terrify you from the fear of God, Repetition.
because it makes her followers to be wise; it gains long life; it
banisheth evil; nay death it self: it cleanses the heart; it makes men
blessed, both in themselves, and also in their posterities: it causes the Lord
to delight in them, and to enrich them; to multiply his mercies on them, and in
the end to crown them with immortality, and with glory.

Now, Man must loath sin.
as these, and many others are the fruits, which the fear of God produces and
brings forth: so will it augment in you a loathing detestation, and a
religious hating of sin.

1 First, in respect of God; because he is altogether righteous and pure, and
none evil can dwell with him.

2 In respect of our selves; because the guiltiness thereof makes a
separation, and pronounces a divorce between God and man.

3 And thirdly, in respect of sin it self, which is a most ugly monster,
proceeding from the devil, for the final and perpetual destruction of all
such, as impiously and wickedly do live and die therein.

As the grim look of a stern Lion will make you afraid, Pierij Aphorismi
Hieroglyphici. 19.
though he come not near unto you: so the view and sight of sin must breed
in you a loathing detestation of her ugly fowlnesse, though she want power and
ability to take hold of you to do you any harm. And you must fly from the
alluring enchantments and prouocations of sin: as the Elephant (with all
expedition) betaketh himself to his legs, as soon as he hears the
grunting of a filthy swine.

A foolish man delights in a sinful life, because his outward senses are
pleased with the vanity, and with the variety of his sins: but he that is
wise, abhors sin, because the fruits thereof are evil. Saint John says,
that sinners are servants: John 8.34. 1 John 38.
and S. Paul tells us, that they are captives; nay they are (indeed) the
children of the devil.

It enters into a man, as a Conqueror takes possession of his vanquished
Kingdom; where he will not accept of a part, but will be Lord and Master of
the whole.

It is compared to a wedge; for as a wedge at the first makes but a little
hole; but being further driven, it renteth, and teareth the whole wood in
sunder: so sin, at his first entrance into the heart of a man, seems to hurt
him but a little; but proceeding further by frequentaction, it begets in him
an ardent desire (by custom) to enlarge it self, and so makes him the
bondslaue of Satan.

For as the little fish called Remora (by sticking fast unto a Ship) stays
her from sailing toward the Port where she should be: Pierij Aphorismi
Hieroglyphici. 192.
so every sin (be it never so small) will detain and hold you back from
those religious and virtuous courses, wherein (otherwise) you would or should
walk, to Gods glory, and the salvation of your own Soul.

Philosophers do affirm, that nothing is more fearful then Fear it self.
And Divines do teach truly, that there is not any thing more sinful then
sin it self. I have read of a kind of Serpent, which is so venomous; that by
stinging the foot of a Horse only, he kills the Horse, and the rider also.
Such a Serpent is sin, which no sooner stingeth the body, but forthwith it
destroieth it, and the soul too: it is so pestilent a disease, that it
corrupts the whole mind of him whom it possesses, and drives out of him
all godly motions. As water (being powered into a vessel) does expel the
Air: and as the children of Israel did the heathen Nations out of the
Countries and Provinces of the land of Canaan: it suddenly bereaueth a man of
all his former practiced virtues, as a little Axe (by few strokes) cutteth
down; or as a whirlewind (with one furious blast) ouerturneth, the greatest
and the tallest trees, which for many years have bin growing to their perfect
strength and greatness.

In the winter, when the warm heat of the Sun forsakes us, the earth is
benumbed with cold, with frosts, with snowes, and with unpleasing weather. And
in like sort, when Gods grace departs from a sinner, his soul is hardened
with many vices, and robbed of all virtue: yea, such is the bewitching nature,
and quality of sin, that the more it plungeth men in the gulfes of their
transgressions, the more pleasure, and the greater delight they take therein.
Like unto mad men who are vnmeasurably delighted with the sight and gingling of
those chains, wherewith they are fettered and tormented.

It is true, Plato.
that no man lives, and sins not, and it is as true that Plato said, It is
better not to live, then to live wickedly.

As there is no thorn without his prickles; so there is no man, that is
utterly destitute of sin. Yet must you strive (my son) with all your might,
and with all your strength, yea with your uttermost endeauours, to shake it
off, because the reward thereof is death: and the longer it is retained, the
more hardly it is removed: for like as a small river, by running far, is
fellowshipped with many other streams, which at length do make him great. So
small offenses by long continuance, are augmented by greater faults which do
concur. Heming de Magistratu.
It is impossible to be a man, and not to sin; yet you must avoid sin, as
fire, because it burns: as water, because it drowneth: as a plague, because
it infecteth: Nay, as death it self, because it mortally kills: Principijs
obsta, sero medicina paratur:
Cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
Therefore before sin have gotten in you the upper hand, you must frame your
self to be like unto a ship, close below, to resist, and to keep out the
temptations and the allurements of worldly vanities. And open above, whereby
you may be capable of the grace, and mercy, and favor of Almighty God: who
(though he detest sin) yet in his infinite mercy, he imbraceth a^ repentant
sinner: as a kind mother lulleth her sick hild lovingly in her arms, though
she repine at the disease.

Valerius writes of one, who had the fit of an ague upon him, when he was
borne, Valerius.
which never left him for many years until he died. Such an ague is sin,
which (by natural propagation, being derived to us from our first parents Adam
and Eve: by reason of their transgression in eating of the forbidden fruit,
contrary to the express commandment of Almighty God) never leaves, never
forsakes us, until by death we be deprived of this mortal life.

Yet must you not (by sinning) foster in your self, a longing desire to sin
more, like unto such as being drunken with wine, do vnmeasurably covet to be
always drinking. But contrariwise, you must be careful that sin reign not,
that sin have not dominion in your earthly members. Nam quot habemus vitia,
tot habemus Dominos. A little rope suffices to hang a great thief: a little
dross to abase much gold: a little poison to infect much wholesome liquor; a
little heresy to corrupt good doctrine: and so do the smallest sins (without
Gods mercy) to damme your soul. The hearts of sinful men, may fitly be
compared unto snailes houses, for as they have no vacant places, to store up
provision enough for the necessary sustentation of their lives, no more have
those hearts any rooms at all, to entertain any virtuous, or godly motions,
which would be profitable for the salvation of their souls.

Every sinner (as much as in him lies) is naturally an enemy unto God: and
with the ancient giants contendeth, to cast rocks, and stones against Iuptter,
he says in his heart, Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God and that his wickedness shall never be revealed, Psalm. 2.4.
nor rewarded: But he that sits in heaven shall laugh him to skorne: the
Lord will have him in derision.

As a man that is suddenly taken out of a dark prison, cannot (without much
pain) behold the bright shining of the clear sun: no more can that man
(which for a long season has bin enthralled in the dark dungeon of iniquity
and of sin) behold the fair beams of godliness, and of virtue: but he
rather delights to wallow in the beastly and loathsome puddle of his former
foul transgressions: as the swine does in the mire, wherewith she is polluted,
and defiled.

Some men there are who (^t the last cast) do cease from perpetrating of such
gross and enormious sins as in former times they have committed. Lipsius 115.
1. Either because they want ability to maintain them: 2. Or power to perform
them: 3. or for the shame, or for the punishment which they fear, and do
deserve.

But he that is virtuous, and he that is religious, detesteth, and abhors
sin, as a ghastly monster, because he fears and loves God.

The smallest sins do prick, Conscience.
but great ones do wound the consciences of men, and a feared, and terrified
conscience by reason of her sin, is the worm that never dies.

As a dog, which secretly has killed a sheep, cannot with a settled eye,
behold his masters face, because he is guilty to himself of his foul fault:
so a man (whose conscience does accuse him of some heinous sin toward God)
cannot behold the face of his creator: but by his blushing he will bewray his
own sin. A sinful conscience (as Iustine Martyr does affirm) is a ready
witness to accuse, a severe judge to condemn, and a merciless hangman to
execute him that has sinned: and broken the commandments of his God. A guilty
conscience is first perplexed with fear, and terror: and is then from fear
transported into fury: and last of all, it is tormented with despair.

A fierce and a cruel beast, whilst he sleeps, seems to be very mild and
gentle: but being awaked, he rusheth with a savage violence upon the man which
troubled him: and leaves him not, until he have torn him into many pieces.
And so a guilty conscience sleeping on the bed of deep security, and
carelessness, seems to enjoy a continual feast of happiness, and of peace:
but being by God informed of the guiltiness of her sin, and being startled
out of her drowsy sleep, she awaketh, and with continual anguish, pains
intolerable, and with perpetual torments she lasheth, and whippeth the body,
in which she dwells, Oth^ Casman. 140. Solinus. Pliny.
and cease not to afflict it grievously, until she have murdered it with
perpetual death. Solinus and Pliny do report, that when by too much ravening,
and ill digestion, the belly of the Crocodile is filled up, and distempered
with many worms she lays her mouth open unto certain birds, which live upon
the river of Nilus in the country of Egypt,) who (entering into her throat) do
eat them, and devour them, by means whereof she is restored to her former
health. But the worm of an evil conscience, is not so consumed, there are no
birds that can ease her of that pain.

My son, to conclude this point, let it be your chiefest Study, and your
daily practice: First of all to serve God, then to fear him, and (in fearing
of him) to abhor sin, as the greatest enemy to virtue, and the death of your
immortal soul.

Quae iuuenibus arrident voluptates, easdem irrident senes.

The sins of youth are pleasing for a while, but old age (waxing wise)
abhors them as the souls poison. Caelum si vis pede calcare, vitium mente
calca. And if you must needs behold sins in other men, yet look on them as
sailers do on rocks, not to come near them, but to avoid them. And if (of
force) you must behold sin in your self, then look on it, as Job did on his
soars with a woeful eye: Job. 2.8. Job. 16.16. Math. 26.75. Mark. 14.72. Luke
22.62.
Or as Peter did on Christ his master when he denied him and wept bitterly.
Now, that you may be the better enabled to serve God, in fear, and to hate
sin, which trecherously slaieth the soul, whilst flatteringly it smileth on
her, as Ioab did on Amasa, and as Judas betrayed his Lord and Master, 2. Sam.
20 9. Math. 26.48.
when he kissed him.

You must (with a true heart) embrace, RELIGION
and unfeignedly love religion, which will rectify your conscience toward God:
and teaches you to magnify him with an holy worship, according to the rules
and directions of his word: and to delight in virtue, as in your choicest love,
and to loath vice, as the blackness of an Ethiopian, which no washing can make
white, which will confirm your obedience to your King and sovereign, and to
your other superiors, and make you a worthy member in a flourishing, and in a
happy common weal. And will order your manners, generally toward all men, and
your civil behauior more particularly toward those with whom you do mutually
converse. For as Lactantius writes, and Lipsius from him does report,
Lactantius.
sola Religioest, quae hominum inter se custodit societatem, It is religion
only, that maintains, and preserves society among men. And in another place,
he says, Toll Religionem, and vita humana, Stultitia, and Immunitate est
impleta: If religion cleanse not the heart, man's life will be fully fraughted
with cruelty and with folly.

Where religion wants, there the chiefest atchieuments of men are obscured,
as the sinner is, when his face is veiled, and masked with a cloud. Fishes must
needs die, if the rivers be dried up, and so must the thoughts of men perish,
when they are not watered, with the dew, and refreshed with the comfortable
streams of a religious mind, and conversation. As Saul's honor was the more
eminent, because in stature he was taller then all the residue of his people:
so no man (among wise men) is more respected then he, who frames himself to
be more religious then the rest. Cultus omnis est in cultus, sine cultu Dei. A
fit garment is easily shaped to serve a comely body, but hardly are deformed
members covered by the tailors skill: so a man that is religious in all his
ways, may (without difficulty or doubt) be the object of his own praise, and
commendation. But if he be irreligious, then no famous act can free him from in
famy, and from shame. A spent candle (loosing her flame) leaves naught behind
but a stinking snuff, neither does a man (when he dies) leave any thing
behind him, but ignominy, and shame, and reproach: if (whilst he lived) he
beautify not himself with a religious life.

The reverent respect, Heathens in their kinds were religious.
and great regard to religion, which (from the beginning) all nations, and all
people (though not illuminated with the true knowledge of the true God) have
had, being by the only instinct of nature instructed, that there was a divine
power, infinite, and supreme, which both created the world, and all things that
were, and which are therein. And which also ruled, and preserved them, by a
singular wisdom, and in a wonderful order, and fashion made some of them (in
their blind zeal, and superstitious ignorance) to worship such, and such
things as were no Gods.

Hence it was, Idolatry.
that some of them adored Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Mercury, and such like
poetically fained Gods. And that some others of them worshipped the sun, the
moon, the stars, and other celestial bodies, which were created only for
the use of man. That some of them have sacrificed their devotions to the works
of mens-hands: Act. 19.
As the Ephesians did to the Image of Diana, and as the children of Israel (in
the wilderness) did to the golden Calfe. Exodus 32. Dan. 3. 2. Reg. 5.18. 1.
Sam. 5.
And as Nebuchadnezzars people did to the golden statue, which he had erected,
and set up, and as the king of Aram, and his subjects aid to the idol Rymmon;
And as the Philistines did unto Dagon, Historia.
and as the Medes and Persians (under Cyrus their king) did to the image of Bell
and of the Dragon. And hence it is, Psalm. 135.
that the Prophet David with a bitter taunt, reproves and reprehendeth their
gross, and abominable follies, when he says, the idols of the heathen, are
silver, and gold, even the works of men's hands, they have a mouth, and speak
not, they have ears, and hear not; Neither is there any breath in their
mouth: they that make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that trust
in them.

But contrariwise (my son) true religion being founded upon the truth of Gods
word, Religion.
will direct you with understanding, and with knowledge, religiously and
without superstitious blindness, to adore, and to worship the true and the
living God.

Cyrus an heathen King, (but in his kind and fashion zealous and religious) was
wont to say, that if subjects did religiously fear, and honor their Gods, they
would not then commit abominable sins against them: nor heinous offenses
against their kings. And Cicero does report, that the Romans conquered more
nations and subdued more people, and provinces, by the reverent obseruances of
their religious exercises, then they did by policy, and by the sword.

Where religion wants, there no christian duty is performed for conscience
sake: for religion is the best informer of the consciences of men: where
religion is not embraced, the government of kingdoms, and of commonweals,
are either neglected, or subverted; like as a ship, under her sails in a
tempestuous sea, (wanting a cunning pilot to direct her) is suddenly ^ashed
against the rocks to her utter ruin and confusion.

For like as bones do support the flesh of a man's body, and walls the building
of an house, so does religion the being, and the welbeing of every state, and
common weal. And as the moon has the greater light, when she approaches
nearest in opposition to the sun; so every man's virtues are the more
splendent, and the more eminent, by how much the nearer they are knit, and
joined to religion. Nothing than religion is more excellent among men, neither
does any thing in this world make us nearer to approach unto God himself. It
is therefore to be sought with your labor, to be bought with your chiefest
treasure, and to be protected and defended with your dearest blood.

Without it no noble act must be attempted, and with it, no subtle or crafty
plot or practice may be taken in hand.

For such things as by religion are warranted to be virtuous, to be profitable,
to be good, are (without it) neither virtuous, nor profitable, nor good.

The chiefest virtue which a man possesses in this life, is true religion,
which mollifieth the hard, and the stony heart of man, and makes him capable
of Gods grace: As the Sun, or Fire does the hard wax, making it apt, and fit
to receive any impression, that shall be made upon it.

Religion makes a man warily, and carefully to look unto his ways, and
wisely to govern, and to rule himself. It makes persecutions to be
tolerable, that we despair not. And it moderateth our prosperity, that by
means thereof, we do not wax insolent, or proud, it makes our worldly
pilgrimage, a pleasing journey, as a good companion by his delightful
discourses, abridgeth the tediousness of a long way. Berchorius well
observes, that the lark, as long as she fitteth on the ground, is very
silent, and still, but mounting up into the air, and houering in the golden
beams of the delightful sun, she lifts up her voice, and chanteth
merrily, and doubleth her various tunes, to the great pleasure and contentment
of those that are partakers of her melody, and sweet music: So, and so is it,
with mortal men, who, whilst (they do fix, and riuet fast their affections,
and their thoughts to the transitory vanities, and vain negotiations of this
wicked world; they are faint, yea, they are almost dead to all good works. But
when they reuine their minds, and lift up their cogitations devoutly unto God,
with religious motions, and zealous meditations; then (and not before) their
tunes are sweet, they are delightful, yea they are pleasing unto God himself.

And like as the air is the purer the nearer it is to the worlds chiefest
light, Idem. Page 154.
so men's devotions are more celestial, and heavenly, by how much the nearer,
(by true religion) they do ascend, and present themselves to the son of God.

And thus (my son) you see, that when your mind is sanctified by true
religion, then religion will make it pure, and a fit receptacle, and storehouse
for every kind of virtue. Wherein you ought daily to be exercised in this
world. Virtue.


For without virtue your religion is but fained, your devotions dull, and your
prayers but varnished, and ouercast with an outward show of holiness toward
God, and of charity toward men. The offspring of religion is virtue, and
without virtue, religion is barren and near unto cursing. As was the fig
tree, Mark. 11.13.
which yielded no fruit to our Savior Christ, when (being hungry) he sought it.

Therefore (my Son) to the end that with a more ardent affection, and longing
will, you may be desirous to be retained into her service, it is most fitting
that you be instructed plainly what she is: that knowing her, and her
worthiness, you may think your time to be well spent, in seeking her, and in
honoring of her.

Some men have defined her to be, an vprighmesse of life, Several opinions
concerning virtue. De ciuit. Dei. lib. 4.
in all things agreeable unto reason: others that she is the habit of doing
well. Others that she is the art of choosing that which is good.

S. Augustine says, That she is the skill to live well. And Horace affirms,
that virtue is nothing else, but the banishment of vice: In sum they do all
best agree when they say, that virtue consists in action, and that the
meditation thereof without practice, is as an vnstringed instrument, whereon no
man plaieth.

For what avails it, Prudence.
that a man is wise, if the worlds occasions be not partakers of his wisdom?
What mattereth it, Justice.
if a man's knowledge be exquisite to discern right from injury, and from
wrong? if he pronounce not sentence for him that is oppressed.

To what end is a man's mind, and the composition of his body framed to be
valiant: Fortitude.
if (when the commonweales estate is in peril, and in danger) he be not
forward to support, and to maintain her cause.

And wherefore is a man temperate, Temperance.
if to himself only, and not unto others, he be a president of modesty, and of
sober government.

He that sows virtue, shall reap honor. A virtuous man is never at rest,
until (by his endeavors) he has done good: Neither does he imagine that he
has done any good at all, except he do the best, and the most good that he is
able.

He cease not from any toil, if thereby he may profit others, either
particularly to themselves, or generally for the good of many, and of the
common weal.

And though his actions be many, and various, yet they are always virtuous: as
in music, Wisd. 19.17.
the harmony does still remain, though the notes, and tunes and songs, be
oftentimes changed.

It is not enough to boast of the name of virtue, without virtuous deeds and
actions; for without them, the name of virtue is fitly compared to a shadow
without substance: And like to a drop of water on the sands, or thirsty ground,
which being quickly dried up, leaves no sign behind it, that it ever was.

Such men as do only desire to know virtue, and not to practice her in their
deeds, may fitly be compared un. to children, who do delight to knock flints
together, that thereby they may see, and behold the sparkles, but do not
endeavor to make any true use of fire it self.

It is a pleasing thing to be commended, but his praises are more precious who
meriteth them, by exercising of his virtues.

The practice of virtue is the chiefest patrimony, that a worthy man can
expect, or ought (indeed) to desire. Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulcherrima
merces: There is no price, which can counteruaile virtue. Stillius Poeta.
A wise man places his contentment in nothing more, then by the active
distribution of his virtues, to make himself the more famous.

Our parents may make us rich, but it is God alone, that makes us to be
virtuous: hence it is, that the power of Monarchs, and of Kings, must be
supported by the goodness of their virtues: For he is much more generous whom
his virtues, then he whom his ancestors ^aue made noble.

Much more is he to be admited, that swayeth a kingdom by his virtues, then he
that rules it by the only privilege of his enobled and heroical descent. For
honors are but the servants, and the attendants of virtue.

If virtue be joined unto Nobility, she spreads her self into every quarter,
and darteth forth her glorious beams over large and spacious countries, as the
sun does his when (with them) he beautifieth the face, and visage of the
whole earth.

And like as an artificially carned picture, being presented in gold, is much
more delightful to the eye, and is of a more choice esteem, then the same,
being stamped on iron, or on some baser metal. So though in men of low
degree, and parentage, virtue be not without her deserved praise and
commendation, yet having the residence in the breasts of such as are of a
generous stock, and progeny, she is more pleasing, and splendent, she is more
honorable, and more profitable to the common weal.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus,
Then virtues are more precious, and more dear,
When in heroicke spirits they appear.
This was the cause, Cominaeus. 265.
that made Cominaeus to be of this opinion, That wise men ought not so much to
respect an honorable descent as a virtuous life.

For as it is much better, D. Homfr. in Prax. Jesuit 47.
to drink good wine, out of an earthen pot, then unwholesome liquor, in a
golden cup, so he that is wise, will more esteem of the wisdom of a virtuous
man, then of the honors, and promotions of an only rich man, which has none
acquain tance or familiarity with virtue.

Leuinius Apolonius in his discovery of Peru, Leuinius Apolonius. 16.
reports that those Indians and barbarous nations, whom Pizarrus could not
(by his sword) violently, he easily conquered, and subdued, by the discreet
practice, and pleasing examples of his alluring virtues. Emitur sola virtute
potestas. Lips. 59.
That command and that authority is most sovereign, which deriueth her power
from virtue.

Until Alexander the great waxed proud, and drunken, he wan more provinces,
subdued more kingdoms, and conquered more people, by the practice of his
admirable virtues, then he did by the undaunted boldness, and courage of
himself, and of his valiant men of war.

Neroes virtues (when he first began to reign) gained him the due report of a
most renowned Emperor: and Octauius Caesar was never surnamed Augustus, until
his experimented virtues crowned him with that immortalized dignity, and title.

So profitable is virtue, that she must be followed, and so amiable is she, and
so lovely, that she must be embraced. She makes her suitors of poor men, to
become rich: of rich men, she makes nobles, and of nobles, she creates Kings,
and Potentates, and Emperors of the world.

A virtuous man cannot be miserable in any fortune, nor unfortunate, what
chance soever happens. For virtue supplieth al wants, and swimmeth with us,
in every shipwreck.

If we be sick, it mattereth not much, though our friends do forbear to visit
us, if at that tme, the true remembrance of our virtues do keep us company:
neither will it be grievous unto us to die in our beds, if our virtuous life
warrant us, that we die not in our sins.

Pythagoras affirms, that riches are no sure pillars, and that glory is
uncertain, that beauty fades as the flowers in the field, and that honors
have no long continuance, but virtue (says he) is a strong anchor, which
holds us from danger in every storm, you must not therefore hunt after those
things, that be most pleasing: but after such only, as are most virtuous, and
you must understand, (if you will effectually know any thing that he has lived
unworthily, whose fame virtue has not reported to posterity: And death is
never sudden, nor fearful unto him, who has lived virtuously and well.
Therefore to conclude this point, that you may live well, and die well, and
that after death your fame may live, and (as your children) survive, you being
dead, love virtue for her own sake, and practice her for the benefit of your
self.

She is the wife (my Son) whom you must wedde whilst you are young: if you
expect that your good deeds shall grow unto any maturity, and ripenes, when you
are old.

This is the Mistress, whom you must serve in your tender years, as an
apprentize, if (by her) you will be made free, and receive profit and
reputation for your wages, and salary, when you are old.

In iuuentute cernuntur virtutis flores, vel fructus nunquam. The Autumn
cannot see the fruit of those trees, whose blossoms the spring time never saw.

If you begin not to love virtue in your youth, it will be a harsh thing for
you, to woo her, when the thread of your life shall be tentred, and drawn
forth almost to the utmost length.

Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit, if your youth be moistened with her
delightful liquor, your age will always retain, and keep the sweet savor
thereof: and if (whilst you are young) you entertain her for your
acquaintance, the whole course of your earthly pilgrimage will then be
accompanied with her, as with a faithful friend.

Vir sapiens is est, qui non patitur vitam: and Iuuentutem, inter iocos, and
somnum affluere: and he is truly wise, who being young, resolves to attempt
nothing but that, which by virtue, he shall be counseled and advised to take
in hand.

For her directions are religious without hypocrisy.

They are true without falsehood. They are plain without dissimulation. They
are upright without fraud. They are honest without wantonness. They are
temperate without excess. They are grave without lightness. They are constant
without wavering. They are confident, without fear.
Viaticum tibi (fili mi) ab Adolescentia ad senectutem, Diogenes Laertius.
virtutem compara.

From youth to age, let virtue be your passage, as a bridge is from the one
side of a river to the other. So shall your young years be respected by the
aged, and so shall your old age be a president of virtue unto those that be
young.

Now as it is not enough for a man to possess great store of silver and of
gold, unless he be also taught, and instructed by the rules of bounty, and of
liberality, how to dispose it well. So it is not only requisite, that a man be
virtuously inclined, but he must likewise be furnished with learning, and with
wisdom: whereby he may be able to make a profitable dispensation and
distribution of his virtues, Learning. Wisdom.
for the good of himself and of other men.

This made Solomon to say, That he that possesses understanding, Prou. 19.18.
loves his own soul: and keeps wisdom to find goodness.

For like as a warlike galley swimmeth smoothly in her perfect strength,
against her enemies, being winged with her oars on either side, but (being
maimed upon one of them) can hardly defend her self. So virtue (being by
learning and by wisdom and by her harnesbearers, mightily supported) marches
as a stout champion into the worlds field: and fights a strong combat against
wickedness and sin. But being deprived of one of those her helps, she makes
a weak resistance (not without much difficulty) to preserve her self from
danger, and from spoil.

Concerning the necessity of being learned, Learning.
(for the better practicing of religion, and of virtuous actions) you must
know, that without learning, you shall be unprofitable to the commonweal: as
a ship is to the merchant, if (irrecuperably) she be moared, and grauelled in
the sands.

He which walks in darkness, sees not whither he goes, neither can you, if
you want learning (by reason of your ignorance) direct your own ways. Eccles.
51.28.
Learning is of so great a price, that you must get her with a great sum of
money, for that (by her) you may possess much gold.

There is gold (says Solomon) and a multitude of precious stones, but the
lips of knowledge are a precious jewel, Prou. 20.15. Pro. 18.16. Pro. 18.25.
it brings such as keep her company before great men. And if you do exalt
her, she will exalt you again: A wise heart gets knowledge and the ear of
the wise seeks learning. She finds many foolish whom by her precepts she
makes wise: She finds many men poor, whom in short time she places upon
honors throne, she finds many men vicious, but by her instructions, she
makes them in godliness and in virtue to surmount others.

By learning the king himself, and his Nobles, are enabled to know God, and to
rule the heady multitude; wisely persuading, or enforcing them to obey. Fortuna
Craesum facit: Minerua Platone^, Fortune may make men rich, but learning makes
them wise.

Marcus Aurelius the Emperor of Rome was wont to say, that a Prince ought not
to content himself with so much learning as one man has. But he advised him
(by study) to endeavor to know as much as many men did: because he rules, and
governs not one, but many.

And Alexander the great estimated learning at so high a rate, Plutarch. in
vita Alexandri. 676.
that he was much offended with Aristotle his schoolmaster, because he had
published to the worlds view, those notable precepts wherein he had instructed
him: saying, that he more desired to excel others in knowledge, and in
learning, Idem.
then in authority and power. This singular and extraordinary love which he
bare unto learning, made him to carry with him in his wars, all Homers works,
in a curious and costly casket which he found among the richest, and best
jewels which he had taken from Darius the great king of the Persians. Leo a
king of the Romans, was so great a patron, and so effectual a lover of
learning, that he wished often, that he might once be so fortunate, as to
convert the wages of his soldiers into stipends for learned men.

Paulus Aemilius that noble Roman, Plutarch in vita Pauli Aemily. 260.
who overthrew in a fierce and cruel battle, Perseus the king of the
Macedonians, refused to see the riches and the treasure of his conquered enemy,
because he would not covet it. And would not permit his own sons to take any
thing which belonged to him, but his books only, by whom their minds, and their
understandings might be adored, and beautified with learning and with knowledge.

When Cato Vtican in vacation times, Idem in vita Catonis Vtican. Page 776.
and at his best leisure, went to recreat himself in the country, he used to
carry thither with him, the best Philosophers, and his choicest books.

And Demosthenes, Idem on vitae Demosthenis. Page 847.
to the end that his acquaintance, and nearest friends might not (by carrying
of him abroad according to their custom) withdraw him from his study, and from
his books, caused the hairs of his head to be shaven off.

To one, who asked of Thales the Philosopher who was happy? he made this
answer, Qui corpore sanus est, Fortuna Dives, and Animo eruditus: He that is
healthy, wealthy, and learned.

Plato admired and wondered, how men would love, and seek after learning, if
they knew her? And Constantine the great made many laws, for the furtherance
of learning, and for the advancement of learned men.

Alphonsus king of Arragon, Hartin. Sthedell. 248.
so greatly loved learning, that he omitted not his hard studies in his most
dangerous wars. And Pliny the second so inwardly affected it, Idem. 111.
that he would willingly and diligently read all books which were published:
affirming the time to be lost, which was not spent in study, and that no book
was so bad, but that some learning, and some instruction might be gotten in
reading of it.

And Pythagoras the great Philosopher was wont to say, that men ought to be
more careful, Idem. Page 61.
by learning to expel ignorance out of their minds, then by physic to purge
the diseases of their bodies.

Empedocles said, Idem. Page 71.
that a wise man (above all things) should long for future happiness, contemn
uncertain riches, and adorn his mind with learning. and with knowledge.

Albertus Magnus, Idem. Page 214.
(albeit that for his great learning and wisdom, he were advanced unto many
dignities, and created Bishop of Ratisbona; yet (finding his Episcopal
imploiments, to be daily impediments to his studies) he resigned his place, and
office to another, that in a more private course of life, he might make
himself the more familiarly acquainted with his books.

It is reported of the Emperor Charles the fourth, Idem. Page 231.
that on a time he continued more then four hours in the schools of the
Philosophers, harkning (with such contentment, and with such delight and
pleasure) to the serious and skillful disputations of those learned men, that
he forgot his dinner, and thereby) in some sort displeased some of his Noble
men. So that one (among the rest) being more forwards then others were
(covertly to reprove him for his long stay) told him, that his supper was
ready. But the good Emperor mildly answered him thus: My supper indeed is
ready, so is not thine, meaning thereby, that the exercises of the learned,
were as pleasing to his mind, as meats and drinks were to the others belly.

Infinitely therefore deceived was Licinius the Emperor, Iustine.
who grossly did affirm, that learning was the poison, and the ruin of the
common weal. Scientia non habet inimicum prater ignorantem: Learning has no
greater enemy then ignorance: and so was Alacicus king of the Goths deceived,
when he would not suffer his son to be instructed in learning, because (as he
said) it would make him faint hearted, and a coward: and so was Lewis the
eleventh the French King much deceived: who (in a skorne of learning, and of
learned men) would often say, that his son should only learn this one
sentence in the latin tongue: Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare: He has
not learned to rule, and to govern well, who has not learned artificially to
dissemble, to cozen, and to deceive. Nay rather it may be truly said, that
without learning, it is a hard matter to be a king: but to be a learned king,
it is to be a worthy, and a renowned king in deed. For like as grafts, being
incorporated into the best stocks, do bring forth the best, the most pleasing,
and the fairest fruit, so learning being joined unto heroical and princely
nobility, or with gentry, produces rare effects, and makes such (as do
possess her) truly noble, and deservedly to be respected and advanced above
other men.

Plutarch says, Plutarth. in vita Coriolani Page 221.
that the benefit which men do get by means of their learning, is very great:
For it teaches such as by nature are rude, and rough, by the rules and
compass of reason, to be courteous and civil: and rather to be contended with
a mean estate, which promises much security, and peace, then to affect higher
dignities and eminent promotions. In whom there is neither safety nor
certainty, nor contentment, nor ease. Ignorance.


An ignorant man without learning is altogether barren, and dry in all worthy
proiects, and devises whatsoever, by reason of his ignorance, like as the
country of Egypt is unfruitful in that year, wherein it is not watered, and
made fruitful, by the ouerflowing pride of the river of Nilus: He that is
ignorant has fewer eyes to discern his own good, and to prevent his own
misfortunes, then Polyphemus had to foresee his own danger.

As an Owl cannot behold the bright shining of the splendent sun, so a man
that is ignorant, takes no pleasure in the society of such as are sharply
witted, and of mature judgment and understanding.

An ignorant man (because he knows little, distrusteth much: if he be silent,
his wisdom is suspected, and if he speak, his own tongue is the proclaimer
of his own shame. If he hear other men discoursing wisely, he is not thereby
instructed, because he can no better censure of their wisdom, then a blind man
can distinguish of the variety, and diversity of many colors: But if he hear
men speaking foolishly, he augmenteth and increases thereby his own folly:
For his mean capacity (apprehending only things of the smallest consequence)
is so benumbed, as it cannot ascend to the understanding of any knowledge or
profitable learning.

A man that trauelleth in a strange country, may not be marvelled at nor held
to be unwise, though some times he chance to wander out of the right way. But a
man that is ignorant may justly be wondered at, because he loses not his way,
but his own self. He walks in darkness in the brightest day, and is too
too light in every weighty matter.

Ignorance in matters of profit, banisheth all hopes either of present, or of
future advancement, in matters of rule and of government, it ruinateth th^^
state, which it endeuoreth to support. And in matters of religion, it carries
men's souls headlong into the bottomless pit of torments, and of eternal
destruction.

An ignorant man lives in perpetual captivity and in bondage: For ignorance
is rank foolishness, and who is in deeper thraldom then a fool?

If a man be unlearned, he wandreth up and down in the intricate labyrinth of
the cunning world, like to a lost traveler without a guide in a solitary, and
in a vast desert, and as a bird without wings, or as a soldier despoiled of
his armor, or as a ship without a director in the ocean sea: so is he unable,
so is he imperfect in all his ways. All his conceits, and all his imaginations,
are as untimely fruit, and all his labors and his actions are out of joint.

He deuiseth things which are unprofitable, and puts them in execution to
his own hinderance, and loss.

But he that is learned, treasureth up wisdom, whereby he effects what he
lists: Learning.
yea things justly to be admired, and to be wondered at. This fair, and this
lovely Lady cannot be won, but by an industrious care, and by a constant suit,
and she is overtaken by such only, as with daily labor and study do follow
after her. Study.
Therefore (my son) if you desire to be her companion, you must (by frequent
study) attempt to procure, and to win her love. Nemo enim nascitur Artifex,
Learning is not obtained without labor, and labor improbus omnia vincit, as
says the poet, by hard labor, and daily study, we always do step nearer unto
learning.

Omnia dij laboribus vendunt, No excellent thing is achieved and gotten
without difficulty and pain: and learning being so gotten) does not only make
men excellent, but she is (indeed) the excellency of man.

In every day (therefore) you must make some progress in the way toward
learning, by your study. Perit enim omne tempus, quod studio non impartitur,
That time is lost, which is not spent in study, and in serious meditations for
learnings sake.

But if you bend your resolutions (with will and study, as with the best, and
swiftest hounds) to hunt, and to run after her, your pains will be
delightful, and your labors will be replenished with variety of contentment,
and with pleasure. Consuetudo enim facit alteram naturam, custom begets an
habit, yea (in some sort) it creates (as it were) a new nature, both in
study, and also in all other negotiations whatsoever.

And when a man (by frequent study) has found learning, and understanding, he
then knows that studiosis in otio nullum est otium: A student when he is most
at leisure, is never idle. This (my son) is a work of important weight, and
consequence, and therefore you must know, that opere in magno fas est obrumpere
somnum. You must not be idle, negligent, nor slothful in a business of such
great moment and weight.

But neither do I require, nor is it meet, and fitting, Moderation in study.
that your studies be more painful then pleasing, or more laborious then
healthful. For I my self have learned long agone, that nullum violentum est
perpetuum. Things that are violent, have no long being, and continuance.

The proverb tells us, that it is the moderate pace comes soonest to the
iournies end. If the strongest piece of ordinance be surcharged with power, and
with shot, it will surely break.

A strong ship, that is ouer-laden must needs sink.

A bow kept always bent, will either crack in sunder, or loose his strength.
And a willing mind being oppressed with overmuch study, will rather wax feeble,
and dull, then be capable of the multitude of those things, which incessant
labors do offer, and present.

Gutta cauat lapidem, etc.
As stones are pearst with drops of rain,
Not by their force, but often fall:
So men much learning do attain,
By reading often, not reading all.
A man (not by infinite study, nor by continual pain) is made learned, but by
his moderate endeavors, duly employed with pleasure, and with delight.

Let your study therefore be moderate, A rule for study.
not violent, more pleasing, then painful, that sanity, and health of body may
(with study, and with learning) be preserved and maintained, nam frustra sapit,
qui sibi non sapit: you shall in vain think to make your self to be
profitable unto others by your learning, if you be not careful (by moderating
of your studies) to provide for your own health.

It is true, that for the attaining of learning, Melior est vigilantia somno:
Night studies hurtful.
We must not be slothful or sluggish, but we must watch: But not too much in
the night. For night watchings in study are dangerous and hurtful, both to the
wit, and also to the eyes: yea, they are generally prejudicial unto the state
of the whole body.

The mornings must therefore be the choicest, Morning Studies profitable.
and chiefest times in which I counsel you to spend, and to employ your labors
in those studies, and in those proiects which by your religious, learned, Mr.
Haniball Gamon.
and honest tutor shall (for your best furtherance in knowledge, and in
learning) be appointed to you, which times (I am right well assured) you can
with the more facility, and alacrity employ therein; Mr. William Periman.
because you have heretofore bin trained and enured so to do, by the provident
care, and directions of your last sufficient and kind schoolmaster. Wisdom.


The next pillar, upon which true virtue (as on an immovable rock) is
founded, and established, Wisdom. 7.
is wisdom. Which Solomon the wisest king that ever was, preferred before
Scepters, and before thrones, and accounted riches to be nothing, and gold to
be dust, and gravel, and silver to be clay in comparion of her. And does
affirm, Eccles. 7.21.
that he who uses wisdom, becomes a partaker of the love of God: And that
wisdom does strengthen a man more then ten mighty Princes that are within the
City.

The heathen Philosopher being ignorant of the true God, and guided only by the
light of nature, Ethic. lib. 2.
and of reason, defined wisdom to be the knowledge of the truth, consisting
in the choice of that which is good.

Cicero says, that she is the best directer of a man's life, the joy of good
society, the ground of virtue, the enemy of vice, the builder of cities, and
the founder of kingdoms, and of commonweals. Isocrates writing to Demon cus
says, that strength of body without wisdom, is as a sword in a mad man's
hand, but he that is wise orders his steps by wisdom, and by good
discretion. A wise man has one foot upon the land, and another foot upon the
sea. For by his wisdom, he compasses both sea and land, seeking out, and
finding those things which are always hidden from ignorant and from foolish
men.

He looks upon the heavens, and considers of the circling of the sun, the
courses of the moon, and of the stars, the motions of the Spheres, and of the
planets and of the rest of the celestial orbs, the causes of lightnings, and
of thunders, the generating of winds, storms, tempests, frosts, snowes,
hailes, and of the rain.

He diggeth deep into the earths bowels (piercing almost her center) where he
finds allkinds of metal, and of precious stones.

He discerns the natures of herbs, of trees, of stones, of fishes, of birds,
and of creeping things innumerable both small and great.

He tameth and makes gentle savage beasts, and reclaimeth birds from their
wildness, he rules cities, and countries, in times of peace, and in times of
war, by his devises, stratagems, plots, and policies, he conquereth his
stoutest enemies in the field.

A wise man never attempteth any thing against his own will, nor is sorry for
any thing that he has done, because he does nothing rashly, nor of felse
will. He understands much when he hears but a word, and concealeth enough
when he hears but little spoken.

Sapienti omnia, licet inuia sunt, tamen peruia: He turns adverse fortune to
his own happiness, and bliss. And evil chances are (by his discretion,
patience, and moderation) converted to his good.

His mind is not captiuated, nor enthraled with any bations, nor with the
worlds follies, and his wit discerns those things which other men's eyes did
scarcely ever see.

The whole world is to him but as one city, because his wisdom makes him
thoroughly acquainted with all passages, and with all occurrences whatsoever.

A wise man disposes rightly of such things as are present, he foreseeth
things that are to come, Lipsius. 13.
and remembers (with profit) things forepast.

He will not deceive, nor be deceived, Cic. de orat. Eschilus.
he never thinks that he has found wisdom, except he do make a commendable
use of her. The common Proverb tells us, that a wise man's words do draw water
unto the mill. For he speaks not in vain, but frames his speech to sound
and to good purpose. He thinks it not to be so needful, to know many things
(for oftentations sake) as a few with pleasure, and with profit. Ethics. 335.


Daneus does affirm, that by how much the wiser a man is, with so much the
more commodity, and honor, he effects, and performs those things, that are
committed to his charge.

A wise man's judgment, Ren. de vit. Jesus. 3.
and his discretion are oftentimes so much applauded, and approved, that the
whole state and the affairs of kingdoms, and of commonweals, are committed,
and referred to the managing and disposing of one wise man.

And Euripides says, that men's vnasapientis, multorum vincit manus. A wise man
is so potent, by means of his wisdom, that he overcomes multitudes, and
binds them in fetters as his slaves. Wisd. 7.


The true reason whereof is plainly discovered by Solomon, where he says, that
God is the leader unto wisdom, and he is the director of the wise.

A wise man only is rich, and where wisdom keeps her residence, there
poverty dares not to approach, or to show her face.

His hands do not offend, because they are restrained from evil by his
wisdom.

His eyes are not betrayed, or beguiled by vanities, because his mind has
pronounced her judgment, that all things are but vain. His ears are not open
to the enchantments of folly, because he is instructed and resolved to neglect
them, as the deceiving sweetness of a Sirens song.

And his heart despises and contemns all wicked and ungodly motions, Psalm.
45.1.
because it is still enditing of a good matter, as David's was.

So that of a wise man, it is truly said, Sapiens dominabitur astris, and that
sapiens est ipso Jove tantum minor: A wise man prieth, and searches into the
secrets of the heavens: and is only inferior to the Gods. Yet must we not be
wise in our own opinions, Rule.
and conceits; for of such a one, it is thus sentenced: See thou a man that
is wise in his own conceit, Proverb. 26.12
more hope is of a fool then of him. But we must still labor to get wisdom,
Seize love.
for one day spent in studying for her, is better employed, then an eternity of
time, consumed in hunting after vanity and folly.

It is reported in histories, that Apelles the cunning and most renowned
painter bestowed ten years (by his exquisite and most curious art) to
delineate, and rarely to set forth the picture of Venus, and her beauty. And
we may read that the Grecians with the infinite expense of their treasury,
Dares Phri^ins.
and with the loss and death of many thousand of skillful captains, and of
renowned and valiant men of war, spent as long a time to take to ransacke, and
to destroy the stoutly defended city of Troy.

The winning of such a city is of far lesser account, and moment, then the
enjoying of wisdom: and in regard of her unspeakable excellency, painting is
but a foolish art.

Though therefore (my son) you spend more time then ten years, nay though
you labor all your life's days in her study, and to obtain her, you shall in
the end reap more benefit, and commendations by those your travels, then
either those Grecians did by theirs, or Apelles by his. For wisdom is so
fair, that none but her own pensill can depaint her, and so impregnable, that
none but they whom she pleases, can assault and win her.

For wisdom comes from the Lord, Ecclus. 1.
and without her you cannot (as you ought) praise, and magnify your God.

Therefore (my son) embrace her, for she is fair, court her, for she is
lovely, follow after her, for she is rich, reverence her, for she is honorable,
and admire her for she makes her darlings, and her companions, the only
wonders of the world.

The next thing of great importance, Company.
which I counsel you advisedly to observe is, that you be wisely respective
and very wary, and chary, in making good choice of those, with whom you do
intend, and purpose to converse. Nam plaerumque tales sumus, quales ij sunt
quibuscum viuimus: Such we are for the most part, as they are, with whom
familiarly we live, and with whom for the most part we spend our time.

The Philosophers do well observe, that al waters (both in temperature, in
color, and in taste) do answer, and agree with the nature, and the disposition
of those grounds and of that earth, through which they make their secret
passages, and their ways.

And in like manner, men do put in practice those things, which by frequent
custom they have derived to themselves, from those, with whom they have had
familiarity and friendly dealings.

And like as it is quickly known, of what country, or province, ships are by
their flags, and penions, which proudly they bear highest in their tops.

And as the inward cogitations of a man's heart are publicly revealed by his
speech, and outward actions, so is it plainly demonstrated to such as are wise,
what motions do chiefly rule, and reign in a man, by the dispositions and
qualities of those, with whom he does in familiarity converse. And though (my
son) by Gods grace, and furtherance you may be well inclined unto godliness,
and holiness of life, yet if you be not matched with correspondent company,
nor do fellowship with such, as are in like qualities alike disposed, you can
no more produce into action those good and virtuous things, whereunto you are
by nature inclined, and well framed, then a clock can (by a due consent with
time) signify the hours of the day aright, if his waights, and poises, be not
in all proportions answerable to his wheels. Who but those hacking fencers,
impudent stage players, Examples.
beastly drunkards, polluted masters of damnable brothell houses, and desperate
companions (with whom Commodus the Emperor conuersed in his youth) infected him
with their loose, Commodus imperator
and abominable vices, and defiled him with all those detestable, and
unmatchable sins which wickedly and with greediness they practiced? Who? but
Pierce Gaueston and the two Spencers (the Father and the Son with whose
company King Edward the second was too too much delighted) enticed him by
lightness of his life, Vita. Edw. 2.
and unkind behavior to be injurious unto Queen Isabell his virtuous wife?
who (at that time was reputed to be the goodliest and the fairest Lady in the
world) and persuaded him to contemn and to make havoc of his nobles: and
made him at length to be deprived both of his kingdom, and of his life?

Who (in the reign of King Richard the second) but Robert Vere Duke of Ireland
Michael de la Pool his Chan cellor William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire, Vita.
Rich. 2.
Robert Tresihan his chief Justice, Sir Nicholas Brembre, Sir John Bush, Sir
John Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, men of proud stomachs, flattering tongues,
oppressors of the common people, contemners of the nobility, and enticers of
their sovereign to naughty and lewd behauior) occasioned the ruin and the
downfall of so great a king (who fawning more then was fitting on their
company) was by their wicked counsel advised and forwarded to put into
execution and practice things which were hurtful to himself, and hateful to
the common weal?

Who but the unthrifty companions of Henry the fifth, made him a wild, and a
swaggering Prince? And what but their banishment? and a mutual converse with
his grave, and prudent counselors of estate, made him afterward to be a most
renowned and a peerlesse king?

And though (my son) I instance in this matter, (as in other passages of this
discourse) upon kings and Princes, who (either to their utter downfals, or to
their great peril, and danger) have chiefly experimented the bitter effects of
hard fortune, by associating to themselves lewd and graceless companions, yet
may you certainly understand, and infallibly conclude thereby, that not only
such high, and imperious Monarchs, but inferior persons also (in their several
places) will quickly be corrupted, and endangered by the ungodly and wicked
qualities of their wicked companions, with whom too familiarly they do converse.

Beware therefore of evil company, for like as a bad bird by nature cannot
bring forth a good egg, so an evil companion cannot (by his example, or by
his counsel) produce in his friend, any commendable action whatsoever.

It is far better therefore to be solitary, and alone, then to be sorted with
wicked company: For as a red rose being smothered in the smoke of sulphur
loses her fair color, Eerch. Reduct. Moral. 16.
and does assume another, which is a counterfeit and a false white.

So a virtuous man, frequenting the society of bad companions, loses his
former virtues, and blemisheth himself with the imperfect die of impiety and
sin. It is impossible to touch pitch, and not to be defiled therewith.

A man cannot lie among dogs, but he shall be stung, and bitten, and troubled
with many fleas.

Neither can a man haunt, or usually frequent the company of such as are evil,
and himself remain virtuous and good.

It is more safe for an Ass laden with gold, to lodge among thieves, then it
is for a virtuous man to engage himself as a familiar companion to live among
such as are Godles and unjust.

For like as the Sun is of himself clear, beutifull, and pure, and
comfort all living cratures with the nourishing and fruitful influence of
his glorious beams, but hurts often times, if it be in conjunction with a
planet, which is malignant and unfortunate; so though a man be of himself
virtuous and well disposed: yet if he be tied and bound, if he be linked; and
locked fast to the loathsome Society of a lewd and of a badde companion, he
shall (together with him) run into many mischiefs, and into many dangers: as
Partridges do vnwisly follow one another into the fowlers net, to their own
perdition and destruction.

It is the nature and property of sick men to love them best, who do give
unto them and bring to them, such things, as (most greedily) they do desire,
though they do much augment and increase their sickness, and their grief
thereby.

And so it is the quality of many men, who are not virtuously and well
inclined, to affect most of all, such men as are of all others worst disposed,
and do sooth them in their vanities, and in their gross and palpable follies.
Though (indeed) such glozing, and such hateful flattery, do daily (with
their sin) augment their shame. But contrariwise, Idem. 61.
a prudent man makes his companion to be wise, as a pleasant spring
moistneth, and fructifieth those grounds, which do next adioyne unto her. And
like as that part of all kinds of flesh tastes most delicately, which lies
next unto the bones; by reason of the sweetness of the marrow that is in them,
so the dearer and the nearer we be unto honest and unto religious and good
companions; the more commendable and praise worthy will our actions be by
reason of their choicest qualities, and virtues.

A fair morning commonly betokens a fair and a pleasant day; and the good
company, which a man frequenteth, is a strong argument that he is disposed
well. It is for painters to devise for their pictures such visages, and such
faces, as they please, but you may not choose whom you list, for your familiar
consorts and companions.

But like as good wine is to be chosen by the smell, and by the color, and by
the taste: so must you choose your companions by their Religion, by their
Wisdom, and by their virtue.

And though (perhaps) you may justly find some fault in the^: Rule.
(Nam nemo est qui omnibus horis sapit) yet may you not again forsake your
companion if (in his chiefest parts, and in his general disposition) he be
virtuous and good: no more the^ you can truly condemn the right, and the good
use of a knife, or of a needle, because peradventure the one by a mischaunce
has cut your hand, and the other pricked your finger.

Let this suffice (my Son) for the best rules, and for the chiefest
instructions which I am able to give, and to prescribe unto you, concerning the
electing, and the choosing of your familiar companions, with whom you do intend
familiarly to spend your time. Now as it is exceeding necessary, that you be
right well advised in the choice of such companions; Friendship.
as (by their wisdom and good example) may make you a happy partner of their
virtues; so is it as needful, that some of them be reputed, nay rather, that
some few of them be (indeed) your inward friends: for in the fruition of the
love of such will consist a great part of your contentedness in this life.

For your true friend oftentimes will prevent the causes of your misfortunes,
or else (by his good advice and counsel) he will either expel, or at least
mitigate the vehemency of your sorrows.

His mutual exchange of love for love, will augment your joys, and
plentifully power into your bosom, those comforts which most of all you want,
and do desire.

The presence of a faithful friend will make you (in some measure) to smile at
your adverse fortunes; and will so qualify their bitterness, that thereby they
seem to be less, then indeed they be. Multa quae nos non possumus animo,
amico superamus mala: A friend will teach with patience to endure calamities,
which otherwise you shall not be able to digest.

If your estate be small, by friendship it will increase; and though it be very
splendent and eminent above others, yet the want of faithful friends will
soon impair it, and make it heavy and burdensome unto us.

The longest journey will seem to be but a common walk, if you be
fellowshiped with a faithful friend; and if you seek for a matchless
treasure, you shall surely find it, if you find a constant friend: and of all
other men, you shall be most miserable, if you have not such a one.

An ordinary companion, if he do but slightly fancy you will assist, and
aid you in your adversities, if they be but ordinary and common; but a sure
friend is tried both in matters of choicest consequence; and of greatest
danger: In every society, some there are that will adventure some part of
their substance, and of their superfluity and store, to do their distressed
companion some little good. But a true and a faithful friend reckeneth not of
al his possessions, nor of al his goods, no he esteems not his own liberty,
nor his life; (if by the loss of them) he may preserve and keep his friend,
whom he inwardly loves, from like important harm, it therefore behooves you
much (My Son) that in the choice of those you entertain to be your friends,
you do observe (above other) principally these rules.

First of all, Rules touching friendship.
that your friends nature, and his qualities, may in some proportion have a
similitude, and a resemblance with your own, for in those two respects, so
near should your friend be, like unto your self, that when you look on him,
you must suppose and think, that his picture is your own, his will must agree
with yours, One mind betwixt friends.
and yours must consent with his, what he does loath, you must refuse, and what
he delights in, you must especially embrace; except reason do persuade you
otherwise, and that thereby you can reclaim him from his error, for in all
precepts, and in all rules, concerning the choosing, and the using of a
faithful friend, all things must be seasoned with Religion, with wisdom, and
with virtue, for without them there must be no friendship, nor any yielding to
the affections, inclinations, or motions of your friend. Secondly your friend
may not conveniently be your superior: Equality among friends.
except he (being so) will be contented, and pleased (for friendships sake) to
make you his companion, and will repute you to be his equal. Amicitia enim aut
pares facit, vel quaerit. Except it be among equals (either indeed, or else by
mutual acceptance) there is no true and faithful friendship.

Thirdly when you have gotten a faithful friend (which is as rare a novelty,
No Jealousy in friendship.
as a black swan) you must together (with him) have but one heart in two
bodies, and you may not suspect him to be unconstant, faithles, or untrue, for
such hateful jealousy destroys frie^dship.

Et solemn videtur e Mundo tollere, qui tollit Amicitiam.
He seems of Sun the heavens to deprive,
That from the world true friendship seeks to drive.
Fourthly, you must not suffer your friend to flatter you: Nam nulla est in
Amicitia pestis grauior quam adulatio, There is not a greater enemy unto
friendship, No flattery in friendship.
then base and servile flattery.

For a flatterer seems to faune upon his friend when (for his private
commodity and gain) he could be contented to spoil him, if he might.
Flattery.
As a Be has honey in his mouth, but stingeth with his tail: So a flatterer
speaks smoothly when mischief is lurking in his double heart. He bears
water in one hand, and carries fire in the other, he has roses in his mouth,
and thorns and prickles in his breast.

He frames his glozing speeches, to serve his own turn, without regard
whether his words be true or false.

He makes an Elephant of a Fly, and his tongue waits upon untruth, as a
Noble man's horse does for his master at the Court gates. His flattery hurts
more then a mad dog, which biteth cruelly, and when he speaks fairest, then
is there greatest cause of fear.

Saepe latet molli coluber sub graminis vmbra:
In greenest grass Mischief to work, Mantuan. 138.

A stinging Serpent often does lurk.
Kings by such Traitors are sooner supplanted, then subdued by their open
enemies, and inferior persons are more often beguiled by sweet, then by bitter
words.

A flattering friend will salute you with his hat, Theatrum Mundi.
when his heart deuiseth, how he may deprive you of your head. Such a flatterer,
Sledan de quatuor Imper 32.
and such a fained friend was Cicero who (whilst he followed Pompey in his
succesful wars) disdainfully depraved Caesar, to magnify and to extol
Pompeyes honor. But when Caesar had subdued Pompey, and compelled him by
flight, to meet his own death in Egypt, he the^ exalted Caesar's name above
the moon. But as soon as Caesar was murdered by Brutus and Cassius in the
Senate house, he publicly scoffed at him, and reviled him as the capital
enemy, and arch-traitor both to the people, and to Rome it self.

As it is an unworthy thing, that a man should live only to please himself:
so is it hateful unto honest men, that any man should live to be pleasing by
his flattery unto others.

Such flattering friends Alphonsus King of Aragon could not endure, who being
asked, qui fuerunt sibi consiliarij fidelissimi, who were his most faithful
friends and counselors? made this answer, Mortui scilicet libri, qui non
adulantur: Such as are Dead (quoth he) meaning thereby his books, who would
not flatter him.

Tiberius would not permit a known flatterer to call him King, or Emperor.
And Caligula, not as a Tyrant, though he were a hateful one; but as an
Emperor regardfull to preserve his state, and person from ruin, and from
destruction, commanded that all his courtiers and attendants, which were
addicted to servile flattery, should be put to death.

By daily experience we are taught, that Adulatores fiunt ex lingua et ventre.
flatterers are composed only of a tongue to speak smoothly, and of a belly,
which must be pampered, and stuffed up with such viands and costly dainties, as
may be catered, and provided by the labor of the tongue.

Now as you may not admit him to be your friend, No dissimulation in friendship.
that flattereth you, so must you be careful to foresee, that your self do
not dissemble with your friend.

For a dissembler offends not through Ignorance against his will, but with a
resolved purpose to cozen, Luther super Galath. 190.
and to deceive, and under a false pretense of honesty, and of truth, he
shadoweth gross hypocrisy. Whereby he wins opportunity, to put in
practice (without suspicion, or jealousy) such villainies, as have been
contrived in his double heart. Such a dissembler was Lysander, who purposing to
make havoc of the Gracians, Plutarch in vita Lysandri. 453.
willed them to preserve their lives within the City of Athens, for that he
intended to waste the Countries abroad, and would destroy all such as he found
in them: by means whereof, multitudes of credulous people (believing that he
purposed to show favor unto that City, and unto all such as should be
therein) repaired thither. But forthwith he gyrded them round about with his
Lacedemonian army, and with a merciless Siege, suffering none to issue forth,
by reason whereof greater numbers of the Athenians were more quickly wasted,
and consumed by Mortality, and Famine then all his forces could in a longer
time have devoured with their swords, page 449.
whereat he boasted scoffingly, and said: That when a Lions skin would not
serve the turn, a Foxes must, such a fained, and such a dissembling friend, is
worse then an open enemy, for as Josephus does affirm, Antiq. Judaeorum. lib.
6.
in the professed maliciousness of an enemy, a man finds the one half of
his comfort, but the secret envy of a dissembling friend cannot be quickly
discovered, or avoided.

Such a fained friend (holding with the hair, Bercho Reduct. Moral. 123.
yet running with the hound) is fitly compared to a comet, which by her lucid
light seems to be a planet, but being none, is soon extinguished and
vanished quite away.

Such a friend (like to the summers swallow) affords his helping presence, in
the hot sunshine of prosperity, but betaketh himself to a wilful exile, and
banishment, when adverse fortunes do enforce his friend to deplore his case,
and to implore his help.

Such a friend (to fit his own purpose, and to serve his own turn) inclines
his unsettled affections to all manner of purposes whatsoever. As a ducke does
hers when (for food and sustenance) she goes on the land with beasts, and
swimmeth in the water with fishes, and flies in the air with birds.

A dissembling friend in the outward show is fair, spotless, and without any
blemish, like unto a swanne, but his inward parts do give small contentme^t,
either in taste or in color, that is to say, in honesty, or in love. A shadow
plainly represents the shape of the body of a man yet it altogether wa^teth
substance, and a dissembling friend seems to be such a one as will be ready,
and very forward to perform all necessary and fitting services to his friend,
but his dissembling and double heart will not permit him, when times and
occasions do require, to do him any good, Sledan de quatuor Imperijs.
such a dissembling friend was Ptolomey, Dionisius king of Egypt unto Pompey
promising unto him many gracious favors, when he fled for succor to him, but
to gain Caesar's love, and favor, he secretly deprived Pompey of his life.

A dissembling friend looks upon his friend (as Lea did) with a squint eye,
and seems to be such a one, as indeed he is not, for as a barge-man turning
his face one way, roweth another, so a dissembling friend, has honey in his
mouth, but poison is in his heart.

He is like unto the glow-worme, which in the darkness of the night, seems
to be fire, but is none, for he promises faith and fidelity, when as his
best thoughts are fraughted with hypocrisy, and al his imaginations are
contriuing how he may deceive.

Therefore this short discourse, which so plainly describes the folly, and the
vanity of such false and fained friends ( My son) beware, beware, I say,
that you dissemble not with your friend, for no dissembler loves constantly,
and where there is no constant love, there true and faithful friendship can
take no place, nor bear sway.

And when you have enricht your self with so inestimable a treasure, as
faithful and honest friends are, Friends 'must not be forsaken for trifling
faults.
then be you right well advised, that you take not hold upon small and trifling
occasions, to estrange your self from them, but let this resolution abide and
dwell with you: That such as love you as their friend, cannot abuse you as
their foe: and that such as do affect you in their hearts will not willingly
offend you with their tongues, nor hurt you with their hands, and that though
by means of unadvised rashness, they happen to do you some wrong, yet they
will advisedly reform, and amend their faults, Humanum est errare: it is an
incident to the frailty of man, sometimes to speak, and some times to do
amiss.

A skillful Hunter will not put away a cunning Hounde, because he has a little
faulted in hunting, and straied from the game. A strong ship is not by and by
forsaken and lodged in her dock, because now and then she is searched, and
pierced with some leake.

A good horse is not suddenly cast off, because he has once or twice by a
misfortune stumbled, and fallen to the ground.

Nor may a faithful friend be abandoned, though some times his actions be not
in all points answerable to our wills.

Neither must you associate to your self good friends, We must not get friends
to gain by them.
in hope to make some profit and gain by them, for unto a faithful friend, it
is much better to give, then to receive, or to take any thing away from him,
and in your bounty to your faithful friend, you ought to imitate the Fields,
who do restore to the husbandman, a greater increase of benefit, 1. Timothy.
cap. 6. v. 10.
then they did receive from him. Covetousness says S. Paul, is the root of
all evil, but that Covetousness, which tempts a man not to love his friend,
but for gain and profit sake, is the worst fruit that proceeds from a
Covetous mind.

No man will be willing by sinister means to deceive himself of his own
goods, a man's friend is himself, therefore he that deceitfully takes any
thing from his friend, unwisely takes it from himself.

As virtue is to be loved, only because she is virtue, and for her ownesake,
so a faithful friend must be respected, only for his own sake, and because
he is your worthy friend. Hence it is, as you may read, that many have been
willing to have died, yea that some of them have died to save their frie^dsfro^
the like peril and mischif.

Their names are better known, then their examples practiced: this therefore
shall now suffice to inform you, that it is much better to enjoy a true and
faithful friend, then to possess much gold.

Now though your friend be more then a principal part, Reveal not all secrets
to your friend.
or member of your self, yet do I counsel you to retain your chiefest secrets
of choicest importance toyour self.

For unto him you do commit your liberty, and your fortunes, unto whom you
do reveal such counsels, and such secrets.

An earthquake, is able to displace and to remove the foundations of the
strongest Cities, friends are not so surely grounded and founded, as Cities
are, therefore lesser causes then such as be miraculous, may make your friend
to be your foe^ no man's judgment is so infallible, that he cannot be deceived
in choosing of his friend, his own integrity is no sufficient warrant for
another man's fidelity and love.

A good touchstone tries base copper from good and perfect gold, but an honest
mind cannot so plainly discover the inward intentions of another heart.

One wise man may pass his censure, and sentence of another wit, if he fill
his hearers ear with sharp and pleasant conceits, savoring of discretion, and
of learning, but whether, or no, that wit be matched with an honest heart, he
knows not, because honesty consists as much in the inward thoughts, as in
the outward words or deeds. Seeing then, that to choose a friend which shall be
both honest and faithful, there is such difficulty; nay seeing it is almost
impossible ( My Son) let it suffice you, to love your chosen friend with your
heart for his own sake, whilst in proof, you find him to be honest, but
reveal not unto him, your chiefest secrets, nor your counsels of greatest
moment and importance, least if (in the end) he proving to be unfaithful, you
be enforced (but too too late) to repent your unwise, and credulous folly.

The next thing, Honesty and whordome.
which (with more then ordinary affection, and vehement persuasions) I advise,
and require you to embrace, is Honesty of life, the same being a gemme of so
rare, and so in estimable a price, thatnone but such as are assisted by God,
can purchase her. An honest life makes a man's presence to be both lovely, and
comely, as women are more amiable, when they have neatly attired themselves in
their looking-glasses. S. Paul affirms: 1. Cor. 6.
That our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, and thereupon he demands
this question in some sort by way of admiration, and of wonder, shall we then
make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid.

To live well and to enjoy a blessed and a happy life, is nothing else but to
live honestly, for without honesty all our lives are polluted and defiled, as
streams of water must be corrupted, if the springs, from which they do
descend, be filthy and unclean.

When Solomon, (by too much experience) was instructed, that by his wanton
conversation with lewd and strong women, he had offended the majesty of his
God, (partly by way of repentance for that sin, and partly to admonish others
to abhor their society, and alluring company, he could then-say.

A Whore forsakes the guide of her youth (that is, Prou. 2.
her Husband) and forgets the covenant of her God) that is, her solemn vow
of honesty which she made in the congregation when she was married, and then
(with a surely) he was able to affirm, that her house tends to death, and
her paths unto the dead, that all such as go unto her, do not return
again, neither take they hold of the way of life.

Then could he say, Prou. 6.
that the lips of a strange woman drop as an hony-combe, and that her mouth
is more soft then oil. But the end of her is bitter as wormwood, and sharp
as a two edged sword, that her feet go down to death, and that her steps
take hold of hell.

Then could he give to another this advice. Keep thee from the wicked woman,
Pro. 6.
and from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman, desire not her
beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids for by
means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread, can a man
(faith he) take fire in his bosom and his clothes not burn? or can a man go
upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? So he that goes into his neighbors
wife, shall not be innocent, he that commits adultery with a woman, is
destitute of understanding, he that does it destroys his own soul, he shall
find a wound, and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be put away.

We may further read in those his proverbs: Prou. 7.
That he that follows the straight ways of an harlot, is as an ox that
goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks to be corrected, that her
house is the way unto the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death.

That the mouth of a strange woman is as a deep pit, Prou. 22.
and that he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall therein, that a whore is
a deep ditch, Prou. 23. Prou. 26. Prou. 36.
and a strange woman is as a narrow pit, that he who uses harlots, wastes his
(ubstance, and should not therefore give his strength unto women.

By all which descriptions, caueats and admonitions, that prudent and best
experimented king discovers plainly, and to excellent purpose, the ugly and
loathsome shapes of those beastly and filthy monsters, and endeuoreth to make
them (as indeed they ought to be) hateful and deformed, both in the eyes, and
also in the hearts of virtuous, and of honest men.

You may also read in the holy scriptures (all which were published for our
learning, Deuteronomy. 23.
and for our instruction, that the price of a dog: and the price of an
harlot, were reckoned and accounted to be one.

Because as a dog fawneth upon every passer by, so a harlot prostituteth her
self impudently to every man that will entertain her. When Painters by their
art, and by their skill do draw the portracture of Venus, Imago Deorum. 343.
that lascivious wanton, and Goddess (as she was termed) of unchaste and
dishonest love, they (sometimes) do leave her naked, whereby is signified,
that such as do plunge themselves in the vanity of her lewd follies, are
naked and deprived of all grace and goodness, and of all virtuous qualities
whatsoever.

And sometimes they paint her swimming in a quiet and in a calm sea, Dewtr. 23.
noting thereby, that such as do wantonly solace themselves in the sugared
delights of a lascivious and a whorish life, are subject, and in great peril
(yea in a moment, and in the midst of their security and dishonest life) to
be overwhelmed with destruction, as a quiet and a peaceable sea, is suddenly
troubled withstormes and with tempestuous winds.

The end of a lascivious man, is seldom or never commendable and good.

He that saileth in Cupids ship, shall hardly (if ever) arrive into the haven,
or port of godliness and of virtue

Many men have received their deserved praise, because they have hated
uncleanness and wanton lust, but the beastly use, and wicked practice thereof
never yet made any man to attain unto true worship, or true honor.

King David (if he had not thoroughly repented for that sin) had been shut, 2.
Sam. 12. v. 13.
and pierced through with the fiery dart of Gods vengeance, and of his wrath,
the wicked Judges which impiously, and lewdly assaulted Susannas chastity
(failing of their ungodly purpose, and yet falsely accusing and condemning her
were (by the prophet Daniel) found to be guilty of notorious villainy and
injustice, and were (according to their merits and deserts) stoned to death, in
the sight of all the people. Nomb. 25.2.8.9.
The Israelites in the wilderness committed whoredom, and were for the same
sin plagued grievously with the pestilence, and with the sword.

A mong the decemuiri in Rome Appius Claudius ravished Vergina the daughter of
Verginius a worthy Roman, whereupon he was deprived of his office, Plutarch.
and that authority and dignity was (for a time) abolished, and taken quite
away.

And Sextus Tarquinius the wicked son of as bad a father, Hurim Schedell. 65.
Tarquinius Superbus (the last of the Roman Kings) by like rage and violence,
Sledan de quatuor Imperijs.
ravished Lucretia the wife of Noble Collatinus, for which offense, himself,
his Father, and all their name were banished from Rome, and the kingly
government (which had continued there under seven Kings for the space of 244.
years) was extinguished, and the Consulship of two Senators was established in
steed thereof.

The wanton dishonestie of Paris king Priams son, Dares Phrigius
with fair Helena, the wife of Agamemnon, occasioned the ruin and the
destruction of the famous, and most renowned City of Troy, and the deaths of
many thousands of Princes, and of valiant men of war. Antonies wanton love
with Cleopatra was the ruin of them both.

The inordinate affection, which king Demetrius bare unto his concubines,
Plutarch in vita Demetrij. 896.
and to his curtezans, made him to levy a great tax of two hundred and fifty
talents, and which he bestowed upon one of those wanton minions, to provide
her soap, by means whereof he lost the dutiful affections of his subjects,
and was reckned to be but a wantonking. Idem fo. 38.


Rodorick, sometimes king of Spain, filthily ravished Cuba, Felicity of man.
48.
the daughter of the Earl of Cepta, for which cause her father revolted to the
Mores, and incited them to invade Spain, which they did, and with his succor
and assistance became Lords over Rodoricke, and subdued to their government all
his countries.

Tymolea a renowned and chaste Lady among the Thebans (at the taking of that
City) was villanously ravished by a soldier, Plutarch in vita Alexandri. page
678.
who (having done to her that intolerable injury and wrong) demanded of her,
where her treasure was? who made answer that she had cast it into a well in
the back most part of all her house to preserve it, but whilst the soldier
(being greedy to have the spoil of them) looked narrowly into the well, the
deflowred Lady (to revenge her self) standing close behind him, took up his
legs and threw him headlong into the well, and forthwith stoned him to death.

To abandon this beastly and loathsome sin from the Romans, Marcellus (having
subdued the Siracusans) placed the Temple of Venus at his return without the
Gates of Rome. Signifying thereby, that all lascivious wantons ought to be
banished out of that renowned and fair City.

Yea so ielous was Cato Censorius of any manner of example that might entice
others to wantonness and unto dishonestie of life, Plutarch in vita Mar: Cato.
page 356.
that he deposed Manlius from his Senatorship in Rome, only for that in the
presence of his daughter he had kissed his own wife.

Much deceived therefore was Aristippus the Philosopher, Niphus de pulchre et
amore. 145.
who (like unto an Epicure) placed the Summum bonum, and chiefest happiness
and felicity of man, in the actual exercise of lascivious, and of wanton lust.

There is no earthly solace, joy, or comfort, that can be compared to the
peace, and to the tranquillity of a quiet conscience, neither is any man's
conscience more joyful or more quiet then his, who was never infected, or
polluted with this sin.

It was Esaus profaneness, Genesis 25.
that made him to sell his birthright, and his inheritance for a mess of
pottage.

And it is a lascivious man's foolishness, and his folly, that for a short
fleshly delight, and a little vain, and filthy pleasure, he will abandon the
tranquillity, and the peace of his immortal soul.

Therefore (my son) expose not the wife of your youth (I mean your virgin
chastity) to the impudent and whorish enticements of a shameless harlot.

For all her pleasures are but pain, all her joys are without true mirth, all
her comforts are but sorrows, and her crafty baits do kill, as the fishers
do. Keep her therefore from you, as enemies are carefully debarred from
entering into a besieged City, and let her not come near you, least, whilst
you sleep in her lap, she bereave you of all godliness and virtue, Judges.
16.
as Dalila did Sampson of his hairs, in which his strength did consist.

Leave her as the Israelites did the land of Egypt, Exodus 17.3.
but never desire, nor long (as they did) to return to her again. Remember
how temperate and chaste Alexander the great, sometimes was, Plutarch in vita
Alexandri.
who never touched the wife, nor daughters of Darius, albeit, that (as unto a
conqueror) they were or might have been made subject to his lust. And call to
mind his wonderful virtue, when as he chastely passed by all the fairest women,
and maidens of the Persians (whom he had vanquished) looking upon them only,
as men use to look upon images, and upon pictures, which have no life.

And think upon the modest chastity, Idem in vita Scip Affric. page 1088.
and much commended honesty of Scipio Affricanus, unto whom (when he had taken
new Carthage in Spain) the fairest, and the most beutifullladie of al his
prisoners, being the young wife of Luceius the prince of the Celtiberians, was
brought, that with her he might have solaced himself, after his turmoiles in
those wars, but preserving her honor, and her honesty, he restored her
untouched to her husband. God knows al things.


And think not that any secret place can hide or cover him from the presence
of almighty God, that perpetrateth that abominable sin.

For God that fashioneth men's hearts, knows all their warkes. He knows the
secret thoughts of men, Ps. 33.15. Ps. 44 21. Ps. 94.9. God sees all things.
Ps. 139.
and that they are but vain. If his eyes saw us, when we were without form.
And if our bones were not hidden from him, though we were made in a secret
place, and fa shioned beneath in the earth, shall he not then behold us, being
made and fashioned in our full and perfect shapes? And shall he not then
discover our nakedness, when sinfully we do pollute our selves, and defile
our members with harlots, and with whores? God hears all things. Ps. 194.
Has God (which is omnipotent, and only wise) planted the ear? and shall not
he hear? Has he formed the eye, and shall not he himself see? Are not all
our sins, and all our transgressions written and recorded in his book? yea
verily. Ps. 1.6.
The Lord knows the way of the righteous, Ps. 139. Eccles. 12.
and the way of the wicked shall perish. There is not a word in our tongue, but
he knows it, yea, God will bring every work unto judgment with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

Since then God sees and hears, and knows al things, though they be spoken
or contrived, or committed, and done in the most secret corners of the house.
If light and darkness be unto him alike, and seeing that no evil can dwell
with him, beware, beware (I say) of this denouring and deadly sin of damnable
whoredom, the guilt whereof will cleave as fast to the offenders conscience,
and to his soul, 2. Reg. 5.
as Naamans leprosy did unto Gehazies flesh.

Run from her therefore, as from a Lion, and from a Bear, for when she
fawneth and flattereth most, she destroieth soonest, as does the Crocadile,
and she leaves for an enheritance for her children, shame to disgrace them,
poverty to afflict them, and Gods eternal anger and vengeance to torment and
plague them in the world to come. Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua, Evil
words do corrupt good manners.

Therefore be you well advised, Modest talking.
and very wary, that your talk and communication be not wanton, lascivious,
or uncomely, and carefully avoid the company of all loose, and of all
suspected women, and then (if daily you implore Gods favor and his grace, for
your assistance and help) you shall never be polluted nor defiled with this
filthy loathsome and beastly sin of whordome: Cor. 1.6.19.
but you shall preserve your body spotless, as the temple of the holy Ghost.

And further (to the end that a luxurious unchaste life may not defile you) you
must especially be careful, Idleness.
that idleness be avoided, and (like unto an enemy) put to flight.

For dishonestie waits upon idleness, as the eyes of a servant do upon the
hands of her mistress.

It follows idleness as a shadow does the body, but if idleness be exiled,
then lust grows faint, as a sick patient does, when by his physician he is
deprived of much blood.

Hence it is, 2 arland.
that learned Barlandus in his Aphorisms says thus: Nulla re alia facilius
obruuntur libidinis incitamenta, quam labor. The allurements of Venus, and the
temptations of filthy lust, and of dishonestie, are not by any ways or means
sooner or better shaken off, then by labor, by travel and by pain. Otiasi
tollas periere eupidinis arcus. Lust has no command, where idleness bears
no sway.

Quaeritur Aegistus, Onidius.
quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
Aegistus soon became adulterate,
When he his life to sloth did dedicate.
The end of such men is never good, who bequeathing, and (as it were)
sacrificing their whole time unto idleness and pleasure, can do no manner of
good.

Numa Pompilius to avoid sloth and idleness in Rome, divided the whole City
into several parts, quartring them most fittingly for every several mystery,
Plutarch in vita Numa Pompily. 72.
and trade.

And Pericles to avoid that enormious sin (as the root and mother of many
other vices and sins, sent great numbers of sloathfull people, into Cheronesa,
Idem in vita Periclis page 163.
and into the Islands of Napos, of Andros, and into many other places in Greece,
there to be trained up in honest mysteries and trades. Cymon (to the end that
the Soldiers of Athens, should not be infeebled by means of idleness and
luxury) compelled them in times of greatest peace to wear their armor, Idem
in vita. Cimon.
and to carry their weapons daily in their hands. By means whereof they not
only continued good and perfect soldiers, but were maruellously feared by their
enemies.

Licurgus made a law, that no child among the Spartans should be brought vpin
idleness, nor be suffered loitringly to spend his time, Idem in vita Licurgi. 52.
but should be instructed in some good thing or other, by means whereof he
might be the more capable (as he increased in years) to be employed in some
one or other profitable art and trade.

Tamberlan, the victorious Parthian (who scourged Bajazet, the great Emperor of
the Turks, with the fierce fury of his revenging hand, slaying, Harim Shed of
236.
and killing in one battle more then two hundred thousand of his men, and
carrying Baiezet himself with him as a slave, and as the Trophey of his
victories in a golden Cage) permitted no man in his army to be idle, by means
whereof his camp in the field was ruled and governed as a well ordered City,
wherein every man is ouerviewed and hardly kept to the exercising of his
mystery and trade: from idleness ensues no good effect, Praestat otiosum
esse, quam nihil agere, it is much better to pick strawes then (being idle) to
do nothing at all. Of that opinion was Mantuan when he said, Otia damnantur
quae multa negotia tractant, that sloathfull and that lazieidlenesse, is most
of all to be condemned, which imployeth her self unto no labor.

Qui molam fugit, fugitfarinam, he that scorneth to go unto the mill, must
eat nobread.

The Catt deserves not to eat Fish, which (being over curious and dainty of
her labor) refuses to wett her foot. Hermanus Hessus. 73.
As horses (for our commodity and profit) are labored almost every day, so
must we be busied always, in one or another thing which is good.

For if a man's mind be made dull and heavy through idleness and sloth, he
will then be altogether unfit for any worthy attempt, and service whatsoever.

If after the creation of the world, God had first of all created man before
any other of his creatures, then might he have had some colorable excuse, to
have spent his time in idleness.

But God created man, after he had created all his other creatures, that he
might forthwith be employed, and occupied in the works of his creators hands.

It is not lawful for any Scholar in a grammar school to sit idle among his
consorts and companions, but he must employ himself to learn such books, as
by his master are appointed to his charge and task.

So when the great volume and book of the world, and of all things which are
therein, is spread and laid abroad to each man's open view, none must be idle,
but every man must diligently employ himself in such affairs and business,
as God (his master) has committed to his care. A sloathfull hand (says
Solomon) makes poor, but the hand of the Diligent makes rich. Prou. 10.4.


A sloathfull man hides his hand in his bosom, Prou. 19.24. Prou. 20.4.
and will not put it to his mouth again, his punishment therefore is to beg
in the summer, but nothing shall be given him because he will not plough in the
winter. When a man is idle, his mind is encombred with many variable
cogitations, and sundry thoughts, but not with any which are virtuous and
good, if the air and the sea were not in continual motion, they would soon
be corrupted, and become noisome in steed of being commodious, and helpefull
for the life and use of man.

The fields unmanured will yield forth nothing but weeds, brambles and
thorns, an ox vnlabored is most unfitting for the plough.

A ship not used will sooner moulder and rot away, then if she were still
employed to that end for which she was made, and he that spends and passes
away his days in Idleness and in sloth (forsaking labor and travail and
pain) becomes unapt and unprepared for any good service and commendable
action whatsoever, and is thereby made more inclinable unto luxury, and to
dishonest lust, then a proud man is unto pride by gay and garish apparel, or
then a covetous man is to his particular sin, by the abundant increase of his
silver, and of his gold.

Now as uncleanness and lust are augmented by sloth and idleness, Niceness,
excess, Banqueting and Feasting.
so is it much provoked by superfluity and excess in diet, and by foolish
feastings. Nam sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus, when the belly is stuffed up
and pampered with dainty meats and pleasant drinks, then is the wit unable to
intertaine any sharp conceit, and the mind untoward and incapable of any
virtuous motion, or good conceit, Pinguis venture dormit libenter, the fullness
of the belly attacheth the whole body under the arrest of idleness and sloth,
and makes it a prisoner to ignorance and to stupiditie, and to filthy and
ungodly lusts, Pinguis venture non gigint tenuem sensum, and hence it is that
both the body and the mind also being dull, heavy and sluggish, with
superfluous feasting and banqueting, the whole man it self will easily be
tempted with lascivious and unlawful lust.

This position Darius approved to be true, Sledan de quatuor Jmper
when (to increase his lustful appetite, and to enable himself the more to
perform such wanton exercises, as with much exces he delighted in) he procured
from al foreign countries (with vnualable expense and charge) the most
exquisite and skillful cooks and artizans, that did excel and exceed others
in devising, compounding and making, such lusshious and luxurious meats,
drinks, sawses and such like confections as extraordinarily would augment the
superfluous humor of his immodest appetite and lustful actions.

The houses of Marcus Antonius, Platarchs lives. page 956. page 534.
and of Lucullus (as Plutarch tells us) seemed to be the curious palaces,
and the lustful courts of wanton Venus, by reason of the rich furniture,
vessels of silver and of gold, stately plays, sweet music, delicate
pasteries, costly banquets, rare devices, and the excessive abundance of all
things in them that might be pleasing unto any sense.

But because those vanities were allurements unto lust, the masters of those
superfluities were reckoned to be enemies to the common wealth.

More discrete and sober was worthy Crassas, Plutarch in vita Crassi. page 560.
who (albeit he were almost the richest Roman that lived in his time) yet would
he be served at his table with ordinary and decent sufficiencies, forbidding
all excess and costly diet, because they incited and provoked men to sin.
Idem in vita Lycurgi. page 52.


To banish all sloth and voluptuousness out of Sparta, Lycurgus banished all
banquetings and feasts, and in Rome such as used them, Idem in vita. Quinti
Flami nis. page 388.
were subject to be corrected by the Censor.

But most of all is a man provoked to lust by drunkenness, As Noah, and as Lot
were. Genesis 19: Genesis 9.
For drunkenness (depriving a man of the true and perfect use of his reason)
makes him brutish as a beast, and consequently a filthy prosecuter, and an
intemperate actor of such unchaste and unclean suggestions, as whores and
harlots do contriue.

Neither is whoredom the only sin, which as a vile effect proceeds from
drunkenness, for it produces other vices which are hateful unto God and to
good men.

When Alexander the great was drunken, Quintus cur^ius. lib. 8.
he caused Glytus his most familiar friend to be put to death, and burned the
renowned and beautiful City of Persipolis, Idem. lib. 5.
to please and to content the whorish fancy of Thais his wanton and lascivious
queen.

For both which wicked facts being (though all too late better advised) he
foolishly repented, and was sorry.

And Josephus in his discourse of the Jewish wars, De bello Iudaic^. lib. 1.
reports that when a king of the Jews, named Alexander had in his conquests
taken eight hundred Pharisees, as his prisoners, he caused them to be brought
upon the leads of his palace, and in their presence he made a royal feast
unto his nobles, and (being drunk and pleasing himself with such mirth as was
merciless) he caused all those prisoners to be put to death, and merrily
laughed at their misery. The ancient proverb tells us, that In vino est
veritas, a drunkard can keep no counsel, but foolishly he reuealeth the
inward counsels of his own heart, Garm. prou. 76.
Aebrietas prodit quod amat cor sieve quod odit. Hereof Josephus himself had
good experience, for having received by a bold soldier, a smoothing letter
from certain persons, In vita Iosephi. 542.
who (not loving him) had (he supposed) conspired his destruction and his
overthrow, and not prevailing (by any kind entreatie, or fair promises) to
understand the truth thereof from that undaunted messenger, Josephus
(pretending high favor and extraordinary love to that soldier) invited him
for money to carrowse in wine, which when he had immoderatly done, then of his
own accord (without any request or persuasion) he revealed the treason and the
treachery, whereby Josephus was sufficiently armed, because he was thereby
warned to prevent, and to avoid it. Furthermore, when men are drunken, they
are for a time (in a manner) senseless, and altogether unable to eschew their
own harms.

So was Holofernes, when Iudeth of Bethulia smote off his head with his own
sword. So was Aristobulus a Jewish king, when (being drunken) he was poisoned
by the Ambassadors of Pompey. Antiquit. Judaeorum lib. 14. page 359.


We may read that Alexander the great at a solemn feast, which he made,
proposed for a reward, Plutarch 708. in vita Plutarch.
a golden crown for him, who in quaffing could drink most, and that one
drunkard among the rest won it by drinking (at the least) four gallons, but
his vain honor quickly faded, for he died within four days after. A
drunkard pleases himself beyond measure, to say thus: The earth drinks up
the rain, the plants and trees do drink up the moisture of the earth, the
fruits and flowers do drink the juice and sap of the plants and trees,
wherefore seeing that all things do drink, I must and will drink too. And
thus does the excess of drink beguile many, making them of men to become
monsters, and bereaueth them of the right use of their reason, and foolishly to
display the banner and colors of their own shame.

Little remembering that Anacharsis said, that the first draught quenched
thirst, the second norished, Plutarch.
the third made men drunken, but the fourth made them stark staring mad.

And little regarding to imitate the example of Cato Vtican, who used to drink
but once at one meal. Idem in vita Cato, Vticam. page 770.


Or the saying of Aristotle, who affirmed that three things changed men's
natures, to wit lordship, women and wine, and little respecting, Pro. 20.1.
and less believing the true and the wise saying of King Solomon, that wine is
a mocker, and that strong drink is raging, and that whosoever is deceived
thereby is not wise.

Nor harkning to his advice, Prom. 23.
when he counsels thus. Look not upon wine when it is red, and when it
shows his color in the cup, or goes down pleasantly, for in the end it
will bite as a serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice, Grafton. 179.
and so did it hurt Hardicanutus king of the Saxons, within this land, who died
whilst he was carousing immoderately at a marriage feast, Theat of Gods iudgm.
and so did it hurt Anacreon the drunken poet, who was choked with the husk
of a grape: whilst he was swallowing down his superfluous boles of wine.

To preuentsuch immoderate bibbing and swinish quaffing, the Grecians had
Censours of their cups.

And the Heluetians permitted not any man to drink unto his friend, least some
occasion might be thereby offered to make men drunk. Grafton. 156. English
Statutes against Drunkenness. 5 E. 6. c. 25. Ia. 1. c. 9. 4. Ia. c. 4.5.7. Iac.
c. 10.


And Edgar king of the west Saxons commanded cups to be made with pinnes and
other marks, beyond which it was not lawful for any man to drink: far
different was that temperate and good kings practice, from that of the
Emperor, Tiberius Claudius Nero, who (in a common skoffe for his excessive
drunkenness) was nicknamed and called Biberius Caldius Nero.

But leaving this odious and abominable vice of drunkenness (as unworthy of
further labor of my pen, Drunkenness.
I now do advise and counsel you to take a brief survey of temperance,
Temperance.
as of a virtue, which far exceeds the large limits of all praise, because
(with sobriety and contentedness, she will moderate and season all your
deeds and actions whatsoever.

For if prosperity do advance you to higher promotions, dignities, offices,
or favors, then you can either well deserve, or reasonably expect, she will
instruct you, not to wax proud therewith, as the crow did when she was made
fair with the plumes and feathers of other birds, but was left naked and
deformed when (for her prides sake) every bird had from her taken her own
feathers.

And if adversity do invade you, she will teach you (like a valiant soldier,
and as a resolved man of war) to keep her from you (with courage) at the
spears point.

And if you cannot choose but become a prisoner unto misfortunes, she will then
instruct you with patience, to endure your pain, and joyfully to hope for
better hap, as Socrates did, who never altered his countenance for any
chance, were it good or were it bad.

If you be addicted to honest love, she will enable you (with sound reason) to
make your choice, and (for her virtues without wanton lusting) to love her whom
you have chosen, and if you cannot obtain such fitting and such pleasing
favors, as you sue for and do deserve, then she will advise you (with modest
discretion) to vnloue her from whom you can get no exchange of love.

And if you be injuriously wro^ged by a wrangling or by a froward Nabal, 1.
Sam. 25.
by temperance you shall be persuaded mildly to pass it over, and not to be
thirsty of revenge, she will persuade you in your diet to avoid excess for
your healths sake, as Lycurgus, Pompey, and as Crassus did.

In your apparel to be neither garish nor vile, but to be in the mean. In
wealth not to be prodigal, nor in sparing to be miserable. In your pleasures,
not to be wanton nor Stoickly to pass by them, without taking notice of them.
In great attempts not to be foolishly desperate, nor sheepishly fearful.

She teaches us (if we be beautiful) to think that we are but comely, and if
we be not well favored. She then informs us that by our inward virtues, and
good qualities, we are shaped and framed according to the similitude of God
himself.

If we be strong and lusty, she tells us that we must make a gentle use
thereof, because we shall be weak.

And if we be weak and feeble, she then advises us to hope for health and
strength again: she persuades us not to be angry without a cause, and not to
be furious, though a just occasion be offered.

If we be at liberty she commands us (for our own good) to use it well. And
if we be in captivity, she nurtureth us patiently to expect freedom and
deliverance from all those troubles.

When we have overcome others, she teaches us to overcome our selves (which is
a greater victory and conquest then all Alexanders were) for though he
oftentimes overcame many nations, yet could he seldom overcome himself.

In punishing of offenses, she informs us not to be too remiss nor too
severe.

If any noble and worthy act be by us performed for a private good, or for
public honor and profit to the common wealth, by temperance we are schooled
to crown it with our praises, without assentation or base flattery.

And if a well intended action be not seconded with fortunate success, she
then teaches us not to accuse the attempter thereof without reason or cause,
but modestly and kindly to impute the defect of speeding to the truth it self.

Temperance is never without measure, she prescribes bounds and limits unto
happiness, and by her mediation, she makes such as be fortunate, to be more
mighty and more strong.

She shows us the way by courtesy to be reconciled to our enemies, and to
regaine them to our selves, and with mutual respects to enlarge our faith and
hearty love to our worthy friends, she craves nothing to be repented of; she
is not immoderate in her desires, but submits all her affections unto
reason, if she love riches, she uses them well, she is not perplexed, not
vexed for the want of them. And if she loose them (having once had them) she
is not without measure grieved thereat.

It is not therefore (my son) so praiseworthie to be borne fair, and
beutifull and comely, as it is to be made comely, beutifull and fair by this
noble and heroical virtue of temperance.

Seek her therefore as a pearl of inestimable price and find her, though with
much travel and pain; for in her company there is contentedness and much
joy.

And when you do possess her, let her not go from you, but keep you only
unto her, as long as you have days to live. Humility.


And to the end that you may have the more pleasure in her company, Prou. 11.2.
let humility be her hand-maiden to attend upon her, for God gives grace unto
the humble, and with such as are lowly there is understanding and wisdom.
Ps. 37.11.
Meek men shall possess the earth, and have their delight in the multitude of
peace, an humble man treasureth up love, and is daily enriched with many
friends.

If misfortunes do violently run toward a man of an humble spirit, they
will pass by him, and will not hurt him, for he resists not but (lying on
the ground) can take no fall. Humility overcomes such as are otherwise
invincible, and raises such unto great honor as were of a mean estate. An
humble man is fast moared in a quiet haven, where he is free from tempests and
careless of all storms, he fears not the displeasures of potent and of
mighty men, because he will not provoke the least and the meanest unto wrath,
he strives not with his superior, nor skorneth the society of his inferior,
he exalts not himself because he is learned but is always more desirous to
harken then to speak.

He magnifieth not himself by reason of his riches (because they are not
permanent, he boasts not in his strength, because old age or sickness can
make him weak, he is not confident of his health, because he may quickly be
diseased.

Finally in his own reputation he is not such a one as he is indeed, Barland
Aphoris. 1 51.
but he is lesser then himself, yet greater then he who is great in his own
eyes. It is not true humility for a man to reverence his elders, nor to
dignifie his superiors, nor with good respects to reckon of his, equals for
this is rather to be deemed and esteemed a duty, but to prefer before
himself such as are honest and virtuous (yet in estate and in degree are lower
and inferior unto him) this, and none but this is true, and absolute humility.

A bucket before it can be filled withwater, must descend into the well, and
men by humility, and with humble spirits must first descend into the lowest
rooms of their meek hearts before they can be truly wise.

Vt nemo te euertat cadas sponte, that no man may be able to throw you down,
fall of your own accord.

Be humble that no stout stomach may find any occasion, or have any power to
make you lower then you will make your self to be, so shall your humility
raise you with more assurance of continuance then ambition or pride can.
Solomon says, Pride. Peru. 29.23.
that a man's pride shall bring him low, but that the humble in spirit shall
enjoy glory.

This was approved (by woeful experience) to be true by all the famous and most
renouned Cities in Greece, every one of them proudly co^tending against
theother (by force of arms) for pre-eminence and sovereignty, by means
whereof all of them in a short time were by their enemies ruinated and
subverted. Nunc seges est ybi Troia fuit.


The ambitious and unbounded haughtiness of Caesar was the cause of the wars
in Rome, and Pompeys pride weakened the Romans strength, and hastened his own
death, for ambitious minds make great men to attempt many desperate things,
and they are dangerous in the common weal. The prophet David tells us, Ps.
18.27. Ps. 31.23.
that the Lord casts down the proud looks, and that he rewards
abundantly the proud doer.

Before destruction (says he) the heart of a man is hauty. Ps. 18.12. Dau. 4.
So was Nebucadnezzers heart before he was cast from his princely throne, and
compelled by the sentence of God to eat grass in the field like a beast, for
the space of seuenyeares, until that by his punishment he acknowledged God,
and became humble.

And so was Hamans heart, who (being glutted and surcharged with those
unspeakable honors which were unworthily and without just deserts conferred
upon him by Ahashueroth the king, Ester. 7.
was hanged upon his own gallows at the same time, when (in his malice and in
his pride) he intended to have insulted wickedly upon the death of Mordocai,
and upon the bloody massacring, and murdring of Gods people the Jews.

And sowas Absoloms heart, 2 Samuel 18.
who (in his pride) traitorously and against nature affecting his fathers
crown and kingdom was in his flight suddenly hanged by the hairs of his head
on a tree, 2 Regum. cap. 18. et. cap. 19.
until his body was pierced through with three spears, by Ioab his mortal
enemy. And so was the heart of Senacherib who (trusting in his own strength)
and in the multitude of his men of war) impiously and proudly blasphemed the
great name of the living God, but was (forthwith) plagued with the loss of the
greatest part of his huge army, and not long after was murdered as he
sacrificed in the temple of Nisroch his God, by Adramelech and Sharezar his
own sons.

And so were the proud hearts of Caesar who (in his ambitious humor) scorned an
equal, and of Pompey who (disdained to admit of any superior) until Pompey
was compelled by Caesar to fly into Egypt where he was trecherously slain by
his false friend, Sledan. 31.
and that Caesar was by Brutus and Cassius assaulted and murdered with penkniues
in the senate house.

And so was the heart of that monster among men; Caligula, who caused the Gods
of the Grecians to be brought unto Rome, where he himself wore their
ornaments and crowns, and would be adored as a God. And so was the heart of
the proud wife of the Venetian duke, named Dominico Seluio, sister to Niceforus
the Emperor, Historia Italica.
who used ordinarily to wash her body in baths made of the dewes of heaven,
but was (before she died) choked, and poisoned with the noisome stench of her
own rotten and putrified flesh.

You may read that the Grecian monarch used the dining table of Darius the
late monarch of the Medes and Persians (being al made of beaten gold) for his
footstool as he sat at meat.

And that Pope Alexander the third, Harim Schedul. 102.
proudly treading upon the neck of the first Frederick abusing and perverting
the attributes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and converting them by way
of application to his own pride, said with king David (but with a wicked
meaning) Super Aspidem, et basiliscum ambulabis, et conculcabis Leonem et
Draconem: Thou shall walk upon the Aspe, and basiliske, Ps. 91.13. Harim
Schedul. fo. 192. Sledan. 83.
and shall tread the Lion and the Dragon under thy feet. Did not Pope Gregory
the seventh, compel the noble Emperor, Henry the fourth (in the depth of an
unseasonable winter) to attend, and to wait at his gate barefooted, by the
space of three days, before he would give him any audience, and absolve him,
being excommunicated, because he had conferred bishoprics on diverse men
without the Popes leave or consent (according the old and ancient rites,
privileges, and customs of the Empires.

These and such like monstrous effects of pride, do make men (in their own
eyes) to seem to be immortal Gods, when as (indeed) they are no better then
reprobate fiendes, and incarnate devils, and (instead of being famoused for
many virtuous qualities) to be infamed with perpetual ignominy and shame.

For like as a planet, by how much the higher it is, by so much the more slowly
it attaineth to the full compass of his sphere, so by how much the more a
proud man is elated and puffed up with vain glory and ambition, the further
off he is from his end, which is, or ought to be, God: as it appeared by
Lucifer and his bragging angels, who (in their usurping pride) coveting and
desiring to be Gods, were suddenly cast down from heaven, and transformed, and
changed in to hideous fearful and loathsome hagges of hell.

Therefore (my son) you must be wary that you clime not too hie, least (the
boughs failing you, by which you strive and struggle to ascend) you fall down
flat unto the ground, unable and hopeless to arise any more.

If you carry greater sails then your barks can bear, you shall undoubtedly
be drowned in the high seas of your own pride.

When pride possesses a man's heart, it poysoneth the whole man, like as a
devouring canker (having festered and putrified one principal member) quickly
by degrees destroys the whole body.

There is no calamity which (in the end) is not a familiar companion with
haughtiness, and with pride.

Neither is there any felicity or happiness that can make him truly blessed,
that is proud, and of an ambitious mind. Page 18.
Diogenes Lacrtius in Solons life reports, that when Craesus the great and
rich king of Lydia, had proudly apparelled himself, in the finest, fairest,
and most costly silks that could for any price be procured, and when he had
decked and imbost his body with the richest ornaments of pearl of gold, and of
precious stones which he possessed, and had with pompous majesty, seated
himself in his advanced royal throne he then demanded of Solon if (in all
the course of his life) he had ever seen and beheld so splendent and so fair
a sight, to whom the grave and wise Philosopher (mildly reproouing and
reprehending his vanity and pride) made answer, yea for that (quoth he)
cocks, hens, phesants, peacockes, partridges, and such like birds are more
gloriously clothed and covered with their own fair and beautiful feathers,
but thou (quoth he) art varnished and ouer-florisht with the excrements and
counterfaited colors and riches of other creatures.

A proud man's mind never takes rest, for when it is least occupied, it then
buildes castles in the air.

But an humble man knows, Humility.
that no man can attain unto happiness, but he that is lowly in his own
heart, for like as the highest soaring Eagle cannot be fed, except she do
descend from the skies, and fall upon the ground, so no man (of what estate or
condition soever he be) can be happy, either in this life, or in the life to
come, except he be humble and lowly, and leaving the hight of his proud and
ambitious conceits, do behave himself humbly both toward God, and also
toward men. In a word know this for a truth and surety, that this monstrous
and wicked sin of pride, draws down from heaven, Gods judgments and his
vengeance upon man.

And therefore seeing it must be hated with a perfect hatred, seeing it is most
assured in the end to receive a shameful fall, come not near unto her, for
she is as infectious as the plague, be not acquainted with such as (through
their pride and ambition) have heads which are lighter then their hattes, but
(contenting your self with your own estate, Self love. Boasting.
and living decently within the bounds and limits thereof) do you endeavor by
honest means, void of pride, to advance it when and as God will.

And (in any case) be not in love or liking with your self, nor with your own
conceits, neither do you relish too pleasingly your own actions and doings,
but rather frame them discreetely, to be such as that others (having just
cause) may speak well of them, and commend them, for nothing sounds more
harshly in a wise man's ears then a man's own praises, vainly proclaimed with
his own tongue, Laus propria sordet in ore. Endeavor your self and bend your
courses (rather for the practice of your virtues, then (for the vain boasting
and tatling of them by your self) to be esteemed and commended: Frustra enim
de radice gloriatur, qui nihil adfert nisi folia, it is an idle thing to
praise, and to commend that tree which brings forthno fruit but leaves.

It was Narcissus his vain folly, to drown himself, being in love with his
own watrie shadow.

And many men do foolishly vanish quite away, as shadows do without merit or
remembrance, because they do more affect to be well spoken of, then indeed to
do well.

Virtus in action consistit, the true honor of virtue consists not in the
only speculatiue knowledge and contemplation thereof, nor in boasting tatling
and idle talking, but in exercising of virtue, when she is known.

For like as a barking dog does not often bite, so he that bableth overmuch
of himself, does seldom put in practice any thing worthy of praise and
commendation, the deepest waters do glide and pass away with the smallest
noice, and a wise man is most silent, when he deserves best.

Converse not with such as (relating wonders of themselves) will strive to
persuade you, that they have out whet-stones insunder with their knives, and
that (with one word or with a stern look) they have compelled an boast of
armed men to fly before them.

Credit me, no wisdom can proceed from such boasters, leave them therefore
alone like unto windemils, upon the mountains of their own vanities, to be
turned about with every blast of wind of their own praise.

Next unto these (My son) my counsel is, Courtesy. Gentlentesse.
Affability. Clemency. Humanity.
that you be courteous, affable, gentle, and familiar in all your carriage and
behavior, unto all such as do either keep you company, or crave your help.
For none other qualities then these, can more commend you to your friends, nor
make you to be better respected among your foes, because they do bind your
wel-willers firmly to your friendship, and (in some sort) do procure wonder and
admiration in your enemies, when they shall see, and perfectly understand, that
the mildness of your nature (though perchance provoked) does neither incline
to anger nor to revenge, but rather unto a fair inuitation to reconciliation,
and unto love.

We may easily observe, that like as a generous (though a proud) horse is
sooner turned about with a gentle, then with an hard or a stubborn bit, so
many men's natures (though fierce and hasty) are notwithstanding sooner
reclaimed from rage and fury, by the courteous disposition, and gentle
humanity of those with whom they do contend, then otherwise they would be by
their asperitie and stoutness of their stomachs to command. Peragit
tranquilla potestas,
Quod violentanequit.


Clemency and gentleness have sooner freede some beseeged Cities from
sacking, from spoiling, from fire, and from the sword, then policy or
strength, or skill in arms could do.

The strong and the tall oak that proudly confronteth the boisterous and the
wherling winds, is sooner overthrown and tumbled to the ground then weaker
trees, and lower shrubbes are, which make no resistance for want of ability
and strength.

If a ship sailing on the seas, should stem both wind and tide, she will be
in great hazard and peril to be drowned. And if bitterness and rough
conditions be opposed against the violence of hasty spirits, there will be no
pleasing peace, but rather a beginning of perpetual mutinies and of iarres.

Soft clay makes strong and hard walls, and courtesy (mitigating other men's
wrath and furious passions) does both gain them and retain them for kind and
for hearty friends.

By courtesy and humanity, all societies among men are maintained and
preserved, Societas enim nihil aliud est quam amica hominum inter se coniuncta
familiaritas, society is nothing else but a mutual and a reciprocal exchange of
gentleness, of kindness, of affability, of familiarity, and of courtesy
among men. In histories we may read that Antonius Pius the Emperor was
singularly beloved of all men, because he was affable and friendly unto all.

And that Theodosius was so familiar with his subjects that he seemed only to
differ from them in the fashion and in the worth of his apparel.

And Traian (the Emperor) being on a time demanded why he was so familiar with
his subjects, made this answer, that a king ought to be unto his subjects such
a one as his subjects ought to be unto him.

Clemency in a man, may (in some sort) be compared to the love of God toward
man, for as God (loving us) satisfies and fills us with all good things, so
a man that is courteous and gentle, and beutified with Clemency and kindness
toward his friend helps him in what he is able, and stands him in steed,
when he may do him any good. Humanity pardons without suit or much
entreatie, such things as (among friends) are now and then unwittingly or
unwillingly committed and done amiss, and spares to give judgment, when it
sees and knows that grief and sorrow is conceived for an offense, it
pittieth where it may justly correct and punish, and it gains by mildness
where by severity it may strike.

Therefore let these fair and pleasant flowers, be the primroses in your
garland, set this rich jewel in the front of your brow, that others (beholding
it and taking perfect notice of so fair a sign) may voluntarily repair to you
as friends, and be kindly lodged in your love.

So shall your wel-willers be many, and your enemies very few, your friends
expectation shall be answered, and your self be pleased in the fruition of
their company and good liking.

Unto courtesy and to those other virtues, Patience.
you must join patience, which deserves no less to be commended and
embraced then the rest, because none other virtue is so good a preservative or
so sovereign an antidote against injuries received, and adversity to be
endured, as patience is, for if a man be wronged by his friend, she makes him
to banish anger, and tells him, Anger.
that in forbearing to revenge, he is truly valiant, who can suppress and
discreetely conquer his own rage.

She tells him, that anger is an infallible argument of small courage, and
that it is an ardent, and an eger appetite to revenge, and that no revenge is
free from its own proper danger.

She tells him, that an angry man is (for a time) a mad man, and that he
must therefore give place unto wrath whilst it runs and passes by,
according to the Poets wise instruction, when he says Currenti cede furori.

She tells him, Silius Italicus.
that whilst a man is furious, and with anger ranging, he wants the use of
reason, whichshould be the director and the guide of all his passions, and that
an angry man may sooner repent then amend what he does amiss. And that it is
more praise-worthie to pardon, then basely to revenge injuries and wrongs.

She presents before your eyes the example of the impatience of Coriolanus
the great Roman, Plutarch in vita Coriolani.
who used to be so angry, that he was senseless, until he did revenge.

And teaches you, Idem in vita Marcelli. page 319.
how much more commendable the patience of Marcellus was, who being falsely
accused of many faults to the City of Rome and to the senate there, by the
Syracusans, whom he had conquered, and having cleared himself of the^ all, was
notwithstanding so patient, that he not only remitted their wilful offense
and great ingratitude, but procured (of his own accord) a confirmation from
the senate, that they should enjoy their own laws, liberties and customs,
according to a former grant which he had made unto them in that behalf, Idem
in vita Polopid. page 299.
the like courtesy was showed by Epaminondas to the Thebans, when he had
cleared himself of such treasons, as by them were falsely objected against
him, and laid unto his charge. And of Marcus Antonius it is reported, that the
greater misfortunes that did befall him, Idem in vita Antonij. page 919.
with the more constancy and patience he did endure them all.

This is a principal effect of true patience, Adversity. Afflictions.
that if adversities do with rage and fury rush in upon a man, she
instructs him to bear them patiently as a burden imposed on his sholders by
God himself, it tells him that God chasteneth every one whom he does
receive, Heb. 12.6. 1. Cor. 10.13.
and tempts no man above his strength, and it teaches him to know that as
little children seem to be banished from their fathers houses (but are not)
when they are put forth to be nursed, but being grown to riper age and
strength, are joyfully received and entertained as members of their fathers
families, so a repentant sinner (when he is tried with any tribulation or
affliction for his souls health) seems for a time to be cast out, and to be
exiled from the love and presence of his most gracious and good God, but he is
not, for when those afflictions and those crosses have begotten in him a true
confession of his sins, an hearty repentance for his transgressions, and an
amendment of his wretched life, he is then received again by his father and
good God, and by him acknowledged for his child, as by the history of the
prodigal son it appears luke. 15. Patience persuades men quietly to endure
their trials, and easily to support their adverse fortunes. Reasons persuading
to pauence.


Either because there was no possibility that they might be avoided, or else
because they have deserved that cross and punishment, and more, or else
because adversity and affliction (sooner then ease or prosperity) will draw
them to the amendment of their sinful lives.

Or else because by them they should be seasoned for better fortunes, or else
because (if their afflictions be but small) they should thereby be persuaded,
yea thoroughly resolved of Gods favor, and of his love toward them, who has
not so grievously, and in that heavy measure corrected them, as he has
punished other men.

And if they be great and burdensome, that then (through repentance) they shall
in the end be recompensed with much joy, and be rewarded with unspeakable
gladness in the world to come.

These and many more be the sweet and the comfortable fruits, which (with a
liberal and an enlarged hand) patience powers into our bosoms.

It is written, Diogenes Laertius. 197.
that Diogenes the Cinicke used instantly, and with much importunity to crave
and beg rich gifts of the statues and pictures of Noble men, of Princes, of
Kings, and of Emperors (which long before were dead) because he would exercise
his patience in not obtaining of such things as so earnestly he had sued for.
Jdem. page 59.


And that Socrates was so patient, that being immoderately and immodestly
chidden and reviled by Zantipe (his cursed and froward wife) he quietly went out
of his doors, to free himself from the hearing of those domestical chidings,
but as he sat under his window, he was filthily polluted and defiled with
urine, which in great abundance, she powered upon his head, whereat he
smilingly and mildly iested without choler or anger in this quiet and merry
fashion, I knew (quoth he) that after so great a thunder, a shower of reign
would fall.

You see therefore that a patient man (if he cannot with mildness prevent it)
endures (without anger or desire to revenge) as much injury and wrong,
English fugitives.
if not cruelty, as the worst inuentons of his enemies can^^ add unto the
extremity of their hatred.

He will not bend his own bow, though himself be in hazard to be shot quite
through. But if he may peaceably and quietly prevent, or avoid his own
danger, he then breaks in sunder the darts, and plucketh out the teeth of
anger, of rage, and of fury, that they may do no harm.

Seeing then that patience will not be servile or slavish unto anger, nor to
revenge, but will rather contend and strive by meek sufferance to prevent, or
to bear such future mischiefs, as rage and hasty fury cannot avoid, let her
be entertained by you as a friend that always brings with her contentment,
Contentment
without which riches and honor, and pleasure (men's chiefest darlings) and all
things else will be as vnwelcomed, as water is into a ship, and will sound no
better then music out of tune, nor taste any sweeter then bitter pills, which
sick men (against their stomachs) are enforced to swallow down. And thus (my
son) I having briefly discoursed upon these former qualities, Liberality
shall be the next virtue which I will commend unto you for her own sake:
Liberality.
but cannot commannd you to put her much in practice, because your means are
small.

Yet do I wish you to understand, that such is her comelines and beauty, that
it cannot be discerned, but in a fair and in a large glass.

That her mind is so noble, and truly generous, that she is only familiar
with men and women of good ability and of good worth.

That she is strong as a Lion, and so powerful, that at her pleasure, and when
she lists, she can throw down huge and mighty gates of brass.

That Cities and countries, and kingdoms, and Empires, are subject to her
command, that she discovers secret things, and understands Princes counsels.

That she compels the fiercest and the stoutest enemies to stoop, and to
become captines at het beck. And makes weak armies to prevail against such
as are puisant and very strong.

Without liberality, a rich man cannot establish his estate, nor purchase
fame. Neither can poor men (without her) receive such relief and comfort as
their necessities do require.

Without liberality, charity soon waxes cold, and works not by love.
Without her, arts and sciences are laid asleep with ignorance, that ugly
monster, as Og the king of Basan was with his cruelty and tyranny lodged in
his iron bed.

Without her peace cannot long continue, nor wars be waged with good and
fortunate success.

Liberality resembles and represents Gods bounty, in being open handed to
such as want and stand in need of help, she teaches rich men rightly to use
their riches which they possess. And true liberality does principally consist
in these things. Eight rules in Liberality.


First that we give that which is our own, and not that which belongs unto
another man, for otherwise we shall no less offend then thieves, bribers, and
extortioners do, who practice their unconscionable villainies thereby to enable
themselves to be charitable unto other men who stand in need of help.

Secondly, that we give not where nothing is deserved for it argues a great
defect and scarsitie of discretion, to be bountiful to an unworthy man.

Thirdly, that in giving we do proportion our gift with the merit and desert,
for proportion in all things (especially in the practice of liberality) is
carefully to be respected and observed.

Fourthly, that in giving we do observe a fitting and a convenient time, for
he which gives not, when by his gift he may do good to the distressed party,
upon whom he purposes to extend his bounty, cannot at any other time benefit
and pleasure him, as he intends by his gift to do.

Fifthly that (though upon good desert) yet we give not so much, that by the
large extent of our liberality our own families be wronged and do want, for
he who is not careful of those whom God has committed to his charge, is
worse then an infidel, and has denied the faith.

Sixthly, that we do not give in hope to receive again for it is a more blessed
thing to give then to take.

Seventhly, that we give with a ready and with a willing mind, for Hilarem
datorem amat Deus. God himself is well pleased with a cheerful giver.

And lastly, that we give not any thing to, and for a wicked end and purpose.
Finis enim beat exitum, the end of our liberality must be honest, for
otherwise we cannot be truly liberal. Now as every one that works upon
timber is not a cunning and a skillful Carpenter, so every man or woman that
gives gifts is not rightly and indeed liberal, for if his gift be not
approved and warranted by all these former observations, then it is not the
effect, or the fruit of liberality, but of prodigality, and it is rather
disgraceful then (in any sort) praisefull or commendable to the giver. And we
must know that liberality is attended with two extremes, that is to say,
Prodigality.
with prodigality and with covetousness.

Prodigality exercises her self about superfluous expenses and needelesse
gifts, Covetousness.
and covetousness greedily heapeth and hoordeth up al which she can scratch
and gripe, not communicating her fortunes with other men, no though they stand
in great necessity and in need.

The former of these two is in excess, and the latter of them is in defect,
the former has a fair show of virtue, but the other has none at all.

Of prodigality it shall not be needful to discourse further, or to dilate
more, for (in a word) he is not truly liberal, but riotous and prodigal, who
performs not all those former recited requisits in giving.

But of Covetousness some what shall be spoken, Covetousness.
because I have a longing desire to make her loathsome and odious unto you,
whom most men so affectionatly do love. Col. 3.5.
She is a Species or a kind of idolatry (as the Apostle Saint Paul does
testify) because she persuades her vassals, and her slaves, impiously to
adore money and riches, as their God.

A covetous man shuts his eyes against all others, and opens them only to
himself.

His hands are always fast, when they should be stretched forth to give
bountifully unto other men. He does al things for his own commodity and
gain, and nothing, by which he may be beneficial to his friend.

He leaves no stone unremoved, if by his travel, and by his toil he may
augment and increase his store. All is fish that comes into his net, and he
cares little, by what means his substance is enlarged, so that his estate be
advanced thereby.

A covetous man is never satisfied, nay he is always needy, and his thirst
after riches is never quenched, he supplieth not his own need with those
things which he possesses, but as in the extremity of laughter there are some
tears, so in a covetous man's greatest store and plenty, there is scarcity
and want: Nam auaro tam deest quod habet, quam quod non. A covetous man wants
as well that which he has, as that which he has not, he entertaineth none but
such as do bring him gain and profit, commending the poets opinion, when in a
covetous man's behalf he says thus.

Si nihil attuler is, ibis Homere for as.
If empty handed thou appear,
No welcome guest thou can be here.
His labor to gather wealth and riches is restless, his care to keep them is
boundless, and his sorrow (if he chance to loose them) is endless.

If any thing be taken from him, he thinks he has lost his soul, and if any
thing be given to him, he prizeth it at a greater value then his life. If he be
ouer-loaden with silver and with gold, he says his burden is too too light.

And though nature be (of her own disposition) contented with a little, yet a
covetous man imagines that he can never have enough. Nunquam satiatur auarus.

The more that he has, the more he still desires, his eyes are never
satisfied, his hands are never filled, his heart is never contented with the too
much abundance of his wealth, a covetous man is compassed round about as a
ship is oftentimes with craggie rocks, and at length he is dashed against them
to his destruction, as she is against those to her utter ruin.

And like as the moon, by the interposition of the earth betwixt her and the
Sun, suffers an Eclipse, so a man (when covetousness intrudeth betwixt his
God and him) is deprived of his heavenly grace and is dead to all good works.

For like as a sponge licketh and drinks up much liquor, but gives none
forth again, except it be strongly pressed and bruised: so a covetous man
heapeth up much riches and great treasure, but departs not with any to
supply and to relieve the distressed necessities of such as want, and do
stand in need, until that by death it be wrung and wrested out of his fist.

And like as a goose will only disclose her own eggs, and not those which are
laid by other birds: so a covetous man will not do any good but only to,
and for himself.

Pliny writes of a kind of Eagle, who (having one clawfoote and the other
flat) is armed and provided, Bercho. Reduct Moral. 178.
and uses to take her pray both upon the water, and upon the land also. Such a
devouring Eagle is a covetous man, who (both by land, and by sea, by good
means and by bad, by right and by wrong) scrapeth and scratcheth wealth and
riches together, and powers it by heaps into his own bosom, though in so
doing, he do rob, spoil, and undo others. Caesar's Coment.
Caesar in his commentaries does report, that Scipio Affricanus was so
covetous, that to increase his wealth he robbed Churches, Temples, Statues and
the rich sepulchers of the dead.

And Arthipertus king of the Lombards flying from Asprandus (his enemy) was so
heavily laden with gold, Descriptio Italiae. 20.
that swimming over the river Tesino to save his life, he was miserably
drowned by reason of the weight and ponderousness thereof.

Pontanus in his Book of liberality, Theat. Mundi. 98.
makes mention of a Cardinal named Angelot, who was so basely wretched and
covetous, that almost every night (when his bed should have contained him) he
used (in the darkness of the same) to go secretly into his own stable, and to
steal away from his own horses, such prouender as by his horseman was given
to them, by means whereof his horses became feeble, faint, and very lean,
whereat the horseman much maruaeled, because he supposed their allowance to
be liberal and large, and fitting to have made them fat, wherefore he watched
one night privily in the stable, to make a trial whether any these did there
practice his skill or no, and at length the Cardinal (according to his manner
and custom) came in at his own secret door, and performed his nightly task,
in taking his horses allowance from them, but the horseman (perceiving that a
thief was there, and not knowing who it was) with a stiff and strong cudgel
so guirded, and laced the back and shoulders of his covetous master, that in
the end (to free himself from that unexpected entertainment) he was enforced
to confess his fault, and very shamefully to bewray himself. Such and so vile
and base is the wretched nature of a covetous man, that it makes him to forget
himself, and to commit such things as are unseemly and vile, any it makes
him to do any thing, be it never so uncharitable, and be it never so wicked
and ungodly.

Therefore (My son) though the weakness of your thin purse will not
suffer you to be liberal, yet let your generous and free nature teach you to
hate and detest covetousness, because she will strive to alienate your
affections from virtue, as an harlot does the best love of a woman from her
husband.

The next thing which you must principally, Playing. Dice and Cards.
and with an extraordinary care shun and avoid, is playing at cards, and
at dice, because (among many others) these inconveniences, nay these mischiefs
do especially proceed and flow from such gaming, and from such play.

First of all, the expense and loss of time, which (indeed) I may truly term
to be lost, because no time can (almost) be worse spent, Time.
then that which is vainly consumed in such foolish sporting. And if we could
(with a judicious eye) behold how precious and how inualuable a thing time is,
we should then think, nay we should then know our fortune to be very bad, to
loose time, though we were (otherwise) assured to win all whatsoever we
played for.

Fugit irreuocabile Tempus, time which is past, and gone away, cannot (with
millions of gold and of silver) be recalled to our presence, no, not with the
price of a whole world. It is commonly said, that Tempus est edax rerum, time
is the consumer and the deuourer of all things. But a busy gamester
falsifieth this position, for by his vnthriftienesse, he is the deuourer of
time it self.

Another mischief, which gaming does produce, is an increasing of a greedy
desire, in such a gamester, not to recreate and to refresh, but to tire and
weary out himself, with the continual use of that vain exercise and sport,
every minute of time, so being spent, increasing in him a greater delight, and
a more longing appetite to spend more and more time therein, as men diseased
with the dropsy, by drinking much, do augment their desire to drink, and to
drink again.

Another mischief proceeding from playing at dice, and at cards, is
covetousness, which animateth a gamester, greedily to desire that money which
rightfully does belong unto another man, not contenting himself with the
sweet enioyment of his own; and this kind of covetousness exceeds, and is
much worse then briberie, extortion, and usury, for these three do offer, or
do give to him that paieth, some kind of recompense for his money (either in
show or in substance) but he that gains another man's coin by play, affords
him no amends nor valuable consideration for the same, but rather (in some
sort, like to a cunning and to a crafty thief) he robs his friend (by a
deceitful skill without violence) of his money, which might supply his wants,
and do both himself and others good.

The next mischief which is begotten by gaming and playing at cards, and at
dice, is coffeehouse and disquietnesse of mind, for he who loses his
money, forthwith grudgeth at, and condemns his unadvised folly, adiudging
himself to be worse then a fool, because he might have kept his money if he
had been wise. And from this difcontentment, and from this disquietnesse of
mind, arises want of sleep, contempt of honest mirth or carelessness to
converse with honest company, a melancholy disposition which hatcheth, and
fostereth bad conceits and many more inconveniences, besides which my self
(not being such a gamester) cannot (for want of evil experience) repeat and
name.

The next mischief which springs from gaming, is a sullen and a secret
murmuring, which he that loses does inwardly conceive against his cogamester
(yea though he be his welwilling and his familiar friend) weakening thereby his
love toward him, and scarsly reputing him to be such a one as he is indeed.
Because in gaining from him his money, he leaves him (sometimes) penilesse,
and subject unto many wants, which (intruth) he should not do.

Again, evil fortune in gaming, makes most men (using it) to be impatient,
yea (in many men) it breeds a kind of frenzy and madness, which
transporteth them into a blasphemous kind of swearing, whereby the cares of
good-men are displeased, and Gods hands are stretched forth to punish and to
correct (with great severity) such as (so grossly do offend. A Rule.
Therefore among wisemen, this position (as amaxime or a principle, not to be
disputed of) does firmly hold, that in providing of trifling things, tending
to our convenient repose, and honest recreation, the charge in providing of
them, must be small and trifling, and answerable in due proportion to those
merriments and sports. Seeing then that al play and gaming (if ever it be used)
ought to be practiced as a trifling sport, for none other end, but only to
recreate our defatigated and wearied minds, we ought (if we will be accounted
wise) so to proportion the money for which we play, that in winning or in
loosing we be recreated, not grieuing others with our too much gain, nor
vexing our selves, by reason of our pinching loss.

Neither must we show our selves weak and unwise, if adverse fortune in gaming
do tempt us unto anger, by blaming and reproving the dice, or cards, and
threatening to cast them into the fire, as if they knew in what sort we were
wronged, for if we will repute and account him to be over angry, who looking
in a true judging glass, with a confidence and an assured hope to see therein
a fair visage of his own, and perceiving it to be foul or evil favored,
will therefore break the glass, imputing it to be the author and the occasion
of his deformity or fowlenesse, when as (indeed) the blemish is in his face
it self, then must we needs think him to want a great measure of true
discretion, who (if at play he loose his money) will condemn the dice or
cards, and threaten their ruin, whenas (indeed) the damage which he
receives is only occasioned by his own folly, and not in them.

Seeing then that so many inconveniences, Rules for Playing.
and so many mischiefs do follow this kind of play at cards, and at dice (
My son) if you use it at all, then use it but for a short time, and very
sildome, and for little money, only to recreate your wearied spirits, or for
honest company sake, without a greedy desire to gain by it. But for your
better and more gentlemanlike sporting and recreatoin, I will (upon mine own
experience) commend unto you (above other exercises) dancing and vauting,
Dancing. Vauting.
the former of them putting in to practice, the more soft and delicate, but the
latter more strong and manlike nimblenesse, and agilitie of body, and both of
them so enliuening both limbs and spirit, that they do make them the more apt
and able in cases as well of pleasure as of necessity, to perform what shall
be expedient and convenient, the former of those two, best beseems the hall
or the dining room, to pass the time for honest recreation sake, and for
modest mirth to the good contentment of such as are actors or beholders
thereof, but oftentimes may vawting stand you in better steed abroad, when
your life may be in peril or in danger.

I like not that dancing which makes a man either lascivious or proud, A
rule for Dancing.
for such an abusefull use thereof serves as a baude to an haughty or to a
wanton mind, neither is the praiseable exercise of vawting to be commended, A
rule for Vauting.
if the actor do either immoderately affect praise or if he do thereby hunt
basely after profit and filthy gain, Rules for both.
but both those two, I mean dancing and vawting, must propose for those
chiefest ends, comeliness without Pride; pleasure without wantonness;
recreation without selfe-liking; society without ribaldry; exercise without
weariness; and contentedness, without covetousness. Another rule.
And if ( My son) you list for your recreation, and for your exercise to
intertaine these two delightful and pleasing qualities, I do advise and
counsel you, that in the practice of them you hold a discreet moderation, and
a mean, least that too much violence in the performance of them, do make
those sports irksome, which should delight you; and disable your body (by the
weariness of your limbs, and by the stiffness of your ioints) to act them as
you should. Thus leaving you to these as unto your best and cheifest bodily
exercises (if they be with sobriety, Speech. Tongue.
and with a moderation used.) you shall next understand, that it behooves you
exceeding much principally to regard and observe, that your speech and
communication be always such, as that the virtues of your inward parts, and of
your outward actions may be approved and confirmed thereby, and that no
discovery at all, be made of many follies, by the loose and lavish tatling of
your tongue.

For your tongue is the messenger of your mind, and of the abundance of your
heart your mouth speaks, whether it be good or bad, a good man is better
known by his talk, then good wine is by the Iuy-bush. The tongue of a
Merchant speaks of his commodities, of his adventures, and of his loss, or
of his gain.

The tongue of the Physician, speaks of the natures of herbs, of plants, of
stones, and of other creatures, and of the diseases, the griefs the
recoueries, relapses, and deaths of his cheifest patients. The tongue of the
lawyer makes mention of his cases, his Quaeres, his demurres, his issues
joined, his judgments, and of his clients.

The tongue of a Soldier, boasts of his skarres of his wounds, of his
maimings, and of such strong encounters as he has had, and as the tongue of
these, and of such like do exercise themselves in making mention of things
which are most incident and proper to their honest professions, arts, and
sciences.

So the tongue of an avaritious and of a covetous man is never wearied whilst
it sings descant upon his money. The tongue of a prodigal man is bragging of
his riotous excess, and of his overmuch lavishness and spending.

The tongue of an amorous wanton vainly speaks of his minions and of his
drabs, and finally every man's tongue beats upon the anuill of his own
passions. And forgeth such forms and such shapes as are contrived in his own
brain.

The tongue is one of the least members in the body, yet if she be not
restrained and governed by wisdom and by good discretion, she will make a man
captive and slavish to the greatest woe, and like as the helm of a ship being
turned the wrong way, carries her quite a way, and dasheth her ribs against
the rocks, so the tongue of a man (if it speak evil things) transporteth the
whole man unto many mischiefs, and brings him quickly unto ruin and
destruction.

Therefore to the end that your speech, your talk, your communication, may be
grave, and savor of wisdom and of discretion, you must (in speaking) be
careful and well advised to observe these rules and instructions which do
follow.

First that your speech be not lascivious, Rules for speaking well.
light and wanton, for evil words corrupt good manners, and looseness of life
is first conceived in the heart, next uttered by the tongue, and last of all
put in practice by the rest of the members of the body. A man by the wanton
discourses of his tongue may do more mischief then he who is (indeed) lewd
and dishonest.

For when a man does actually transgress against chastity and honesty,
hehath few or no witnesses of his sin but he that talks loosely and with a
wanton tongue, refuses no company, but makes all such as are present
partakers of the iniquity, and of the beastly defilements of his polluted
tongue.

As a Traitor conspireth the overthrow and the destruction of his Lord and
sovereign, so a wanton and a lascivious tongue subuerteth and undermines the
fame, the honor, and the reputation of his master. Your talk therefore must
be sober, modest and cleanely, seasoned with wisdom, and with temperance, if
you do effectually desire to be, and to be deemed and reputed for an honest
man.

Secondly, in your talk you must be moderate and sparing, not babbling to
others all that you hear or know, in which rule nature her self seems to
instruct you, because she has given you two ears, and two eyes, and but one
mouth, signifying thereby, that you ought not to speak all that you do hear
and see.

For as a fool is discovered by his overmuch laughter, so an unwise man is
revealed by the ouerflowing of his tongue, the tongue of a common speaker
oftentimes breeds much offense. Nam minus nocet pedum, quam Lin quae lapsus:
By the sliding and slipping of your foot, you receive not so much harm, as
you do by the lauishnes of your busy and vnmastered tongue.

The volubilitie of a smooth tongue is nothing profitable, nor pleasing if it
be not circumscribed within the bounds, and within the limits of temperance
and moderation.

A wise man delights not in speech which is extended into a prolixe and
needless length, comprising little matter and little substance.

A roling and a tumbling stone never gathers any moss, neither does a
tatling tongue purchase reputation or merit deserved praise.

In Multiloquio non deest peccatum, Pro. 10.19. Pro. 15 2.
many words (says Solomon) want not iniquity, the tongue of the wise (says
he) uses knowledge aright, but the mouths of fools do babble out
foolishness. Pro. 6.17.
A lavish and a bufie tongue is one of the six things which God hates,
Eccles. 5.2^
as a dream comes by the multitude of business, so the voice of a fool is
in the multitude of words.

The tongue of an idle babbler is like unto a sickmans pulse, which always
beats, but ever out of order, it is also like unto the braying of an Ass,
which makes an imperfect sound without knowledge or instruction.

The third thing which in speaking must be observed, is, that you be well
advised before you speak. For oftentimes many men's tongues do overrun and
outstrippe their wits. Bias the philosopher held it for an in fallible rule of
reason, that speaking rashly without premeditation or advise was a branch of
madness. And Xenophon said, that it had repented him oftentimes that he had
spoken, but was never sorry for his silence, you must make a door, Eccles.
18.25.
and a bar, and a sure bridle for your mouth. And if it be a good point of
discretion to look before we leap, Not Hist. Libro. 11.
it is an argument of greater wisdom for you to be well advised before you
speak.

Pliny notes well, that it is long ere those children can go, that can speakk
quickly, whereupon Berchorius does well infer, that such as are hasty and
unadvised in their speaking, fol. 41.
are slow in doing and performing of any good, you must therefore observe this
counsel in your advised speech and speakings, that the same be fitting to the
time, to the place, to the person, and to the matter.

For if your speech be not applied and fitted unto those four necessary, and
incidentall circumstances, it will soon discover your weakness and your
folly; to know when to speak, and when to be silent is great wisdom, and if
you desire to live a peaceable and a quiet life, you must see much and hear
much, but not speak much, for little said is soon amended, and words vainly
spoken can never be recalled and unsaid, it is an absurd folly for a man to
speak foolishly, and then by way of sorrow and of repenrance to excuse it with
a Non putaram, or had I wist.

The fourth thing which in speaking must be regarded, is that you slander not
another with your tongue, for the tongue of a slanderer is sharper then a
sword, and Mantuan says, that it is, Mantuan.
Res male tuta viros lingua irritare proterua, it is a wicked and an ungodly
thing to provoke men to wrath with a slanderous tongue for though the tongue
(in her self) have not any bones, yet is it able to break more then bones.

In Ecclesiasticus you may read, that evil tongues have disquieted many,
trodden down great Cities, cap. 23.
overthrown the houses of great men, brought down the strength of the people,
and have been the decay of mighty Nations.

And Solomon says, that he who inuenteth slanders, Pro. 10. Ps. 15.
is a fool, and the prophet David, that such as are slanderers shall not dwell
in the tabernacle of the Lord: Ps 101.
and destruction is denounced against him that privily slandereth his neighbor.

What is deerer to a man then his fame, his honest reputation, and his good
name, nothing besides his soul, Fame.
for many me^ have confidently been of this opinion, that it is better to die
with honor, and in a good report, then to enjoy their lives with ignominy, and
with shame.

For he who dies and leaves behind him an honest and a good report, Joseph.
de Antiqu. Iud. 156.
in regard of his manifold and commendable virtues, leaves an honorable
posterity to continue his memorial, and his name unto many ages that shall
succeed. A good name is better then a good omtment, Eccles. 3. Pro. 22 1.
and it is to be chosen before great riches. There is no greater theft then to
rob a man of his good fame.

Qua semel amissa, postea nullus erit.
Which being lost by foolish slandrous mean,
Flies quite away, and comes not back again.
Finally as one mad-dog, biting another dog, makes him that is bitten mad too.
So a slanderer (in his mad folly skandalizing another man's name and good
report, makes him angry, discontented and furious, and is the occasion of
great discord, and unquietness among men.

Fifthly in speaking, you must be wary that you be no talebearer, for such
tatlers and such busybodies do blow and kindle the coals of strife, Pro.
18.8.
of variance and of dissension among good neighbors, and loving friends. The
words of a talebearer are as flattering, they go down into the bowels of
the belly (that is they do go deep, or do pierce unto the quick, and like
as a little flaw kindles such a fire as a great wind cannot put out, so a
foolish talebearer, by his folly raises many troubles which are not again
pacified, and reconciled by the mediation and help of many friends. Let us
therefore wisely consider, that as fire is quenched when the wood fails, so
without a talebearer strife cease, and peace continues in a lovely consort,
and harmony among friends.

The sixth observation in speaking is, that in your talk you do avoid foolish
jesting and peevish scoffing at other men: Jesting.
yet jesting amongst merry friends and friendly company is not utterly to be
disliked or forbidden, nay rather it is commendable and praiseworthie, so that
it be pretty and witty, not bitter, not scorning, nor wounding the reputation
and credit of him upon whom your jests shall be bestowed, and so that they be
sparingly used (as sauce unto good fellowship and gravity) But a scorner is an
abomination unto men, yea judgments are prepared for such a one, Pro. 24.9.
Pro. 19.29. Pro. 14.6. Pro. 22.10.
he seeks wisdom and finds it not, he is therefore to be cast out, that
strife and contention and reproach may have an end.

The seventh rule in speaking is, that you speak the truth from your heart,
for lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are
his delight. Pro. 12.22. Pro. 19.6. v. 9 22. Pro. 23.23.
He that speaks lies shall not escape, but shall perish, and a poor man is
better then a rich lier. Therefore you must buy truth, and having bought her,
you must not sell her again, no not for any gain. Pro. 12.19.


The lips of truth shall be stable for ever, but a lying tongue varyeth
incontinently: he who uses to lie, is seldom or never credited and believed,
no, though sometimes he speak truly, but he who speaks the truth wins
much credit. Truth.


Truth is fairer and more amiable then Helena of Greece was, she cannot be too
dearly bought, if she be bought for any price.

She is beautiful within, and her outward apparel is made of needleworke, she
is without spot or blemish, and her fame reaches unto the clouds, without her
there can be no friendship among private men, nor any civil commerce among
neighbors, no leagues among princes, nor any support of a kingdom or common
wealth.

She is victorious in all her wars, and in times of peace she rules and
reigns as an imperious Queen that is sustained and held up with prosperity
and with honor.

Though she have many enemies, yet she cares not for their malice, nor for
their displeasure, but she breaks their arrows and their darts in sunder, so
that they are unable to do her any harm.

Opprimi potest, non deprimi,
Potest periclitari, non perire,
Impugnari potest, sed non expugnari veritas.
Truth may be oppressed, but she cannot be quite pressed down, she may be
endangered, but she cannot perish, and she may be assaulted, but she can never
be surprised.

She is not made splendent by crastie and by cunning speaking, but by
sincerity and by plainenes she is made noble, she animateth a man to be
confident as a Lion in all dangers and misfotunes, and she departs not from
him, when all his other friends do forsake and leave him, she disperseth the
thick clouds of subtle plots and devises, and she prepares the way to a
right judgment.

You must (therefore) seek her without ceasing, or weatinesse, until you have
found her, and having found her, you must dwell with her, for her lips drop
sweetness, and her instructions do teach wisdom.

Many other things ( My son) as well as these must be observed in speaking,
which I will only touch and point at, without any amplification, or
discoursing upon them, least that in framing of a tedious description or method
for speaking well, I my self may be justly taxed for speaking ill, by speaking
overmuch.

Briefly therefore I do exhort you, that in speaking you do not cavil nor
contend eagerly about the truth, but modestly with temper and with substance,
least you chance to loose her, whilst vainly you dispute and strive about her.

Next that you argue not, nor do maintain talk and conference against the
truth, but in matters which are indifferent, and only for disputations sake,
and the better to make trial of the truth, wherein I wish you not to be
violent, nor over long.

Next that you put not your familiar, or your common friend to an open foil,
to his reproach or disgrace in the presence of other hearers, when in disputing
you may (perhaps) have the upper hand.

Next that in your communication with other men you be not peremptory, nor
idly wedded to your own conceits and will, thinking your own opinion to be
more-found, and profound then other men's.

Next that you make not any answer before you have heard and considered of the
proposition, objection or question, for he that does otherwise, commits
folly, and publishes his own shame.

Next that in cases material and of substance, you speak as you think,
without pride, envy, equivocation, mental reservation, dissimulation, lying
or such like.

Next that you speak not any evil of such as are absent, nor of the dead, but
rather wisely make choice, that you be silent, if you cannot truly utter any
good of them.

Next that you be not silent, where and when your speaking may either profit or
pleasure another man, and likewise that you speak not at all, when by speaking
you may do harm.

Next that you speak not stiffly, or too earnestly in matters either trisling
or absurd.

Next that in your speaking, you do neither discover your own, nor your
friends counsel, which may turn either him or your self to loss, reproof
or shame.

Next that you speak little or nothing at all, in the presence of fools,
captious persons, tale bearers, and of such as use to slander.

Next that your speech be not interrupted with anger, for anger peruerteth the
mind, and oftentimes disableth the speaker to finish that which he has well
begun.

And last of all, that you reprove not in another man, such defects, faults or
offenses, as your self are guilty of, Nam turpe est Doctori, cum culpa
redarguit ipsum.

These rules and these directions ( My son) if you do carefully observe in
speaking, your speech and your communication will be seasoned with wisdom and
with discretion, and by means thereof you shall purchase grace and favor, and
reputation, with those, unto whom, or with whom you speak, and now having thus
informed you, touching the ordering, and well disposing of your speech and
talk, it will be as necessary, that you be also instructed and directed in
the manner of your proceedings, in such affairs, and business as you take in
hand, wherein you must principally, and above others, observe these rules.

First, Actions.
that you do nothing rashly: Nam sat cito, si sat been, things are soon
enough done, if they be well enough done.

Secondly, Deliberation.
that with your leisure in doing of any thing, you do also soundly ponder, and
deliberate of that which you have to do, so shall you not need to repent what
you have done. Advise, Counsel, Deliberaration, Premeditation.


And last of all, that in doing you take the advice, and counsel of other men,
to supply your own defects, or to strengthen your own judgment, Plus enim
vident oculi, quam oculus, and make not more have then good speed, for want of
such advice: Canis enim festinans caecos parit Catulos, have makes waste.

It is not so much the part of a wiseman to put in practice and execution,
Rashness.
those things which he sees before his eyes, as it is first to foresee, and
then to deliberate and consider whether the end of his actions and employments
be good or evil.

He is but a foolish man, who will not first think how to come out of the
river again before he enter into it, mischiefs and dangers are prevented
with more facility, then they are shaken off, when they are happened. Rash
beginnings have (for the most part) unfortunate ends: to gather fruit before it
be ripe, argues the want both of skill and of discretion.

In physic nothing is more dangerous then the administering of sudden and of
hasty medicines. A wise mariner will not rashly lanch into the deep, but he
will first be persuaded of a successful wind. For like as a prodigal man
begins to spare too late, after he has unthriftily diued into the bottom of
his exhausted and peniles purse, so he that has over hastily undertaken a
business, which (for want of more advise and good deliberation) sorteth not to a
fair, and to an expected end, repents too too late, and cannot (at his own
pleasure, and when himself is disposed) repair and amend that which foolishly
and improuidently he has done amiss.

A wise man (in all his negotiations and affairs) must be busied upon
premeditation and good advise, for it skilleth not whether he do many things
or no, if he do a few things substantially and well. One task will be soon
enough performed, if with mature advise, and sound deliberation it be ended.

We do use to commend that rain, which (falling moderately) wastes not nor
washes quite away, by too much violence, where it should only mollify and
make fruitful, by soft and by gentle dropping.

A wise man before he goes out of his house knows what he intends to do,
when he is abroad, and being returned home, he considers of that which he
has done.

Agrippa counseled the Jews that they should not obstinately resist the rage
and fury of the Romans, Josephus:
telling them that where deliberation was, there was also safety, and things
would come to an happy end.

And Scipio Affricanus wan Carthage, more by deliberation, and lingering
delays, then by violence, or with have.

Now therefore ( My son) if your own discretion cannot manage a business of
more then ordinary consequent and moment. Advise.
Then use the advice of other men, many eyes do see more then one eye can, and
oftentimes we do perceive, that those things which time denies to afford, are
by counsel obtained to our comfort and good content.

Advise and counsel helps the defects and the impediments of nature,
Counsel.
it is the part of a wise man, first to harken unto, and then to put in
practice the advice and counsel of other men.

For it is a rare thing for a man, by his own only endeavors to wax wise,
nay without instruction and direction, a man cannot inform himself of those
things which are difficult and hard.

Hence it was that Xenophon the Philosopher said, that a wife man must have
many ears, and many eyes, for that he ought to hear and to see more with the
eyes and with the ears of other men, then with his own.

By counsel, men, houses, cities, provinces, countries, kingdoms, and
empires are established, sustained and preserved.

To conclude this matter, let nothing be done or attempted rashly, but by good
deliberation with your self, or with the advice and counsel of other men (if
your own experience and skill do not enable you of your self to perform
them, wisely as you ought.

My son, concerning your apparel, and your diet, I will say nothing,
Apparel. Diet.
hoping that if you do with diligent observation, oftentimes peruse this small
discourse, which in my dearest love toward you I have composed, you will be
sufficiently instructed to be temperate in them both, and the rather because
pride and g^uttonie are the coheires of the Devil, whose possession and
inheritance is hell.

And as for the choosing and practizing of your common exercises, Exercises.
and of such other qualities as are most firting for you to entertain, I will
refer you to the deliberate reading and meditating upon that excellent,
Balthazar. Castilion, or the Courtier.
and ever most praise-worthie work of Balthazer Castilion, who by his choice
precepts, has cast young gentlemen into a fairer moulde then their fathers did.

And now seeing that this my discourse has accomplished her intended viage,
and has finished her race and journey, I do most humbly pray and beseech my
most gracious and everliving God, so to bless and prosper you ( My son) that
by traueling in these my labors, you may the better, and the more happily (in
this life) attain to the period and height of virtue, and of true godliness,
which will make you most blessed, and most happy in the life to come, which
God grant, Amen.

Qualis vita, Finis ita.
FINIS.
The Table.
Actions. 106 Adversity. 83 Advise. 106. 108 Affability. 79 Affliction. 83
Anger. 81 Apparel. 109 Banqueting. 64 Boasting. 77 Card-play. 92 Clemency. 79
Company. 37 Conscience. 11 Contentment. 85 Counsel. 108 Covetousness. 88
Courtesy. 79 Dancing. 95 Deliberation. 106 Dice-play. 92 Dissimulation. 47
Drunkenness. 68 Diet. 109 Excess. 94 Exercise. 109 Fame. 101 Feasting. 64
Flattery. 45 Friendship. 42 Frendships. Rules. 44 Gaming. 92 Gentleness. 79 God
feared. 4 God served. 1 God knows al things. 58 God sees al things. 59 God
hears al things. 59 Honesty. 52 Humanity. 79 Humility. 71. 77 Idleness.
60 Idolatry. 14 Jesting. 102 Ignorance. 29 Learning. 24. 29 Leisure. 108
Liberality. 85 Liberalities Rules. ibid Nicenes. 64 Patience. 81 Play. 92
Premeditation. 106 Pride. 73 Prodigality. 88 Rashness. 106 Religion. 12. 15
Reputation. 101 Secrecy. 51 Self-love. 77 Speech. 96 Speech. Rules. 98
Studying. 29 Sin. 6 Temperance. 68 Tongue. 96 Truth. 103 Time. 92 Vawting. 95
Virtue. 17 Whoredom. 52 Wisdom. 24. 33
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 13. l. 19. for sinner read sun. p. 20. l. 20. for the residence, her
residence p. 24. l. 16. and by her harnes bearers, as by etc. p. 34. l. 27.
concealeth, conceiueth, p. 39. l. 14. Tresihan Tresilian. p. 56. l. 14. and,
all p. 62. l. 9. multa. nulla p. 96. l. 13. those chiefest ends, their chiefest
etc. p. 100. putaram, putarem.


