A DECLARATION OF THE QVEENE, Mother of the most CHRISTIAN KING.

Containing the reasons of her departure out of the Low Countries; And
disadvowing a Manifest, set out in her Name upon the same Argument.

LONDON, Printed by John Raworth for (...) and Thomas Warren, and are to be
sold at the (...) of the White-horse In Saint (...). 1639.

A Declaration of the Queen, Mother of the most Christian KING, Containing the
reasons of her departure out of the Low Countries, and disadvowing a Manifest,
set out in her name, upon the same Argument.
PErsons of my quality, being placed on the Theater of the World, and their
lives exposed to public view; by how much their Estate is the greater, by so
much their liberty is the less. For although they are not tied in Conscience,
to give an account of their Actions to any but to God, who is the sole Judge of
their duty; yet, their Honor inforceth them many times to lay open, even their
secret thoughts to men, who are the Judges of their reputation.

If then my arrival in Flanders heretofore, has given so much occasion of
discourse to all Christendom, my departure lately from thence has caused
little less throughout all Europe. But as ill Fortune has as little,
wherewithal to recompense just praises, as good has too much to reward
flatteries; The misery of mine in either time has been cause, that more
interessed tongues and pens have been found to blame me, then charitable to
defend me.

So I understand now from all parts, that they endeavor by diverse means to
condemn the design and manner of my departure out of the Low Countries, as
well by letters, written in several places, as also by memorialls, relations
and Gazetts, published and dispersed, and by manifests, set forth even under my
own name; amongst which one is come to my hand in Print, a piece indeed, which
seems to be to my Justification; But in effect, tends not but to trouble and
imbroyle me on all fides. Briefly, I perceive no Imaginary thing omitted, to
give sinister Interpretations to my retreat.

Now, as I have cause to fear, that so many devises may prevail against the
sincerity of my intentions, and inclinations: and to the end, that this
pretended Manifest, which passes for my own, may not hereafter be of any
force in this nature, especially having been publicly seen in my hands, which
might serve as a tacit Approbation of it, if I should dissemble it: e thought
it but due to my reputation, and true Interests, to set forth this public
Declaration, containing the disadvowing of that piece, and such like, if there
be any to be found, together with the principal motives, which made me retire
from the Low Countries, the occasions which made me pass into England, and the
resolutions wherein hitherto I remain, that there may be no cause left of such
various discourse to my disadvantage.

I desire then that every one may know, That when I took Flanders for my
refuge, I looked upon that place, but as a neighbor Port, whereto I repaired
to avoid the tempest, that then disordered me; and not as a Country I would
have chosen to have remained or settled in, my obligation to France, being too
strict to admit of such a thought.

I would likewise have it known, that in all the time I sojourned in Flanders,
as well during the Peace, as since the rupture betwixt the two Crowns, my
principal cares, have tended to my reconciliation with the King my Son, and
I never concealed this desire, which even my Son in Law the King of Spain
did ever profess to esteem both just and commendable.

It is true, that having for the space of seven years in vain labored an
accommodation, and now discovering by advise of the wiser, neither passionate,
nor interessed, and even by reason and experience, that after all possible care
employed, it has rather been reconded then advanced; And that the place,
wherein I remained seemed a perpetual obstacle to all encounters, which might
lead toward it, as well by reason of the breach continued, as also for other
powerful Considerations: At last, I found it would be most agreeable with my
affairs, to live (at least for a time) in some place free from Suspicion; And
the Season being then proper for drinking the Spaw Waters, when I first entered
into this deliberation, I resolved to make some stay in the Country of Liege, a
place Newtrall, hoping thereby, to find as well remedy for my indispositions,
as expedients for the advancement of my reconciliation.

This was my clear Intention without any resolution concerning my return into
Flanders; And to speak the truth, this incertainity wherein I found my self,
hindered me from communicating the particulars of my design to my Nephew the
Cardinal Infant; besides, his employments in the wars, held him at such a
distance from me at the time of my departure, that I could not have opportunity
so much as to take my leave of him.

Parting then from Brussells, I went directly toward Liege, where the
expectation of those people was as observable as the applause, wherewith I was
received in all the Cities of that Dominion. And I have reason, to acknowledge
an oblation to these Magistrates for the orders, they had given for my
reception, wheresoever I was to stay. Nevertheless, having before dispatched
into Holland and other parts, to make provision for my security, during the
time I stayed in the Country of Liege; besides, foreseeing many difficulties in
the safety of my abode there, I discovered that there would have been yet more
in my departure thence, if I should have been necessitated to have left that
place, so that finding all these accidents, as well by advice from such as I
had employed abroad, as by the observations I made upon the place, where I was,
and having yet free passage for Holland, I thought no time was to be lost in
seeking some safe and quiet habitation which to me was then of most importance,
considering my inconstant condition. So that for avoiding further hazard, I
resolved presently to pass into England, as to the place of most security.

But before I proceed further in this discourse, I must not omit the success,
wherewith it pleased God to favor my voyage, which indeed was beyond all that
I could desire. My Cousin, the prince of Orange, who met me at my very first
entrance into the Country, received me in the Equipage, I was (which indeed
might have made me unknown) as if my adversity had served me for ornaments,
and as if I had been in as great splendour as in my highest prosperity. And as
for the States, they did not entertain me, as a Princess of my condition,
desiring passage, but rather as a triumphant King, coming to visit them, and
impart his victories to them. And for my Cousin the Princess of Orange, who
accompanied me through all Holland, she lived with me so respectfully and
obliegeingly, and made the Country and her houses wherein I lodged, so
agreeable to me, as that I could have almost thought them my own, had not my
ill fortune already too much accustomed me to know, that they are no more mine.
And as to the entertainment given me by the King of Great Britain, my Son
in Law, all that I can say of it, would but derogate from what was publicly
seen, and my self must acknowledge: By His extraordidinary magnificence at my
entrance into London, he has published the esteem he had of my Person, by the
cheerfulness appearing in his own Countenance, and in that of all his
Subjects; he showed how dear my presence was to him. But above all, I
acknowledge the true friendship, which I read in his heart, the freenes of his
proceeding, and the tender affections of the Queen my Daughter, toward me,
which have few examples, and have given so much ease to my pressing
afflictions, that it could not have been more, if God had sent an angel from
heaven to comfort me. Insomuch, that I could not have had in all my voyage
other occasion then of joy, if those things, which were prepared for my delight
had not likewise been Subjects of my Sorrow: In that they made me think, that
the late King, my lord, appeared yet living in my person in strange Countries,
but in effect his very memory seemed dead for my sake in his own Kingdom.

Now to return to my discourse; I must say, that having run over all that
has past in this my retreat from Flanders, I cannot think, that any can
charge me with neglect of my reputation for my diligence in the good of my
affairs, nor that it will be hard to persuade such, as will indifferently
judge thereof, that in this Retreat I have done any thing, either in
Circumstances or Consequences, more, then all the time I sojourned in the
Low Countries, which may be repugnant to gratitude: And I add, that I had done
nothing unseemly, if, when I had left the territories of Spain, I had remained
in Holland, though it be an Enemies Country; because in this Occasion I had not
sought Holland, as an Enemy to Spain, but as an Allie and Confederate with
France. And this quality of Holland, which was then advantageous to me, was not
hurtful to Spain, in profiting me, So that remaining in Holland, I should not
have prejudiced Spain, in doing my self good.

And as for the bruites spread abroad, that I went into Holland to do ill
offices to Spain, and that some of my people by order from me, had given up to
my Cousin the Prince of Orange the Map of sundry places of the Low Countries;
It is a rumor so ridiculous, that it deserves no answer but of scorn. Surely
it had been much to my credit, by this example to have demonstrated to my
Cousin the Prince of Orange, who received me so courteously, how well I used my
hosts when I was gone from them, and besides, in giving him a good impression
of my integrity, I had also made him know that I had a better of his
providence, judging it such, as that he had not care enough to provide himself
of a Plattforme of all the places of the Low Countries. Truly this would have
passed for a fair Compliment at my arrival.

And this rumor is not more contemptible then another quite contrary is false,
savoring of a malicious Invention, That I should go into Holland to treat of
the Truce, or to practice against that State, and against my Cousin the Prince
of Orange, under the pretense of hospitality.

But time having made appear even to the most simple, that these rumors were
altogether false, and reason having made the wisest apprehend, that they had no
resemblance of truth: I will rely upon that which is of more weight, and for
Justification of all my designs, declare ingeniously, what were the motives of
my resolution, in regard both of France and Spain, whilst I remained in the
Low Countries, and, why I retired from thence.

All the time I passed in Flanders, I kept this Temper, that my affections, as
well as my behavior, were al ways Neutrall in respect of Public affairs
between France and Spain. The assistance which I received from Spain on one
side, and the Obligations, which I had to France on the other side, obliged me
to carry my self in that Manner. And to speak clearly, I should have held it
as unjust, whilst I remained in the Dominions of Spain, and lived at their
expense, to take part with France, to the prejudice of Spain, as contrary to my
own inclination to have taken part with Spain to the prejudice of France. And
howsoever that pretended Manifest aggravating the complaints, which it makes
under my name of Spain, does artificially insinuate, that I have borne much
affection to the good of their affairs, which is but a hidden venom, to
perplex me on the part of France, The truth is, that Spain in that point has
no more obligation to me then that I have ever passionately longed for that
Union and Concord between those two Crowns, whereof in former times I had laid
the foundations by a double Alliance. And that besides I have always
endeavored since the rupture, to contribute all I was able to the
reestablishment of Peace.

God forbid, I should desire to pay the new obligations, I have to Spain, to
the prejudice of those ancient bonds, which I have contracted with France, it
is to that I have vowed my first affections, And it is that, which shall for
ever keep them with the ashes of my deceased Lord.

But God forbid likewise, that for any advantage I might have from France, it
should ever enter into my thoughts, to disadvow the Obligations I have to
Spain. I know too well, that it is the utmost degree of ingratitude to deny
benefits received; I am so far from that, that I will always proclaim them
with advantage. And I confess it troubles me that I have no other means to
acquit my self then on all occasions (as on this) to acknowledge the
subsistence, which the King of Spain my Son in Law gave me seven years
together, and the proofs of Cordial love, which I received from the Queen my
Daughter, the care which my late sister the Infanta had of my person: who
besides did no less instruct me with her virtues, then comfort me with her
good offices: And lastly the great courtesy and good will of my Nephew the
Cardinal Infant: All which, are effects which I refer principally to the
King of Spain my Son in Law, to whose intentions my Nephew and my deceased
Sister, the Infanta, have but joined their natural inclinations.

Moreover I am far from weakening these public testimonies (which I desire
to confirm in all places) by making complaint against any of his Officers, and
herein I am injured by the Authors of that pretended Manifest, in their
exposing false ones to the view of the world, under my name; On the contrary it
imports me, that it be known (as it is true) that in case there had been any
disrespect of me through the fault of any Officers in Flanders (which yet would
have been contrary to the orders of the King of Spain my Son in Law) the
good entertainment I received from the Master would in my opinion have covered
the error of the Servants, And although peradventure it would not have taken
away my ressentiment of it, yet discretion would have taught me to have
concealed it.

Neither shall it ever be said, that any such thing falls from me, But rather
expressions of the entire satisfaction I received from the King of Spain my
Son in Law, And at my departure from the Hague, I dispatched an express to
my Nephew the Cardinal Infant, to testify to him my Acknowledgements and to
let him understand my intention of coming out of the Low Countries: which is
the same wherein this day I persist, and which I will clearly express to
conclude this Declaration.

My end neither was nor is in all these proceedings any other then my
reconciliation with the King my Son: To the effecting of which, those means,
which would seem hard and troublesome to persons of my quality; shall be
pleasant and easy to me. Nor do I account it of the number of those painful
means, to affect those whom he honors with his principal trust: I will do that
willingly though they give me no cause: and am resolved to omit nothing (no not
that which I shall know to be in vain) to gain the friendship of the King my
Son.

It would be a happiness precious to me, yet due by so many just Titles that I
hold my self as blameles for the pretending to it, as innocent of the least
ambition thereby to partake of the Government. Nor should I pardon my self if
I had any temptation of that nature, and withal, if I held not that authority
as unusefull for my particular happiness, as I esteem the love of the King my
Son, necessary to my present contentment.

And it will be easy to believe, that I am of this opinion, if the present may
be judged by what is past, and to that end it may be considered how I behaved
my self during my regency, wherein I made use of it, and with what Spirit I
governed, when through my misfortune and that of France, in loosing the late
King my Lord, I was engaged to employ my care and diligence, to uphold the
public affairs, which were then in eminent danger: And when the Common Vote
and consent of the states of the Kingdom had committed to my care, the fortune
of the State, I think I so forgot my own, that even Slander and my enemies
together, never dreamed to lay to my charge, that I had any thought of making
Advantage of that Authority: Nor that Ambition or Interest had upon any
occasion a Vote in my private Counsels. As for the former, it cannot be
doubted, since it is clear, that I never sought in all my Regency other glory,
then to leave the Kingdom as quiet and flourishing under the government of a
woman (notwithstanding all the troubles, that then come upon it) as one of the
greatest Kings of the world saw it at his death, after twelve years of settled
peace. And as for Interest, I dare boldly say, without offense to modesty (and
France cannot without ingratitude deny it) that I so ordered the Treasure of my
Son, that in preserving it, I had care of it, as of my own; but in expending
it, I considered it as the goods of another. So that at the end of my labors,
there is nothing left me, but the quality of a Mother, which God himself
cannot take from me.

These actions, whereof the public monuments themselves will be for ever
witnesses, are the only Trophies, which I have erected to my Memory. These
Actions, I say, are the only Citadells, which I have raised to my defense and
have built in the heart of the King my Son, in that of the French, and in my
own Conscience. But certainly not to deceive my self, it is upon this last
foundation, whereon I settle my principal hopes, and in all accidents, my most
solid satisfaction. And lastly, although it should happen by the secret
reasons of Gods Providence, that the rest of my days should pass in disgrace,
and though I should never have before my death the comfort of seeing the King
my Son, yet I will not leave to give him, absent, as now I do, my continual
blessings. And I will finish my life, as I now end this Declaration; Beseeching
God that these my blessings may be as effectual to him, as if I had been ever
favorably treated.

Signed Marie.

and underneath is written, This Declaration has been read publicly before
the whole Court of the Queen, in presence of her Majesty. And after it was
Signed with her own hand and by her commandment, the Original remains in the
hand of the Vicount.

FABRONI.




