A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THE whole occurrences in the Queens voyage from her
departure from Florence, until her arrival at the City of Marseilles,
together with the Triumphs there made at her entry: whereto is adjoined her
receiving and entry into Lions.

HEREUNTO IS ANnexed, the first Sauoyan: WHEREIN Is set forth the right of the
conquest of Sauoy by the French, and the importance of holding it.

All faithfully translated out of French, by E. A.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be sold
at his shop at the Royal Exchange.

1601.

A TRVE DISCOVRSE of the whole occurrences in the Queens voyage from her
departure from Flo rence, until her arrival at the City of Marseilles,
together with the triumphs there made at her entry: whereto is adjoined her
receiving and entry into Lions.
All faithfully translated out of French by E. A.

MY Lord, according to the promise which you enforced of me at my departure
from Paris, namely, that I should repair to his majesty, and upon receipt of
his command, to hasten with all diligence to Marseilles, where I have spent my
time in expectation of the so long desired arrival of the Queen: I do now
write unto you these presents, infull discharge of my said promise: whereby you
shall understand, that upon the thirteenth day of October, the Queen departed
from the City of Florence, toward France, and arrived at Liuorne the
seventeenth day following, where she embarked in the general Galley of the
Lord the great Duke, where she was attended with five of the Popes Galleyes,
five of the Galleyes of Malta, and six of the said Lord Dukes: in all
seventeen Galleyes. Her first harbor was at Espetie, where the Ambassadors of
the state of Genes came to salute her, with tender of their Galleyes on the
behalf of the said state, for the which she returned them great thanks.
From that harbor she arrived at Fin, where through tempest and soul weather,
she was forced to soiourne nine days full: but ordinarily lay in her Galley.
From Fin she took harbor at Sauonne: the next day at Antibe: thence at Saint
Maryes: then at Treport: next at Tollon, where she took land, and stayed two
days: and from Tollon she arrived at Marseilles, the third of this month of
November, between five and six of the clock at night, and landed upon a
great bridge, purposely erected on the Kay over against the lodging prepared
for her: upon the which bridge waited on the left hand the Lord Cardinals
Ioyeuse, Gondy, Giury, and Sourdy, the Archbishops of Arles and Aix, the
Bishops of Marseilles, Tolon, and Paris. The Lords Duke of Guyse, the
Constable and the Chanceler, assisted with the Counselors of his Majesty's
Council. On the right hand stood the Lady Duchess of Nemours and Guyse, and
Madamoyselle her daughter; the Lady of Vantadour, the Lady Chanceler, the
Marquess of Guyercbeuille, and other Ladies.

At the entry unto the said bridge, the four Consuls of the said City of
Marseilles, in long scarlet gowns, holding in their hands a Canapie of russet
violet, upon a ground of silver, upon their knees presented her Majesty, with
two keys of gold fastened upon a chain: which keys her said Majesty
immediately delivered to the Lord of Lussa^, Captain of her guard: the
Consulsrysed and withdrawn some three or four steps back, the said Lord
Cardinals did their obeisance and received her: then the Lords of Guyse, the
Constable, and Chanceler. After them came the Duchess of Nemours, and saluted
the Queen, then the Lady of Guyse, and Madamoyselle her daughter, and so
consequently all the other Ladies.

This done, her said Majesty returned under her Canapie: before whom marched
the said Lord of Guyse, Constable, and Chaunceler, led by the said Lord
Cardinals of Ioyeuse and Gonay: then followed the Lady great Duchess of
Florence, led by the Lord Cardinal of Giury: then the Lady Duchesle of
Mantua, led by the Cardinal of Sourdy: after these marched the Ladies
Duchesses of Nemours and Guyse, with her daughter: the Ladies of Vantadour,
Chanceler, and others, according to their degrees: and so ascending a great
stayre that was purposely made, they came to the door of a great chamber
prepared for that purpose, for the said Lady Queen, and so to the presence,
where many Ladies waited for her.

This done, she entered her chamber, followed by the said Ladies, the great
Duchess, the Duchesses of Mantua, Nemours, and Guyse, and the young Lady of
Guyse, with the other Ladies, who all made but short stay, but returned to
their lodgings, so as there remained with her none but the Princesses and
Ladies that had accompanied her in her iourneyes. The Lords likewise that had
accompanied her, did depart, namely `Don Iouan, Don Virginio, and Don Antonio,
who also had assisted her in all her said voyages: neither am I able to
express the magnificent descent out of the said Galleyes, each taking place
according to their degrees, enriched with all kinds of honor, as well in
regard of the multitude of the Nobility, as for the sumptuousness of the
furniture of the said Gallyes, especially of the Queens, which was under the
conduct of the Lord Marc. Anthonio Colicat. Therein were two hundred knights,
that bare the cross of Florence. The Galley-slaues were magnifically
apparrelled. In them of Malta, under the conduct of Don Peter Mendoza, a
hundred and fifty Knights, and so in the rest: so that in the whole, it is
accounted she had for her conduct at the least seven thousand men, all at the
Kings pay and expenses.

The next day, the fourth of this month, all the Ladies came to help up the
Queen, whom they brought to the Chapel purposely prepared near to the great
Chamber, where she had the Mass celebrated, at what time the Princes,
Princesses, Lords, and Ladies, had their Gentlemen, Pages, and servants as
proudly apparrelled as may be: nothing but cloth of gold, embrodery and
spangles.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE RECEIVING AND TRIVMPHS upon the Queens entry into the
City of Lions.
Translated out of French.
MY Lord, this bringer coming to Paris, I have accompanied with these
presents, as wishing in what I might, to make show of the friendship which
continually I have vowed unto you, and in regard thereof to participate unto
you the pleasures whereof my self was an eyewitness in this town, where,
through Gods grace, hearing of the expected, and long wished approach of the
Queen of France, I was forced upon a desire, as well to behold the
magnificence thereof, as to write unto you of the whole proceedings, to
intermit whatsoever any other affairs.

The Queen therefore upon Saturday last toward the twy-light, arriving in the
suburbs called La Guillotier, standing at the end of Rosne bridge, was lodged
at the Crown, a very large lodging, and of great receipt.

The next day being Sunday, she returned two leagues back to a Castle, called
La Moth, where she dined, whither also the inhabitants of Lions came to see
her. After dinner the Burgesses troops issued out of the town, and marched to
the said Castle to meet her, being in number some three or four thousand
gallant and very choice soldiers. Their chief captains were all attyred
alike, every man his mandilion of black velvet, his white satin doublet, his
netherstocks of white silk, his gascognes and buskins of black velvet, all
guarded with gold parchment lace. Their Lieutenants all in violet velvet, guarded
likewise with gold parchment lace. The Captain Ancients all in russet velvet,
laid also with gold lace, and Beuere hats of the like color, with feathers,
garnished with Agate stones, set in gold ouall wise. The Coronell marched
before them excellently well appointed, and mounted upon a mighty courser,
barded and guarded with gold lace, himself apparrelled in black velvet, all
covered with gold parchment lace.

Then followed the soldiers, one third part pikes, another third part
Musqueters, and another third part harquebuziers: the musqueters their cassocks
of green velvet, with the bandoliers of the same, and white doublets, all laid
with silver lace. The harquebuziers for the most part white doublets, and
cassocks of violet cloth. The pike men white doublets, with cassocks of black
russet cloth, all well lay de with lace, and hattes all seathers of one color,
and armed in white armor.

Then came forth the town watch, armed at all assayes. Next the Serieants on
horseback, and the Lawyers. Then the Governors of the town, the Steward, and
Sheriffs, accompanied with thirty Burgesses, all attyred in violet velvet and
foot-cloathes. After them the Italian nation.

The streets were hanged with tapistrie, from Rosne gate, to the church of
Saint John, which was also hanged, and the said streets grauelled all the way
that the French Queen should come.

First entered the troops that went forth to meet the Queen in very good
order: then the Burgesses and nations: then the Governors of the town: after
them the French and Italian Nobility mixed. Next the Queens bastard brother,
accompanied with the chiefest of the Nobility, and with them ten pages,
apparrelled in cloth of gold. After all followed the Queen, who entered the
city in an open lictier, about four of the clock in the after noone: her
lictier all laid with gold parchmentlace. At her entry into the town gate,
she was received under a canopie of cloth of gold, borne by four of the chief
Burgesses of the town, under the which the said Lady Queen passed along the
town, attired in cloth of gold, set with an infinite number of Diamonds, and
stones that gave such a reuerberation, as to the beholders seemed a number of
suns: yet was all this nothing, in regard of her own most excellent beauty,
whereat all men did much marvel: and withal, the voice of the people so
sounded forth their blessings and prayers, crying, God save the Queen, that
the very mountains about returned an echo. Her Pages marched before her,
with two that guided the lictier, apparelled in cornation cloth of gold,
accompanied and followed with Princes, Lords, Cardinals, Bishops, Gentlemen,
Princesses, and Ladies, as well French as foreyn, so many, that if I should
undertake to describe the whole, it would take a quier of Paper. Thus was she
brought to the church of Saint John.

Thus much in brief have I written unto you, of our Lady the French Queens
entry into our city of Lions, whom I beseech God to preserve for us, and
shortly to send her some issue, which is the thing that with my heart I do
most desire. From Lions this fourth of December.

1600.

THE FIRST SAVOYAN.

WHEREIN Is set forth the right of the conquest of Sauoy by the French, and the
importance of holding it.

Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be sold at his shop
adjoining to the Royal Exchange.

1601.

The first Sauoyan.
Wherein is set forth the right of the conquest of Sauoy by the French, and the
importance of holding it.
ALbeit my manifold wounds received in the service of our good Kings, Charles
and his two successors, have chayned me to my bed, and in manner extinguished
all hope of recovery of my health, considering my age: yet can I not choose
(since it will be no better) but serve my king and country with all that is
left me, namely my speech. In as much therefore, as I can not deliver any
thing so fair and convenient, as that excellent subject which I have
undertaken, even the equity and benefit of the conquest and presernation of
Sauoy: I will without farther preface, aduow that the King has sufficiently
made demonstration to the whole world, how unwilling he was to proceed by
force of arms, in that he stood only upon his Marquizate: For as well might
he have called an account of six times greater duties: even such duties as
were neither uncertain nor doubtful, but most evident, and justified by
authentical titles reserved among the treasury of the charters of France,
whereof the most part are sufficiently known by the histories of these three
latter ages, albeit we seek no farther for them.

First, the Earls of Sauoy have without any color or pretense, seyzed upon
Nice and Villefranch, members of the true, and ancient body of the County of
Province, whereof the Earls of Province have evermore been acknowledged to be
Lords: as Queen Jane, daughter to Robert king of Sicile, and Earl of
Prouence: who enjoyed the fame in the year 1380. and with all other her goods
gave them to Jews the first Duke of Angeou: who, as also after him Queen
Marie, in the name of Jews the second Duke of Aniou, did peaceably enjoy them
as Earls of Prouence. Howbeit, during the great wars between the houses of
Aniou and Arragon for Naples, the Duke of Sauoy, without any title or pretense,
but only of seemlinesse, seyzed upon the territories of Nice and Villefranch.
Albeit consequently the French Kings, as heirs general to the Earls of
Prouence, are the undoubted Lords of both these places.

Secondly, the house of Sauoy has forcibly and by violence seyzed upon the
country of Piemont, an other part of the ancient body and patrimony of
Prouence: For aduow of the truth hereof, in the year 1306. was the
principality of Piedmont united to the County of Prouence, and the Earls
thereof peaceably enjoyed the same, until the year 1363. at what time Queen
Jane was defeated of it.

Thirdly, they have also encroched upon a great part of the County of Ast,
which appertains to the house of Orleance, as being given in dowry to
Valentine* As also they have seyzed upon the homage of Fousigny, which
depends upon Dauphine.

Fourthly, in duty they are to obey the contradictory sentence given the 10 of
June, 1390* in the parliament of Paris, where they proceeded, and by all means
defended themselves: for by that decree the K. Dauphin was pronounced
sovereign Lord of the Marquizat of Saluces. And in execution of this decree,
the Duke of Sauoy is to yield up a great deal of land appertaining to the said
Marquizate, together with the fruits of the same. These lands are called
Barges, Caours, Pancalier, Ennee, Villeneufue de Solier, Morel, Murel, Carignan
Monasterol, Card, Vigon, Villefranche Cauallimours, Raconis, Moullebrune,
Carail, Someriue, Camaraigne, Caualerlyon, Polongnieres, Cazalgras, Fortpas,
Faule, Malazan, Villefalet, and Busque.


Fifthly and lastly, Philip the seventh, Duke of Sauoy, had two wives. The
first, Margaret of Burbon, who brought him sixty thousand crowns. By the
contract of this marriage, the children that should be borne to the^, should
succeed each other in the whole, and unto them (as in advance) is given the
County of Bauge and Castelwick of Bourg in Bresse. Of this marriage issued a
son called Philibert, and Loyse that was mother to King Francis the first. By
the second wife he had two sons. Philibert succeeded his Father, and dyed
without issue, leaving his sister his heir general, as well by course of the
common law, which prefers the conjoined on both sides, as by the express
clause of the contract of marriage. True it is, that in those lands that
prefer the male child, our Lady Regent pretended no part: but in all her
mothers goods, in that which was given in advance, and in all the moueables
and goods, she was her brothers undoubted and sole heir.

In the year 1534. King Francis the first sent diverse times sundry great
personages to Charles the ninth, Duke of Sauoy, his Lady Mothers half brother,
to demand his rights. But this Duke, prevented by the passions of his wife,
and lingering in hope of a certain exchange most dangerous for us, not only
denied to do him reason in these so evident and palpable rights, but also
resolved to debar the Kings passage, as he was on his journey, to be revenged
upon Sforce, Duke of Millan, for the most villainous act that ever was
committed, namely, the beheading of the Lord Merueilles, Ambassador of France.

Hereupon did the King denounce war to the Duke of Sauoy, who wrongfully
detained his rights: and according to law of Nations, which gives to the
strongest in true and full propriety, the goods of him that has denied him
his right: his Majesty in the year 1536. conquered Sauoy, Bresse, and
Piedmont, which he reserved twenty three years: And very presumptuous he had
been, that durst have moved this great King to abandon this principal rampire
or bulwark of the Gauls, for the custody whereof, we need not to cross
the seas, or travail through foreign Countries, but may come to it by firm
footing. Thus are great empires cymented and established.

But such was the calamity of France, that in the year 1559. we made a
treaty, whereby we rendered 198. places, where the King held his garrisons,
as the Marshall Monluc does testify, who terms it the unfortunate and
accursed peace, saying, that since the same, we have never been free from
misfortunes. Also that our Civil wars have wasted more valiant Captains in
seven years, then any foreign wars in seventy. Yet spoke he not this upon
any good will that he bare to those, with whom we were at wars: for they
never had a sorer enemy, or any that dealt more rudely with them. But the
Flower de Luce was painted in his heart, and he most vehemently did affect any
thing, that might tend to the greatness and glory of this crown. In this
regard he could not without grief speak of so unprofitable a restitution,
whereto our mishap had forced us, with a whole sequence of all sorts of
miseries, in that so many warlike people (as he terms them) could not
otherwise employ themselves, then in most furious cutting each others throats.
Nevertheless we did not at that time so far give way to the storm, that
tossed and turmoyled this Realm, but that we retained five of the principal
and strongest towns of Piedmont, as pledges for the reason that should be done
us in our rights, namely Thurin, Quiers, Chiuas, Pinerol, Villeneufue d' Ast,
wherein we are also to note, that our treaty of peace in 1559. in express
words imported, that the King should hold Thurin, Chiuas, and Villeneufue d'
Ast, with all their confines, territories, commands, jurisdictions, and other
appurtenances: and as for Quiers and Pinerol, the king should hold the^ with
such confines and territories, as he should find to be necessary for the
sustenance and defense of the fayd places.

Now at the same time dyed King Henry the second, leaving king Frauncis very
young, which occasion the Duke of Sauoy would not ouerslip: For being still at
Paris, fourteen days after the fathers death, he obtained the sons letters
patents (never verified as the treaty of peace was) wherein the confines of
these five towns were restrained to a Piedmont mile, which was as much as to
abridge us of the five sixth parts at the least of all that was left us, as if
it had not been enough that we had yielded up so many places, unless we were
also so straightened in the remainder of our shipwreck.

All which notwithstanding, I would to God things had yet so remained: But in
the year 62. during our first civil wars, they that had already found
opportunity so to shorten the territories, seeing the realm in trouble, and
King Charles but twelve years old, gave the adventure, and restored into this
Dukes hands, Thurin, Quiers, Chinas, and Villeneufue d' Ast. Ten battelles
would not have wrested from us such places, which had cost France so much gold
and blood.

Not long before, they had in fit time made away Marshall Brissac, who would
rather have cast himself headlong from the rocks, then in the kings nonage
have given up towns of such importance to the crown, the value whereof he
was better acquainted withal, then any man alive. His successor in this
government (yet accounted one of the fairest, in regard of the great importance
thereof) forgot no remonstrance: and in deed he satisfied all men but himself:
for thrice did he refuse the execution of so wonderful hurtful an act, using
most vehement and lively remonstrances and protestations, craving an assembly
of the Estates, or at the least considering the Kings minority, the
verification of the Parliament of Peers, sitting at Paris.

Had they had any hope to obtain this promulgation, it had not been denied
him, especially considering that it would have stood for a discharge to all
others: But they knew very well, that such a parliament, consisting of so many
great personages, practiced in all sorts of affairs, who also by the reading
of hystories were acquainted with the truth of our rights mentioned in the
beginning, would never by their decree have authorized an act so prejudicial
to the estate. In this regard, not daring to exhibit such letters to the
Parliament of France, they grew to such grievous and strange threats against
this Governor, that at the last he gave way: howbeit with such and so violent
grief, that it stuck by him to his end, and brought him to his grave,
enforcing him sundry times to cry out, that he was accursed, that he ought to
have dyed in Thurin, unless his master after declaration of his maioritie, had
of his own absolute authority revoked him: also that peradventure his
Majesty finding what a fair flower they sought to pluck from his crown, and
what a grief and loss the same might for ever remain, both to him and his
successors, would have altered his purpose, and been of another mind.

Thus we see how in 62. these four places were lost only for Sauillan, and
33000. Franckes, for a months pay for the Soldiers, which was no doubt a
proper change. All the Artillery was drawn to Carmaegnolle, which by this
means was as well stored as all the rest of the Realm: and in this wise was
the assurance and pledge of all our rights reduced to two holds, Pinerall, one
of the five, and Sauillan, which was but little worth: yet was not the Duke of
Sauoy thus content: for the pledge, howsoever small, did still remember us of
our rights, which he labored to raze out of our minds* and therefore at the late
kings return (who^ God pardon) out of Poland, passing through Sauoy, the same
were begged in recompense of a collation: and the Prince, whose only error
rested in his too great goodness, granted them: whereupon the late Duke ever
after acknowledged himself greatly bound unto him, and good reason. His son
an ambitious Prince, as any bred in Europe these five hundred years, who in
imagination has swallowed the whole Monarchy of all Christendom, grounded
upon the decease of his nearest allies without issue, which his sorcerers and
Magicians do promise him, together with the decease of his Majesty, which God
in his mercy forbid, seeing the late King in 88. excluded out ofhis chief
City, accompting him undone, and contemning the Salicke law, immediately
persuaded himself that he had most apparent right to this crown: or that at
the least he would carry away one of the best parts of the broken ship,
and that the Rhosne should stream under his banners. And to be the first at
the booty, and to begin with those places that are allotted to the Kings
eldest son, as a pledge of his future succession, in the face of the estates
assembled at Bloys, during a most secure peace, he invaded the Marquizate of
Saluces, by the surprise of Carmagnole, and the beating of Rauell.

Were the loss of such fortresses, the sole remainder of the French name
beyond the Mounts, very great, yet was the loss of the Artillery no whit
inferior thereto: for there were laid up the Canons, which under the banners
of the Flower de Luce had made the proudest rauelins of warlicke Italy to
stoop. At the beginning of this usurpation he sought sundry pretenses, and
sent his Ambassadors expressly to the King, to assure him of restitution of
the whole into his hands. But immediately he disgraced his Majesty's officers,
and of his Ducall authority established others: he pulled down and brake the
Flower de Luces, and raised the arms of Sauoy: he furnished his towns with
part of our Artillery, and at the same instant, to acquaint all the world with
the trophies of his victory, he forgeth a proud coin, whereupon he stampeth a
Centaure, treading under his feet a crown reuersed, with this devise,
Opportune.

All such as are acquainted with Histories, can testify, that since the
establishment of this great Monarchy, the most ancient in the world, it never
brooked such an outrage: for if injuries are much the more aggrauated by the
consideration of his weakness from whom they do proceed, what greater shame,
what greater reproach to the chief Crown in Christendom, to the most sacred
King in the world, the Prince over a Nationa, even borne to Mars his
occupation, the subduers of Asia and Africa: at the report of whose name, even
the fiercest Nations that ever had dominion upon the earth, have trembled, then
to see his forts and storehouse beyond the mounts, carried away by a petty
Duke of Sauoy?

Surely no true Frenchman can speak of this insolent brauado, without grief
and extreme anguish. All words are too base for such an indignity, to say that
this great and mighty kingdom should bear this reproach and blemish in her
forehead for the space of a dozen years, and that it has rested only upon
this unthankful person, that he never felt the punishment for such an
outrage, done to the majesty and glory of the French name.

But it was not Gods will, who has hardened his heart, that he might receive
the reward of such treason, accompanied with the most notable ingratitude that
was ever heard of, and with a thousand cruelties that have insued the same. For
not content with this invasion, he has since practiced all the cruelties that
he could devise against all such sorts of Frenchmen, as he has found
resolute in the defense of the liberties of their Countries, with the price of
their blood, or that preferred death before bondage. Prouence and Dauphine,
which he assumed to reunite to the Crown of Sauoy, as his predecessors have
done Piedmont, Ast, Nice, Villefranche, and many other places to us
appertainiug, do yet groan under the anguish of such wounds, as his cruel
tyranny has inflicted upon them: yea such, so great and intolerable, that
even they that had opened him the gates, were forced to drive him out again,
wheresoever their strength would serve.

Afterward seeing this Realm quiet under one of the might and most
excellent Princes that ever swayed this glorious Scepter, a Prince grown up
among the allarmes, the nurse-child of legions, and in all points requisite in a
most perfect Captain, most accomplished, and withal a mighty King; he was
not so slender witted, but that he well perceived how very difficult it was for
him, any long time to hold this Marquizate by force, especially considering,
that by the treaty every man was to reenter into like estate, as he enjoyed
before the wars, at the least, within one year: besides, that his Holiness
had sufficiently given to understand, that before all things it was requisite,
fully to restore him, that in the time of peace had perforce been robbed.

Finding himself therefore in these perplexities, with the Kings permission,
whom he had assured every way to content, he came to Paris, where he was
received with all cheerfulness and honor that himself could desire: after
long and often treaties, he finally in the month of February promised within
the first of lune, to yield up the Marquizate in like state as he took it, or
the exchange thereof agreed upon between his Majesty and him: and this was
solemnly signed, as well by the one as by the other. Afterward being returned
into Piedmont, he was so far from certifying the King that his mind was
changed, that contrariwise from day to day he entertained him with goodly
promises of faithful performance of all that he had promised. So that as
ordinarily such men as had rather incur a thousand deaths, then break their
word, do imagine al others to be like themselves, especially where they have to
do with Princes, whose greatness and honor shining as well during their
lives, as after their decease, consists in the exact observation of their
faith, the Queen of men, the sunshine of this world, and the ornament of all
virtues: his Majesty accounted the restitution of his Marquizate, as sure as
if the Lord of Passage, a Gentleman without reproach, whom he had chosen to be
Governor, had already been entered with his garrison appointed to that
effect. But the Prince of Piedmonts purposes had a far other drift: he sought
only to win months, weeks, and days, that so the winter coming on, might
debar the King from any enterprise for that year, which was already well
spent, assuring himself, that before the Spring he would set so many matters
on broach, and ftir such coals, that they should have other matters enough to
think upon, rather then the Marquizate of Saluces, withal conioyning his
extreme confidence that he reposed in his Witches, Sorcerers, and prickers of
waxen Images. But God had otherwise appointed: for after forbearance of feuenty
days above covenant, withal that this Prince had declared, that he would not
perform or accomplish that which his Ambassadors and pastors had advised: the
King, whose wisdom was correspondent to his bounty, finding himself thus
unworthily entreated in the execution of this accord, that had been made by
his predecessor, in the invasion of his inheritance, did finally resolve by
force of arms to revenge so many wrongs offered to this Crown and withal, to
let all the world, where the fame of his conquests and victories should be
bruted, to understand, that it was neither want of power in his Kingdom,
neither fear of danger that forced him to like of the said accord, in liew of
six times as large an inheritance, by this unthankful wretch detained from
him: but rather for that he was most religiously bent to observe the peace of
Veruins, which since the Prince of Piedmont had on his part broken, and withal,
shrunk from his promise so solemnly signed: as also that God, the great Judge
of both good and badde meanings, who gives victory to the righteous quarrel,
has so prospered our arms, that with his help and a little patience, we may
soon compass this so important a conquest of Sauoy and Bresse: shall we then
possibly find any of our own Nation, so careless of the glory and safety of
their Country, as again to desire the presence of the most mortal and
passionate enemy that we have in this world, on this side the Alps, on this
side the Bulwarck of the Gauls, and even in our bowels?

Nature, said our elders (and in that word we comprehend the power of God) has
limited the great Empires with deep seas, with high mountains, with mighty
and swift rivers, perpetual and unchangeable bounds, far more sure then any
made by man's hand, which must always be repaired. The true bounds of the
Gauls Eastward, are the Alps: what more profitable, and withal, more
honorable, can any man imagine, then by so just a war, and so acknowledged
throughout Christendom, to drive all foreign Dominion over the Mounts, and to
take such order, that albeit all Transalpine Gauls fail us, yet so much as is
on this side, may conspire the preservation of the glory and greatness of the
Flower de Luce?

Hereupon especially let us likewise consider the diverse accidents that may
befall this great body, and remember that when the enemies armies must needs
climb these high Mountains, and crane up their Canons, a very small
resistance will mightily trouble them: and contrariwise, that the estate
wherein we lived before this happy conquest, Dauphine and Prouence lay open
to all invasions.

If they that lived in former ages had not regarded our safety, as we are
also to take order for our posterity, the fire would daily have flamed in
Angoulmois, in Anieow, and in many other parts of this Realm, If our former
Kings had had no meaning to live among us (as they do) through the glory of
their great and stately conquests, or that they would have surrendered the
inheritance of such as durst presume to try their forces, and what a French
army, fighting in the view of their Prince, is able to do: undoubtedly we
should now have neither seas nor mountains to bounder this Kingdom.

Neither is there any person so unexperienced in worldly affairs, as not to
know, that the Pyrenian limits are not unto us of greater use and commodity
then the Alps: for from them we stand in danger of the assault of one only
Nation, which since the creation of the world, could never alone so fight with
the French, but that the honor has rested with us. Contrariwise, by the Alps
we lie open to all the most fierce, proud, and most capable of extending
their Dominion, had the Ottomans prosecuted their progress through Italy, as
well as they caught sure footing by the taking of Ottranto, which could not be
wrested from them under eighteen months siege, after his decease that
conquered it, even those against whom we are now to make wars, must have
been the chief bulwark of our fortress to keep it: such men are they to
support such clouds of innumerable men.

Let us not imagine these considerations to be scar-crowes, as things
impossible, which I would to God they were, for we must confess, that it is
not half so far from Mont Senis to Zigeth, or into Esclauonia, as from
thence to Constantinople, which Mahomet took but in the year 1453. Hereby let
us consider, in how short a time they may come upon us, or upon our children,
to whose good we are to refer all our labors: God of his mercy keep us
from this misery: yet must we think upon all, and that in time, holding the
Alps as we do, and united to the Switzers in a sure league, the greatest
power in the world is not able to force us in a ground of such advantage.

And this may stop the mouths of some that object unto us the power of
Turks, to make us give over, whereas contrariwise, that is the chief matter
that should the rather move us to the safe custody of our principal rampire.
Here unto we may add, that whilst we lost Naples, Milan, and Flanders, we did
not consider the Turks great success in the mean time. When the Duke of
Sauoy even of late invaded the Marquizate, and bent all his forces to usurp
Pronence and Dauphine, no man regarded whether the Infidels prospered or not:
but now that our affairs are at a better stay, and the case altered, by and by
they cry out, The Turk, Beware the Turk: by these policies incroching upon
us, when we have the worse, and lingering and lulling us asleep, when our
fortune smileth upon us: they have made us lose almost as much as we have
left. Thus do they dandle us like children: but let us no longer brook this
entertainment; rather let us keep this natural and incomparable rampire, that
shall on that side warrant and secure us from all sorts of enemies.

The remainder of this great Realm is bounded with the East and West Seas,
except toward Germany, where our German, francke and valiant brethren, men
deuoyde of all malice, or purpose to enterprise, do inhabit: united with
them, we shall at all times so fiercely, and with such courage defend our
selves, that all the world conspiring our ruin, shall not be able to bear us:
we never failed them of help in their need, and therefore with great reason
did they account us as an arch pillar of their liberty, against all that would
assault them. Neither have we ever holden any great wars against them, except
by the policies and instigation of others more politic, and less valiant then
our selves, who sundry times have fleshed us each against other, to the end to
weaken both parts, as our Histories do testify: but now our eyes are open,
and these policies discovered and blown up: and I do certainly believe, that
France and Germany were never greater friends then at this day: so as we may
say, that God has delivered into our hands, that which we ought most fervently
to defire, namely this great bulwark against all invasion: and we may truly
say, that this so important a matter, was our greatest want for the
accomplishment of this fortress.

God likewise with the eyes of his mercy has looked upon these poor
Sauoyans, that speak our language, and are our true fellow Country men, borne
for the most part under the lawful Empire of our Kings, Francis the first, and
Henry the second, who at this day do fear nothing so much, as to returns under
the proud dominion of the Piedmontaine, whom they hate as much, as they honor
and love the most excellent virtues of their true King, at whose knees they
prostrate themselves, that they may not be miserably abandoned, since God has
vouchsafed, that he that held them so short, has shrunk from his word, from
whence may proceed the beginning of their liberty. Should we return it into
his hands, we may well think how these poor people that were noted to be so
ready to open their gates to his Majesty, shall be tormented: besides that,
in so doing we shall never find any people willing to acknowledge our king, but
by extreme force: for by that example every man shall see, that in us there is
no hold, who make no difficulty to thrust out those to the cruelty of our
enemy, that have yielded thems elues into his Majesty's arms, to live and die
his most humb le subjects, to whose preservation by the law of Nations he is
no less bound, then they to obey his commandments in all fidelity.

It is likewise a matter of great import for the Kings service, with all speed
to root out of the minds of his subjects in Sauoy, al doubt of passing away a
Province of such importance: for so shall you soon see them the more bold and
resolute to serve his Majesty in all sorts. But some there are, and
peradventure even among our selves, who with their coldness, and some speeches
that slip them, do drive this poor people into despair, as imagining that we
do already deliver them bound into the hands of the Piedmontaine. Well do I
suppose, that the procurers of this mischief, do it not maliciously: but some
there are both fearful and too mistrustfull, yet must they be gently
admonished, to alter their countenance and speech, and for their more
assurance, to cast their eyes upon the valor and good fortune of their great
King, and of this mighty Empire, as also upon the ingratitude and treachery of
our enemy, and the justice of this conquest.

As in truth, if among all Nations reprysals be holden for a inft title of
Lordship, when one of the two Sovereigns is unwilling to make restitution of
things violently usurped: If the equity of lawful war, be another title
throughout the world aduowed for just, whereupon the greatest Monarchs are
also grounded: what man, considering the enterprises of the House of Sauoy
against that of France, and the Kings long patience before he would enter into
wars, but must confesle his conquest to be so just, that his Majesty has as
good right to Sauoy, as to Paris it self? Likewise, if the Prince of Piedmont
by his policies and mediators, should now rob us of the fruits of our labors,
and our good fortune, what man alive would fear hereafter to invade us, or to
falsify his faith or word, with full resolution in all extremity to follow his
victory (if he could obtain it) when he shall be sure, being overcome,
always to recover himself through the help of some great mediator (whereof
France, to her great hurt, was never destitute) as our Annals do testify,
which have been written principally to admonish nish us to shun the like
ouersights?

By the same Histories do we learn, that the Monarch that pardons his
subjects, does seldom repent it: for they be his children, even such as
returning to their duties, do many times endeavor by notable service to make
satisfaction for their former defaults, and finding the discommodities and
incredible hindrances that they incur by the loss of their Princesfauour,
they vow, and bind themselves for ever to his service, and utterly root out
all other conceits or cogitations out of their minds. But it is far
otherwise with the Sovereign, who can never forget the grief of being
overcome or an incredible desire of revenge, and continual care to recover the
wants in his estate, either to enter into new leagues, and practices to
atchieue the victory in his course, whereby the world may be informed as well
of his revenge, as of his misfortune. The more he is bound to you, the less
will he remember you: such remembrance will lie ouer-heauie and intolerable
upon his mind: he will, if he can, take you at advantage, seek by some new
quarrel to be freed from such a wonderful and excessive favor. What must we
then do? even take from our enemy all means to hurt us, though he would. And
this may we now easily do, if we leave him nothing on this side the Alps, and
so cross all his drifts for Lions, where he shall get small good, by planting
whole families of his subjects at his own cost, to be as it were secret
colonyes, when al is gone on this side the Mounts. Without Dourlans, Amyens had
never beenetaken: Saint Denis in the end carried away Paris: and had we not
given up Thurin, Carmagnole had never been lost.

How mightily do we think, shall the City of Lions, one of the eyes of
France, yea, even of Europe, the ordinary seat of sundry Roman Emperors,
and a place ofthe greatest traffic in the world, which yet at this day gives
law to all other places, increase hereafter in wealth, and multitude of
Citizens, being covered with Bresse and Sauoy, whereas before she seemed
rather a Frontier town, then a City of the Realm? as also in regard of the
multitudes that still arrived there from all parts, and the usual passage of
great armies near to her confines, she was always in danger to be surprised,
to the great loss and incredible ruin of the whole estate? Even this point is
a matter of great weight, and worthy manifold consideration: for it is no
small matter to stop foreign armies, without denouncing of war, from making
the mow at such a City as Lions, one of the strongest in Christendom, and
ofmost difficult recovery, if it should be lost: we cannot be too jealous of
such places, neither too curious to keep away all sorts of Courtiers. This
proposition do I hold, and there of refer my self to all Captains, namely,
that Lions remaining a Frontier town, is one of the easiest to be surprised, in
regard of the great traffic, and multitude of strangers there sciourning, and
daily arriving out of all parts without suspicion: which if you ween to hinder,
ye undo the town: It shall no longer be Lions, it must have great liberty:
but standing at this day so far within the Frontiers, there is no more fear
of it then of Paris. I do also hold this second proposition, that Lions
continuing a Frontier town, is, except Bourdeaux and Marseilles, the most
difficult town in this land to be recovered, if it should be once lost. Would
not such and so great a blow, deserve the conclusion of the exchange propounded
in the year of our Lord God 1 5 3 4. so necessary an exchange for the passage
of the armies into the Low Countries? What know we what is already determined
between so near kinsmen? If this should come to pass, and this mighty town
be obstinately defended with the whole forces of such a neighbor, into what a
miserable estate should we be reduced? What should become of Prouence and
Dauphine? Into what a straight should four or five other great Provinces be
brought? Had any man told us twenty years ago, that a handful of people
should have surprised Amiens, we would not have believed him, and indeed
there was less likelihood: for it was not so begarded with foreign families
as Lions. It makes me to despair, to see men be such cowards, and sometimes
purposely to amplify the forces of our adversaries, and yet when afterward we
come to propound these great considerations, they make but a mock of it: for
indeed they care not greatly. For my part I fear no open forces. Our Fathers
have seen in Prouence 50000. at the least at once, and whole clouds of men in
Champagne and Picardy: this never hurt them, it made them not so much as
afraid, so long as the Realm was in itself at peace, as now it is. What
should I then fear? even practices, policies, and surprises of our Frontier
Towns, such as Lions should be, if we should render Sauoy: unless we should
think that we should be loath to break the peace for Lions, since we would not
break it for Carmagnole. I think indeed that on the behalf, or by his
command that should send his armies along our frontiers, we should not fear
to incur such a storm (for we must still think, that great Princes do make
some account of their faith and honor) yet might there be some General of
the army that would gladly be spoken of, but never look for the answer that
Sextus Pompeyus made, saying, Thou should not have told me of it. The most
that we shall get, he shall be disauowed: then must he fortify himself.
Hereupon the wars are kindled, but the smarting loss is ours, which if it
once grow old, they will forget to do us right, unless at the hour of death
in discharge of conscience: but if ye look for the execution of the will, ye
must seek your Judges at Pampelune.

It is therefore a great advantage, to be out of this continual fear of Lions:
for undoubtedly, they with whom we are at this time so threatened, are more
crafty, more close and secret then we, and their drifts have a further fetch.
In the field with open force, we shall always beat them well enough: had
neither Germans nor Englishmen set in footing, they would never have had the
faces so much as to look upon us: three hundred French horses will always
beat a thousand of theirs. And as for footmen, ours are of more force,
dexterity, and contempt of death, but less discipline. It lies in our selves
to remedy the last, the rest proceed from nature, who has given us these
advantages, which we must not lose. We can keep them when we list: witness
the Ocean, which even this year has seen our French adventures, who cannot
possibly be retained, unless we should chain up all our youth. For what can
we tell who shall escape? they be no troops or garrisons licensed at pleasure,
so might there be fraud: but they be stragglers, coming some from one place,
some from another, the whole Nation being so borne to the wars, that they
must seek it where it is, or make it among themselves. The Ocean, I say, has
seen of these mad fools, that have beaten the flower and choice of the best
and oldest Captains and soldiers, whom we hold in such esteem. Go ye therefore
and report in those countries, that the French foote-men are nothing worth.

But who shall make it as gallant, as firm, and withal, bring it into as good
discipline as it was at Cerisoles, if this our great King cannot compass it?
Is he of less ability then his uncle, who was but a most faithful and most
profitable servant unto him that swayed the Scepter and crown which he has
succeeded? Eight years had we held Sauoy and Piedmont, when the Lord of
Anguien, under the command of King Francis, won that glorious day, where our
foot-me^ with the push of the pike, most furiously overthrew all those old
triumphant bands of two parts of the world, albeit they were a third part more
then we, and so well armed, that we won from them eight thousand corcelets.
The story tells us, without the Conquest of Sauoy, France had missed of
that great and stately triumph, as wanting wherewith to have fed the army one
day. Had this commodious a conquest been achieved before the year of our Lord
God one thousand five hundred twenty and four, King Frauncis, who should have
found himself upon the Marches of his estate, near to all succor, treasure,
and refreshing, had not fallen into that calamity that has stuck by us ever
since.

Very high had he bin mounted, if the Lord of Anguyen had not caught him by the
throat, that should have wished him to speak to his Lord the King to yield
up Sauoy: so long is it since this fatal and valiant race of the Bourbons was
promised to restore the eminency and perfect glory of the Flower de Luce.

The ten first years of his reign were spent in his establishment, that was
hindered by those that always feared the greatness of this estate. At his
entry into his second ten years, God has vouchsafed to add unto his
Empire the highest mountains in the world, thereby to lift up this Prince, and
to place him in the view of the whole world, as the Grandchilde of his beloved
King Lewis the fifth.

What men be these then, that seeking to pluck him from his type of glory,
would fetch him six days iourneyes back again, and in one moment defeat
him of that great eminent and shining fame, which shines even into the East,
achieved in five and twenty years, through his so wonderful prowess and
famous victories, still following his good fortune, and proceeding still
forward, without stumbling or retire?

Is it possible for this mighty Prince, who was able to conquer his Kingdom
with the swords point, now for ever to defraude his memory of the glory of
this increase, thatis of such importance to his Crown? In regard of our
selves now living, whatsoever his Majesty do ordain, or whatsoever he do,
our perfect obedience, yea I will say more, our love and fervent affection
shall never quail: But what will the posterity say, when they shall hear of
so happy a conquest, and find the inconvenience of the not keeping of the same
such inconveniences as will happen either first or last, and those very sharp?
Let us not flatter our selves: It is hard to take away the sobs, the sighs and
bitter complaints from those that feel the smart. Why have they not spoken?
why have they not written of the restitution of 1559? and yet in truth we were
forced thereto by an extreme mishap: besides that almost all Europe was
conspired against us. But who forces us now? what color? what retence shall
our history find? what excuse shall ve make to our nephews, for giving away
such an advantage? Surely I see none: all things do smile upon us, and for one
that fretteth at our conquest, four are glad of it though they say nothing.
Such there are that will entreat his Majesty, and exhort him to let go his
hold, yea and make orations unto him for the same, that in heart would be sorry
to be believed.

Here will some man ask, whether we must always continue the wars.

Whom I will answer, that France has many times been driven to peace,
without the recovery of Naples, Millan, or the sovereignty of Flanders. Why
must we then of necessity, for the making of peace, restore that which we have
so lawfully conquered, since we have so often been forced to agree without
recovery of our own? Is it because France is weaker then Piedmont, or that
we are such dolts, as to think all things lawful for others, and nothing for
our selves?

Let our enemy beg peace if he list, as well as he drew on and prosecuted the
war: but it may please his Majesty to call to mind, that it is were
requisite that prosperity should recompense adversity: also that he that so
plays that he may always lose and never win, will be soon undone.

True it is, that they reply that so we shall draw on a greater war against
us. But hereto we may find a double answer: First, that it is unlikely, that
they that have so longed after peace, a matter to them as necessary as
profitable to us, would now break it, especially upon so bad and base a title
as is the Prince of Piedmonts. The second answer is this, that since our cause
is good, they that we are threatened withal, will never enter war against us,
unless they have before resolved upon it for other causes, and motives farther
fetched: and in that case it is far better for us to keep our advantage, then to
lose it, and be sorry for it when it is too late. Withal, that this ground
standing fast, that our enterprise is just, and consequently the conquest
thereof proceeding: If we be so timorous as for a threat cowardly to forgo
that which we have so lawfully and happily achieved, then farewell all: there
is no more Frenchman, no more Gaul in the world. For how can any man imagine,
that this valiant nation, in former times an actor in all the greatest wars
in the world: a nation that has sought them from one end of the earth to
another: that has taken the imperial City of Constantinople, and forced the
mightiest cities in the East and South: that feared nothing but the falling of
the sky, as assured to overcome all that should withstand, should at this day
be so degenerate and so quailed, as for a Rodomontade or Spanish brag, to
abandon that which so justly to us does appertain? that is to say, should show
themselves so fearful and such cowards, that through the default of his
subjects hearts, aforetime the terror of all nations, so great a King should
not be able to keep his own conquests? But in deed we are far from those
terms. For albeit our lamentable wars have greatly diminished us, yet shall
our experience, valor and courage recompense the want of our number: besides
that, our head shall always be counted for twenty thousand: he is the great
Lion that guides the lesser to the battle: his soldiers are not counted by
their number, but by their valor: yet if need be, and that this Empire must
stir up her stumps in earnest, we shall cover their largest fields with
soldiers, and make the earth to tremble under the feet of our horses: we shall
dry up the rivers, and of these old French armies bring forth a hundred or two
hundred thousand warriors, as gallant and courageous as ever were their
ancestors: even such as will go to the field with as good courages as others
come thence. Let no man therefore think to terrify us with such threats. We
seek peace with every one but this ungrateful person, yet fear we not the
war. If any be resolved to set upon us, we were fools to shrink back: we
must plead for all, we must defend all, or rather march half the way to meet
with any that would join with this presumptuous person, who in liew of humble
reverence to the Majesty of so great a neighbor kingdom, as nature and
wisdom do teach, and all the world do put in practice, has showed himself
so presumptuous and desperate rash, as to seek to ouerrun a great Lion, who at
one sole lift is able to squeaze him asunder. But these be vain conceits, for
there is no prince in the world willing to raise war against us, upon so bad
a quarrel as is the Prince of Piedmonts. Well may every one intermeddle to
agree us, and we will give them the hearing: For in the midst of our weapons we
seek for peace, yet in any wise let us remember two things: First, that we
brook no delay whilst our wind blows fair: as our Kings Jews the 12.
Francis the 1. and Henry the 2. always did. Our histories do make mention, and
our ouersights are noted, but when it is too late. It is not enough to be
valiant in the field: the chief point is to be wise and circumspect in
counsel. And in that regard did Homer never commend any valiant Captain for
his courage, unless withal it were accompanied with wisdom, witness his
speech of Agamemnon: In arms valiant, and in counsel discreet. So wise was
Hercules, that his valor was the least part of his glory. This wisdom and
this excellent counsel, so far as it concerns the sovereign, consists not
only in the well pitching of a field; in the furious assault of a great city
by the weaker; or in choosing the field: but the chiefest skill is in the
knowledge how to use the victory and his forces, and cutting off his enemy
from all means to take heart again: as also in the forecast how to stop his
ears against the fair words of certain intermeddlers, that seek no more but
to hinder the course of such prosperity as they do suspects that so he have no
cause to repent that he believed them, and through this belief limited his
good fortune and conquests, and so lost the occasion of assuring his frontiers.
It concerns no less, and so let us remember.

Secondly, we must beware of ouerbuying our quiet. Darius sent to offer
Alexander part of his Empire: but this great Prince, the true image and perfect
pattern of all generosity, also of courtesy, so long as the same was not
prejudicial to his estate, answered in one word: Behold where thou find me:
I have already passed more then he offers: we must speak either of
atoneme^t, or fight for that that is left him: for all that is behind me, is
past compromise. And he said truth, for a great Captain never returns back:
he that forsakes it, is unworthy the prosperity that God sends him: yet
had Alexander to do with so mighty an enemy, as soon after met him with a
million of men: albeit when he made that brave answer, he was not ignorant
what forces this mighty Emperor of Persia might have, yet could he not be
terrified, because he was Alexander. But had he exchaunged the hope of his
victory with the agreement offered, both body and fame had been shut up in
one self tomb, whereas now contrariwise while the world lasts, he shall
still live as fresh and famous as when he dyed. And in truth we must confess
either pusillanimitie, or extreme weakness in those that yield up that which
they have lawfully conquered. But we are (thanks be to God) far enough from
both. For as for fear, it never came near our Kings heart: for had he had
never so small a spice thereof, he had long since bin overthrown, and his
estate covered up in darkness. Rather may we say, that so many valiant acts
and so many trophies, whereby he shines as a fair Sun over the face of the
earth, do but burgeon forth conceits of higher enterprises against all that
dare give him good cause, as having the hope of things to come, still fighting
in his fancy with the glory of things passed.

As for force, it consists especially in money and me^: concerning the first,
the K. treasures well husbanded, as they are will go farther the^ men ween for:
foreign war does somewhat help to maintain it self. True it is, that it is
now high time to begin (since to our great detriment, we did it not sooner) I
say to begin yearly to spare 3. millions of gold, which we do wretchedly
consume in silks which we need not, whereas our neighbors cannot forbear
so many of our commodities necessary for man's life, which to us are in stead of
mines of gold and silver. This done, we shall grow into abundance of wealth:
for as the Philosopher says, Nature is never no loser: because that that which
comes forth of one place, reentreth into another: even so the expenses of
this Realm do stand us in nothing. The 3. millions, which we so miserably for
lack of forecast, or rather for want of wit, do yearly waste upon worms
work, through the enchanting speeches of such as reap the benesite thereof,
do more empouerish this estate in 6. months, then 6. years of foreign war.
Powder, Cannon thot, and most part of our weapons are made in the land, and so
cost us little to speak of. The soldiers pay returns to the hands of the K.
receyuers, to who^ the commons that have earned it with their labor and
cunning, do return for their taxes. Any man that list to deal with us, shall
have more need of foreign soldiers then we, and all things reckoned, must
spend more ducats then we testornes, and so see the bottom of his purse sooner
then we. Were we to be assaulted by such as had a hundred millions ready
gathered, the danger were the greater: but if we have any discommoditie, they
that we are threatened with, are in necessity, and in far less credit then
we, as being long since with all their partakers, drawn dry, through their
incredible expenses continued these 34. years, which their last mishap must
force them to redouble, or to lose all. Were we thoroughly acquainted with their
bullion, we should find that they are rather to stand in fear of us, then we
of them; also that he that threatens most, is in most fear. As for multitude
of men, the conceived opinion that the King at this time would have no more,
together with the collection of the fruits of a fruitful year, and the
beginning of winter, detained a number in their houses. But if his Majesty
should earnestly call for assistance, and give out that he would find means to
discern the house-birds from the true Gentlemen, whose service he would have
truly recorded, to be monthly sent to his Parliaments and Chambers of
accounts, that thither he might hereafter have recourse; we should soon see
our armies increase, with an incredible number of Gentlemen, who would be loath
in themselves or their posterity, to bear so shameful a badge, as is the
abandoning of their King and Country in time of need, especially, in so just
and honorable a war, whereto from all parts both great and small have
recourse.

No man can complain of such remembrances, as do consecrate to the posterity,
the names and valor of those, that as the true children of their gallant
ancestors, have hasted to the place, whither the presence of their King, and
glory of their Country has called them. He that would be an unprofitable
servant to his Prince, and yet misliketh that he should be known, seeks to
confound labor with idleness, valor with cowardice, and the forsaker of his
country with the true Gentleman, that always considers in what regard his
ancestors had their lands given them, with freedom from such charges as other
Citizens do bear. To be brief, he indeuoureth to make a mixture of all vice,
with the rarest virtues: yea, so dangerous a mixture, that the greatest
obseruers of antiquity, whose principles we have to our cost tried to be
most true, do agree, that when such confusions take place, in whatsoever form
of government, the same are an infallible token, that that estate is extreme
sick: yet if it be in a Monarchy, the cure is both ready and certain. For
the Prince may speedily reestablish virtue in her eminency, and so open the
deformity and shame of her contrary, that for one of his subjects that
continue in this filth, he shall find ten thousand hasting to that glory,
wherewith it may please the sovereign to note the affection, courage, and
travails of his faithful servants: neither shall we want men, yea, as brave
men as ever the earth bare. But in any wise, rid me from these men that
depend upon our enemies wages, whose only care rests in daily writing from
the army, that peace is concluded, that is to say, that no man must come. My
self do know, that this policy has within these two months detained a
hundred Gentlemen within ten league about the house of my abode: yet have we
one rule in Monarchy undoubtedly true, namely, that it is in the King only to
think upon peace, when he thinks it profitable for his estate, and in the
subjects no farther to trouble themselves, but to keep their hands nimble, and
their swords sharp, according to the saying of Aemilius, and to use no
communication but of weapons, of horses, and of war, after it is once
proclaimed. This is it that makes a Prince to be feared, yea, this is it that
makes him condescend unto profitable peace, when he finds that the heat of
his subjects, boiling in a burning desire to fight, must be restrained.

Let us peruse our Histories, and we shall find, that this great Monarchy was
founded, augmented, and preserved, not by lukewarm and effeminate humors,
but by valor and generositie, by entering into ferraine wars, not for
threats, but for benefit and advantage. Civil and intestine wars have
sundry times, and twice within these two hundred years, brought it to the
point of destruction, other wars never shook it: but contrariwise, have ever
been holden as an exercise of our principal profession, and as the substance
and theater of our glory. For as Lycurgus referred all his laws to the war:
and as the Romans made their vaunts, that they were not acquainted with any
other arts or occupations, but left the^ all to their subjects, as unworthy
themselves, so our ancestors, inured to the natures of this warlike Nation,
did utterly reject from all succession to the crown, that sex which they
thought unfit to lead the Frenchmen to the wars, and withal, established
the foundation of this Empire, upon the force of arms, and the perfection of
military knowledge, the most generous of all, and most noble, as well in the
cause as in the end.

Through the excellency of this Art, the Romans overcame the multitude of the
Cymbrians, the force and craft of the Affricans, the wisdom and policy of
the Grecians, and the riches and power of Asia.

But when they went about to alter their brave and valorous principles, and in
liew of Iron to use gold, flattery for commandment, treaties for battles,
and composition in stead of victories and triumphs* the resplendent Majesty
of this mighty Empire withered, the fame thereof vanished, the subjects fear
changed into contempt, and the reverence of the Neighbors into dension. And it
was with all men, as with the Nations, which beforetime trembled at the view
of the Roman Magistrates: but when they saw themselves renting and dismembring
their Empire, they also set upon them, and assaulted the^ even in their
Capitol, which they have so often and so miserably sacked and razed, that now
there remains no more but the sole tomb and cinders thereof.

Let us beware that we fall not in the like fault, and that we alter not our
old principles, both bold, courageous, and in a word, right French, into their
contraryes; and withal, let us remember, that so soon as we, like women,
shall begin to quail at the threate of some great war, we shall see our
selves environed round about, every man will overrun us, one will pluck at
the one side, another at the other, and we shall be the contempt and scorn
of the children of those that could not, without trembling, hear any speech of
our forefathers.

Yet do I not say, that we should prefer a continual war before a wished
peace, which through Gods goodness, and the valor and wisdom of our great
King, we do at this day enjoy with all men, except this ungrateful person,
that has infringed his promise and faith: but rather to confirm our first
proposition, namely, That being justly grounded in this war, and the Conquest
being both just, lawful, and most profitable to our estate, neither threate,
nor any other consideration, should make us to give over that which we hold, or
to step one foot back again.

If we can firm our selves in these principles replenished with equity,
glory, and honor, and be resolved courageously to set upon any that would
intrude into so wrongful war against us, we should even against the whole
world, relieve the ancient glory of this mighty Empire, yea, we should give
them to understand, that it is not good meddling with France in her
afflictions: also that either first or last, God, who favors her as the
chief crown of those that are baptized in his name, will enable her to be
quit with her enemies. To be brief, that she knows how to live in peace with
those that account of her amity and alliance, and to tread down all such as
will attempt against her glory and honor.

Thus have we finished this discourse, and yet the principal is behind, that
is, most fervently to pray unto the heavenly goodness, so to vouchsafe to
touch the heart of our King, that he will courteously hear, and at length
yield to a most humble petition, which our just fear of extreme peril has
wrested, not out of my heart and pen only, but out of the hearts and mouths
of all his subjects.

The Petition.
SIr, your self are as well acquainted with all worldly affairs, I will not say
as any Prince, but as any man in Europe* how is it then possible, that you
should not conceive the principal drifts of your enemies* If you please
attentively to consider, you shall undoubtedly find, that their great hope is
built upon your tomb, whom they see so extreme aduenturous, that every hour,
yea, every moment, they hearken afterthat desired news, eue^ the type of all
their vows. Cut them off, Sir, from this hope, by a moderation worthy your
glory already achieved, worthy the Imperial throne whereto God has exalted
you, and worthy the extreme necessity that all your France, and all your
confederates have of the preservation of your life. So shall your Majesty
immediately see the weapons drop out of your enemies hands, all their devices
confounded, and their drifts dispersed. Indeed, Sir, we are to confess, that
hitherto this great contempt of danger was necessary for the reestablishment
of your estate, which was so sick, as usual remedies could never have
recovered it. It was requisite to adventure farther, then stood with any
discourse of military reason, to execute before deliberation, and with
extraordinary and more then humane confidence to plunge your self among many
dangers, yea even the dangers of death, But God environed you with his Angels:
for it was no rashness, but perfect valiancie. But now sir, that he has graced
you with the restitution of your kingdom, quiet and in peace: also that your
Majesty have the assistance of so many great Princes, and excellent Captains,
(almost all trained up at your own hand) and of these, brave French horsemen,
so famous and so feared throughout the world, followed with the great squadrons
of thundering legions, replenished with young and galla^t nobility, who burn
with an incredible desire to join and overthrow your enemies in a pitched
field, in case they dare stand you, or proudly to assault some strong
fortress. Seeing your self also entered into such and so mighty alliances as
never any king your predecessor was the like: Is it not time, sir, that the
same affection to your subjects that carried you into all these hazards, should
now make you to reserve your self to such as are worthy of your Majesty? If
a king, said Theophrastus, must needs die in the wars, let him die like a
king: that is to say, in some fierce and bloody battle, environed with all
the gallant, noble and brave men of his estate: let him be drowned in some
maine sea of his enemies blood, mixed with the blood of his own soldiers, and
never be slain as some mean Captain at the siege of some town, or in some
skirmish: For so should his glory and triumphs be so far from increase,
that they should even wither and decay: witness that great and courageous
Captain, that thought himself greatly disgraced, in that a quarrel shot out
of Samos, light near him: wherewith had he been slain, his army through his
default had stood as a body without a head at the enemies mercy, to the
reproach and ruin of his country.

But as the excellent Archimedes, by planting his engines, threw more darts and
shot at the Romans, then all the rest of the Siracusans together: even so your
Majesty, being the soul infused into the veins, sinews, and arteries of
this great body, and proud preparation for wars, and kindling the courages of
all his Captains and soldiers, does alone make all hands to walk, all
Cannons to rore, and all the swords of his army to cut. Assure your self
therefore, Sir, that if you will vouchsafe to yield to the fervent supplications
and tears of all your subjects, that prostrate themselves at your feet, only
to obtain this sole request, as the fullness of their felicity, and so take
from them this extreme fear and incomparable terror, which only does freeze
the blood of all your soldiers; you shall revive their courages, and
maruailously cheer up their forces, as knowing, that so long as your person
are in safety from so many Cannons leueled at your heart, the affairs of your
France, even of your warlike France, will prosper and grow from better to
better: and contrariwise, your enemies that cannot stand and bear up
themselves but upon this cowardly and cursed hope, seeing themselves fallen
from the same, shall find their destruction, and that they are in worse estate,
then if they had lost ten battles. Doing this, Sir, you shall surmount your
self, which is the most difficult, gallant, and glorious victory of all
other, and withal, by this great point of discretion, crown all your triumphs
and trophies, whose glory and fame shall never be limited, but with the bounds
of the earth, and all eternity; and besides, Sir, you shall reserve your
anointed (...) to infinite Garlands of great victories, yet due to your good
fortune, which it has pleased God to give you, for a faithful companion to
your Heroycall and excellent virtue.

FINIS.

