THE HISTORY, AND LIVES, OF THE KINGS of England; From WILLIAM the CONQVEROR,
unto the end of the Reign of King HENRY the EIGHT.

By WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire, Recorder of the Honorable City of EXETER.

Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. LONDON, Printed for
JOHN BILL, William Barret, and Henry Fetherstone.

1615.

TO THE GENTRY OF ENGLAND.
Worthy Gentlemen (omitting all elaborated Eloquence, which oftentimes is used
as a varnish, to cover unprofitable labors; As cunning Goldsmithes do enrich
their basest Silver, when they Gilt it with their purest Gold) J purpose to
render to you an account of two reasons, which induced me to take this pain,
and to publish this work.

1. It is common among Physicians; That though profound Learning, and frequent
Experience, have furnished them with abundant skill, in their Honorable
profession: yet they do still strive to make their knowledge more perfect, in
the discovery of the imperfections of other men's bodies, then of their own:
Jn like sort it is the common custom of our times; that many hopeful
Gentlemen (whom Nature and Arts have beautified, with the rich treasures of
their bounty) do endeavor to be more exact and refined, in knowing the
Religion, Laws, Government, Manners, Strength, and Sites of foreign Countries,
then of that Kingdom wherein themselves were borne.

But as that man is wise in vain, who is not wise unto himself; So it is a
simple grace (nay to speak plainly, it is a foul disgrace) to a Gentleman
(especially to such a one, as has, or does intend to spend much time abroad to
know the fashions of foreign Nations) to be ignorant in the State of his own
Country at home. The History of which, affords as much variety and
profitable instruction, to captiuate the Readers delight in the perusal, as
the fairest Pictures do contentment, when with their artificial beauties,
they do allure men's eyes to look and to gaze upon them.

To this end therefore, that henceforth such worthy Gentlemen as are purposed,
in long traueling, to enlarge their experience, by the view of foraine
Countries, may first be furnished with a convenient knowledge of their own; J
undertook this labor, and do present it unto you, with this my first reason
which induced me thereunto.

2. The second reason of my so doing, springs out of mine own conceit; which
(as J conjecture) deceiues me not. For, in regard that the Histories of this
Kingdom, are frequently interrupted, yea blemished, by too too many
interuening Occurrences, and by a multitude of extrauagant Observations (which
do much differ from the true Method, and Nature, of a well digested and
composed Chronicle; and thereby do extend it into a needless and an
unprofitable length) J am resolved that the Readers capacity (to observe and
to remember) is much weakened thereby: And that many young Gentlemen, who do
egerly strive to attain to much knowledge in a short time, do rather bend
their Studies and their courses, to read over the more narrowly contracted
Histories of other Countries, then the voluminous Discourses of their own.

Wherefore to inlighten their knowledge much, by reading this little; J have
thrust forth into the World this short History, of the Reigns, Deeds, and
Actions, of twenty of our English Kings; which J will neither praise, least J
wrong it by mine own commendation; nor dispraise, least you (believing me on
my word) should think your time ill spent, to read what I have written.

J know that such as are worthily descended, or who by learning are made
worthy, will not only wink at some imperfections, because some knowledge is to
be gained by the rest: but will also take in good part the presentment of a
small gift; if it be delivered with a friendly hand. To such only, and to none
other (which are you) do J dedicate these my labors: Being confidently
assured, that they cannot want their expected reward, which is nothing, but
your kind acceptance, and graceful love.

Fare you well, from my house in Exeter the twentieth of January. 1615. Your
loving Friend. WILLIAM MARTYN.

TO MY MOST DEAR Father WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire.
THough my vnpractis'd Muse might well conceal
Her self from th'eye-reach of a public view;
Yet my devoted heart, stirred on with zeal,
And duty (which are owing both to you)
Fears not the spleen of Critics, but shall bear
Their heauiest censures; True love orecomes fear.
I will not speak of your unwearied pain
In gathring, and disposing: it is a treasure
Well worth the Readers pains, when he may gain,
With little reading, profit mixed with pleasure.
These ruder lines, your labors little need,
To win the Readers liking: Let him read.
NICHOLAS MARTYN.

To my most loved and dearest Father WILLIAM MARTYN ESQVIRE.
I Could (dear Sir) have spoke, with far more ease,
In copious Prose, than in strict Verse, your praise;
But that I knew, your fame would far out-goe
All foote-lesse Prose; my Verse (not full so slow
Having the help of feet) serves thus far forth,
Though not to Usher, yet to attend your worth.
You need not either, to enlarge your fame;
The Book it self does Chronicle the same.
WILLIAM MARTYN.

To my most dearly loved Father WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire.
Whilst others send you Lines trickt out with Art,
My Infant years shall only send mine heart:
Look for no greater gift, from so small store;
He that gives all he has, can give no more.
EDWARD MARTYN.

TO MY DEARLY HONORED FATHER-IN-Law WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire.
A Public good, must quell your private fear.
The profit of a Writers industry,
Should be imparted to a general Ear;
For good is bettered by community.
Nor may detraction, or the injury
Of some men's censures, dash what he does write:
If, but what only pleases all men's sight,
No work should come to light, no work should come to light.
What though you gathered have the several flowr's
Of other Books, into this History?
Distilled to Spirit by you, they are wholly yours:
So honey, sucked from the variety
Of flowr's, is yet the honey of the Be.
And though, in these days, Miracles are fled,
Yet this shall of your Chronicle be read,
It brings back Time that is past, and gives life to the Dead.
Peter Beuys.

THE SVMMARIES OR ABBREVIATES, OF THE REIGNS OF THE twenty Kings, mentioned
(more largely) in this Discourse.
King WILLIAM the Conqueror.
AFTER the death of King Edward, Harold (contrary to his promise and oath)
refuses to give the possession of the Crown and kingdom of England to
William, the seventh Duke of the Normans: Wherefore (to prevent the effusion of
much blood) the Duke challenged him to a single combat, which he refused:
whereupon the Duke landeth, and (being assisted by the Natives of this
Country) he obtayneth the victory, 1066.
and claymed this Crown by conquest. Page 2. He is in danger, as he trauelleth
toward Dover, and makes his peace. 3. His policies to suppress the English
Nation, and his cruelties toward them. 3, 4, 5, 6. He taxes them beyond
measure: they rebel twice, and are twice subdued. 6. He plucks down Churches,
Religious houses, and Towns, (for his pleasure in hunting) to make the New
Forest; and enacteth tyrannical Laws, for the preserving of his Game. 5. His
eldest son Robert Curthois rebelleth, and puts him to the worst in Normandy,
but is reconciled. 7. He warreth in France successefully. 7. He falls sick,
and repents of his cruelty to the English Nation, and dies, but his body
can hardly obtain a place to be buried in. page 8.
King WILLIAM RUFUS.
HIs cruelty to the English Nation. 10. He flattereth them in his distress;
but requiteth them unthankfully, when his turn is served. 10, 11. The Welshmen
do rebel. 11, 12. His valor. 13. He pilleth and pooleth the Church. 14, 15.
He yields, when the Pope peremptorily commands. 15. He is fortunate in his
wars in Normandy. 15. In the New-Forest, which his Father had made, by the
ruin of many Churches, Religious houses, and Towns. 5. He was slain, being
mistaken for a Dear, as he hunted. 16.
King HENRY the First.
HIs policies and Laws. 18. He yields to the Pope, and restores Church
livings, dignities, and liberties; not for conscience sake, but because Robert
his eldest brother, troubled him for his Crown. 18. He invadeth Normandy, and
prevails; and plucketh out his brothers eyes. 20, 21. He curbeth and
ransacketh the Church and Churchmen, and makes them pay for enjoying of wives,
whether they have wives or no. 20. Anselme and Thurstone appeal against him to
the Pope, and he yields. 20, 23. He is patient and very thankful. 24. He is
lascivious, he surfetteth, and then dies. 24.
King STEPHEN.
He usurps the Right of Mawld the Empress, and breaks his oath. 27. He is
very liberal. 28. He refuses and releaseth the payment of Dane-gilt, and of
all other taxes: he honoreth the Clergy, and gives unto them large
restitution, and exempteth all Clergy men from the authority of the Temporal
Magistrate. 28. Mawld the Empress invadeth and takes him prisoner: he is
enlarged for the Duke of Gloucester. The Empress is besieged in Oxford, and
escapes by a policy in the snow. 29. He is again invaded by Henry
Short-Mantell, the Son of Mawld the Empress: Prince Eustace his son is
drowned. They two compound, and King Stephen dies. 30, 31.
King HENRY the Second.
HIs great courage. 34. He refineth the Laws, and deuiseth the Circuits, in
which Nisi prius, and other law causes are decided. 34. He destroys Castles
to prevent Rebellions. 35. He reseiseth things given by his Predecessors. 35.
He exercises his people in martial Discipline in times of Peace. 35. He
Conquereth Ireland. 36. His children are rebellious, and punished by God. 36.
His Riches. 37. His amorous affections to Rosamond. 37. He is vexed by Thomas
Becket, who is slain. 37. He is accursed. 40. He does Penance: He is whipped;
And dies. 42.
King RICHARD the First.
FOr his valor, he is termed Cuer de Lion. 44. His piety and compassion to
his Mother, and to distressed prisoners. 44. His bounty. 45. He warreth
gloriously in the holy Land. 45. He wins Cyprus twice. page 46, 47. Iarres
arise betwixt him, and the French King, and Leopold Archduke of Austria,
whereupon they depart, and do leave him. 46, 47. He is styled King of Jerusalem
47. By swimming he saves his life, but is taken Prisoner: Ransometh himself,
and returns into Normandy from the holy Land: He warreth successefully
against the French King in his own Country, and returns into England, 48. To
pay his Ransom, and to relieve his wants, he ransacketh Religious houses, and
reseiseth such things as formerly he sold to get money. 49. He besieges the
Castle of Chalons, and is reuengefully wounded to death: He takes the Castle,
Pardons the offender, slaies all the rest, and then he dies. 49.
King JOHN.
PHILIP the French King raises against him Arthur Plantagenet, who dema^ds the
crown. 51 The King goes twice into Normandy, and puts the Frenchmen to
flight. 52, 53. He loses Normandy. 53. 1202.
His quarrel and unspeakable troubles with the Pope. 53. He forbids all
appeals to Rome. 54. Four of his own Bishops do interdict him, and he
seiseth upon their lands, and goods: He is accursed, and his kingdom is by
the Pope given to Philip the French King: He takes an Oath of Allegiance of
his Subjects. He inuadeth the Scots, and they do submit themselves. 55, 56.
Philip of France provides to invade him, but loses three hundred ships. 56.
King John (without the knowledge of his Nobility or Counsel) submits
himself on his knees to Pandulphus, the Popes Legate, and resigneth to him (to
the Popes use) his Kingdom and his Crown, and after a few days receives it as
a gift. 56. His people do despise and forsake him. 57. Lewys the Dolphin (in
his Fathers Right, by reason of the Popes donation) inuadeth England. The Pope
accurseth him, and his father, and protecteth King John, and his kingdom: He
also accurseth such of the Nobility of England, as sided with the French, by
reason whereof the Commons rob, rifle, and forage, both their goods and
lands. Misery makes them to submit themselves. 57. The Dolphin is expelled.
58. The King has peace, and is poisoned by a Monk. 59.
King HENRY the third.
LEWYS the Dolphin disturbs him in England: The French attempt to invade, but
are overthrown at Sea. 63. They are accursed, absolved, and do leave this
kingdom: The king restores the ancient Laws. 63. He warreth in Angeou, and
elsewhere. 63. And concludes a Truce. 64. His Barons and he do jar, but are
reconciled. 64. The league with France is broken. 64. King Henry has the
worse in the new wars. 65, 66. He warreth with his Barons. 66. Insanum
Parliamentum. 66. The commission of the twelve Peers. 66. They exercise their
Authority. 67. It is confirmed, wherefore the King sayleth into France. 67.
1258.
He releaseth his Title and his Right in Normandy, and is confirmed Duke of
Guyan. 68. He procures two Bulls from the Pope: The Lord chief Justice is
displaced. 68. He publishes the Popes Bulls against the twelve Peers; and the
Londoners take an Oath to assist him. 69. The Barons raise an Army, and do
write unto the King, and he answers them. 69. The Barons Army is joyfully
received into London. 70. The controversy is referred to the French King, who
is accused to be partial. 70, 71. The Barons fight with the Prince, and do
overthrow him. 71. Richard King of the Romans (being wronged) is angry. 71.
1262.
The bataile of Lewis, in which the Barons took the two Kings, and Prince
Edward prisoners, and more then twenty thousand men were slain. 73. An
agreement is made, and the Prince is one of the Hostages: The commission given
to the 12. Peers is confirmed, and the Hostages are enlarged. 73. A discord
betwixt the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester. 73. Occasioned the overthrow of
the Barons in the battle of Euersham 74. 1263.
The Barons are executed. 74. The Commission of the twelve Peers, is by
Parliament dissolved. And the King (for revenge) resolved to have burnt the
City of London. 74. But it is redeemed by suit, and by money. 75. The Earl of
Gloucester, with the base off-skome of London, do much mischief. But by the
Prince his entreatie all is pardoned. 76. The Earl of Gloucester is by the King
furnished to go a warfare in the holy land. He gives it over: And Prince
Edward undertakes it: he is trecherously wounded, but recouereth: The King
dies; and he returns with much honor into England. 77.
King EDWARD the First.
THe French King fears his valor, and therefore inuiteth Lluellen to rebel
against him in Wales. 79. By promises, that he shall marie with the Lady
Eleanor, the banished daughter of the banished Earl of Leicester; who for
succor was his guest. 80. The King takes her in her passage toward Wales:
the King marches toward Lluellens Army, He submits himself, swears to
be loyal, and is wiued. 80. He rebelleth again, and he and his brother are
both beheaded. 81. King Edward is chosen (as sovereign Lord) to decide the
controversy and debate, touching the Right to the Crown of Scotland, which
many Competitors do strive for. 81. John Bayliol. 83. He strippeth the Church
and Churchmen, and is disliked of them, especially for enacting of the Statute
against Mortmaine. 82. John Bayliol (being ungrateful) inuadeth England. But
King Edward winnes from him the Castle and Town of Barwike, and slays 25000
of his Men. 83. He surrendreth Scotland, and King Edward gouernes it by a
Lieutenant, and places all Officers of state therein. 84. The Scots rebel
again, and are subdued. 84. They rebel once more: Thirty and two thousand of
them are slain. 85. They do homage and fealty to King Edward. 85. John
Bayliol (at the Popes request) is set at liberty: his subjects do again
rebel against England: The King enters into Scotland, and the Castle of
Eastervlnie (in which the Scottish Nobility, for their safeguard enclosed
themselves) being summoned, is yielded to King Edward. 85. He swears them to
his obedience, and (for a monument of his victories) he brings from thence
the Chair in which their Kings were usually Crowned. 86. He enquireth of the
extortions done by his Officers, and corrects them. 86. Prince Edward is
committed to prison, and his unthrifty Companion Pierce Gaueston, is banished.
86. Wales and Cornwall are given to the Prince. 86. The Pope claymeth the
sovereignty of Scotland, but King Edward rejects and scorneth his claim.
Robert le Bruze usurps in Scotland, so that King Edward, the fourth time,
goes in his own person into Scotland. The Usurper flies into Norway, and
King Edward dies. 86, 87.
King EDWARD the Second.
HE breaks his Oath, and recals Gaueston. He doateth on Gaueston: Makes him
Earl of Cornwall, and he does all in all: whereat the Nobles are displeased.
89, 90. The King (through Gauestons wicked counsel) lives lewdly, and
forsakes the Company of the Queen. 90. Gaueston has the custody of the
Kings Jewels, and conueies many of them into Ireland. 90 The people murmur at
Gauestons authority and wicked courses. The King reiects good counsel. Yet at
last Gaueston is banished into Ireland. The King comforts him, and sends him
money and Jewels. 91 The King is so sad for his departure, that at the request
of the Nobility (in hope of amendment) he is recalled. 92 By reason of his
insolency he is again banished into Flanders, but is recalled, and waxes
more scornful then he was before. 92 The Lords (despairing of redress) do
strike off his head. 92 The King (to despite his Nobility) entertaineth the
two Spencers, who are worse then Gaueston, and do persuade him to more leaud
and ungracious courses. 92 The King and his Nobles do not agree. Robert le
Bruze (taking advantage by the Kings evil government) usurps in Scotland. He
is again crowned King, and overthrows king Edward. 93 John Poydras is
discovered to be a counterfeit, and is put to death. 93 Barwike is betrayed to
the Scots. 93 The Scots do overthrow King Edward the second time. 94 The King
(being entreated) will not put the Spencers from him. 94 The Nobles in
Parliament do stand on their Guard. 95 The Spencers are banished for ever. 95
The Nobles complain for the younger Spencers Piracies: but the King makes
sport at it, and recals them from their exile. They scorn the Barons, who
fight, but are overthrown. 96 Twenty and two Barons are beheaded. 97 The
elder Spencer is made Earl of Winchester: and Sir Andrew Harkley (by whose
principal service the Barons were overthrown, and who was made Earl of
Carlisle) consorting with the Scots, who had almost taken the King, and enforced
him to fly, lost his head. 98 The Queen (being oppressed by the Spencers)
goes into France, and carries the Prince with her. She is well entertained
by the French King her brother. But he is bribed by the Spencers, and so is the
Pope, who conspire her delivery to King Edward. And she with her son do
fly into Arthoys. 99 The Queen and Prince do land in England. The Nobles
repair to her with an Army, and the King is strangely taken prisoner. The
Earls of Arundel and Winchester are beheaded. 100 And Hugh Spencer, the
younger, being carried to London, is disgraced, and cruelly executed as a
Traitor. 100 The King is committed, deposed, his son is crowned and the old
King is murdered by the practice of Sir Roger Mortimer, who was too familiar
with the Queen. For which offense she was honorably imprisoned thirty
years and more before she died. 105
King EDWARD the third.
HE goes with an Army into Scotland, to correct them for their insolency in
his fathers days. The Natives fly into the woods, and the King returns. 103
He concludes a dishonorable peace with Scotland, by the counsel of Sir
Roger Mortimer, whom he creates Earl of March, and marieth his sister Jane to
the King of Scots son named David. Scotland, and delivers up the great
Charter called Ragman, which testified their tenure of the Kings of England.
104 The Earl of March procures the Kings uncle the Earl of Kent to be
beheaded, and is himself executed as a Traitor. 104. 105 The King and the
French King do jar about the Kings homage for the Duchy of Guyan. 105 The
Kings title to the Kingdom of France was now first broached. 105 He recouereth
Barwicke from the Scots, and makes Edward Bayliol King. 106 In his own person
he settleth the government of Scotland. 106 The King seeks aid of foreign
Princes for his French wars. 107 And is (by favor) made Vicar General of the
Empire, and is thereby enabled to win Jacques Dartuell, with the Flemings, and
the Princes of Germany, to join with him. 108 He fills his coffers. 108 The
French King staieth his Army from going to the Holy Land, to fight with
England. 108 King Edward transporteth his Army into Flanders, and ioining with
his consorts, he marches into France with 27000. men. The French King takes
the field. 108 Jane Countess of Henault (mother to the Queen of England, and
sister to the French King) parts the fray without blows. 109 1339.
King Edward quartereth the Arms of France, and coins his money with the like
stamp. 109 He taxes his people, and borrows much money. 109 As he passed
toward Sluice with his Army, he met with and overthrew the French Navy. 110
He with his associates do besiege Tournay. But the said Countess procures a
Truce. 111 The Scots do rebel. The King marches against them. A truce is
made, but they do break it. They do invade, and burn Durham. 111 The
valiant exploit of Sir William Montague. The Castle of Ronsborough is besieged.
The King marches against the Scots, and they fly. 112 He concludes a truce
with them. He returns, proclaims a Feast, and martial exercises and sports.
113 Subsidies are granted, but Commissioners are made to receive and to employ
it. 114 1344.
He deuiseth the noble Order of the Garter. 114 Jacques Dartuell is murdered
because he would have disherited the Earl of Flanders to prefer the Black
Prince. 114 By his death King Edward lost the Flemish aid. But he is the more
resolved in his attempts. 116 The French King besieges Aguilon with 100000.
men. The King takes Harflew, Louiers, Cane, and many other things, and
harroweth and burns in Normandy at his pleasure. 117 He passes with his
Army over the River of Some. 118 The battle of Cressey. 119 1345.
The numbers of slain men and prisoners. 121 King Edward besieges Calice and
the French K. with 200000. 123 The Scots invade England in the Kings absence,
and King David is taken prisoner. 123 The King himself surpriseth the
Frenchmen, who came to receive Calice. 124 The Calicians take Guyens. 125 The
Black Prince wins the battle of Poyters, John and his younger son
prisoners into England. 126 The whole English Army is made rich. 128 The
Dolphin allows not his fathers agreements with King Edward. 128 He is
enforced to crave peace, which is granted upon conditions. 129 The King
relinquisheth the French title and right. 129 A tax levied by the Black
Prince, and the not paying of his Soldiers, occasioned his great losses in
Guyan, Aquitaine, etc. 130. 131 Whereto civil dissension must be added. 132
The Earl of Pembroke is taken at Sea. 132 The Kings evil Officers. 133 The
Black Prince dies. 134 The King dies. 134
King RICHARD the second.
THe summarie of his evil government. 135 Wat Tilars Rebellion. 137 Their
insolency and madness. 137 Their entertainment in London. 138 They do burn,
rifle, and commit Sacrilege. 138 Their behavior at the Tower, and at
Mile-end-greene. 139 Their Captain is slain. They prepare for revenge, but
do fly. 140. 141 Fifteen hundred of them are executed. 141 The Kings evil
Counselors. 142 Fifteenes in a Parliament are denied. 142 The Lower House will
depart except the King in person will come to them. 142 Michael de la Pole is
displaced from his Chancellorship. 144 Commissioners are appointed to order the
Kings Officers, and the King swears to observe it. 144 The Commissioners are
reputed to be Traitors. 145 The Scots and French do make a bad voyage into
Wales, and in the mean time the King with 68000. men spoileth Scotland. 145
The Frenchmen well rewarded by the Scots. 145 The French King prepares an Army
of 1200. Ships to invade and to conquer England, and King Richard makes
incredible preparations to confront him. 146 The French Army vanishes, and
comes to naught. 147 The petition of the Nobility is denied by the King.
Wherefore they do raise an Army. 147 The King cannot get an Army out of
London. 148 On the Kings fair promises, the Army is dismissed. He performs
nothing: so that a new Army is levied, and received into London. 149 The Duke
of Ireland flies, is slain by a Bore, and is buried like a King. 149 The
Kings five evil Counselors and some Judges are condemned as Traitors. 149
John of Gaunts journey, valor, and fortunate success in Spain. 150 The King
marieth the French Kings sister, and delivers up Breast, for which his Uncle the
Duke of Gloucester reproves him: but his death is plotted, and he is murdered.
151 The flattering Speaker of the Parliament grossly deifieth the King. 151 A
strange Commission. 152 The King (in his vanity) will be styled Prince of
Cheshire. 152 The Duke of Norfolk untruly informs the King against his cosen
Henry Bollingbroke Duke of Hartford, for which he is challenged to a single
combat. 153. 154 They are both banished. 154 John of Gaunt dies, and his son
Henry Bollingbroke (now Duke of Lancaster) in the Kings absence in Ireland,
landeth in England, and raises an Army. The King returns, and leuieth his
forces. 155 But his people daily shrink and steal away from him: by means
whereof he submits himself to the Duke. 155 Articles are proposed against
him for his evil government, which are by him confessed under his hand in the
Parliament. He resigneth his Kingdom, and is deposed. Henry of Bollingbroke
is crowned King. And King Richard (valiantly resisting) is wickedly murdered.
160
King HENRY the Fourth.
JOHN Bishop of Carlisle stoutly reproves King Henry's doing openly in the
Parliament house. 163 The Crown is entailed. 164 Treason at Oxford. 164 The
Traitors fly, and are executed. 165 Owen Glendor rebelleth. 166 And takes
Roger Mortimer (the rightful heir apparent to the Crown) prisoner, and the
King refuses to ransom him. 166 The Scots rebelling, are overthrown by
Henry Hotspurre, who will not deliver his prisoners to the King. 167. 168 The
Frenchmen do aid the Welsh Rebels in show, but do fly to their ships when
the King comes. 167. 168 The Percies do ransom Roger Mortimer, and ioining
with Owen Glendor, they intend to make him King. 169 They levy an Army, and
do publish Articles against K. Henry. The Scots do aid them, but are all
overthrown. And in that battle the King himself slew six and thirty men.
1401.
171 Douglas is enlarged without ransom. 171 Glendor is forsaken of his
companions, and is famished in the woods. 172 The Duke of Orleance his
challenge is stoutly refused by King Henry. 172 And disgraced. 173 The Duke of
Britain is commanded by the French King to abandon the siege of Calice. 173
Diverse Lords do practice a Treason, which is discovered, and most of them are
put to death. 173 The King warreth again prosperously in Scotland. 173 He was
in danger to be taken on the Thames by French Pirates. 174 Sir Ralphe Roksbie,
Sheriff of Northumberland, valiantly overthrew the Northern Rebels, and chopped
off their heads before the Kings coming thither. 174 He creates his younger
sons Dukes, and prepares to war in the Holy Land, but falls dangerously
sick. 174 His speech to the Prince his son when he seized on the Crown. 174
He dies. 175
King HENRY the Fifth.
THis King was vnmeasurably wild in his fathers days, and was imprisoned and
disgraced for striking the Lord Chief Justice on the ear. 177 But being King,
he enriched his loose companions, but banished them perpetually from his Court.
177 He chose the grauest, wisest, and best experienced men to be of his
Counsel of Estate. 177 He reformeth the Clergy, and the Lay people, and
erecteth Castles to curb the Scots. 178 A motion was made in Parliament to
dissolve religious houses. But the Clergy reviving the kings title to the
kingdom of France, and being bountifully liberal, do turn the stream into
that channel. 178 The King demands that Crown, but is scoffed by the
Dolphin, whom he girdeth by a reply. 179 The King leuieth an Army. The French
King desires peace. The King yields on certain conditions, which are
denied. 180 The Queen is made Regent. And as the King is ready to depart, his
destruction is conspired. But the Treachery was revealed, and the Traitors
were put to death 180 The King landeth in Normandy, and takes Harflew. His
Army (being but 15000. men) falls sick, and is oppressed with many wants.
Yet the King resolves to march by land unto Calice. 181 1414.
He wins the most famous and the most memorable Battle of Agencourt. 182
The French prisoners were (unwillingly, yet miserably) slain. 185 He gives
God public thanks. 186 And returns into England with his great prisoners.
186. 187 The new Constable of France is overthrown. 187 The French do besiege
Harflew, and their Navy of 500. ships is overthrown. And John Duke of Bedford
raises the siege. 188 Civil dissension among the French Nobility does
further the success of K. Henry's wars. 189 Great sums of money, are
cheerfully given to the King, to maintain his invasion. 189 Nine Carricks of
Genoa, and Tonque, and Cane, are taken by the English. 191 Most Towns in
Normandy do become English. 192 Roan is besieged by the king. 192 A proud
Roanist dares him; he replies, and takes the City. 197 The French Nobles are
outwardly reconciled, but not in heart. 198 1416
Normandy is won by King Henry. 198 He marieth the Lady Katherine sister to
the French King; and is made Regent of France, 1519
and is proclaimed Heir apparent to that Crown. 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204.
The Kings brother the Duke of Clarence, Regent of Normandy, and France, 1420
is betrayed, and slain in the battle of Blangy. 205, 206 The Earl of
Mortaigne succeeds in his charge. 207 The King warreth again in France. 207
The Dolphin raises his siege from Chartiers, and flies fearfully from place
to place. 208 The King falls grievously sick, exhorts his Nobles to unity,
and concord; and to be especially careful to retain the friendship and love
of Philip, Duke of Burgoine. 209 He commends unto them his young Infant, and
their King; Directs them for their proceedings in France: and then dies.
King HENRY the Sixth.
FRance contemns the infancy of King Henry. 211 John Duke of Bedford is made
Regent of France; and Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester, is made Protector of the
Kings person, and of the Realm of England. 212 The Regent wins Towns
daily. 212 The Parisians are treacherous. 213 1424
The battle of Vernoile. 215 The Earl of Salisburies valor and name is
feared. 216 A strange overthrow of the French. 216 They do brag and run
away. 217 Towns and victories are daily won by the English. 218, 219
Orleance is besieged, and offered to Philip, Duke of Burgoine; but the Regent
will not consent thereto, and for that cause the said Duke reuolteth to the
French King. 221 The battle of Herings. 221 The siege of Orleance is
abandoned. 222 The Duke of Alanson overthrows the English; slays the Earl
of Salisbury; and takes prisoners, the Earl of Suffolk, and the Lords
Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford, and many others. 222 Charles causes himself
to be crowned King of France, and is sommoned to a battle by the Regent: he
flies cowardly; and is hunted from place to place, but all in vain. 223
Diverse Nobles of France do revolt from King Henry. 224. The French King
assaults Paris, and is well beaten. 224 The Parisians do flatter, but are
treacherous. 225 Henry is crowned King of France in Paris. 225 England is
wondered at for her puissance. 225 Treason discovered. 226 A Rebellion in
Normandy. 226 The noble Regent dies. 228 And from the time of his death, the
English gain little, but do loose much both in Normandy, and in France.
Richard, Duke of York, is made Regent. 229 229 Calice is besieged by the Duke
of Burgoine. 229 But he flies in the night. 230 The Earl of Warwick is made
Regent. 231 The French King flies in the night. 233 Ponthois is taken by the
English 234 A parley for peace: 234 The Articles proposed, are disliked. 235 A
cruel Army, and a huge on the French part. 235 Much is gotten daily, and much
is daily lost beyond the Seas. 235 A truce with France for eighteen months.
237 An unworthy marriage concluded for the King, by the Duke of Suffolk,
without Commission. 237 Which was the Dukes overthrow 246 He will have his Acts
and Counsels registered in Parliament. 238 The cause of the losses of France,
1466
Normandy, Aquitaine, etc. 238 The descriptions of the King and Queen. 239 The
good Duke of Gloucester is removed by the Queen from the Protectorship, and is
murdered. 240 The French wars are neglected, and the Truce is broken on both
parts. 240 Towns are lost, Roan yields to the French King. 241 The English
are overthrown in field. 242 Cane is yielded to the French King. 243 The Duke
of Suffolk is accused of treason, and banished. 244 But is taken at Sea and
beheaded. 246 The policies of the Duke of York, to attain unto the Crown.
Jack Cade the Rebel flies, and is proscribed and slain. 247 A pacification,
but fained, betwixt the King, and the Duke of York. 248 The Duke is accused,
and imprisoned for treason, but is enlarged. 248 Guyan and Aquitaine are
yielded to King Henry, but are regained by the French. 249 The wars betwixt
the King, and the Yorkists. 249 The King is overthrown, and taken prisoner in
the battle of 1454
S. Albons, and in Parliament the Duke of York is made Protector. 250 Merchant
strangers are rifled in London. 251 A policy against the Yorkists, but it is
discovered. 252 The King labors for peace; but each part dissembleth. 252 New
Armies are raised. 254 The Lords do fly in the night, and are proclaimed
traitors. 255 The Kings ships, twice taken out of Sandwich by John Dynham, and
the Yorkists. 256 The battle of 1459
Northampton, in which the Queen is ouerthrown, and the King is taken prisoner.
257 The Duke of Yorks proceedings in Parliament against King Henry. 258 The
Crown is settled by Parliament. The Scots overthrow, and do sley the Duke of
York in the 1460
battle of Wakefield. 259 The young Duke of York wins the field of Queen
Margaret. 260 He is by the Queen ouerthrown, and the King is enlarged. 260 The
Dukes new Army consisting of 49000. men: the Queens new Army consisting of
60000. men. The 1460
Queen is ouerthrown in the battle of Towton. 260 The King to win favor
with the king of Scots, delivers to him the Castle, and the Town of Barwike:
and the Duke of York is crowned King. 261.
King EDWARD the Fourth.
IN Parliament he repealeth all former Acts which attainted him, and his
friends, of high treason. 263 He is troubled by wars, raised against him by
Queen Margaret, in which he prevails. 265 He takes especial 1462
care for the Commonweal. 266 King Henry is taken prisoner. 266 The Earl of
Warwick becomes his Enemy, because he wronged him, in the choice of his wife.
267 George, Duke of Clarence, takes part with Warwick against his brother King
Edward. 268 The 1467
Yorkshire-men do rebel. 269 King Edward is taken prisoner and escapes. 271
The discommodities of War. 272 A new 1468
Rebellion, in which the Rebels were overthrown. 273 Warwick and Clarence
fly to Calice, and find bad entertainment. 274 Prince Edward (son to King
Henry the sixth) marieth the second daughter of the Earl of Warwick. 275
Clarence (secretly) revolteth to King Edward his brother. 275 Warwick landeth
in England, where his forces do so increase, that king Edward flies, 277 King
Henry is enlarged, and by Parliament, the crown is intailed to him. 277 King
Edward landeth in England, and breaks his oath, made to the citizens of
York. 278 He, and his Army are joyfully received into the city of London.
280 280 The Queen Margaret leuieth another Army, and is ouerthrown in the
battle of Tewkesbury. 282 Henry (being murdered) is brought open faced into
S. Paul's Church. 283 King Edward has new wars in France; and the Duke of
Burgoine breaks promise with him. 285 A peace for nine years is concluded, for
which the Duke of Burgoine is angry with the King, who cares not for it. 286
The bounty of the French King to the English Army. 288 Henry Earl of
Richmond is by the Duke of Britain delivered to King Edwards Ambassadors:
but Peter Landoys freeth him. 289 The Duke of Clarence (being a prisoner) is
murdered. 290 King Edward changes the form of his government; and (by
executing of penal statutes) he enricheth himself, but loses his peoples
love. 290 He has new wars with Scotland, but (on certain conditions) he
grants him peace. 291 The French King breaks all his Articles, annexed to the
last concluded peace; wherefore King Edward leuieth a new Army, but falls
sick, and dies. 292 The Description of King Edward. 297
King EDWARD the Fifth.
HE was a child when his father dyed. 297 His Uncle, Richard, Duke of
Gloucester, aims to have his crown. 299 He practizeth mischief against the
Queen Mothers kindred. 300 He betrayeth them, and bereaueth them of their
lives. 301, 307 The Queen Mother with her children takes Sanctuary. 302 The
Duke of Gloucester is made Protector. 302 By subtlety he gets the young Duke
of York out of prison, and sends the King, and him, to the Tower, under
pretense of greater safety. 302 He with the Duke of Buckingham practizeth
their destruction. 304, 305 His villainy at the Tower. 306 His friend the Lord
Hastings is beheaded, because he will not consent to that murder. 307 Doctor
Shawes flattering sermon. 308 Richard Duke of Gloucester is made King. 309
King RICHARD the third.
KIng Richard (by base flattery) endeavors to make a bad matter good. 311
Doctor Morton, Bishop of Ely, is committed to the custody of the Duke of
Buckingham. 311 King Richard is despised by the French king. 312 The two young
Princes (by the villainous procurement of King Richard) are murdered. 312 The
reasons, which might have dissuaded him from that wickedness, are examined.
313 His only son by death is taken from him. 315 Doctor Morton (by flattery)
insinuates himself into the inward love and familiarity of the Duke of
Buckingham, and having with him resolved on the destruction of king Richard,
he escapes, and flies into Flanders, from whence he gives good intelligence
of all King Richards proceedings, to Henry Earl of Richmond. 315 He moves
him to marry the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth,
which he protests to do. 317 King Richard had almost gotten into his hands
the Earl of Richmond, but Peter Landoys freeth him. 317 The Duke of Buckingham
and the K. do levy two strong Armies, but the fight is deferred by a sudden
flood: The Welshmen forsake the Duke: he flies: he is proscribed: he is
betrayed by his own servant, and loses his head. 318 Peter Landoys would
have betrayed the Earl of Richmond to king Richard; but he, and his, do
escape hardly into France, where they are comforted and aided. 320 King Richard
by flattery and bribes gets King Edward the Fourth his children into his own
possession: and makes love to his own Niece, the said Lady Elizabeth. 322 His
own wife suddenly dies, and he reviueth his incestuous suit to his said
Niece, who wittily protracteth that business. 323 False news from France,
makes him secure. 323 The Earl of Richmond landeth in England, and the King,
and he are with their Armies in Bosworth field. 323 King Richards people cleave
not to him. 324 He is desperate in fight: but is slain by the Earl himself,
and his body is used with great despite by the common people, 324, 325 Henry,
Earl of Richmond, is proclaimed, and crowned King by the soldiers, in the
open field, where his Enemy lay dead: And in the same place, He, with his
whole Army do thank GOD. 325
King HENRY the Seventh.
KIng Henry the Seventh (as he had sworn) unites the two divided houses of
Lancaster and York, by his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, King Edward the
Fourth his eldest daughter. 327 He causes the Crown to be intayled. 328 He
makes Yeomen of his Guard, and is thankful to his friends. 327 He repaieth
the French King, and the Duke of Britaigne. 328 He repealeth Acts of
Attainders, makes good laws, and grants a general Pardon. 328 He
suppresseth Rebels. 329 Lambert, the counterfaited Earl of Warwick, by force
and policy is taken. 329, 330, 331 King Henry the Seventh, takes part with
the Duke of Britaigne, against the French King. 332, 333 The Earl of
Northumberland (leuying of a Tax) is slain by the people. 333, 334 The Rebels
fly, and are punished. 334 Maximilian (being aided by King Henry the Seventh)
comes not forth, yet King Henry alone warreth against the French King. 335 The
King demands a Benevolence. 335 He besieges Bullein, and grants a peace.
336 Perkin Warbeck, the counterfaited Duke of York, vexes king Henry. 337 He
is supported. 337, 338, 339 The King wisely discouers their intentions. 339,
340 The Mart is removed to Calice 340 Sir William Stanley is beheaded, and
Warbeck is discomforted in Kent. 342 The Scots (under pretense to aid him) vex
England. 343 The Cornish Rebels are overthrown. 343, 344 And many of them are
executed. 345 The Scots invade, and are wasted 346 The Mart is restored to the
Flemings. 346 Exeter is besieged, and defended valiantly. 342 King Henry
comes to that City, and gives unto it his sword. 348 The Rebels fly. 349
Perkin Warbeck, and the young Earl of Warwick (son to George Duke of Clarence,
the brother of King Edward the Fourth) seeking to escape, are prevented, and
beheaded. 350 Two marriages with France and Scotland. 350 Empson and Dudley, do
execute penal laws. 351 The King (in his death bed) does repent it: and lends
money freely to his Merchants, and dies. 359
King HENRY the Eighth.
HE executes Empson and Dudley. 355 And marieth his brothers wife. 355 He
sideth with the Pope against France. 356 His Father-in-law Ferdinando, uses
him ill. 357 And trecherously surpriseth the kingdom of Navarre. 357 Edward
Howard, Lord Admiral, is drowned. 359 King Henry has three armies in France.
360 Maximilian the Emperor serves him in those wars. 361 Tyrwin and Tourney
are won. 361 James the Fourth King of Scots is slain in Flodden field. 361,
362 Peace is concluded with France. 364 Cardinal Wolseys deeds and actions,
from page 364. unto page 388. The Clergy fear the Praemunire, and therefore
are liberal. 388 The king is acknowledged supreme head of the Church. 388, 403
He marieth Anne of Bullein. 389 And beheadeth her. 403 Evil May Day. 390
Tournay is delivered upon conditions. 390 Which (by the French) were broken.
393 The Duke of Buckingham is attainted and executed. 392 The King writes a
book against Martin Luther. 393 He makes wars in France. 394, 395, 396, 397
Privy seals being granted, are released by Parliament. 395 English soldiers
do return vnlicenced out of France. 397 The Emperor, the Scots, and the
French do crave peace. 398, 399 The King is in danger to be drowned. 400 He
has wars with the Emperor. 401 He curbeth the Popes authority. 401 Fisher
and Moore do loose their heads. 402 Petit Religious houses are suppressed. 403
All the rest are likewise suppressed. 407 The holy maid of Kent. 402 The
Lancashire-men do rebel. 404 The King is passing stout. 404 Rebellion by the
holy Pilgrims, miraculously appeased. 405 An other Rebellion is suppressed.
406 Cromwell is advanced highly. 406 But is overthrown by concluding a marriage
for the King with Anne of Cleue, which the King disliked. 408, 409 That marriage
is pronounced to be void. 409 The King marries the Lady Katherine Howard. 409
And beheaded her. 410 He is made King of Ireland. 410 The Scots invade and are
miserably overthrown. 413 A marriage being motioned by the Scots. 413 Is
concluded, but they break their oaths, and the match too. 415 Scotland is
wasted. 415 The King sends two Armies into France. 415 Bullein is won. 417
The King has a Benevolence. 417 The Frenchmen are ouerthrown 418 The Scots
invade and are vanquished. 419 The famous and renowned Earl of Surry is
beheaded: And the King dies.
THE HISTORY OF KING WILLIAM THE CONQVEROR.
AFTER the death of King Edward (who was the son of Egeldredus, and of
Goditha his wife) Harold her brother, and second son to the Earl Godwin,
usurped this kingdom, and caused himself to be crowned King, the Crown being
formerly given by King Edward unto William the seventh Duke of the Normans, and
base son to Robert their sixth Duke. To whose use and behoof, Harold had
formerly sworn to keep the same. Whereof, when Duke William was certainly
informed, He charged him (by his Letters, and by Messengers) with his promise,
confirmed by his Oath; and required him (in friendly sort, and without blows)
to possess him of his Crown. But proud Ambition (arming him with a Resolution
to remain a King in despite of threats, or Fortune) made him, rather to
quoine dishonorable excuses, then to give satisfaction as he had sworn: And
for answer, to return, That promises, and vows rashly made, and by
compulsion (as his was) especially for a Kingdom, whereunto the State had
given no free consent, were not (at all) to be regarded. And therefore (seeing
the Dukes Rule and Dominions were as ample, and as large elsewhere, as Nature
and Art had enabled him to manage, and to command) he wished him to be
contented with his own, and not adventure to claspe more within his hand, then
he was well able to hold fast, Nor to covet that which he should not enjoy.

As this answer bred Discontent: So rage began to resolve on Arms. For the
Duke (assisted by his Martial friends) levied a strong Army; and furnished it
with all abiliments and necessaries for the War: with which (through the
assistance of some native Nobles, who adhered to his part) he safely landed in
Sussex: where (having prouidently sheltred himself, against all sudden
storms) he challenged Harold to a single Combat; thereby to decide the
strife, without much blood. But Harold entertained not the Challenge; but sent
him word, That to gain, or keep a Kingdom, it required more blows then two
could give. 14. October. 1066.
So that (within few days after) a fierce and cruel Battle (of the
continuance of one whole day) without intermission, or breathing, was fought
betwixt them. But in the Evening, HAROLD, being deadly wounded with an Arrow,
left both his Kingdom and his life: And Duke William (almost with equal loss
of his men) became Victor in the field.

The Saxons Reign ended
And thus ended the Saxons Reign; which (from the first year of Hengistus, in
the year of our Lord God four hundred seventy and five, until the time of
this Conquest in the year of our Lord God one thousand sixty and six) had
continued: (Saving that now and then, it was interrupted by the Danes) the
space of five hundred fourscore and eleven years. The Duke (having thus
slain Harold, and gained his Kingdom) began to reign as King: And (on
Christmas day then next following) he was crowned by Aldredus Archbishop of
York, by the enforced consents of the English Nobles: Who (with an outward
applause, but with an inward grief and sorrow) submitted themselves to be his
subjects; the Kentish men excepted. By whom (is he travailed to possess
himself of the strong Castle of Dover) he was prevented in his journey, and
compassed round about by valiant men of War, who (carrying green boughs in
their hands, and resembling a moving Wood) environed the King, and all his
followers, ere they were aware thereof; And protested manfully to die, rather
then they would (by servile baseness) be deprived of those ancient Laws and
Customs, whereby their Country was then ruled. The King (perceiving his own
danger, and their resolution) hearkened to their demands; and not only granted
their requests, but (for their bold and valorous attempt) he honored them
with this pre-eminence; That ever afterward, the Kentish inhabitants should
make the Vantgard of the Field.

This gained he that Country, The Conquerors Policies.
and became sole Lord and Sovereign of each whole Kingdom: and ruled it as a
Conqueror, with more Policy than by profitable Laws; and with more severity
than did become the Gracious disposition of a favorable King.

For first of all (because he presumed, that such as were conquered, Normandy,
because sudden force and strength should not deprive him of so sure a mean
of his safety.

Then (to deprive the English of all command, and to make Normans strong) he
seized their chiefest Offices, both of Honor, and of Profit, into his own
hands, and conferred them upon strangers: Whereat the English grieved much, but
found no remedy: for Weakness was enforced to yield to Power, and usurping
Policy tyrannized over the Oppressed, and bereaved them of their Right.

And (because in those days the Clergy was had in great reverence

He was not ignorant, that the hope of Liberty did oftentimes

And (because the concourse of much people might give them and also to consult
of the means of their deliverance from their Thraldom) he debarred the
English from frequent and common meetings, especially in the night: which to
prevent, he caused a Bell in every Village, Town, and City, to be rong at
eight of the clock in the evening; upon the sound whereof, all English men
were enjoined to cover their fire, and to keep themselves within their doors.
And this ceremony was, and is yet called, Cover le fiew, or the raking up of
the Fire.



Normandy and in France: thereby lessening their numbers, and making his own
power more eminent among such, as he enforced to lament their own misfortunes,
and in vain to meditate upon their present woe.

English Nation, as that they dared not to make show, that they repined at any
thing, which wickedly they did amiss.

English abounded in Riches, and in Wealth, he knew they were not altogether
heartlesse; and therefore he deprived them of those comforts. And (to increase
his own store) he practiced subtle tricks on both estates: for he robbed the
Clergy of all their best and richest Plate and Ornaments (which had been
consecrated to holy uses) alleging, That Thieves and Traitorous Rebels had hid
them there, to deceive him of his forfeitures, and secretly to support
themselves therewith, to his great hurt.



owners for great sums of money, if they could pay them: but otherwise he
gave them to his Normans, and to the French.

He procured a general view to be taken of his subjects Lands,

He erected sundry Courts for the administration of his new English Nation
with extraordinary troubles, and excessive charges in the prosecution of their
Suites in Law.

To open a wide door, and to give the more free access unto the French and
Normans (if the English should happen to rebel) he ruinated all Churches,
Chapels, Villages, and Towns, which stood within the compass of many miles
in Hampshire, and made the New Forest there; utterly dispeopling those places
where God was formerly served, and frugall Husbandry maintained; making them
an habitation for wild and savage Beasts: which act and deed he colored with
the pretense of fitness, and conueniencie for his recreation in Hunting, when
great affairs and important business would give him leave. But God revenged
his own cause by the untimely death of Rufus his son, and successor; who (as
he hunted) was slain with an arrow in the same Forest.

Above all other pleasures he placed his chiefest delight in Hunting:

He gave large territories and spacious fields unto his favorites; Hyde
containing twenty acres, and eight Hydes making a whole Knights fee. The
Tenures which he reserved, were Knights service in capite: by means whereof,
his Tenants were enjoined to do him many necessary and honorable Services,
either in his Wars, or to his Royal person. For the performance whereof, he
took their Oaths in public Courts, both of Homage and of Fealty. And by
reason of this kind of Tenure, he disposed of the bodies of their Heirs in
marriage as he listed, and retained in his custody and Wardship, to his own
use, their whole Inheritance, until they accomplished their age of one and
twenty years. Which Tenures are continued at this day. And, by his example,
others of great possessions did the like.

And thus may we plainly see (as in a Map) the perfect Model and
Description of his rigorous and sharp Government; wherein he rather practiced
the licentious power of an insolent Conqueror, than the gracious kindness of
an anointed King. By means whereof, many feared, few did love him: and such
as pleased him best, were many times in great hazard (upon small occasions) to
be frowned on.

ANNO. 2.
In the second year of his reign, by reason of his Taxes, which exceeded
beyond measure, the inhabitants of Northumberland, and of Deuon, Taxes caused
Rebellions.
did rebel. But such was his valor and expedition, that (ere they were aware
thereof) his forces (like a lofty Sea, or a whirling Wind) rushed violently
upon them, and easily subdued them, to their pain.

ANNO. 3.
And not long after, Swanus then King of the Danes (being animated and set on
edge by the daily persuasions and enticements of such English Nobles, The Danes
invade, and are put to flight.
as to prevent their own ruin and destruction were fled to him for succor)
arrived with a strong Army in the North: where the inhabitants (endeavoring the
enjoyment of their former liberty) with bold courage assisted them in their
invasion. But the King almost no sooner saw them) than he compelled them upon
the loosing hand) to fly unto their ships. And (to revenge the infidelity
of the English) he utterly spoiled and harrowed their best and most fruitful
Lands, The English are plagued.
lying betwixt York and Durham. So that by reason thereof (for the space of
nine years after) those grounds lay wast, and unmanured; and great numbers of
people, of all ages, died miserably, with famine, and with want.

ANNO. 4.
The next year after he summoned a general Convocation of his Clergy. In
which (with much asperitie and bitterness) he accused diverse and sundry grave
and learned Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Religious Prelates, of many surmises,
faults, and offenses: for which he utterly deposed and deprived them, both of
their Dignities, Goods, and Livings: all which he conferred upon such, as
(either through his favor, or for great sums of money) were able to procure
them.

These fearful presidents of insufferable cruelties, Another Rebellion.
provoked Marcarus, and Edwyn, then Earls of Northumberland, and of Mercia,
together with Egilwynus, then Bishop of Durham, to rebel. But the King (like a
Lion encountering their weaker forces) drove Edwyn into Scotland; where
trecherously he was murdered. He took Marcarus, and imprisoned him in the
Tower of London: where (many years after) he remained, with little hope of
his deliverance. And the Bishop (being a prisoner in the Abbey of Abbington)
was cruelly famished to death.

At this time great strife, touching the Primacie, arose, ANNO. 7. The Primacie
of Canterbury. ANNO. 9.
betwixt the Archbishops of Canterbury, and of York: which continued almost
two years. But at length, Thomas was adjudged to be subordinate to Lanfrank,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other submitted himself accordingly.

In the twelfth year of this Kings Reign (at a great Synod holden at Paul's
Church in London) some Bishoprics were translated from one place to another:
as Selwy, unto Chichester; ANNO 12. Bishoprics translated.
Kyrton unto Exeter; Wells unto Bath; Shirborne unto Salisburie; Dorchester
unto Lincoln; and Lichfield unto Chester.

Oswald, Bishop of Salisburie, ANNO 13. Secundum vsum Sarum.
was a most devout and religious man: he devised a certain form of Prayers to
be daily used in his Church: which was so generally liked by the Clergy, that
they were published in books, and used in other Churches. Whence proceeded the
common saying of Secundum vsum Sarum.

In the fifteenth year of this Kings Reign (by the instigation, ANNO 15.
and with the assistance of Philip the French King) Robert, his eldest son,
rebelled in Normandy: A Rebellion in Normandy
which occasioned his father to go thither with an Army. But he was so
stiffely encountered in the field, that by his son he was unhorsed, and in
great peril of his life. But he rescued him again, reconciled himself,
received pardon, and the King (with much loss) returned again into England.

And within few years after, ANNO 20.
to be revenged of many injuries and wrongs to him done by the said Philip,
from Normandy, The Conqueror inuadeth France.
he carried a puissant Army into France: where (with fortunate success, and
with abundance of cruelty) he slew burnt, spoiled, and ransacked his People
Towns, and Country. But so much was he traveled in those affairs, and so
extremely did he heat himself in those eager conflicts, that presently he
fell sick, and within few days after he died, The Conqueror falls sick,
and dies.
after he had much sorrowed and lamented for the Tyrannies which he had
exercised on the English Nation: and at last he was buried at Cane in
Normandy, in the Abbey of S. Stephen, which himself had builded. But his
Funerals were interrupted by a Norman Gentleman: This dead dog could not bite.
who would not permit him to be interred there, until a satisfactorie
recompense was unto him given for that soil, which the Conqueror had unjustly
taken from him.

Thus this victorious Conqueror, whose mind was not to be confined with one
Kingdom whilst he lived, could (being dead) hardly obtain a place to be
buried in.

He left behind him one daughter, named Adela, and three sons: Robert, to
whom he gave his Duchy of Normandy: William, surnamed Rufus, because his
complexion was very red; and Henry: both which successively were Kings.

The description of the Conqueror.
He was of an indifferent stature, strongly composed in his limbs, and comely in
his behavior; stern of countenance, and of an undaunted spirit: resolute in
all his actions; quick in his Expeditions; wise, discreet, and politic in the
managing of his affairs and business. He banqueted, and hunted very much;
coueted all; oppressed such as he subdued (to keep them low) and always held
his dearest friends in an awful regard of his love.

THE HISTORY OF KING WILLIAM RUFUS.
WHEN William the Conqueror died, Robert his eldest son (being in Germany)
accommodated himself (with great sufficiency) to those affairs and
businesses wherewith his father had entrusted him: so that, by means of his
absence, the Conquerors last Will and Testament, the furtherance by Lanfrank,
then Archbishop of Canterbury (who, by reason of his great learning, and
singular virtues, was very dear and reverend in the peoples eyes) and by
many costly gifts, enlarged with unaccustomed bounty, 9. September. 1087.
William (his younger brother) was crowned King.

But not long after, Duke Robert (repining, that his right, by force and
injustice, should be made a prey to him that did usurp; ANNO 2. Duke Robert
warreth in England.
and purposing to regaine by his presence that which by his absence he had
lost) came into England, guarded with a brave Army of unconquered Normans, and
many French, whom Philip their King had waged for his aid: But such was the
Dukes mild and flexible disposition (though he were passing valorous, and
bold) that he rather inclined himself to a peaceable composition, A
composition betwixt the two brothers.
which was gently craved by his brother, than (by the effusion of much blood)
to possess himself of this Crown: so that (in the end) being fairly
promised, That if he suruiued, he should succeed; and accepting the grant of
three thousand marks by the year, he took a friendly leave, and returned,
well pleased, and safely unto his own Duchy.

The King oppresses the English Nation by Taxes and other cruelties.
The King (by these means) more strongly fixing his foot in the possession of
this Kingdom, and being better assured of his establishment than he was
before, began forthwith to tread in his fathers steps, and (with like
oppressions and severity) to humble the haughty courage of the English: and
finding by the Rules of Policy, That Plenty puffs up, and that Penury
robs such as are hardy of the chiefest Requisites which might enable them
to resist, imposed on them many unusual Payments, and intolerable Taxes;
which by his greedy ministers and saucy officers were levied with such
despite and cruelty, that thereby they might well perceive, that he meant
nothing more than to cut the nerves and sinews of their strength.

An old Bishop made a young Earl.
About the same time, Odo his uncle, being Bishop of Bayon, repaired into
England; where (by reason of the Kings regardfull affection toward him) he
found such welcome and friendly entertainment, that he was created Earl of
Kent.

The old Bishop, and young Earl, presuming too much on his Nephews love, and
mounting his conceits above the height of a convenient pitch, took upon him
more authority to rule, than either a stranger, or a subject, in wisdom
should affect: which altered the pleasantness of the Kings countenance into
frowns, and made him much less esteemed, than otherwise he would have been.

The Kings uncle rebelleth.
The Bishop (whose heart was haughty, and whose mind aspired to more than
ordinary greatness) so inwardly grudged, that the Line of Sovereign Majesty
should tie him short, that openly he did rebel; and in such sort (by the help
of the English Normans) distempered the soundness of the Commonweales Peace
with many turbulent and dangerous mutinies, in sundry places of the Land,
that the King (contrary to his natural disposition, and contrary to the
former Rules of his Policy) was compelled to strengthen his own part by the
English Nation; The King through necessity flattereth the English.
whom (with better usage, fairer speeches, releasement of injurious Taxes, and
great gifts) he made so firm and faithful to him, that (by their assistance)
he more than well hoped to prevail. And such was his new courtesy and
kindness to many of the revolted Lords, that (leaving the Bishop and his
associates) they adhered firmly unto the King.

These fractions and these disorders in the public State begot new conceits in
Malcolyne King of Scots: The Scots rebel.
who on the sudden railing a fair Army of aduenturous men of war, invaded
the Northren parts of this Kingdom. The news whereof appalled not the King,
but rather it inspired him with a spirit of such invincible courage, that
marching first against the Bishop and his accomplices, The Bishop is overthrown.
with an high hand he obtained a quick victory, and enforced the unwise
Bishop, his uncle, to abjure the Land.

And forthwith (being mounted aloft, upon the wings of Fury, ANNO. 3. The
Scots overthrown.
and scorning to be checked by resistance) he rushed with such manlike violence
upon the hardy Scots, that the greatest numbers of them were quickly slain in
the field; and Malcolyne was not only compelled to acknowledge his subjection,
The Scots subjection.
by renewing of his former Oath, but willingly he became a Pentioner to the
King.

In the sixth year of his Reign his prosperity was interrupted by the
obstinate Rebellion of Rees, the last King of the Welchmen: ANNO. 6. The
Welchmen rebel, and are subdued.
who so infested him with broken wars, that, for many months together, being
urged to fight with Mountains (to which upon all enforcements they fled) in
stead of combating with men, he could find no rest. But such was his
resolution, his valor, and undaunted courage, to withstand the strongest push
of all extremities, that in the end he slew their King, and (by a glorious
victory) he better secured the subjection of the Welchmen, than any of his
predecessors had done before.

Not long afterward, The Scots rebel again.
Malcolyne the King of Scots (being unkindly and disgracefully denied access
to the English Court, where he intended a friendly conference upon many matters
of great weight and consequence) returned into Scotland; and being infected
with a million of discontents, the disease of his passions published it self,
with much danger, to the Northren parts: which he invaded with a strong Army;
spoiling, robbing, burning, wounding, and killing (without controlment) in all
places, as he listed: until he besieged a strong Castle; which for many days
was valiantly defended by Robert Mowbray, then Earl of Northumberland: who at
length seeming to yield to the frowardness of his disasterous fortune, and
coming out of his Castle gate well mounted, with the keys thereof fastened
unto his lance, The King of Scots slain.
and making low obeisance to the King in token of his submission, and dashing
his spurs into his horse, he ran upon the King, and with his lance (in
stead of tendering him the keys) he pierced out his eye, and slew him on the
place: Which having done, he escaped, flying like the wind, leaving the
dismayed Scots behind him, to lament their irrecuperable loss, and with much
sorrow to return into Scotland with their breathless King.

As on the Seashore one wave succeedes another: so in humane affairs there is
no end of troubles. No sooner was this business concluded, but another did
begin. For Robert Duke of Normandy (conceiving himself to be much wronged, by
a supposed breach of the Kings former promises) resolved to transport a fair
Army into England, for the regayning of his Right: but the King (purposing
rather to adventure offensive Wars abroad, A good Policy.
than with assured loss to defend himself at home) gathered a strong power of
able and willing men of war, with which he sailed into Normandy. The French
strengthen Robert Duke of Normandy against the King.
But Philip of France so friendly backed the Duke in those employments, that
the English forces found themselves too weak to do him any harm. So this
unexpected resistance compelled the King to cast his plot into a new mould, and
by sleight and policy to effect that, which by open violence he could not do.
Wherefore (not making himself overmuch beholding to long deliberation) he
sent many of his chiefest Commanders into England; who (with more than
ordinary diligence and speed) in short time waged a strong Army of twenty
thousand men: who (being ready to be embarked) were unexpectedly greeted with
this fair offer, A politic and a pleasing Tax.
That such of them as would severally give ten shillings to the King, toward
his leuying of new forces in Normandy, should be dismissed from that journey.
This demand (in regard of each particular giver) was not great: but the entire
value thereof, when it was collected, amounted to a good sum; because there
were few, or none, who by this payment procured not their discharge. And the
French King (being secretly corrupted with the gift of the greater part of this
money) made present choice rather to shrink from his kind friend, Quid non
Regina pecunia?
than to assist him at his need: so that the good Duke (being left alone, and
yet accompanied with the sensible apprehension of his own defects, and making
a virtue of his necessities) contented himself to subscribe to the command of
his adverse fortune. A composition
For, making an enforced Peace with his brother, and pawning to him his Duchy
of Normandy for ten thousand pounds; himself in person, with other
Christian Princes, waged wars in the Holy Land.

The Welchmen rebel.
As soon as the King was returned into England, the Rebels in Wales summoned
him to a new War; which he undertook with great celeritie and with much
valor. But the craggie Mountains, the steepie Hills, the thick Woods, and the
watrie Marshes (unto which the Welchmen used continually to fly upon every
fear of danger) so toyled and tired the English forces, that the King (to
increase his strength, and to furnish himself with more fitting means to
subdue those Rebels) was compelled, without honor, to return.

But those his new preparations were interrupted by another Rebellion in the
North: The Earl of Northumberland rebelleth.
which was occasioned and conducted by Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland;
who madly expressed the malecontentednes of his disordered passions, because
the King (as he conceived) had not requited his service done upon Malcolyne,
the King of Scots, with any worthy or condign reward. A courageous King.
But such was the haughty spirit and courage of the King, that those
unexpected troubles, which benumbed the senses of the vulgar, did set an edge
upon his valor, making him to scorn fear, and to entertain hope; and
animating him, with a settled resolution, to dare fortune to do her worst. For
he no sooner saw his revolted subjects of the North, The Rebels subdued.
but he loaded them in such sort with blows and wounds, that such as fled not
he made a prey unto death, or made them miserable examples to their friends;
who might bemoane them, but could not release them, of their loss of Ears,
Eyes, Hands, Noses, or Feet. Thus did the King beat down their pride, and
took the Earl as he fled, and sent him to the Castle of Windsour, where he
was committed to a strong Prison.

Then did the King (with new strength) march again into Wales: The King could
not subdue the Welchmen in two Expeditions.
but his former mishaps were presidents to his later success. For albeit that
Fury made him more aduenturous than Reason gave him warrant, in regard that
his magnanimous spirit could not digest the counter-checks of such a scattered
Rabble: yet (when he had weakened his strength, and impaired his Army, by the
loss of many valiant men, upon the vast and desolate Mountains, which
affoorded him nothing but Repentance) he was enforced (far against his will)
the second time to return, leaving the Welsh Rebels uncorrected; and therefore
exceedingly emboldened in their sin. Whose insolences bred in the King such
a strong resolution to revenge, that four years after (when they suspected
not any approaching danger) he sent against them the two Earls of Shrewsburie,
and of Chester, with a strong Power: The Welchmen suddenly invaded are
overthrown
who finding them rioting in the Isle of Anglesey, set upon them, slew diverse,
wounded more, suffered few to escape; and such as were taken prisoners, were
either executed with many Torments, or dismembered, with such Depriuements, as
happened to the Rebels in the North.

ANNO 10.
Now when the King (by the help of the English Nation) had obtained many
memorable victories against the Scots, Welchmen, and the Northren Rebels; An
ungrateful King.
and (by their assistance) had in such sort established his affairs, that all
fear of future perils was quite banishe^; imitating the example of some
unthankful Mariners: who (by the goodness of a sound Ship) having escaped the
boisterous rage of an hideous Tempest, will leave her in the Road, subject to
the fury of the winds, and to the violence of the waters: He not only
forgot his honorable atchieuements by their means, but unthankfully he
requited them, who had freed him from many unspeakable dangers. For, as in
former times, so now again he dis-heartened them, The English Nation is
miserably oppressed.
by many intolerable exactions, new impossitions, and merciless oppressions:
turning their longings after Liberty into a servile Bondage; their
expectations for Favor, into Despair; and their Plenty into such Poverty:
that though those Times gave them leave sorrowfully to bewail their griefs;
yet Hope administered to them no comfort for Relief. Yea, such was his
impiety, Extreme covetousness in a King.
and such was his covetous desire, by all unjust means to enrich himself;
that impiously he sold for money the greatest and the best Promotions, both in
Church, and in Commonweal: and did prohibit Anselme, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, to assemble any Conuocations, or Synods, for the well ordering of
the Clergy, or for the correcting of such as did offend; without his leave and
license: by means whereof, he secretly filled his coffers with much Treasure.

The Archbishop of Canterbury robbed, and rifled.
These indignities, and these irreligious practices, were sharply reprehended
by Anselme: yet found he no reformation of those monstrous abuses. Wherefore
(being unable any longer to support so ponderous a burden, both to his
Conscience, and also to his Estate) he resolved to forsake the Realm, and
appeal to Pope Urban the third; Appeal to Rome.
though by the King he was prohibited so to do. But in the beginning of his
journey, as he passed toward Dover; himself, The King likely to have been
excommunicated.
and all his followers (by the Kings uncharitable appointment) were euilly
entreated, and robbed of their chiefest wealth. Yet went he forth, and at Rome
complained to the Pope: who forthwith would have excummunicated the King; had
he not formerly pronounced that Sentence against the Emperor Henry the
fourth (who was the first Christian Prince Sovereign that ever was
excommunicated by any Bishop of Rome: The Emperor Henry the fourth was the
first excommunicated Christian Prince.
) and by his Clergy he was advised to see the end and effect of that Sentence;
and should not heat any more yrons, before he saw how the former would be
quenched.

Many Letters and sundry Messengers were sent unto the King; Commands from
Pope Urban the third.
admonishing him not to intermeddle any more with the inuesting of Bishops; by
giving to them the Cross, Ring, and Pastoral Staff: nor with the
Temporalties of any Ecclesiastical Promotions, either when they were vacant,
or otherwise. Nor should prohibit the assembling of any Conuocations or
Synods, touching the Churches affairs and business: Nor should prohibit the
execution of any Canons; albeit they were not by Regal authority confirmed.

But the King little respected those Commands, The King regards not the Popes
commands.
and stoutly answered, That, touching them all, he would still do as he
pleased; and would not loose so fair a flower belonging unto his Crown.

But whilst these businesses were thus acted, the King was oftentimes sharply
rebuked by Ralph, the Bishop of Chichester, The King is reproved, and is the
worse.
for those unjust grieuances and wrongs which were offered to the Archbishop,
and his followers, at the time of their departure toward Rome. But, like as a
man, the deeper he is wounded, the more impatient he is to be soundly searched:
so the King (knowing his offense to be impious and ungodly) refused to be
admonished: and, in stead of reforming of those things which had been done
amiss, he heaped many disgraceful wrongs upon the good Bishop, and his
Diocese; within which (of his own wilful obstinacy, and because he would
proclaim his will to be a Law) he suspended many Churches, and converted
their Revenues to his own use.

But his later meditations better informing him than his former neglect, and
unadvised passions: The King repents.
he not only received the Bishop into his extraordinary grace and favor; but
enriched him and his See with many honorable Privileges and Princely gifts:
Yet afterward he banished him out of his Kingdom.

It happened, that (as he hunted in the New-Forest) he was informed, that the
Frenchmen had compassed the City of Constancia in Normandy with a Siege,
which was both strong, and dangerous. Whereupon (leaving his Sports, his
Nobles, Wonderful courage,
and all his Company) with great expedition he posted toward the Sea: and,
without any preparations fitting for such a journey, he leapt into a Bark; and
commanded the Mariners to weigh their anchor, and to hoyse their Sails. But
such was the furious violence of a boisterous storm, that (not daring to do
what they were commanded) they refused to obey: Whereat the King was much
enraged, and did enforce them to yield to his resolved humor; affirming, That
they had never heard, that a King was drowned by the distemper of any wind.
And such was his fortunate Passage in a time so dangerous, and so much were the
Frenchmen daunted with the unexpected news of his sudden landing: Fortunate
success.
that instantly they abandoned the Siege; and by their quick departure
prevented the hazard which they much doubted.

ANNO 13.
And within two years after his return into England, and in the thirteenth
year of his Reign (as he hunted in the said New-Forest, The King slain as he
hunted.
which his Father had made, and which himself had enlarged, by depopulating of
sundry Towns, Villages, and Farms, and with the utter ruin of many
Churches, Chapels, and Religious houses) he was slain with an arrow: which
being shot unto a Dear, unfortunately glanced upon him, as, not long before,
his Nephew Richard, and Son unto Duke Robert of Normandy, had been there
slain.

And thus ended the troublesome, yet victorious, Reign of King William, third
son to the Conqueror: who being of a wanton disposition, neglecting marriage,
and daily solacing himself among his whores and concubines, died without any
lawful issue of his body. He was of a comely stature; firmly compacted in
his limbs; very strong, active, and healthie; exceeding lecherous, and
covetous; of an high courage, and nobly valorous; constant in his resolutions;
scorning Fortune, and all Troubles. Thus he lived, and thus he died; getting
much, and suddenly leaving all.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE FIRST.
WHEN King William the second died; Robert, ANNO 1100.
his eldest brother (fortunate in all his proceedings, saving only in his
Succession to this Crown) warred victoriously (as many other Christian
Princes did) in the Holy Land: where (in regard of his honorable deeds and
heroical actions) he refused to be made King of Jerusalem.

By means of his absence, a fit opportunity was offered unto Henry, his
youngest brother, to sit as King in his Throne: whereunto (without labor, or
difficulty) he ascended, through the favorable affection of the Nobles and
common People: whose hearts were the more firmly engaged to his service,
because he was borne in England after his father was crowned King: and also,
because his singular Wisdom, rare Learning, mild Disposition, and princely
Virtues, were plain and apparent demonstrations, that his Government would be
accompanied with honorable Atchieuements; graceful, safe, and profitable both
to the Church, and also to the Commonweal.

No sooner was he crowned, and proclaimed King, but Wisdom did inform him, A
true use of Riches.
That it was expedient, that his Estate should strongly be supported against
the hazards of future Time, and his Good policies worthy of a noble King, and
to be noted.
as upon all occasions, and in all dangers, were able to afford him their best
counsel, and the best relief. Then he dignified such as were great, with the
greatest Offices; and with Dane-gelt; and from all other unjust payments and
demands imposed Flatterers banished the Court.
and better recreation) to enclose Parkes for Dear, and free Warrens for their
Conies, and such like Game. And as Traitors to his Virtues, Anselme, and
restored him to his Archbishopricke of Canterbury: and gave him full power to
assemble Conuocations and Synods at his pleasure, The King leaves the
inuesture of Bishops to the Pope.
for the amendment of such things as were insufferable in the Church. He left
unto the Pope his power and authority to inuest Bishops, by giving to them the
Ring, the Cross, and the Pastoral Staff. All such Ecclesiastical Promotions
and Dignities, as, by Reynulph, Bishop of Durham, his London; R bert Duke of
Normandy inuadeth England.
from whence he afterward escaped, and eagerly incited Robert, Duke of
Normandy, by the Sword to lay his claim to this kingdom. Who thereupon (to
maintain his demand in that behalf) raised a strong Army; which he
intended, with all convenient expedition, to transport into this Realm. But as
king Henry, by those precedent provisions, had endeared himself in the
Peoples love: so had he the more confirmed it, by taking to wife Mawlde, the
sister of Edgar, King Henry's title made stronger by his marriage.
King of Scots, and daughter unto Malcolyne, by Margaret his wife, sister to
Edgar Adelinge (who died without issue) and daughter to King Edward, the son
of Edmund Iron-side, the victorious and valiant King of the Saxons.

When Duke Robert, with his Army, was arrived in England, the noise of
Trumpets, the sound of Drums, and the swarming multitudes of well-approued
Soldiers, fit for the War, affoorded none other thing but a fearful
expectation of much trouble. But as a threatening lowering Cloud is sometimes
dispersed by a fa^^e shining Sun: so these approaching conflicts (by the
discreet mediation and counsel of worthy friends) were suddenly prevented;
and a friendly peace, A peace concluded betwixt the two brethren.
betwixt the two brothers, was lovingly concluded, upon such like conditions,
as formerly had been agreed on in William Rufus his days: whereat the Norman
Lords were much displeased, and returned discontented with their Lord.

But such were the malignant spirits of the Envious; The King inuadeth, and
prevails in Normandy.
or such was the greedy disposition of those who were Covetous; or so eager
was the Kings appetite to enlarge his Dominion: that many great quarrels, for
small and trifling causes, began upon the sudden to present themselves unto
those two brethren. Insomuch, that King Henry passed with a sufficient and a
well-ordered Army into Normandy: where he was assisted by many of the Dukes
discontented Nobles. By means whereof, The Duke is forsaken by his Nobles and
Gentry.
the King (in sundry skirmishes and conflicts) so prevailed, that with little
danger, and small resistance, he chased the forsaken Duke from place to place;
and won from him the Cities of Roan, Cane, Valoys, and many others: and then
he returned into England with much honor.

The Duke perceiving that his Lords and Gentry refused to give him any help;
and that the Kings Estate, Strength, and Riches so increased, that no hope of
recovery (by striving and by struggling) was left unto him, submitted himself
to his two Enemies, Time and Fortune, (the scornful deluders of such as
repose their confidence upon them) and came secretly and privately into England;
presented himself to the King his brother; and referred to his own censure
and will, both himself, his Duchy, and all Debates and Controversies
whatsoever. But the King (either because he knew that the Duke was too
unconstant; The Dukes submission is scornefully despised.
or for that some secret whisperers had prepared him to prejudicate his
brothers Truth, and honest Meaning) with an estranged countenance, and a
disdainefull eye, departed unkindly from the distressed and perplexed Duke;
coyly refusing to accept of his submission, which in all humility by him was
proffered. The Duke returns, and the King follows.


The Duke (being pierced to the heart, that his misfortunes should so much
wrong him) returned with all expedition into his own Country; resolving, That
in the open Field he would rather die as a valiant man, than thus be trampled
on by Dishonor and by Disgrace. And the king (conjecturing rightly what he
pretended) followed him with many thousands of men: and so often he encountered
the weak Duke with his great strength, The Duke is taken, and his eyes are put
out.
that within few days he took him, and brought him as a prisoner into
England: where (because he hearkened to Natures enticement; which persuaded him
to seek his liberty, and to practice his escape) both his eyes (by the kings
commandment) were plucked out. After which time he lived as a miserable and
as a wretched captive more than the space of twenty years. At length, being
dead, in Gloucester he was buried.

A Rebellion by the Earls of Shrewsburie and of Mortaigne.
About the same time Robert Belasme, Earl of Shrewsburie, traitorously did
rebel: but wanting Wealth, Wit, Courage, and Strength (the four Champions of
the strongest Field) he was enforced to fly into Normandy. Where finding
William, Earl of Mortaigne and of Cornwall, much displeased with the king, for
that (as he surmised) he kept from him unjustly the Earldom of Kent; he so
much insinuated himself into his love and counsels, that easily he persuaded
him to rebel. So both of them joining both their forces together, they made a
goodly show, as if they would work wonders. They are taken, and imprisoned.
But small opposition enforced them to take a plain view of their rash errors;
and (leaving that which they had) to make hard shifts for the safeguard of
themselves. Wherein their ill success was a just reward for their foul
offense: for by the kings Power they were taken, and by him held as prisoners
whilst they lived.

New troubles betwixt the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury about the
Temporalties of the Clergy and inuesture of Bishops.
The king having now cast anchor, as he was resolved, in a safe harborow; and
nothing fearing the blasts of any Fortune which might attempt to shake his
settlement in this kingdom: and finding that many inconveniences did daily
press him with much dishonor and disgrace; because he intermedled not with the
Temporalties of Bishoprics when they were vacant; nor with the inuesture of
Bishops, as his Ancestors had done: and being informed, That those things were
inseparable incidents unto his Crown; and that his neglect to use them
deprived him not of his Right unto them; resolved, That he would not any longer
forbear to challenge, and to put in practice, those things which so justly did
belong unto him. Whereat Anselme, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was much
displeased; and did utterly refuse to consecrate such new Bishops, as had
received their Inuestures from the king. But Gerald, then Archbishop of York,
cheerfully performed that Ceremony, upon the kings command.

This new quarrel transported Anselme the second time from England unto Rome:
Anselme goes to Rome the second time, and complains to Pope Pascal the
second. The Archbishop prevails.
where he complained to Pope Paschal the second of those, and of many other,
wrongs: all which were controuerted, and debated with the strongest oppositions
on either party. But two years after, Anselme (with the license and favor of
the king) returned: and in a Synod of the Clergy, holden by him in London, by
the Popes authority, it was enacted, That from thenceforth no Temporal man
should give Inuesture to any Bishop by the Cross and Ring.

Within three years after, Anselme died: and the Temporalties of that Dignity
being seized into the kings hands, The King enters upon the Temporalties of
the Archbishop of Canterbury.
were (for the space of five years) taken, received, and converted to the
kings use. And if at any time (as he was often) he were entreated by the
Bishops to confer that See upon some other; his answer was, That he only
kept it for a sufficient and a worthy man.

In the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred and eight, he erected the
Bishopric of Ely, The Bishopric of Ely founded in Anno 1108.
and endowed it with large and honorable Possessions: which won him much
favor with the Pope, and procured him the love of his own Clergy.

Thus, when the King (for a few years) had enjoyed the benefit of an happy
Peace, Normandy invaded.
and held all Normandy subject to his own command; his tranquillity and his
pleasure were envied by Lewis le Gross, then king of France: who first of all
procured Fulke, Earl of Angeou (upon a weak pretense) to seize upon the
Country of Main; and then animated Baldwyne, Earl of Flanders, to declare
against the king in Arms, for the withholding of a yearly pension of three
hundred marks; which the Conqueror gave only unto Baldwyne, the fifth Earl
of Flanders, during his life. But the same had afterward been paid to his
Son, and Nephew, by the courtesy of the succeeding kings; because the
Conqueror had been well assisted in his Wars with England by the said
Baldwyne the fifth. All these made strong preparations to invade the Kings
Duchy of Normandy: But the news thereof rowsed the King from his bed of
ease; The King sayleth into Normandy, and prevails
filled him full with Princely resolutions; occasioned him to pass the Sea
with an Army of rough and tough Nobles, Gentry, and common Soldiers. And
shortly after his landing (loosing no time) he set upon the Earl of Angeou and
his associates: And after he had beaten him soundly on every side, he enforced
him to save himself by a shameful flight.

Another victory.
And near unto the Town of Nice (which was surprised and holden by the King of
France) King Henry encountered the other two.

This Battle was made famous by the continuance of nine hours; and was on
all parts fought with such eager and manlike resolution, that albeit the King
of England won the Field, and had the long chase of his flying enemies; yet
he boldly and truly would confess, that he then fought not for victory, but
for his life.

A peace is concluded.
At length, when the heat of Anger was well quenched, and when many lay cold on
the floor of death, who in their life times had blown the coals of
contention between those four Princes; A Marriage.
they all were reconciled unto peace: and the King married to his eldest son
William the daughter of the said Fulke. But in their journey toward England,
the said young Princes, Richard, and Marie Countess of Perch, two others of
the Kings children; his Niece Lucie, A great misfortune.
with her husband the Earl of Chesier; and more than an hundred and fourscore
others, were unfortunately drowned by the careless folly of the drunken
Mariners. Drunkenness.


This unexpected news (being accompanied with many millions of sorrows, and
of doleful passions) much grieved the King: but made him not heartlesse, as
most Princes would have been in the like case. The Kings admirable patience.
For Wisdom had sufficiently instructed him, with patience to sustain and
bear those burdens, which could not by any means be shaken off. And
likewise, the King was at that time affoorded but little leisure to fix his
cogitations on those mishaps, because the obstinate Rebellion of the Welchmen
drew him unwillingly into a new War. For when he saw and perceived, that
though he were a King, yet urgent necessity commanded him to Arms; and that
Justice did require him (by the Sword) to judge and to execute those lewd and
graceless Malefactors: The Welchmen rebel, and are subdued.
he marched with a strong Power into Wales; when the Rebels (trusting
overmuch to their own valor; which little, or nothing at all, helps in
Treasonable Plots and Employments) resolved to abide the utmost push of their
fortune: which yielded to the King a speedy and a successful end of those
Wars. For (with little danger, and as small a loss) he gave them the
overthrow, and permitted the wastfull devouring swords of his associates to
surfeit upon the carcasses of those Rebels; whom neither gentle usage, nor
former executions of that nature, could persuade to perform those duties which
good subjects do owe unto their Prince.

Then returned the King, laden with much honor, Maulde the kings daughter
married to the Emperor Henry the fifth.
and was joyfully received by all his people; especially by Mauld his daughter:
whom he forthwith sent to be married unto the Emperor Henry the fifth, her
affied husband, with a princely portion of Silver and of Gold; which (in the
nature of a Tax) was levied upon the common people of their Land; which he
took for an aid toward her marriage. And the same custom, Aid purfi^e
marrier.
for the marriage of the eldest daughter of the Kings of this Realm, has
been and is continued unto this day.

At the same time he devised and ordered the manner and fashion of a Court in
Parliament; Anno 1114. The High Court of Parliament f^^^t established at
Salisburie in April.
appointing it to consist of the three Estates, of which himself was the Head:
So that his Laws, being made by the consents of all, were not disliked of any.

It chanced, that about five years after the death of Anselme, Ralph, Bishop
of Rochester, The King inuesteth the Archbishop of Canterbury.
was by the King appointed to succeed him; and (notwithstanding all former
Counsels, Decrees, Commandments, Letters, and Threatenings from the Pope) he
received his Inuesture from the King. Then died the Archbishop of York: To
which See Thurston, the kings Chapleine, should have been preferred. Pride.
But Pride having a more large rule and dominion in him, than Lowliness and
Humility; he refused to swear obedience to the Sea of Canterbury; which his
predecessors had both sworn and performed. And because the king (disliking his
obstinacy) would not inuest him; he appealed, and went to Rome: where (by the
favor of some Cardinals, Thurston invested by the Pope.

The King is highly displeased. Thurston prevails, and the King yields.


who had the Popes Censure at their command) he so prevailed, that the Pope
not only freed him of his said obedience and subjection* but also invested
him, and gave him the Pale: whereat the king was extraordinarily displeased,
and prohibited his return. But in the end (the Popes threatenings menacing
nothing but Curses, Suspensions, Excommunications, and such like) he was
permitted to return, and to enjoy the dignity of his Place.

In the seven and twentieth year of his Reign died the Emperor Henry the
fifth, not having any issue by Maulde the Kings daughter and heir. At which
time she being aged about four and twenty years, Mauld the Empress married
to Geoffrey Plantagenet.
and being much sued unto by most of the greatest Princes of the Christian
World; the king (to strengthen his Realm against the kings of France) married
her to Geoffrey Plantagenet, the son and heir apparent of Fulke, then Earl
of Angeou. By whom she had issue three sons: Henry, who was (after Stephen)
king; Her issue.
Geoffrey, and William.

This fair offspring enriched the king with the truest endowment of good
content; for that (as he conceived) he saw in them the settled continuance of
his Line in the Crown of this Realm. An oath to maintain the succession of
the Crown in the Kings Line.
And (to make it the more sure) within the space of five years he took three
solemn Oaths of his Nobility and greatest Officers of his kingdom, That
with their best advice, and with the hazard of their goods, lands, lives, and
fortune, they should support and maintain the succession of his daughter, and
of her heirs.

The King surfeteth and dies.
Finally, when he had reigned more than five and thirty years, he surfetted on
a Lamprey; of which he languished a few days, and died; and was honorably
buried in the Abbey of Reading, which himself had founded.

This king was Wise, Learned, Mild, Valiant, and Just, beyond most of his
Predecessors; more inclined to Peace than unto War: so that he made War
his Champion stoutly to challenge his Rights, and to revenge his Wrongs. He
never levied but two Taxes upon his People: the first was, to maintain his
Wars against the king of France: and the second was, to prefer his daughter
in marriage with the Emperor. He waxed rich with his own, and yet he was very
liberal: but he only extended his bounty to such as merited it by their
public Service; and he confined his Gifts within the Limits of Thrift and of
Measure. He established Laws, which were profitable to such as were virtuous;
but sharp unto malefactors who did transgress: against whom he caused them
to be put in execution with more Severity than Mercy: he being persuaded,
that Pity extended to such as were wicked, hardened them in their sin, and
too much encouraged such, as nothing but correction could either terrify or
reform. To his friends he was a sure Pillar, whereunto in all necessities they
might boldly lean: and to his enemies he was rough and stiff, until time
presented occasion of more love; and then he was very flexible, and easy to
be reconciled. And, as he would never forget good service done, nor any good
turns performed for him: so would he seldom, or never, take rest, until by
some worthy gift, or correspondent requital, he had showed himself thankful
to such as deserved well. He was too lascivious in his course of life; using
many concubines: by whom he had twelve known bastards. He erected the two
Bishoprics of Ely, and of Carelyle; and founded the Monasteries of Circester,
Reading, and Shyrborne; with the Priorie of Dunstable, and some others: all
which he beautified with many Privileges and Possessions, answerable to their
Dignities and Charge.

Yet did he not retain the chiefest room in the Clergies love: because that
(after the death of Anselme) he rejected the Popes Decrees, to which he had
formerly subjected himself: and invested Bishops; received Homage of Prelates;
seized their Temporaltie^ ^hen their Sees were vacant; gave no allowance to any
Canons of the Church, except they were ratified and confirmed by the King;
compounded with Priests for annual pensions, to keep their wives, or to take
them (though unto them the holy estate of Matrimony was forbidden:) which
pensions he enforced them to pay, whether they had wives or no.

Thus (in this King) ended the issues males of the Conqueror: and the Crown
of this Realm was deuolued to his general Heirs.

THE HISTORY OF KING STEPHEN.
THe experience of all Ages has made sufficient proof, Stephen usurps.
that the eager appetite which most Men have to gain Wealth and Riches, has
made them careless to perform those common Duties, which do belong to
Honesty and to Right. But if a Kingdom may be obtained (though with the
breach of a most solemn Oath) no scruple is then made. For the desire of
Soueraignetie, and to enjoy a Crown, makes men play fast and loose, and to
hazard the loss of their Souls, by the wilful periurious violating of their
Faith.

This proved too true at this time: For albeit that Stephen Earl of Boloigne,
the son and heir apparent of Stephen Earl of Bloys, and of Adela the
Conquerours Daughter, was one of the chiefest, The former Oath is forgotten.
whom king Henry the first had obliged by many solemn and public Oaths,
to further the succession of Mauld the Empress, being his Daughter; and of her
children: yet (when the king was dead) he finding, that all the Nobles (though
sworn as himself was) applied themselves to wait upon his pleasure: he either
utterly forgot, or (at least) he cared not for the vows of former times;

And so well was he instructed by the former examples of his Progenitors;
that, as they did, so did he endeavor (by Wisdom, and by Policy) to lay a
sure Foundation to his Estate. And because Riches are the Synewes and the
Strength of the Good policy.
he therefore (to enrich himself) seized upon the Treasure of his uncle, The
Kings liberality.
the last deceased King: Which he closed not up in Chests, or in Bags, as
idle Archers do their Dane-gelt, and all other extraordinary Burdens and
Exactions whatsoever: causing a large Charter thereof, and of the mitigation of
the Privileges granted to the Clergy.
when they should become vacant. He gave to the Church and Churchmen such
graceful and profitable Castles and Fortresses erected.
To prevent sudden Eruptions, Rebellions, and Incursions, tending to the
general disturbance of the common Peace; by having many strong and fortified
places for good David the King of Scots, and uncle to Mauld the Empress
(because he should not second her in her demands, The Scots flattered by the
King.
or warlike attempts) the whole Province of Cumberland; and created his eldest
son Henry Earl of Huntingdon. Yet notwithstanding, not long after (in her
quarrel) he entered into the Northren parts of this Kingdom; The King of
Scots overthrown by the Archbishop of York.
which he tormented with fire and sword. But in the end he was encountered by
Thurston, then Archbishop of York; who compelled him (being pursued with
unspeakable dangers) to fly into Scotland; and to leave behind him, dead upon
the ground, more than ten thousand men of his Army.

In the sixth year of his Reign, Mauld the Empress, Mauld the Empress
landeth in England.
being accompanied with her base brother, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, landed
with an army in England; and was quickly strengthened and emboldened in her
Enterprise by the plentiful access of many of the English, and of Raynulph
Earl of Chester, with a lusty crew of bold and forward Welchmen. Hereupon the
King (imposing no confidence in delay; but Experience instructing him, that
advised Expedition is the chiefest enabler of good success) levied a strong
army; and marched with good resolution against the Empress, and her Forces:
who greeted him with such Music as her warlike Troops did gallantly present.
So that a cruel and a bloody Battle (with equal hopes) for many hours
was fought between them. But at length, King Stephen overthrown.
the Kings common Soldiers (striving faintly, and, as cowards, rather
endeavoring to save themselves by flight, than manfully to defend their King)
did basely leave the King: who, with his Nobles and Gentry, scorning to turn
their backs, maintained their part, with as much courage as manhood could
afford; King Stephen taken prisoner.
till (in the end) the King was taken, and committed to the Castle of Bristoll:
where he remained a prisoner about the space of three months; and was at the
last delivered, King Stephen is set at liberty.
to free the Earl of Gloucester, who had been taken, and was imprisoned by the
Queen.

After this victory thus obtained, the Empress (with many honorable
Triumphs and Solemnities) was received into the Cities of Circester, Oxford,
Winchester, and London. The Londoners attempt to surprise the Empress
But the Londoners desiring the Restitution of King Edwards Laws, and not
obtaining their request) consulted to surprise the Empress, and to deliver her
unto the King. By means whereof, good counsel advised her to fly: which
suddenly she did; and came unto Oxford: Where (within few days, and
unexpectedly) she was environed with a strong Siege: So that despair of good
success dis-heartening her, The Empress besieged in Oxford.
and teaching her a ready means for her escape; taking the benefit of the
Snow (which at that time lay thick upon the ground) she, with her chiefest
accomplices, apparrelling themselves in white linen, secretly issued forth; A
politic flight.
and posting with all speed toward the Sea, they embarked themselves, and
sailed into Normandy.

Many years together, after these turmoyles, this Realm enjoyed a blessed
Peace: And in the seventeenth year of this Kings Reign died the most valorous
and hardy knight Raynulph Earl of Chester: Henry Short-Mantel heir apparent
to the Empress.
and so did Geoffrey Plantagenet, husband to the Empress. And Henry, surnamed
Short-Mantle, her eldest son, took to wife Elianor, the daughter and heir
of the Earl of Poytou: which Elianor not long before (for neerenesse in blood,
and after she had borne him two daughters) was divorced from Lewis the seventh,
then King of France. So that Prince Henry was now Duke of Normandy, in the
right of his Mother; Earl of Angeou by descent from his Father; and Earl of
Poytou in the right of his wife: by whom (not long after) he also had the
Earldom of Toulouse.

This worthy Prince (by many of his friends and valiant men of War, who
longed to have employment in so fair a journey) was incited to levy a strong
army, and to transport them into England; and by their help, and the
assistance of other wel-willers, to attempt the recovery of his Right: and the
rather, for that king Stephen, and Eustace his only son, did now begin to
war upon many of those, who held their Castles for the Prince his use. His
strong Expectation, and hope to be enthroned in this Kingdom, through the
favor of diverse Lords and Commons of this Realm; easily persuaded him to lend
a listening ear to their whisperings: So that to give unto them good content,
and to forward the attayning of his own desires, Henry Short-Mantel inuadeth
England.
he raised a strong power of willing and able men of War. Which (being
bravely conducted by noble Captains, well skilled in those Affairs) arrived
safely in England: where King Stephen and his son disdained to be idle; for
they had provided with an equal strength to encounter him.

Both armies had daily news the one from the other: they threatened much, did
somewhat, but it was but little: Yet in those Expeditions, Eustace the kings
son by misaduenture was unfortunately drowned; Prince Eustace drowned
which overcame the king with infinite passions of sorrow and extreme grief.
But it made a quiet end of this quarrel. For now, the king (not having any
son which might succeed him) was well pleased to lend a listening ear to the
fair proffer of a friendly Peace. The quarrel is comp^unded and ended.
And thereupon he adopted Prince Henry for his Son; proclaimed him to be
the Heir apparent of his Crown; gave him many honorable and kingly Gifts;
assured him of his unchangeable love and friendship.

And by these means all Arms were cast aside, and Peace triumphed; having
gotten a certain and a sure Victory with few blows. And the Prince, with his
followers, returned into Normandy: where they were with much honor and
incredible joy received.

And the next year after, king Stephen died, King Stephen dies.

The Saxons blood restored to the Crown of England. See the descent in the
Reign of King Henry the first.


when he had reigned almost nineteen years; and lies buried in the Abbey of
Feuersham in Kent, which himself had founded. And by the happy Succession of
this Henry, the Saxon Blood was again restored unto the Imperial Crown of
this Realm.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE SECOND.
WHEN Henry was returned into Normandy; the French King (fearing least Time,
and his Fortunes, would make him too puissant and too great for his bordering
Neighbors; and intending to deal roughly with him, before he should be the
absolute Master and Commander of his own strength) very injuriously seized
upon diverse of his Fortresses and Castles in Normandy, and elsewhere, which
(questionless) ought to have been subject to his Government. But Henry
(being wise, Henry Short-Mantels valor and courage.
and full of courage and heroical Magnimitie; and foreseeing, that if he
should shrink as a coward, and not make himself known by his valor to the
world, when the wrongs which were done unto him were too apparent) raised a
fair Army: and (for the regayning of one of those his Castles) he girded it
round about with a strong Siege. And whilst he was thus employed to win his
right, He sayleth speedily into England: but first wins the Castle which he
had besieged.
the news of King Stephens death came freshly unto his ears. And (to prevent
such usurpation, as oftentimes, in the absence of the lawful Kings, depriueth
them of their Crowns) he was by his nearest and dearest friends advised to
abandon the Siege; and, without tarrying, to transport himself into England.
But his answer was full of discretion and true valor to this effect: A
resolute speech.
The Kingdom of England (quoth he) shall henceforth be at my command, in
despite of those who dare to cross me most: And so shall these intruding
Frenchmen ere I go hence.

This Resolution redoubled his honor among his friends; and so it did among
his enemies. For when the besieged were informed what he had said and
determined (fearing the event, if obstinately they should detain him there too
long) they surrendered the Castle, and submitted themselves to his mercy: who
received it and them with a favorable and gracious acceptance. And then giving
such directions as both the time and occasions did require, and being
accompanied with many Lords and Gentlemen of the best and chiefest rank; he
sailed with a prosperous wind into England:

The singular zeal and love which he bare to the furtherance of Justice, and
to the execution thereof, appeared manifestly by two Actions of his, The King
reformeth the Laws.
performed: the one in the beginning; and the other, toward the later end of
his Reign. For first he made an especial choice of certain men, who were
very honest, upright, and best learned in the Laws of this Realm: by whose
industrious labors and travails he refined and reformed the common Laws;
making them to be more tolerable and profitable unto his People. England
divided into Circuits: into which Judges were sent, to ease the people.
And toward the end of his days he divided his whole Kingdom into six
several Circuits; and (for the administration of Justice, and for the trials
of Causes betwixt men and men, for the better ease and comfort of his Subjects)
he appointed certain Judges twice in every year to ride, and to travail
through those Circuits: which course and order is carefully continued at this
day.

Strangers banished: and the cause why
He also banished the greatest part of Strangers, who (in those days) by
multitudes flocked hither; and by their extraordinary Sparing, and painful
Industry, procured to themselves much Wealth, and beggered such as were
Natives borne.

Oath-breakers banished.
He also exiled many of the Nobles, who contrary to their public Oaths,
Duties, and Consciences, had more than ordinarily adhered unto King Stephen:
being fully resolved, That the Cogitations of their own Guiltiness, in that
behalf, would never suffer them to be hearty and faithful unto him.

He differed much from the opinion of his last predecessor; Castles politikely
razed, and overthrown.
and affirmed, That strong Forts and Castles, erected and maintained in the
Heart or Body of a Kingdom, did rather animate great men, upon all
displeasures, to revolt, than in any sort contain them within the bounds and
limits of their Obedience, and of their Duty: wherefore he caused them to be
rased (for the greater number) to the ground.

He also seized into his own hands such Territories, Manors, He seizes on
Crowne^ands formerly given away
Lordships, and Possessions, as his Predecessors had either given, or sold,
from the Crown: holding it to be the duty of every Subject, to refuse the
Gift or Purchase of such things, as do so immediately concern the Honor and
Maintenance of the King. Nota.


And the like he did in the Northren Parts; where many great Men, commanding
almost as they listed, had wrought themselves and their Posterities into many
Honors, Castles, and Manors (without title) which in truth and in deed
appertained to the King.

He also resumed into his own hands the Provinces of Cumberland, and of
Northumberland, together with the Earldom of Huntingdon; which David the King
of Scots, and Henry his son, had received as a gift from King Stephen,
because they should not intermeddie in the furtherance of his mother Mauld the
Empress to her Right and Crown.

In the thirteenth year of his Reign, Geoffrey the Kings younger son is Duke
of Britain.
he married Geoffrey (being one of his younger sons) unto Constance, the
daughter and heir apparent of Conaccus Duke of Britain: who died not long
after, and left unto them that Duchy.

He also affied his younger son Richard unto Adela, one of the daughters of
Lewis the King of France: and married his daughter Mauld unto Henry Duke of
Saxony. Mauld the Empress dies.
And about the same time the Empress his mother died.

He loved Peace (though he were passing valiant) because he found it to be
pleasing and profitable: Peace preferred before War.
yet he willingly entered at all times into the Lists of War, when necessity
or good reason persuaded him to arm.

When his estate was most quiet, The King exercised his soldiers in warlike
negotiations in the time of greatest peace.
and freest from Wars abroad, or civil disturbances at home; he would now
and then, upon the sudden, raise an Army, and transport them either into
Normandy, or into Britain, Angeou, or other places subject to the Dominion of
himself, or of his sons. And himself in person used to go with them. And
in those places he exercised them in fortifications, trainings, and lyings in
the field, and with other Martial discipline. By means whereof he settled
those Countries in peace, and with good Government made warlike businesses
familiar to his Soldiers; and then returned without blows into England. The
commodity of his so doing.
By these means, when troubles happened, he little feared: because his men were
aptly inured to those things, which most properly belong unto the wars.

1174. Henry the second Conquereth Ireland.
In the nineteenth year of his Reign (because the Irish Nation attempted to
deprive him of certain Territories in that Island, which were left unto him by
his predecessors) he sailed thither with a mighty Army, and fought many
victorious battles, against five Kings which at that time reigned there. All
which he subdued, and made subject unto himself: and became the sole Lord of
all that Country; and annexed that Title unto the Title of his Crown, The
Kings son twice Crowned King in his fathers days.
and returned honorably into England. Such was the surpassing love of this
worthy King to his eldest son Henry, That he caused him, and his wife
Margaret the daughter of the French King, to be twice solemnly Crowned in the
presence of his people: (himself the second time, for that day, leaving the
Title of a King, and serving as a Sewer at his sons table) whereat his proud
son made no wonder, A proud and an unthankful Son.
but publicly affirmed, That his father was nothing thereby dishonored; For
that he was only the son of an Empress: But he himself was the son both
of a King, and also of a Queen.

Wars betwixt England and France.
Many Iarres, and quarrels in his later days, arose betwixt King Henry the
father and Lewys the French King: which at length were decided by sharp and
bloody wars. In all which (most unnaturally) Henry, Geffrey and John, the
Kings sons: and (most undutifully) Robert Earl of Leicester, Unnatural
children.
and Hugh Earl of Chester, together with William then King of Scots, took
part with the French against the King. In all which (notwithstanding) King
Henry by noble valor and courage did prevail; and upon submission granted
Pardon to his sons, and all the rest. Yet were his sons after grievously
punished by God. God plagued them.
For Henry died before his father, in the prime and flower of his strength; And
John, his son, (who was after King) was poisoned by a Monk. Yet these
unnatural Rebellions by his own children, unto whom he had extended (if we
may believe reports) more then the love, and affection of a worthy father, King
Henry sorrowing for his childrens rebellions, dies.
so inwardly perplexed his mind; that surfeiting upon bitter passions,
occasioned by their revolt, he fell into a dangerous Fever, which the more
vexed him, because Richard his son had then raised an other broyle against
him. And within four days after he died in Normandy, when he had Reigned
almost five and twenty years; and was buried at Founteuerard in France.

The history of this Kings Reign, King Henry's description.
approves him to have been learned, wise, politic, just and valiant: And
that (which not a little augmenteth the number of his praises) albeit he were
oftentimes engaged in many businesses: Some of them concerning his wars in
France, Normandy, Angeou, Ireland, and in other places: A rich King, who taxed
not his people
And some of them respecting his politic rule, and Government at home; yet he
never imposed, nor levied upon his Subjects any extraordinary tax, or payment
whatsoever. Yet left he unto his successor more then nine hundred thousand
pounds in silver and in gold: besides his Plate, Jewels, Household Stuff,
900000. l.
and provision for the war.

And though in most things prosperity made him happy: His unhappiness.
yet in three things, especially, he was most unfortunate and unhappy. The
first was the unnatural disobedience, and rebellious reuolts Rosamond his
inseperable Concubine: His incontinencie, with the fair Rosamond his Concubine.
who (being admirably fair, but wantonly conditioned) alienated, and estranged
his best affections, and love, wholly from the Lady Elianor his most renowned
wife; and made his desires subject, nay slavish, unto her will. So that whilst
she lived, she was seldom from his right hand: And being dead, he caused
her, with great solemnity and pomp, to be sumptuously buried at Godstow
besides Oxford; Fixing on her Tomb this Epitaph. Rosamonds Epitaph.


Hic iacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi: Non Rosa-munda:
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
And the third was, the irreconciliable dissension and strife, The History of
the Kings troubles with Thomas Becket.
which happened betwixt himself and Thomas Becket, the proud and insolent
Archbishop of Canterbury. The which, beginning in the tenth year of his
Reign, was prosecuted seven years after, with great asperitie and
bitterness, on either party; as briefly it shall appear.

Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury (for what desert few did know) in such
sort favored Thomas Becket a Londoner, borne of ordinary parentage, that he
made him Archdeacon of his own Church. And (being able to obtain any thing
of the King, which he did reasonably crave) he procured him to be removed from
one Dignity unto another, until (at length) he was made Lord Chancellor of the
Realm. Thomas Becket made Lord Chancellor.
This high honor so puffed up Thomas Becket with the wind of Pride and
vainglory, that now he thought few, or none, exceeded him for his honor and
for his virtues. Yet did he carry himself with such regardfull observance and
duty to the King, that he augmented his Estate with the gift of large
Territories and Possessions: which daily made him the more confident of the
continuance of his great fortunes.

Thomas Becket is made Archbishop of Canterbury. His unthankfulness.

He is invested at Rome.

He is made the Popes Legate.

He proudly surrendreth his Chancelorship and the great Seal.


At length Theobald died; and the King preferred Thomas Becket to succeed him.
But he (being most unthankful, and resolved as it seemed to play his prankes)
secretly, and without leave, traveled unto Rome: and was invested by Pope
Innocent the second; of whom he received his Pale, and was made a Legate. And
then he returned into England; and was in great disfavor with the King. But he
(taking little notice of the Kings dislike) contrary to the Kings pleasure,
upon the sudden surrendered to the King his Chancelorship, and the great
Seal. The King enquired diligently for the cause why he so did. But such was
his obstinate folly and unthankfulness, that he would not reveal it unto
any.

These jarres between the King and the Archbishop, emboldened the baser and
the worser sort of the Clergy to commit many great and horrible sins and
offenses; for which they received small punishment, because (though their
transgressions were Murders, Manslaughters, Thefts, and Robberies) yet they,
being to be tried and adjudged by men of their own profession, were too too
much winked at. So that, by means of their carelessness, the Commonweal was
much wronged. The Clergies temp rall offenses made subject to be tried before
the Temporal Judge.
Wherefore the King summoned and assembled his High Court of Parliament: In
which, that Law, made by king Stephen, which exempted the authority of the
Temporal Judge to meddle with any Ecclesiastical persons, for any crime by
them committed whatsoever, was abolished; and the ancient Laws of this Realm,
used in the times of Henry the first, and of others the kings Progenitors, and
(which were commonly called Auitae Leges) were reduced to their former
validity and force. Auitae Leges


But in these proceedings the king was much crossed and interrupted by the
obstinate and bold frowardness of Thomas Becket, and of some few other
Bishops; who unadvisedly made themselves partakers of his Faction. But after
many Conferences, Disputes, and Consultations, touching those businesses; all
the Bishops ( Becket only excepted) ratified and subscribed those newly
revived Laws. Becket would not give way to those Laws
But Becket would not by any means assent thereunto, except he might insert
this Clause, Saluo ordine suo: Which words would clearly have annihilated the
life and substance of those Laws. His Exception Saluo iure suo.


This his folly made the king to bite his lip, and to say little: So that
the other Bishops, much fearing to what end the kings extraordinary
displeasure and coffeehouse would tend, did privately commune with the
Archbishop; and prayed him (for the preventing of future mischiefs) to submit
himself: whereunto he gave his free consent; Becket is persuaded: and swears
to those Laws.
and (as the rest had done) so did he take a solemn Oath, to give allowance to
those Laws. The king forthwith altered the strangeness of his countenance
into pleasing and familiar looks: he spoke kindly unto Becket; and assured him
of his former love. And being wise and politic, and purposing to assure the
Peace of future times, whilst opportunity did serve: he caused a tripartite
Instrument to be drawn betwixt himself and the two Archbishops, testifying
this Submission, and this Oath: Two of which parts were forthwith subscribed by
the King and by the Archbishop of York. But Thomas Becket (falling into the
relapse of his former folly) did not only refuse to do the like, Becket
again withstandeth those Laws.
but expressed great Repentance for the former Oath which he had taken. And
(not so contented) he secretly informed the Pope thereof; and of his inward
sorrow for that sin. Becket is absolved by the Pope.
The Pope not only absolved him of that Oath, and enjoined him to some private
Penance: but he also required him, without yielding, stoutly to persist (with
a strong Resolution) in his opinion.

Hereupon the kings anger toward Becket daily increased more and more. And
when this news from Rome was diuulged, Beckets temporalties seized by the King.

He is called to an account for 30000 marks, and refuses to account.


his Majesty seized into his own hands all such Temporal Lands and
Promotions as he had given in former times unto Becket: and required him to
render him an account for thirty thousand Marks, which (to his use) he had
received when he was Chancellor of this Realm. But boldly he affirmed, That
the king had frankely and freely given it unto him: and that therefore he
would not enter into any such account. Whereupon the king, to satisfy
himself, His mouables are seized.
made a seizure of such moveable goods as appertained to him.

Thus, whilst the Wheel thus turned, Thomas Becket, without the kings
License, transported himself secretly unto Rome: Becket goes to Rome.
and the king (thereby perceiving that Becket intended nothing more than to
incense the Pope against him) sent his Ambassadors and Letters unto Rome: The
Pope denies the Kings request.
and by them he signified unto the Pope, how reasonable his own demands were,
and how peruersely Thomas Becket had refused to obey. And therefore he
entreated the Pope, that he might be deprived of his Place and Dignity:
protesting, That he would provide for him and his in some other kind. He
threateneth the king
But the Pope not only denied his request, but with thundering terms he
threatened to send two Legates into England, who should curse the King, and all
his Realm; except, on their demand, he restored the Archbishop both to his
Place and Dignity, and also to all such Lands and Mouables, as by the Kings
commandment had been taken from him. And in the mean time he commended
Becket to the Abbot of Pontinyack, where he was gently received, and kindly
entertained as a Monk.

The Kings anger against Becket.
But when the King perceived into what corner the wind did blow, and that the
Pope had filled Becket with the blasts of pride and vainglory: he (being
more and more exasperated) sent unto the said Abbot, and required him to turn
Becket out of his house, or otherwise he protested, he would not leave one
Monk of his Order in all France.

The King forbids access from the Pope into England.
He also published certain Injunctions against the Pope, and all Cardinals, and
Legates, which (without his License) should presume to enter into his kingdom.

He also deprived Thomas Beckets nearest and choicest friends of all such
Promotions, Lands, and Substance, as they did enjoy; and banished them out of
the Realm, Beckets friends are banished.
because (with counsel and with money) they had joined with him in this his
obstinacy against the king.

This round and bitter course, more troubled Becket then all other precedent
passages whatsoever. And, to increase his grief, the Abbot of Pontinyacke
(fearing the event of the Kings displeasure, if he submitted not himself to
his command) gently persuaded Becket to leave his house. The French King
underhand animateth the Pope.
Whereof when Lewis the French King heard; (albeit his daughter Margaret was
married unto Henry the young King) yet he procured him better entertainment
elsewhere, and secretly wrote in his behalf unto the Pope.

The King sayleth into France. He conferreth with Becket. His offer to Becket.
King Henry (desiring to see an end of these troubles, if by any means
conveniently he might) upon the sudden sailed into France. And (in the
French Kings presence) he conferred with Becket oftentimes; and made him this
offer, That if (at last) he would take the said Oath again, and would
subscribe the said Instrument Tripartite (as himself, and the Archbishop of
York had done to the other two) He should then return into England, Graced
with the Kings especial favor: and that he should enjoy his place and
dignity, and be (in ample sort) restored to all things taken from him, and
whereof justly he had been deprived: And that the like bounty should be
extended to his exiled friends. But he proudly answered, that if the king would
consent, that he might so swear and subscribe with this exception, Saluo
honor Dei.
Salua honor Dei; he then would yield. But this exception displeased the King
more then all the rest had done. For then he perceived plainly, that Becket
intended thereby to express; That those Laws tended to the dishonor of
Almighty God: and that therefore he had a purpose no longer to obey them
(notwithstanding he should subscribe and swear) then he should please. Beckets
proud resolution.
But Becket told him proudly and plainly, That he feared none but God: and
that (since those his Laws were derogatorie to the ancient customs, and
privileges of the Church, and robbed God of his honor) the King (in seeking
to establish them) should not have his own will whilst he lived.

The King, failing of his purpose, returned into England; and not long after,
two Legates came to him from Rome, Two Legates sent to interdict the king.
to interdict him from coming to the Church, until he had in all things
whatsoever restored Becket, according to the Popes commands. High displeasure
transported the King into Normandy: where he conferred again with Becket, but
found him still the selfsame man. He sayleth into Normandy, but finds no
alteration in Becket.

The King is pleased that Becket shall return into England. The King would
feign have Becket dispatched.


And being desirous to set an end of those troubles: he gave him way, and
consented to his return; and came again into England. And not long after
Becket followed the King. But the King muttringly repined, that among all such
as he had advanced, there was not one who would endeavor to rid him of so
dangerous and malapert an enemy.

He also received a strange welcome of Henry the young king, who exiled him
from his Court, and confined him to his own house in Canterbury: because (in
his absence) the king in his Parliament desiring that his said son should be
crowned King, the Bishop of London, and three other Bishops (upon the kings
commandment) had performed those ceremonial Solemnities, and were suspended
by Becket, because they presumed so to do without his leave; and could not be
absolved by Becket, although he had been entreated therein by both those kings.

And within four days after, Becket (by four graceless malefactors) was
wickedly murdered in his own Church: Thomas Becket murdered.
whereof the king was accused by the Pope; but he denied it upon his oath. The
King accused.
Yet in regard of his former muttering speeches (which by all conjecture
hastened his end) the king submitted himself to the Popes Censure: The Kings
Penance.
Who enjoined him to war three years in person in the Holy Land; which he
redeemed by erecting three Houses of Religion. He was also enjoined to go from
London to Canterbury barefooted, to visit Beckets Shryne: which he did; and
suffered himself to be scourged with rods by every Monk there. He is
whipped.
And thus the king had a bad end of all those Troubles.

THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD THE FIRST.
RICHARD, the eldest son living of Henry the second (being in Normandy when
his Father died) succeeded in his Throne. And (because those Countries wanted
settlement, and required a longer time of his presence) above all other things
he was most careful for the enlargement of Queen Elianor his Mother: A good
son but an evil husband.
who by her deceased husband was committed to strait Imprisonment, because she
loathed, and would not endure, his lascivious course of living with his wanton
Rosamond; but sharply reproved him for the same. And because she was every
way virtuous, discreet, and wise; Queen Elianor is made Regent of England.
he committed the whole Government of this Realm, in his absence, to her
care. And (because her own Experience had informed her, what anguish and what
sorrow poor helpelesse Captives did endure) she set at liberty all such as
were imprisoned for ordinary offenses, Non ignara ma^i, miseris succur^ete
discit.
or for small Debts, which her self did pay: and administered the Commonweals
affairs with great Moderation, Integrity, and Justice, until her son the
king came home, and was with all Solemnity and strange Triumphs anointed and
crowned king.

This king (imitating the mild disposition of his mother; and commiserating
the troubles of such as were afflicted) freed out of every Prison all such as
were his Debtors, A merciful King.
or were enthralled for any transgression which concerned himself; and whom,
without injustice done to others, he might acquit. And in the whole course of
his Government he so provided, that Justice with Mercy should be extended unto
all.

Too much honor elateth.
He heaped many Honors and profitable Promotions upon his brother John, whom
he created Earl of Lancaster, and gave unto him the Provinces of Nottingham,
Devonshire, and Cornwall: and married him to the sole and only Daughter and
Heir of the Earl of Gloucester; from whom he received the Lordship of that
Country.

These great and kind favors required, that he should be thankful. But
oftentimes it happens, that as the addition of too much Oil extinguisheth
the Lamp, which otherwise would burn, and yield her light; and as the
ouer-abundance of too much water, falling upon a Wheel, makes it the less
serviceable for the use to which it is employed: So the conferring of too much
Honor, and of too many Titles of Dignity, upon such as are not capable of
them all, alters and changes their mild and gentle dispositions, and makes
them altogether unthankful for those benefits which they have received. And
oftentimes they are incited and provoked thereby to affect things of higher
consequence and moment than are fitting; and to conjecture, that the greatest
fortunes are most agreeable to their Estates. So that they never cease to
attempt great things: which in the end will rather be hurtful to them, than
do them any good.

An unthankful brother.
This proved true betwixt the king and his brother John. For when the king had
powered on him plentiful showers of his bounty and great abundance; and had
advanced him in Honor, and in Estate, above all others: his thoughts mounted
above the Moon, and made him unnaturally and unthankfully to affect the
Crown; and to boast, That his endowments were sufficient, and fitting for a
king. And though he wanted opportunity, yet he resolved to push hard for the
Crown, if Time and Fortune would present it to him.

This king (for his invincible valor, and haughty courage) was esteemed to be
almost matchless in the Christian world: so that he was surnamed Cuer de Lion,
Cuer de Lion.
or the Lions Heart. And (to say the truth) he was such a one, as (upon good
advice and counsel) dared to attempt any thing, if it were honorable to be
achieved, and possible to be done.

His fathers Treasure enriched him exceedingly with great store of Silver and
of Gold. And such was his contempt of Riches, A bountiful King.
and such was his Bounty to such, as either deserved well, or left in him any
impression of Noble worth, that he bestowed on them great Gifts with such
alacrity and cheerfulness, that in short time he vnbowelled all his Bags
and Chests; little foreseeing, that future Businesses might require the expense
of more than the great Plenty which was left unto him: and that (when he
wanted) he should be enforced to make hard shift to relieve himself.

In the beginning of his Reign, The King resolves to war in the Holy Land
upon the Popes motion
the Pope solicited him with strong persuasions, and many promises of his
Blessings, to wage War in his own person against the Turks in the Holy
Land; and to attempt the winning of Jerusalem from the Infidels and unbelieving
Men: who maliciously opposed themselves against the Incarnation, Passion, and
Ascension of Christ Jesus. Which journey he undertook, because Frederick the
Emperor, Frederick, Philip, Leopold.
and Philip the second, surnamed Augustus, king of France, Leopoldus then
Archduke of Austria, and many other Christian Princes, had engaged themselves
(both with Men, Money, and all other Provisions) to further those Attempts. And
thereupon he entered into Covenants with the king of France, and the rest of
that Union, Their Covenants and Agreements.
That their general meeting should be in Sicilia: and that such Wealth and
Booty, as GOD and good Fortune should make them Owners of, should equally be
shared and divided among them and theirs.

These things being thus concluded (although the kings profuse Expenses, and
great Gifts exceeding measure, had made him bare and needy) yet would he not
burden his People with any Tax to supply his wants. The King in his wants
would not tax his people.
But raising great sums of Money out of his own Estate; among other things,
he sold his Castles of Barwick and of Rokesbrough to the king of Scots for
ten thousand pounds: and the Lordship and Earldom of Durham unto Hugh then
Bishop of that See, for much money. He leuieth money of his own State.
He also enriched himself with Silver and with Gold, by the Sale of sundry
Honors, Lordships, Manors, Offices, Privileges, Royalties, and other things,
unto such as parsimonie and sparing had made Owners and Possessors of great
plenty; and did protest, His willingness to undertake this voyage.
That (for the performing of so great and honorable a Service) he was not
unwilling to sell his City of London, if any were of ability to buy it,
rather than he would be chargeable unto others.

And thus the king having furnished himself with all provisions fit and
necessary for his journey; and having levied a strong Army, in which were
many Lords, William Longchamp made Regent of England.
Knights, and Gentlemen, whose resolutions increased his hopes of good
success: he committed the principal Government of his Kingdom unto William
Longchampe, then Bishop of Ely; who (not long after) was made the Popes Legate.
The King departs.
And then he sailed with his whole Army to the Isle of Cyprus: which (with
brave courage) after many hot and dangerous Encounters, he won; and sold
the same to the Knights Templars for thirty thousand Marks. He winnes Cyprus:
and sells it for 30000 marks


And from thence (according to his former appointment) he transported his Army
into Sicilia; where he met with Philip the French king: and upon their first
enter-view, they pleased each other with many passages of familiarity and of
love. But this fair Sunshine was quickly vayled and covered with a cloud of
skorne and coffeehouse. A jar between the King and Philip King of France.
For when the French king was denied to have any part or share with king
Richard in his atchieuement of the Isle of Cyprus (both because he was absent
when it was taken; and also because it was affirmed by king Richard, That their
Covenant extended only to such things, as they should win and gain in the
Holy Land) he waxed angry, and used many high and disdainefull terms, and
made public show of inward discontent. King Richard neglected the French Kings
anger.
All which king Richard did set at naught; and told him to his face, That do
what he dared, he should not be a partner in that Booty.

It stood not with king Philips honor, to wax cold so soon in this great
Enterprise, whereon the eyes of all the Christian World were fixed; and
dastardly to return home. But howsoever he had disposed of himself, and of
such Forces as he commanded, yet king Richard was resolved to go forth; so
that (Necessity enforcing them to some agreement) they proceeded in their
Journey. The Christian Princes do prevail.
In which, they all, and their Confederates, performed many honorable and
wonderful deeds of Arms; terrifying and daily diminishing the Turks Numbers
and Forces with continual slaughters, and giving them but little leisure, or
courage to resist.

And (among many other strong Towns, Forts, Castles, and Garrisons of great
strength and importance, which they conquered) they won (after a long and a
sharp Siege) by maine Batteries and resolute Assaults, Acon w^on.
the stoutly defended City of Acon: Upon the walls whereof a forward knight
advanced the Banner and the Colors of Leopold the Archduke of Austria. King
Richard trampleth on Leopolds colors.
But king Richard, skorning that too much Grace and Honor should be done unto
the Duke, and his own deserts be thereby blemished, he having first of all
entered into the City, ran up unto the Wall; plucked down that Banner, and
those colors; and trampled them with his feet: Whereat the French King was
much displeased, and gave his tongue liberty to speak great things. The
French King is angry.
But King Richard (neglecting his frowns; and laughing at his discontent)
affirmed, that in so doing he had only righted himself of those Injuries
which were done to him: And that, if any were disposed to look sower thereat,
he was careless of his anger, King Richards courage.
and in the field would be ready to maintain his doings against any.

The French King swelling at the heart, to see King Richard thus careless,
resolute, and bold: The forces of the Empire and of the French King and of
Leopold, do leave K. Richard.
And seeming to distrust least by some secret league, or other compact, betwixt
King Richard and the Turks, some danger might assail him and his followers,
He took an unkind leave, and carrying away with him all such troops as
belonged to the Emperor, to Leopold, and to himself, he left the King of
England, and returned home.

This his departure discomforted not King Richard: But with his own
Soldiers, King Richard prevails.
and with the forces of some other Christian Princes, who submitted themselves
to his direction and Government, he persisted in those Wars, and prosecuted
his attempts with such constancy, and heroical magnanimity, that he
prevailed, and became Victorious, when the greatest dangers assaulted him most
to make him fear. And (among many other things which boldly he attempted) he
returned unto the I Will of Cyprus; He wins Cyprus again
and by force he valiantly won it from the Knights Templers, unto whom he
had formerly sold it, and then exchanged it for the City of Jerusalem, with
Guy of Lesingham the last Christian King; who held, and did possess it. By
means whereof, He is styled King of Iaerusalem.
King Richard was styled King of Jerusalem; and so were many of his successors
long after.

Thus while he became victorious, England is badly Governed.
and daily triumphed over the Turks miseries; his Kingdom of England was
badly Governed at home by the Bishop of Ely; to whom he had committed the
charge thereof. For he (being the Grandchild of a Ploughman, and the son of
a Cow-heard in the North: Asperius nihil est humili. quam surgere in altu^.
and being advanced to that Bishoppricke, and made Lord Chancellor of England;
Legate to the Pope; and Protector of all this Realm) tyrannized, as himself
listed, over all sorts of people; Exercised on them strange and unusual
oppressions, both in the Church, A beggar on horseback will ride.
and also in the Commonweal; and was so infinitely ambitious and so proud,
that he would never ride abroad for his pastime, and for his recreation, except
he were attended and waited on by a thousand horse, and more; and was served
by the sons of the greatest Nobles in this Land, unto whom he gave in
marriage, with some portions, diverse of his base and rusticke kin. The
ambitious Bishops fall.
But at length he grew to be so contemptible, loathsome and vile, in all the
peoples eyes, that (fearing what would be the sequel of his unlimited
insolency and pride,) He resolved to forsake this Kingdom. And coming (for
that purpose) into Dover, He disguiseth himself, and is dragged on the Sands.
disguised in the habit of a woman, and having under his arm a piece of
Country-cloth, which he offered to the sale, he was descried and discovered,
and by the common people was furiously and shamefully dragged and drawn upon
the Sands, and was afterward sent unto London: where the Lords and greatest
Nobles committed him to the Tower; in which he remained until the kings
return, He is restored.
and then he was restored both to his liberty and Offices. But shortly after,
as he traveled toward Rome, he died; He dies.
whereat much joy was conceived generally by the Englishmen.

Of these Affairs, and of his evil Government, king Richard was informed in
the Holy Land: as also of the great coffeehouse of his brother John, The
causes which hastened king Richards return.
for that the Bishop of Ely, and not himself, was (in the kings absence) made
Governor of this kingdom: and how that he had seized many of the kings
Towns, Forts, and Castles, into his hands; and only wanted the peoples favor
to make himself a king.

He likewise was informed, what Sallyes, Inrodes, and Invasions, the French
king (after his return home) had made in Normandy, thereby to revenge
himself of those pretended injuries and wrongs, which he supposed he had
received from king Richard in the Holy Land.

These Tidings thus concurring, and the good desire which king Richard had to
prevent the ruin of his own Estate; enforced him (when he possessed the
greatest hopes of Conquest) to conclude a peace with the Turks for three
years. King Richard saves his life by swimming. He is taken prisoner, and
sold to the Emperor Henry the sixth.

He is ransomed.

He reuengeth his injuries upon the French king.


But in his return, he was (by the violence of a raging storm) compelled
after a dangerous shipwreck to save his life by Swimming, near unto Histria;
which lies between Aquileia and Venice: and coming to the Territories of
Leopold in Austria, he was taken prisoner; and by him sold to the Emperor
Henry the sixth, the son of Frederick, for threescore thousand Marks; who
(taking of him good security for his Ransom, assessed unto one hundred
thousand pounds) did set him at liberty: So that with speedy journeyes he
poasted until be came into Normandy; where he raised a strong Army, and
marched furiously into France, and revenged himself soundly of all such
injuries and wrongs, as in his absence were done unto him by the French king.
And then he reduced to his subjection all such Peers in Normandy, as by the
Frenchmen, in his absence, had been taken from him.

Thus whilst the King was busied abroad; his brother John, Duke John
submits himself to the King his brother, and is pardoned.
Earl of Lancaster, repaired to him, and not only submitted himself to his
grace and mercy, but voluntarily surrendered to him all such Forts and Castles
as he had seized into his hands: excusing himself, as being provoked and
enforced to disloyalty by the extraordinary pride and insolent behavior of
William Longchampe Bishop of Ely; who unworthily had disordered the government
of the whole Realm. Upon which submission, and his contrition for his offense,
he obtained not only the kings pardon, but also his especial grace and favor.

Then did they both come into England: He uses unjust means to pay his Debts
and Ransom.
where the king (to make payment of his Ransom) ransacked the Treasures of
diverse Religious Houses, and grievously taxed the People; and summoned his High
Court of Parliament, in which he caused himself to be again crowned King. He
is crowned anew.
And to augment his own Estate, he resumed into his hands all such Honors,
Lordships, Manors, Castles, Offices, and Privileges, He resumeth the Lands
which he sold, and pays nothing for them.
as he had formerly sold to his own subjects for his supplies; and enforced
the Buyers to content themselves with such profits thereof, as they had taken.
Then fourscore thousand pounds of his Ransom were paid: Leopold is accused,
and releaseth part of the Kings Ransom.
but the residue was discharged by Leopold; who was accursed by Pope Innocent
the third, for that he had injuriously made king Richard a prisoner, in his
return from his Wars in the Holy Land.

Then the king raised a new Army, and transported it into France; and from
that time forward he ceased not (with variable success) to war with the
French king: until at length taking a private view of the besieged Castle of
Chalons, near to Lymoys, The King warreth in France.
he was descried by a common souldior; who so grievously wounded him with an
arrow, that within three days after he died, when he had reigned almost nine
years; and was buried at Founteuerard in France at his fathers feet. He is
slain.


After he was wounded, as is before mentioned, he won the Castle by
terrible assaults, and caused all such as he found therein to be slain; except
the malefactor: who being demanded by him how he dared to shoot unto the person
of a king, made answer, That in those Wars he had lost his father, and his
brother, Vltio Diuina.
and that he was exceeding glad that fortune had so assisted him in his
revenge. Then when he expected nothing but a present terrible death, The King
pardons him who slew him.
the king gave him his pardon; and caused him to be safely conducted out of his
Army.

In the beginning of this Kings Reign, certain Out-lawes, to the number of
one hundred and more, being resolved and desperate men (whose chiefest leaders
were named Robin Hood and Little John) robbed and spoiled in diverse places of
this Land. Robin Hood and Little John.
They neither hurted, nor much wronged any, except they would run themselves
into danger by resistance. They attempted against none, Honest Thieves.
but against such, as being rich, gained by usury; or gave no entertainment
by good Hospitality to their Neighbors, and to the poor. They spared all
women, and were bountiful benefactors to such as stood in need. Thus they
continued diverse months; until their chiefest Leader Robin Hood, by means of
a sharp sickness (being let blood, and being betrayed) bled himself to
death. And then the whole Rout of this theeuish Company was dispersed, and the
Malefactors secretly repaired home to their own houses.

THE HISTORY OF KING JOHN.
JOHN PLANTAGENET (Earl of Lancaster in his own Right, and Earl of Gloucester
in the right of his wife; and being the youngest son of King Henry the
second) succeeded, and was crowned king: albeit that Arthur Plantagenet his
nephew, Arthur Plantagenet was lawful heir.
and son to Geoffrey his elder brother, was then living. The whole course of
this Kings Government was accompanied with continual troubles: and his two
Persecutors were Pope Innocent the third; The Kings two persecutors.
and Philip the second, then King of France.

The French King feared the greatness of Englands strength, and the
prosperity of this Kingdom was hurtful unto his eyes: The French king takes
part with Arthur against King John.
and glad he was, if (at any time) the least occasion would offer him some
service to further his designs against King John. For proof hereof, he
protested a world of love to the said Arthur; informed him of his Title to the
Crown of England, and of his undoubted right to the Duchies of Normandy, and
of Britain; animated him to raise his spirits, and to advance his courage to
win them all. If he were destitute of Friends, which might advise and
counsel him; he and his Nobles would supply that want: if he stood in need of
Silver and of Gold, to feed and to nourish the great body of that War; he
should be supplied with sufficient store: And if he would have valiant men to
fight for him, and for those his Rights, he would supply him with many
thousands, who should adventure to spend their best blood in his Quarrels.

These large and friendly proffers (which indeed proceeded rather from a
jealousy which the French King had of himself, by reason of King John's
Greatness, than from any inward affection or hearty love which he bare unto
Arthur, the lawful and the rightful Heir of this Crown) and the longing
desire which made this young Gallant hopeful of those great atchieuements;
persuaded him very easily, not only to accept of the French Kings friendship,
but also to use his aid. So that partly by the help of the Normans, and
partly by the French Kings means, Arthur Plantagenet leuieth an army.
he levied a puissant Army; and won diverse places both of Worth and of
Strength in Normandy. But the Kings Lieutenant, and his other Agents in that
Duchy, defended themselves valiantly, persisted in their Duties, and fought it
out diverse times; King John goes into Normandy with an Army.
until King John himself came into that Country with a strong Army, and
fought many cruel Battles with his Nephew.

But oftentimes it falls out, that by War (which is the enemy of Peace)
Peace it self is procured. For when those two Princes had exchanged store of
blows, and when their Armies had made havoc each of other; and death had
drenched her self in their blood: they entered into certain Capitulations for
Peace; A peace is concluded.
which, for a short time, gave them some respit of breathing. But the same was
again interrupted by Philip the French King; The peace is broken by the French
kings means.
who promised Arthur a doubling of his strength, and fed him with much
assurance of prosperous success; and made him confident to renew those Wars.
And hereupon the French King carried a fair Army into Normandy; with which
he spoiled, ransacked, and depopulated many places in that Duchy.

But King John (who wanted nothing but money to encounter with so perverse an
enemy) was warned by his Lords, Gentlemen, and the inferior sort of his
common people, That shame would wait upon him for his neglect, in suffering his
Honor to be trampled on, and his Territories in such sort, without blows, to
be taken from him. And (to whet the dull edge of his courage, The Englishmens
forwardness to buckle with the French.
dejected by reason of his wants) they voluntarily and freely granted him a
large Tax to support his necessity: and every lusty Ladde boldly proffered
his service, to buckle strongly with the French.

By these means King John was quickly furnished and strengthened both with
Money and with Men; King John passes into N^rmandie the second time with an
Army.
and with a strong Army he landed in the Duchy of Normandy: where his
numbers were every day augmented, by the repair of many thousands, who were
well appointed, and did resolve with him to expect the same lot and the same
fortune. And not long after, the two Armies met, and fought together with such
desperate boldness, The two Armies fight.
that each of them took pleasure to give blows, wounds, death. Each of them
rejoiced in the ruin of the other; and those solemn spectacles of sorrow
which would have made others sad, gave them occasion of much mirth.

But things which are violent cannot long endure. This fearful storm must
be changed into a pleasant calm. The Frenchmen fly.
And so it was. For the Frenchmen were discouraged, and fled; and Arthur, the
Kings Nephew, and the rightful Heir unto his Crown, Arthur is sent prisoner
to Roan. He is drowned. This War ended.
was taken prisoner, and sent to the Castle of Roan: where (leaping from the
walls with an intent to escape) he was drowned in the Ditch. And thus ended his
Life, his Title, and those Wars.

But the next year following, the French King himself, pretending Title to
the said Duchy of Normandy, raised an exceeding great power; and so
suddenly, and with such fury, The French King suddenly w^^^eth all Normandy.
did invade it, that (wanting present means of resistance) the whole Duchy
(to prevent utter desolation and ruin) yielded, and subjected it self to the
French king.

And now began the Kings other Enemy, The quarrel b^tw^xt the King and the
Pope.
Pope Innocent the third, to play his part, and to vex him more dangerously
than Philip of France had done. And the occasion which he entertained to effect
his purpose, was this.

Hubert, the Archbishop of Canterbury, died: and the Monks of Saint
Augustines in that City (without the kings License, or knowledge and about
midnight) elected Raynold (a brother of their own) to succeed him; and took
of him an Oath forthwith to travail unto Rome, and there to procure his
inuesture, and to receive his P^l^ from the Pope.

The king being thereof informed by manifest shows, made known his inward
dislike of those their unadvised doings: So that (upon his motion, and to
appease his wrath) they newly elected John Gray, who was then Bishop of
Norwich. And incontinently, the king (upon his own charge) sent Letters and
Ambassadors unto the Pope, entreating him to ratify his last choice.

But in the mean time a new Schism or Faction did appear. For the Suffragan
(because he was not made acquainted, nor an actor in either of the said two
Elections) made suit to the Pope to displace them both. Popes do seldom or
never grant to any Kings their reasonable requests.
But the Pope (imitating the proud example of his Predecessors, who coueted to
swim against the Stream, and seldom, or never, granted any kings request,
least they should in some sort be thought to be yielding) neglected the kings
entreatie, and confirmed him that was chosen first. The king stormed because he
was so slenderly regarded. And diverse of those Monks (to please the king)
refused to receive him that was by the Pope confirmed; contesting against their
own choice, because it was made in the night, and not in the open day. But the
rest affirmed, That such a choice was not merely void, and in it self a
Nullitie; but remained good, until by Judicial proceedings, and by a
Sentence, it were pronounced to be void.

At length, this question and this doubt was controuerted and disputed on in
Rome: and thereupon, the Pope (making a colorable show to content the King, to
please the Monks, and to end this Schism; but indeed to prefer Stephen
Langton, the Cardinal of Chrisogone, to that Dignity) advised the said Monks
to elect the said Stephen.

Stephen Langton is chosen Archbishop of Canterbury on the Popes motion, and
against the commandment of the King.
The King perceiving well what was intended and meant thereby; required the said
Monks not to proceed to the said Election, nor to deal any further in that
business. But very undutifully they neglected to content, or to obey the
King; and with them the Papal Commandment took place: and Stephen Langton (a
man plyant to the Popes humor) was elected Archbishop of Canterbury.

This later choice so sharply exasperated the king, that by his Letters to the
Pope he protested plainly, That from thenceforth he would take a strict
account of all such of his subjects whatsoever, as for any matters concerning
Right, or Justice, should be gadding unto Rome. The King forbids Appeals to
Rome.
And did allege, That he had Bishops, Prelates, Nobles, and Magistrates of his
own, who could and should (according to the Laws and Customs of his
Kingdom) decide and determine all Controversies and Doubts, which should arise
either in the Church, or in the Commonweal. And that he would rather expose
himself to a thousand deaths, then basely (as he was required) make himself
and his Kingdom servile and subject to the Popes insolent and peremptory
Commands.

The Pope (according to his custom and fashion) not only answered prowdly,
The Popes proud and peremptory answer. Four Bishops authorized to interdict
the King.
That the Election of the Cardinal should stand: but required the King, to
give him the quiet possession of his See; to recall such Monks from banishment
as he had exild; and to restore to them their goods, on which he had seized by
reason of their last choice: and did authorize four Bishops within this Land,
to interdict and to curse the King, and his Realm, if he refused to do as by
the Pope he was enjoined.

The King (perceiving that those four Bishops were much elated by reason of
their new authority: and that they thought the time to be long, ere the King
had replied and signified his intent and resolution) seized upon their lands
and goods; The King seizes on the four Bishops lands and goods.
and did proclaim, That he resolved to take the like course with all such, as
received any Promotions, Inuestitures, or Ecclesiastical degrees, from the said
Cardinal; or went unto Rome upon any occasion without his license, or did
appeal for any cause thither; or did attempt to put in execution any command
from the Pope, within his Kingdom.

The Pope (being advertised hereof) sent into England his two Legates,
Pandulphus and Durant (men of proud spirits, and prone to put in practice al
things as they should be required) These two persuaded the King to be
reconciled to Stephen Langton; The Popes Legates curse the King and his ayders.
to the four Bishops; and to the Prior and the Monks of his Covent of S.
Austins; and to restore to them their Places, Lands, and Goods, that peace, and
amity, by means of his so doing, might be renewed betwixt the Pope and him.
The King (fearing to be accursed, and being desirous to prevent future
inconveniences) yielded, and promised to perform all whatsoever was required,
except it were to allow the said Election of the said Cardinal: and protested
faithfully, That if another might be chosen, he then would with all speed and
expedition, prefer him to some other Bishoprique, or better place of Dignity
within his Realm. But the two Legates (in steed of gratifying the Kings
request) pronounced the Popes curse; not only against him, but also against all
such as gave him attendance, or things necessary; or kept him company. They
likewise absolved all his subjects from their oaths, duty, and service
toward him, and required all Christian Princes to make war upon him, as
upon the arch and grand enemy of the Church of God. This Kingdom is given to
the French King.
The Pope also pronounced and published against him his sentence of
deprivation, and gave his Crown and his Kingdom to Philip the French King, if
by any secret plot, or open violence and hostility, he could expel or murder
him.

These were the fruits of this unholy holy Father, the Popes Religion and
Government. And this usurping arrogancy was a badge of his insufferable pride:
in that he presumed to do what no earthly creature can do, nor what a Christian
ought to attempt to do, against the Anointed of God; and against such a one,
as the Almighty has placed in a Kingdom to govern and to rule his people.
The King confronteth the Pope and his Legates.
The King was not (as yet) terrified with this Thunder, but was in good hope
that all those Fulminations would quickly flash, and as soon vanish away, as
the Lightning does. And being thoroughly resolved to confront the Pope, and his
busy Legates, in contemning them and their greatest power, He takes an oath of
his people.
he took a solemn oath of his Subjects for his defense, and their faithful
service. And then with a strong Army he entered into Scotland, against King
Alexander the second, because he had received, supported, and maintained diverse
of his Clergy, He carries an Army into Scotland.
and others: who (adhering to the Pope, and magnifying his usurped authority
within this kingdom) had forsaken the King; and (as Rebels, and Out-lawes)
fled unto him for succor. The Scots submit themselves.
But the Scottish King (perceiving that Fire and Sword gaped greedily to devour
both him and his Country) submitted himself (with great humility and
reverence) to king John; and without further trouble, he was reconciled to his
Grace and Favor.

The French king, hoping and endeavoring to possess himself of the Popes gift
(which was not his to give) and gladding his own heart that now he had gotten
some color to war in England upon king John; The French King prepares for
England.
provided a great Army to invade this Realm. But by the wisdom, valor, and
circumspection of the king, and by Gods assistance, Three hundred of his Ships
are taken.
three hundred of his Ships (being laden with Corn, Victuals, and other
requisits for the war) were surprised, and by means thereof king Philip was
at that time robbed of his vain hope.

King John faints.
The Pope (notwithstanding) ceased not, but ever and anon he accursed the king
again, and again: insomuch that he feared, lest utter ruin and his overthrow
did attend him. Wherefore (suddenly, He asks pardon, and resigneth his kingdom
to the Pope.
without the consent of his Nobles, or advice of his Council of Estate) upon
his knees, before Pandulphus the Legate, he confessed his disobedience to the
Pope; craved Pardon; and (by a public Instrument in writing under his hand
and seal) he resigned his Crown and his kingdom, to the Pope: which
Pandulphus kept the space of four days to the Popes use. The Pope regranteth.
And then he gave the Kingdom and the Crown again to King John, and to his
heirs; reserving a Tenure thereof to the Church of Rome, with an yearly
tribute of one thousand marks.

This base submission and subjection of his, The King is despised and forsaken.
so alienated from him the dear affection of diverse of his Nobles, and men
best skilled in Chivalry, that they revolted from his service, and fled unto
his enemy the French King; whose head was building of Castles in the air, and
who made new and large preparations and provisions, to make Jews his son the
sole King and Monarch of this Kingdom. And when all things were in a
readiness, Prince Jews of France inuadeth.
the young Prince with a strong Army came into England, and was oftentimes
encountered with sharp blows, but yet he did much harm. And the Pope (being
by his Legates informed in what case King John and his Realm stood) required
the French King, and Prince Jews his son, and all others who adhered to
their part, of what estate or condition soever they were, forthwith to desist
and cease from all hostility and war; because both King John and his
kingdom, were reconciled to his favor, and to the Church, and the Crown of
his Realm was holden of the Sea of Rome: Contention between the Pope and the
French King.
So that (by conscience, and by the laws of God and of Men) he ought to be
protected and defended by him, and by his authority and power. But the French
refused to obey; affirming, That no king (without the free consent of his
Nobles, Prelates, and common people) could give unto any other his kingdom, nor
the protection of his Subjects, which were committed to him by God; and
consequently, The Pope curses.
that this kingdom was not holden of the Church of Rome, nor ought to be
defended or protected by her. This answer so startled the Pope (whose will may
not willingly meet with the least resistance) that incontinently he sent Guallo
the Cardinal of St. Martins, into this Realm: who accursed Philip the French
king, and Prince Jews his son, and such of the English Nobility as took
part with them, and all their Accomplices and adherents.

The wiser sort among them little respected what was done by the said
Cardinal: but the common people, The effects of the said curs.
and the ordinary degree of Soldiers (whose devotions more depended upon
fear, then upon their knowledge) were so amazed and daunted with those sharp
and sudden curses, that (leaving their Leaders, and the Field) they returned
home to their houses, and to their Ships. Robbery, stealth, and oppression.
And the poor Natives of this Realm (knowing that diverse great Lords were
under the censure of this curse) entered into their houses, fields, and
grounds, robbing and spoiling, and bearing and driving away, whatsoever they
could find and take: they being so far off from doubting or disputing with
their own consciences, whether therein they did well or no, Popish blindness.
that they supposed their so doing tended immediately to the glory of Almighty
God, and that their stealths and Robberies were meritorious and pleasing in his
sight.

The revolted Lords are distressed.
By these means, those Lords and Nobles were much perplexed and pinched with
great distress, and were likely to be starued to death; because they wanted
all necessaries belonging unto life, and knew not how to relieve their own
wants. Neither durst any other (by reason of those Curses, and of their
Treasons) to relieve them: They submit them elues.
So that at length (when all friends, and when all other remedies did fail)
Necessity (which is the most imperious Commander of all those, over whom she
tyrannizeth) enforced them to prostrate themselves at the Kings feet; to
confess their undutiful revolt; and to crave his pardon.

They are pardoned and received into favor.
The King (who by nature was gracious, and full of pity; and being more willing
to forgive than to punish such, as in the highest measure had offended him,
albeit he had, by their assistance given to his enemies, been oppressed with
infinite miseries, and had found more fidelity and service in strangers borne,
than in those his own subjects) in mild and in gentle sort accepted of their
submission, pardoned their transgressions, and restored them to their Honors,
and to their Lands.

Peace.
And by these means this Realm was disburthened of the French Nation; and a
quiet peace began to salute the King and his people: who now found some leisure
to look up, and to refresh themselves; as Fishes do in a fair calm, after
they have been tumbled and tossed in the Waters by an unquiet Storm.

1212. The Council of Lateran.
The Pope intending to make these his proceedings with King John in England, a
president unto other Princes) assembled a general Council at Lateran: wherein
he published them all at large, together with the said kings Grant of his
Kingdom to the Pope, Princes excommunicated, and their Provinces and Kingdoms
interdicted.
and his said regrant, and the Tenure thereof to be of the Church of Rome. And
in the same Council, Otho the Emperor, Peter king of Arragon, and Raymond
Earl of Toulouse, and diverse other Princes, were excommunicated: and others
were interdicted, together with their Kingdoms and their Provinces (for
Heresy, as it was pretended. A Popish Policy.
) But the certain scope of this crafty and cunning packing tended to none
other end, than only to make temporal Princes subject to the Popes
correction; and consequently to enrich himself and his successors, Auricular
Confession. Transubstantiation. Damnation.
with their spoil. In the same Council also, Auricular Confession, and
Transubstantiation were established and decreed: and therein it was enacted,
That such as spoke evil of the Pope should be damned in Hell; and that no man
should be Emperor, Emperor.
until he had sworn his Homage to the Pope, and had received his Crown from
him.

And thus all these troubles (having had from the fourth year of King John's
Reign as long a continuance as the Trojan Wars) were at last ended. Peace
after ten years war.
But the Clergy would in no sort be heartily reconciled to the King. For such
was their secret grudge and spleen toward him, that (under the color of much
service and duty) as he lay in the Abbey of Swansteede, not far from
Lincoln) he was poisoned by a Monk of the Order of Saint Bernard: who, to
make his match sure, King John is poisoned.
and to avoid jealousy and suspicion, first drank unto the King, and poisoned
himself for company. And thus died King John, when he had reigned above
seu^nteene years; and lies buried at Winchester.

In the seventh year of his Reign he transported a puissant army of valiant
men of arms, and common soldiers, 1205.
into Ireland: Ireland.
and with great resolution and courage he reduced that Nation to their former
obedience; from which (with insolent obstinacy) they had revolted.

And in the ninth year, by a new Charter, 1208. A Mayor in London.
he enabled the Citizens of London to make their annual choice of a Mayor,
and of two Shirifes, for the better Government of that City.

And the year following, London Bridge.
the Bridge of Stone was there built over the River of Thames.

This King was very wise, politic, and wonderful valiant: 1209.
not to be subdued but by Death; A descripti^n of King John
nor wearied with any Travail; nor would be discouraged with more than
ordinary Dangers. He fought many successful Battles both at home and
abroad; yet was he not always fortunate. For by means of the Popes
quarrellings, Philip of France won from him the greatest part, yea almost his
whole Duchy of Normandy, and vexed him exceedingly at home in his own
Kingdom. He was liberally bountiful and benign to all Strangers; but
sparing in his gifts to his own subjects. And some reason he had to be the
more close-handed toward them, because the most of them (better loving France
than their own Country, and caring more for the French King than for him, who
was their Sovereign Lord and Master) gave him little stomach and courage to
advance them; as otherwise (no doubt) he would have longed and desired to have
done.

He left behind him four sons; viz. Henry who succeeded him; Richard, who
was elected King of the Romans; William of Valentia; and Guido Disnay: and
three daughters; viz. Isabell, married to Frederick the Emperor; the second,
to William Marshall Earl of Worcester; and the third, to the Earl of
Leicester.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE THIRD.
AFTER the death of King John, Henry his son (being of the age of nine
years) was crowned King: and the Protection of him, A Protector.
and of this Realm, was committed to the Earl of Gloucester: who having
married one of the Kings aunts, and being well learned, politic, and wise;
temperate, and valiant; administered the Laws and Justice uprightly to the
people.

So deep an impression had confidence made in the hearts of Philip of France,
and of Prince Lewis his eldest son, The French King again inuadeth England.
that the Kings Minority, Traitorous friends, and their own good fortune,
would make them the Sovereign Lords of this kingdom; that no former
Commandments, or Curses from the Pope, prevailed, to make them utterly to
abandon and to forsake this kingdom. For their Hopes fed them with this
conceit, that their new repair hither, and the daily disturbance and trouble,
which by their means should vnjoynt the Peace, and the good Government of this
Commonweal, would and (in the end) should shake it with a continual fever;
and make it hopeless of all recovery or relief, saving only by their
means. And upon this Project they landed fresh forces within this Land.

But the new Protector was not idle in his charge. For his Preparations were
expedited with great celeritie and judgment: and (with such forces as he had
levied) he manfully opposed himself against all Encounters of the French, The
Welchmen take part with the French.
and of the Welsh, which obstinately adhered to the French part.

But the best success by Wars (in a distempered and in a mutinous Estate)
gives little cause of boasting to either part. For the slaughter of many
friends and kinsfolk (affoording the Victory) cannot choose but bring with it
a sorrowful remembrance of their untimely end; and beget many wishes, that
(their undutiful Errors having been reformed) they were alive again.

The Pope curses again
Honorius the Pope being truly informed, how obstinately the French and the
Welsh Nations (being assisted with some English) daily warred and spoiled
within this Realm: not only confirmed the authority of Guallo the Legate;
but by him he thundered more sharp and terrible Curses against them all, than
formerly he or his predecessors had done. Whereunto he added new
Excommunications, Deprivations, and other bitter Censures of the Church of Rome.

His curses are not cared for.
Hereupon Prince Lewis, with his confederates, seemed to be peaceful for a
while; and made an outward show, as if he only waited for a fit opportunity
to depart. Yet in the mean time, king Philip his father (with great care and
cost) prepared new Forces for his aid, and shipped them for this Realm. But
Hugh de Burgh (being a man provident, Hugh de Bergh prevails on the sea.
and truly valiant, and being chief Master of the five Ports) having fitted a
strong Fleet of good Ships, and furnished them to the proof with choice
Mariners and expert men of War, encountered them bravely upon the Sea: and
with such hardy blows so fiercely did assail them, that (being altogether
unable to resist him) they submitted themselves, and all their Ships, unto
his mercy.

The French are absolved, and do return.
This noble Exploit (being thus attended by Victory) forthwith drew Prince
Lewis to a mild entreatie of Peace: So that (being absolved by Guallo, and
receiving good sums of money to further his return) he surrendered all such
Forts, Castles, and Towns as he had taken, and with his companies sailed into
France; leaving his English friends (who had supported his Estate and part in
all these Wars) to the censure of the Laws, and to end their miserable days
with sundry executions and strange deaths.

The Commonweal being now suffered to breath, A Parliament.
and having found some leisure to provide fitting medicines to cure such
maladies as distempered her estate, required that a Parliament might be
sommoned, which was granted: King Edwards laws restored.
and in it the ancient Laws of King Edward were reduced and restored to their
former vigor and strength. And the Grand Charter (in those days called Magna
Charta, comprising sundry laws, Magna Charta.
which were both easefull and commodious to the common people) was ratified and
confirmed. And whereas the Wardships of the heirs of such of the Kings tenants
as died, Warships and marriages. Ann. 902. Ann. 1056.
seized of any lands by them holden in Knights service, was granted to King
Edgar during their minorities; and their marriages were afterward granted to
King Edward the Confessor. Those laws (which a long time had lien asleep)
were now revived and awaked; and were restored to their former use. In the same
Parliament also, a voluntary Tax was frankely given to the King: A voluntary
Tax.
partly to discharge such debts as former wars had occasioned, and partly to
levy new forces, to be conducted by Richard the kings brother, for the
recovering of Poyters and of Gascoyne; which of late years (most injuriously,
and with too much violence) had been usurped and taken from King Henry's
predecessors, by the French King.

The Parliament being ended; the said Tax, An Army transported into Gascoyne
etc.
with great celeritie, and without contradiction by any, was soon levied: so
that the Kings Coffers were replenished with silver, and with gold; and all
requisits were carefully provided, and a gallant Army of courageous men of
war were assembled, and safely transported. Richard recouereth Poyters and
Gascoine.
With which, Richard the Kings brother did (almost) wonders; subduing where he
found resistance, and seizing upon Lordships, Towns, Forts, Castles, and other
defenced places, quietly, and without blows, where no head was made against
him. So that within few months (such was his valor and good fortune) he
recovered both those Provinces wholly for the king; and returned with much
honor into England.

But the kings absence from those places, The French King wins Poyters,
Perigot, etc.
ministered opportunity to the French king to be unfriendly, and daily to make
wars, roads, incursions, and invasions into those Provinces, which (without
color of right) he endeavored to subdue. So that he (refusing no advantage,
which might in any sort further his desires) suddenly led a new Army into
Poyters, and quickly made himself the Lord thereof. And then he marched into
Pierigot and Aluerne, and other places in Guian; where he did the like. But
king Henry sent thither another Army, A new Army transported.
with which his brother Richard Earl of Cornwall fought many cruel and sharp
battles; and in the most of them, Fortune assisted him with good success,
and all things afforded him great hopes, A peace is concluded.
that he should recover whatsoever (in his absence) had been lost. But in the
height of all these broils, a friendly peace was concluded betwixt the two
Kings; and Richard returned safely into England.

The causes of dislike betwixt the K. and his Barons.
These troubles being thus ended, and peace gladding the hearts of all such as
had been tired with those wars: unkind iealousies began to breed much
hart-burning, betwixt the King, and his own Barons; for that (as they
conceived) the King reposed little confidence in their faith; neglected their
service and society; and applied himself, and his favors, wholly unto
strangers; whom neither alliance, nor Country, bound to perform any duty
toward him, nor would be found trusty, when the hand of his bounty and
liberality was closed up, The King reconcileth himself to his Barons.
And the King (perceiving their discontent) entered into the secret closet of
his own breast, and took a strict examination of his own dealings. And
finding them to be such, as justly might displease he reformed his error;
removed the causes of those dislikes; and lovingly reconciled himself to his
Nobles.

John Scot Earl of Chester dies.
About this time, John Scot Earl of Chester died, without issue male, having
four daughters and heirs. From them the king resumed into his own hands that
Earledom, and all the Territories belonging thereunto: which he augmented with
large additions of yearly reuennues; and many Regal Privileges, Liberties,
and Honors. And for a recompense and by way of exchange, he gave unto those
Ladies many Honors, Lordships, Castles, and Manors, which exceeded their own
in true value. And having married Prince Edward, Chester and Wales annexed to
the Kings eldest sons.
his son, to Elyanor sister unto the King of Spain: he gave unto him the
Province of Guyan; the Lordship of all Ireland; and created him Earl of
Chester, and Prince of Wales: which two later dignities he then annexed to the
eldest sons of the Kings of this Realm.

The murdering of the King is attempted.
And not long after, a Clerk dwelling in Oxford (counterfeiting a kind of
madness) attempting to murder the King; for which purpose in the depth of the
night, he crept in at the window of the Kings chamber, in which most commonly
he lodged. But (failing of his purpose, because the King lay not then there)
he was taken; examined; confessed his villainy; and by the course of law being
condemned, he was put to a cruel death.

The French King breaks the league.
We have heard before, that a peace was concluded between the Kings of England
and of France; but the French kings were always secretly, or openly, malicious
to the Kings of this Realm; because they had certain Territories and
Provinces in France which bordered on their Countries. And this malice made
them little respective of the sanctity of such solemn Oaths and honest
promises, as (more strongly than bonds of iron) should bind Kings. For no
sooner was any gappe open, into which they might thrust a foot; nor any
opportunity (were it never so little) was offered; but that they threw behind
their backs the remembrance of all Truces, Leagues, and Conuentions of Peace
whatsoever, and made all things to be lawful, which either by sleight, or by
violence, they could enterprise or do. And as common experience oftentimes
made it manifest; so did it now. For about the four and twentieth year of
King Henry's Reign, Lewis the ninth, with a devouring Army, entered into
Guyan, Lewis the ninth inuadeth Guyan.
and spoiled and wasted that Country in all places where he came. And King
Henry (intending their quick relief; and purposing, if he might, to regaine
all Normandy, and such other Provinces as the kings of France unjustly had
detained from him) sailed thither with a puissant Army; King Henry carries
an army thither
and oftentimes bickered with his enemies: against whom sometimes he
prevailed, and at other times had the worser hand. Yet his haughty courage
abandoned all fear; and no perils whatsoever could make him shrink: for in
all those skirmishes he performed stout resolution, and the noble valor of a
worthy king.

But Fortune no further favoring those his endeauours, He steppeth the French
Kings courses, but beats him not back.
than only enabling him to stop the French Kings proceedings; he returned
into England. But shortly before his departure, the French king married his
brother Alphonsus unto the daughter of the Earl of Toulouse; and gave to him
the Earldom of Poytiers, and all king Henry: Territories in Aluerne: and
plotted cunningly to have procured the Earl of March to do him homage for
such Lands as he affirmed he held of the said Earldom of Poytiers. But he
stoutly refused to yield unto him any such duty or service. And this his
denial so enraged the French king, The Earldom of March is invaded by the
French.
that he entered with an Army into the Earldom of March, and daily spoiled it
without sparing.

But king Henry having carefully employed his labors to withstand this
violence; and having raised a fair Army, which himself conducted,
transported it unto Bordeaux. And not far from thence (due preparations on
all parts being made) both the Armies met; in which the blood of the most
valiant men of War was freely sold, and dearly paid for. But in the end,
Fortune extending more favor to the French, King Henry leaves the field.
than to King Henry; he was enforced (with the loss and slaughter of his best
men) to leave the Field.

The Earl of March submits himself
And the Earl of March grieuing at this mishap, and being loath that King Henry
should be engaged in a greater danger; submitted himself, and obtained Peace
on fair conditions with the French King. And then King Henry returned into
England; and married one of his sisters unto Alexander then King of Scots,
because he would the better assure himself of his friendship in time of need.

41. 1256. The Barons War.
And now began those mischievous broils and turmoyles within this Realm; which
(until the kings death) daily, yea almost hourly, vexed and molested him and
his whole kingdom. For the King (of later years) lending too pleasing an ear
to many lewd and evil Officers (whom, above all others, he best loved and
favored; The causes thereof.
and by whose counsel and advice both himself and his whole Estate was guided
and directed) made little account and reckoning of the best of his subjects
love: and took from them (in diverse things) such liberty and freedom, as by
the Laws and Ordinances of this kingdom they justly claymed, and ought to
have enjoyed. He also pinched his people with many unnecessary Impositions
and grievous Taxes; which (by those lewd and bold Officers) were with much
rigor and sharpness levied, to their great dislike.

And the king following their humors, assembled his High Court of Parliament
in Oxford: In which, his designs were altogether crossed: and the prosecution
of businesses was so unfortunate to the whole Estate of this Realm, that (ab
euentu) it was ever after named, Insanum Parliamentum.
Insanum Parliamentum, or the Mad Parliament. For when multitudes of such as
were grieved, swarmed thither, and complained of many injuries and wrongs
which daily did oppress them; the Lords and the Commons (endeavoring to
redress what was amiss) established many things, profitable (as they
intended them) for the Commonweal, but highly derogating from the Prerogative
of the king. The Kings Prerogative crossed.
And to the end that those things which they had so contrived and concluded,
should be inuiolably kept and observed; choice was there made of twelve of the
grauest and most worthy persons of this kingdom (whereof the Earls of
Leicester and of Gloucester were the chiefest) and they were styled with the
title of Les douze Piers, Les douze Piers.
or the Twelve Peers, to whom complete and absolute authority and power was
largely given to support and to maintain those Laws. For which cause they
publicly received their Patent, and a solemn Oath. All which was sealed, and
ratified by the King himself; The King ratifieth their Commission.
although unwillingly he did it. So that (the Parliament being ended) the said
Commissioners began (by strict execution) to give life unto those Ordinances
and Laws. For which purpose, The Commissioners displace the Kings Officers and
Attendants.
they first of all dismissed, and did clearly thrust from their Places,
Offices, and Attendance, many of the Kings meniall servants; and appointed
others in their stead.

And this their doing was (above all other things) most distasted and grudged
at. For the King perceiving, that such as waited on his person should rather be
trusted by others than by himself; and that he himself should be furthest
off from choosing such as should be nearest unto him: waxed infinitely
melancholy and sad. And hoping, that upon further advice and counsel he
should receive better contentment, and be more kindly used; 43. 1258. Another
Parliament.
he assembled another Parliament: in which (with great grief, and
extraordinary Passion) he complained of the hard measure which was offered to
his own Person by the Twelve Peers: So that much labor was taken by his
nearest friends, The King complains.
not only to abolish their Authority and Power, but also to cancel and to
make void those new Ordinances and Laws.

But such was the determinate resolution of the Lords in general, and of the
Commons of that Assembly, The former Laws and Ordinances are confirmed
that in stead of pleasing the King with Reformation answerable to his desires,
they ratified and confirmed whatsoever was formerly concluded on: and by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and nine other Bishops of this Kingdom, A Curse.
a solemn Curse was publicly denounced against all such, as either by
Direction, or by Arms, or otherwise, withstood or hindered the execution of
those Laws, or the Authority of the Twelve Peers.

These new proceedings so much augmented the Kings fury and implacable
discontent; that even those things, The King is full of indignation.
which by his natural disposition he chiefly delighted in, were by him
loathed and detested most. And to the end that he might procure and purchase
more contentment and joy abroad, than he could find at home; he sailed into
France, He sayleth into France.
to visit King Lewis the ninth: by whom he was with all gentleness and
courtesy received, and lodged in his own Palace; where he was feasted as a
friend, and honored with all accomplements appertaining to a great King. And
at the same time he concluded a Marriage betwixt John Duke of Britain, and
one of his own Daughters.

Normandy surrendered to the Kings of France by King Henry
The French King also held a Grand Parliament of Estate: in which he protested
publicly, That his conscience was much grieved, for that (unjustly, and
without Title) he detained from King Henry his Duchy of Normandy, and such
other Territories in France, as in right he ought to enjoy. And on the other
side, King Henry (intending to conclude an inviolable Peace with so dear a
friend, and to remove from him all future scruples of his conscience in that
behalf) frankely and freely surrendered to him the said Duchy; King Henry is
made Duke of Guyan.
together with the Lordships of Angeou, Poytiers, and Main. And in the same
Parliament (with great solemnity and honor) he received again to himself,
and to his heirs, the said three Lordships, with the style of the Duke of
Guyan; for which he did his Homage in that Assembly.

Discord between the Prince and the Duke of Gloucester.
Whilst these things thus proceeded in France, a public Quarrel (upon some
secret displeasure conceived by reason of the execution of those curbing Laws)
began to break forth, betwixt Edward the young Prince, and the Duke of
Gloucester; which by the Barons was stoutly suppressed, until the Kings
return: by whom they were not long after reconciled, and made friends.

The King procures two Bulls from Rome.
The King being vexed at the heart, because his Regal Authority was diminished
by the Twelve Peers: and not finding any redress thereof at home;
endeavored to procure some remedy thereof by his friends abroad. And for that
purpose (with the great expense of much Coin, and with rich and costly Gifts)
he (secretly) obtained two Bulls from Pope Alexander the third: by both which,
the King himself, and all others who had formerly sworn to observe and to
maintain those new Ordinances and Laws, and to support the Proceedings and
the Authority of the twelve Peers, were freely absolved from their Oaths.

Yet the twelve Peers (not having any notice of those Bulls) ruled all: and
were so busily employed about their charge, that the King had little or nothing
at all to do. They had but small leisure to recreate themselves with any
sports; but the King had time enough to play: for he was a King in name, but
not in Authority, nor in Power.

The Lord chief Justice displaced.
Among others, Sir Hugh le Spencer being then Lord chief Justice of England,
and an especial favorite with the King; administered the Laws of this Realm,
not according to Equity and Right, but after his own fancy and will: and
such was his indiscreete carriage of most things which belonged unto his Office
and to his place, that the Twelve Peers (far against the Kings mind) removed
him, and supplied his room by Sir Philip Basset (a man well learned, wise,
virtuous, and discreet.)

They also dismissed such Sherifs and Justices errants, as the King had made,
and bestowed those offices upon others; Justices errants and Sherifs displaced.
The Popes Bulls are published by the King.
so that the king (being unable any longer to endure those indignities, and
deeply repining to be every hour disgraced and crossed by his own subjects)
resolved presently to make use of the Popes Bulls: for which purpose, he caused
them with great solemnity and reverence to be proclaimed in sundry eminent
places, in England, Ireland, and in Wales; and therewithal he commanded
straighty, That all such (of what estate, condition, He countermandeth the
authority of the Twelve Peers. The Londoners are sworn to obey and to aid him.
and degree soever they were) as did from thenceforth by word or by deed,
support and maintain the said Ordinances and Laws, or the authority of the
said Twelve Peers, should be committed to strong prisons, and should not be
enlarged but by his especial notice and consent. He also took a solemn oath
in the City of London, of all such as were twelve years old or more, to be
true, faithful, and ayding to him and to his heirs, and did persuade
himself, that by this means he should from thenceforth have his own will. But
he was much deceived therein; for such was the resolution of his Barons to the
contrary, that they protested they would rather die then cease to uphold all
those things which in so honorable an assembly they had solemnly sworn to
maintain. And some of them (coniecturing, The resolution of the Barons.
and peradventure not without good cause, that the King in private contrived some
desperate plot, The Barons raise an Army.
to set himself at liberty by their ruin) repaired to the Marches of Wales,
where they raised a strong Army, and furnished it with all things needful and
convenient for the war.

And standing thus upon their Guard, yet resolved to abstain from all
violence, Their Letter to the K.
except necessity (which obeys no King nor laws) should vrgently compel
them to take a sharper course. They addressed their Letters (in most submissiue
and humble sort) and sent them to the King; protesting with many oaths their
duty and their service to his Grace, and entreating his Highness, for the
honor of Almighty God, for his own souls health, and for the welfare and
happiness of his people and Kingdom, utterly to defy (except his Queen and
Children) all such as either counseled him, The King makes them no answer.
or did themselves intend to suppress the Ordinances and laws which were
established at Oxford, or the authority and the power which (for the
Commonweals prosperity) was granted to the Twelve Peers.

The King (having read those Letters) was much displeased, and returned not any
answer to the Barons; The Barons march toward London
wherefore they maintained a stout march toward London, under a Banner richly
and beautifully flourished with the Kings Arms. And as they passed by the
houses, or possessions of such as favored the Popes Bulls, they robbed,
spoiled, wasted, burnt and consumed them with fire, holding them for undoubted
enemies to the King and to his Crown. And when they approached near to the
City of London, by their Letters they importuned the answer of the Mayor and
Citizens thereof; Their Letter to the city of London.
whether they resolved to support the said Ordinances and Laws, and the
authority of the Twelve Peers, or no? protesting before God, and assuring
them that they themselves meant not, nor intended any other thing. And that if
any matters of substance contained in them were defective, or could justly be
condemned, it should receive sound reformation with all convenient speed.

That Letter was sent by the city to the King.
These Letters (being thus received) were postingly sent unto the King, who
demanded of the said Mayor and Citizens, whether they would support those
laws and the Twelve Peers, or no? who stoutly answered, that they would, in
regard that by the Kings consent they had taken their oaths to that purpose.
The cities answer to the King, and also to the Barons. They are joyfully
received into London. The Kings device fails him.
The King vnmeasurably stormed at this answer, but none other could he get:
and the same answer was by them sent unto the Barons, who thereupon proceeded in
their march, and were with much joy and kindness received into the City.

The King (plotting to defeat those Lords, and to dissolve their Companies by a
slight) proclaimed, that himself, and the greater number of the Barons were
agreed; and did require, that (in regard thereof) all Arms might be laid
aside, that his peace might be preserved, and no further fear or terror might
amaze his people. But (this notwithstanding) the Barons marched with their
whole Army unto the Kings Castle of Windsor, where they found many alians,
whom the Prince had placed there in several Offices and rooms: Officers
removed.
those they rifled of their goods, and removed them from thence; whereat the
King was much displeased. And the Lords of his Council (laboring to content
him) ordered that those goods should be restored to those alians, The Councels
order disobeied. The controversy is referred to the French kings censure.
and that from thenceforth none (but the King himself) should presume to
place, or to displace any of his meniall servants. But the Barons utterly
refused to obey their order: yet (upon the Kings motion) they gave consent,
that all those debates, controversies, and sharp displeasures should be
referred to the censure and judgment of the French king, Lewis the ninth.

This conclusion sheathed all swords, The French Kings decree
appeased (for the present time) all those Iarres, and gave good contentment to
either part; and as time gave leave, those businesses were controuerted before
the said King, and reasons were urged to the proof on either side, until (at
length) it was by him decreed that all the said Ordinances and Laws should be
anihilated and made void, and that from thenceforth no authority or power
should be left in the Twelve Peers. This sentence was so displeasing to the
Barons, The French King is accused of partiality. His Decree is rejected.
that they publicly accused the French King of gross partiality, and
smoothing with King Henry; and so absolutely did they refuse to obey his
order: and so strongly were they bent to maintain whatsoever had been in
Parliament established, that they repaired again to the marches of Wales, and
levied a new Army, The Barons levy a new Army.
and (in their passage toward London) they robbed, spoiled, and burnt the
houses, Lordships and goods of Sir Roger Mortimer; who (above all others
counseled the King to withstand them) and the Prince (whose lusty youth was
furnished with much valor) levied another Army, with which he marched
toward the Barons: The Prince does the like.
and each of them so fitted and disposed their iournies, that those two Armies
greeted each other with warlike salutations, and fought together without
remorse or pity; so that in the end, The Prince is ouerthrown.
diverse of the Princes most potent friends and best soldiers being slain, and
his part discomfited, they all were enforced to flight to save their lives, and
to leave the Barons masters of the field.

After this victory, they marched forth and came to London, where they were
received with as great kindness as before; The Barons are received into
London. A mad tumult. The two Captains called the two Constables of London.
Richard king of the Romans being grossly wronged, is thereby made the Barons
enemy.
but some of the under sort of the inhabitants of the City (despising
government, and intending under the color of these broiles to do some
mischief) elected two brain-sicke Captains, and called them the Constables of
the City, and did agree that (at the toling of the great Bell in Paul's
Church) as many as would partake with them should be in a readiness to put
into execution, whatsoever those Constables should command, and (though much
pain and labor was taken to dissuade them from their wicked purpose and
intent) yet their longing desires after spoils, and their resolution to be
lawless (upon the touling of the said Bell) transported them furiously eight
miles Westward from London, to the house and possessions of the Kings brother
Richard King of the Romans, which they ruinated, and carried away with him all
his moveable goods there found whatsoever.

This insolent outrage thus wickedly committed by the headles multitude,
furthered the succeeding wars. For whereas before that time the virtuous and
mild king Richard, king of the Romans, and brother to king Henry (in regard
of his near alliance with Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester) had (with all his
power and best endeavors) mediated a peace betwixt the Barons and the King: now
was he so exasperated and rowsed from his peaceful humor, that he became a
professed enemy both to the Barons, and also to the City of London. And King
Henry having intelligence, that Sir Peter Mountfort had raised a strong Army
at Northampton on the Barons behalf; The King obtains a victory.
and being resolved to make some trial of his fortunes, in regard of the
apparent injuries and wrongs which daily were practiced to his disgrace: levied
a strong Army, and marched thither; and by maine assaults he took the Town,
surprised Sir Peter Mountfort, and Simon the eldest son of the Earl of
Leicester, and many others; and sent them all to sundry Prisons, to be
disposed of as he should please.

And on the other side, the Barons (who being exceeding strong, and nothing at
all discouraged with this pranke of uncertain fortune; but preferring the
duty of worthy subjects to their Sovereign before their hopes, which
expected fortunate success) wrote their Letters to the King; The Barons Letter
to the King.
and with all humility and submissiue protestations confirmed their
fidelities, and assured him, That they intended nothing but the performance of
their Oaths, by supporting those Ordinances and those Laws which in Parliament
had been established at Oxford, for his Highness good, and for the welfare
and profit of the Commonweal.

But the King, his Brother, King Richard, and Edward the young Prince,
believing nothing what was written, and deeply disdaining, that Subjects
should rule and correct their Sovereign Lord and Master, and determining to
revenge those disgraces, which their stomachs no longer could endure;
proclaimed an utter defiance to the Barons: and with their Army met them in
Sussex, near to the Town called Lewys; The battle of Lewis.
where (betwixt them) was fought so fierce and so cruel a battle, that the
father spared not the son, nor the son the father. All kindred and alliance
was there forgotten: 47. 1262.
the common Souldior held himself to be as good a man as the greatest Lord.
Honor was there set at naught; and Manhood (being oppressed with Multitude)
could make no show. He who was most valiant, was soonest made breathless; and
the Coward found no opportunity to run away. He who could strike deepest,
wound many, and kill most, obtained the chiefest praise. Pity and Compassion
were skorned and laughed at, and all remorse was utterly exiled from them. None
mediated betwixt them but their swords, and their best Reconciler was death.
Lamentable were the sighs and the groans, the plunges, and the pangs of such,
as (bleeding) breathed forth their lives: and every man fought with such an
obstinate resolution, as if but one only man at the last should be left alive.
At length the two kings, The two Kings and the Prince, with many others, are
taken prisoners.
Prince Edward, and many Knights and Gentlemen of choice account, and of the
best worth, were taken prisoners, and more than twenty thousand men were
slain in this Battle.

And thus Fury (triumphing in blood) was contented at length to hearken unto
Reason: and they who could scarcely set their feet upon the ground, by reason
of the multitude of dead carcasses, which as thick as stones lay before them;
20000 men are slain.
were now pleased to take breath, and to confer upon conditions of Peace. And
in the end it was agreed, That the King should (by new Articles, A new
conclusion for Peace.
and by the renewing of his Oath) confirm the authority granted to the
Twelve Peers; and all the said Ordinances and Laws: with this Caution
notwithstanding, That two Lords of the Spirituality, and two Lords of the
Temporaltie, should take a strait examination and view of them: and if in their
judgments it were needful, that any of them should be reformed, full power
to them was given, to alter and to change what they thought fit. And if they
dissented in their opinions, it was then further ordered, that the Duke of
Britain (as Vmpier) should have power to arbitrate and to end the doubt. The
two Kings are set at liberty. H^stages given, and the Prince was one.
This being on both parts consented to and concluded, the two Kings left both
their eldest sons for hostages with the Barons: who sent them to the Castle
of Dover; where they remained about nine months.

Then did the King with all convenient expedition summon his High Court of
Parliament: In which, so strongly was the continuance of the said Laws and
Ordinances made at Oxford, urged, A Parliament.
that they were then again ratified and confirmed: and the king (though much
against his will) took an Oath to maintain them and the authority of the
Twelve Peers, The former Laws and Ordinances are again confirmed.
until (according to the said former referment) they should be reformed, if
any thing in them were found to be amiss. And all such as in those Wars, or
otherwise, had in any sort maintained them, received their pardon from the
king. And hereupon the two young Princes were enlarged. The Hostages are
enlarged.
But not long after, so great a variance touching those Ordinances grew betwixt
the two Earls of Leicester and of Gloucester (the two Generals of the Barons
Faction) that nothing but mortal War had decided their controversy, Discord
between the Earls of Leicester and of Gloucester.
if the King had not interposed his authority and mediation to make them
friends.

A fair opportunity well watched and taken.
But the young Prince Edward (taking much advantage by reason of this jarre)
departed secretly from the Kings Court, consorted to his company the Earls of
Gloucester and Warreyne, Sir Roger Mortymer, and many other renowned men for
the War. And all these raised a new Army in Wales. The Prince rayseth an
Army. ANNO 48. 1263. The Barons do the like.
And the Earl of Leicester conceiving that his surprisall and ruin was
conspired (to prevent his own danger and misfortune) did the like. And not
long after the two Armies met, near to Euersham in Worcestershire, and fought
together so maliciously, and with such bloody resolutions, that in short time
many thousands among them were slain. For Death (taking part with both)
spared neither; but striving to make her gain by their loss, The battle of
Euersham.
insulted proudly in the Army, and bragged most, when she did most harm. But
in the end the Barons were discomfited; The Barons are overthrown.
and Simon Earl of Leicester, with his eldest son, and Sir Hugh le Spencer,
and many others of great account, were slain, and the rest fled. The common
soldiers that prevailed, despightfully mangled the dead carcass of the Earl;
cutting off both hands and feet, and sending them into diverse Shires to their
friends, as Trophies of their Victory. And others among them (being more
inhumane and barbarous) cut off his head, and his privy members, and placed
them on either side of his nose.

This overthrow did utterly defeat the Barons, and deprived them of all their
hopes: and it so revived the melancholy King, that now he began again to be
sensible of his own strength, and resolved (with all speed possible) to
break those chains with which so lately he was so strongly bound. And for
the effecting thereof, A Parliament.
he assembled his High Court of Parliament: In which, no man dared to speak
otherwise than as the King spoke. So that those former Ordinances and Laws,
which were made at Oxford in the Mad Parliament, The former Decrees are all
made void
and the authority of the Twelve Peers, and all Patents, Commissions, and
Instruments whatsoever (which tended to the establishing or ratifying of those
affairs) were (by the Kings express commandment) brought forth, and were
publicly damned, cancelled, and made void. And thus King Henry regained his
former liberty and power, to say and to do in all things as he pleased.

The King resolves to burn the city of London.
When this Parliament was ended, the King (perhaps by the instigation of his
brother Richard, King of the Romans; who was cruelly wronged by the baser sort
of the inhabitants of London, without any cause by him given, as before it is
mentioned) resolved utterly to wast and to consume with fire his City of
London: because (as he alleged) the Rulers and the Inhabitants thereof had
always despised him, and taken part against him with the Barons in their
Wars. Whereupon such of the Nobility (and others as were near in favor,
and next about the person of the King) besought him instantly to abstain from
so foul a deed; which would not only much weaken his Estate and Kingdom,
but also make him infamous through the World, and unto all succeeding Ages.
Their suite was earnest, and their reasons to persuade were unanswerable: yet
the King protested, No intercession can prevail.
That his determination should be unchangeable; and that his Justice upon such
rebellious Caitiues should be a president to terrify all perverse and
obstinate Traitors and Rebels in future times. And this his resolution justly
occasioned the Citizens of London to quake at the indignation of their angry
King: so that they (perceiving that his rage and fury could not be mitigated)
caused an Instrument in writing to be made, and ratified it with their common
Seal, The submission of the Londoners.
by which they confessed their Rebellion, humbly craved pardon, and without
any restraint, or exception, wholly submitted their Lands, their Goods, and
their Lives, together with the whole City, to the kings Grace and Mercy.

This Instrument they sent unto Windsour by diverse of the chiefest and richest
inhabitants of the City, The citizens committed to prison, and given away by
the King.
who were prepared with all humility to have presented it upon their knees.
But so fierce was the Kings wroth toward them, and so implacable was his
anger, that he reputed none of those to be his friends, who interposed
themselves as Mediators in their behalfes: Neither would he vouchsafe to admit
any one of them to come into his presence; but caused them forthwith to be
cast into prison: and five of the chiefest of them, together with all their
Lands and their Goods, he gave unto the Prince; and all the others he gave to
other of his attendants, who burdened them with heavy servitude and much
misery, and took from them what they pleased, leaving to them the least part
of their own.

Thus when the King had a little avenged himself, The Prince procures the
Kings pardon and favor.
and time had cooled the heat of his passionate humor; he hearkened to the
importunate intercession of the Prince, and received the City and all the
inhabitants thereof into favor, and only took of them a fine of one thousand
marks; and restored them to all their Liberties and Customs, which for their
transgression were seized into his hands.

The King also, upon the Princes entreatie, The five Ports are pardoned.
pardoned the inhabitants of the five Ports: who finding Justice to be fast
asleep, whilst the Barons wars outragiously disturbed the whole Estate and
Kingdom; robbed, rifled, and spoiled on the Seas both their own neighbors
and Contrymen, and also all Nations whom they met, without any difference or
respect.

And lest the King should be too much troubled with the frequent complaints of
such as had been wronged by them, or his Courts of Justice pestred with the
multitude of such suitors; the King commanded that none of the offenders should
be impleaded elsewhere, but only in the Courts of those Ports: by means whereof
there were but few that complained, because none of them had any hope to have
recompense or redress there. And now, though those intestine troubles and
civil wars (which like an outrageous fire dispersed in the heart, and
midst of a well compacted City, endangered the whole estate of this Kingdom
and Commonweal) were thus appeased: The Earl of Gloucester being unrewarded,
thinks on mischief.
and although Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester by his revolt from the Barons,
and by his adhering to the Prince and to his accomplices, had greatly furthered
the good success, which had made the King to enjoy a blessed peace; yet was
the said Earl so little trusted, that he neither found favor nor reward; but
the little respect which was had of him, and his cold entertainment at the
Court, made him desperate of all good fortunes, and inflamed his heart to work
revenge.

The rascality of London do flock unto him.
This fury carried him headlong unto the City of London, where no sooner was
his discontented humor made known, but the rascal and the baser sort
(forgetting the great calamity which that famous City did endure, and the
great favors which so lately they had received from the King) flocked in
troops about him, They do mischief.
and boldly committed many grievous outrages within the City. And then they
went unto the Kings Palace at Westminster, which they rifled, spoiled, and
ransacked without mean or measure. This rude beginning prognosticated the
sudden access of another civil war: which might have bred as much danger as
any of the former had done; The Prince procures a large pardon.
but the Prince (again) interposed himself an earnest mediator betwixt the
King and all the said offenders, and procured a large and a free pardon for the
Earl.

Thus this dangerous fire was soon quenched, and good prevention in due time
did wisely cut off all occasions of future war: and at the same time, and by
the like means, the King pardoned many decayed and outlawed Gentlemen, who
(in the heat of those broiles) had committed many robberies and spoils in
diverse places of this kingdom.

The Earl of Glocesters request.
And not long after, the Earl of Gloucester (despairing of all inward grace and
favor from the king, and being desirous, as it seemed, by deeds of Chivalry
to make himself famous among the enemies of Christ) requested that he might be
sent with an Army to make war in the Holy Land. This motion (though it
tended to much expense and great charge) yet it pleased the King exceedingly;
because he knew that the Earls busy head and turbulent spirit would still be
plotting and devising of new broiles, An Army raised to be conducted into the
Holy land by the Earl of Gloucester.
and hurlyburlies at home: wherefore he caused a fair Army to be raised, and
furnished it with all necessaries fit and requisite for so long, and for so
dangerous a journey.

But when all things were in a readiness, the Earl fained many excuses which
tended to overmuch delay, which caused him to be less regarded by the King,
and to be in great dislike with all others.

But Prince Edward (being full of youth and courage, The Earl is dismissed
worthily from that charge.
and longing greedily to hoist his Sails in the Sea of Honor, and by
aduentrous deeds of Knighthood, to equal his name with those who were
accounted most valiant in the world) by his earnest suite and travel, obtained
the conducting of that Army, The Prince undertakes it, and does perform it.
Their happy success.
and transported it into the Holy Land, where his sword wrought wonders: and
his Army bred such terror and admiration among the Turks, that they would
seldom or never adventure themselves against the Christians in that quarter
where the Prince served. And to save themselves from his fury upon his coming
thither, they raised their siege from the City of Acon, The siege of Acon
raised.
which (for a long time) they had continued with more then a hundred thousand
men. And seeing that his death could not be hastened by force and violence in
the open field, The Prince was villanously wounded.
they attempted it by poysonings and other secret villainies, which took no
effect. But at length a dogged Sarazen grievously wounded him with an enuenomed
Knife, yet (after much pain and great danger) he escaped death. But in his
absence his father King Henry died, and was buried at Westminster, The King
dies.
when he had reigned more then fifty and six years; whereof the Prince was
quickly informed, and therefore (by great iournies) he safely returned (with
great honor) into ENGLAND.

THE HISTORY OF KING EDWARD THE FIRST.
WHEN Edward, surnamed Longshankes, was informed of his fathers death, he made
quick preparations for his return from the Holy Land; The new King returns
from the Holy Land.
and by great journeyes travailed until he came into England: where (with the
general applause, both of his Nobles and common People) he was crowned King,
when he was of the age of five and thirty years.

We have heard how, when, The French kings practice against King Edward.
and where Simon de Mountford Earl of Leicester, Henry his eldest son, and
sundry other Barons were slain in the last Battle between them and the
last King. And it is true, that after his overthrow, the Lady Elianor his
daughter, with many others of his allies and kinsfolks, were sentenced to
Exile; and departed into France: where they were courteously received by the
French king Philip the third, surnamed the Hardy; whose kind entertaining of
them proceeded not so much from his own bounty and natural disposition to
Liberality, as it did from an opinion which he conceived, That in so doing
he should gain the love and good liking of many English Lords: who (being
discontented with the last Kings Government) were not well pleased with his
son, who had crossed them in most of those affairs. And moreover, he knew
the noble valor and courage of King Edward to be so eminent, that it was now
high time to crave counsel of Wisdom and of Policy, how and by what means
he might prevent him from making himself more great. And because Reason and
common Experience taught him, That he, whose own house is on fire, will
rather employ his endeavors to quench that flame, than to set his enemies house
on fire also: he therefore practiced secretly with Lluellen (the most valiant,
Lluellen of Wales sueth to the French King to have in marriage Elianor the
exiled daughter of the late Earl of Leicester.
and greatest in dignity among the Welchmen) that he, with those inhabitants,
would rebel, if at any time any Wars were but likely to be attempted
against the French Nation by King Edward. And this his plot was much furthered
by the exile of the aforesaid Lady Elianor: who being (by reason of her
misfortunes) in the disposing and power of the French King, was (with great
importunity) desired in marriage by the said Lluellen: to whom (upon those
conclusions and agreements especially) she was sent with honorable attendance
and rich gifts. She is sent toward Wales.
But king Edward (being secretly informed both of the said purpose, and of her
passage toward Wales) wisely prevented his own danger, and intercepted her on
the Sea, She is taken at Sea.
and detained her as his prisoner. By means whereof, Lluellen (whose best
Rhetoric to persuade, was by open War and Rebellion) entered into the field
with many thousands; Lluellen rebelleth.
who were more ready to rob and to steal, than to reclayme themselves, and
to be mindful of their duty to their Prince.

The King rayseth an Army.
The King likewise on his part (purposing to make his first voyage terrible to
the Welchmen, for examples sake to that fickle Nation) levied so strong an
Army, that (by all conjectures) the Welchmen were altogether unable to resist
him. And it seemed they thought so too: For their chiefest Captain and Leader
(partly for the love which he bare to his longed-for Lady, and partly to
prevent those fatal dangers which knocked at his door) unexpectedly submitted
himself to the Kings Grace, Lluellen voluntarily submits himself.
and yielded himself to be disposed of wholly and only at the Kings pleasure;
and vowed and protested with many great and solemn Oaths, That his obedience
should be constant, Lluellen voweth and swears loyalty.
and his sword always ready to serve the King, both against France and
against all others in future time, if he might be made happy with the Kings
favor, and have the enjoyment of his Lady.

Lluellen is pardoned favored, and wiued.
The King, whose heart was ever inclined to mercy, and more desired by
affability to win an enemy, than to conquer him by blows; and supposing
that his love to his Mistress would be a stronger bond to strengthen his
allegiance, than any other thing; freely granted him his pardon, his favor,
and his wife. And thus those Wars (which menaced the death of many
thousands) were quietly ended, without the effusion of any blood.

But within few years after, Lluellen, Lluellen rebelleth.
by the wicked persuasions and enticement of his brother David (a man more
contentious than provident, and less valiant than mutinous; and yet one whom
the King did extraordinarily love and favor) rebelled against the King; and
fought with Sir Roger Mortymer many sharp and aduantagious battles.
Lluellen and his brother are taken and beheaded.
But at length (Gods judgments hastening Traitors to a shameful end) both of
them were taken; and their heads (as Trophies of the victory) were sent vn^^
the King: who caused them to be set upon the Tower of London, for a terror unto
others; and there they remained long after.

But (notwithstanding all this) yet the natural disposition of the Welchmen so
strongly prevailed, and so blind they were, and unable to foresee their own
ruin, The Welchmen rebel again and again.
that within few months after they rebelled twice; and by many slaughters and
strange executions they were subdued, and compelled to obey. And because their
Wars were rather maintained and cherished by shiftings and by startings into
the huge and vast Woods (which made those Rebels more disordered, They are
subdued.
and confident to save themselves when greatest danger did approach) the King
caused those Woods to be hewn down, Their woods are burned.
and to be consumed with fire: By means whereof, they were reduced to a more
civil kind of life; They become more civil.
and began to practice diverse commendable Occupations, Arts, and Sciences, and
took some pleasure (from thenceforth) to live like honest men.

In the eighteenth year of King Edwards Reign, The King of Scots breaks his
neck
Alexander the King of Scots (not having any issue of his body) fell with his
horse, and unfortunately brake his neck. He had three sisters: the eldest of
which was married unto John Baylyol, Lord of Galloway; the second unto Robert
le Bruze, Lord of Valley-Androw; and the third was married into England to John
Hastings, Lord of Abergauenny. Contention about the Crown of Scotland.
Betwixt these three (each of them being backed with the best support of their
most able friends) sharp bickerings and civil wars occasioned the deaths of
many worthy and valiant men, together with the ruin and destruction of some
of their Houses and best Fortunes: The title is referred to the censure of King
Edward, as to the soueraign Lord thereof.
and the Commonweal of that kingdom received many desperate wounds and
strange misaduentures, because each of them (in the right of his wife)
attempted and hoped to be a king. Whereupon king Edward (with great expedition)
went into Scotland as their Sovereign Lord, and endeavored to compose this
strife. But such was their mutual desire to reign, that no persuasions
prevailed to make any one of them to yield. But in the end, more sounder
advice took place: so that they all (by a public writing under their hands
and seals) consented to refer themselves and their Titles to the censure and
judgment of King Edward. Scotland is surrendered to king Edward
And by the same Instrument they freely surrendered all Scotland, and that
Crown, into the Kings hands; to the end, that thereby they might enable him
absolutely to possess such a one of them in that Kingdom, as (in his
judgment) ought to have the same. He also received from them in writing their
several demands, and each man's proofs, A wise and a discreet King
reasons and arguments to maintain his Claim. And thereupon King Edward
elected and made choice of twenty of the most discreet, wise, and worthy men
of his kingdom of England, and of twenty more of the kingdom of Scotland:
and by their advice and counsel he informed himself truly of that business;
and at length pronounced his Sentence for John Baylyol, John Bailiol is made
King of the Scots. He does homage for it to the King.
who had married the eldest of those three sisters: who received from him that
Crown and Country, and for it performed and did his homage to King Edward.

The King, although he were earnestly employed in these and in other affairs
at home; yet was he more troubled with greater businesses abroad, The French
King wrongeth King Edward.
by reason that the French King daily wronged him in Gascoyne, Guyan, and
elsewhere. And to maintain those wars, the King (by the advice and counsel
of William Marchyan his chiefest Treasurer) seized into his hands the Plate,
Jewels, and Treasure of the Churches and of the religious Houses within this
kingdom, Eu^ll counsel.
and compelled the Clergy to give unto him the one half of one years value
of all their Ecclesiastical Dignities and Promotions. The King st^^ppeth the
Church. He is hated by Churchmen.
This unaccustomed Sacrilege made the King hateful in Churchmens eyes. But
yet he seemed in some sort to content them with fair promises of Restitution,
when his Treasures should by other means be increased. But they little relying
upon that promise, and (by common experience in other things) being resolved,
that the Kings Coffers would not be emptied to fill theirs (and yet feeding
themselves with a vain hope, that some other recompense might be made them)
became humble suitors to the King, The Clergies ^ute denied.
That he would be pleased to revoke and to annihilate the Statute, which in the
fourth year of his Reign was made against Mortmayne; Mortmayne.
which prohibited the giving and the conueying of any Lands and Tenements to
any Corporation whatsoever, without the Kings leave. But as he never meant to
gratify them in any sort whatsoever: so he made them answer, That it lay not
in him, without the consent of a Parliament, to revoke and to frustrate any
Law. The Clergy (to their great grief and sorrow) perceived, that their
Treasure was swept away, together with all hope of restitution or amends: and
though it vexed them inwardly, yet durst they not to express any outward
tokens of dislike.

Thus when the King had augmented his store by the Clergies plenty: he (by the
directions of his said Treasurer) imposed a Tax or Subsidy upon every Sack
of Woolls, A new Tax.
and upon all Fells and Hydes which were to be transported out of this
kingdom; and also required the tenth part of every man's moveable goods and
substance to maintain his Wars: which being granted, he caused it to be
levied by many payments within the sp^^e of three years. He also compelled
the Clergy to bring into his Coffers all such sums of money as they had
promised to pay unto the Pope, toward the maintenance of the Christians War
with the Turks in the Holy Land. He also took up one hundred thousand
Quarters of the best Wheat, and sent it to his Armies in Gascoyne and in Guyan:
where they fought with much courage and valor, but with doubtful success;
sometimes gaining what was lost, and sometimes loosing what they had won.

In the five and twentieth year of King Edwards Reign, 25. 1296. John Baylyol
inuadeth England.
John Baylyol the King of Scots (partly by the secret procurement of the French
King, and partly by the lewd advice and counsel of factious and wicked
persons) sent a Defiance (with a proud renunciation of his Fealty and Homage)
to the King; and with an Army of braine-sicke Rebels entered into the Northern
parts of this kingdom: where (with fire and sword) they oppressed such as
could make no resistance, and (without pity and compassion) slew such as were
armed in the defense of their Country, and to save themselves. The King with
an army marches against the Scots.
Whereupon King Edward recounting his manifold favors and great love to the
said revolted King, and the high Honor wherewith (not many years before) he
had graced him; and being resolved to correct his unthankfulness with sharp
revenge, levied a puissant Army, and marched (in full strength) toward the
Northern parts: and found his fortune to be so favorable, Barwike won. The
Scots are overthrown. 25000 Scots are slain.
that with much ease he won the strong Castle of Barwike, with the slaughter
of five and twenty thousand Scots. He also won the well-defended Castle of
Donn-Barre: and (piercing into the sides of Scotland) he took Edenburrough,
and all other places of the best defense. And the King of Scots perceiving the
dangerous estate wherein he stood, and reposing his last hopes in the Kings
Grace; by the advice of all his Nobles repaired in person to the Kings
presence, The King of Scots yields himself, and surrendreth his Kingdom. He
is sent to the Tower of London.
humbly submitted himself, craved pardon, and solemnly surrendered his whole
Kingdom into King Edwards hands: Who forthwith sent the said Scottish King
with a strong Guard to the Tower of London; but gave him large allowance both
of Liberty and of Attendance, and of his Diet. And then he committed the
Government of that Kingdom unto John Warrayne, Earl of Sussex and of Surrey;
and made Sir Hugh Cressingham his High Treasurer, and William Earnsley his
chief Justice of that Kingdom. The King places a Governor over Scotland.
And having confined some of the Rebellious Peers of Scotland within the
Marches of England; he returned triumphantly, and with great honor.

And then King Edward using great expedition and much policy for the
refreshing and for the renewing of his Army; King Edward sayleth into Flanders
and assisteth the Earl thereof.
transported it into the Territories of Guy, then Earl of Flanders: against
whom, Robert Earl of Arthois (by the procurement, and with the assistance of
the French King) made sharp war. And the French King intending to hasten
King Edwards return into England, to save himself and his own Country;
animated the Scots to rebel again: And they (because they were factious, and
ready to do unto France all service upon all commands, The Scots rebel.
though with the hazard of their lives, and of their lands) without any fear,
or forecast of their future miseries, did put themselves in Arms.

But King Edward purposing to greet the French King and his Forces with a
Soldiers welcome; appointed Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, and many
other Lords and Gentlemen of the best rank, The Scots are subdued.
for the repressing of that Rebellion: who so manfully banged the Scots, that
they enforced them to fly out of the field, and pursued them with a merciless
slaughter, and reduced the rest to their former duty and obedience.

The French King dared not to fight with King Edward.
The French King perceiving, that his practice with the Scots wanted his hoped
success; was not desirous to try his strength with King Edward in the open
field: but reposing more confidence in his wit than in his valor, he proposed
very honorable conditions of amity and love; which by King Edward were
accepted: and then a general Peace was proclaimed betwixt them all. And thus
those Wars (by King Edwards means and assistance) received a short end; A
Peace is concluded.
which made a show of long continuance, with the expense of much blood.

London is restored to her liberties.
After the Kings return into England, he restored to the Citizens of London
their Liberties; which (for many undutiful misdemeanors) had remained
forfeited in his hands for the space of twelve years. The Scots rebel again.
And forthwith he led all his Forces into Scotland; where a new Rebellion
madly raged, and could not be suppressed without much strength. And being more
willing, that the execution of Justice upon few (for examples sake) should
rather reclayme the multitude, than that the Sword should wastfully consume
them; he required the delivery of their Leaders, A merciful King.
and offered his free pardon to the rest.

But their froward dispositions (preparing them to much more misery than as
yet they had endured) animated them obstinately to arm themselves, The
battle of Fanrike. The Scots are overthrown. 28. Englishmen slain. 32000.
Scots are slain.
set upon them with such fury and violence, that with the loss of eight and
twenty of his followers, and with the slaughter of two and thirty thousand of
the Scots, he enforced the rest to yield: and taking a new Oath for their
Fealty and Homage, he appeased that Country; and (to the great joy of all his
people) he returned again into England. Where (upon the earnest entreatie and
request of Pope Boniface the eight) he enlarged John Baylyol: Who travailed
into France, John Baylyol set at liberty
to take a view of his Lordships there; which (according to his own name) were
called Baylyols Lands.

King Edward had no sooner finished these Troubles; The Scots do rebel again.
but the Scots were in Arms again: So that the third time he entered with a
great Power into that Country; where none were so daring, or so hardy, as to
endure his presence. The King leads an Army into Scotland.
But the greater number of the Earls, Barons, and chiefest Gentlemen of that
kingdom had withdrawn themselves into the strong Castle of Estryuelyne; which
was by them so strengthened, that in their judgments it was impregnable. This
Castle was long besieged by the King, Estryueline is besieged, in which the
Nobles are.
but to little purpose: and he much doubted, least his continuance in that
service would afford him but little honor in the end. Wherefore (to make a
trial how far his Invention would take place) he caused two pair of
Gallows to be set up in the Castles view; The Kings Policy.
and with the sound of a Trumpet did proclayme his free Pardon, if the besieged
did yield themselves within three days: but denounced death unto them all, by
hanging, without respect of Honor, A Proclamation.
or of Person, if obstinately they enforced him to continue a longer Siege. And
hereupon the besieged, although they were so strongly immured, that they might
boldly have trusted upon their strong defense; yet because they distrusted to
be relieved, Estryuelyne is yielded.
they reposed their confidence in the Kings word, and submitted both the Castle
and themselves to his grace and mercy, The Scots do swear their obedience to
K. Edward.
whereof they had good proof. For (taking new oaths for the performance of
their obedience, and duty in future times) he set them free and at liberty:
and the like oaths he took of all Justices, Mayors, and other Officers of
Towns, Cities, Castles, and Forts; and having disposed all things in a comely
and in a peaceable order, for the good government of that Kingdom, The
Scottish chairn.
he returned into England, and brought with him (for a memorial of his great
victory) a Chair of stone, in which the Kings of Scotland by common custom
received their Enstallment and their Crown: which Chair remains in the
Kings Chapel at Westminster, among the fair Monuments of our famous Kings of
this Realm.

As Soon as King Edward was returned from his journey, he caused a general
inquiry (which was termed Troile Baston) to be made throughout his Kingdom,
Troy-baston
of the misdemeanors and oppressions of his Officers of all sorts; A memorable
deed done by a worthy King.
so that the number of the transgressors was such, and so great were their
offenses, and their fines so heavy, that with their money the King filled his
empty coffers to the brimme, discharged his old scores, which were very great
by reason of his wars in Wales, Scotland, the Low Countries, Gascoyne, Guyan,
and elsewhere, and then he displaced those corrupted Officers, and placed
better in their steads. The Prince is committed to prison, and Pierce Gaueston
is banished Cornwall and Wales given to the Prince. 29. 1300. Peace betwixt
England and Scotland. The Scots do swear obedience. The Popes claim to be
high Lord of Scotland, and his command to King Edward.


About the same time Doctor Langton then Bishop of Chester, complained
grievously to the King upon Edward the young Prince, who (by the lewd advice and
instigation of Pierce Gaueston his loose and graceless companion) brake
forcibly into his Park, and made havoc of his game; for which the Prince was
committed to prison, and Gaueston was banished the land, and required not to
return on pain of death. And the next year after Edmund Earl of Cornwall,
son to Richard King of the Romans, died without issue; so that that Earldome
reuerted to the Crown, which (together with the Principality of Wales) the
King gave unto Prince Edward, his eldest son and heir apparent to his Crown.

In the three and thirtieth year of King Edwards reign, a general peace was
proclaimed between England and Scotland, and Robert le Bruise, and many other
knights, Lords, and Earls of that Country came into England, and voluntarily
swore their fealty and their homage to the king: yet before one year was
fully expired, the said Lord Bruise and many others secretly procured from the
Pope an instrument in writing, by which the Pope made claim to the kingdom of
Scotland, as holden of his Church of Rome; and the king was thereby
peremptorily required to surcease from all demands of Tenure, and of
Soueraintie over it. The Kings message to the Pope.
But the king (by the advice of his Nobles) signified by his Ambassadors to the
Pope, That the Signiory and Lordship of the said kingdom of Scotland did only
belong to the kings of England, and not unto the Sea of Rome, nor unto any
other: and therefore he prayed him to revoke his said Instrument and unjust
claim; for that both he and his Nobles were resolved to maintain his right
and lawful inheritance therein, with the utmost expense of their goods, lands,
and lives. But whilst those things were thus handling, Robert le Bruise does
vsurp in Scotland. The King in his own person the fourth time subdueth the
Scots. The usurper flies into Norway. The King dies.
Robert le Bruise (by the Popes consent) caused himself to be crowned king of
that Realm: which occasioned king Edward the fourth time to enter into Scotland
with a puissant Army; where he so largely extended his valor, and with the
sword so fiercely devoured the Inhabitants which joined with their usurping
king, that they were compelled (with extraordinary tokens of subjection and
humility) to yield themselves to the kings mercy. And Robert le Bruise
(finding no means to make good his false title to that Crown) secretly
withdrew himself, and fled into Norway, where he remained until king Edwards
death; which happened soon after, when he had reigned victoriously almost
thirty five years.

THE HISTORY OF KING EDWARD THE SECOND.
AFTER the Kings death, his son Edward succeeded, and was crowned King.

His tall and comely Personage, An evil King.
graced with outward Majesty, seemed to promise many blessings to ensue: But
his Manners (being grossly corrupted by lewd and graceless companions) were so
lascivious, and unbefitting the condition of a King, that he became burdensome
to his Nobility; and (almost) a skorne to his inferior subjects. For he
neglected the society and the counsel of such as were wise and grave, and
consorted himself with his own Minions: by means whereof, he put in practice
every loathed thing, wherein he could either take pleasure, or express his
folly. So that his evil Government made his Kingdom to be unfortunate, and
himself a president of wretchedness to succeeding Ages: as in the discourse
of his History it will more particularly appear.

No sooner was his head adorned with his Imperial Crown, Pierce Gaueston.
but his heart longed for Pierce Gaueston; the wicked corrupter of his youth,
and the professed enemy of all honesty and virtue. For albeit that he was
exiled by the last King; The King breaks his Oath to recall Gaueston
who took an Oath of this his Successor, never to permit him (unpunished) to
come back again into England: yet the remembrance of his villainies
(consorting with the Kings bad nature and evil disposition) was a quick
messenger for his return. Pierce Gaueston is all in all.
And his arrival so abundantly replenished the Kings conceits with
extraordinary joy, that nothing else (in comparison of it) gave him any
contentment: Neither could any man (besides him) expect for any graceful
entertainment from the King.

The Nobles tell the King of his Oath.
The Noble men (who perfectly knew how wickedly this Gaueston was inclined)
perceiving that the King doted on him, and that his affections toward him were
unlimited: being perplexed with inward grief, and fearing the Ruin which
(through his insolency) threatened the subversion of the whole Realm;
emboldened themselves to put the King in mind of his oath. But as his
conscience troubled him not for the breach thereof: So their disliking
increased his desires toward Gaueston, and to make him great. For Gaueston
alone, and none but Gaueston, was likely to do all in all: and (frown he
that frown would) the King cared not who was displeased; he was resolved,
that Gaueston should be great. And therefore he first Lorded him with the
Baronie of Wallingford: Gaueston is advanced.
and soon after, he created him Earl of Cornwall; and made him the sole and
only Commander over his Jewels and his Treasure. In which Office, so absolute
was his power, and so cunning was his crafty head, to provide in the time of
his prosperity for adverse fortune which might ensue; that secretly he
conveyed beyond the Sea a fair Table and Tressels, He conueyes the Kings
Jewels out of the Realm.
all made of beaten gold, and many rich and precious Ornaments and Jewels, to
the great hurt and prejudice of the King and of this Realm.

He also took much pleasure to feed the Kings fancies with great variety of
new delights; The King lives loosely and lewdly.
and by his example, he enured him to Banquet, Drink, and to Carowse beyond
measure: And his dishonest persuasions and enticements made him careless of
the Bed and of the society and fellowship of Isabell his Religious and
virtuous Queen, the daughter of the French King Philip the fair, and sister
to his Successor Charles the fourth; and trained him to the adulterous
consortship of wanton Curtizans and shameless Whores.

The Queen in vain seeks to reclaim the King.
The Queen (who sorrowed hereat beyond measure) reposed all means for redress
of those her insufferable wrongs in her prayers unto God, and in her modest
wooings for her Kings love. But all her endeavors proved nothing at all: For
the beams of her excellent virtues could not pierce the thick clouds of his
vanities; neither could her tears or her groans mollify his hard heart,
which surfetted upon too much plenty of loathsome sins.

The common people gave large liberty to their Tongues, The people talk of
the Kings evil life.
to speak and to talk reproachfully, and to the Kings disgrace. He knew it
well; he heard it; and cared not for it: but was resolved to persevere in those
ungodly courses, which by Pierce Gaueston were contrived and proposed unto him.

The Noblemen, and such as by reason of their Offices and Places were of the
Kings Council; did (in their particulars) adventure many times secretly to
inform him of the lewdness of Pierce Gaueston; and that both strangers, and
also his own people, did strangely speak of him and of his Government: which
was altogether eclipsed by the foul interposition of his vices betwixt
himself and it. But their labor was quite lost, The King cares not for good
counsel.
and their fidelity was requited with unthankful frowns; rather testifying
his determination to continue subject (though he were a King) to his follies,
than in any sort to amend any thing which was amiss.

When nothing could prevail, either to reform the King, A petition for
Gauestons banishment.
or to make him careless of Pierce Gaueston; the Lords and Barons of this
Kingdom began seriously to consult and to take another course. For they
preferred their general Petition to the King: wherein they plainly discovered
the foulness of his faults, and the sorrow of his best affected subjects, for
that his Majesty (more than was fitting or comely) was guided and governed by
Pierce Gaueston: and earnestly entreated him to be pleased (for the preventing
of such mischiefs as were otherwise likely to ensue) to banish that lewd
Companion both from his Court and Kingdom.

The King perceiving that his Nobles were resolved to urge his consent unto
Pierce Gauestons Exile, agreed (though unwillingly) thereunto: yea, in such a
displeased humor granted he their request, that thereby they might well
understand, Gaueston is banished into Ireland. The King sends comfortable
messages unto Gaueston. Gaueston is made Governor of Ireland. The King sends
him Jewels and Money.
that his heart subscribed not to their desires. But away he was sent into
Ireland: Where he was no sooner arrived, but by messengers sent to him by the
King, he was required to be jocund and cheerful in his banishment; for that
his absence should in the end be recompensed with greater honors and more
graceful favors than he had formerly received: And for a pledge thereof, the
King appointed him to be the chief Governor and highest Commander in that
Country; and sent him such store of Plate, Jewels, and Coin, both of Silver
and of Gold, that he might well think, that his banishment was but an
honorable Embassade, and an occasion thereby presented by good fortune to the
King, to make him the more potent and more rich.

The Nobles do sue for his return.
And besides all this, the Kings discontented passions so swayed in him, and
Gauestons absence so much perplexed him; that his Nobles (being in hope of
future amendment of all things which had been done amiss, Gaueston is
recalled.
and to please the King) freely, and of their own accords, moved the King for
his return. But when he came back again, Gaueston is wicked and insolent.
so strongly and so strangely was he supported by the public favors and
unremovable love of the King; that with greater insolency and pride than
before he practiced many more notorious villainies than ever he had done.
Gaueston is banished again. He is recalled.
So that (by means of the incessant importunity of the Nobles) he was again
banished into Flanders: where he remained not long, but the king called him
back again.

Those his Exiles (thus procured by the Lords and Barons of this kingdom, and
their consents to call him home again) might have reclaymed him from his foul
and gross errors, if wisdom and virtue had in any sort been entertained by
him. Gaueston boasts of his wicked courses.
But in stead of changing his bad nature into good qualities; he took an
extraordinary delight to glory in his own sin; and to boast, how he
misled the king. He also skornefully despised the greatest Nobles of this
Land, He skornes the Nobles.
and abused them at their faces: and by untrue informations (which privately
and behind their backs he gave unto the king) he caused them to be frowned on;
and did all things in such a disordered fashion, without controlment, that the
Barons with one consent (being hopeless of redress, The Barons strike off
Gauestons head.
and being unable any longer to support such a despised burden) besieged him,
being in a strong Castle; which they won: and to redeem the kings honor,
The King is impatient for Gauestons death.
and to procure their own liberties, and the welfare of the Commonweal; they
caused his head to be smitten off. But so highly was the king displeased
thereat, that always from thenceforth he endeavored nothing more, than by
cruelty and by tyranny to revenge his death.

The King favors the two Spencers.
And then (to anger his Nobility) he entertained into his nearest familiarity
and counsels the two Spencers, Sir Hugh the father, and Sir Hugh the son;
men as graceless, and as odious to the Lords and common people, The Spencers
are as bad as was Gaueston
as the other was. Their advice inclined the king to prosecute his lewd and
wanton course of life among lascivious and wanton Whores and Concubines, and to
set at naught the sweet company of his modest and virtuous Queen: which made
him a skorne to foreign Princes, and batefull in the sight of all honest men.
The fruits of evil government.
Yet the king, in despite of his greatest Lords, supported the two Spencers in
all things which they would take in hand.

But his evil government, both of himself and of his kingdom, The King and
his Nobles are at variance.
revived new discords between the king and his Barons: and by means thereof,
the affairs and businesses of the Commonweal were ill managed; and such as
lay in wait to advance their Estates by reason of this dissension, had now
gotten fit opportunity to put in practice what they pleased. Among which,
Robert le Bruce (returning from Norway into Scotland) was joyfully received
there, Robert le Bruise being recrowned, inuadeth England. 7. 1313. The Battle
of Estreuelyne
and was the second time crowned king of that kingdom: And then he levied a
strong Army, with which he entered into the Marches of England four or five
days journey; and with fire and sword miserably wasted and desolated those
Countries, until he was encountered by the king, and compelled to retire.

But king Edward fighting a Battle with the Scottish power within the borders
of their own Country, received the overthrow: and having seen the slaughter
of many thousands in his Army (among which, were Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, The King receives a great overthrow.
and two and forty other Lords, and more than threescore knights and Baronets,
besides two and twenty men of Name, who were taken prisoners) he was
compelled (for his own safety) shamefully to fly, and with dishonorable
success to return again into England. The King flies.
Where he was (eftsoons) perplexed and put to much trouble by the untrue and
desperate attempt of one John Poydras a Tanners son dwelling in Exeter: John
Poydras discovered and executed
who boldly affirmed himself to be the truly begotten son of the last king,
and said, That he was changed in his Cradle by his Nurse for a Carters child;
and offered diverse colorable proofs for the same: and among the rest, he
strongly instanced upon the unworthy and base conditions of the king; sorting
to none so fitly, as unto one of obscure and of common birth.

This his claim, and bold assertions, quickly abused the ears and the hearts
of the vulgar, and drew many of them (for want of wisdom and obedience) to
flock unto him, as to their king. But at length he was apprehended; and having
confessed his Treason and his folly, and being arraigned, convicted, and
condemned, he was executed according to his deserts.

At the same time also, Barwike betrayed to the Scots.
the strong and almost impregnable Castle of Barwike was trecherously betrayed
into the hands of Robert le Bruise, the usurping king of Scots: and such a
general scarcity of all sorts of Victuals, and such a Murreine of all kinds
of Cattle so punished the people, A famine Thieves bear great sway.
that the like before among them was never seen. And diverse notorious and bold
Thieves, to the number of two hundred at the least (being clothed in Friars
weeds of gray) without respect of person or of sex, The Scots invade England.
robbed and spoiled the Inhabitants of the North. But (in the end) they were
taken, and, according to their deserts, were put to death. The Scots also
raised a new Army, and with great violence and fury they entered England; The
Famine grievously increases.
where (besides the great afflictions occasioned by that watre) the Inhabitants
of those Countries were so pinched and plagued with famine, that in many places
those who lived, scarcely sufficed to interre their dead: and the rest (to
preserve their lives) were compelled to sustain themselves in the great
extremity of their hunger, by eating of Rats, Mice, Cats, Dogs, Horses, and
such like.

The King is ouerthrown the second time by the Scots. A miserably distressed
people.
The King (intending to suppress the Scots, and to correct them for their
insolency and folly) encountered them with his whole Army, but received a
notorious overthrow; and (being scornfully checked and disgraced by his bold
and saucy enemies) he returned home again with great ignominy and shame,
leaving his poor subjects in the North, so miserably distressed and
vnrelieued, as ever any people were forsaken by an unworthy and a careless
King.

The use of this History.
Of these disgraces, and of these troubles, we make this profitable use: That as
the heroical virtues of excellent Princes are crowned with many blessings from
above; so for the iniquity and heinous transgressions of wicked and ungodly
Kings, both themselves and their people likewise, are severely punished by God,
before whom Princes must fall as well as the common subjects, except their true
and hearty repentance (being joined with the amendment of their lives) do (in
season) procure his mercy and his favor.

The Nobles endeavor reformation.
The Peers and the Nobles of this Kingdom (perceiving that the diseases of the
Commonweal did daily increase and grow more dangerous) determined (like good
Physicians) narrowly to search out the causes of these maladies, and to find
some remedy to cure them before it were too late. They complain on the two
Spencers.
The miserable examples of all kinds of wickedness which presented themselves
unto their view, emboldned them to inform the King, That the two Spencers and
their misguiding of the State (by whom only, and by none other the King was
counseled and directed) were the immediate occasioners of all those mischiefs
and calamities, which miserably afflicted and tormented the whole Kingdom.
They plainly told him, That such was their interest in the Kings person, and
in his government of his people, that they were bound (in honor, and for
conscience sake) to inform his Highness of all such misdemeanors committed by
any of his subjects as tended to the subversion of the State, and the
disturbing of the common peace thereof: and then they became importunat suitors
to his Majesty, That he would be pleased to put from him the two Spencers, who
corrupted him with monstrous vices, and made him altogether careless of those
duties which by Almighty God were required at his hands. They told him
likewise, That as subjection belonged to the people; so the King was bound to
protect them, and that (unconscionably and most dishonorably) he had left his
Commons in the North, to the rage and rigor of the Scots, The resolution of the
Nobles touching the two Spencers.
and to all extremities of hunger and of other wants: and that if he pleased
not (upon their humble entreaty and request) to cassier those two graceless
Counsailors, of their places and from his service; they then must and would
presume to do it, though it were with the hazard and peril of their own
lives.

The king could not choose but hearken to this grievous and true report. For as
it was founded and grounded upon conscience, and on duty; so was it
maintained with a constant resolution to reform that which was amiss. He bit
his lip thereat, and his countenance proclaimed his coffeehouse. The King
frowneth on his Nobles.
Inwardly he meditated and devised how he might surprise those Noblemen, who
(most of all) stomacked the two Spencers, whom so immoderatly he did love, yet
inwardly his tongue gave the Barons a pleasing answer; so that he forthwith
sommoned his high Court of Parliament: A Parlame^t.
and pretending a reformation of all things that were conceived to be amiss,
he gladded the hearts of his Nobles and Commons exceedingly. But the Lords and
Barons (although they reioiced much that the time would shortly come, The
Nobles do stand upon their guard.
in which these matters should be substantially debated on) yet were they
jealous, and suspected lest the king intended their surprisal in that solemn
meeting: wherefore the greater numbers of them repaired unto London, being
strongly guarded with a brave Army of sufficient and gallant men, which were
all clothed in a like Liuerie; whereat the king was highly displeased: but
most of all it grieved him, that he knew the Barons would have their own will
by taking and separating from him the two Spencers (who were more deer to him
then his Queen and children, How the king loved the two Spencers. The two
Spencers are banished for ever.
and all his friends beside) and in the end (among many other things) it was
(by the whole Parliament) enacted, That they should be exiled during their
lives, and never be licensed by the king to return again into England.

This being thus concluded, the Barons (who longed to see the two Spencers
under sail) caused certain Ships to be prepared, in which they were embarked
and sent away. So that now all men were well pleased except the King; whom
their absence vexed at the heart: The King hates his Barons.
and in all things he endeavored plainly to express his hatred and his anger
toward the Barons, who had enforced him to consent unto their banishment. And
to express the same more fully; he was informed, that the younger Spencer had
strengthened himself with a few good Ships; The younger Spencer becomes a
Pyrate.
and that he lay (as a Grand Pyrate) coasting upon the Narrow Seas, robbing,
ransacking, and spoiling the Merchants, and all Nations who passed by them; but
especially, and chiefly, such as were of this Kingdom. And although great
suit was made unto the King, that a convenient Fleet might be prepared for his
surprizall; and that he might be produced unto judgment, The grieved Lords
complain, but the King laughs.
and receive such punishment as the Laws of this Kingdom appointed for the
cutting off of such a notorious Thief: yet the King smyled, and was inwardly
glad to hear this news, and turned a deaf ear to their request; and was so
far off from providing to fetch him in, that (pardoning all his offenses, The
Spencers are recalled, and honored.
and to despite his Barons) he recalled them both from their Banishment, and
honored them with more Dignities, Offices, and Authority, than ever he had
done before.

ANNO 13.
This thing being thus strangely performed by the King, and the daily
insufferable injuries and insolency of the two Spencers (who skorned and
derided the Nobles, as being unable to control them, The Spencers do skorne
and deride the Nobles.
or to do them any harm) were sufficient warnings to the Barons to look
unto themselves, and to provide for their own safety, before it were too
late. Wherefore, seeing that neither entreatie nor Law could right their
wrongs; they raised a strong Army, The Barons do raise a strong army.
and boldly marched into the field: And the King, with the two Spencers, and
some others of the Nobles, did the like. And after many sharp Bickerings and
Encounters both their Armies met, The King does the like.
and fought on either part with such obstinate desire to revenge, that he was
supposed to be the most valiant man among them, who could and did drench his
sword deepest in the most blood. A cruel Battle.
The Noblemen now forgot, that undutifully they fought against their Sovereign
Lord: and the King would not by any means know, that his Tyranny had
compelled them to take Arms. Kindred, Alliance, Country, Religion,
Neighborhood, nor any other respect now prevailed to win favor: but fury
made them trust to their weapons, and death stickled the controversy betwixt
them. The Barons are overthrown.
In the end, when many of the Barons, and thousands of their adherents were
slain; they fled, and were pursued by the King, who (obtaining the victory)
never ceased the pursuit until he had taken the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford,
and many other Lords, of which he caused two and twenty to loose their heads
in sundry places of this Realm, Twenty and two Lords beheaded.
to the great astonishment of the rest, and to the terror of the vulgar sort.

Thus when this hauock was made of the Nobility, and when this victory had
puffed up the two Spencers with intolerable insolency and pride, they made no
good use of their good fortune, The two Spencers wax more insolent and proud.
for the amendment of their lives, or better counsailing of the King, but (as
tyrants) they now did all in all as they themselves listed; and their will was
the best law. And then (presuming that all things should be ordered as they
listed) they procured the King to hold his high Court of Parliament at York;
The Prince of Wales created. Sir Hugh Spencer the elder made an Earl. A great
tax.
in which he created Edward his eldest son Prince of Wales and Duke of
Aquitaine. He also created Sir Hugh Spencer the Father, Earl of Winchester,
and Sir Andrew Harkley (whose extraordinary service was a principal means of
the Barons late overthrow) Earl of Care-Liele. He also exacted the sixth penny
of all Temporal men's goods and moueaables, inhabiting in England, Wales, and
in Ireland, to defray and to support his intended wars against the Scots: The
people do murmur.
but the leuying thereof enforced the common people to grudge and to murmr;
affirming, That they were altogether impouerished by dearth and famine, and
almost undone by reason of the disordred government of the King.

The Scots (being secretly informed that King Edward was resolved to invade
their Country, ANNO 15. The Scots do invade Ireland. The Scots are ouerthrown.
and to revenge those indignities and those wrongs, which by the incursions and
invasions of Robert le Bruise their usurping King, he had received) endeavored
to divert his purpose another way; so that they entered into Ireland with a
copious Army. But the king (who was not ignorant of their determination) made
such provision against their landing there, that the greater number of those
assailants were slain, and the rest (being utterly overthrown) were compelled
to fly unto their Ships, and shamefully to return into their own Country.
The King enters into Scotland with an Army.


The king was now persuaded that scarcely any strength could withstand so great
a power as he had levied, and that the Scots should now be called to a strict
account for all their inroades, incursions, invasions, murders, robberies, and
spoils. And for the effecting thereof, he conducted his Army into Scotland,
where the Nobles and the other inhabitants of that land (being armed well, and
being in number many thousands) for many days by continual preparations, made
a show to give battle to king Edward, when as (indeed) they meant nothing
less. The Scots do retire into the Woods and Mountains.
For when King Edward approached near unto them, they craftily, yet stoutly
and strongly, retired many miles, and at length withdrew themselves into the
Woods, Forests, and Mountains: where they soon cloyed, wearied, and wasted
the English forces; The English Army is tired out.
partly with the vneasinesse of those passages, and partly with such Storms,
Tempests, Rain, Hayle, Snow, Frosts, and other distempered weather, as usually
in those places were too bitter and too sharp.

The Kings Army is afflicted.
And besides all this, the want of victuals and other necessaries so grievously
afflicted the Kings Army with mortality and death, that (not having performed
any thing worthy a Kings care and travail) he began to retire: which when
the Scots perceived, they pursued and hunted him with much cruelty and
violence: So that (finding his forces to be broken, The King is pursued, and
flies.
and his Army scattered) the Scots gave a bold onset upon the King himself,
and enforced him to save his life by an ignominious flight, and to leave
behind him his Treasure, The King loses his Treasure and provisions.
Ordinance, and all his best provisions, whereat they made great jolitie and
mirth.

This last disaster and this last danger (which King Edward by a shameful
flight escaped) was principally occasioned by Sir Andrew Harkley; Sir Andrew
Harkley Earl of Carlisle beheaded.
whom the King had created Earl of Carlyle, for his great service in his
behalf against his Barons in their late overthrow: for he (having secretly
received from the Scots a great sum of money for a bribe) practiced to betray
the King: for which offense he lost his head.

The Queen flies into France, and carries the prince with her.
The Queen (knowing that the two Spencers envied her deeply at the heart, and
that by their persuasions the King refused to keep her company, and solaced
himself too too wantonly with lewd and lascivious strumpets; and pitying the
late slaughter and bloody executions of very many of the Nobility, and
perceiving that the affairs and business of the Commonweal were made slavish
and servile to all misfortunes) taking with her the young Prince Edward her
son, fled into France to her brother King Charles: She is kindly entertained
by her brother the King.
by whom she was received lovingly, and was recomforted by earnest promises
and oaths, That by his assistance, and at his costs, her wrongs, and this whole
Kingdoms ruins, should be repaired. And not long after, the Barons (by their
letters) offered their best service to her and to the Prince her son; The
Barons do offer her their service.
and did protest, That if she could return strengthened only with the help
of one thousand valiant men at arms, they would thereto add so great a
strength as should suffice to make the two Spencers feel the smart of their
insufferable follies.

This proffer exceedingly rejoiced the Queen, The Spencers do bribe the French
King with the Kings Money and Jewels. The French King checketh the Queen his
sister. The Pope and his Cardinals are bribed. Sir Robert Earl of Arthois a
friend to the Queen The Queen and Prince fly into the Empire. They are kindly
entertained by the Earl of Henault. The Queen and Prince do land in England.
ANNO 19. 1325. The Nobles and Commons do repair to the Queen and Prince. The
Bishop of Exeter beheaded by the Londoners. The King goes toward Wales. The
Londoners take the Tower.
and daily fed her conceits with fresh hopes of fortunate success at the
last. But the two Spencers (greatly fearing the event of her return, if the
French King should take her part, and making the Kings Coin and his Treasure
their best Advocates to plead their case) so corrupted King Charles and his
Council of Estate with invaluable presents of Gold, of Silver, and of rich
Jewels, that not only all aid and succor was denied to her by her own
brother; but in very sharp and in quick manner she was by him reproved and
blamed, as being foolishly afraid of her own shadow: and as having unwisely
and undutifully forsaken the company of her Lord and kind husband. The Pope
likewise, and many of his chiefest Cardinals (being by like rewards engaged by
the two Spencers) required the French King (upon the penalty of Cursing) to
send the Queen and the young Prince her son to King Edward. And doubtless
she had unnaturally been betrayed by her own brother, if secretly and
speedily her self and her young son had not been conveyed into the Empire by
Sir Robert of Arthois, her near and kind cousin and friend: where they were
with unexpected and extraordinary joy received and welcomed by the Earl of
Henault, and by Sir John of Henault, Lord Beaumont his brother; who (being
accompanied with three hundred Knights and selected men of Arms) went with her
and with her son into England.

Upon the first intelligence given of their landing, the Lords and Barons, with
gladded hearts and lusty troops of resolved Gallants (who were soundly and at
all points armed) repaired every day to the Queen and Prince, and hourly
their forces were increased. So that the King having notice of these new
troubles, left the Government of the City of London to his chiefest Treasurer
Walter Stapleton then Bishop of Exeter (who was an inward friend to the two
Spencers, and a professed enemy to the Queen, and hated generally by the
inhabitants of that City) and the King hasted unto the Marches of Wales for
the present leuying of an Army. But he was no sooner on his journey, but the
Londoners (skorning the Government of their proud and insolent Commander)
apprehended him; and without any lawful proceedings, or judicial Sentence,
caused his head to be smitten off at the Standard in Cheap: and then they
suddenly, and with great violence, rushed into the Tower of London; where they
slew all such as they found there: and kept both it and that City to the use
of the Queen and of the young Prince her son.

The King changes his purpose. The King fortifieth Bristoll. The Queen
wins Bristoll. The King is besieged in the Castle. Est ineuitabile Fatum. A
strange matter. The King and Sir Hugh Spencer the younger are taken. The Castle
of Bristoll yields. Sir Hugh Spencer the father, and the Earl of Arundell
are beheaded. The Queen and Prince do march toward London. The younger
Spencer is publicly derided. He is cruelly executed.
As soon as King Edward was resolved and informed of this Revolt; he desisted
from his intended purpose, and posted unto Bristow, and fortified it in the
strongest manner that he was able; and committed the defense thereof to the
Earl of Arundell, and to Sir Hugh Spencer the father: and himself (with Sir
Hugh the son) entered into the Castle there, and were determined to defend it
with all their strength. But within few days after, the said City was
besieged, assaulted, and won by the Queen and by the Barons: who (committing
the two Earls, and diverse others of the chiefest note, unto safe keeping)
besieged the Castle in such sort, that the King and his Minion (distrusting the
event) stole away secretly in the night, and put themselves into a little
Fisher-boat. Yet such was the will and pleasure of GOD (to make them to know
him by their future miseries) that every day, for a week and more, the same
Boat (by reason of a contrary wind) was driven back, near to the said
Castle: Which being at length perceived and observed by the Lord Beaumont, he
chased the Fisher-boat with a small vessel, and boarded her, and found in her
the King and Sir Hugh Spencer the son, whom they so much desired, and
brought them to the Queen; who presented them before the Castles view: and
upon the sight of them, the besieged yielded the possession of their Fort into
the Queens hands. Then were the heads of Sir Hugh Spencer the father, Earl of
Winchester, and of John Earl of Arundell (whose daughter was married to the
younger Spencer) smitten off. And the King being committed unto honorable and
safe keeping; the Queen, with the young Prince her son, being accompanied
with the Barons and a strong Army, marched toward London; carrying with them
Sir Hugh Spencer the son as a slave: before whom, certain unworthy and base
Fiddlers (upon Pypes which they had made of Reeds) skornfully played, skipped,
and sung, in every Town which they passed through. And being come to the
City of London, he was fast bound upon the top of an high Ladder; and (his
privy members and his heart being severed from his body and burned) his head
was forthwith cut off and set upon London Bridge.

A just reward for their wickedness.
Thus GODS judgments pursued those two ungodly and ambitious caitiues: by whose
lewd advice and evil counsel the King forsook the bed and company of the
Queen his wife; lived wickedly; made havoc of his Nobility; neglected his
common People; permitted his Enemies (to his disgrace) to triumph and to insult
over him; and governed more like a Tyrant than a King.

And thus those times of Trouble being now again blessed with a happy Peace,
Sir John of Henault and his company are feasted and rewarded.
the Queen bountifully feasted and rewarded Sir John of Henault, Lord
Beaumont, and all his associates: who taking leave, departed; and were received
into their Country with much joy and great honor.

And then the Queen and the young Prince (to reform such things as were
amiss, A Parliament.
and to settle a better course of Government within this Land) assembled an
High Court of Parliament at Westminster. In which, the King, by a general
consent, was deposed: The King is deposed. Prince Edward crowned King.
and (being very honorably respected and attended) he was committed to the
Castle of Killingworth; and Prince Edward was crowned King. And not long after,
the King being removed to the Castle of Corff, was wickedly assailed by his
Keepers: who through a Horn which they did put into his fundament, pierced his
guts with a burning Spit, and murdered him; The old King is murdered.
when he had reigned almost nineteen years.

THE HISTORY OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
EDWARD the third, Isabell his mother, and of his uncle Edmund of Woodstock
Earl of Kent, and of Sir Roger Mortymer: Sir Roger Mortymer wickedly procured
the murder of the old King.
which knight (to interesse himself more especially in the Queens love)
traitorously conspired and procured the murder of the last king, by the
monstrous villainy and barbarous cruelty before mentioned.

In the second year of this kings Reign, Robert le Bruise (the busy usurping
king of the Scots) denounced Wars against him and his kingdom: which
occasioned the leuying of a strong Army, King Edward inuadeth Scotland.
which consisted of four and fifty thousand men; with which, the king
himself (being accompanied with Sir John of Henault, Lord Beaumont, and five
hundred Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen strangers his associates) marched into
Scotland: The Scots fly into the Woods and Mountains.
Where he hunted and chased his enemies from Marish to Marish, from Wood to
Wood, from Hill to Hill, and from Mountain to Mountain, for the space of one
month and more: yet (by reason of the Scots cowardice, which made them to
skulke and run from place to place, tyring out the English Army. The King
returns. The King marries Philip daughter to the Earl of Henault. A
Parliament. Persons attainted. A dishonorable peace with Scotland. Their tenure
is released. The Charter called Ragman, delivered up. A marriage with Scotland.
Sir Roger Mortimer created Earl of March. He is too familiar with Queen Isabel
He procures the Kings uncle to be beheaded. Articles against Sir Roger
Mortimer.
The King with his whole company (not having performed any memorable service)
returned home; and shortly after, took to wife the Lady Philip, youngest
daughter to William Earl of Henault, his cosen german in the third degree,
and assembled his high Court of Parliament at Northampton: in which (among
other passages) the two deceased Spencers and Walter Stapleton the late Bishop
of Exeter were attainted of high treason. And then the King (by the directions
of his mother and of Sir Roger Mortimer) concluded a dishonorable peace with
the Scots, and released to them their homage, fealty, and services to him due
for that Kingdom, and delivered up to them the Grand Instrument or Charter
called Ragman, which under the hands and seals of their late King, and of the
Nobility of Scotland, testified their tenure and subjection to the Kings of
this Realm; and then he married his sister Jane unto David the son and
heir apparent of Robert le Bruise the usurping Scottish King, and created Sir
Roger Mortimer Earl of March, whereat his Nobles were exceedingly discontent.
And such was this new Earls inward malice and hatred unto the Kings uncle the
Earl of Kent, and so powerful was he with the King, by reason of his too much
familiarity with his mother Queen Isabel; that he never desisted from his
wicked and ungodly plottings, until he had bereaved him of his head. But God
permitted not this wretched man to sway long in his ungodly courses. For within
few months after he was accused by the State for these horrible and heinous
crimes:

1. Imprimis, For that he had wickedly plotted and procured the murder of the
Kings father.

2. Item, For that (by his false accusations and sinister counsel) he had
caused the King to cut off the head of his said uncle, who was truly Noble,
Religious, valiant, honest, and a strong pillar to the Commonweal. 3. Item,
For that too too familiarly he conuersed with Queen Isabel the Kings mother,
to her just reproach and the dishonor of the King. 4. Item, for that he
received of the Scots a bribe of twenty thousand pounds, for which he procured
the Kings retreat out of Scotland, and the releasement of his Signiorie and
homage due for that Kingdom. 5. And lastly, because he had deceitfully
cousened and beguiled the King of his Wards and Treasure, converting all to his
own use.
For these his wicked Treasons and horrible transgressions, Sir Roger Mortymer
attainted and Executed. Queen Isabel sequestered The Kings Homage for Guyan
required. The King would not do Homage in such sort as it was required. The
French King is angry, The Kings Homage again required.

It is sent under the Great Seal. The Nobles are offended. The Kings Title to
France first broched.


he was condemned to die, in the same manner which he had devised for the
execution of Sir Hugh Spencer the younger. And Queen Isabel (being most
honorably provided for, and attended on) was sequestered into a strong Castle,
where she lived more then thirty years after and then died.

In the fifth year of King Edwards Reign, his personal appearance (in kind
and friendly sort) was required by Philip de Valoys king of France, and uncle
to the young Queen (that is to say) brother to Jane, Countess of Henalt, who
was mother to K. Edwards wife; together with his Homage and Fealty for his
Duchy of Guyan. For the performance whereof, he departed hence; and was with
much triumph, and magnificence received, entertained, and feasted in France.
But his homage, and his fealty, he would, and did only confess by words, and
would not do them in such solemn and submissiue fashion as they were
demanded; Whereat the French King was so inwardly moved, that King Edward (at
his departure from the French Court) might well perceive, that his welcome was
more respected and honored, then his going from thence.

As Soon as the King came home, by new Ambassadors his homage was again
required to be performed with all solemnity and due rites. And thereupon, (to
give some contentment to the French King) it was sent unto him, in an
instrument in writing, under the great seal. Whereat the Lords and Peers
repined much, affirming that the crown of France, (in the right of Queen
Isabel his mother) did belong to him: and that therefore he might justly have
refused, to have done unto him any homage at all.

Not long after these businesses thus ended, King Edward by his Ambassadors
required David the young King of Scots, The King requires the Castle of
Barwicke to be restored. It is denied by the King of Scots, and his Homage
denied also.
being his brother-in-law, to restore unto him his Castle of Barwick; and to
do him homage for his kingdom: But David stoutly returned answer, that his
father by conquest and by his sword won that Castle, and that he had received
it, by descent from him; and therefore would hold and keep it as his own. And
touching the kings demand of his homage for the kingdom of Scotland, his
answer was that his Father never acknowledged any such service; and that king
Edward had released it, if any had been due. And that therefore he would not
confess any tenure of king Edwards crown.

The King warreth in Scotland. The King prevails. Barwicke is recovered.
The high spirit of the King would not suffer him thus to be slighted and
shaken off, for he resolved to make himself the Lord of both. For which cause;
he marched with a strong Army into Scotland, and quickly subdued the better
and the greater part of that kingdom, with small resistance. And having
fortifyed for his own use, the Castles and Towns of best defense, he returned,
and came to Barwick, where the Town (after a strong siege) was by composition
surrendered into his hands: Edward Baylyol Crowned King of Scotland.
And then he crowned Sir Edward Baylyol king of Scotland, and committed the
government of the Town of Barwick unto his charge; and returned into England
with much honor.

The King in person setleth the Government of Scotland.
But before two years more were expired, he passed again with an army into
Scotland, placed his new king in his throne; and received his homage: and
reinuested diverse English Lords, and gentlemen, of such Lordships and
Territories, as by reason of the kings dishonorable peace with the Scots, (when
he first began to reign) had been taken from them.

David flies into France.
These disasters, and adverse fortunes, which inseparably accompanied David the
deposed king, compelled him to fly into France, where (after two years
continuance) his heart was cheered with fair promises, and his necessities
were relieved plentifully, with large and ample supplies of all things needful
and convenient: He returns with an Army into Scotland.
he also obtained an Army with which he sailed into Scotland; his hopes
fairly promising that ere long he should be a king again. But he was much
deceived. For king Edward having certain intelligence of his and of the French
kings endeavors, provided effectually for the encounter; David is overthrown
by King Edward.
and marched into Scotland with a strong Army, where he fought often with
fortunate success, against David and the French kings forces: and at length by
battle obtained an honorable victory; and securing the government of that
kingdom, according to the rules of wisdom and of policy) he returned
joyfully into England.

Robert de Arthoys comes into England.
In the tenth year of this kings reign, Philip de Valoys then king of France,
sentenced the Earldom of Arthoys from Robert De Arthoys, unto Maud Countess
of Burgondie, and Aunt to the said Robert; which censure so incensed the said
Earl, that in his heat he uttered these words: By me was he made a King, and
by me, he shall be again deposed. For which offense, The King requites his
former kindness.
he was throughout all France proclaimed to be a traitor to the crown, so that
(to preserve his life) he was compelled to fly into England; where (in regard
of his fidelity, and honorable service, performed to Queen Isabel, and to
the king himself, when they were both in France) he was with all complements
of kindness and hearty love received; and entertained by king Edward: who
(knowing him to be right valiant, hardy, and wise, and not forgetting to
requite favors extended to him in his distress) created him Earl of
Richmond: He is Created Earl of Richmond.
and so entirely loved him, that whilst he lived, he never attempted any
great and important matter without his counsel and advice.

This noble Knight ceased not to inform the King of his Title to the Crown of
France, By Queen Isabel his mother, who was the daughter of Philip the Fair;
which appeared to stand thus.

Philip the Hardy, had issue two sons, Philip the Fair, King Edwards title
to the Crown of France.
and Charles de Valoys. Philip the Fair had issue three sons, (all which
successively were Kings and died without issue Male) that is to say, Jews the
tenth, Philip the fifth surnamed the Long; and Charles the fourth. He had also
one daughter which was named Isabel, Queen of England, and married to the
Kings Father named Edward the second.

And Charles de Valoys (the second son of Philip the Hardy) was father unto
Philip de Valoys who reigned then in France; Charles de Valoys.
and of this Charles it is noted that he was the son of a King, The brother
of a King, The uncle of a King, and the father of a King, and that himself was
no King.

According to the Laws of France, the Crown was to descend to the Issue Male,
and no woman could inherit the Crown: but King Edward, (in regard that he was
a Male, though the descent of the Males was interrupted by a Female, viz. by
Queen Isabel his mother) pretended that in right the Crown of France was his;
and could not be deprived thereof by humane laws. The state of this question
standing thus, Sir Robert de Arthois Earl of Richmond daily whispered it into
the Kings ear. and with such forcible reason and persuasions so urged the same,
that now the King began to think on nothing more, then how to attain to the
Crown of France. Secrecy is the best fartherer of great negotiations. The
Counsel of the Earl of Henalt is craved. A^de promised to the King. The King
is made Vicar general of the Empire.


This business as it was of extraordinary weight and importance, so it required
the best secrecy until it were plotted well. For which purpose K. Edward (by
private messengers and letters) craved the advice and counsel of the Earl of
Henalt (his wifes father; and brother-in-law to the French King) and of Sir
John of Henalt Lord Beaumont his brother, and of sundry other great States and
Princes of the Empire; who not only counseled him by his sword to prosecute
his right, but made him offers of their assistance by their best means. They
also procured King Edward by a solemn instrument in writing to be created the
Vicar General of the Empire, by reason whereof he had the power to command the
Nobles and the common people of those Countries, to further his purpose and his
doings

ANNO 11.
Whilst these things were thus contriuing in England, and whilst king Philip de
Valoys little thought that his kingdom and Crown were aimed at, The French
King makes incredible provision to War in the Holy Land.
or that his strength should be tr^ed with English wars; he (by the
importunity of Pope Benedict the eleventh) prepared such an Army to have made
wars in the Holy Land, as never before was conducted by any Christian
Prince. He also committed the government of his kingdom unto his eldest son
John Duke of Normandy: To whom (by reason of his youth) he added (for
assistance) a discreet, wise, and a grave Council. And when he had thus
provided and settled all things needful for his huge army; The French King
alters his purpose.
and for the maintenance thereof for three years space: the reports of king
Edwards claim and purpose, began as a sudden storm to break forth, and to
be known: Whereupon, king Philip assuring himself, that (in his absence) the
English Army would very little regard such forces as should be left behind;
and that his departure would encourage many (who hunted after novelties and
change) rather to make offers of their service to his enemies, He prepares
against England.
then to perform that duty which by subjects was due unto their king: And
knowing That it would be a ridiculous thing (by dangerous attempts) to win
honor abroad, and to neglect the safety of his own kingdom and estate at
home; he desisted (on the sudden) from prosecuting his journie into the Holy
land; and prepared strongly to defend himself against king Edward, King Edward
fills his Coffers.
and his claim. And (on the other side) king Edward (to the end that nothing
might be wanting, when time should serve) By many politic devices levied such
inestimable sums of money, Want of Money in England.
That (for want of coin among the common people) a fat Ox was sold for a
noble, a fat sheep for six pence, six Pigeons for a penny; and a quarter of
wheat for two shillings.

When he had thus done, he (with Queen Philip his wife) sailed into Flanders,
The King and Queen do sail into Flanders.,
where they remained all that winter, and (at Antwerp) The king oftentimes
conferred, and at length concluded with the Princes, and States of Germany,
and of those Provinces, He enleageth himself with the Germans and Belgicks
upon all things touching his said intended war. So that, after his return,
he levied a strong Army, King Edwards Army
which (with his assisting friends) consisted of seven and twenty thousand
chosen fighting men, with which strength he landed in France, King Edward
landeth in France.
when the Summer was almost spent.

The French King takes the field.
The French king, having an Army which consisted of threescore thousand
soldiers, and being accompanied with the three kings of Behayne, Navarre, and
of Scotland, with five Dukes; Six and twenty Earls; and more then four
thousand Lords, and knights; bravely entered into the field, where he found
king Edward sufficiently provided to show himself a valiant man. But whilst
each Army gazed on the other, A woman parts a great affray.
and expected many hours, which part should give the first stroke of the
battle: Behold and wonder, and a strange wonder! For betwixt both those Kings
(upon the motion, and through the mediation of the Lady Jane Countess of
Henalt, sister to King Philip, and mother to King Edwards wife) not a blow was
given: but (on a sudden) Both the Armies were dissolved, and King Edward with
his friends, and Nobles returned into England.

In the fourteenth year of King Edwards Reign, ANNO. 14 1339. The Germans
incorporate themselves with King Edward in his Wars. Upon what conditions the
Flemings joined with King Edward.

He quarters the Arms of France. The French do burn in England.


he sailed into Flanders, where at Brusels he met with the greater number of
the Princes of Germany, who of their own accords, with hearty love and
forwardness, incorporated themselves with king Edward in those his wars
against France.

And (at the instance of the king) the said Princes entreated the Flemmings to
join with them in that Enterprise, and service: whereunto they seemed willing
to condescend, if king Edward would entitle himself king of France; and would
quarter the Arms of France, with the Arms of England; and would (as king of
France) release unto them a bond of two millions of Floreynes, wherein they
stood obliged not to wage any war against the king of France. Whereunto the
king yielded, and did perform all things, according to their desires. And
thus he consorted to his part, the Germans and Flemmings in those affairs, by
promises, oaths, and by a solemn instrument in writing under their hands and
seals.

Whilst king Edward was thus busied abroad, the French kings Navy landed many
thousand men at Southhampton, who ransacked the Town and consumed it with
fire: and the like outrage and cruelty they exercised in the Countries
thereunto adjoining.

The king (immediately upon his return out of Flanders) Summoned his high
Court of Parliament: in which, A Parliament.
that nothing needful might be wanting, to furnish and to maintain his wars
with France; a Subsidy of the fifth part of all his Subjects moveable goods
was granted to him, and the ninth part of their Corn, A great Tax.
Together with a large custom upon Wolles, to be paid two years before hand.
The leuying of which Tax, turned the prayers of the People into Curses, The
King borrows Money.
because they were altogether unwilling to pay the same. He also (by way of
lone) borrowed huge sums of money of his richest Subjects: and the City of
London disbursed for him twenty thousand marks.

New coin with the French arms quartred. King Edwards Fleet and Army. The
battle of Sluice.
The King also coined great store of silver and of gold, on which he quartered
with his own the Arms of France in the first place, and instamped him thereon
King of England and of France. He also prepared a fleet of two hundred Sail of
Ships, and thoroughly appointed them to the proof, and then he levied an Army
often thousand selected men of war; all which he embarked: and passing with
them toward Sluice, he fortunatly met with the French fleet, which (consisting
of Frenchmen, Piccards, Genowayes, and of other Nations) amounted to the number
of forty thousand men; The Kings victory at Sea.
among which were they who not only had robbed and rifled many English
Merchants on the narrow Seas, but also had burned Southhampton and the
Countries thereabout (as lately you have heard.) The King being full of
magnanimity and valor, resolute in his purposes, and reckoning of the French
as of his subjects and inferiors in Arms, especially upon the Seas, and
hopping by his good success, not only to win honor among the Princes and
States of his confederacy, and purposing, if he might, to strike a terror in
the French Nation concerning those wars, set upon their whole Navy with such
an incomparable courage and bold spirit, that after a long, a fierce, and a
bloody fight, very few or none of the French Ships escaped, but were (by him)
either taken or sunk into the Sea.

King Edward landeth at Sluice.
The King on his part having received but little loss, his prisoners he sent
into England, but himself (the next day) landed at Sluice, where he was
triumphantly received by the Inhabitants and Country, who (with great joy and
infinite commendations) congratulated his happy and victorious success.

He rides to Gaunt.
And from thence he rode to Gaunt where his Queen lay. And about the space of
one month after, he (being accompanied with seven Earls, eight Bishops,
eight and twenty Baronets, two hundred Knights, A huge Army.
four thousand men of Arms, and nine thousand Archers of his own Nation, and
with the Duke of Brabant, who commanded twenty thousand of his followers: and
with Jacques Dartuell the famous Fleming, Jacques Dartuell a famous Fleming.
who conducted threescore thousand men of those Provinces: and with the Duke of
Guelders, the Marquess of Muse, the Earls of Iullers, Mouns, Sauiens, and of
Henault, the Lord Faulquemont, and many thousand Almaines: He strongly besieged
the City Tournay, which was with great resolution and valor manfully defended
for the space of ten weeks; Tournay besieged.
in all which time the French King appeared not for their defense. But (by the
importunat mediation of the aforenamed Jane de Valoys, mother to the Queen of
England, and to the Duchess of Iullers, and to the then Earl of Henalt, A
huge Army was dissolved upon the motion of a woman.
and sister to the French King) a truce was concluded for one year: which was
afterward renewed for one year more. Thus was the siege broken up: and every
one returned to his own home.

Now whilst the King had thus employed himself in the Low Countries: and in
the Empire; and in France: The Scots revolt from their King and from king Edward
The Scots (disliking Edward Baylyol their King, because he would not in any
sort oppose himself against the King of England, who so highly had advanced
him; and leaving to him only the name, but no honor due to a King) rebelled
against king Edward: And gained into their possessions almost all things
whatsoever, which he in his former Wars had won from them. But king
Edward, scorning to be checked by the lawless disobedience, and insolency of
the Scots, The King leads a huge Army into Scotland
levied an Army of six thousand horsemen, and forty thousand on foot; with
which he marched into Scotland; And those Inhabitants (having intelligence of
these irresistable preparations; and and being apprehensiue of their own
weakness) craved, and obtained a Truce for four Months, upon condition to
surrender to king Edward, A Truce.
whatsoever in his absence they had taken from him: And also to submit
themselves, if within that time David their deposed King returned not out of
France for their defense. But before the time of Truce was expired, David
returned secretly: and being safely landed in Scotland, The Scots invade
England.
he raised an Army of more then threescore thousand men; with which he entered
into Northumberland, spoiling, robbing, wasting, burning and killing (without
compassion) in all places whereon he set his foot, New Castle is besieged.
until he came to New Castle upon Tyen; which he girded about with a strong
siege. But in the depth of the night, two hundred resolved gallants issued
forth; A bold brauado.
And (upon the sudden) entered into the Earl of Murrayes Tent; which they
ransacked, slew many, and carried the said Earl a way with them, to the great
amazement and terror of the Scottish Camp.

The day appearing, was their true informer of all things, which in the night
had happened. The siege is raised.
And David (purposing a bloody revenge for this dishonor done unto him) caused
the Castle to be continually assaulted. But the Scots were manfully repulsed by
the defendants, whose undaunted spirits had banished all fear: In so much that
David (being unwilling to spend there too much time in vain) raised his siege,
and marched to the City of Durham; Durham taken and burnt.
which he took, ransacked and burnt, and slew all the men, women and children,
which did inhabit and were found there.

From thence the Scottish Army marched forth, and passed by the strong Castle
of Rowsbrough: A valiant exploit by Sir William Mountagew.
which then belonged to the Earl of Salisburie who was a prisoner in France.
In this Castle was his fair and admirably beautiful Lady, and it was kept by
Sir William Mountagew (his brother) who for his wisdom, and for his valor,
was a most renowned Knight. When he had narrowly viewed the Scottish March, he
expected their utmost fury in their return, and therefore he determined to
give him a present taste of his manhood. So that he issued forth with forty
Horsemen well appointed, and fell upon their Rereward, and slew of them more
then two hundred, and took from them one hundred and twenty horses, which
were laden with the richest of those booties, which they had taken at Durham:
and safely returned, and carried them into the Castle.

The Castle of Rosbrough is besieged.
David (disdaining thus to be beaten by so small a number) forth with retired,
and with continual assault so sharply oppressed the besieged for many days,
that he scarcely gave them leisure to take breath. By means whereof they were
almost tired, and so worn out, that small hope of long resistance was left
unto them, except they were (in due time) rescued and relieved by the King. To
give his Highness intelligence whereof, it was resolved; That one of them (in
the depth of the night) must give a desperate adventure through the Scottish
Camp. This project seemed so full of imminent peril and danger, A brave
attempt with fortunate success.
that every one of the inferiors refused the attempt: So that the brave Knight
himself (considering advisedly in what case the Castle stood: and pitying the
distressed estate of the comfortless Countess his sister, who expected
nothing but villainous abuse if it were yielded) with a settled resolution
undertook the journey. And being gallantly mounted upon a swift courser, he
speedily posted through all the thousands of his enemies And in the morning,
he informed David (by such passingers as he did meet) that very quickly he
should hear news of him again.

The Castle is bravely assaulted and defended. The siege is raised.
The Scots (knowing that it was no time to linger; and yet being desirous, to
revenge the great disgrace which their Army had received) again, and again
furiously assaulted the Castle; and (in them) they performed many brave feats
of Arms: which witnessed their eager longing to have won it, but they were
still repulsed; and beaten back, with many incredible slaughters of their
Soldiers; The King comes to late, for the Scots are gone.
and were compelled to raise the siege, and with great speed to hasten into
their own Country.

King Edward (the very day of their departure) had traveled a long and weary
journey, thinking to have met them there. But he failed of his purpose, for
which he was much grieved. Yet by the mediation of diverse Honorable
personages, A Truce.
a Truce was concluded on for a few Months: But to be enlarged for two years;
if the French King (without whose leave the Scots could make no Peace) would
consent thereto.

The French King liked the motion well, and gave freedom to the Earl of
Salisburie: For whom the Earl of Morret was by ki^^ Edward set at liberty.

And though king Edward took but little pleasure in this Truce, The causes why
the King consented to this Truce.
yet he was the more easily drawn to consent thereto: because (at the same
time) he had Wars in France, Gascoyne, Poyters, Paynton, Britain and else
where. All which daily consumed as much Treasure as he could get. The king
(when he perceived that the Scots were gone from the Castle; disarmed
himself; and (with ten, The King makes love to the Countess of Salisburie.
or twelve Lords and Knights) entered into the Castle, where the excellent
beauty, and modest behavior of the sweet Countess of Salisburie so inflamed
his heart, that by secret and amorous wooings he endeavored to persuade her,
to ease his passions with her love. But the virtuous Lady (first with mild and
kind entreaties, She cares not for it.
and afterward with quick and nipping reprehensions) striued to make the king
to see his own error. But such was his desire, and her denials were so
peremptory, and resolute; That discontentedly the King left her, cashired his
Army, and returned back again. And (having for many years together been
vexed, The King keeps a solemn Feast.
and toyled in sundry Wars) he intended to recreate himself, his Lords,
his knights and chiefest Martialists, with such pastimes and sportings, as men
of War took greatest pleasure in. Wherefore he proclaimed a solemn Feast
to continue many days, and generally invited thereunto, the valiant men of his
own, and of foreign Nations and Kingdoms; proposing the exercise of feats
of Arms, Strangers repair into England.
at the appointed time. By means whereof, many Noblemen and such as were of
best renown for Chivalry, repaired into England from many Countries
(excepting France) and were (with all magnificence; courtesy, and love)
received, and entertained by the King, Martial sportings.
and by all his Court. But in those heroical sportings (by an evil and an
unfortunate accident) Sir John Lord Beamount, The Lord Beamount slain.
a valiant Knight of this Realm: (who formerly had taken the last King, and
Sir Hugh Spencer the younger in a fisher, before the Castle of Bristoll) was
slain.

This Royal feast, and these warlike pastimes, ANNO. 18. A Parliament The
Prince of Wales is Created.
being thus finished: a Parliament was assembled at Westminster; wherein the
king Created his eldest Son Edward Prince of Wales, and unto him was given by
a free and general consent, Commissioners for the employment of the Subsidy
money.
four fifteenes by the Laity, and three by the Clergy, but with this
condition, that no part thereof should be converted unto any other use, then
only to the furtherance of the wars of France. And certain Lords and some
others of principal note, were then selected, to whom the only care and charge
of that employment should belong.

ANNO. 19
The next year following, king Edward to increase virtue, and valor, in his
Nobles, to enlarge his Amity, and Friendship with the States and Princes of
foreign Countries, The order of the Garter devised, and established.
The Rites and Ceremonies of which order, are every year solemnized with
Princely magnificence in the kings Castle at Windsor, to Gods glory, and the
honor of all such as are dignified with that degree.

And thus king Edward having a while recreated himself, with such Princely
delights as exercised his Martialists in feats of Arms, to the pleasure and
good contentment of his people: He now began again to think upon his
affairs with France, and to make his Forces better known to the Frenchmen,
then formerly they had been.

An Army sent into Gascoyne.
For which purpose, he levied a fair Army; which by his Cousin the Earl of
Darby, was landed and directed in Gascoine, with such discretion, and with such
valor, that he not only acquitted himself right nobly, by way of defense
against Philip the French king, but daily won from him his Cities, Towns,
Castles, and his Forts; and filled his hands so full, that whilst the said
Earl remained there he labored in vain to catch at any thing, which
belonged to king Edward.

Jacques Dartuell.
At the same time Jacques Dartuel (whom fortune from a low beginning had raised
to the greatest command that ever any man before him had in Flanders,
notwithstanding that Loys their Earl then personally did live among them;
secretly purposed to disherite the said Earl, and to make Prince Edward of
England the great Lord and master of those Countries: Malum consilium
consultori pessimum.
And to effect what therein he did intend, he called a general Council of
the Lords, and great men of those Territories, and appointed the place of their
meeting to be at Sluice; where he also procured the presence of king Edward,
and of the Prince his son.

To draw these States together, he proposed nothing publicly, but the
necessity of a sound conference touching their proceedings with the King of
England against France. And within the Haven there, the place of Council was in
King Edwards great ship; called the Katharine. But (unexpectedly to the Flemish
Lords) Jacques Dartuell discoursed boldly, and at large, of the great Honor,
Prowes and valor of King Edward; and of the young Prince his Son. And by many
circumstances, and devised arguments, he endeavored to extenuate the worth of
their own Earl, as being altogether unfit, and unable to be a Lord of so
great a command: and in the conclusion of his speech, he strongly striued to
persuade them all, to depose the Earl Loys and his posterity: and to add an
invincible strength to their Estates, by electing, and choosing the Prince of
England to be their Master, and great Lord.

The Nobles and the great men of Flanders (being now made ear witnesses of
Jacques Dartuells attempt: Displeasing Counsel.
And inwardly detesting to leave unto a future age a memorial of such
treacherous infidelity and wrong) made answer, that albeit no people in the
world, did more then they respect King Edward: Nor more affect the advancement
and the Honor of the Prince his Son: Yet this motion could not prevail,
except the Natives and common people of those Countries (who had as large an
interest as they, in the deposing of the said Earl, and in the disposing of
his Lordship and command) would willingly assent thereto. And (though in their
hearts they intended and meant nothing less) yet (to make fair weather for
the present time) They told the King, that they liked the motion exceeding
well: and that they would forthwith depart unto the several places of their
habitations; and would inform the people of this project, and do their best
endeauours to persuade, and to encourage them to consent thereunto. And (having
promised the King, that at the end of one Month they would return again,
with their full answer to the said motion: And having mutually performed all
complements requisite for a kind farewell) they departed thence. But when this
news was diuulged, and when it was publicly known what Jacques Dartuell had
proposed, No trusting to the peoples favor. Jacques Dartuell is hated and
murdered
both he and his practice were inwardly detested, and so hated, that he was not
esteemed to be a true borne Fleming, who had the least inclination, to give any
furtherance thereunto. Yet notwithstanding, such was the great confidence,
which this great Commander reposed in the favor of the common people: and
such was the resolution of him (whose authority before that time was
unlimited, and whose prosperity was equal to the greatness of a potent King)
that his presence would work wonders; and change the minds of the common
people. That to make trial of his power in that behalf, he came to Gaunt. But
as he passed through the streets, he might well perceive that his
entertainment was nothing correspondent to his former wel-comes, and that the
countenances of the Inhabitants bewrayed their inward contempt, and loathing,
both of him and of his despised motion. And no sooner was he entered into his
house, but by many thousands of mutenous and armed Swaggarers, it was compassed
round about: and then was he rayled on with the foulest words, and reviled
with the most bitter terms, that either their hearts could devise, or their
tongues utter. So that he perceived that it auailed him not to look big,
nor to presume (by his authority) to appease their rage. Wherefore (at a great
window of the house) he began mildly, and with humble terms to plead in his
own excuse, and promised to give them a full satisfaction, upon what grounds,
points and reasons, he had unadvisedly conceived that motion. But the sight of
him (whom in former times they loved and honored as an Angel) was now so
loathsome and so vile, and his words were so unpleasing to them, that with dirt
and stones they beat him from the window, King Edward loses many powerful
friends.
assaulted his house, brake it open, entered in, and slaughtered him with a
thousand wounds: And thus died that great Commander of the Flemings, who (for
his power and absolute authority among them) had never his equal in those
Countries. And by these means, King Edward not only lost a sound, and a
potent friend; But ever after that time, the hearts of the Flemings more
favored the French King, then they did him.

At the same time also, his noble and worthy friend and uncle Sir John of
Henalt, Sir John of Henalt reuolteth to the French.
Lord Beamont, revolted from him, and adheared to the French King, because King
Edward (upon some private unkindness conceived) did withold and keep from
him a Pension, which (for his faithful and good service) he had formerly
given, and duly paid unto him.

And though King Edward did daily grow more strong in his hopes, A valiant
King.
to possess himself of the Crown of France: yet the loss of some great
friends, being his associates in those Wars, made him indeed more weak;
yet, those his misfortunes so little auailed to discourage him, that it
increased his magnanimity and his resolutions, to maintain those his Wars
with the greater helps of his own strength. ANNO. 20 Aguillon is besieged by
100000. men.


Now was the King informed, that John the eldest Son of the French King, had
strongly besieged the Castle of Aguillon in Gascoyne, wel-neere with an hundred
thousand men (within which were the Noble Earl of Pembroke, and the renowned
Knight Sir Walter of Manny, and diverse others of especial note and place. The
King transporteth an Army into Normandy
Whereupon King Edward levied the number of fourteen thousand men, which he
and the Prince his Son, being accompanied with eight Earls, fifteen
Barrons, and a great number of brave Knights and gallant Gentlemen, by the
advice and counsel of Sir Godfray Lord Harcourt, a French banished Noble man
of great wisdom, and wonderful valor in the War, carried into Normandy:
and with them he besieged the rich and strong Town of Harflew: Harflew is
taken.
but (because the English Army seemed terrible in the sight of the
Inhabitants) it was not defended, but the King took it without blows, and
gave the spoil thereof to his common Soldiers, so that he fil^ed their Purses
with Crowns, and thereby prepared them with the greater courage, Diverse towns
and Castles are taken.
and resolution for more dangerous attempts. So that within few days after,
he won, rifled and spoiled the rich Towns of Cheirbrough, Mount-brough and
Quaren^ue, and the Castle there.

Then King Edward marched forth in great strength through that Country;
Normandy harrowed by King Edward.
being hedged in on the one side by his Marshall the Lord Harcourt, and five
hundred chosen men of war which he commanded, and by his other Marshall on
the other side with a like number: And with such severity, ransacked, spoiled,
burned and ha^owed all places as he passed by: The English Army is rich. The
English Army increases.
that every common soldier was now a rich man, and the Kings Army was
increased: and now consisted of nineteen thousand fighting men: with which he
pitched before the city of Cane (in which were the Earls of Tankeruile and of
Ewe: Besides the Earl of Guyens, who being high Constable of France, had
gathered and brought unto that place many brave and approved men at Arms, and
made a flourishing show as if he meant to issue forth, and to give battle to
the King. But fear possessing his heart, he made but a faint resistance, The
City of Cane is taken
and in short time and with little loss, the City was taken, and ransacked by
the English soldiers; who conueighed all their spoils into England. Sir
Thomas Holland. Loureys is taken. Why King Edward meddled with no walled Towns,
nor Castles in the Province of Eureux.


In the yielding up of this City. First, the three Earls submitted their
fortunes to Sir Thomas Holland, a valiant English Knight who had but one eye,
of whom the King bought them for ten thousand marks in Gold: and receiving
them as prisoners into his Army, he marched to the Town of Loures which he
quickly won, and then entered into the Province of Eureux all which he wasted,
spoiled and burned without pity: (the walled Towns, Cities, and Castles only
excepted) with none of which he meddled, ^east by them, his strength should be
deminished before he met with the French King, who had solemnly sworn and
protested that King Edward should not return into England before a battle
fought between them.

Many towns won by the English.
After this, King Edward in his march, won Gisours, Vernon, Saint Germans in
Lay, Mountrell, Saint Cloud, Rely, and the whole Country about Roan, Pont de'
Larch, Nants, Newlench, Robboys, Fountain, Poys, and Vimew, in all which
places he found but weak resistance. King Philip of France, having true
intelligence, that King Edward with all his Army was within two leagues of
Paris, The French King forsakes the Parisians.
left that City, and went to S. Dennis where his Army lay, persuading the
Parisians that King Edward dared not to look them in the face, but they
believed him not, and fear made them greatly displeased with their king. Those
of Amyens are slain, and taken.
Near about the same time Sir Godfrey Lord Harcourt being one of King Edwards
Marshals, encountered with certain Burgesses of Amyens, whom the French king
had appointed to come unto Paris for the better defense thereof, if need should
so require: and though they defended themselves with much valor, yet at length
twelve hundred of them were slain, and the rest being taken prisoners, were
brought unto the king. The English Army so eagerly pursued the happiness of
their fortune, That they possessed the whole country through which they
passed, yea even to the gates of Aubeuile, The English Army is environed on
the sudden.
and of Saint Valary: yet were they unawares environed with the River of Some
on the one side; and with the French Kings army (consisting of more then an
hundred thousand men) on the other side. The place wherein he was, promised him
no manner of advantage, if he should fight: but many inconueniencies presented
themselves unto him, So that he consulted with his Prisoners, if any of them
could direct him to any Ford where he might transport his Army, among whom,
one who was named Gobyn of Grace, Gobyn of Grace.
directed him to a convenient passage. But when the King came thither, it was
defended by twelve thousand of the French Kings Army. Yet notwithstanding
(when the Sea was ebbed) King Edward, with the Prince and the whole Army, did
put themselves into the water, and so did the French men on the other side,
King Edward passes through the river of Some and slaughtereth the French.
so that they all encountered pell mell in the midst of the River, and fought
with such desperate resolution on either part, that many a man was stricken
down, being slain, or by that mean was drowned. But at length the Frenchmen
being much wasted by the sword fled, and the Englishmen slaughtered them in the
Chase a full league and more.

Edward and his son was to be blessed with much honor, and happiness, or to
be unfortunate, The famous and victorious Battle of Cressey.
though hitherto it had proceeded well. For the French king (being resolved to
be revenged without pity, and in regard that his Army contained in number
more then six times as many fighting men as king Edward had; and making no
doubt, Great odds.
but that a triumphant victory should prevent all future danger of Englands
claim to the French Crown) marched with all his strength, in good order of
battle, against king Edward. Who (knowing that only the sword was then to
decide the controversy, and to pronounce the judgment) entered into a spacious
field near unto Cressey, where he did set his whole Army in good order, and
divided it into three battles. All which he so imparked behind with
carriages and carts, that no man was easily able to interrupt or to endanger
them in the Reareward. The Battle of the Black Prince.
And when the battle should begin, the first Companies were conducted by the
young Prince, who was assisted by the Earls of Warwick, and of Canford, and by
the Lords of Harcourt, Stafford, Manny, De Lauarre, Chandoys, Clifford, and
Bourchier, Sir Reynold Cobham, Sir Thomas Holland, Sir Roger Neuill, and many
other Lords, knights, and Gentlemen of name. And in that battle were eight
hundred men at Arms, Two thousand Archers, and one thousand other lusty and
good Soldiers.

The second battle was directed by the Earls of Northampton, The second
Battle of the English.
and of Arondel, who were accompanied with the Lords Rose, Lygo, Willoughby,
Basset, Saint Awbin, Myleton, and De La Sell; and by many other Lords,
knights, and Gentlemen. And in this battle there were eight hundred men at
Arms, and twelve hundred Archers.

And the third and maine battle (being placed betwixt the other two) was led
by the king himself, who was assisted by many Earls, Lords, knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen of the best rank. The Kings Battle.
And in that battle there were seven hundred men at Arms, Two thousand
Archers, and ten thousand other common soldiers, well approved and expert
men of war.

The English Army having exercised themselves in prayer unto God, and
moderatly refreshed themselus with some meat, and some drink, laid themselves
down upon the ground, thereby to comfort, and to ease themselves before they
fought. But the Frenchmen (although they proudly bragged, and profferd many
shows) yet for that day they wanted courage to begin the fight. Fifteen
thousand Genowayes overthrown.
But the next morning, the French king commanded that fifteen thousand
Genowayes, with their Crosbowes, should give the first onset upon the Prince
his battle. But either for want of skill, or else (in making king more have
than good speed) their disorder was so foul, and so gross, That by the
English Archers the greater part of them were slain; The maine Battle of the
French Army is disordered.
and the rest were soon defeated, and compelled to retire. In which (so
violent was their have and posting) that in rude heaps they rushed into the
French kings maine battle, and disordered it, but were by their own friends
without mercy put unto the sword.

The Prince his Battle receives the Frenchmen to their pain
And though the French Army (by reason of their disorder not to be repaired)
had little warrant for good success: yet being emboldned by reason of their
multituds, and being sharp set upon revenge, advanced themselus, and charged
gallantly upon the English Army; but bent their chiefest strength against the
Prince his battle, who received them with such fury, and hardy blows, that
thousands of them (almost in a moment) were made Bond-slaues unto death.

The benefit of good order.
For still: the Prince his battle remained entire and unbroken. By means
whereof he made prodigal expense and havoc of the Frenchmen, who being
first broken, could not observe any order at all, nor help themselves by any
ingenious policy of War.

And though they fell in great numbers before the Prince his battle, yet
their new, and copious supplies, which always succeeded those who were slain,
gave no leisure nor respit at all to the Prince, nor to his assistants, to take
any breathing; Much less to refresh themselves. So that the brave Prince
(though he were full of incomparable valor, and resolution, yet (being
distressed for want of breath, and of some relief) he sent to have some help
and succor from the King: The King would not relieve the Prince his Son.
who inquired of the messinger if he were alive? who answered that he was: Then
(quoth the King) report to him from me, that he expect no aid; For this shall
be the day in which he shall win his spurs, or else shall loose his life.
For in life, or in death, he shall ingrosse to himself the whole honor and
glory of this day. When Prince Edward was informed what the King had said,
(being urged by sharp necessity, and animated with fresh hopes of a famous
Victory) He, with his companions in Arms, renewed their strength, and
redoubled their manlike courage: And (wholly reposing their trust, The French
Army is overthrown.
and confidence in Gods goodness, and in the edges of their hungry swords)
they fought with such undaunted spirits, that the Frenchmen began to fly:
and were so eagerly pursued, That the greater part of their whole Army lay
breathless upon the ground. And, in the Chase, the two Marshals of England
encountered with a multitude of the Inhabitants of Beuoys, Reignyer, An other
French company is slain.
Aubeuile, and of Roan, of whom seven thousand were slain, and the rest by
flight had much ado in saving of themselves. And the next day the said
Marshals were recharged by the Archbishop of Roan, and by the Grand-Pryor of
France, No misfortune goes alone.
who conducted a strong Army to aid their king: They not knowing that the
Battle was already fought, and the field lost by their friends.

With these new forces the English men encountered and contended so proudly,
that quickly they began to fly; and were almost all wasted by the sword. The
number of Prisoners, and of such as were slain
So that within the compass of those two days, there were slain on the
French part eleven Princes, fourscore Baron, twelve hundred knights, and more
then thirty thousand soldiers of the common sort: And the French king
himself by speedy flight, very hardly escaped with his life. The King gives
away all the spoils
The whole booty of this field, the king frankly bestowed upon his Nobles,
Gentry, and on his whole army: and caused the dead bodies of all such as were
honorable and of note, to be taken up, The Kings charity.
and carried them with him unto Mountrell, where they were buried with much
solemnity, and great honor.

Now (when king Edward perceived, King Edward besieges Callice.
that the French king made no preparation at all for a new supply to encounter
him) he marched toward Callice; burning, spoiling, and rifling all places,
as he passed by. The Town, and Castle, he intended not to assault. For as it
would have been full of danger, so he knew the strength thereof to be such,
that in assaulting it he should both loose his labor, and his men. It
therefore gave him good content, Two hundred thousand men in the French Kings
army The French
to gird and to compass it round about with a strong siege: Which (when he had
continued a full whole year) the French king, with a huge army of two hundred
thousand men, marched toward Callice.

But finding every passage and way, in such warlike sort to be guarded, and
defended, that he could not approach unto the English army: He challenged
king Edward to maintain his honor, Kings Challenge.
by fighting with him a battle in the Field. But king Edward (by reason of
his long siege having spent much Treasure; and the Town and Castle of Callice
wanting many things, needful, King Edwards answer.
and necessary for their relief) made this answer: That his many and great
Victories in France, and elsewhere, sufficiently cleared him from the suspicion
of Cowardice: and that (seeing he had traveled, and spent so much time, and
money, for the winning of Callice) the French king should open all passages by
force, and then make trial of his Strength before that Town, The French Army
Cashired.
or (otherwise) might return. Whereupon the French King (not finding any
means how he might relieve Callice) cashired his Army, and retired: leaving
poor distressed Callice to the mercy of King Edward) who daily expected when
it should be yielded into his hands.

The Scots invade England in the Kings absence. The Queen fights with them.
John Copland takes the King of Scots are overthrown. John Copland would not
deliver his Prisoner to the Queen.
Now whilst the King thus lay before Callice, David of Scotland, with an Army
of fifty thousand men (by the procurement, and furtherance of the French King)
entered into England, and did much harm. But the Queen (with her Army,
consisting only of twelve thousand valiant men) confronted him in the field,
where was fought a long and a sharp battle; until King David (by an Esquire
named John Copland) was taken prisoner, and secretly conveyed out of the army.
There were also (at that time) slain of the Scots, diverse Earls, Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, besides more then fifteen thousand soldiers of the
common rank. And the residue of them being defeated, returned by continual
flight into Scotland.

The Queen much importuned John Copland for the delivery of his Prisoner king
David. But he (making challenge unto him, as to his only behoof, by the
Laws of Arms) made answer, that he would not deliver him unto any but to
the King himself. So that the Queen (being highly displeased with him)
certified the king both of her Victory, and also in what sort John Copland had
answered her, touching the delivery of the Scottish king. Whereupon, John
Copland (being sent for) went unto Callice, John Copland is thanked, and
rewarded
where he was graciously and lovingly welcomed by the king, who thanked him
heartily for his great service; and made him an Esquire of his own body; and
recompensed his travails, King David and others are committed to the Tower.
and his good fortune, with the gift in Fee simple of five hundred pounds by
the year in good Land; and commanded him to deliver his Prisoner to the Queen
at his return: which he performed accordingly. And then the Queen committed
the said king and the Earl of Morret, and many others, Prisoners to the Tower
of London: where they remained long after.

The Queen passes over to Callice.
And then the Queen (being accompanied with a fair troop of fair Ladies, and
beautiful Gentlewomen (whose husbands, fathers, brothers, and kinsfolks, had
for a long time been employed in the French wars) came unto the king, as he
lay before Callice; and were by the king, and his whole army received, and
entertained with much joy. The Callicians crave mercy.


And now the distressed, and the besieged Town of Callice (traveling with
many wants, and being destitute of all hope to be relieved, because the French
King not long before had cashired and dismissed his whole Army) craved pardon,
A hard condition.
and mercy of King Edward: Who (in regard of their perverse and long continued
obstinacy, and for that they had spoiled and robbed many of his English
Merchants upon the Sea, before they were besieged) would in no sort hearken to
their request and submission; except six of their worthiest Inhabitants did
come unto him, Bare-legged, Bareheaded, in their Shirts, and with Halters about
their necks, to be corrected and disposed of as the king should please. Ingens
telum necessitas.
And though this condition was full of terror and of bitterness, yet
necessity compelled them to accomplish the kings demand. So that they sent
him the keys both of the Town, and Castle, by those six, A heavy sentence.
who presented them to the king. The keys he received; but forthwith commanded
that the said Townsmen should be hanged. Whereupon, all such in the kings
Army, Intercession for the lives of the Callicians.
as were either Honorable by birth, or had for their service deserved well, or
were graced by the kings especial love and favor; became earnest Petitioners
to the king for the Pardon of those distressed men. But such was the kings
resolution, and full determination, to make them examples to the rest, for the
injuries, and for the wrongs which formerly they had done to the English
Nation, The Queen only procures their Pardon.
that all their means was insufficient, and unable to deliver them from death.
Which when the Queen perceived (on bended knees, with Prayers and with Tears,
and with importunate request) she never ceased to urge the king, until she
had procured their Pardon, and their enlargement from that danger. Callice is
yielded to King Edward, in An. Dom. 1347. and in the 22. year of King Edwards
reign A stranger made Captain of Callice. The King returns into England.
Londoners are sent to dwell in Callice.


The chief Captain named Sir Guy of Vyen, and such knights and Gentlemen as
were in the Town, and in the Castle, were sent Prisoners into England; where
they remained about six months, and were then ransomed by the French king.

Thus when the king was quietly and fully possessed of Callice (the keye to
France) and had (without sparing of any cost) in wonderful sort strengthened,
and fortified it: He left none to remain there, but Englishmen; the Captain
only excepted: Who being a Lombard by birth, was named Sir Andrew de Pauye, an
especial favorite of the kings, whom the king (upon the undoubted trust, and
confidence which he reposed in him) placed chief Captain, and Commander
there.

These things being thus settled in good order; the king with the Queen and all
his troops, returned into England; and were received into London with
extraordinary Triumph, and great joy. And from thence he sent six and
thirty rich, wise, and grave Citizens, with there Wives and Families to
Callice, to inhabit, and to trade and traffic there: Great privileges
granted to the Callicians.
and gave to the said Town and Castle such profitable and large immunites,
privileges, liberties and franchesses; that they thought themselves to be very
happy, whom the king would license to dwell there.

The Pope mediates a Truce.
Pope Clement the sixth (having many years laughed in his sleeue, to see these
two potent and mighty kings, so busily to employ themselves each against other
in those bloody Wars) at length mediated a Truce betwixt them: which (on his
motion) was concluded for two years.

Callice should have been betrayed
And in the mean time, king Edward was informed, that Sir Andrew de Pauie his
chief Captain of Callice, (for twenty thousand Crowns to him promised by
the Lord Charney Captain of Arras) had conspired to betray the Town and
Castle into his hands. Whereupon king Edward (to make a trial of this news,
and to surprise the said Lord, The King passes secretly unto Callice.
and all his Company, if he might, when he should come to take the
possession of Callice) departed secretly out of England with three hundred
selected men at arms, and in the depth of the night landed at Callice, and was
quickly received in: where he sharply reprehended the Lombard, who, under the
pretext of honest dealing for the king, excused himself of any treacherous
intent. But within a night or two after, the Lord Charney (at the appointed
time) repaired thither with twelve hundred armed men, to surprise both the
Castle, and the Town. The money (in good Gold) was by the Captain received at
a posterne gate of the Castle; The Money is received.
and one hundred only of that Company were suffered to enter in. But they
(finding quickly that they were beguiled, and betrayed) without noise, or
resistance, yielded themselves; and were closed up in a strong Dungeon. And
then the king himself, King Edwards valor and courage.
with three hundred men at arms, (under the Banner of Sir Walter of Mannie)
brake forth out of the Castle, and furiously rushed upon the Frenchmen; who
attended for better news. But when they did perceive that they were deceived;
they resolved to acquit themselves like men; and, for an hour and more, so
they did. But when many of them were slain, the rest fled; and were thus
deprived, both of their many, and of their hope. In this conflict the King
himself encountered hand to hand with the Lord Eustace of Rybamount, Sir
Eustace Lord Rybamont.
a right hardy and valiant knight; and was by him twice stooped on his knees:
But skorning to yield to any base conceit, or froward Fortune, he advanced
himself so nobly, A noble King.
and in such sort redoubled his courage and his strength, that in the end he
took the said Sir Eustace prisoner with his own hand: the said Lord not
knowing with whom he had so sharply contended. But the King, making him to know
all, released him without Ransom; promised him future favors; and dismissed
him with a Princely reward.

About the same time, the French king Philip of Valoys died: The French King
dies. ANNO 24. John is Crowned King of France. The Kings Victory at Sea.
Guyens is yielded to the Callicians ANNO. 25 ANNO. 27 A Duke of Lancaster
Created. How John of Gaunt became Duke of Lancaster. A Combat appointed
between the Duke of Lancaster and the Duke of Brunswicke. A reconciliation.
The Marts for England removed from the Flemings.
and his son was crowned King.

In the beginning of his Reign he created Sir Charles a Noble man of Spain,
Earl of Angolesme; because he entered into the narrow Seas on the French
behalf with a powerful Fleet, and miserably spoiled, robbed, and rifled the
English Merchants; and exposed them to much cruelty. With him king Edward
fought; and compelled him to fly having lost many of his chiefest men, and
two and twenty of his best ships.

And about the same time, the Castle of Guyens was yielded to the Kings people
of Callice: and in the seven and twentieth year of his Reign, he created his
Cousin Henry of Bullinbrooke (who was Earl of Darby) Duke of Lancaster: with
whose daughter and heir, the kings son John of Gaunt afterward married; and
was Duke of Lancaster in her right. He also created Sir Roger Stafford, Earl
of Stafford. The said Duke (upon some misinformation that he should publish
some disgraceful words of the Duke of Brunswicke) was by him challenged to a
single Combat before king John of France; whereof he gladly accepted: and at
the appointed time, they both being thoroughly fitted for that purpose, entered
with hautie courage into the Lists, for the trial of their cause. But they
both of them were reconciled by the French King, to the great contentment and
honor of the Duke of Lancaster, notwithstanding that he was an Englishman and
a subject to his Enemy.

King Edward (during the time of the aforesaid Truce) had used all friendly
means to reconcile the Flemmings, and to draw them from the French to his own
part: but finding that al his endeavors proved vain, and that no courtesy
could win them, he withdrew from them all his Marts for Marchandizing, which
Jacques Dartuell had procured for them. Which thing (in a short time) became
exceeding hurtful and prejudicial to the Flemmings.

And now (the time of the former Truce with France being long since ended) King
Edward levied a puissant Army of his most expert and approved men of war,
The Black Prince landeth in Gascoyne with an Army.
which he committed to the charge and Government of his son, the Noble and
Valorous Prince of Wales, surnamed the Black Prince: Who being accompanied
with many Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of name, He prevails. The
French King l^uieth a huge army.
departed out of England, and landed in Gascoyne; where he ransacked, spoiled,
burnt, and consumed Villages, Towns, Cities, Forts, and Castles, in all places
as he passed by, without any resistance or defense. But King John of France,
intending to ^op this Torrent: and making no doubt but that the multitude of
his soldiers should give him an easy Victory over so small a Company as the
Prince conducted, Ten thou^an^ men only (...) English Army.
which exceeded not ten thousand men; Levied a huge Army, which he
assembled from all places subject to his Dominion. And being accompanied with
Philip his younger son, and with the Flower of all the Chivalry of France, He
marched with great strength, ANNo. 30 1355. The Battle of Poyters.
against the Black Prince; whom he found near unto Poyters, readily prepared
in the field to receive him. The French army was divided into four Battles:
who (as their turns, or lots came) fought with much valor, but with little
use of their great skill. For the thick shot of the English Archers, (galling
vnmeasurably their great Horses) was the cause, that quickly they brake their
order and their array: which suddenly bred such a total disturbance in the
whole army, The French men are disordred.
that themselves (as waves of water do in a turbulent, and in a tempestuous
Sea) overwhelmed each others; so that such as were down, were trodden to death
by their own friends who could not avoid them; such as would press forward to
make good proof of their valor, were repressed by such as did retire; And
such as did recoyle, were stopped and hindered of their purpose, by those who
could not choose but resist their coming back. Notwithstanding, the French
Kings own Battle (which was better ordered then all the rest) encountering
with that Battle of the English army, in which the Prince of Wales was;
performed most rare and wonderful feats of Chivalry, King John is a most
valiant Prince.
which (to the utmost of their powers) they increased; being extraordinarily
animated thereunto by the matchless valor and fortitude of their King: who
(like a worthy Knight for his surpassing valor and courage) exceeded all his
Nobles for performance of that day.

The Brave valor, and resolution of the English.
But the Black Prince, and his Battle (whom no disorder troubled) striving
almost beyond the abilities of men to win honor, and to save them selves;
remained undaunted spirits. And as dangers pressed forth; so did they (with
incomparable manhood) drive them back again, making the Frenchmen know by
their miserable experience, that they could not so much as dream of any
flight, The Black Prince his vow.
nor of yielding, but were so greedy of the best honor, that nothing but
Death, or Victory, could content them. The Prince himself vowed, that through
the help of Almighty God he would that day perform the part of a good
Knight. And to say the truth, such were his unmatchable deeds of arms, so
hautie was his spirit, so pleasing was his example, and so cheerful were his
encouragements to his whole army; that every one among them (striving to
imitate his valor, and to win his favor,) redoubled his strength; The
French Army is overthrown.
and with such resolution fell upon the Frenchmen, that they were compelled to
give back, and were so violently pursued, that the battle (in which their
King fought) was now opened, and in such sort disordered, that the Englishmen
entered into the midst of them; wounding and killing on every side with little
or no loss, or danger to themselves. And at length; King John, and his younger
Son are taken Prisoners by Sir Dennis Morbecke.
King John (scorning to leave the field) yielded himself and his son Philip,
prisoners unto Sir Dennis Morbeck a Knight of Saint Omers: who for a murder
forsook his Country, and served for wages with the Black Prince. In this
battle there were slain very many great men of the Nobility, and Gentry
of France; and above ten thousand others.

Too much desire of Honor, and too much covetousness; The French King is ill
used.
were the causes, that the French King (being thus taken) was ill used: For (by
reason that more than ten Gentlemen laid several claims unto him, as to
their Prisoner) he was uncivilly drawn from one to another, not without some
peril to his life: but telling them, that he was so great a Lord, that he
could make them all rich, they were better pleased, and brought him to the
Prince: Who with great reverence bowed himself before the King: How the Black
Prince received and entertained the French King, and his Son. The Black
Prince brings the French King and his Son: Prisoners into England. Sir Dennis
Morbecke.
revived his heavy spirits, with cheerful, and with comfortable words:
feasted him and Phillip his younger Son: attended duetifully at his Table;
lodged him in his own bed: Provided for him most honorable attendance:
Supplied all things about him which were wanting: and brought them both, from
thence unto Bordeaux, and from thence into England; where he was joyfully, and
royally received, and wel-commed by the King and Queen, and by the Nobility
of this Kingdom, and was entertained with as great magnificence and courtesy,
as he could expect, or wish for. And upon King John's own confession, the
honor of his taking was by King Edward adjudged to Sir Dennis Morbeck: who for
his great and good service was much thanked: and bountifully rewarded by the
King.

In this Battle (besides such as were slain) There were taken prisoners
seventeen Earls, thrice as many Barons, Prisoners.
and so great a number of Knights, and Gentlemen of name, and of note: that
every English common soldier (who had fewest prisoners) had two: all which, A
bountiful Prince.
together with the wohle spoils of the field, the Prince frankely and freely
gave to his companies who valiantly had won them by their swords. The English
Army are made rich.
So that there was not a poor man in the English army, but every one of them
had as much Gold, and as much Silver, Plate, and Jewels, as gave him good
contentment for his pains. And such was their store, and such was their
plenty of those things, that rich and costly Armours, and such like warlike
provisions, were not taken up, nor cared for at all.

How the French King was disposed of.
The French King (for a while) lived at the Sauoy; which by King Edward was
sumptuously furnished; and beautified, with all things necessary for so great a
guest. And from thence, he was removed to the Castle of Windsor, where he
feasted, hunted, hawked, and did all things according to his own pleasure, and
will, for the space of two years; the King, and the Black Prince, as often as
any leisure gave them leave repairing thither; and gladding him with their
cheerful and most friendly company, and with the variety of many pleasing
sports. By means whereof, true and hearty love, and affection, did knit them
fast together, so that they concluded a friendly Truce, to continue for the
space of two years. The honorable prosperity of King Edward, and of the
Black Prince.
And thus were King Edward, and the Noble Prince his son, honored and
blessed by Almighty God, with such triumphant success in their wars, both
in Scotland, and in France, (they then possessing for their Prisoners at one
time, the Kings of those two Kingdoms, and Philip the French Kings younger
son, and many Dukes, Earls, and Barons) as none other Princes in
Christendom then were.

King David of Scotland is released.
And David the King of Scots after ten years of imprisonment in England was
enlarged for a ransom of one hundred thousand pounds, to be paid in five
years: And (upon his oath never again to bear arms against England; and
upon his Homage, and Fealty, done for that Kingdom; ANNO. 32
and upon his faithful promise to do his best to procure the Nobility of
Scotland to do the like) he was enlarged and set free.

ANNO. 33 The Dalphin allows not his Fathers conclusions. King John of France
committed to the Tower.
Not long after, King Edward and the King of France, entered into a parley for a
longer time of Truce. But their conclusions and agreements were utterly
disliked by his eldest Son Charles then Regent of France, and Duke of
Normandy; and by the whole Baronie of that County. Whereupon King Edward,
with all expedition and convenient speed, made greater preparation to make
War there, then he had done at any time before. And (having committed the
French king, and his son Philip with honorable attendance, close prisoners to
the Tower of London, himself, with the Black Prince his son, transported
thither a puissant Army; ANNO. 34. King Edward and the Black Prince do land a
puisant Army at Callice The Regent Dolphin sueth for Pe^ce.
and landed at his Town of Callice: and from thence he marched strongly unto
Rhemes, where he besieged the Castle seven weeks; but did not win it in the
end. From thence he marched toward Paris, and Chartres, wasting, burning, and
killing in all places as he passed; so that he compelled the Regent, and the
Nobility of France, to become earnest petitioners unto him for peace: which
they obtained, upon these Articles ensuing.

1. FIrst, that King JOHN should pay for his ransom, The Articles of the Peace.
five hundred thousand Pounds of sterling money. 2. Secondly, That from
thencefoorth, No King of France should aid, or assist, The Ransom
any King of Scotland in any War or Rebellion against England: And that no
King of England should from thencefoorth take part with the Flemings in any
expedition, or War against France. 3. Thirdly, That the Kings of England
should have, and for ever enjoy freely, without homage, and in their own
right, their Territories in Gascoyne, and in Guyan, with the Precincts,
Castles, Forts, Towns and Cities of Poyters, and Perygrot; The Earledomes of
Bygrot, Poytiau, and Guyens, the City of Lymoges, Tharbes, Guaire, Again,
Angolesme, Agenoys, Rauerne, and Caours, The Lordship of Xantes, Caumesin,
Hammes, Ouy, and Mountrell, with the Seigniories of Callice, Marguise,
Sandgate, and Coloigne. 4. And lastly; That (in regard thereof) King EDWARD,
The Title to the Crown of France is relinquished.
As well in the behalf of himself, as of his Successors Kings of England,
should utterly renounce and leave, both the name and title to the Kingdom of
France.
And for the performance of these Articles, ANNO. 34 How the observation of
this Peace was ratified. The King and Prince return into England.
Charles the Regent of France, and the Prince of Wales, in the presence of six
Knights of either Nation, received the holy Sacrament at the high Altar, and
then King Edward and his son returned into England, and were (with all
complements of love and kindness) entertained, and feasted at the Tower of
London by the French King, who was conveyed from thence to Callis, The French
King feasteth them.

The two princes swear. Hostages.


where (according to agreement) he remained four months, and then King Edward
repaired to him, and both of them (at a high Mass) solemnly swore to observe,
perform, and keep the said Articles and the peace. And King John (for the
hostages of his Ransom) delivered to King Edward four Dukes, seven Earls,
ten Barons, many Knights, and two of the worthiest Burgesses of every great
City in France, and took a most friendly leave of the King, and of the Prince
of Wales, and departed toward Boleine: King John was a prisoner four years.
he having remained a prisoner more then four years. And King Edward with his
son returned into England, bringing with them their honorable Hostages, who
were (with all humanity and kindness) feasted and entertained by the King and
by his Nobility, and were permitted freely to use all sports, pastimes, and
exercises for pleasure and contentation, as they pleased.

ANNO. 37 Three Kings do visit King Edward. King John dies in England. The
Black Prince lives in Bordeaux. ANNO. 40 The causes of King Edwards future
losses in those Countries. Peter King of Castile, is deposed by Henry the
Bastard. King Charles the fifth takes part with Henry the Bastard. The Black
Prince being victorious resetleth Peter in his Kingdom.
About two years after king Edward was at one time visited (for love and
kindness only, and for no business at all) by three Kings, that is to say,
by king John of France, David the king of Scots, and by the king of Cyprus, and
were with all munificent bounty and liberality feasted, and honored by the
King, but king John fell sick, and dyed in the Sauoy, and his body was conuayd
unto S. Dennis in France, where (with great pomp, and princely ceremonies) it
was buried.

The next year following, the noble Prince of ^ales and his wife (being very
gallantly attended, and provided) went unto Bordeaux, where he lived, and
governed the kings Provinces thereabout, and elsewhere in France, to the great
contentment and good liking of the Nobles and commons of those Countries.

In the fortith year of king Edwards reign an unfortunate business was taken
in hand by the valiant Prince of Wales, which albeit it were performed with
great resolution, and was rewarded with deserved honor, yet within few years,
by reason of a future accident, it was the occasion that king Edward lost a
great part of his territories in France, and it was thus. Peter the true and
lawful king of Castile was in the field overthrown, put to flight, and
dispossessed of his Crown by Henry his Bastard Brother, who was assisted by
Charles the fifth, the son of John the deceased king of France. This poor
distressed king (in his wants and misery) repaired to the Prince of Wales for
aid, who for his restoring, and upon large and faithful promises of liberal
pay and great rewards, conducted an army into Castile. And, albeit that the
Spanish and the French forces were in number four times more then the Princes
were, yet in a bloody battle the most of them were slain, and the rest were
put to flight. And king Peter was again restored to his Crown, and settled in
his kingdom by the Prince, who returned again to Bordeaux with great honor.

But (not long after) Henry the Bastard, Henry the Bastard takes, and slaieth
Peter. Peter's two heirs married to John of Gant and Thomas of Woodstocke. The
want of pay was the Prince his overthrow. This Tax mard all.
(being newly supplied with fresh forces) warred with such great fury and
violence upon king Peter, that he subdued him: and (to prevent all future
claymes and troubles which he might make) he caused him to be put to death. But
his two daughters and heirs were after married unto John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, and to Thomas of Woodstock, two of king Edwards sons.

By reason of king Peter's death; the Prince his soldiers (being hopeless to
receive their promised pay, and large rewards) and being oppressed with many
wants, daily petitioned the Prince to supply their need. But he (finding none
other means to support their necessities, nor being stored with money to
relieve their poverty) imposed (contrary to the customs of those Countries)
diverse Taxes upon the inhabitants of Aquitaine: which so highly did displease
them, that the Lords thereof complained of this sharp novelty to the French
king, who (flatly contrary to the Articles not long before concluded on for
peace betwixt England and France) arrogated to himself the Sovereignty over
the Prince, The French King breaks the League.
and his Dominions in France; and sommoned him to appear before him at Paris.
So that the peace, and those agreed Articles were broken by the French king,
The Prince sommoned to appear at Paris. Wars proclaimed. Almost all do
revolt from the Prince. The mutabilitie of fortun An unfortunate year.
and wars were again proclaimed between England and France. But before the
Prince of Wales could enable his forces for a strong defense: the inhabitants
of those Countries for the most part revolted from him, and daily yielded their
Towns, Cities, Forts, and Castles, into the hands of the French king. So that
king Edward (who for the space of forty years together was most honorable, and
more fortunate then any other Christian Prince, by gayning of incredible
victories upon the Scots, and French Nation) within the compass of one year,
and without blows, lost (almost) all his Command in those Provinces, which by
the said agreement, and articles of peace, were allotted, and by solemn oath
assured unto him.

King Charles of France (forgetting what he had sworn, ANNO. 43 The French
Name.
and pleasing himself thus quietly to be made the Lord of all those Countries
which were assigned to king Edward) conceived strong hope, not only to defeat
him utterly of all these Countries, but also to vex him at home in his own
kingdom. And for that purpose he furnished a strong Navy, with which he kept
the Narrow Seas. But king Edward (to drive those forces back again) sent his
son John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, John of Gant with an Army, landeth at
Callice, and marches to Bordeaux.

He beats the French King.

ANNO. 44 An other Army sent into France. The English do prevail.


with an army into Callice, who (to the terror and spoil of the Frenchmen)
marched from thence, until he came to Bordeaux to the Prince his Brother,
without opposition, or resistance; wasting, and hauoking in all places as he
passed by, saving that he was once met with, and encountered by king Charles;
who (being soundly beaten) was enforced to retire, and to give free passage to
the Duke.

King Edward (as much as in him lay) though he began to grow old, yet he was
very careful of those affairs. For as soon as his son John of Gaunt was
gone out of England: he sent another Army unto Saint Omers, which was
conducted by Sir Robert Knowles; who (marching through those adjacent
Countries) with fire and sword depopulated it, yea almost until he came to the
City of Paris. And then he marched into the Earldom of Angeou where he
won the strong Towns of Vaas, and Ruylly, and sundry others thereabout. But
the French king being informed, that there was great dissension in the English
army, betwixt Sir Robert Knowles and the Lords Fitz-water, and of Grauntson;
rushed upon them suddenly with an army: and finding their minds divided, and
their forces by great disorder broken, Dissension caused the Englishmens
overthrow.
prevailed against them, and slew about one thousand Englishmen. Whereupon the
said Towns, which they had taken, were again yielded into the French kings
hands. He also (following the good hap of his fawning Fortune) sent another
army into the Province of Guyan: ANNO. 45
where the Prince was weakly assisted, and his Towns, and Castles daily
revolted from him.

King Edward (being much perplexed with the common reports of his declining
Fortune; ANNO. 46
and being resolved to do his best to prevent the worst) assembled his high
Court of Parliament at Westminster: A Parliament.
wherein (to supply his wants, and to give better strength and furtherance to
his French Wars) the Temporaltie with much cheerfulness granted him a
Subsidy of fifteen thousand pounds: A Subsidy granted.
and the like sum he requested of the Clergy; who were contented to give
him fair words, but no money. Whereat he was so much displeased, The Clergy
will grant none.

The Clergy disgraced. ANNO. 46 The Earl of Pembroke defeated, and taken at
Sea.


that whereas (at that time) the Bishops and the Clergy men, were chiefly
honored with all Places and Offices of Honor, and of Profit; and of Command;
disgracefully he deprived them, and dismissed them all, and placed more
thankful Subjects of the Laity in their rooms.

King Charles had now besieged the Town of Rochell almost one whole year: For
whose relief, and to remove the siege, king Edward sent the Earl of Pembroke
with an army to the Sea; but he was encountered, fought with, and put unto the
worst, by Henry the usurper of Castile, who in favor of the French king, and
thankfully to requite his former love, when he assisted him against king
Peter, kept the narrow Seas with a strong Fleet. In this fight, the Earl
himself, and one hundred and threescore others, were taken Prisoners; many
men were slain, The French King winnes Rochell, etc.
and the rest who escaped returned altogether discomforted into England. And
upon the certain report of this disaster, The Town of Rochell, Angolesme,
Xants, and Saint John's of Angley, and diverse other Provinces, were given up
unto the French king.

Sir John de Mountford Duke of Britain (perceiving that good success
accompanied the French king in all his actions) began to fear, ANNO. 47
John of Gant and the Duke of Britain, oppose themselves against the French
King.

They waste the Country. ANNO. 48


left (in the height of his prosperity) he would attempt some quarrel against
him. Wherefore He fortified his Countries, and then came into England, and
offered his assistance to K. Edward: who forthwith levied a strong army, and
committed it to the government of his son the Duke of Lancaster. Who (being
accompanied with the Duke of Britain) landed at Callice, and with sword and
fire wasted the whole Country, until he came to Bordeaux: where the Duke of
Lancaster found his brother the Prince of Wales exceeding sick; who made him
Governor of all King Edwards Provinces. And having scene all such Noble men,
as he could command, John of Gant is made Governor. The sick Prince comes
into England. ANNO. 49 ANNO. 50
to take their solemn oaths for the performance of their duties, and
obedience to his brother the Duke; he sailed into England. After whose
arrival, three parles for peace betwixt England and France were entertained,
upon the motion, and by the mediation of Pope Gregory the eleventh. But not
one of them was made fruitful with any fortunate success.

In the last year of King Edwards Reign, in a Parliament holden at
Westminster, the King required a Subsidy from the Clergy and from the
Temporaltie of his Kingdom, toward the supporting of his wars. The Lower
house of the Parli^ment complain upon the K ng^ evil Officers.
But the Lower house of that assembly complained grievously against the Lord
Latimer, chief Chamberlain to the King, and of many other of his Officers;
for that they not only misled the King in his old age, but also unthriftily
spent and consumed the Treasure of his Kingdom. Wherefore they refused to
yield unto the kings demand, except those evil Officers might be displaced,
and better men settled in their rooms. Which being by the king through the
important persuasions of the Prince consented unto, he cheerfully obtained his
demand.

And now approached the ends of these two famous,.1376.
and most worthy Princes the Father and the Son. For the Prince of Wales
died the eight day of June, The Black Prince dies.
in the year of our Lord God one thousand, three hundred, threescore and
sixteen, when he had lived forty years; and lies buried at Canterbury.

The King restores his evil Officers
And no sooner was he dead, but king Edward (very unadvisedly, to his great
dishonor, and to the great coffeehouse of his people) removed from him such
new Officers, as in the late High Court of Parliament were established and
placed near about him: and restored the Lord Latimer, Richard is Created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester. King Edward dies.
and all the rest, to their former Offices, and places. And finding himself
exceeding weak (by reason of his sharp, and grievous sickness) he created his
Nephew Richard (Son to the Prince deceased) Prince of Wales, Earl of
Chester, and Duke of Cornwall; and committed the Regencie of his kingdom to
his son John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster: and died, when he had reigned fifty
years, and somewhat more.

THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND.
RICHARD the second (being the Son and heir of the Black Prince, ANNO. 1.
1377.
and aged eleven years, and somewhat more) was crowned king of England in the
year of our Lord God, one thousand three hundred and seventy seven.

In the whole course of his evil Government, King Richards evil manners and
bad Government.
he neglected his Nobility, and taxed his Subjects, to enable himself to give
prodigally unto his ill deserving Favorites. He was too too resolute in his
follies, and refused to be reproved or reformed. He also despised the sage
advice, and good directions, of his wisest and best Counselors; and wholly
plotted all his courses, by the wicked and graceless projects of his base
companions, whom he raised to more honorable Estates then befitted the means
of their condition. So that they fell by their own weight; and he himself (in
the end) was enforced to endure the extremity of his hard fortune. For being
first disgraced by his Cousin, Henry of Bullingbrooke Duke of Lancaster, and
son and heir to his Uncle John of Gaunt; he was at length by him (with the
general consent of a whole Parliament) deposed from his Crown, committed to
Prison, and afterward wickedly murdered, as in this discourse of his
disordered Government, more amply it shall appear.

The Frenchmen burn diverse towns in England.
In the first year of king Richards Reign, Charles the French king (presuming
much on his Minority, and being aided by the Spaniards) landed in the
Southwest, and in the South-east parts of this kingdom, and ransacked, and
burnt the Towns of Plymouth, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, Rye, and some other Towns
and Villages, coasting upon the Sea, and would have done more mischief, if by
the kings Uncle Edmund of Langly Earl of Cambridge, and by the Earls of
Buckingham, and of Salisburie, they had not been fought with, and beaten to
their ships.

Alexander Ramseyes desperate attempt: and success.
At the same time also (by the instigation of the French king) one Alexander
Ramsey, an approved Scottishman at arms, with forty of his Company, in the
depth of the night, suddenly and desperately scalled the walls of the Castle of
Barwicke: and (finding the Captain, and all his soldiers securely sleeping)
he took it without blows; and intended also to have surprised the Town. But
the inhabitants, (hearing an extraordinary noise and tumult in the Castle, and
indeuouring to prevent a feared mischief) hewed away the stays of the
Drawbridge, on the Towns side: so that when the Scots did let fall the
Drawbridge, the chains brake, and the Bridge fell into the Castle Ditch. By
means whereof the Scots could not issue out, but were imprisoned by their own
Victory.

This necessity enforced them (as well as they were able) to fortify the
Castle, which on the kings behalf, was soon besieged, and assaulted by ten
thousand men: who after many feats of Arms performed bravely by the
assailants, and after much valor, with high courage, showed by that small
number of valiant Scots, won the Castle, and received not one of them to
mercy, but only their Captain Alexander Ramsey.

The Frenchmen land in England.
And not long after, the Frenchmen landed again in England, and did much harm
at Dover, Wynchelsay, Hastings, and at Grauesend; and returned with their
booties into France: But to prevent like future mischiefs, and to revenge
those injuries done to the King and his Realm by the French King: ANNO. 3. A
Parliament. This Tax caused much trouble. An Army sent into France.
A Parliament was assembled at Westminster. In which, a Subsidy of four
pence, for every man, and for every woman within this Kingdom (being above
fourteen years of age) was granted to the King. The leuying whereof procured
much heart-burning, which (not long after) brake forth, and endangered the
whole State of the Commonweal. Yet with that money great provision was made,
and an army of eight thousand men was sent into France, under the command of
Thomas of Woodstock the Kings Uncle: who passing over the fair and great
Rivers of Soame, Oyse, and Marne, spoiled, and burnt all the Countries, and
ransomed the inhabitants, until he came into Britain; where he was received
by the Duke John Mountford with all friendly entertainment, and much joy.

And now began a Rebellion in England, which was exceeding hazardous to the
whole kingdom. For John Wall, a factious Priest, ANNO. 4.
perceiving that the inferior sort of the people much murmured and grudged at
the payment of the aforesaid Subsidy; A great Rebellion in England. John Wall
was the beginner of this Rebellion.

His wicked course in persuading.


by secret conferences in all places where he came, informed the Bondmen,
Villains, Slaves, and such others, as were pinched with penury, and with want,
that, by descent and parentage from Adam, all men were of one condition, and of
equal worth: and that the Laws of this kingdom were injurious, and unjust,
which did set so great a difference betwixt men, as to make some of them great
Peers, Potentates, and Lords, and in giving to some others large authority and
command, and in enlarging of great possessions, and store of riches unto some,
and in commanding others to be base, servile, beggars, and to enjoy little or
nothing at all. And therefore (with traytrous reasons) he persuaded them,
either by fair means, or by open insurrection and civil war, to provide
for their own liberties, and to relieve their own wants.

This lewd and damnable doctrine so infatuated and infected the Rusticks from
Shire to Shire, that (at length) it was spread in the City of London, where
the meanest, and the basest sort (being a multitude, who egerly enuyed the
prosperity of the more worthy inhabitants, and greedily coueted to be
enriched with their substance) were in great hope (by Rebellious mutening) to
make utter hauoke and spoil of all things at their pleasure. And (to effect
that which they intended) such as were most desperately inclined among them,
informed the headless multitude in the Countries round about them, that if
they would come thither and join with them, the whole City of London should
be at their command. So that incredible numbers of brainsick, turbulent, and
traytrous people prepared to flock thither, from Kent, Essex, Sussex,
Bedfordshire, and from many other places.

Of this rude and rascal rout, Watt Tyler, John Wall, Jack Straw and Jack
Shepherd, Captains in this Rebellion
Wat Tylar (who by his profession was a Tailor) was made Captain, to command
the rest: and the said John Wall, Jack Straw, Jack Shepard, and some others,
were made chief directors, and their leaders. And (Stiling themselves, The
Kings men, and the servants of the Commonweal of England, they marched
toward London, beating down the houses, and rifling all the moueables of all
such as were professors of the Law; How they passed toward London.
and compelling all Knights and Gentlemen either to fly before their coming,
or to be partakers in this uproar. They also sent unto the King who then lay in
the Tower, requiring him to come and to speak with them. The King went to
speak with the Rebels, but dared not.
Whereupon, the King (purposing, if he might, to prevent all future mischiefs
which were threatened by this disorder, and being accompanied with some of his
wisest and discreetest Lords, and Counselors) went by water to Grauesend. But
when he perceived their unruly madness, and their rage and fury, and that
all their numbers consisted of the basest Swads, and of the Off-scumme of the
People, he feared to put himself into their hands; and returned back again
to the Tower.

They resolve to burn South warke.

They enter into London. Their kind entertainment pleases them.


The next day they all came to London. But finding the Gates to be shut against
them, and the Bridge to be strongly fortified: they intended first to kill all
the inhabitants of South-warke; then to steal their goods; and last of al to
consume it utterly with fire. But (to prevent that mischief) a free entrance
was given them into the City: where the greatest men made them the best
cheer, and fed them with their chiefest dainties; and by liberal gifts (in
some sort) pacified their fury and their rage.

Then they entered into the Sauoy (which then belonged to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster the Kings Uncle) which house they rifled, The Sauoy burned.
burnt, and wickedly murdered all his Officers whom they found there. The Innes
of Court rifled.
They also robbed all the Innes of Court; burnt their Law-bookes; and
sacrilegiously they stole in all Churches, and in all Religious Houses; They
commit sacriledg.
accounting their monstrous thefts to be no sin.

They also released out of all Prisons all manner of offenders whatsoever.
Prisoners enlarged. Wat Tylars cruelty to his old master.
Among sundry other outrages which they then committed, Their chiefest
Ringleader Wat Tylar sent for his old Master, named Richard Lion, a worthy
and grave Citizen, from whom (during the time of his service) he had received
for a foul offense some small correction: and (for a revenge) without other
judgment, according to his graceless command, All strangers are rifled.
his head was stricken off, and borne upon a Lance before him in the streets.
They also robbed and spoiled all Flemmings, Frenchmen, Lombards, and other
Forrainers inhabiting in or near about the City of London. 60000. The
inciuilitie at Saint Katherines.
And at length (their numbers being increased to threescore thousand) they came
to Saint Katherines, near to the Kings lodging; where they remained that
night. But such were their hideous, beastly, and confused howlings, roarings,
whoopings, and outcries, that oftentimes the King and his Counsel feared
greatly, least by treachery, and by treason, they had possessed themselves of
the Tower, in which he lay.

The next morning they sent again to the King: The King goes to
Mile-end-Greene to speak with the Rebels. Wat Tylor enters into the Tower. He
robs the Kings Mother. He beheadeth the Archbishop of Canterbury.
entreating him to speak with them at Mile-end-greene. But his Highness was no
sooner gone thither, then Wat Tilar, with forty more of his wicked and rascal
companions, pressed in by violence at the Tower Gates, and robbed the Chambers
and the lodgings there: not sparing those which did belong to the Princess of
Wales the Kings mother; whose head Wat Tilar brake, and in such rude and
beastly sort behaved himself toward her, that fear, and grief increased a
sickness in her, which a long time after was dangerous to her life.

They also apprehended there Simon, a learned and ^ famous Archbishop of
Canterbury, and stroke off his head, because upon the first notice of John
Walls traitorous persuasions to the base rascals, he had committed him to a
short and to an easy imprisonment.

The King (as soon as he came to Mile-end-greene) demanded what it was that
with such violence they required? Manumission is required and promised.
They all with a mighty shout, and with a horrible confused cry, desired that
they might be manumitted and set free: and that their posterities might not be
Villains, nor in bondage. The King graciously replied that he would not only
grant (in most ample and large manner) their demand: and procure it to be
established by a Parliament: The Kings Banners, and Pardon given to the Rebels.
but gave unto them his banners for their safe conduct to return into their
Countries, and to their own houses; and also pardoned them their rebellion and
their offense.

The greater part of this rude multitude, The greater number do depart to
their Houses.
(who were not made acquainted with any further mischief, which was secretly
intended by the rest) returned unto London: where (with all convenient speed)
by instruments in writing, The King^ ^heerefully performed his promise: and
thereupon great numbers of them, returned to their own homes.

But Wat Tilar, and about twenty thousand more of his wicked and graceless
consorts (determining, if it was possible, Twenty thousand would not depart.
Wat Tylor comes into Smithfield. The King comes to the Rebels.
first to ransack, and then to burn, the City of London) kept many of the
Kings banners, and his pardons which were under the great seal; and came with
all his remaining Rabble into Smithfield.

When the King heard that this unruly assembly was not utterly dissolved (to
prevent in time such mischief as they might do) being guarded but with a small
strength he presented himself before the Rebels: and with all Princely
courtesy, and kindness, behaved himself toward them: and persuaded them to
de^ist from all violence, and from wrong; assuring them, that they should not
only obtain their liberty, and pardons, but should (upon trial) find him to
be their good Lord, and gracious King. But the Arch-Traytour, Wat Tylar
refuses the Kings favors
Wat Tilar, with a frowning countenance, insolent behavior, and rough speech,
refused to accept of the Kings favor: and proudly told him, that all these
Troops, and many more thousands, were ready at his beck, to do and to
execute whatsoever he would command: His proud speech to the King.
and (to the end that his pride might want no manner of audacious boldness) he
required the Kings Esquire (who bare the sword) to deliver to him his dagger.
But with a ^^out answer, He requires his Sword-bearers dagger.
and with a man-like courage he refused so to do, until he was by the King
commanded to deliver it. Now when the Traitor had thus gotten the dagger, he
required to have the sword also: but the Esquire told him plainly, that it was
the Kings sword; and should not be given to a Knave. Whereat Wat Tilar was so
extraordinarily incensed, He requires to have the Kings sword. The Esquires
stout answer The vow of Wat Tylar. Wat Tylar slain by the Mayor of London.
For this cause that City gives the Sword in her Arms. The Rebels prepare for
revenge. The Londoners sent an Army into Smithfield. The Kings Banners and
Pardons are redeliuered. They are torn in the Rebels view.
that (with an execrable and a vile oath) he swore, that the Esquire should
loose his head before he himself would either eat any meat, or drink any
drink. The Major of London (named John Hadley) who then attended on the King,
disdaining that a proud Traitor should so confront, and brave the King, drew
forth his sword, and struck him so sound on the head, that he felled him to the
ground: and (incontinently) he was slain Whereat, some hope was suddenly
conceived, that the rest of the Rebels would have gone away. But they (being
desperately resolved to revenge his death) according to their little skill cast
themselves in some order: so that now, every minute of time threatened the
destruction, and slaughter of many men.

The Citizens of London being informed what had happened: and purposing with all
speed to aid the King, and to free themselves and the C^^ie from ruin and
from spoil; sent an Army of eight thousand men well armed, and well
appointed, to the King: all which were quickly marshalled and ready to give
the charge. But first the King required the Rebels to submit themselves, or
else to deliver unto him such of his Banners, and Free Pardons, and
Manumissions, as they had gotten into their hands. But so far off were they
from being sorry or repentant for their Treasons, that (in a proud bravery,
and in much scorn) they redeliuered them all unto the King: Who caused them
(in their open view) to be cancelled, and to be torn in pieces. The doing
whereof, so suddenly daunted and quailed the hearts and courages of those
insolent and graceless Rebels: that (when the King expected nothing but all
violence to be executed by the sword) they cowardly dispersed themselves, and
ran away; The Rebels fly.
every man (without any order or staying) making all possible have and shift to
save themselves. And thus vanished this cloud, which threatened an outrageous
storm of much danger, and mischief, to the King and Commonweal.

And the chiefest of those malefactors (a thing which never fails in such
tumultuous rebellions) were by their own companions (to insinuate grace and
favor with the King) delivered into the hands of Justice: who afterward, The
Captains delivered to the King by the Rebels themselves. Fifteen hundred
Rebels Executed.
with fifteen hundred more (of the principal agents in this business) were
(upon due enquiries, and just conuictions, according to the Law) executed, and
put to sundry tortures and deaths, in diverse places of this Realm.

The King having thus pacified this Rebellion, and Vproare; ANNO. 5. King
Richard marries.
married the Lady Anne (daughter to the deceased Emperor Charles the fourth:
and sister unto Wenceslaus the Emperor who then reigned) and was made happy,
through much prosperity and peace, until the ninth Year of his Government.
ANNO. 9. 1385. A Parliament Two of the Kings Uncles were created Dukes of York
and Gloucester. Henry of Bullingbroke created Earl of Darby. Other Earls
created. King Richards evil Counselors.
And then he summoned, and held his High Court of Parliament at Westminster.
In which he created his fifth and sixth Uncles, Edmund of Langly (being then
Earl of Cambridge) Duke of York; and Thomas of Woodstock (who was then Earl
of Buckingham) Duke of Gloucester. He also created his Cousin Henry of
Bollingbrooke (son and heir apparent to his fourth Uncle John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster) Earl of Darbie; and his Cousin Edward Plantagenet, (the son
and heir apparent of his said Uncle Edmund of Langley) he created Earl of
Rutland; and Sir John Holland (brother to the Earl of Kent) was made Earl of
Huntingdon; and Thomas Lord Mowbray was made Earl of Nottingham.

The King (whose affections were but green, and who was easily seduced by such
as he best loved) was at this time wholly directed, and counseled into many
evil and ungodly courses, by his unworthy favorites, Michael De la Pole (his
Chauncellor) whom he created Duke of Suffolck; and by Robert de Vere (Earl of
Oxford, and Marquess of Dublyn,) whom he made Duke of Ireland; Affection
without reason.
and would have made him King of that Country, if his Nobility would have
consented thereunto.

In the same Parliament, Roger Mortymer Proclaimed heir Apparent.
He caused his Cousin Sir Roger Mortimer Earl of March (who was the son and
heir of Edmund Mortimer, and of Philip his wife; who was the Daughter and
heir of the Kings third Uncle, This Sir Roger Mortimer was slain many years
after.

ANNO. 10 1386. The King neglects his Nobility and their Counsel. Michaell
de la Poole. Robert de Vere. Alexander Archbishop of York. Robert Tresilian.

The King intends the surprisall of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earls
of Warwick and of Arundell.

They come well guarded to the Parliament.

Four Fifteenes demanded. It is denied. A Parliament may be held once a year.
In what case the Knights and Burgesses may depart.

The Houses of Parlame^ts demands.


Lionel Duke of Clarence) to be proclaimed heir apparent to his Crown. But
he was long afterward slain in Ireland, by such Rebels as he endeavored to
suppress.

It is now to be observed, that from henceforth the King respected not the
sage advice and counsel of his grauest, and most experienced Lords: and that
he began careleslely to neglect the Nobility, and his great Officers of his
Kingdom: and that he did all things preposterously, by the lewd and
unskillful persuasions and directions of his two newly-created Dukes, of
Suffolk, and of Ireland; and of Alexander then Archbishop of York; and of
Robert Tresilian his Chief Justice. And as they all did lead him into many
erros: so did they especially exasperat him (without just cause) against his
renowned, and truly noble Uncle Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester; and
against the two Earls of Warwick, and of Arondel: which three he intended to
have surprised at a Banquet in London; if Nicholas Exton (then Major of that
City) would have consented thereunto. But because his help then failed, and
the King could not (at that time) obtain his purpose: He resolved to effect
it at a more solemn meeting. For which cause principally, He summoned his High
Court of Parliament: but the said three Lords (upon good information being
jealous of such unkindly entertainment) repaired to the said assembly; being
strongly guarded by a multitude of valiant men at arms: by means whereof they
secured their own liberty; and the ungodly project of the King, and of his
wicked Counselors, came to naught.

Now when this long Parliament produced nothing worthy to be noted: Michael
de la Pole (in the Kings behalf) required a Tax of four fifteenes, affirming
that a lesser gift could not support his Estate, and maintain such wars as
he was likely to undertake. But the Lords, and the Lower House, not only
refused to yield unto this motion, but made a solemn declaration, That as the
Kings of this Realm (for the better ordering, and preserving of their Estate,
and Kingdom) might once in every year assemble a Parliament: so by an ancient
law, all the members of that great Counsel might, without leave, break up the
same assembly, and depart to their own houses, If the King absented himself
from their company for the space of forty days together; and that they would
not proceed in any business but depart, except the King would be pleased
personally to come among them, and to grace them with his presence; and would
also remove Michael de la Pole from his Chancelorship, and commit him to strait
Prison, because he lewdly counseled the King to attempt many things, which
were dishonorable to himself and hurtful to the Commonweal.

The King (as a Lion) being stern, and scorning to yield unto any motion,
although it tended to his own safety, The King denies their suit
and to the welfare of his people; required, that fifty selected men of that
Assembly might be sent unto him, with whom he would confer and agree upon
such affairs, as they required to be treated on. They will not yield to his
command.
But the two houses (denying to make any conclusions privately, of such
affairs, and businesses, as by a Parliament were to be disputed publicly, and
publicly to be established) did send unto him his said Uncle Thomas of
Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundell then Archbishop of
Canterbury: and none others. And they two (by express commandment) told the
King, Two, and no more are sent unto the king
that by his absence he obscured the light of justice, and hindered the
negotiations of the Commonweal, which (without his approbation and consent)
could not receive any strength, or life: and that if he please^ not (upon
their humble entreaty) to come among them for the furthering, The King is told
of his faults.
and for the finishing of such weighty affairs as th^n they had in hand; they
would depart to their own houses, because he had absented himself from them
(to their dislike and discouragement) more than forty days. They also craved
with great submission and humility (as they were commanded) to be informed,
by whom his Majesty's treasure, A reckoning is demanded of the King.
belonging to the commonweal, was prodigally wasted and consumed? and how it
came to pass, that his large revenues could not suffice to maintain and to
support his Estate and charge (seeing he had no wars) except his people must be
taxed?

This message, and these demands, The King threatens the two Houses of his
Parliament.
so wonderfully incensed the King against both the houses of his Parliament,
that in great chollar and indignation he deeply swore, that if he had
foreknowne the sa^cie boldness of his own Subjects, (who as he supposed
intended to rise in Arms against him) he would more willingly have submitted
himself to the King of France, and have relied upon his protection and
defense, then thus be baffled, and be made servile and an underling to those,
whom his Sovereignty ought to command.

The two Lords (with such wonderful gravity and temperate mildness) so
effectually related to the King, A caveat to beware of France.
the inueterated malice which the Kings of France had borne toward this
Kingdom, and the kings which ruled it; and the loyal duty, and obedience,
which both the Lords, and also all other inferior subjects of this Realm, did
bear unto him, as unto their most gracious and good Lord, that (thereby) the
greatest flame of his fire was much quenched: Wise Counsel appeaseth the Kings
rage. The King comes to the Parlame^t Michael de la Poole, accused,
condemned, fined imprisoned, deprived, etc
and the kings passions began to be more moderate and calm. So that he
promised (within three days) to come among them; and did perform it
accordingly, to the great joy and contentment of all such, as meant and wished
well.

When they were all thus met together: Michael de la Pole was by the Lords
accused, and found guilty of many notable and notorious cousonages, and
deceats by him practiced in the execution of his office; and for that he had
purchased with the kings money, in yearly reuenew, so much land as was worth
one thousand pounds and more; and had purloined (in bribes from the kings
Subjects for expeditions, and by such crafty and dishonest tricks) the sum
of twenty thousand marks at the least: for which offenses all his lands were
given to the king; together with a fine of twenty thousand Marks: Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury is made Lord Chancellor.
and himself (being deprived of his Office of Chancellorship; and of his
liberty, was committed unto straight Prison: and Thomas Arondell then
Archbishop of Canterbury (who was a wise and great Statesman, and did employ
his best endeavors for the welfare and prosperity of the Commonweal,
without any respect to his friends, or profit to himself) was made Chancellor
in his steed. In the same Parliament also thirteen persons were elected,
Commissioners chosen in the Parliament to examine the Kings Officers.

The King swears to allow it.


sworn, and authorized (as well by the consents of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and by the Commons, as also by the kings agreement thereunto
published in writing under his great Seal) to examine all, or any of his
Majesty's officers, touching their behauiours, and their demeanors, in their
several rooms and places; and by whom, and how, both at home, and abroad, the
kings treasure had been purloined, or misspent; and to correct and punish all
such, as for just transgressions they should censure and condemn. And the king
himself took a public oath, not to revoke, nor to suppress the said
Commission, or their power, except a Parliament should join with him therein.
And furthermore it was then enacted for a Law, that if any man should or did
attempt, Disswaders to be punished.
directly, or indirectly, to persuade or to encourage the king, to infringe his
promise, and to make breach of his said oath, touching all, or any of those
matters; he should for his first offense loose all his Lands and Goods; and,
for his second offense, should receive trial, judgment, and execution, as a
Traitor to the king, Half a fifteen conditionally granted.
and to his Crown. And then a Subsidy of one half Fifteen was granted: If,
by the said Commissioners, and upon their view of the kings Estate, it should
be thought needful for him to have the same.

No sooner was this Parliament ended, but the king (by the persuasions of his
evil Counselors, and contrary to his own assent, ANNO. 11 The King breaks
his promise and his oath. Michael de la Pole is enlarged.

The Commissioners are pronounced Traitors. Some Judges do ratify the
confirmation.


promise, and oath) enlarged Michael de la Pole, and went with him, and Robert
De Vere his Duke of Ireland, and with Tresilian his Chief Justice, and many
of his Judges, unto Nottingham: where they pronounced the kings Uncle, Thomas of
Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester; and Thomas Arondel Archbishop of Canterbury; the
said thirteen Commissioners; and many others; to be guilty of High Treason:
because they had compelled the king, against his will, and conscience, to
ratify the said Commission by his oath, and under his Great Seal. And then
they went to Couentrie: where the said Judges, by an instrument in writing
under their hands and seals, declared and confirmed their opinions (touching
those matters) to be agreeable, and consonant to the Laws of this Realm.

Now (for a while) must we leave the king, and his Nobility, perplexed with
many evil conceits, each of the other, and studying upon the future events of
those former conclusions: and will inform the Reader, that the time of Truce,
betwixt England and France, was more then fully ended: The French Lords, and
Gentlemen, come to animate the Scots against England. Their course
entertainment.

They invade England. They make a troublesome journey into Wales.

King Richard with an army of 68000. men, enters and spoileth Scotland.


and that the French king (to beget more broils at home) sent his Admiral
into Scotland, with a thousand Lords, knights, and Gentlemen, completely armed,
and furnished with armor and with weapons, sufficient for one thousand more.
But such was their course and homely entertainment, that (upon their first
arrival) the Common people abandoned their company, making no manner of
reckoning or account of them, nor relieuing of their wants with any thing which
was needful: but suffered them to be oppressed with as many miseries, as
strangers (being in a foreign, and in a poor Country) were able to endure;
until they joined with the Scottish army, which consisted of thirty thousand
men. And with them, they entered into England, and did much harm. But when they
were informed, that the king with eight thousand men at arms, and threescore
thousand Archers, travailed hard iournies to encounter with them: they then
forsook their ordinary march, and passages, and went over the high and
craggie Mountains into Wales; where they committed many vile, and wicked
outrages, which turned little to their commodity and gain. But (in the mean
time) king Richard with fire and sword entered into Scotland: where (being
unresisted) he rifled and burnt the Towns, and Cities of Eden-burgh, The
French and Scots return into that wasted Country.
Saint John's, Estreuelinge, Dondee and many others; and returned home. And the
Scots and Frenchmen retired themselves into Scotland: where (by reason of the
late hauock, and ruins of that kingdom) the French Gallants were worn out
with more necessities than before. The great misery of the Frenchmen.
For neither could or would the Towns or Country afford them any help; and
the apparent hazard of their lives, by the violence of the poor distressed
Scots, did altogether terrify them from foraging abroad: How the Scots abused
and wronged them.
And in the end (to add unto them greater affliction than all the rest) the
Scots compelled their meanest Gentlemen (without their horses, and unarmed, and
pennilesse) to return into France; but kept (as pledges, or as pawnes) the
Admiral, and such as were honorable and great, until a full reckoning and an
amends were made unto them for all such loss and damages, as (by the English
army) they had sustained: affirming, That the French king had engaged Scotland
in those wars, not for themselves, but to serve his own turn, and in his
service.

The King of France is enforced to redeem his subjects.
The French king (though angered at the heart to be thus abused, yet finding none
other means to enlarge the Admiral, and such other great men as he had
employed in those Wars) sent to the Scots as much money as was demanded: and
thereupon, the French Admiral, Barons, and Gentry, were dismissed; and
returned home, having small cause to brag of their success, or of their
entertainment in that journey.

The French King dreameth to conquer England
But the French king intending to relieve himself, and to wrecke his anger upon
England; resolved to transport into this kingdom such an Army, as should make
an absolute Conquest of this whole Land. And (to further his provisions
therein) he imposed many grievous and intolerable Taxes on his people; which
were not levied without much grudging, and great trouble. His whole Fleet
consisted of more than twelve hundred sail of ships. 1200. ships
The number of his men was extraordinary, and exceeding great: and such were
his provisions, that (among Christian Princes) the like before was seldom
seen or heard of.

The great Army of the English.
King Richard (who was very valiant, and cared not for his approach) was
readily prepared to give him a welcome, with ten thousand gallant men at
arms, and with more than one hundred thousand fighting men: besides such as
furnished his brave Navy on the sea; and besides all such, as for the defense
of Callice were sent thither.

Homo ponit disponit autem Deus.
Experience teaches us, That the greatest preparations for any Expedition
whatsoever, are made in vain, if the thing to which they are intended and
directed be not seconded by GODS favor; as by this example it shall appear.
For when the French soldiers were departed from their own dwellings, The
disorders of the French soldiers.
and traveled disorderedly toward the place where their ships lay; they
robbed and spoiled in all Provinces, and in all Countries, through which they
passed, with greater fury, and with more violence, than commonly the English,
or any other foreign enemy, accustomed to do. The men and the enterprise
are accursed by the oppressed people.
So that the inhabitants of all places (subject to their cruelty and uncivil
outrage) were not only (in the highest degree) displeased and discontented;
but, by solemn imprecations, they cursed both them and the action likewise
which they had in hand. And when those loose companions came into the
Low Countries where the Fleet was: The French Army are in great misery.
such were their wants of all things needful to relieve them (by reason of
their excessive numbers, and by reason of the long absence of the Duke of
Berrey, the French kings uncle; who hasted not thither, nor liked well of that
journey, although it altogether depended upon his furtherance and presence)
that first they sold their armor and their weapons; then their horses: They
sell all.
and last of all, their clothes, to provide them meat. And when all those means
failed them, then they daily, yea hourly, The Army is dissolved.
committed such violence and such outrages in those Countries without
controlment, that they became hateful and odious to the inhabitants:
Parturiunt Montes, nascitur ridiculus Mus.
and (at length) the King their master (being utterly discouraged by his said
uncle in this attempt) dissolved his whole Army. And thus (at one instant
almost) he lost both his honor and his hope, his money, and many great things
besides.

And the end of those his great designs affoords us liberty to return again
to our highly displeased and discontented King: The history of the Kings evil
government at home is pursued. The petition of the Nobility.

The Kings five evil Counselors.


whom his Lords (with all humility and submissiue modesty) petitioned, and
desired, Newly to ratify and to confirm his former promise and his Oath; and
to thrust from him Michael de la Pole, Robert de Vere, Alexander the lewd
Archbishop of York, Robert Treselian his chief Justice, and Sir Nicholas
Brembre of London (who were generally termed to be the Kings wicked
counselors) and to banish out of the Land all those soothing and flattering
Judges, who (to please the King) had subscribed to the Nullitie of the said
Commission, and had censured all such as procured it, to be traitors to the
King and to his Crown.

But the Kings affections were so strongly riueted and annexed unto those five,
and so confident was he, that both himself, The King denies their petition.
and they, and his said Judges, had done well in their proceedings at
Nottingham, and at Couentrie, that in plain terms he denied them their
request. And thereupon, the Lords (for their own safety and to support the
peace, and to prevent the ruin and the destruction of the Commonweal) raised
a strong Army of their friends, and of such as utterly disliked those
disorders in the King, The Nobility raise an Army.
and came to the City of London: being fully resolved, that they themselves
would put in execution those things, which the King (upon their reasonable and
just request and petition) had refused to yield unto.

Wicked advice given by the five wicked Counselors.
But when (...) five wicked Counselors perceived thoroughly what was p^ (...)
and meant; they then endeavored to persuade the King to ^^^^ender Callice, and
all his other Lordships and Territories in B^^^^ce, to the French King, and
confidently to rely upon his aid ^^assuring him, That in so doing he should
obtain two glorious and pleasing victories; the one, over all his Wars, by
settling of his Estate in a perfect peace; and the other, over his Noblemen, who
striued (as lewdly they pretended) to make him subject and servile to their
wills.

The King would not hearken to that counsel.
And though, in all things besides, their counsels were his Oracles; yet the
King would not (at any hand) hearken to this motion: and yet he was determined
(by one means or other) to curb and to abridge the strength of his Nobility;
who striued to reform such things as were amiss. And (that his purpose might
therein be effected) especially he enquired of the Mayor of London, The King
requires an Army from the Londonners.
How many able armed men that City could conveniently set forth? who
certified him, That fifty thousand such might easily, and in a short time, be
prepared and spared there. Whereupon the King commanded him, with all
expedition, to send him such an Army: which forthwith he endeavored to
perform.

The grave (...) Citizens o^ (...) London (...) resist the (...) unwise M^^or.
But when the grauest and the wisest Citizens had maturely considered of this
business; they interrupted his proceedings, and told the King, That they might
not be employed in warlike manner against his Lords, who for his Majesty and
Honor, and to preserve his Kingdom from ruin and from destruction, had used
all faithful and good means to remove from his Person those his wicked
Counselors; who only (for their own commodity and advancement) had hazarded
the whole estate of his Kingdom, by aduising and by counselling of him to rule
and to govern unadvisedly, according to their pleasures, and after their lewd
and lawless wills.

The Kings gentle message to the Lords.
The King perceiving by this Message, that his inferior subjects would (in
those Troubles) adhere unto the Lords; seemed a little to restrain his violent
affections: and did inform the Lords, That he would assemble his High Court of
Parliament; in which, those five favorites of his should be answerable to all
Objections whatsoever, and should (if they were convicted) receive such
punishment, as should (by the public censure of the House) be inflicted on
them.

This unexpected and good Message so thoroughly contented the Barons, The Lords
do cass^er their army. The King performs not his promise. He licenceth the
Duke of Ireland to raise 5000 men to defend himself.

The Lords do renew their army.

The Duke swimmes on horseback over the Thames. He is slain by a wild Bear.

How the King honored his dead corpse.


that presently they disfurnished themselves of all their warlike Forces, and
were most thankful for it to the King. But as the Wind, so was he suddenly
changed: For in stead of performing what he had promised; he freely licenced
Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, to levy five thousand men for his own
particular guard and defense. And the Barons perceiving thereby, that it was
high time for them to look unto their own safety, with incredible celeritie
and expedition renewed their strength; and (upon the sudden) so strongly
environed the said Duke betwixt their army and the River of Thames, that they
compelled him (for the preservation of his life) by swimming on horseback, to
pass over unto the other side: from whence he presently fled into France; in
which Kingdom (about five years after, as he hunted) he was slain by a
wild Boar.

But such was the Kings affection toward him whilst he lived, that he caused
his dead carcass to be embalmed, and to be brought into England; and to be
apparrelled in princely Ornaments and Robes: His neck to be compassed with a
massy chain of Gold, his fingers to be covered with Rings, and his Funerals
to be solemnized with all magnificence and pomp.

Now when the said Duke of Ireland was compelled by swimming on horseback (as
you have heard) to save himself, and was fled into France; the Barons executed
some of his chiefest consorts for an example unto others, Some of the said
Dukes consorts executed.

The Barons army is with joy received into London.


but suffered the multitude to disperse themselves, and required them (with all
speed) to repair to their own houses. But the said Barons conducted their
own army to London; where they were received with much joy. And such was the
bountiful entertainment which they found there, that they might thereby assure
themselves of their hearty welcome.

The King (who kept his Court in the Tower of London) was well pleased to admit
of a conference with the Lords. In which it was concluded, That a Parliament
should be summoned: A Parliament.
Which being orderly assembled, the Kings wicked Counselors, and some of the
aforesaid Judges were required personally to appear. But they came not
thither: The five wicked Counselors and the Judges condemned as Traitors.
yet were they (after great debating and disputing of that business) condemned
of high Treason to the King and to the Commonweal. And not long after, Sir
John Earl of Salisburie, and Sir Nicholas Brembre lost their heads; and Robert
Tresilian the chief Justice was hanged at Tiborne: and the rest of those
Judges had been hanged in like sort, Execution.
if (upon the importunate and incessant request of the Queen) their lives had
not been redeemed by their banishment. Banishment.
And thus were the threatenings of civil wars, converted into some assurance of
prosperity and of peace.

ANNO. 12 The Scots do invade.
But the next year following, the Scots invaded this realm; and did much
harm: against whom great preparations were made by the King; who resolved to
recompense his own damage, by just and severe revenge.

A Truce betwixt England, France and Scotland for seven years.

ANNO. 13 John of Gant goes with an Army into Spain.


But the wisdom and discretion of many great Estates, were such, that a Truce
was concluded to endure for three years, betwixt England, France and Scotland,
which shortly after was enlarged for four years more.

So that now, all matters betwixt those three Kingdoms, and their Kings, being
blessed with tranquillity, and with peace: the Kings fourth Uncle, John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was suffered by the King to levy a strong Army,
which he transported into Spain where he demanded his right to the Kingdom
of Castile, in the behalf of Constance his wife; who was the eldest daughter
of Peter, the deposed and slain king.

ANNO. 14 How his bran attempts succeeded there. His two Daughters are married
to the Kings of Spain, and of Portingall.
In those Wars; the Duke and his Army performed many honorable services:
and (with the assistance of the king of Portugale) so prevailed, that, to
conclude a sued for peace, the king of Spain married with Constance, the Dukes
eldest daughter by his said wife; and gave unto him eight Wagons laden with
massy Gold; and secured him, and his wife, of the yearly payment of ten
thousand Marks, during both their lives. And then the Duke went into
Portugale, where he married Anne his younger daughter to the king of that
Country; and then returned into England with great riches, and much honor.

ANNO. 16 Laws against the Popes usurped Authority.
This time of peace betwixt England, and other nations, bred some quarrelling
betwixt the king and the Pope; who usurped too too much authority and
jurisdiction within this Realm. Wherefore (to prevent such mischiefs as this
intolerable sufferance mght beget) in a Parliament (upon grave and great
advise) it was enacted, That the Popes pretended authority within this kingdom
should cease and be determined: and that no appeal for any matter, or cause
whatsoever, should from thenceforth be made to the Sea of Rome; upon the
penalty of a praemunire, which did extend to perpetual imprisonment, and to
the forfeiture of the Lands and goods of such, as (contrary to that law)
presumed to offend.

ANNO. 17
In the seventeenth year of king Richards Reign, his fair and virtuous Queen
Anne died.

ANNO. 19
And about two years after, the king married the Lady Isabel, daughter to the
French king Charles the sixth. By reason whereof a peace was concluded betwixt
those two kings, King Richard marries the French kings daughter. A Peace for
thirty years.

Breast is yielded up. The Duke of Gloucester reprooues the King for it. The
death of the Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle is plotted.

A Machauillian policy Ambition makes evil Princes confident, that their
Virtues do deserve much.

The King intends the destruction of his Barrons: being gulled with an untrue
report. Certain Lords surprised.

A Parliament A gross fl^ttering Speaker.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is accused of Treason. How the king wronged the
Archbishop.


to endure for thirty years. And king Richard (being too kind, but too little
advised) of his own accord, and free will, surrendered and gave up to the Duke
of Britain, the strong Town and Castle of Breast: which very much grieved
and discontented his Nobility, especially his Uncle Thomas of Woodstocke Duke
of Gloucester; who told him plainly, that it was not convenient, that (without
blows with the said Duke of Britain) he should have departed with that
strong Town and Castle, which his ancestors had won with the expense of much
blood. Whereat the king was so much displeased, that in his heart he
causelessely vowed severe revenge: and in this his hasty passion he was
abused, and furthered by such of his Favorites as envied the estate, the
virtues, and honor of the Duke; causing strangers to inform the king
(flateringly, and maliciously) that diverse of the Princes Electors intended to
have made him Emperor, had not some others of them gainsaid it, and alleged
that he was altogether unfit, to govern the dispersed Segniorie^, and
Dominions of the Empire; who could not rule and command his own subjects at
home. The greedy desire which king Richard had, to be magnified, and made
great, by being dignified with the name and power of the Empire: and his strong
reliance upon the untrue report, which was suggested unto him by such as only
endeavored to whet his anger against his Lords; armed him with subtletie, and
with a hearty desire to circumuent his Barons; though it were done with the
breach of his oath, and with the shipwreck of his honor. So that (pretending
much love and favor toward them: but especially to the Duke of Gloucester his
Uncle, and to the two Earls of Arondell and Warwick) he caused them to be
apprehended, when (as they imagined) they had least cause to fear. And having
so done, he assembled his High Court of Parliament. In which, his basest and
his grossest flatterer, the speaker of the Lower House, named Sir John Bush,
who was a man of a most proud, insolent, and aspiring spirit, irreligiously,
profanely, and dishonestly (in a formal and in a tedious speech) attributed
unto the King the highest titles of divine honor: and therefore condemned
(almost to Hell) all such, as traitorously had conspired against his Majesty.
Among whom he particularly impeached Thomas, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
sitting next unto the King: who made no answer at all thereto, because the
King himself (under pretense of more then ordinary love and favor) had
privately enjoined him unto silence, and unto future absence from that Assembly:
promising, and protesting, that nothing should be attempted, or done against
him by any means. Yet notwithstanding (for want of his presence, and of his
answer to the said untrue objections) he was (with the Kings consent) banished
this Realm. He is banished.

Warwick, and Arundell are condemned as Traitors.

Arundell is beheaded. Salisburie is banished, and dies miserably.

The Duke of Gloucester murdered at Callice, by Thomas Mowbray Earl of
Notingham.

A weak parliament, to grant such an unreasonable Commission.


And the two Earls of Arundell, and of Warwick, were also condemned of High
Treason: and shortly after, the former of those two lost his head. And so had
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, if (by his humble confession of things
untrue, and upon his great submission steeped in tears, and much sorrow) he
had not procured a mitigation of his punishment. For he was confined into the
I Will of Wight: where (contrary to the Kings promise) he endured such misery,
and was so grievously oppressed, with the grief which he sustained by reason
of his great wants; that he quickly died.

But the good Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle, (being vnsentenced) was sent
to Callice: where (according to the Kings directions) Thomas Mowbray Earl of
Nottingham (betwixt two featherbeds) caused him to be smothered to death; for
which good service, he was afterward made a Duke.

This being done, the King procured the Upper and the Lower Houses of
Parliament, to make an example, without precedent, by granting full and
absolute authority unto six or eight, such persons as he should nominate,
finally to determine all such causes (and to enact them) as then remained
undiscussed; and not ended there. This act not only made him proud: but (to
serve his present turns) he nominated for that purpose, such, as (to please
his humor) decreed many things which were dishonorable to the King, and
hurtful to the Commonweal.

The King will be called Prince of Cheshire.
The King also, to please his Guard (who for the most part were Cheshire men of
ordinary parentage, and of base birth) caused himself (very ridiculously) to
be styled Prince of Cheshire: as if it had been more honorable for him to be
such a Prince, then to be the King and Monarch of the whole Realm.

And (to add more strength and liking unto those things which then were done
amiss) the King bestowed many honorable dignities upon some of his best liked
Noblemen.

So that his Cousin Henry of Bullingbrooke (son and heir apparent to the
Kings fourth Uncle John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and who was at that time
Earl of Darby) was by him created Duk of Hartford: his Cousin Edward
Plantagenet, being Earl of Rutland, Creation of Noblemen.
was created Duke of Aubemarle: and Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, was
made Marshall of England, and Duke of Norfolk: and the Earl of Kent, was
created Duke of Surrie: and Sir John Holland his brother, being Earl of
Huntington, was made Duke of Exeter: and the Earl of Somerset was created
Marquess Dorset: and the Lord Spencer, was made Earl of Gloucester: the Lord
Neuil Earl of Westmerland: the Lord William Scrope Earl of Wilshire: and the
Lord Percie was created Earl of Worcester: and upon all these, he bestowed
many great Lordships, Manors, and large revenues, which of late did belong to
his murdered uncle Thomas of Woodstock, sometimes Duke of Gloucester; and unto
the said two deceased Earls of Arundell, and of Warwick.

He also granted his free pardon to all offenders whatsoever: A crafty Pardon,
which enabled the King to much mischief.
fifteen only excepted whom he would not nominate. By which ungodly and
crafty policy, he hedged his Nobility ^ound about with continual fear;
and made them most servile, and most base. For if any one of them in any high
measure had offended him, he would then pronounce him to be one of those
fifteen, who were excepted out of his free, and general pardon; and then
would put his life upon trial, for supposed and surmised Treason.

It happned about this time, ANNO. 22
that Henry Bullinbrooke Duke of Hartford, and Cousin to the King, The Kings
Cousin, desires reformation in the King, by his friend Tho. Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, whom the King did favor extraordinarily.
was much grieved daily to hear such slanderous reports, as were too commonly
noysed of the King; partly upon his too much liberty, which beyond the Laws
he challenged in the course of his Government; and partly by reason of his
unjust, and unskillful managing of the weighty affairs, and businesses of his
Kingdom. And though affection (by means of his near consanguinitie with the
King) moved him heartily to wish for, and to desire, a present reformation of
those evils: yet could he not better devise, how he might effect that which
he so much craved, than by making use of his great familiarity, and
acquaintance with Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk; who had an extrao^dinarie
interest in the Kings favor. Whereupon (very privately, and in great secrecy,
as unto a most kind and loving friend) he imparted the causes of his grief in
that behalf unto the said Duke: and earnestly entreated him (upon fit
opportunity, and at his leisure, and as from himself) seriously to inform
the King of the said reports; and (withal) to entreat his Highness, to
extend more grace, and more favor, to those Lords, who (for his honor, and
the Kingdoms good) had both incurred his displeasure, and also were (with too
much extremity) condemned of High Treason.

But the Duke of Norfolk (who more respected his own preferment, than the
kings honor, and strongly presumed that he had now gotten fit means to
advance himself, by his friends fall) related all his sayings to the King, A
false, and an unfaithful friend.
in the rudest, and most uncivil manner which he could devise: and added many
things to his relation, which were untrue, and never spoken; thereby
aggravating an offense, which was not committed, and incensing the king with
high indignation to vow revenge and punishment, when the Duke of Hartfords
fidelity, and loyal service, deserved great thanks and a good reward.

The King is angry.

The Duke of Hartford answers for himself.


The king was so much vexed and enraged by means of these tidinges, that
nothing could give him any contentment in any thing: until his Cousin the
Duke had made his answer thereunto. And, being sharply pressed thereunto by
the king: Such things, as in that secret, and friendly manner, he had desired
might be reformed, he both confessed and justified. But the untrue
suggestions, which falsely and maliciously were added; he denied. The Combat
challenged and accepted.
And to clear himself of them, he challenged the Duke of Norfolk to a
single Combat: which was by him accepted; and consented unto by the king. But
when the appointed day was come, and the two Dukes were within the Lists,
readily prepared, and advanced themselves each toward the other, for the
encounter: The King would not permit them to proceed; but banished the Duke of
Norfolk for ever, Banishment.
who shortly after died at Venice; and his Cousin, the Duke of Hartford, he
exiled for six years.

King Charles the sixth.
Whereupon He sailed into France; and was honorably received by King Charles
the sixth, Father to the Queen of England, King Richards wife: who so
effectually justified him in his said actions and doings, and so highly
affected his Descent, his Personage, his Wisdom, his Virtues, and his right
Noble Conditions, that he would have bestowed upon him in marriage the Daughter
of his Uncle, the Duke of Berrie, if his Sonne-in-law King Richard (by
extraordinary solicitations, and by unusual means had not been the
hinderer thereof.

John of Gant dies.
Not long after this Dukes Banishment; his father John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster and Uncle to the king, died: the descent of which Duchy, would have
made the said Duke a potent Prince. But the king (refreshing his humors with
new practices of secret revenge, and that he might keep him low) unjustly
seized upon all the Lordships, The King wrongeth Henry the new Duke of
Lancaster.
and Possessions, belonging to that Duchy, and upon all the moueables of his
said deceased Uncle, and shared and distributed them among his Sycophants, and
wicked Counselors. Which tyrannous, and wrongful dealing, so much displeased
his uncle the Duke of York, and his cousin the Duke of Aumarle, Edmund of
Langley and Edward his son.

More wicked Counselors to the King. Scrope, Bushe, Bag^t, Gree^e. The King
farmeth his King^^me, and sayleth into Ireland. The Journey c^st h m ^^s Crown
and his life.

ANNO 23 The Duke of Lancas^^r landeth in England. His companies increase to a
strong Army. He is r^ceiued i^to Lo^^^^. He (...) into the W^^^. King Ri^^^^
retur^^^^. He (...). Three of the w ^ked Counselors were b^^eaded. The Kings
(...) and (...) to the Duk^.


that presently they left the Kings Court, and retired themselves to their own
houses.

At this time King Richard was wholly misled, and lewdly directed in all his
doings and negotiations by his principal favorites, Sir William Scrope Earl
of Wilshire, Sir John Bushe, Sir James Bagot, and Sir Henry Green: by whose
advice (without the consent of his privy Counselors of Estate) he levied a
strong Army; farmed to them, for certain years, his whole Kingdom, and all
his Revenues belonging thereunto; and sailed into Ireland: where he behaved
himself so valiantly, that he subdued that rebelling Nation; and by his
severity, he compelled them to be willing to obey.

But in his absence, his banished cousin, Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of
Hartford and of Lancaster, together with his old friend and exiled companion,
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury; returned into England, to make claim to his
Duchy of Lanca^ter. His first landing was in the North: where, such was the
singular love and the great affection of the Noblemen and of the common sort of
people toward him, partly in regard of his nobleness and virtues, and partly
in regard of the Kings disordered courses in his government; that they all
(with extraordinary cheerfulness and alacrity) flocked unto him, well
armed, and in great troops: So that within few days his companies were
increased to a strong Army; with which he marched peaceably, and in good
order, unto London, and was received, entertained, and feasted there, with much
honor and great joy. And from thence he went into the Western parts of this
Kingdom; the people (in all places where he came) being heartily gladded,
with much contentment, with his doings.

But in the mean time, King Richard (who was returned, and had quickly levied
great forces, which he conducted against the Duke) perceiving that every day
his subjects fled from him, and voluntarily offered their service to the Duke;
and being certainly informed, that Sir William Scrope Earl of Wilshire, Sir
John Bushe, and Sir Henry Green (three of his wicked Counselors, and upon
whom he most of all relied) were taken, and had lost their heads: despairing
of any safety to be gained by force and violence; of his own accord he came
unto his cousin the Duke of Lancaster, confessed publicly his own
insufficiency and weakness to rule and to govern well, praised the Dukes
rare and singular virtues, and his absolute worthiness to be a King, and
proffered to make him an absolute Surrender of his whole Kingdom, if he would
accept thereof.

A faint refusal.
But the Duke (though he much affected the wearing of a Crown; yet, because
he hoped, that the favor of the Nobility, Gentry, and of the common People,
would freely cast that burden and Dignity upon him, with greater safety, and
assurance of continuance) refused to accept thereof: and protesting (with many
pleasing speeches) That he only desired to enjoy his own Patrimony, and to
reform such things as were amiss; he caused the King (with very honorable
and respective attendance) to be guarded to the Tower of London: The King is
sent to the Tower.
and then he assembled a Parliament; in which (among sundry other things)
were publicly proposed these ensuing Articles, concerning the evil Government
of the King. The Duke summoneth a Parliament


Articles proposed in Parliament against the King.
1. INprimis, That he would not permit the said Duke of Hartford (who was so
much wronged for his good advice and counsel touching the Kings Government) to
fight the Combat against the falsely accusing Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
and yet banished him unjustly for six years. 2. Item, That albeit under the
Great Seal of his Kingdom he had licenced the said Duke of Hartford, at his
departure out of England, to make his Attorney to proceed for him in his causes
of Law: yet (he being gone) the King would not permit any man to deal for
him in his absence. 3. Item, That very uncharitably he prohibited all his
Nobility, and all others, to be suitors unto him for the said Duke of Hartfords
return from his unjust banishment, upon the forfeiture of their lives and
goods. 4. Item, That after the death of John of Gaunt, the Kings uncle, father
to the said Duke, and Duke of Lancaster, he had wrongfully seized into his
hands all his moueables whatsoever, and had divided and shared them among his
graceless, and wicked Counselors, and had also (by like injustice) seized all
the possessions of the said Duchy of Lancaster (which rightfully did belong to
the said Duke of Hartford) into his own hands, and kept the profits thereof to
his own use. 5. Item, that colourably, as a good friend to Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury (who was falsely accused of high treason to the King,
as he sat next to him in the higher house of Parliament) he persuaded the said
Archbishop to make no answer at all in defense of the said accusation; nor
repair any more to the same house: protesting, that neither the said
accusation, nor his silence, nor his absence, should be hurtful or
prejudicial unto him: and yet banished him out of the Realm; not having
examined the said surmised treason. 6. Item, that whereas his Chancellor had
refused (in an unjust matter) to grant a prohibition under the great Seal of
England; the King himself (to pervert the due course of Justice and of right)
granted the said prohibition under his privy seal, and straightly required,
that it should be executed, and obeyed. 7. Item, that most unnaturally and
cruelly he had procured Thomas Mowbray to smother to death, betwixt two
fetherbeds, the Kings most noble and most renowned uncle Thomas of Woodstock,
Duke of Gloucester, when (wrongfully, and without any good cause) he was a
prisoner at Callice: and afterward dignified the said murderer; first, with
the Earldome of Nottingham; then, with the Office of the Marshall general of
England: and last of all, made him Duke of Norfolk; he being altogether
unworthy of so great honor. 8. Item, that the King (to further his last
Expedition for Ireland) without law and without justice, took from the Clergy
and many Religious houses, great store of money, plate, jewels, and rich
ornaments; not having the owners consent so to do. 9 Item, that in the same
journey, without the approbation of his Counsel of Estate, he carried with
him into Ireland the plate, and rich jewels, belonging to the Crown, which
might have tended to the great inpouerishment of this Realm. 10 Item, that in
every Shire he had secret Intelligencers, upon whose bare information that ane
man had repined at the Kings bad government, the party so accused (without
examination or trial) was enforced to procure his pardon by the payment of a
grievous fine. 11 Item, that by the lewd advise of his wicked Counselors, he
had devised many subtle and crafty Oaths; by means whereof many of his
honest Subjects had been undone. 12 Item, that by the like advise, and
counsel, he procured Ruffians, and desperate companions, to accuse rich (but
weak) men, of sundry falsly-supposed crimes, and imagined offenses, and by
means thereof, enforced them to redeem the combat with much money. 13 Item,
that he gave large gifts unto wicked and lewd companions, who (maliciously to
advance their own Estates) animated him against diverse of his Barons, who only
desired a good reformation of his evil government; and imposed diverse Taxes
upon his people, to enrich them. 14 Item, that he had procured such Records to
be cancelled, and imbeselled, as testified his extortions, and his oppressions
unjustly imposed upon his people. 15 Item, that he had oftentimes said, that
the Laws of his Kingdom were in his own breast: and that (upon this opinion)
he had put to death many of his noble men, and some of his inferior subjects
without just cause. 16 Item, that most of his writings, and letters unto
foraigne Princes, and Estates, were so crafty, ambiguous, doubtful, and
uncertain; that they could not rely confidently upon any thing which he had
written. 17 Item, that in his Parliament holden in the one and twentieth year
of his Reign, his Cheshire Guard (who only were permitted and suffered to
wear weapons) committed many Robberies, and Murders, and yet not one of them
was punished or reproved for the same. 18 Item, that (to insinuate favor with
those loose, and lewd companions) the King had basely, and fondly, dishonored
his High Estate and Sovereignty, by entitling himself The Prince of Cheshire.
19 Item, that whereas, in the same Parliament, sundry great Lords intended
liberally, and dutifully to have spoken of such things as were not well
ordered, to the end that they might have been reformed* the King in such sort
threatened them, that for fear of ensuing dangers they held themselves silent,
and spoke not at all. 20 Item, that he exacted great fines from the wealthiest
of his Subjects, for adhearing to the Barons; notwithstanding that in full
Parliament he had before granted them his free pardon. 21 Item, that by
himself, and his own authority, he had displaced diverse Burgesses of the
Parliament; and had placed such other in their rooms, as would better fit, and
serve his own turn. 22 Item, that contrary to his solemn Oath, and
instrument in writing under the great Seal of his Kingdom, He had not only
disallowed the Commission, granted in the same Parliament to the thirteen
Lords, to enquire of, and to reform the great abuses, and the apparent
misgouernment of the Commonweal, But also had exiled, beheaded, and otherwise
executed, diverse Noble Men, and others, who for the Kings honor, and for the
safety and welfare of the Commonweal, had procured the said Commission, or
had executed the said Authority, according to the trust and confidence in them
reposed. 23 Item, that whereas he had caused certain Laws in the same
Parliament to be made for his own gain, and to serve his own turn, he
procured the Popes Bulls to curse such as should withstand, or disobey them:
which thing greatly tended to the derogation of his Crown, and was done
expressly against his own law made against the Authority of the Pope within
this Realm but seven years before. 24 Item, that he had displaced lawful
and good Shiriffes, and had elected others, whom he suffered to continue, and
to hold the said Office, two years together and more, because their unjust
oppressions augmented and increased his gain.
King Richard confesses all the Articles.
The transcript of all these Articles and Objections, were (by both the Houses
of Parliament) authentically sent unto the king: who not only confessed them to
be true, and acknowledged his own insufficiency to rule and to govern
better; but also by a plain, He resignes his Crown. King Richard is deposed.

Henry Duke of Lancaster is made King. Thomas Arundell restored to the
Archbishopprick of Canterbury.


and exact instrument in writing under his hand and Seal, he resigned his
Crown and kingdom to his Cousin Henry of Bullinbrooke Duke of Lancaster:
which being read publicly, and being generally ratified, approved and
confirmed by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons in the same
Parliament assembled; they deposed king Richard, and made the said Duke king.
And his true, and faithful friend, and his companion in Banishment, Thomas
Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury (being then and there restored to his
place, and dignity) installed the said Henry in the kingly Throne. And the
late King Richard was sent to Pomfret Castle, there to be safely kept, and
with Princely honor to be maintained: but very shortly after (by the new
kings direction and commandment; who feared least his Estate might be
shaken, so long as Richard lived) he was wickedly and villanously assaulted in
his Lodging, King Richard is cruelly murdered
by Sir Pierce Exton, and eight other armed men: from one of which (with a
Princely courage) he wrested a browne-Bill, and therewith slew four of his
Mischievous and Ungodly Assailants: He was very valiant.
and (with admirable resolution) fought with all the rest; until coming by
his own Chair (in which the base Cowardly Knight himself stood for his own
safety) he was by him stricken with a Polle-axe in the hinder part of his
head: Though he were an evil King, yet no religion warranted those unjust
proceedings.
so that presently he fell down and died. And thus was he wicredly and
treacherously murdered, and his body buried at Langley: but was (afterward)
removed unto Westminster, where it now lies.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE FOVRTH.
ALTHOUGH the Crown of England, ANNO. 1. 1399.
in right (if Richard the deposed king should die without issue) was by
succession to descend unto Edmund Mortimer Earl of March (the Son and heir of
Edmund Mortimer, by Philip his wife, who was the daughter and heir of Lionel
Duke of Clarence, the third son of Edward the third: Yet his Cousin Henry of
Bullinbrooke Duke of Hartford, and son and heir unto John of Gaunt the
younger brother of the said Lionel, was elected and crowned king. And forthwith
he created his eldest son Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and
Earl of Chester: and summoned his High Court of Parliament, in which an order
was prescribed and set down, for the safe keeping, and for the honorable
attendance, and maintaining of Richard the late king. But his deposing,
imprisonment, and all the former proceedings which were had against him, John
Bishop of Carleyl condemns the former proceedings against King Richard.
were in the same Assembly publicly condemned and reproved by John Bishop of
Carlisle, as hateful unto God, traiterous toward the wronged king, and
infamous among good men. For he auerred boldly, That if he were not a good
king, yet more injury was done unto him then ordinarily is done to Murderers,
and to Thieves: because they are not (as he was) condemned, before they had
made their answer to the objected crime, before Judges which were indifferent,
The Bishop of Carleyl is attached.
and pronounced their judgment upon good proof. But as soon as he had ended
his speech: he was attached by the Earl Marshal; and committed to strait
Prison in the Abbey of Saint Albons. And then (among many other things in the
same Parliament done) the Crown of England was entailed to King Henry, The
Crown is Entayled.
and to his heirs for ever.

Treason plotted, to be acted at Oxford.
As Soon as this Parliament was ended, such of the greatest Lords, as made the
fairest show of public applause and joy, for the High dignity which King
Henry did possess; conspired by Treason to take away his life, at a solemn
Iusts to be holden in the City of Oxford: whereunto the King was invited; and
promised to be present, because he conceived, that the same Triumph was so
appointed for his honor, and for his delight.

This Treachery was cunningly plotted and contrived by the Conspirators: who
by Indentures under their hands and seals, had bound themselves each unto
other, both for secrecy, and also for the resolute effecting and performing
thereof; all which they solemnly confirmed by their Oaths.

The confederates.
The Confederates in this Treason, were the Kings Cousin German, Edward
Plantagenet Duke of Aumarle, son and heir apparent to Edmund of Langley Duke
of York: Thomas Holland Duke of Surrie; and John Holland his brother, Duke of
Exeter, both which were half brothers to King Richard; John Montague Earl of
Salisburie; Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester; Sir Thomas Blunt; and one
Magdalen, who was sometimes a Chamber-wayter to the deposed King, and both in
stature, and in countenance, and in his behavior, was not much unlike him.

All these Conspirators (the Duke of Aumarle only excepted) met at Oxford, at
the appointed time, being strongly guarded, and honorably attended, The
Treason was strangely discovered.
by lusty Archers, and other valiant men. But the absence of the said Duke,
was (by his Associates) wondered at: for which their was good cause. For as he
sat at Table with the Duke his Father, one Labell of a part of the said
Indentures appeared at his bosom: by which, the old Duke drew forth the whole
writing. And having read the same; he caused his Horse to be made ready,
because he intended (with all poasting speed) to make this news known unto
the King. But his guilty, The Duke of Aumarle confesses all to the King.
and perplexed Son (perceiving that his Father would reveal this secret) and
knowing that, now, the least delay might extraordinarily hasten his danger:
being bravely mounted (with all celeritie) he out-rode his Father, and came to
Windsor Castle to the King (who was preparing for his said journey) and without
any tedious discourse, or lingering ceremonies, He is pardoned.
he revealed to his Majesty the whole conspired Treason; and freely obtained
his own pardon.

It now behooved the King to change his course: and so he did. For presently he
rode to the Tower of London: The King raises an army.
where he took a present and a perfect view of all such things, as were
behoofefull, and necessary to an Army.

And then he levied a strong power: purposing to defend himself, and to
surprise those grand Traitors, if he might. But when the Conspirators were
informed, that all their Plot and Treason was revealed: Magdalen was King
Richards counterfeit.
They caused the said Magdalen to be attired in Royal Robes; and to feign,
and affirm himself, to be King Richard. And with him, and all their Troops
(which were very warlike and strong) they marched toward London: resolving
to oppose themselves in the field against the king.

But king Henry (knowing that those Lords, both in blood, and for their power,
The King marches toward the Traitors.
were more then ordinarily great) was not ignorant, that his best means to
repress, and vanquish them, consisted in the quickest expedition and dispatch,
which he could make. Wherefore (with a bold and with a kingly courage) he
marched speedily toward them, with twenty thousand wel-armed men.

The news of the kings approach being voiced among the companies, which were
conducted by the conspiratours; so perplexed, The Traitorous Lords are left by
their companions.
and so amazed them, that very cowardly they ran away, and left those Lords
comfortless, and destitute of all aid. So that the most of them were
apprehended; and not long after were put to death, in sundry places of this
kingdom: The Lords fl^e and are taken and executed.
and the rest (being surcharged, and ouer-burdned with fear, and sorrow) not
long after dyed.

Thus was king Henry happily delivered from this danger. And lest the like
Treason for king Richards sake might at an other time be attempted against his
person: he caused him to be murdered in the Castle of Pomfret; Charles the
sixth, resolves to releue his Son in-law King Richard.
as in the end of the discourse describing his Reign, and History, more
particularly it does appear. When the French King Charles the sixth,
Father-in-law to king Richard, was truly informed what had been done in
England: he was much grieved at the insufferable wrongs which were done unto
him; and did intend (as a faithful friend in his extremities) to relieve his
lamentable Estate, and (to be pitied) miseries. And for that purpose he sent
his letters of defiance to king Henry: and brought an Army Royal into
Piccardie, with which he resolved to make sharp War within this Realm.

He desisteth when he hears of King Richards death.

A French Army.

An English Army.


But when he certainly knew, that the poor, distressed, and afflicted King,
was dead, and that it was too late to do him any good: he dissolved his
Army; and proceeded no further in that business. Yet to revenge those wrongs;
he was very hopeful to surprise many Towns, Cities, and Castles in
Aquitaine, and in Guyan. And, to effect the same, not long after he levied
other Forces; increasing them to a great Army. And King Henry (to withstand
him) did the like. But the English Army (landing in those Countries before the
French King was in a readiness: and being boldly commanded and conducted by
the Lord Percie, Earl of Worcester, unto Sir Thomas Knowles the King of
Englands Lieutenant there: The French King gives over his enterprise.
and they having taken the fealty, and the homage, of the Lords of those
Provinces, for their obedience, and allegiance unto King Henry: caused the
French King to change his mind, and dishonourably to disband all such companies
as he had levied. Yet for all this, King Henry (still distrusting the
weakness of his usurped title, and endeavoring to support it with a more sure
foundation, entreated the French King Charles the sixth, to give in marriage his
daughter Isabel (sometime King Richards wife) unto his eldest son Henry,
Marriages with France are seldom fortunate.
Prince of Wales. But her father (observing that marriages betwixt England and
France were but seldom fortunate) denied the kings request, whereupon, she was
conveyed into France with Princely attendance, and great honor. And not long
after she was married to her Cousin Charles, the eldest son of Jews Duke of
Orleance, her Uncle.

The aforesaid Treason conspired against the king by the aforesaid Lords; and
the late preparations of the French King, first to have invaded the Kingdom of
England, and secondly, to have wrought wonders in Aquitaine, and in Guyan: and
the frequent speeches which every where were uttered touching the manner of
the Kings attaining to the Crown; animated the Welchmen, and the Scots, to
show themselves troublesome neighbors unto the King.

Owen Glendor rebelleth.
For in Wales, Owen Glendor (a bold Squire) with many hundreds of his lawless
and uncivil companions, entered into Arms, and did much harm in the Marches
which bordered near unto them. Against whom, Edmund Mortimer taken and sharply
imprisoned.
the Lord Gray of Ruthen, and Edmund Mortimer (who was the true and rightful
Heir of the Crown) conducted their Forces, and fought with him. But they both
were taken Prisoners: and the said Edmond was by him kept close in a dark
Dungeon, which was both cold and vnhealthie; where he was ouerburdened with
daily wants, and much misery. All which were with the greater extremity laid
upon him, because king Henry, his Cousin, should be enforced the sooner to
redeem him with a great Ransom. Wherein (because the King was too too slack
and negligent) he was entreated and urged by his Lords, The King would not
redeem him.
but especially by the distressed Earls kinsmen the Percies. But unto them all
he turned the deaf ear: rather desiring his destruction, then holding it safe
for him to set him free.

The Scots also invaded the Northern parts of this Kingdom: The Scots invade.
but King Henry, with a puissant Army, entered into their Country; and
revenged his wrongs every where, with fire, and sword, at his own pleasure.
The king curbeth them.
But (because the Winter was extraordinarily wet, and cold) he dissolved his
Army; and with great honor, victoriously he returned back.

But as soon as he was gone, the angry Scots (being in number twenty
thousand at the least) entered with barbarous cruelty into England upon the
Northumbers, The Scots again do invade.

Henry Hotspurre overthrows them.

His great Prisoners.


but were gallantly encountered by Sir Henry Hot-spurre, the son and heir
apparent of Henry Percie Earl of that Province: who (with ten thousand
lusty and brave men) gave the Scots such a bloody overthrow, that he slew of
them more then ten thousand in the field, and took above five hundred
Prisoners; among whom Mordake Earl of Fyffe, Archibald Earl Douglasse,
Thomas Earl of Murrey, and Robert Earl of Angus, were the chief.

The next year following, ANNO. 1. The Frenchmen, spoiled by a storm at Sea.
the French King sent for Wales (to assist Owen Glendor in his rebellious
enterprises) twelve hundred Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of good account,
that they might be leaders, and directors, to those disordered Traitors. But
the winds (not being answerable to their desires) were so contrary at the Sea,
and a storm so violently increased: that twelve of their greatest ships,
with all their men and furniture, were swallowed into the Sea; and the rest,
with great difficulty, returned into France.

This misfortune so animated the English Nation; The English do deride the
French.
that they began (every where) to talk of and to jest at the French King:
because all his warlike expeditions had still been unfortunate and disastrous;
and though they threatened much, Twelve thousand Frenchmen sent into Wales.
yet always they vanished as a cloud. The report whereof so whetted and
exasperated his resolutions, to do some memorable service: that forthwith he
sent unto the said rebelling Welchmen, an army of twelve thousand men; who
safely landed, and joined with ten thousand of that Nation.

The King marched into Wales.
This Army occasioned King Henry to prepare soundly for his safety. For he
was well assured, that if any neglect, or want of skill, or of courage, should
give them the least advantage whatsoever: then his Crown would be shaken; and
many miseries would threaten his overthrow. Wherefore he (in his own person)
marched with a strong and with a complete Army into Wales. But as soon as the
Frenchmen had certain notice of his coming, they thought it was high time for
them to advise what course to take: perchance, not because they were
distrustful of their own valor, and resolution, but because the inconstancy
of that turbulent and fickle Nation, when danger did appear, affrighted them
fully with fears and with doubts, least they would fly into the Woods, and
craggie Mountains, and forsake them, when they should crave the best
performance of their help. The Frenchmen fly to their ships.
And so strongly did this doubtful fear possess them, that suddenly, like
men amazed, and heartlesse, they ran unto their ships: and (not having
performed any manner of service whatsoever) disgracefully, and cowardly, they
returned into France.

The King is victorious without blows.
Hereupon, the Welsh Rebels (desperately shifting for themselves) fled, every
man his own way: so that king Henry found those Traitorous multitudes
dispersed, and quite vanished; and would not be fought with. Wherefore he
dissolved his great army, and returned in peace, without blows.

The King marries the Duchess of Britain.

The King makes great friends abroad.

ANNO. 3. The King requires the Percies to deliver to him their Scottish
Prisoners. They refuse it The Percies resolve to set Edmond Mortimer at
liberty* and to restore him to the Crown.


Afterward, King Henry took to wife, Jane the widow of John the deceased
Duke of Britain; and gave Blanch (his eldest daughter) in marriage unto
William Duke of Bauier, the son and heir apparent of the Emperor Jews of
Bauier.

And (some few years after) he matched Philip, his youngest daughter, with the
King of Denmark. For his daily troubles, and turmoiles at home, gave him
advise, to make himself more strong by procuring of great friends abroad.

In the third year of his Reign, he required Henry Percie, Earl of
Worcester; Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland; and Henry Hot-spurre his
son; to deliver unto him such Scottish Prisoners, as they had taken in those
last wars. But they affirmed stoutly, that (by the Laws of Arms, and
Chivalry) those Prisoners belonged unto them: and thereupon they refused to
deliver them unto the King. By means whereof, some unkindness grew betwixt
the king and them; which not long after was made apparent to the World. For the
Percies now began to resolve upon the restoring of their inthralled Cousin,
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, both unto his liberty, and also to his Crown:
and to depose King Henry; if by any means, and endeauours, they could bring
their purposes to pass. Yet (for a time) they concealed their intent: and
(making none other show but of natural kindness, and friendship, to the said
Earl, in regard of their affinity, and kindred, earnestly prayed the king to
ransom him, and to set him free; They desire the King to Ransom him.
because he was unfortunately taken in his service; and was oppressed with much
misery. But the king, not harkening to their suit; nor (indeed) desiring that
he should be enlarged: made answer, and caused it to be proclaimed, The King
will not, but accuses him.
that the said Earl had voluntarily caused himself to be taken prisoner, so
that Rebels (having him in their custody, and company) might pretend some
color, therewith to varnish such Conspiracies, and Treasons, as secretly they
had plotted, and contrived against his Crown, and him: and that therefore his
own safety, and his good discretion, gave him advise and counsel, not to
hearken to their motion but to punish his offense.

The Percies (having received this answer, ANNO. 4. Sir Edmond Mortymer is
Ransomed by the Percies.
and being much grieved with the said Proclamation: and being resolved no
longer to delay and to defer the enlargement of the said Earl) paid his
Ransom to Owen Glendor, and redeemed him at their own cost: and secretly
entered into such a League of friendship and familiarity with Owen Glendor,
Owen Glendor conspireth with the Percies.
that he faithfully promised to stick unto them stoutly, whenever they
would attempt the deposing of king Henry.

And then the said Lords Percies, being (by reason of their Scottish prisoners)
assisted with a multitude of warlike Scots; joined unto their part the Earl of
Stafford, and Richard Scrope Archbishop of York, brother to the beheaded Earl
of Salisburie; and many others; who increased their numbers with Englishmen,
and purposed to join with Owen Glendor and his Welsh Consorts, in the deposing
of the king: against whom (by way of accusation) they framed certain Articles,
which they published; and sent them to him in writing, to this effect.

Articles against King HENRY.
1. INprimis, That when he came into England from his Banishment, he took an
oath, only to challenge, and to recover his inheritance, and his wives; and not
to intermedle with the King, nor with the Crown. By reason of which oath
diverse loyal and good Subjects to King Richard, resorted unto him, not having
any treasonable intent. But when he perceived that his strength was so much
increased, that he might do what he pleased; he wickedly brake his oath, and
without any title, or right, procured himself to be made, and to be crowned
King. 2 Item, that not only, as an Archtraitor, he had imprisoned his
natural, and undoubted Lord and Master, King Richard, but had caused him
wickedly, and traitorously to be murdered: that with greater security, he
might enjoy his Crown, and his Kingdom. 3 Item, that, ever since the death of
King Richard, he had unjustly kept the Kingdom, and the Crown, from his
Cousin Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, who was the son and heir of Philip,
the daughter and heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, elder brother to John of
Gaunt father to the usurping King. 4 Item, that when no want or need compelled
him, he had imposed diverse Subsidies, and taxes, upon the people, to their
great grief, and coffeehouse: of which they willingly would, but dared not
to complain. 5 Item, that no justice could be expected at his hand: because
(contrary to the oath which he took when he was crowned) he had by letters,
written, and sent into sundry Shires, procured certain Burgeships for the
Parliament, all which he bestowed upon such as would not fail to serve his
turn, when opportunity did serve. 6 And lastly, that whereas in honor and
for affinities sake, he ought to have ransomed, and redeemed his said Cousin
the Earl of March, from his strait and loathsome imprisonment (and the rather
for that he was earnestly solicited so to do) he not only denied the said
request, but falsely, and untruly published and proclaimed, that the Earl
himself was of his own accord become a voluntary Prisoner, to the end, that
Traitors and Rebels joining with him, might have somewhat wherewith they might
color such Treasons as they would conspire against him.
For all which causes, and many others more, The Percies do defy the King.
they utterly defied him as a Traitor, and as a Usurper; and (as an enemy)
they vowed his destruction, and the restoring of the said Earl to his Right.

The King perceiving, that nothing but strong blows could end this strife: and
being persuaded, The King rayseth an Army.
that if he became victorious in this Rebellion, he should bereave all his
enemies of all hope to prevail in the like attempts; had levied a strong
Army: with which he marched courageously against those Lords; hoping to meet
with them, before they should join their forces with the Welchmen: and so
great was his care, The battle of Shrewsburie.
that he failed not therein of his purpose. For both their Armies met near
unto Shrewsburie: and in their first encounter, the Scots gave a brave onset
upon the King. But with such hardy violence he received them, The Scots are
overthrown.
that (almost in a moment) the greatest part of them were slain.

Yet notwithstanding, the Lords and their Army stoutly performed their task;
and fought with such admired courage and resolution, that they persuaded
themselves of good success, until the King and the martial Prince his son
(determining by honorable death rather to be subdued, 3. 1401. The Percies are
overthrown.
than to become the laughing stocks of adverse and froward fortune) redoubled
their strength and valor, and by their particular examples each to the other,
they so renewed the fight, that Sir Henry Hotspurre, and some others of the
principal Leaders of those companies, and many thousands more, were slain;
and his uncle, the Earl of Worcester, was taken prisoner in the field, and the
rest fled. And so the King, with the loss of sixteen hundred of his
soldiers, The King himself slew 36.

Douglas is released by the King without ransom.


having slain more than six thousand of his enemies (of which, thirty and six
fell by his own sword) obtained a famous victory. And because the Earl
Douglas, in a single combat with the King himself, performed the part of an
approved and of a worthy knight, the King granted him his liberty, without
ransom.

The next day following, the King and all his army (with great devotion and
reverence) gave thanks unto Almighty GOD for their good and honorable
success: Thanksgiving unto God.

The Earl of Worcester is beheaded.


and then he caused the Earl of Worcester to be beheaded; and many others,
being ringleaders in that Rebellion, to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and
did set their heads upon London Bridge.

The Prince marches into Wales. Owen Glendor forsaken by his companions. He is
famished to death.
And the King intending forthwith to pursue and prosecute his good fortunes, for
the surer settling of his estate in future time; sent the Prince of Wales, and
his whole army, into Wales. But when he came thither, his chiefest enemy
Owen Glendor was utterly forsaken by his whole companies, and shrouded himself
in the Woods; and being compassed round about by the Princes forces (who
eagerly hunted to apprehend him) he was miserably famished to death; and many
of his associates being taken, were put to death: and then the Prince returned
joyfully to the King.

The Earl of Northumberlands voluntary submission.
Now, whilst the Prince was thus busied in Wales, Henry Percie Earl of
Northumberland, came (of his own accord) and submitted himself to the Kings
mercy; protesting and swearing with many oaths, That he was never made
acquainted, nor intermedled in those Treasons. And though the King conceived
not the least thought which might excuse him, yet (for that time) he
entertained him with smooth words, and with a smiling countenance, and suffered
him to come and to go at his pleasure; because he had in his possession the
Castle of Barwike, and other places of great strength.

A Challenge sent by the Duke of Orleans to king Henry.
When all these Troubles had found an end, Lewis Duke of Orleance, brother to
the French King (being proud and vainglorious) sent a Challenge to King Henry;
requiring him, with one hundred chosen men at arms of his Kingdom, in some
indifferent and convenient place, to fight with him, and with the like number
of Frenchmen, for honors sake. But the King (with great discretion and
wisdom) made him this answer, King Henry's discreet answer.
That his former actions, in warlike employments, could clearly acquit him
from the infamous name and title of a Coward: And that Kings ought not to be so
careless of their Countries and of their people (whom GOD had committed unto
their charge and government) as to fight for any cause, except it were for the
furtherance or for the maintenance of true Religion; or in defense of their
Rights; or to defend their Kingdoms from foreign enemies; or to revenge their
wrongs; and for such like important causes: And also, that a Sovereign and an
anointed King (by the Laws of Arms, and of Honor) was not bound to answer
any Challenge in the field, except it were made upon good cause, by his Equal
in Dignity and in Office. And yet he further added this, That he would at
all times be very ready to repulse and to repress any violence or wrong,
which the Duke should dare, rashly or unadvisedly, at any time to attempt
against him, or any of his people.

The Duke, A rash attempt had a disgraceful end.
being ouer-passionate when he received this discreet and mild answer, with
all expedition besieged the Town of Vergie in Guian, and remained there for
the space of three months, and somewhat more. In which time he offered many
sharp assaults, and much violence, but received as many stout repulses as he
could well endure. And in the end, having lost many of his best men, and
chiefest friends, he was compelled disgracefully to raise his siege, and to
return into France.

The Duke of Burgoine also (supposing that the instabilitie of king Henry's
estate at home, The Duke of Burgoyne attempteth the regaining of Callice.
could not permit him to leave his Kingdom and to war abroad) obtained leave
of the French King to attempt the regaining of Callice to the French. For which
purpose he procured a puiss^nt Army, in which he had six thousand valiant men
at arms, fifteen hundred crosbowes, and twelve thousand ordinary Soldiers
on foot. But when the French Kings Council were informed, of the great
preparations made in England by King Henry to defeat them, and had maturely
considered of the difficulty (yea almost of the impossibility) of this
attempt: the said Duke was commanded to desist from his intended service: He is
required to desist.
whereat he was much grieved, and did conjecture, that the proud Duke of
Orleans, and some others, had discouraged the King in that business, because
they were jealous, that by his valor he would win too much honor and
renown.

Experience teaches us, that as the highest Trees are subject most to be
hurted by a storm: ANNO. 6. A new Rebellion secretly plotted but discovered.
so the greatest Estates are in greatest danger to be shaken by Envy. An
evident poofe thereof appeared plainly in the whole course of this Kings Reign.
For no sooner was he freed from one mischief, but incontinently he was
threatened by another. And though he had now escaped the great dangers of two
former Treasons, and Rebellions, and had been victorious over the Scots, and
the Welsh Rebels, and had out-faced the French, who (if they had dared) would
have attempted high Atchieuements at Callice, and in Aquitaine, and in Guian:
yet was he now again in hazard to have been turmoiled with an other Civil
War at home; which secretly was plotted, and contrived, by Henry Percie
Earl of Northumberland, Richard Scrope Archbishop of York, Thomas Mowbray
Earl Marshall, and by the Lords, H^stings, Faulconbridge, and Bardolf, and by
diverse others.

But as (in such like cases) it often falls out, The King suddenly
surpriseth the Traitors.
so this Traitorous Conspiracy was secretly revealed to the King: who came so
unexpectedly with an Army into the North, that ere any man reported the news
of his coming, he surprised the said Lords (the Earl of Northumberland, and
the Lord Bardolf excepted) and struck off their heads. But the said Earl fled
into France, from whence he came afterward into Scotland, The Prince warreth
in Scotland prosperously.
where he was promised to be aided against the King. But (to prevent such
mischiefs as those intendements did threaten) the Prince of Wales was sent
into Scotland with an Army, where he burnt and spoiled (without controlment)
at his own will and pleasure; and recovered to the Kings use, the Castles of
Barwicke, and of Anwicke; and enforced the Scots to crave a truce, which was
granted unto them for a few months: and then the Prince returned to the King.

The King in danger to be taken on the Thames by French Pirates. The Lord of
Camoys in trouble, clears himself. ANNO. 9. A valiant Sheriff.
And now it chanced, that as king Henry passed over the River of Thames, from
Kent into Essex, under the conduct of the Lord of Camois, he was almost taken
by the French Pirates: for which cause the said Lord was suspected, and attached
as a Traitor, and received his due trial, by his Peers; but was clearly
acquitted of that offense, and received into favor.

In the ninth year of this kings Reign, the Earl of Nothumberland, and the
Lord Bardolfe (animating the Scots to a new war) entered with them into
Northumberland; and did much mischief: whereupon king Henry levied a strong
army, and by great iournies) travailed to encounter them. But (before his
coming forth) they were fought with, and overthrown by Sir Ralph Rokesby then
Shirif of that County, who took the said Lords and many others, and smote
off their heads; and sent them (for presents) to the king.

ANNO. 11 Thomas is made Duke of Clarence* John Duke of Bedford. Humphrie Duke
of Gloucester. The King prepares to War in the Holy land. The King falls
^k^. His Crown is placed on his Pillow.
In the eleventh year of his reign he assembled his high Court of Parliament:
in which he created his three younger sons, Thomas, Duke of Clarence* John,
Duke of Bedford: and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester: and enacted many Laws, which
were helpefull, and profitable to this Commonweal.

And from that time forth until he died, he enjoyed a happy peace; and
rested from all hostility, and wars, both at home and abroad. And to
express his thankfulness to God for all his goodness, and great bounty
toward him: he made great and costly preparations, of men, money, victuals,
and armor, and ships, and all other things, requisite, and needful; and
purposed to have waged wars with the Turks in the Holy Land. But whilst he
busily employed himself in those affairs, he was attached by a deadly
apoplexy: and being near unto his last end, he caused his Crown to be
placed by him upon his pillow, least peradventure in his extremity of
sickness, it might be delivered to some other, who had better right thereto
then he had. But when his attendants verily supposed, that he was dead: the
young Prince of Wales seized upon his Crown. Whereat the king started up, The
Prince seized on the Crown. The Kings speech to the Prince.
and raising himself upon his arms, he demanded who it was that had taken
away his Crown. The Prince answered, that it was he: and then he fell back
into his bed; and (fetching a deep sigh, and sending forth many pensive
groans) My son (quoth he) my son, what right I had unto this Crown, and
how I have enjoyed it, God knows, and the World has seen. Comfort your
self in God, good Father, said the Prince: The Crown you have, and if you
die, The Prince has answer. The King dies.
I will have it, and keep it with my sword, as you have done. And within a
short time after, king Henry died, in the six and fortieth year of his age,
when he had reigned almost fourteen years. And his body was carried to
Canterbury, where (with all Princely, and due requisites) it was buried.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH.
IT is well known, Henry the fifth, whilst he was but a Prince, associated
to himself diverse unthrifty and lewd companions; A wild Prince, but a wise
King.
by whose instigation (among many other unworthy passages in his fathers
days) he smote the Lord chief Justice of England in the face: for which
offense he was imprisoned and dismissed of the Presidentship of the kings
Council; and (to his great grief and disgrace) was succeeded therein by
Thomas, Duke of Clarence, his younger brother. But when he was crowned king,
he disposed himself into a new course, qualifying his behavior with such
heroical virtues, as might beseem both his Person and his Honor, He
banisheth his loose companions.
and banished from his Court his loose and base consorts, after he had enabled
them to live by such gifts as were proportionable to their callings. He also
elected for his Council, and into places of Justice and public Government,
such as were wise, discreet, His good choice of good Governors. He reformeth
the Clergy. He rules the Laity.
learned, and temperate; well able to rule themselves, and to command others.
He painefully labored to reform Pride, Covetousness, and such other gross
abuses as were crept into the Church among the Clergy: and enjoined them
strictly to frequent Prayer and Preaching, to Hospitality, and to the sincere
serving of Almighty GOD. And (by the administration of his Laws with moderate
severity) he made the Laity tractable in the performance of their duties.
And (to settle his Estate in peace and in tranquillity at home; so that neither
the Scots nor the Welchmen should molest him, when he was busied in his Wars
abroad) he erected diverse Castles, He erecteth Castles in the frontiers of
Scotland and of Wales.
Bulwarks, and other Fortifications upon their frontiers; and so disposed of
them, that with many thousands of able men, and skillful Captains to command
them, he was still ready and powerful, with great violence and force, to
suppress and qualify such rebellious Insurrections as they might make.

King Richards body removed to Westminster.
In the first year of his Reign, with great pomp and solemnity, he brought
the body of King Richard the second from Langley unto Westminster, and buried
it by Queen Anne, his first wife.

2. 1413. A motion in Parliament to suppress Religious Houses.
In the second year, he held his High Court of Parliament at Leicester: in
which, he was importunately petitioned, to suppress the Religious Houses of
this Kingdom: because they being ill used, were made the Nurseries of
Idleness, Gluttony, Lechery, and of Pride; and were the Cages of unclean
birds. The Revenues which belonged to those Houses, were proportioned to yield
unto the Kings Cossers the annual Rent of twenty thousand pounds: and would
also (for the increase of the Kings power and strength) maintain fifteen
Earls, fifteen hundred Knights, and more than six thousand men at Arms;
besides, a great number of Almes-houses for the poores relief.

The Clergies policy to quench this fire.
To divert this stream into another Channel, the fat Abbots, Priors, idle
Monks, wanton Friars, and the puling Nuns, procured Henry Chichley, then
Archbishop of Canterbury, in a very learned and excellent Oration, to
discover to the King his Right and his Title to the Crown of France; The Kings
title to the Crown of France set abroach.
to refresh him with confident hopes of good success; to direct him into a
course answerable to his hopes; and (in the Clergies behalf, and for the
furtherance of those Wars) to offer unto the King an incredible mass of
money as their free and as their frank gift.

The French business silenceth all others.
This motion and this business was so much applauded by the King, his Nobles,
and the inferior sorts of his people: and the great sum of money which was
offered, so well contented them all, that the said Petition was thereby lulled
fast asleep; and nothing was now debated and spoken of, but the means how
England might recover France.

This Parliament being ended; the Duke of Exeter, uncle to the King, the
Archbishop of Dublyn, the Lord Gray high Admiral of England, Ambassadors sent
to require the Crown of France. Charles the sixth.
and the Bishop of Norwich (being attended with five hundred Horse) were sent
Ambassadors to the French king Charles the sixth. By these the King required
the peaceable delivery of that Kingdom, together with the whole Duchies of
Aquitaine, Normandy, and of Angeou; and the Counties of Poytou, and of Main:
and made this offer, That if (without the effusion of their peoples blood) the
French King would yield to his demands; he then would be pleased to take to
his wife the Lady Katherine his daughter, and would endow her with all the
said Duchies and Provinces, and would be tractable to all things tending to the
French kings honor and estate. But if he refused to deliver him his
Patrimony and Inheritance without blows; then he assured him, That he would
attempt the gayning of them by his Sword: and would, in those Countries,
afflict those people with such oppressions as were too too rife and common in
the War.

The unexpected strangeness of this motion and quick message so amazed the
French king and his Nobility, The French king craves further time to make his
answer. The Dolphin scoffeth the King.
that (without sound and good deliberation) they were unable to return any
answer: but craved a longer time; with promise, shortly to send his
Ambassadors, concerning that business, to the King. But the Dolphin despising
the youth of King Henry, and holding him unfit to attempt a matter of so high
a consequence; sent unto him (as a present) a Tonne of Tennis Balls:
insinuating thereby, that it was more agreeable to his years to sport himself
among nimble laddes in a Tennis Court, than to dream of the winning of so
potent a kingdom as France was.

The King, although otherwise he would have been persuaded by reason, kindly
to have censured of the French kings request, The Kings courageous speech.
and of his promise: yet, because the Dolphin so basely skorned him, protested
in his angry mood, That ere many months should be spent, he would (if GOD
assisted him) toss so many balls of iron within that kingdom, that the
strongest Rackets in France should be too weak to return them. For this
purpose, he levied a strong and a puissant Army: whereof, King Henry leuieth
a great Army. The Dolphins motion for peace.
when the Dolphin had intelligence (because the charge of those affairs, by
reason of the French kings weakness and infirmity, was committed to his care
and providence) he sent Ambassadors to king Henry, to inform him, That if he
would desist from his purpose, and would live in amity and in peace with that
Nation, and would take his sister, the Lady Katherine, to his wife; he then
should have and receive with her a large sum of money, with some small
Territories and Possessions in that kingdom.

King Henry's answer.
Those Ambassadors were honorably received, kindly entertained; and royally
feasted by the King, at his own table. But for an answer he returned, That
except the French King (with his said daughter) would give unto him the
Dutchies of Aquitaine, Normandy, Angeow, and all other small Segniories, to
him, and to his Crown justly appertaining, and belonging, he would not
disband his army, nor wave his title to the Crown of France; but would
attempt (by fire, and sword) to win it if he might.

King Henry fortifieth against the Scots. The Queen mother is made Regent of
England. ANNO. 3. 1414. King Henry defieth the K. of France. Treason against
King Henry.
As Soon as the French Ambassadors were departed, The King (who proposed none
other end to his endeavors, but an assured trust in God, and in a thousand
hopes of conquest and of victory) placed a strong power upon the marches of
Scotland, to keep them in order in his absence. And, having thoroughly
furnished himself and his army, with all needful preparations, and having
made the Queen his mother the Regent of his Kingdom, and assisted her with a
grave, and with a prudent Counsel, he sent his letters of Defiance to the
French King: and began with great alacrity, and courage, to proceed in this
his royal journey.

But as greatest dangers are then most frequent, when security seems to
banish all fear: so when King Henry persuaded himself, that he was most
sure, and safe, in the midst of his brave army. even then he was in a
greater hazard of his life, then if he had been in France, among the throngs
of his mortal, and professed Enemies. For Richard Earl of Cambridge brother
to the Duke of York, and Henry Lord Scrope, and Sir Thomas Gray (three of the
most approved Captains of this Kingdom) being treacherously engaged by great
rewards, conferred on them by the Dolphin of France: conspired to deliver him
into the French Kings hands; or else to murder him in his own Tent.

The treason is discovered.
Miraculously was this intended villainy revealed to the King, who grieved the
more thereat; because he should want the aidefull assistance of three such
valiant men of War, as gave him much assurance of good success. But when
they were apprehended, and brought into his presence, their open confession of
that conspiracy, The traitors are executed.
and treason (which otherwise would fully have been proved against them)
hastened their public sentence of death, and (as Traitors) they were executed
the next day.

The King landeth with his army in Normandy. Harflew besieged, and taken.
As Soon as the wind served, the King transported his army in an hundred and
forty ships, and landed in Normandy before Hareflew, upon the River of
Seyne, and besieged it on every part for the space of seven and thirty days.
And though the French army, which was conducted by the Dolphin, made many
fair proffers to raise the siege, yet durst they not come too near. But the
Town having been many times sharply assaulted, was yielded to King Henry:
who sacked it, and ransomed the inhabitants, and with great plenty of silver,
and of Gold, and many costly things, he enriched all his own Companies;
Great sickness in king Henry's Army.
and (having placed as Captain there, his Uncle Thomas Duke of Exeter; and as
his Lieuetenant Sir John Fastolf, with fifteen hundred soldiers, and five and
thirty gallant Knights, he resolved to go unto Callice by land; and to rest
there, because the winter (being now more wet, and approaching sooner at that
time then usually it was accustomed) infected many of his men with gieuous
fluxes, and strange fevers: and occasioned the death of the Earl of Stafford,
of the Bishop of Norwich* and of the Lords of Molines, and of Burnel, and of
more then fifteen hundred men.

And (notwithstanding, The French dare not to encounter with King Henry in his
March. Thirteen thousand men. Silver and Gold ^id ^o pleasure to the English
Army. The Dolphin br^ggeth but does not any thing.
that sickness and many wants afflicted his army) yet king Henry marched
with great confidence and resolution through the bowels of those Countries, in
despite of the French forces, who only made proud brags, and fair shows of
encounters: But (like unto hunted, and affrighted Dear) gazed a far off upon
the English army, yet dared not by handie strokes, to make the least trial of
their valor, albeit King Henry's strength did then consist only of two
thousand Horsemen, and of thirteen thousand Archers, and no more. Many of
which number wanted health, meat, wood, and rest, and had not any plenty of
any thing saving only of Silver, and of Gold, which could not (in that place)
supply unto them such things, as most of all they needed.

The Dolphin of France to whom the mannaging of those wars was committed
(having assembled more then thirty thousand fighting men) saw that he was
much dishonored by his own cowardice, and lest he should be infamous among
his own people, he determined to give battle to King Henry: but his fainting
ignoble heart, being terrified, and his courage passing in post out at his
heels* suffered him not to attempt any thing, so that King Henry still
marched on-wards, burning, and spoiling, and doing in his passage whatsoever
himself best liked.

The French king (who lay at Roan) was highly discontented, The French King
takes Counsel.
for that the English army (unfought with) had proudly passed over the River
of Soame) wherefore he entered into a serious consultation concerning those
businesses, with five and thirty of his discreetest, and wisest Counselors:
and the question was; The question.
Whether it were better to give Battle to the English Army, or (for that
time) to give King Henry a free march, without resistance, unto Callice? By
thirty of that number, it was advised, and concluded on, that they should be
fought with, but the other five urged many substantial reasons, and arguments,
to maintain the contrary. But they were not hearkened unto. The King is
defied, and a Battle promised.
So the French king incontinently, by his Herald at Arms sent a defiance to K.
Henry, and promised that within few days, he would try his best strength by
handie strokes in the open field. King Henry's discrete answer.
King Henry (with a Princely boldness and magnanimity) returned him this
answer, That because his army was afflicted with much sickness, and many
wants; he bended his course directly to his Town of Callice, where he would
go and refresh himself, and his companies, and would not therefore (at that
time) seek the French King. But if he endeavored, and dared to interrupt him
in his passage, he was of sufficient force and strength to repel all violence,
which the French Nation should oppose against him.

The Battle of Agencourt
When this answer was returned, the French King (by his Proclamations) caused
many thousand men at arms, and valiant Soldiers, to repair to the Constable
of France, to fight for honor and for their Country with king Henry: who
being informed, that the day drew near in which the Frenchmen intended to give
him battle; Blangie, and of Agencourt, within the County of Saint Paul.

This being done, the Constable of France, being bravely accompanied with
diverse great and honorable personages, The number of the French Army.
well experienced Captains, and lusty men of war, to the number of
threescore thousand on horseback; besides his Footmen, Pages, Waggoners, and
other attendants; approached near to the English army; and placed them in good
order of battle, and in the night time they made great fires about their
standard, How the French Army passed the night. They reckoned without their
Host. The Englishmens resolution.
disposed themselves to extraordinary mirth, and jollitie, and made such sure
account of the Victory on the next day (by reason of their great numbers, and
for that the English forces were so small, so weak, and sickly) that they fell
to the casting of lots for such prisoners as they would take.

And on the other side, king Henry and his people having humbly reconciled
themselves to God, and by repentance, and by public and private prayer,
purchased the happy contentment of quiet consciences, sounded their trumpets
and musical instruments of all sorts, and were resolved to sell their lives
dear, and to die like men, seeing that now they were unable, by any means
(excepting only by the sword) to work unto themselves any deliverance from
infamy, and from death.

Upon friday being the five and twentieth day of October, The Lord Dalabreth.
the Lord Dalabreth High Constable of France, arranged all his companies into
three battles.

1. In the first, he placed eight thousand wel-armed Knights, The first
Battle of the French.
and Esquires; four thousand Archers, and fifteen hundred Crosbowes: and
strongly guarded them with two wings. The one of them consisted of fifteen
hundred men at arms; and the other, of eight hundred. And this battle, and
these wings, were commanded by himself, and by the Dukes of Orleance, and of
Burbon, and by the Earls of Ewe, Richmond, and Vandosme, and by the Lord
Dampter, Admiral of France, and by the Marshal Bouciqualt, and many others.

2. In the middle battle were placed more men at arms, The middle Battle
of the French.
than in the former: and it was commanded by the Dukes of Bar and of
Alanson, and by the Earls of Vawdemont, Salings, Blamont, Grant-Pree, and
Russie.

3. And the third battle (being composed of all the remnant) was marshalled;
and guided by the Earls of Mark, Damp-Martin, The Rere battle af the French.
and of Fawlconbridge, and by the Lord Lurrey Captain of the Town of Arde.

And on the other side the Vauntgard of King Henry, King Henry's vantgard
which consisted of good Archers only, was conducted by the Duke of York: who
being right valiant, and of an hautie courage, by great entreatie obtained that
place; and with him, were the Lords of Beamond, Willoughby, and of Fanhope.

The maine battle was commanded by the King himself: King Henry's maine
Battle.
in which were his strongest bil-men, and some archers: and with him were the
Duke of Gloucester his brother, the Earl Marshall, Oxford, and of Suffolk.

And the Reareward was directed by Thomas Duke of Exeter, The Kings Rereward.
the Kings Uncle. And all the Horsemen (as wings) attended all these companies
on both sides.

And to prevent by policy such breaches, Stakes driven into the ground behind
the English Army.
as otherwise the French Horsemen might suddenly make upon the English army
with their barred Steeds, whilst the archers were busily performing their
task: king Henry caused all his Footmen, to be environed with stakes of five
or six foot long; which being well headded with sharp Iron at both ends, were
thickly pitched into the Earth, and easily might (upon every remove) be newly
fastened into the ground, by such as were appointed to attend them.

King Henry (upon his trust in the merciful aid and assistance of Almighty
God, This Ambush of Archers was a principal means of the victory
and upon a strong hope which he conceived, of brave service to be performed
that day) had secretly placed a lusty crew of good Archers within a new cast
hedge, by which the French Horsemen were to make way toward the English
army. And these were commanded to shoot wholly, and together, when a valiant
and wel-experienced Knight, named Sir Walter Harpington, by the casting up of
his Gauntlet, should occasion the whole Army of the Englishmen to shout with a
mighty cry. And this direction was so well observed, that when the French
Horsemen were passed within the danger of that ambush, and attempted to give
the first onset; upon the said sign and shout, the said archers dimmed the
air with the thickness of their strong flying arrows: and the French Horsemen
by means of the height of the said bank, and depth of the ditch within it,
were not able to come near unto them. Valiant and strong Archers. The first
Battle of the Frenchmen is overthrown.


The English archers likewise, who served in the Vauntgard, so strongly fixed
their shot in the French Horses, that many of them being wounded, and the
arrows shaking in their flesh, threw off their riders to the ground; and other
some of them, with violence ran upon such as rode next unto them; and the
rest of them, in such disordered troops, and plumps, so furiously and so madly
retired, that they thereby not only were disordered, but their footmen also;
who were oppressed, wounded, and miserably slain, and trodden to death by
them. Which when the English army well perceived: the archers threw away their
Bows, and with Malls, Axes, Swords, Gleaues, and Bills, they made an incredible
slaughter upon the first battle of the Frenchmen: The maine Battle is
assaulted by the English.
which by them were utterly discomforted, and put to flight. And (without
breathing, or the least delay) they ran fiercely upon the middle battle of
the French army: who fought with great courage, and resolution; and for a
while acquitted themselves as valiant men.

The French Horsemen of that battle, scorning that so small a number of their
Enemies should work such wonders: and intending by sudden violence, to make
quick dispatch of them; began to charge upon them with great courage. The
Englishmen (the better to save themselves, and to train the French Horsemen
within the danger of their stakes) seemed faint. Yet in good order they
retired, and quickly slipped behind their stakes: so that the Frenchmen (who
made more have then good speed to ouer-throw the Englishmen) rushed
ignorantly, The French Horses are goared on the stakes.
and violently forward; not hurting their Enemies, but goring, spoiling, and
killing of their Horses in great numbers. And thus was their maine battle
dimished, and altogether put out of order, and good government. The maine
battle of the French vanquished. The Kings valor.
Which when the Englishmen saw: they hautily advanced their spirits, and
confidently redoubled their strength: and with rude and hardy blows, they
rushed forth so egarly upon the Frenchmen, that they compelled them to fly. In
this encounter, the King himself fought hand to hand, with the Duke of
Alanson, and was by him, wel-neere taken Prisoner. But his high stomach
disdaining to stoop to fortune, and to loose the least jot of honor: he
encouraged himself with a more constant resolution. So that (in the end) he
slew two of the Dukes nearest attendants with his own hand; The Duke of
Alanson slain.
and felled him to the ground. But whilst the King passionately labored and
striued to save his life; he was unadvisedly slain by his Guard.

As Soon as these two battles were thus overthrown, the king (abandoning all
lingering and delay: and settling his hopes upon the assurance of an honorable
victory) made offer, with his whole Companies, to enuiron the third and last
battle of the Frenchmen: In which were the greatest number, but the worst
men. The third battle of the Frenchmen fly.
But their courage was so cooled, that (like unto Sheep before the Wolf) they
cowardly ran away, casting from them their armor and their weapons: and
(being strangely amazed; and not knowing which way to run, to save
themselves) great numbers of them fell upon their knees, and craved mercy, and
the preservation of their lives; and were received as prisoners by the English
army, by the Kings consent.

But whilst King Henry was thus busied, and (to pursue the Chase) had left
his own Camp, and Tents, An unfortunate service for the French Prisoners.
meanly and weakly guarded, and defended, by Waggoners, and by Lackies only:
Robinet of Bonuile, with six hundred of those Horsemen who first of all
acquitted the field, entered into the Kings Camp; and rifled all things at their
pleasure, and slew as many of the weak Garders as they could: by means
whereof, a strong outcrie was suddenly made there: which when the King heard,
he imagined, that fresh and new forces intended to give him an other battle,
and to try him with an other strength.

This conceit, and this fearing doubt; The French prisoners are miserably
slain.
occasioned him forthwith to proclaim, that (on pain of death) all ordinary
Prisoners should be slain, least (in the new conflict) they should be
troublesome and dangerous to his army. Then was there seen a sorrowful
spectacle of much unexpected cruelty. Fear enforced this cruelty.
For some of their throats were cut: the bellies of others were so lanced, that
their guts fell out: the brains of others were dashed abroad with Malls, and
Axes: others with Daggers were stabbed, and with Swords thrust through; and
finally, almost all of them (upon a sudden) were (with much enforced cruelty)
put to death; whereat the King conceived extraordinary grief, and sorrow, and
lamented it with many tears, when he perfectly understood, that no fresh army
was prepared to assail him.

The King, though he perceived well, and did perfectly know, that his Soldiers
were much tired and wearied with the great travels of that victorious day: King
Henry's providence against future danger.
yet (doubting of the worst) he arranged his whole army into a new battle,
because he was informed, that an other enterprise against him was taken in
hand. And as soon as he was fitly provided to defend himself; he was assailed
by the Earls of Marle, Another victory did attend him.
and of Faulconbridge, and six hundred valiant men at arms; who had kept
together, and had not fought one stroke that day. But as a small, and a weak
vessel, is quickly swallowed up into a wrathful Sea: so this poor handful
was by and by crushed, and almost every one of them was slain.

Afterward, when King Henry (by his Scoutes) received certain intelligence,
that every Coast about him was clear, and that such of his Enemies, as were
courageous, and would fight lay dead upon the ground, The King and his Army
give thanks to God for their great victory.
and none were so hardy as to show their faces: the king (about four of the
clock in the afternoon of the same day) caused his whole army (upon their
knees) to join with him in hearty prayer, and in thankfulness unto Almighty
God; who only, and alone, by his powerful aid and assistance, had given to
him, and them, a most incredible and a glorious Victory. This duty being thus
devoutly accomplished; The spoils.
the common soldiers, had frank leave and license granted them, to rifle
those whom they had slain. By means whereof they not only waxed rich, but
also stored themselus with all such necessaries, and provisions as before they
wanted: and then the King marched forward; and with much joy, and great honor,
was received into his strong town of Callice. In this battle, The French
Noble^ were slain.
were slain Charles Lord Delabreth high Constable of France; Jacques of
Chastilion Lord of Dampier High Admiral of France, John Duke of Alenson,
Anthony Duke of Brabant, Edward Duke of Bar; the Earls of Marle, Vawdemont,
Blawmount, Grand-pree, Russey, Fawlconbridge, Foys, and Lastrake: twenty and
five Lords; eight thousand Knights, and Esquires, and Gentlemen of arms, and
name: and about sixteen hundred of the common sort: besides those who were
taken, Prisoners taken.
and remained prisoners: among whom these were the chief: Charles Duke of
Orleance: John Duke of Burbon: the lords of Donuart, Fosseux, Humiers, Roy,
Cawny, Hamcourt, Noell, Bonciqualt, and some others. And on the other part were
slain Edward Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk; The slain Englishmen.
and of all others, not above six hundred persons.

When King Henry and his soldiers had a while refreshed themselves in
Callice, The King with his army arrive in England.
they took shipping: and being enriched with Silver, Gold, and brave and
costly Armours, they all arrived safely in England; and the King was received
into London triumphantly and with much joy.

When the French king and the Dolphin were informed of the said great and
insupportable overthrow; it is not to be wondered at, if melancholy passions
and much grief surcharged them to the very heart, and made them doubtful of
the event of this business. But the slaughter of the French prisoners,
foolishly occasioned by the base attempt of Robynet of Bonuyle, Robynet of
Bonuyle, and his accomplices, imprisoned.
and of his companions, who cowardly ransacked the English Camp and the kings
Tents in the heat and fury of the aforesaid Battle, perplexed them more than
all the rest: but especially the Dolphin; who imprisoned the Ringleaders of
that folly, and would have sentenced them to death, if suddenly himself had
not after died: The Dolphin dies.
whose death much amazed the weak and much diseased French King. But making a
virtue of necessity, and intending by some provident course to prevent such
mischiefs which future attempts did threaten; The Earl of Arminake is made
High Constable of France.
he made the Earl of Arminack (who was a stout and a warlike Captain) High
Constable of France, and placed in his other great martial Offices none but
such, as by their valor and good trial had made best proof of their
sufficiency to perform them. New French Officers.
These newly established Officers levied many companies of the most able and
stoutest men in sundry places of that kingdom.

And at the same time, the Kings uncle Thomas Duke of Exeter, Thomas duke of
Exeter has gallant service.
and Captain of Hareflew (intending to exercise his soldiers in feats of
War, and by some sudden service both to enrich them, to win honor to
himself, and to endamage his enemies) issued out of that Town with three
thousand men, well armed to the proof, and marched through those Countries,
burning, rifling, and spoiling, until he came almost to the City of Roan:
where he was encountered by the new Constable of France; who with five thousand
horsemen (having a resolution in this exploit to win his Spurs) so sharply
charged the Duke and his followers, that he compelled him (though in good
order, The new Constable is overthrown.
and with little loss) to retire. But the Frenchmen (determining their utter
overthrow) pursued them still with eager spirits, until they came almost to
the Barriers of Harflew: which when the rest of the Englishmen, who were within
the Town, perceived, they issued forth in good order, joined with the Dukes
companies: and then they all, with their entire strength, so furiously opposed
themselves against the Constable and his Associates, that (with the slaughter
of many of their horses and soldiers) they were enforced to fly away, and
were chased by the English Victors more than two miles: and diverse of them, who
were taken prisoners, could not obtain their liberty, until they had
procured it with large Ransomes.

Sigismond the Emperor in vain mediateth a peace.
About this time, Sigismond the Emperor of Germany came into England,
endeavoring to conclude a friendly peace betwixt England and France. His
hearty welcome and his great entertainment liberally sorted with the high
calling of so great a Prince. But his motion was barren and fruitless of good
speeding. In his departure, the King accompanied him to Callice; from whence
he returned home. And thither (upon honorable hostages) repaired to King
Henry* the Duke of Burgoine; and betwixt them a friendly peace, The Duke of
Burgoine is suspected by the French King.
concerning only the Counties of Flanders and of Arthois, was concluded. For
which matter, the Duke was had in great jealousy, and suspected to be a secret
enemy to the Crown of France.

Not long after, the new Constable of France with a strong army upon the Land,
4. 1415. Harflew besieged by the French.
and John Vicount Narbon, Vice Admiral of France, with five hundred ships, at
the mouth of the River of Seyne besieged Harflew on every side; and made
little doubt to win it in few weeks* But when King Henry was aduertized in
what sort the Town and his Subjects were distressed; with extraordinary care
and expedition he levied a powerful army, The English Navy do overthrow
the French Fleet, consisting of 500. ships.
and transported it thither in two hundred warlike and strong ships: of
these, he made General his brother John Duke of Bedford; and associated to
him (in that expedition) the Earls of March, Oxford, Huntingdon, Arondel,
Salisburie, and Devonshire, and many Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen of great
valor and much worth.

John Duke of Bedford rayseth the siege.
The Duke (shortly after his departure) being happily conducted by a pleasing
wind, fell upon the French fleet, who in the view of the Town of Harflew
fought courageously, as men resolved to win honor. But being unable to make
good what they intended, they were at length utterly vanquished and
overthrown, with an incredible slaughter of their men: and great numbers of
them, being taken, were sent Prisoners into England. And thus was the Town of
Harflew happily rescued, and delivered from the Frenchmen. For when the
Constable perceived, that all their Sea-forces were defeated, and, in a manner,
consumed; he raised his Siege, and (with a heavy heart) marched dishonorably
unto Paris: and the Duke of Bedford (having new victualled, manned, and
fortified the Town) returned with great applause, and much honor, into England.

These disasterous misfortunes rushing every day upon the French Nation,
Secret quarrellings among the French Nobility.
rather animated the Nobility of France to seek means to revenge their
private quarrels and grudges one against the other; then, as provident and
worthy Peers, to unite their forces for the defense and protection of their
Country: by means whereof, King Henry fares the better.
a wide Gappe was opened to King Henry (with lesser danger) to attempt great
matters against the Peace and Estate of that Kingdom. And (to further his
designs in those Negotiations) he assembled his High Court of Parliament at
Westminster: A Parliament.
In which, he himself pithily and effectually discovered his Right and Title
to the Crown of France; The Kings Speech.
the often Injuries which the Frenchmen had done from time to time to the
English Nation; his blessed and fortunate Successes in those Wars; the new
Dissentions and secret reuengefull Grudges which divided the hearts and the
strength of the Frenchmen; and his undoubted hopes of winning both honor and
profit: if by the sufficient disbursement of Money and of Treasure his
preparations might be furthered and supported with all speed.

This Speech (being graciously and artificially contrived) was so plausible and
pleasing, Great sums of money quickly an^ ^arefully raised.
and the Kings heroical intendements were so well received and digested by all
sorts of people, who were then present; that not only a great sum of money
(with frank and free consent) was granted to him; but the same was quickly
levied with great love and much ease.

The King (being much encouraged in his French business, by the forward
bounty of his loving subjects) prepared a strong Fleet; furnished it with men
and all things needful; and embarked therein a strong Army of lusty
experienced soldiers: but sent before him, to skowre the Seas, John Earl of
Huntingdon, son to that Duke of Exeter, Another victory at sea by John
Holland Earl of Huntingdon.
who was beheaded in the days of King Henry the fourth. This lusty Gallant
being at all points readily provided, met (luckily) with nine Carricks of
Genoa, which (for money) were waged to serve the French King: with those he
encountered, and fought stoutly, yet (for a while) with variable hopes of the
success: but in the end he sunk into the Sea six of them, and took the
other three, being stored with great store of Money and much Treasure, and
brought them, with his prisoners, to the King.

The King with his Army landed in Normandy
This argument of good speeding much encouraged King Henry; who with his
copious Army of gallant and lusty Lads departed out of England, and landed
safely in Normandy, before the strong Castle of Tonque: which by him was
besieged and won by strong assaults; Tonque is taken by assault
and yet he received the besiedged to his mercy.

When the Normans knew that King Henry was arrived in their Country, The
Normans fly into the walled Towns.
and of his taking of that Castle, they fled as men amazed (with bag and
baggage) into their walled Towns; and so did all the soldiers which were
placed every where for the defense and protection of those Countries: so that
(without resistance) King Henry marched forth, and pitched before the City of
Cane; The City of Cane is besieged.
which was exceedingly well manned, and thoroughly provided of Victuals, Armor,
and Munition of all sorts, for many months. Diverse assaults were fiercely
made, and the walls were oftentimes skaled, with desperate resolution, by the
English; and the Normans with no less valor and stout courage defended the
Town, to the great damage of their enemies, until, at length, King Henry (to
save the lives of many valiant men, who otherwise must needs have died in
that Service) proclaimed Mercy to the besieged, if they would yield. The City
refuses all compositions.
But their hopes to be relieved, and the trust which they reposed in their
own valor, persuaded them to refuse all compositions whatsoever. Whereupon
many terrible assaults were fiercely made, and repulsed: The walls of the City
were in many places undermined; the Englishmen, with undaunted courage, rushed
into the Town, partly through the walls, and partly over them: Cane taken by
assaults.
so that in the end, although the Normans (to their continual praise and
commendation) performed the parts of worthy and faithful soldiers: yet their
Town was won; and all of them forsaking their armor and their weapons, fell
upon their knees, and humbly craved mercy of the King. Which was not by and by
granted to them, because they had obstinately refused it before; yet some
refreshing words of comfort gladded their heavy hearts, so that they hoped the
worst was past.

Then the King caused all the Townesmens Armor to be heaped together in the
Market place, and to be defended by a strong Guard: Thanks given unto God.
which being done, with all the residue of his Army he entered, with great
solemnity and reverence, into the chiefest Church, and on their knees, with
true humility and devotion, they yielded their hearty thanks unto Almighty
GOD for that Victory.

This duty being thus performed, Townsmen executed.
and strong Watches being placed in every quarter of the City; the King (upon
the next morning) assembled all the inhabitants at their Senate or
Councellhouse; where, he censured the principals of such as obstinately refused
his favor when it was offered, to sundry deaths; fined and ransomed others*
and divided the riches and the best things which were found there, among his
soldiers: The soldiers are enriched.
who, in those assaults, had made sufficient trial of their undaunted courage
and bold valor.

At this time the Earl of Arminack, High Constable of France, The Dolphin
wanting money, takes it from the Queen his mother.
together with Charles the Dolphin (who was much grieved for his troubled
Country) proposed to themselves sundry projects for the defeating of King
Henry: and finding the want of money to be their chiefest impediment, the
Dolphin (by the Constables advise) took from the Queen, his mother, a great
Mass of silver and of gold, which for many years she had scraped, scratched,
and hoorded up together.

This Act so inwardly vexed and enraged the Queen, She voweth deep revenge
that in her heart she vowed to be revenged upon them both: and knowing that
John, the Duke of Burgoine, was their capital and greatest enemy, especially
to the Constable of France; She procures John Duke of Burgoine to be Regent
and Protector.
and because the king her husband, by much sickness, was weakened both in his
body and in his understanding; she procured him to be made and to be
established the Protector of the Kings Person, and the Regent of his whole
kingdom.

Now when the said Duke had obtained this authority and power, He intends
reuengement on the Constable.
he forthwith resolved to revenge his old displeasures upon the said Constable,
and afterward to bend his whole strength against king Henry.

The Dolphin likewise and the Constable employed their chiefest care how they
might enfeeble the new Regent and his adherents; The Dolphin and the Constable
arm their wits against the Regent.
and to oppose themselves against the English forces, it was their smallest
thought. So blind is Envy, and so reuengefull is proud Ambition, that the
Countries good is nothing at all respected, when men resolve to pursue their
private hatred and contention: And hereby all men might plainly see, That these
dissentions and these discords did more further the English Army in their
proceedings, This Discord furthered King Henry's proceedings.
than did their own policy and their own strength. For the Normans being
utterly dismayed and hopeless to be assisted, because the Malice which bare
sway among the French Nobility was too too great; fled as men amazed (and as
not being the commanders of their own wits) from place to place, from village
to village, and from town to town: and, in the mean time, the English Army
commanded as it pleased.

King Henry beholding their fear, and seeking rather to win their Castles,
Towns, and Cities by Policy, than by the Sword, proclaimed in all places,
King Henry's proclamation.
That such of them as would yield, and swear to become his subjects, should
not only enjoy freely all their Lands, Goods, Liberties, and Lives, but should
also be protected and defended by his strength, and be received into his
Princely love.

The greatest Towns in Normandy are yielded to King Henry.
This practice quickly procured the surrendering into his hands, without blows,
the strong Towns of Alanson, Argenton, Boyeux, Camboy, Conde, Crewly, Essay,
Faloys, Thorygny, and Vermoyle: And unto the kings brother, the Duke of
Clarence, were quietly yielded the Towns of Auellyers, Barney, Bethelvyn,
Chambroys, Cowrton, Crevener, Fangermon, Freshney, Harcort, Lysoeux, and
Ragles. And into the hands of the kings other brother, the Duke of Gloucester,
were given up and delivered these Towns in the County of Constantine; that is
to say, Auranclies, Briquevile, Cuventon, Chiergurge, Constance, Hambery, Hay
du Pays, Pontorson, Pontdone, S. Savior, S. James, S. Clow, Vire, and
Valoignes: in all which, the king and his brothers placed valiant English
Captains and strong Garrisons to defend them, King Henry fortifieth all those
Towns.
if the French should attempt to regaine them to his own power.

Cane is repaired and fortified.
The City of Cane also was newly repaired, fortified, and inhabited by English
soldiers and traders of all sorts, Sir Gilbert Vmfreuyle being made Captain
of the Castle, Sir Gilbert Talbot of the Town, and Sir John Popham was made
Bailife there.

6 1417. Roan is walled round.
Whilst King Henry and his companies were thus busied in Normandy; he was
informed, That the Citizens of Roan had compassed their City with a strong
wall, and had strengthened it with extraordinary Fortifications, Towers,
Bulwarks, and Ditches, and that the whole Wealth and Treasure of a great part
of the Countries round about it was brought thither. The countries treasure is
brought into Roan.
Whereupon he marched with his whole Army toward that City: and in his
passage, by strong assaults, he took Pontlarch, Louyers, and Eureux, and came
before the strong City of Roan the last day of July, and compassed it round
about upon the Land parts with a strong siege: Roan is besieged by land and by
water.
And at Pontlarch he placed over the River, upon Pyles, a mighty Chain of
Iron and a Wooden Bridge, which prohibited all succors (by water) to come
unto the City.

And the Earl of Warwike having the command of an hundred gallant ships,
well manned, victualled, Cawdebeck gives passage to the English fleet.
and provided for the War; entered into the Rivers mouth, and came before the
Town of Cawdebeck: and so fiercely pressed on it, that by way of composition
they suffered him quietly to pass toward Roan, with faithful promise to
yield it into King Henry's hands, Conditions.
if he fortuned to win Roan: but if he did not; then to give the said Earl
and his whole Fleet a safe and a peaceable return. And for the due performance
thereof, they sent him sufficient hostages; Hostages.
whom he received lovingly, and carried them with him before Roan. Thus was
this City girded round about on every part, so that no man could pass in or
out.

At this Siege, there repaired voluntarily to the King* 1600 Irishmen repair
to the King, and do him great service.
the Lord of Kylmay of Ireland, with sixteen hundred tall, lusty, swift, and
strong men of that Nation, they all being clothed in Coats of Mayle, and
armed with Darts, whom the King entertained cheerfully, and was
extraordinarily furthered by their help and assistance in those his Expeditions.

Daily the King gave terrible assaults unto the City, The Town assaulted and
defended.
which with admirable resolution and manlike valor was bravely defended by the
Normans. But when force and violence prevailed not, the king to spare his men
(and because he understood, 210000 souls in Roan.
That there were above two hundred and ten thousand men, women, and children
within the Town) determined, if he might, to gain it by famine without
blows. The King intends to win Roan by famine.
For which purpose, he cast a deep Ditch about the Land parts of the City,
The Kings fortifications.
and pitched it plentifully with sharp stakes, and guarded them with his
Archers; so that the inhabitants could not issue out, either to offend him, or
to relieve themselves.

Thus this Siege continued, from Lammas until the whole Christmas was ended:
during which time, A great Famine.
the Famine so grievously increased, that the Citizens drank nothing but
vinegar and water, and multitudes of them were enforced to prolong their lives,
by eating of Rattes, Mice, Cattes, Dogs, Horses, and such like. Great numbers
also of the poorer sort uncharitably were thrust out of the City, The poor
are thrust forth, and die.
because they spent their victuals, and could not fight: and because they were
not suffered to pass through the English Army, they miserably perished for
want of food betwixt the Gates and the Trenches of their enemies. And upon
New-yeares day (after the City had been long visited with this famine) there
issued out at the Bridge-Gate certain Commissioners, Commissioners crave
conference with the king
who craved conference with some man of authority in the English Army: unto
whom, the Earl of Huntingdon (who was quartered in that part of the City)
sent Sir Gilbert Vmfreuyle: their errand was, To procure speedy access and
free return from King Henry.

The commissioners repair to the King.
The King was well pleased, that twelve of them should be kindly entreated, if
they came. So, the next morning, four Knights, four learned men, and four of
the choicest Burgesses of the Town, being all clothed in black, repaired to
the King; who beheld them, with a countenance beautified with extraordinary
Majesty and Grace: and unto him one of them boldly spoke as follows:

A proud Speech of a Frenchman to King HENRY.
REnowned and great Prince, the world is taught to know by good Experience,
that Kings and Noble Captains do win their chiefest Reputation for their
valor and for their fortitude, by mastring and subduing of proud enemies and
of valiant men by martial violence, and with the Sword: and that it is, and
ever has been, a notorious Badge of cowardly baseness in a Prince, to make
them servile by Famine, and by the scarsitie of food; in which kind of cruelty
there is neither found Manhood to praise him, nor Wit, which may in any sort
commend him. To the end therefore, that your Highness may make your self
equally famous with the greatest Princes for your generous disposition, in
taming of us, the Souldierie of this City, by the Sword; suffer (I pray you)
the multitude of our diseased and sick folks, and the weaker sort of our men,
women, and Children, safely and charitably to pass through your Army; and
then (if you dare) assault our Fortresses and our Walls: and if, by your
valor, you fortune to become our Lord, you may use us at your pleasure, and
make your self truly and heroically famous among great Men, who do scorn all
base attempts, and can relish nothing but unspotted honor.

When the King (with a troubled mind) had heard and considered of this bold
brag, he stoutly made this answer.

The KINGS discreet ANSWER.
Fantastical and fond Frenchmen, think you, that I am so weak a Scholar in
the Art of War, that I have not yet learned the Principles in that Science.
Are not the Sword, Fire, and Famine, the three Instruments with which worthy
and renowned Kings, Princes, and the best Captains ever have done and do
still endeavor to subdue their Enemies? Do not all Histories accord in one,
That the greatest Monarchs, and the Grand Commanders of the World, have still
achieved their chiefest Conquests by those three? Is not either of them
powerful and able to torment and to afflict the proudest foes? And are they
not (all three being joined together) of sufficient force to overcome and to
overthrow the greatest Nation in the world? It was my clemency and gentleness
to forbear to assault your walls, because I would not willingly hasten the
death of any, except they would wilfully further their own destruction:
Neither do I intend to consume so fair a Jewel, as this City is, in the
fire, because I desire to preserve it, the same being mine own Inheritance and
my Right. If then I use the mildest of these three, namely Famine, to correct
you, and to frame and fashion you to my will, then may you redeem your selves
from her severity, if you be so disposed, by surrendering of this mine own
City into my hands. Which thing if obstinately you refuse to do, then would I
have you know, That Kings may not be instructed in Martial Policies by every
bold companion, who dares impudently to speak: Neither may they permit a
Bookish unexperienced souldior to read unto them a Lecture of warlike
proceedings, especially if he be their Enemy, as you are mine You desire, nay
(sawc^y) you require, That, with my leave and favor, your sick and starued
people may pass into the Country through mine Army; and that then I should
(if I dared) by mean assaults attempt the winning of your Town. The world
will wonder at your cruelty; who have barbarously and uncharitably thrust out
of your Gates multitudes of harmless, poor, and distressed People, being of
your own Blood, Kindred, and Country, to the intent that I should
mercilessely slay and consume them: yet such has been my clemency and
gentleness toward them, that oftentimes I have relieved them with mine own
store. But because I do now find, that your obstinacy is not yet qualified
and corrected, I will from henceforth abstain from giving unto them any
further comfort: and if they perish with extreme famine, as they needs must
do, their blood will be required by GOD at your hands, who do most wickedly
expose them to those calamities; and not at mine, who would willingly preserve
them, if my favors, in that behalf, would not hinder me from the recovering
of my Right. Resolve your selves therefore, that seeing you remain still
froward, they shall not pass through mine Army, but die at your Gates; except
(your hearts being mollified) you will relieve them, and suffer them to spend
some part of your victuals: And when I shall see cause, your Town shall be
assaulted to your pain. But your advise and directions shall not appoint the
time, for it shall be and rest wholly and only at my pleasure. And in the mean
time I would have you know, That he who dares to enter into, and thus to pass
through all your Countries; He who has already taken, though not as large,
yet as strong Towns as this; and he who, by the destruction of your Nobles,
Captains, and brauest men at Arms, has opened the way thus to besiege your
Town; dares also to assault it, and little doubts to win it when he will.

Thus when the King had spoken, and ended his Speech, he commanded, that those
French Commissioners should dine among his great Officers of State, and with a
frowning countenance he departed from them, and went into his chamber.

They desire to speak with the King again.
When Dinner was fully ended, upon a new consultation had betwixt themselves,
the Frenchmen became humble Suitors to speak once more with the King; who
gently admitted them to his presence: and then (with much submission and
humility) they craved a stay from further violence, and a Truce for eight
days, that more deliberate advise might instruct them to resolve what course
was fittest for the Town to take; A Truce granted for eight days.
the King (who loathed all severity, if mildness might obtain him victory)
granted their request: and then they departed (being thereby much comforted)
into the City.

Daily and hourly throughout those eight days the Frenchmen resorted unto the
English Army, and oftentimes consulted of those affairs with the Earls of
Warwike and of Salisburie, and with other Commissioners appointed by the King.
Much was demanded; nothing granted, nor concluded: and yet those eight days
were spent. The eight days are spent.


The Townsmen again earnestly entreated, That the Truce might be prolonged
one day more: One day more of Truce craved.
which was frankly yielded to them. The same day the Multitude and the baser
sort of the people within the City being informed, that nothing was agreed on,
with hideous shouts, The commons do mutiny in the Town.
and fearful cries and exclamations, accused their Magistrates, Captains,
and Commanders, and threatened to cut their throats, because (as murderers of
their countrymen and brethren) they suffered them to starve like dogs;
thereby supporting the stoutnesse of their own stomachs, and their own
particular estates.

The Magistrates and the Captains fearing the evil event of this unruly
tumult, entreated all the Citizens to repair into the Market place. Which when
they did; they then required of them what they would have: With one consent and
with one voice they cried out, That they were resolved to save their own
lives, by yielding of the City to King Henry.

Upon this motion, a new Petition was sent unto the King, craving the
continuance of the Truce for four days more: Which request was granted to
them: And in the fourth day, being about the nineteenth day of January, all
matters were so thoroughly concluded and agreed on, That the strong and fair
City of Roan, Roan is yielded to King Henry's mercy.
the Inhabitants themselves, and all their goods and riches, were yielded to
the Kings mercy.

The rendering of this City, and of all the aforesaid Towns, and many more,
did much perplex and cool the courage of the Normans: and the Duke of
Burgoine, who (with the coffeehouse of the Nobility) ruled both the King
and his Countries, The Regent plotteth to make peace, and to be revenged on his
enemies.
feared much least these disasters would be laid unto his charge. Wherefore,
to prevent ensuing dangers, which (as he suspected) did secretly threaten his
Estate; he resolved, by his best means and endeauours, first to reconcile the
two kings, if possibly he could, and then to avenge himself upon the Dolphin,
upon the Constable, and also upon all such others, as he supposed were most
likely to do him the greatest harm.

Upon the Dukes motion, king Henry with his Nobles and greatest Commanders,
Many parties, but nothing concluded.
and one thousand brave and gallant soldiers, and the French Queen (because
the king was weak and unable) the Lady Katherine his daughter, and the said
Duke, with some other Noblemen of France, accompanied with the like number, met
oftentimes, and consulted much. But whatsoever king Henry did demand, all was
denied, and all their travails sorted to no end. Whereat king Henry was much
displeased; King Henry to angry.
and taking leave, he told the Duke, That he would have the kings daughter,
the Lady Katherine, for his Wife; with all such Seigniories, Provinces, and
Countries as he required: Or otherwise, he would (ere long) drive both his
Master and him also, out of that kingdom.

The Duke replied, The Dukes answer.
That those words were spoken with great ease; but that he must take much
labor and toil to make them good.

Now, when this practice failed, the Duke (upon fair terms) reconciled
himself to the Dolphin. The Dolphin and the Regent outwardly reconciled.
And this their new amity and friendship was by public Notaries reduced into
a formal Instrument in writing, confirmed with both their Seals; and was
proclaimed with great solemnity in many Towns in France: yet was it fained
and vnfirme, as shortly after it appeared.

But this outward Reconciliation contented not King Henry; because he was
right well assured, That their discord and their brawlings would have given an
easy passage to his attempts in those Countries: yet (like an undaunted
Prince) he resolved to try his further Fortunes with them all. King Henry
creates Earls in France. Longeuyle, Tankeruyle, Ewe.
And in hope of future service to be honorably performed; he created Giscoyne
de Foys, Earl of Longeuyle; Sir John Gray, Earl of Tankeruyle; and Sir John
Bourchyer, Earl of Ewe. And then, in close and in secret manner, he sent
Captain Bueff, brother to the said Earl of Longeuyle, with fifteen hundred
approved men of War, to the strong Town of Ponthoyse; Ponthoys taken.
who (before the day appeared) with skaling Ladders resoluedly entered into the
Town, and possessed the Market place without blows. Which when the Lord
Lisleadame, the Captain of the Town, perceived; he fled away, with eight
thousand of the inhabitants: who were received into Paris. And the next day
King Henry's brother, the Duke of Clarence, The Duke of Clarence lay before
Paris two days.
came unto the same Town, with five hundred gallant and well prepared men of
War: and having fortified it, and divided the chiefest of the Spoils thereof
among the brave attempters of this Exploit; he marched unto Paris, and lay
before it two days. But being unable with so small a number to assault, or
much to trouble it, he returned (unfought with) unto Ponthoyse.

The Parisians are afraid.
The winning of this Town immoderately vexed and appalled the Parisians:
because (now) the French King had not, in his possession, any strong Town
betwixt them and the English Army.

All Normandy won by King Henry, except Mount S. Michael.
The Duke of Clarence had also taken the strong Towns of Gysors and of
Gallyard: And within few days after, all the Towns; Cities, Castles, and
Fortresses in Normandy (excepting Mount S. Michael only, which never was
besieged nor assaulted) were either taken by force, or were voluntarily
surrendered to King Henry: who by GODS assistance, and his true valor, thus
reduced the whole Duchy of Normandy to his Crown; 7 1418.
and did enjoy it, as his Inheritance and Right.

The foresaid John, John the proud Duke of Burgoine newly seeks
reconciliation with the Dolphin.
Duke of Burgoine, surnamed the proud, perceiving that the Kingdom of France
was too too weakly underpropped, by reason that the friendship lately
contracted betwixt himself and Charles the Dolphin, was but superficial, and
not hearty; determined, in a more submissiue manner, to humble himself unto
him, that thereby their love taking the deeper root, might bring forth riper
fruits of Unity and of Peace. But when they met, the Dolphin (whose malice was
irreconcilable; and whom mistrustfull jealousy did still persuade, that the
Duke would not be faithful) procured him treacherously to be murdered: The
Duke is murdered.
as the said Duke himself (upon the like enterview, for friendship sake) had
caused Lewis the Duke of Orleance to be slain, A just punishment.
in the tenth year of the reign of King Henry the fourth.

This horrible Accident for a while tormented with insupportable grief Philip
Earl of Carolois, 8 1419. Philip Duke of Burgoine.
the son and heir of the deceased Duke: insomuch, as that (in his dumpish
and melancholy passions, and in the heat of his fury) he once determined to
separate himself from the bed and company of his guiltless wife, only
because she was sister to the Dolphin. But (being more gravely advised by his
Counselors) as his sorrows waxed faint, so his affection toward her
increased strength; and she was entertained with his best love.

This new Duke of Burgoine, and Earl of Flanders, He attempts to conclude a
Peace.
being very wise and politic, behaved himself courteously and friendly to
King Henry; and practiced all means by which he might conclude a firm and a
settled Peace betwixt the Kings of England and of France. And in those his
endeavors he was the more powerful:

First, because his wife was daughter to the said French King. His means to
further it.


Secondly, because his wives sister, the Lady Katharine (who could do all in
all with Isabell the Queen her mother) passionately Henry.

Thirdly, for that the said Queen (who by the Dolphin was

Fourthly, because the Dolphin was more subtle, cunning, crafty,

And lastly, because this late horrible and inhumane Murder

This Peace being again and again consulted and debated on, betwixt the
Queen, the Duke, and diverse of the greatest Nobility in France upon the one
part, and the Ambassadors of King Henry upon the other part; and being brought
to some maturitie and ripeness) it was resolved, That King Henry should meet
with Charles the sixth the French King, Queen Isabell his wife, and with the
Lady Katherine, An enterview.
and their Nobility and Council, at Troys in Champaine: which (with all
expedition) he did; being accompanied with his two brothers, Thomas Duke of
Clarence, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and with the Earls of Warwike,
Salisburie, Huntingdon, Longeuyle, Tankeruyle, and Ewe, and diverse other noble
and great men. But to prevent the worse, and to foresee dangers before they
happened; King Henry is guarded by his Army. A Peace is concluded. The King
is married: and proclaimed Regent and Heir apparent of France.
he was soundly guarded with fifteen thousand men. And within few days after
their enterview, a firm Peace was proclaimed: and the King (with honorable
solemnity and triumphant sportings) was married to the said Lady Katherine;
and was published to be the only Regent and Heir Apparent to the Crown of
France, in both those Kingdoms.

The chiefest Articles (in brief) were these.

The Articles on which the Peace was concluded.
1. FIrst, That the two Great, High, and Mighty Princes, King Charles and
Queen Isabell, should be entitled the Father and the Mother of King Henry;
and should be by him and by his wife honored and respected with that
reverence, which such an alliance did require. 2. Item, That the said King
Charles, during his life, should hold and enjoy (quietly, and in peace} his
Royal Dignity, Crown, and Revenues of all France: And that all Writs,
Processes, Commissions, and all such like Proceedings, should pass under his
Name and Seal as King: And that the said Queen Isabell (if she suruiued her
husband) should hold and enjoy, during her life, her Title and Estate; and all
such Lordships, Rents, and Revenues in France, as of late were holden and
enjoyed by Queen Blanch, sometimes the wife and Dowager of King Philip, great
grandfather to King Charles. 3. Item, That Queen Katherine should have in
England a Dower of twenty thousand marks by the year; unto which she should
be enabled and assured with all convenient speed. 4. Item, That during the
life of King Charles, King Henry should not (in any wise) be styled with the
name and dignity of the king of France; and that the French king, whilst he
lived, should write him and entitle him in French thus: Nostre trechier filz
Henry, Roy Dengleterre, Heretere de France. And in Latin thus: praeclarissimus
filius noster Henricus, Rex Angliae, and Haeres Franciae. 5. Item, That after
the death of King Charles, the Crown and kingdom of France should wholly and
entirely come, he, and remain, to king Henry and to his Heirs for ever* 6.
Item, That in regard that king Charles (by reason of his manifold infirmities,
occasioned by much sickness) was made unapt and unable to administer, by his
own directions, the affairs and businesses of his kingdom, king Henry
should be Regent, and should rule and govern France as he pleased, for the
kings honor, and for the profit and commodity of that Region and
Commonweal. 7. Item, That the Court of Parliament of France should be kept
and be ordered in like sort, and should be supported with the same
Privileges, Customs, Estate, and Power, as in all former times had been used
and accustomed. 8. Item, that king Henry should carefully and faithfully do
his best endeavor to assist as well the Peers as the people, in the attayning
and getting of all such things, as in right, and by the Laws and Customs of
that kingdom did belong unto them: and should protect and defend all the
Rights, Preheminencies, Laws, and Possessions of the Clergy of the kingdom
of France. 9. Item, That King Henry should support and preserve all the
subjects of France against all foreign Enemies; suppress and beat down all
intestine and inbred Quarrels, Debates, Insurrections, and Civil Wars;
increase the prosperity and peace of France, and administer Justice, without
partiality, unto all sorts and degrees of people whatsoever. 10. Item, That
King Henry should place into the Rooms and Offices of Justice, and of
Receipts, and of Government, such persons as shall be wise, discreet, faithful,
and sufficient to minister and to manage those things, which should be
committed to their charge. 11. Item, That King Henry should speedily endeavor,
with his best helps, to reduce the Dolphin and the Earl of Arminake, late
Constable of France, to the obedience of King Charles; and all such others, as
did with them rebelliously maintain civil Dissentions in the Commonweal.
12. Jtem, That King Henry should cause all the Peers, Nobles, Gentry,
Clergy, Towns, Cities, and Burgesses of France to take a corporal Oath for
their obedience to King Charles during his life: And after his death, to King
Henry, and to his heirs: And to admit none other Regent, or King; nor to
conspire any thing against his or their Persons or Estates: but should reveal
all mischiefs which should be contrived and practiced for his or their hurt or
destruction. 13. Item, That such Possessions as King Henry should win from
any person disobedient to King Charles, (excepting only in Normandy) should
be employed and converted unto the only use and benefit of the French King.
But if the offenders do voluntarily and chearefully take the aforesaid oath,
then the said Possessions to be frankely and freely restored unto them. 14.
Item, That after the death of King Charles, the Duchy of Normandy, and all
others conquered by King Henry, should be obedient and bow under the command
of the Scepter and Crown of France. 15. Item, That King Henry should not
burden the subjects of France with any Taxes or Jmpositions, but in cases of
great and urgent necessity: and then only the same to be assessed and levied
according to the custom and manner of France, and not otherwise. 16. Item,
That after the death of King Charles, the two Kingdoms of France and of
England should always soueraignely be ruled and commanded by one Man, and not
by two Kings: and that neither of those kingdoms should be subject the one to
the other, but each of them should still retain, use, and enjoy their
particular Customs, Liberties, Privileges, Preheminences, Immunities, and
Laws. 17. Item, That all care should be taken, and all provision made, that
the subjects of each kingdom, as brethren and friends, should live in mutual
love, amity, and peace; and each of them to procure, by their best means, the
welfare and prosperity of the other. 18. Item, That neither the said French
king, nor king Henry, should conclude any Peace, nor make any truce, with the
falsely entitled Dolphin, except they both, and the said Philip Duke of
Burgoine, did all three consent and agree in one so to do. 19. Item, that none
should be appointed to attend the Person of king Charles but Frenchmen, and
such as himself or his own Council should make choice of: And that from time
to time he should be resident and dwell at his pleasure in the most eminent
places of his kingdom. 20. And lastly, that both the said kings under their
Letters Patents, and all their Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, Cities, and
Comminalties, by Instruments in writing under their hands and seals, should
ratify and confirm the said Articles and Agreements: And that they all should
solemnly swear and vow to maintain them in all points, to the uttermost of
their ability and power.
The Articles are proclaimed in England and in France.
These Articles and these Agreements being thus concluded, were ordered
accordingly; and then, with all convenient expedition, were proclaimed both in
England and in France. The two Kings, and all their Nobles, and other subjects
of account, were solemnly sworn to observe and to maintain them. And then
they both, They are ratified by solemn Oaths.
being accompanied with James the young, but valiant King of Scots, the Duke of
Burgoine, the Prince of Orange, one and twenty Earls, forty and five Barons,
and a multitude of Knights, Gentlemen, and brave soldiers of France, of
England, and of Ireland, wasted such Countries, and besieged and took such
strong and well defenced Towns and Castles within the Duchy of Burgoine, The
King warreth in Burgoine.
as sided and sorted with the Dolphin: As first of all, the Town of Seyne,
after it had been besieged fifteen days: and the Castle there, after it had
held out six weeks: then Molyn, upon the River of Seyne; which they took,
after they had environed it full seven months: and in it were apprehended the
Lord Barbason, The murderers of John Duke of Burgoine are executed.
the chief Commander there, and diverse others, who were agents and actors in
the murdering of John the Proud Duke of Burgoine: all which were by the French
King sent from thence unto Paris, under the guardship of Thomas Duke of
Clarence; who was newly made chief Captain of that City by King Charles. The
Duke of Clarence is made Captain of Paris
And within few days after, the said offenders were legally tried, convicted,
sentenced, and put to death for the said Murder.

Then the two Kings, with their two Queens, and their Nobility and Companies,
went unto Paris; King Henry is proclaimed Regent and Heir apparent to the
Crown of France.
where King Henry was proclaimed Regent and Heir Apparent to the Crown of
France: and so was he, not long after, in London.

In Paris the two Kings kept their Christmas. The French King (being very
sickly and weak) maintained small Hospitality. But King Henry with such
heroical Magnificence, rich Plenty, and liberal Entertainment, so feasted
the Nobles, Gentry, and Citizens of both the said Kingdoms, and was so
open-handed to all sorts and degrees of people, King Henry wins the love of
the Frenchmen.
that his State and Majesty was admired: and his Princely courtesy fast bound
unto him the hearts of the Frenchmen, to yield unto him all manner of obedience
and of service.

Whilst the two Kings thus remained in Paris, The Dolphin and the other
murderers are banished.
a great Assembly (by their Authority) was conuocated thither: In which they
both sat as Judges; and before them, the Duchess of Burgoine, late Wife to
her slain Husband, by her Advocate appealed Charles the late Dolphin, and
seven others, as murderers of her Lord. But no defense was made for them. And
not long after, a Court of Parliament was kept there: In which, a solemn
Process was awarded against the Dolphin, and the rest of the Accused, to appear
at the Marble Table in Paris at an appointed day. But they all failed to
observe that command: And thereupon they were (by the said Court) banished the
Realm, and all the Territories of France; and were also deprived of all
Honors, Names, Titles, Dignities, Preheminences, and Possessions whatsoever.

When the late Dolphin had intelligence thereof, he went into Languedock, and
comforted himself with his old friend the Earl of Arminack, The Dolphin is
aided by his old friend the Earl of Arminake.
sometimes Constable of France: who not only assisted him (in his great
distress) with Money, Munition, and with Men; but also (in his own person)
did him all reverence, and took his part against all such as professed
themselves to be his Enemies.

These things being thus accomplished; the two Kings, their Queens, and
Nobles, sorrowfully departed each from other: And King Henry, King Henry ^th
the state of Fr^
with his Queen, went unto Roan; where he received Homage of all his Nobles
in the Duchy of Normandy: And (among others) of the Earl of Stafford; to
whom he had given the Earldom of Perch: The Duke of Clarence is made
Lieutenant General of France and (...) Normandy. The King and the Queen came
into England. The Queen (...) crowned.
And of Arthur of Britain; upon whom he had bestowed the Country of Iurye.

He also made his brother Thomas, Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant General both
of France and of Normandy: and of that Duchy, he made the Earl of
Salisburie Deputy to the said Duke: And then he, with Queen Katherine his
wife, departed unto Amiens* and from thence to Callis, and so came into
England: Where they were received and entertained with as much triumphant and
true joy as could be by subjects expressed toward their Prince. And in
February following, the Queen was crowned at Westminster, 9 1420. The Duke of
Clarence is betrayed by his friend, and is slain.
with great solemnity and much honor.

The noble and the valiant Duke of Clarence being advertised, That the Duke of
Alanson (entitling himself the Lieutenant General of the Dolphin) with diverse
other Noblemen, had levied an Army; assembled the greatest part of his
garrisons in Normandy, and marched strongly into the Province of Angeou, and
pitched not far off from the City of Angiers, and spoiled and burnt the
Country round about it.

To perform this Enterprise with honor and with safety; the Duke of Clarence
had strengthened himself with sufficient Forces and Provisions, if they had
been well and wisely ordered. But having in his Army a false and a traiterous
Lombard, named Andrew Forgusa, Andrew Forgusa.
whom he too too much loved and trusted; he sent the said Lombard to
discover the preparations and the power with which he was resolved to
encounter: Who brought him word, That their number was but small, their
provisions defective, and their order, orderlesse; and that the Duke of Alanson
was altogether unable and too too weak to contend with him.

The Duke of Clarence firmly and strongly relying upon the faith and the trust
which he reposed in this Traitor; and being desirous with a small number to
win the honor of that day: marched forward with his horsemen only, leaving
behind him his lusty and his strong Archers. But when he was entered within
the secret ambushments, which purposely were placed to distress him; and saw,
that his enemies were in number four for one, and were well provided, well
armed, and arranged in good order of battle, The battle of Blangy.
and that no military discipline or art was wanting; and that himself was
villanously abused and betrayed by the Lombard whom he trusted: he could not
fly, nor make any safe retreat; but was enforced to adventure his fortunes,
with too much inequality on his part. So the fight began: And though it was
long maintained by the Englishmen, with as much constancy and resolute valor
as any men living could perform: yet they being every minute oppressed with
new supplies and multitudes, which still came rushing in upon them, tyring,
oppressing, spoiling, and hauocking of them wastfully on every side; they were
at length ouer-mastred and overthrown.

The Englishmen slain and taken prisoners.
In this Battle there were slain on the French part more than twelve hundred
of their choysest men: and of the English there were slain the brave Duke of
Clarence, the Earl of Tankeruyle, Sir Gilbert Vmfreuyle, Earl of Kent; a
prudent man and a worthy Commander; the Lord Rosse, and almost two thousand
others: And there were taken prisoners, the Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and
Perch; the Lord Fitz-water, and many others.

Sir Thomas Beauford, surnamed the bastard of Clarence (who had the direction
of the Archers which were left behind) being informed (but all too late) that
the Duke of Clarence was betrayed; and that the numbers of the Frenchmen, and
their Power, did far exceed the Lombards report; and that the English were
distressed: with incredible speed marched forth to succor them with his best
helps. But the Frenchmen perceiving his approach, and contenting themselves
with the honor of the day, and with their prisoners, as they had taken; with
posting haste and speed fled and ran away as fast as they were able;
Cowardly Frenchmen*
leaving the new Forces of the Englishmen to perform sad Exequies for their
slain friends: the bodies of whom they buried. But the Duke of Clarence was
carried into England, and honorably interred at Canterbury, by his father
King Henry the fourth.

The heavy news of this unexpected overthrow, The Earl of Mortaigne
succeeds the Duke of Clarence.
and especially the death of the Duke of Clarence (occasioned by the aforesaid
Treachery and Treason) much grieved the King his brother: Who purposing to
revenge himself, if he might, upon the Duke of Alanson, and the late Dolphin,
and his adherents; sent into Normandy the Earl of Mortaigne, brother to the
late taken Earl of Somerset, and gave to him the same Authority and Place
which the Duke of Clarence formerly had. He also assembled his High Court of
Parliament: In which he substantially discovered in what sort the Estate of
both his Kingdoms stood: and how convenient; nay, how necessary and how
needful it was, that the Dolphin and his adherents should speedily be pursued.
He likewise told them, That he wanted neither Men, Munition, nor Courage; but
that Money was too scarce with him to undertake that business. Whereupon the
Temporaltie, with all cheerfulness and alacrity, gave unto him one Fifteen,
and the Clergy gave him two. And because much time would be spent before it
could be levied; therefore the Kings uncle, the Bishop of Winchester, disbursed
unto him in ready coin twenty thousand pounds; which he received again out
of the said Fifteenes.

The King having levied a gallant Army, John Duke of Bedford carries an army
into France.
which consisted of four thousand men at Arms, and of four and twenty
thousand Archers; sent, and with all speed, prosperously landed them at his
own Town of Callis, under the command of his worthy brother, John Duke of
Bedford: whom, himself (in his own person) followed. The King follows.
And understanding, that the Dolphin with seven thousand men, had besieged and
much distressed the City of Chartieres, which was valiantly defended by the
Bastard of Thyan; he marched swiftly unto Paris, and from thence toward his
Enemies: and in his journey he was met by his hearty and true friend, Philip
Duke of Burgoine, He meets his friend Philip Duke of Burgoine.
and Earl of Flanders; who brought unto him four thousand men, and diligently
attended him in that Negotiation and Service.

The Dolphin raised his siege.
The King was now informed, That the Dolphin (distrusting his own strength) had
raised his Siege, and was retired unto Tours into Towrayne: Wherefore (to
repress the rage and violence of Sir Jacques Harcourt, who wasted the Country
of Picardie) he sent the Duke of Burgoine thither: And with other Forces he
caused the young and courageous James, James the King of Scots wins Direx.
the King of the Scots, to lay siege unto the Town of Direx: which he
performed accordingly; and daily with such violence and valor so assaulted it
for the space of six weeks, that with main strength he compelled it to be
yielded into his hands, to King Henry's use.

The Dolphin flies from place to place.
And whilst this Siege did thus continue, the King himself passed over the
River of Loyer, intending to have encountered with the Dolphin. But he
(distrusting his own strength) fled from Tours unto Burgys in Berrye; and
there expected a change of his frowning fortunes.

The King perceiving his flight from place to place to be so quick and
hasty; he thought it not convenient, to tire out his Army to pursue him:
Wherefore, he returned over the River of Loyre; and took, either by force, or
by voluntary yielding, many Towns and Castles, unto his own use.

P^ Henry is borne.
About the same time, Queen Katherine was delivered of a Son at Windsour, who
was named Henry: Of whose birth, as soon as the King had notice, he said unto
the Lord Fitzhugh his Chamberlain: The Kings words.
I HENRY, borne at Monmouth, shall remain but a short time, and gain much;
but HENRY, borne at Windsour, shall reign long, and lose all.

Meux in Bry; enforced it to be yielded into his hands: and thereupon all the
Towns and Fortresses in the Isle of France, in Lanuoys, in Bry, and in
Champaigne, did the like. The Dolphin enters into the Duke of Burgoines
country.


When the Dolphin understood, that the King, with his Army, was departed far
away from him; he raised another Army, and entered into the Duke of Burgoines
Countries, wasting and consuming it with Sword and with Fire: and straightly
besieged the City of Cosney; Cosney is besieged.
which by composition was to be yielded to him, if it were not rescued within
ten days. Of this Agreement notice was sent by the Duke of Burgoine to the
King, with a request, That he would send a power convenient for the remove of
the said Siege. The King goes to relieve Cosney.
Whereupon the King in his own person being accompanied with a gallant
company, marched toward that City to set it free. But as he traveled on the
way, he fell so sick, that he was unable to travail any further. The King
falls sick.
So the charge of that expedition was committed to his brother John Duke of
Bedford: whose passage forth was noysed to the Dolphin to be with such an high
courage and souldior-like resolution, that the Dolphin fearing to grapple with
him, raised his siege, The Dolphin says.
and most dishonourably retired himself and his Army into Berry. And thus was
that City rescued and delivered by the English.

The King, by reason of his increasing sickness, waxing more weak and feeble,
was carried unto Boys in Vyncennes; where, within few days, he was summoned by
Death to depart into another world.

But before he died, The Kings Speech before he died.
he called unto him his two brothers, John Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester: the former, he made Lieutenant General of Normandy, and Regent of
the kingdom of France; and the other, he made Protector of England, and of his
sons own person. He embraced his approaching end comfortably; in regard,
that though his time had been but short, yet it was beautified with matchless
fame and honor, which longer continuance (being the professed enemy of
stabilitie) might have changed. He exhorted them and his Nobles, who then were
present, to maintain true and hearty love and friendship with his noble and
faithful friend Philip Duke of Burgoine, and never to be at variance with him.
He persuaded them to nourish and to cherish an inseperable unity and
faithful friendship among themselves: to be faithful and loving to his young
infant son, and their succeeding king Henry; and by all means to be
helpefull, ayding, and assisting to his most sad, dolorous, and mournful
Queen: to preserve and to maintain by Wisdom, Policy, and Arms, those
things which he by valor and GODS furtherance had honorably won and gotten:
Never to conclude any peace or amity with the late Dolphin and Duke of
Alanson, until they were enforced to submit themselves to his sons grace and
mercy. Finally, he thanked Almighty GOD, who had made him Religious,
Virtuous, Honest, and Victorious: The King died.
and died the last day of August, in the year of our LORD GOD 1422. in the
eight and thirtieth year of his Age; when he had reigned but nine years,
five months, and four and twenty days: And his body being conveyed into
England, Westminster, with extraordinary solemnity and great pomp.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH.
KIng Henry the fifth died when his son Henry was but nine months old:
1422. 1 A young king, but well governed.
Yet was he so fortunate in his beginning, that his Youth and Government were
worthily supported by his three uncles; Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, who (when
the King was crowned) was made Protector both of his Person and also of his
Realm: John Duke of Bedford, who was established Regent of France: and Thomas
Duke of Exeter, who graced all his actions with much wisdom and great valor.

Needful it was, that the new Protector and the Regent should make the utmost
trial of their sufficiencies to the World. For whereas, in the end of the
Kings fathers days, France is unwilling to remain English.
the Nobility of France incorporated themselves to the English Nation, and
heartily envied the Dolphin: King Charles about this time died: and the
unconstant Frenchmen began to play an Irish game. For, on a sudden, many of
those dissembling and fained friends renounced their duties and obedience to
King Henry, and (utterly neglecting the performance of Oaths of Allegiance
made unto him) they revolted, and not only adhered to Charles their new King,
but by all sinister practices and means they endeavored to extirpe the English
Nation among them, if they might.

The Regents Policies.
The Protector at home (by the advice and counsel of the Statists) plotted
many Proiects for the retayning of the Kings inheritance in Normandy and in
France: and for that purpose he furnished the Regent with store of Soldiers,
Silver, and of Gold.

The Regent also levied a strong Army in Normandy among his choysest and
chiefest friends: whom (by substantial arguments and sound reasons) he
persuaded to persevere and to continue loyal to his Master; and not to be
wearied with any labor, or daunted with any danger, because a peaceful and
a blessed conclusion should make them rich and fortunate, and win to them the
love and favor of their young King, as he increased in wisdom and in years.

And on the other side, Charles (the new King) spared not any pains; but did
the like: insomuch, that nothing but tyrannizing War, and the unchristian
effusion of much blood, was thought upon. And to begin those Troubles, the
French King sent the Lord Grandeuyle, Pont-Melance taken.
with a selected company, to Pont-Melance, which stands on the River of
Seyne; which he surprised, and slew the most part of them, whom he found
there, before any notice of his approach gave any warning to the English
garrison to defend it.

The Earl of Salisburie a famous man.
Thomas Montacute, the Earl of Salisburie, for his admired courage and expert
managing of martial actions, was (at that time) more fitly to be compared to a
choice Roman, than to any other who lived in his days. To this Earl, the
Regent commended the regayning of that Town: in the siege whereof, he spent
three months; Pont-Melance regained.
but (at length) it was yielded into his hands: and the Lord Grandeuyle (by a
solemn Oath) promised his faithful and perpetual service to King Henry; but
revolted as soon as he was set at large.

Sens is taken.
From thence, the said Earl marched into Champaigne, besieged and took the
Town of Sens, and devoured the surprised soldiers with the Sword.

The Parisians crave protection.
The unconstant Parisians (more coveting to make an outward show of their
fidelity to the English, than to be true indeed) sent diverse of their
greatest and grauest Citizens into England, to crave protection and defense
against King Charles: Who were received, not only with a cheerful welcome,
hearty thanks, and bountiful entertainment; but also were promised the
fruition of much happiness, if they persisted loyal unto King Henry.

About that time, the Regent meeting at Amiens with the Dukes of Burgoine and
of Britain, 1423. 2 A League renewed. The Regent marries.
renewed the League formerly concluded between them: And to make it the more
firm and sure, he married the Lady Anne of Burgoine, sister unto the Duke.

The triumphant Shows and Pastimes which were prepared to augment the honor
of this Match, The Parisians are unfaithful, and conspire with the French king.
persuaded the Parisians in his absence, that the Regent attended nothing but
Iolitie and Mirth: Which conceit of theirs made them (trecherously) to inuit
their longed for King Charles to come unto them, and to receive that City into
his hands.

This news brought comfort to his soul: The treachery discovered.
So that he appointed the day, when his desire should be effected in that
business. But, as it ever falls out, where many are of counsel, nothing can
be secret: so, some of those Conspirators acquainted the Regent with every
particular of this Plot: Who (with his Army) posted unto Paris, with greater
expedition than may well be credited, and entered into the City gates before
any notice was given of his repair thither. For this Conspiracy; many of
the chiefest confederates were executed publicly with sundry kinds of death.
And from thenceforth he mastred the Parisians with English Garrisons, The
Regent curbeth the Parisians.
and replenished their Castle, Towers, Fortresses, and Places of Defense and
Strength, with such English Soldiers, as solaced themselves in being froward
Commanders and imperious Rulers of the inhabitants of that City.

And likewise (by strong Assaults, and enforced Compositions) he won the two
Castles of Pacy and Coursay, Pacy and Coursay won by the English.
which were not far from it; both which he strengthened in like manner.

Whilst these things were thus acted, the Lord William Steward, Constable of
Scotland; the Earl of Ventadore, The siege of Crauant is raised.
and many others, with a strong Army, besieged the strong Town of Crauant,
within the Territories of Burgoigne. But the Earl of Salisburie, with an Army
of fifteen thousand men, rushed fiercely upon the besiegers; and with the
loss of one and twenty hundred of his companies, and with the slaughter of
eight thousand of his enemies, he raised the Siege, and gained liberty to the
Town.

The Earl, upon his return to Paris, was substituted vice-Regent of the
Countries of France, Bry, and Champaigne: and Sir John Fastolfe (an approved
Knight in Arms) was appointed to be Deputy in the Duchy of Normandy. Which
worthy Captains performed such noble deeds of Chivalry, and obtained such
unexpected victories, as made them famous, their Followers rich, and their
Country renowned in all Kingdoms.

In the mean time, whilst the Protector prouidently endeavoring to prevent the
increasing strength of the Kings enemies in France, and to secure the
tranquillity and peace of this Commonweal at home; The King of Scots ransomed.
for a small ransom he enlarged James the young and martial King of Scots;
who for many years had been a prisoner: And receiving of him, in the Kings
behalf, his homage and his fealty for Scotland; He does homage for Scotland.
he gave to him in marriage (by the consent of all the English Nobility) the
Lady Jane, daughter to the deceased Earl of Somerset, and cousin german to
the King.

He is an excellent Prince, but unfaithful and unthankful.
This gallant Prince, by means of his excellent Learning and Education in feats
of Arms, under the last King Henry, was better enabled to rule a Kingdom
than any of his progenitors did before him. In so much, that making the best
use of those heroical virtues with which he was adorned, he reduced that
Realm into extraordinary Civility; made his soldiers expert in warlike
discipline; and his Nation more learned than ever they had been before his
days. Yet was he altogether unfaithful and unthankful to England, his
nearest and his dearest friend.

Provision and an Army sent into France.
The Protector (who was wise and industrious) never suffered the Regent in
France to complain of any want. For, as in former times, so now he sent unto
him an Army of ten thousand men, with much Treasure. The Regent and his
assistants daily won Towns, Cities, Castles, and Forts, with provident
policy and true valor. But the French King, by gross Flattery, cunning
Devises, secret Treachery, Valor was encountered by treachery.
and covert Dealings (among others) possessed himself of the strong Towns of
Crotoy, and some others, which were suddenly regayned: for true Manhood was
encountered with Subtletie, and approved Valor with Treachery and Craft.

The Duke of Britain and his brother do revolt.
The Duke of Britain fearing least the Regent (growing strong) would at length
be Lord of his Country, basely and perfidiously revolted to the French King.
And so did his brother Arthur, Earl of Richmond; who by King Henry the fifth
was created Earl of Yurye in Normandy, Yury in Normandy besieged.
and made Governor of that Town. Whereupon the Regent besieged it; and with
many secret Mines, violent Batteries, and fierce Assaults, made it so subject
to apparent dangers that the besieged concluded to yield it up, if at an
appointed day they were not relieved by the French King. The Regents resolution.
For the Regent being thoroughly resolved to purchase his peace with a short and
with a sharp war, determined to abide battle, what force soever should be
sent to relieve the miseries of that distressed Town. And to further his
purpose in that behalf, he freely permitted messengers to be sent unto his
enemies, to inform them of the conclusion which he had made.

Within few days after, the Duke of Alanson, with sixteen thousand Frenchmen,
approached near to the English Camp; A cowardly French Army.
who did put themselves into a readiness to receive him. But (according to the
French fashion) he made many bragging shows to perform much: but (on a
sudden) he cowardly quited the place, Vernoyle besieged and won by a false
report.
not giving any one blow; and pitched with his whole strength before the Town
of Vernoyle in the province of Perch: where he falsely informed the
inhabitants, That at Yurye he had fought with the Regent, defeated his Army,
slain thousands, Policy.
taken many prisoners, freed that Town, and had compelled him (by swift
riding) to provide for the safety of his own life.

This false report soon made the Duke owner of that Town, Yury won.
and his Retreat made the Regent Lord of Yurye: and as soon as sound
provisions were made to strengthen it, the Regent with his whole Army marched
unto Vernoyle; where (meeting with the French cowards, and with diverse Scots
who did assist them) he compelled them to engage their fortunes by a bloody
battle in a pitched field. The fight was cruelly maintained for the space of
three hours. But in the end, the Englishmen, The battle of Vernoyle.
with the loss of one and twenty hundred of their common soldiers, won the
honor of that day, and slew of their enemies five Earls, two Vicounts, one
and twenty Barons, and more than seven thousand other men; besides two
thousand and seven hundred Scots, who were sent thither by their King. But the
Duke of Alanson himself, with many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of Name, The
Frenchmen are overthrown.
were taken prisoners. And the Town of Vernoyle (without Assault or Battery)
was surrendered into the Regents hands: Vernoyle is regayned.
who (having fortified it with a strong Garrison, commanded by their worthy
Captain Sir Philip Hall) marched to the City of Roan; where he was received
with many triumphant Shows. And from thence he came to Paris; where his kind
entertainment proclaimed his welcome and his honor.

This overthrow so weakened the French King, that none other Provinces or
Territories, but only Burbon, Aluerne, Berry, The English do prevail.
Poytou, Towrayne, part of Angeou and Languedoc, could give unto his Royal
Person any warrant of safety and assurance. Yet (least he should want the
true honors belonging to a King) in the City of Poytiers he established his
High Court of Parliament, and his Chancerie; The French King labors his own
establishment.
with the public use of his broad Scale: and of all other things needful and
requisite for the due administration of his Laws, and the distribution of
Justice.

The Earl of Salisburie wins many Towns.
The Regent taking the advantage of his late victory, sent into the Country of
Main an Army of ten thousand men: which (with great resolution) were
bravely conducted by the valorous and prudent Earl of Salisburie: who quickly
won the strong City of Mauns, and the Towns of Saint Susan, le Fort Saint
Barnard, and many others. And from thence he went into Angeou: where (with the
Sword) he performed such and so many wonders, His name is feared.
that the very Name of Salisburie became terrible in all France.

1425. 4
The perfidious Earl of Richmond (whom King Charles had newly made High
Constable of France) intending to make himself famous in the minority of his
Government, raised an Army of forty thousand men; which consisted of Britons,
French, and Scots: The Siege of Saint James.
with which he besieged the strong Town of Saint James in Beuyon; which was
defended only by six hundred Englishmen: who having resolutely endured many
sharp assaults and hard bickerings, A miraculous overthrow.
upon a sudden issued boldly out of the Town, and proclaimed their approach
with an hideous shout of Saint George, Salisburie; Saint George, Salisburie;
and fell upon the multitude of their enemies like a storm. This terrible cry,
and the inconsolable fear and terror, which made them think that the Earl of
Salisburie, with his Army, had secretly conveyed himself into the Town for
their rescue; so amazed and daunted the faint-hearted multitude, that (casting
away their Armor, abandoning all Order, and entertaining nothing but Despair)
they leapt headlong into the River: In which, many of them were drowned; more
were slain: some were taken prisoners: and the rest, who ran away, left unto
this little handful all their Tents, fourteen Pieces of Ordnance, forty
barrels of Powder, three hundred Pypes of Wine, two hundred Pypes of Biscuit and
of Flower, and two hundred Pieces of Raisins and Figs, five hundred Barrels
of Herrings, much Armor, and many other things.

A poor revenge.
The New Constable intending to redeem his honor with some better fortune,
recollected and furnished his Army: with which he marched into the Country
of Angeou; where (without resistance) he burnt a few of the smallest, poorest,
and most unworthy Villages of that Province.

This childish Service puffed him up with much pride, and made him to imagine,
that he was now a warlike man, though his own Nation, and all others, did
publicly mock and scoff at his gross folly.

Whilst thus the Regent and his Captains daily triumphed in France; a
dangerous and an unkind jarre brake forth at home, Variance between the
Protector and his uncle the Bishop of Winchester.
betwixt the Protector and his uncle Henry, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord
Chancellor of England: which threatened the breach of the Peace and Tranquillity
of this Kingdom and Commonweal. For the appeasing whereof, the Regent having
made the Earl of Warwike his Lieutenant General, and having set his affairs
and business in good order; came into England: Where (in a Court of
Parliament) the differences betwixt them were discovered, arbitrated, and the
quarrel ended, to the great comfort and contentment of their friends. In
honor whereof, It is appeased.
the King kept a solemn Feast; in which, the Regent dubbed the King a Knight.
The King is dubbed Knight.
The King also invested many of his Great subjects with the same Dignity; and
created his cousin Richard, son to Richard late Earl of Cambridge, Duke of
York; and restored John Mowbray (who was Earl Marshall) to his fathers Duchy
of Norfolk. Creation of Lords.


And in this mean time, the Earl of Warwike approved himself to be a worthy
Commander over his great charge, and conquered many things in Main; and
prepared to fight a set battle, whereunto he was challenged by the French.
But their threatenings were but brags, and their courage fell down into their
heels: For, A French brag.
a little before the appointed time, they basely and cowardly ran away.

When all things were thus quieted at home; the noble Regent (being accompanied
with his uncle the Bishop of Winchester returned into France: And (upon the
request of his brother in law, 1426. 5 The Duke of Alanson is ransomed.
the Duke of Burgoine) he set at liberty the Duke of Alanson for the ransom
of two hundred thousand crowns: The most part of which money he would have
given back again, A worthy Duke.
if the said Duke would have sworn his homage to King Henry: which he refused
to do; and did affirm, That the whole world should not alienate his faith
from King Charles, nor his duty from his own country.

At this time, the rich and proud Bishop of Winchester (being at Callice)
according to his ambitious desires, Winchester is made a Cardinal.

He heapeth great treasure together.


was invested with the Hat, Habit, and Dignity of a Cardinal; and received
from the Pope a Bull: which gave him means (in a short time) to heap together
a great part of the Treasure of this Land: so that all men wondered at him for
his Wealth, but no man had cause to commend him for his Learning, or to respect
him for his Virtue.

After the Regents return into France, the Lord Rustian, Marshall of Britain
(having strongly fortified Pontorson) pitched with his Army before the Town
of Auranches, in the Province of Constantine, A notable victory.
within the Duchy of Normandy; purposing to have besieged it. But such was
the resolute valor of the English Garrison there, that (like unto Lions
greedy of their prey) they issued suddenly out of the Town, and set upon
the Marshall so successefully, that he was taken prisoner; and the greater part
of his followers, as they fled, were slain.

Pontorson besieged by the English.
This victory gave fresh hopes of Good-speeding elsewhere: So that the Earl of
Warwike and the Lord Scales being sent with seven thousand men to Pontorson,
besieged it a long time: where (being much enfeebled through many wants) the
Lord Scales (for the relief of their necessities) taking with him three
thousand of their companies, grievously foraged the Countries of his enemies.
But in his return with plenty of Provisions, he was encountered by sundry
French Lords, The Lord Scales defeateth the Frenchmen.
and six thousand other fighting men: against whom, so luckily he prevailed,
that most of those Nobles, and a thousand more, were taken prisoners, many
hundreds were slain, and the rest, by a quick flight, procured their own
safety.

Ramfort taken.
The Garrison also at Saint Susan made such a sudden road into Angeou, that
they surprised the Castle of Ramfort, before any news gave notice of their
coming. But they no sooner possessed it, but that they were besieged by
twenty thousand men; who were appointed to raise the siege at Pontorson. To
these the Castle yielded upon composition: Ramfort regained.
so that the Frenchmen (being much elated with this poor conquest) imagined,
that they were brave men, and that they had done service sufficient for that
time. And this conceit made them altogether careless to relieve the distressed
estate of Pontorson: Whereupon it was yielded to the Earl of Warwike;
Pontorson w nne by the English.
who fortified it with good Provisions, and with a strong Garrison; and came
(with great honor) to the Regent.

Mouns is betrayed.
Whilst things were thus in handling, some of the Clergy, and some of the
Magistrates of the City of Mouns (knowing, that the Duke of Britain was
revolted, and that his brother, the Earl of Richmond, now wholly adhered to
the French King) offered, by treachery, to yield it to King Charles, if a
convenient and an able Force might be sent thither to work that feat. This
City was eagerly longed for on the French part. Wherefore, that it might be
gotten, the Lords Dalabreth and Fayet, Marshals of France, with sundry more
Barons, Captains, Gentlemen, and old soldiers, to the number of five hundred,
came (in the depth of the night) to the Castle walls; Cruelty.
and then the conspirators within (without any compassion, or manlike pity)
massacred all such English Guarders as then maintained the first Watch: and
setting wide open all the Gates, the Surprizors (armed with barbarous cruelty)
entered into the City, murdering and killing their enemies as they pressed
forth. Lamentable was the fearful cry, which so suddenly amazed the
English Garrisoners within the City. And it was the more full of terror, for
that the cause thereof was not unto them perfitly known.

The Earl of Suffolk, who was chief Governor of the Town, and the greatest
part of the English soldiers, entered into the Castle, and were (betimes in the
morning) sharply assaulted by the Frenchmen. And though they were altogether
unprovided of all necessaries for a long defense, yet their lusty courage
(again, and again) gave their enemies the repulse: who making no doubt, but
through Famine, or by violence, to be owners of the Castle; carelessly disposed
themselves to all ease, jolitie, and mirth. Whereof when the Lord Talbot was
advertised, he forthwith marched thither in the night with seven hundred men.
Mouns is recovered by the Lord Talbot.
The Earl of Suffolk (to whom secret intelligence was given of his coming)
left the Castle, and with his companies (unlooked for, and unthought upon)
rushed into the Town, lustily crying and showting, Policy.
Saint George, Talbot, Saint George, Talbot. Which unexpected noise so
wonderfully amazed the lazy, sleepie, and drunken Frenchmen, that some of
them, unclothed in their shirts, leapt over the Town walls to save their
lives, but lost them: So that (within and without the Town) four hundred
Gentlemen being slain and taken prisoners, and the rascal pesants being
enlarged; thirty Citizens, Execution.
twenty Priests, and fifteen Friars (by whose conspiracy the Town had been
treacherously betrayed) were, as Traitors, 1427. 6
tortured with miserable deaths. And thus was the City of Mouns bravely
regayned to King Henry.

Not long before this time died the Tutor of the Kings Royal Person, the right
Noble Thomas, Duke of Exeter: So that the Earl of Warwike was sent for into
England, to undergo that charge. And in his stead, the renowned and most
valiant Captain Thomas Mountacute, A new Army sent into France.
Earl of Salisburie (whose former Services so appalled and daunted the hearts
and courages of the Frenchmen, that they feared no man more) was sent into
France with five thousand men. To which number, as many more were added.
Orleance is besieged by the Earl of Salisburie.
And with them all, the said Earl marched to besiege the strong and warlike
City of Orleance, which stands upon the River of Loyer. This City was newly
fortified, and incredibly strengthened, by the Bastard, and by the Bishop of
that place, with Towers, Bulwarks and Forts: and the Suburbs, together with
twelve other Parish Churches, four Abbeys, and all Houses and Vines, being
within five leagues of the Town, they caused to be ruinated, defaced, and cut
down; because they should not afford any help, sustenance, or succor to the
Englishmen. When this siedge was strongly planted, The Bastard of Orleance
defeated.
the Bastard of Orleance, intending to make famous his hautie courage to his
enemies; bravely issued out of a strong Bulwark, which was erected upon the
Bridge. But (being unable to maintain his bold challenge) he was compelled
(with the loss of that Fort, and with the slaughter of the greater number of
his Soldiers) to fly into the Town. Within this Bulwark there was raised an
high Tower, with a window in it; at which the Englishmen usually pried into the
Town, taking the view of the greater part of the City: And thereby (from time
to time) did inform themselves, The valiant Earl of Salisburie slain
in what case, and in what plight the Townsmen stood. And at the same window
(about two Months after the first besiedging of the City,) the Noble Earl
of Salisburie, looking into the Town, was with a great shot unfortunately
slain; and with his death, the Triumphs of the English Nation in France waxed
more thin; and the Frenchmen became more victorious then they had been.

The Earl of Suffolk maintayneth the siege.
He being dead, the Earl of Suffolk was made General in that siedge: who
finding that all provisions waxed exceeding scant, sent Sir John Fastolfe to
the Rege^t for new supplies, who furnished him at the full; and dispatched him
and his companies with all speed. But in his return toward the siege, the
Lord Delabreth, with sundry other Barons, Knights and common Soldiers, The
Frenchmen are defeated. Policy.
to the number of nine thousand at the least, intending their overthrow,
presented themselves unto their view: who (placing their Carts and Carriadges
furthest back, their Horses next, and themselves before, and pitching their
Stakes behind their Archers, upon the first encounter retired behind their
stakes; On which the Frenchmen on horseback were received, goared and
miserably slain. And by these means; their Army (being disordered) began to
fly: So that in the fight, and in the chase, The Lord Dalabreth, and the Lord
William Steward Constable of France, with two thousand and five hundred men
were slain, and eleven hundred were taken prisoners: with whom and with rich
supplies, the valiant Knight and his companions repaired honorably unto the
siege. The Battle of Herrings.
And this battle was by the Frenchmen called the Battle of Herrings,
because the chiefest provisions which those Englishmen then had, were Lenten
stuffes.

When the besieged heard of this news, and were hopeless of any succors to
be sent for their relief from the French King, Orleance is offered to the Duke
of Burgoine.
by letters they entreated the Duke of Burgoine to receive them into his
protection, as his own; who made them answer, That he would so do, if the
Regent would thereunto agree. This motion pleased many of the Regents friends
and counselors, because thereby the Dolphin, surnamed the French King, should
not only be dispossessed of so rich and of so strong a City, but also because
it should be enjoyed by their chiefest friend.

But the Regent himself, and some others, The Regent will not consent thereto.
were of another mind, and returned this answer to the Duke, That seeing (for
so long a time) such great expenses and charges had been consumed by King
Henry, to bring that City into such extremities, as that the besieged became
weary any longer to be troubled; it would sound much to his dishonor and
disgrace, if any Prince besides him should enjoy the Lordship and the Siegnorie
thereof.

This Answer pierced the Duke of Burgoine at the heart: The Duke of Burgoine
falls from the English.
so that from thenceforth his affections daily waxed cold, and occasioned him,
in secret, to become a well-willer unto the French King.

When this Project was revealed, and became fruitless, The Duke of Alanson
relieueth Orleance.
the Citizens of Orleance craved present succors from the Duke of Alanson; who
did his best to inspire a new spirit of courage into the French King. And so
sensible was he of their extremities, and so ready to releive them; and so
extremely negligent was the English Army to attend their Watches in the
night, The fond security of the English.
because they daily expected the surrendering of the City; that (in the depth
and darkness of the night) he conveyed many thousand men, and store of all
sorts of provisions, into the Town. And within few days after, the besieged
issued forth, being bravely resolved to attempt much: The Frenchmen prevail,
and are beaten.
These men with strong blows won the Bulwark at the Bridges end, and one
more, and slew six hundred men whom they found there. They also assaulted the
Bastyle, wherein the Lord Talbot was. But with such a wonderful courage and
resolution he issued out upon them, that he massacred their companies on every
side, and enforced them to fly like Sheep before the Wolf: so that with much
losses they hardly recovered into the Town.

The siege of Orleance abandoned.
But the next day, the Earl of Suffolk quited the Siege, severed his Army,
and sent each company to his own Garrison. And in their return, the Lord
Talbot (by maine assault) won the strong Castle and Town of Lauall. And thus
was the fair and the strong City of Orleance delivered from a long and from a
sharp Siege.

And within few days after, the Duke of Alanson besieged and won the Town
of Iargeaux: wherein (among others) he took prisoner the Earl of Suffolk,
The Earl of Suffolk taken prisoner.
and one of his brothers, and slew Sir Alexander Pole, another of his brethren:
All which prisoners (except the former two) were slain by the Frenchmen; who
contended among themselves, to whom those prisoners did in right belong.

1428. 7 The Englishmen are overthrown.
To the Dukes Army (which consisted of three and twenty thousand men) there
repaired Arthur of Britain, the Earl of Vandosme, and sundry other Noblemen,
with great and strong troops. All these fortuned to meet with the Lords Talbot,
Scales, and Hungerford, who conducted five thousand men to fortify the Town
of Meum. Betwixt them there were exchanged many bloody blows: so that in the
end the said three English Lords were taken prisoners, Prisoners.
twelve hundred of their companies were slain, and the rest, which escaped,
hasted unto Meum, and replenished that Town with ability of Strength to
resist future Dangers.

This unfortunate disaster was accompanied with another mischief. For no
sooner was it published and known abroad, but that diverse Cities, Reuolts to
the French King.
Towns, Castles, and strong Holds treacherously fell off and submitted
themselves to the French king: whom these unexpected good chances not only
elated and made proud, but also augmented his good hopes of a speedy end of
all his troubles; English prisoners.
especially, because the Earl of Salisburie was slain, and the Earl of
Suffolk, and the Lords Talbot, Scales, Hungerford, and many other valiant
English Captains, were then his prisoners, and could not assist the Regents
part.

The French King being thus stomacked and put in heart, would not any longer
retain any mean or base thoughts: but in stead of them, he now consulted and
devised how he might recover the City of Rhemes; Rhemes.
that in it he might (with all Solemnities and Prince-like Requisites) be
crowned King, according to the manner and custom of his Ancestors, Kings of
that Kingdom. And to effect those his desires with all convenient speed, he
forthwith passed into Champaigne with a great Army: where he besieged, and by
composition won Troys, the chiefest City in that Province. And the
inhabitants of Challons being thereof informed, Troys won. Challons, Rhemes,
etc. yielded.
perfidiously did rebel, and compelled their Captain to yield the Town. By
which example, the Citizens of Rhemes being induced, did the like. And thus
King Charles obtained his hearts desire, and was crowned there. Charles is
crowned King of France, and is thereby furthered in his future attempts.
And as by that high Title he was chiefly dignified, so was he thereby
exceedingly furthered in all his future attempts: For upon the first report
that he was crowned King, it cannot easily win credit, how many Forts,
Cities, Towns, and Castles, were (without blows) delivered into his hands.

The Regent perceiving that his proceedings would be but vain, except he
speedily checked this good fortune; resolved, The Regents brave resolution.
that a pitched Field should make him prosperous or unhappy. For which
purpose, he marched with a strong Army from Paris toward the new King: and
by his heralds he proclaimed Charles to be an Usurper and a counterfeit King
and an arch-Traytour to King Henry, and summoned him to a battle, The Regent
summoneth the French King to a pitched field.
that thereby he might receive punishments agreeable to his deserts.

The French King not acknowledging any such offense, seemed willingly to accept
of this Challenge: yet (for a while) he trifled and lingered up and down; and
in the end diuerted his course, and marched another way. But the Regent so
closely followed after him, that (to defend him self) he was enforced to
marshall his companies, and to make bragging shows of resistance. The French
King departs and is pursued.
But outward apparances of valor were his best performances for two days
space: For in the depth of the night (with great silence) he raised his Camp,
and ran away. But when the morning had discovered this his cowardly
departure, He runs from the Regent.
the Regent (with much travail and great pain) endeavored to enforce him to
look back. But because he always fled, and would not adventure the exchange
of blows, therefore he returned to the City of Paris, The Regent hunteth him,
but in vain.
to show himself careful of his charge there: And so much the rather, because
those Citizens were ever unconstant, variable, wavering, perfidious, and untrue.

Daily (after the Regents return) his cares were filled with fresh reports of
traiterous Reuolts, which made him (once more) to attempt to make his estate
more stable and more sure, by exposing of himself and his unto some present
danger. For which cause, The French King once more runs away.
he marched again toward the French King with an Army of ten thousand
gallant men: who met him with more than that double number. But when all
outward appearance presented good assurance of a deadly fight, King Henry is
crowned. 1429. 8
the French King did (once more) shamefully run away. And near about the
same time, King Henry (with all Princely Honor and Solemnity) was crowned
King.

Reuolts to the French King.
And albeit, that daily experience made it manifest, that King Charles was a
dastardly and a fearful coward: yet the Towns of Champaigne, Senlys,
Beauois, Gaylard, and many others, trecherously yielded themselves into his
hand. Whereupon the Regent resolved to cast his anchor in Normandy, and to
secure the fidelity and love of the inhabitants of that Province, howsoever
the game should chance to run elsewhere. For which purpose he went thither,
The Regent establishes Normandy.
and in an honorable and full Parliament he related artificially the Lineall
Descent of his Lord and Master King Henry the sixth, from Rollo the Hardy; who
was the first Duke of that Country. He also minded them of those miseries,
which too too commonly, and with overmuch severity, had been inflicted on
their Nation by the Natives of the Kingdom of France. And remembered them of
those Immunities and Royal Privileges, which (under the English Government)
they had long and liberally enjoyed, by which they were made fortunate and
rich: Whereof he promised them, not only a sure and a firm continuance, but
also a daily enlatgement, with all favor. Thus, and by these means, he
confirmed and ratified to King Henry, and to himself, the affections and
friendship of that people.

The French King woeth the Duke of Burgoine.
But whilst the Regent thus busily employed himself in Normandy; the French
King attempted (by all subtle and cunning means) to lessen and to weaken his
power. For the effecting whereof, first of all he endeavored to dissolve that
knot of Love and Amity which conjoined the Regent and the Duke of Burgoine in
an indifferent liking of each other; by excusing himself to the said Duke
touching the murdering of his Father: and (by solemn Promises and Oaths)
vowing to give unto him mountains of Wealth, many Honors, and his inward
favor, if he would be firmly reconciled, and become his friend. And albeit,
that the Duke was not well pleased, for that the Regent would not consent, The
French King assaulteth Paris, and is beaten.
that the City of Orleance (when it was besieged and grievously distressed)
should be yielded into his hands: yet in a friendly manner he acquainted the
Regent with this cunning Plot. So, when King Charles perceived, that this
devise was fruitless; he brought his whole Army before the City of Paris: of
whose revolt (if the Multitude had dared) the Regent had been right well
assured. But when he perceived, that nothing but blows could make him
hopeful of good success: He battered and scaled the walls, and assaulted the
Citizens with sharp fury: But (by the brave valor and courage of the English
Garrisons, which were well assisted by such of the Townsmen as were faithful
to King Henry) he was repulsed many times with great loss, and slaughter of
his men; and at last, was compelled shamefully to depart from thence.

The Regent (at his return) thanked, and praised them exceedingly: but
especially such of the Parisians, as had well testified their faith and
loyalty to King Henry, in his absence. Whereat they seemed publicly to take
so much joy, that (hypocritically) they styled themselves, thus; Friends to the
English, and friends to the Parisians; Enemies to the English, and enemies to
the Parisians: The Parisians flatter, and are treacherous.
yet were they treacherous, and unconstant; as in this future discourse it shall
manifestly appear.

It will be to tedious, to make an ample Relation of every light skirmish that
was made, and of every Revolt, and Martial gayning; which strengthened the
English in some places, and weakened them in others: Wherefore, it shall
suffice, that we be well informed, that either part did sometimes win, and
sometimes loose. But to say the truth, The English forces and strength in
France did not increase; because such was the inconstant leuitie of the French
Nation. That they gladded their hearts at every opportunities, which enabled
them to revolt, and yield to King Charles. By means whereof King Henry (as
he was counseled) sailed with a puisant Army from Dover, 1431. 10 King
Henry crowned in Paris.
and arrived at Calice: And taking Roan in his way, He marched unto Paris,
where he was (with all beseeming requisities) anointed and crowned King of
France, and received homage and fealty upon the Oaths of the Nobles,
Gentlemen, and common People of that City.

These French wars were famous in all the Western parts of the world. And
the more were they spoken off, because men generally did wonder, how it was
possible, that so small an Island, England admired at.
as England was, should (for so many years together) so grievously torment and
scourge so large, so populous, and so potent a Kingdom, as France was, and put
it to the worst.

At length, and after frequent mediations, used by Eugenius the Fourth, then
Pope of Rome, and by many other Christian Princes. Such great hopes, as made
the fairest show of an happy Peace, An imperfect Truce.
vanished quite, and came to nothing: saving that an imperfect Truce for six
years was consented unto, which lasted but a while: For shortly after King
Henry's return into England, Unfortunately it happened, that the Lady Anne,
wife unto the Regent, The Regents wife dies.
and sister to the Duke of Burgoine, died: And not long after, he married the
fair and fresh Lady Iaquet, daughter unto Peter, Earl of S. Paul, The Regent
newly married
and thereby allied himself to the ancient and honorable Family and house of
Luxenbourgh, and from thenceforth the great love, The Regent loses a good
friend.
which for many years had made the Regent and his brother in law, the Duke of
Burgoin, fortunate and happy, waxed faint and feeble: by means whereof the
Duke won nothing, and the Regent became less powerful then he had been in
former times.

1432. 11 The Truce broken.
The solemnities of this marriage were no sooner finished, but that the six
years truce, which was so lately concluded, was quite broken, and war began
to threaten the effusion of much blood: For the adverse part (by secret
underminings and treacherous persuasions) possessed it self daily of many of
the Regents Castles and Towns; and justified that manner of proceeding, by
affirming; That politic gainings without blows, infringed not any Truce: and
so far off were the Frenchmen, from restoring those things, which by those
subtleties they had gained; that to procure more, Treason discovered.
they secretly conuaied two hundred Soldiers into the Castle of Roan, hoping
to have surprised it, but the treason was revealed, and the Conspirators were
(with maine strength) beaten into the Dungeon: From whence they were sentenced,
some to the Gallows; others to death by cruel torments; others to sharp
imprisonment; and such of them as sped best, were (for great ransomes, and
sums of money) set at large.

1433. 12 Talbots name was terrible in France.
These coals quickly kindled the fire of rage, in so much that either party
made it self strong, by the speedy supply of a new Army. And the Regents
forces were much augmented, by John Lord Talbot, who was of late redeemed out
of prison, who though he brought with him out of England but only eight
hundred chosen men at Arms, yet his name and his presence more terrified the
Frenchmen, The Frenchmen would not fight.
then half the English Army besides. Oftentimes the two Armies by their near
approach, striued to outface and to daunt each other: And twice the Regent
boldly challenged the Frenchmen to entertain the fight: but they only made
fair shows to perform much, and seemed as if they thirsted to make
themselves famous by their manhood: yet in two several places, and at two
times, they fled in the night, and would not (in any sort) hazard their
Fortunes in the field.

Now, A Rebellion in Normandy
whilst the Regent was thus carefully employed abroad, the Rustickes of
Normandy treacherously attempting to shake off the English yoke (which was
never burdensome unto them) rudely armed themselves, and marched toward Cane;
exercising much violence and cruelty in all places where they did prevail.
The Rebels are subdued.
But they were speedily encountered and overthrown by the Earl of Arundell and
the Lord Willoughby; who slew more than a thousand of them, and tormented their
rebellious Leaders and Captains with sundry sorts of deaths, but permitted the
baser sort to return home. The Earl of Arundell slain.


This noble and courageous Earl purposing to reseise for King Henry the Town
of Rue, which grievously punished the Countries of Ponthew, Arthois, and
Bolenois; perceived (as he marched) that an old decayed Castle, called
Gerbory, near unto Beauois, was newly reedified and made strong. This Castle
he assaulted with great courage: but being mortally wounded on the ancle with
the shot of a Culuerine, he was taken prisoner from the ground, but within few
days after he died.

About the same time, the Duke of Burbon, who about eighteen years before was
taken prisoner at the battle fought at Agencourt, paid his ransom of
eighteen thousand pounds, The Duke of Bourbon is ransomed, and dies.
but died in London the same day, in which he intended to set forwards toward
France.

In the end of the reign of King Henry the Fifth, The Regent and the Duke of
Burgoine have stout stomachs.
we may reuiew or remember, what a precise charge and command that King gave to
his Brethren, and to his Nobles, never to loose the amity and friendship of
Philip Duke of Burgoine; and this History makes mention how careful they
have been ever since, to observe his counsel in that behalf: but the busy
tongues of Tell-tales, and of foisting Flatterers, obtaining credit where
reprehension was more fitting, prevailed in such sort, That the said Duke
causelessly waxed jealous, and his love was cold toward the Regent;
Tale-bearers or Tale-tellers.
yet through the persuasions, and by the mediation of their honorable friends,
an enteruiew to revive their friendship was procured, and S. Omers was the
place appointed for that purpose. But when they both had made their entrance
into that Town: The Duke of Bedford, because he was Regent, and the son,
brother, and Uncle unto Kings, expected the prioritie of visitation by the
Duke: but he, because he was the Lord and Sovereign of that Town, supposed
that he should be checked for dishonorable baseness, if he should first
repair to the Regents lodging. These conceits touching their pre-eminence and
superiority, were very likely to distemper their humors, more then formerly
they had been. For the preventing whereof, their friends endeavored to
persuade them both to meet together in some indifferent place. But the Regent
refused to yield thereunto. So they departed, and left the Town; The Duke of
Burgoine forsakes the Regent.
being both displeased and discontented with each others haughtiness of
spirit and great stomach. And forthwith the Duke of Burgoine entered into
league and friendship with the French King, who had before murdered his Father.
Which falling off from the English, aduantaged not him, nor sounded to his
honor.

1434. 13 Saint Dennis trecherously betrayed.
About the same time, the Town of Saint Dennys (near unto Paris) was
treasonably yielded to the French King, by the secret practice of the Bastard
of Orleance; who was surnamed the Earl of Dumoys. But the Lord Talbot, and
some other Lords, accompanied with five thousand men, compassed it round about
with a strong Siege. Whereof when the Earl of Dumoys was informed; to remove
the Siege, he collected a strong power of chosen horsemen. But ere he came
thither, the Town (by composition) was surrendered; Saint Dennis is recovered.
and the Walls and Towers thereof were beaten to the ground. And though in this
place the English gained; yet the inhabitants of Ponthoys (which stands on
the River betwixt Normandy and Paris) did rebel, Ponthois reuolteth.
and thrust the English Garrison out of the Town: which from that time forward
animated the inhabitants of Paris to think on nothing more, than how they
might (by Treason, or by Violence) reduce themselves to the subjection of the
French King.

But behold; a greater mishap than the loss of many Towns and Cities, did
(unexpectedly) weaken King Henry's part. For now the most renowned, The Regent
dies.
wise, politic, and worthy Regent of France, died; and was (with all Princely
Ceremonies and Solemnities) buried in a stately Monument, which was erected for
him in our Lady Church, He was buried in Roan.
within the City of Roan. Whereat the mutable and unconstant Nobility of the
Duchy of Normandy (who had received from him many benefits and favors) much
repined. And within few years after, they instantly requested the French King
Lewis the eleventh (who was the son of King Charles the seventh) to pluck it
down, His Sepulcher envied.
and to cast the Regents carcass into the open fields; alleging, That it was
much dishonorable, and a great disgrace for them, to suffer such an enemy (as
he was to them and to the Kings of France) to be so richly interred within the
Metropolitan City of that Province. But King Lewis (who worthily withstood
their base attempt) affirmed, and did publicly protest, A Kingly Speech.
That a more sumptuous Sepulcher was too too bad to cover the dead corpse of
him, who in his life time scorned (upon any occasion whatsoever) to step one
foot back for all the power and souldierie of France: and who, in all his
proceedings, and in all his Government, had approved himself to be so wise,
politic, faithful, and hardy, that all heroical and generous spirits should
rather endeavor to immortalize his Fame, and with the Trumpet of Honor to
proclaim his manlike acts, than (in the least measure) labor to shadow or to
eclipse them with Envy or Disgrace. And that there was no stronger an argument
or proof of baseness and of cowardice, than to insult over the dead body of
him; who (whilst he lived) was amiable and courteous in time of Peace, 1435.
14 Richard Duke of York made Regent.
but bold and terrible in Arms.

The death of this renowned Prince was the cause of infinite alterations and
changes within the Kingdom of France, and elsewhere. For after his death,
Richard Duke of York was made Regent, against the liking and good will of
Edmund Duke of Somerset, cousin to the King; who (for himself) inwardly
affected that authority and place.

The treacherous City of Paris also, and many other Towns, Paris reuolteth,
and is cruel to the English.
Castles, and Forts, rebelliously yielded themselves, and wholly became French.
And not only so: but villanously they murdered, taunted, and scoffed the
English Nation; whom (in outward show, and with fair words) they seemed, not
long before, to honor, and extraordinarily to respect.

The Normans also revolted, and tyrannized over the Englishmen; whom with the
Sword, and by a thousand means, The rebellious Normans are subdued.
they consumed, until (by the slaughter of five thousand of their companies)
they were subdued by the Lord Talbot, the Lord Scales, Sir Thomas Kyriel, and
by some others.

When Paris, Saint Dennys, Saint Germans in Ley, and many more Cities and
Towns were lost; the new Regent, Private envy hindered the public good.
with eight thousand soldiers, landed at Harflew; and from thence came to the
City of Roan: where his Presidents for Justice were much admired and
commended. But in the whole course of his Government he effected nothing else
to be wondered at; by reason that the Duke of Somersets secret grudgings
hindered those Expeditions, which might have made him famous, and his Country
fortunate and happy.

The revolted Duke of Burgoine (who not long before had falsified his Oath and
Promise to King Henry, The Duke of Burgoine besieges Calice
and to his Father) pretending a rightful Title unto the Town of Callice;
besieged it with an Army, which consisted of forty thousand men.

This Town was newly strengthened with many hundreds of brave soldiers; who
by Henry, Earl of Mortayne, and by the Lord of Cammoys, from England were
brought thither. The Duke attempted to win the Town by three terrible
assaults: but he was a great loser by them all: And the incredible strength of
the place, and of his enemies, deprived him utterly of all hope to win it by
any other means, than only by Famine and scarsitie of food. But that course
he was not able to pursue; because the English Navy was Master of the Sea. But
yet to shut up the Haven, and then for a while to attempt what might be done;
he prepared four great Hulkes, and filled them with square and massy stones,
semented and joined close together with Iron and with Lead, because they should
(as a Rock) remain together, and not be beaten in sunder by the Sea. But so
unskillful were they, who had the charge to sink them, that they missed the
Channel: So that when the water was at an ebb, the ships lay dry, and were
by the Callicians torn all abroad: and the Stones and Timber being taken in,
served for the provision and fortifications of the Town.

The Dukes Bastyle taken by the English
The Duke also built a strong Bastyle, which he furnished with four hundred
fighting men: Which, though for a few days it prejudiced the besieged, yet it
did them no memorable harm. For (not long after it was erected) certain
Troops of horsemen issued out of the Town, who fought proudly with the Dukes
Forces: and in the mean time the Bastyle was assaulted and won by others; who
took all such prisoners as were not slain therein, burned the Fort, and
returned (with very little loss) into the Town.

The Duke of Burgoine flies in the night.
The Duke of Burgoine (who seemed much to rejoice, because the Protector had
promised to attempt the raising of the Siege within few days) made great
preparations to withstand it. But being surprised with a sudden fear, to be
swallowed up betwixt the English Army and the Town, he removed from thence in
the night; leaving to the Protector (who landed with his companies the day
before) all his Tents, Ordnance, Armor, and Provisions, being of great worth.

The Protector (who brought with him thither five and twenty thousand men)
entered into the Dukes Countries of Flanders and Arthois: where he slew, burnt,
ransacked, and won rich booties at his own pleasure. And (without
resistance) he returned unto Callice; and (with such superfluities as he had
gotten) abundantly and plentifully he supplied it with all things which they
wanted: and then he returned into England; where he found the State much
troubled. For James the first, being King of Scots (forgetting quite the
manifold favors and Princely education, which, Rosbrough besieged by the Scots.
being a prisoner, he found within the Kingdom of England) with thirty
thousand men had (for many weeks) besieged the Castle of Rosborough: which
was valiantly defended by Sir Ralph Gray. But the Earl of Northumberland (as
he was appointed) prepared to give him battle, and to remove the Siege.
Whereof when notice was given to the Scottish Army, they removed, The Scots
fly.
and fled with extraordinary speed into their own Country.

About the same time died Queen Katherine, Owen Tuthar: who (though his means
were but small) yet was he descended from Cadwallader, the last King of the
Britons: And by her he had issue two sons, half brothers to the King; that
is to say, Edmund, and Iaspar. This Edmund was (by King Henry) created Earl
of Richmond; and took to wife the Lady Margaret, sole Daughter and Heir unto
John Duke of Somerset; and begot on her King Henry the seventh. And Iaspar was
created Earl of Pembroke.

Likewise, the Lady Iaquet (sister unto the Earl of Saint Paul, and Duchess
Dowager to John Duke of Bedford, the late Regent of France) contrary to her
friends liking (yet to please her self) married a gallant Gentleman (who was
much inferior to her estate) named Sir Richard Wooduyle: Sir Richard Wooduyle
made Baron Ryuers: and afterward Earl Ryuers
whom (afterward) the King made Baron Ryuers, and then Earl Ryuers: And by
him (among many other children) she had issue Elizabeth; who was (after) the
wife of King Edward the fourth; and was mother to the Lady Elizabeth, whom
King Henry the seventh espoused and took to wife.

It pleased the Kings Council of this Realm to discharge Richard, Duke of
York, of his Regencie in France; The Earl of Warwike is made Regent 1437. 16
and to establish the Earl of Warwike in his place. Who embarked himself
seven times, before he could set one foot in Normandy. But (at last) his
arrival was fortunate and happy. And having intelligence, that the Duke of
Burgoine, with ten thousand men, lay strongly entrenched before Crotoy; he
sent the Lords Talbot and Fawconbridge, Sir Thomas Kyriell, and many other
valiant Captains, Crotoy is besieged.
with five thousand Englishmen, to raise that Siege. But the Duke (fearing with
his double number to encounter with his enemies) fled with his whole Army unto
Abbeuyle. From whence he being eagerly pursued, and hourly dared to make a
stand, and to play the man; The Duke of Burgoine will not fight.
he posted unto Amiens: where the Englishmen (who daily hunted after him) found
him and his companies strongly enclosed within the walls. But because he played
the coward, and would not fight, the Lord Talbot entered into Picardie and
Arthois: where (unresisted) he wasted and consumed the whole Country (the
walled Towns, Castles, and Forts only excepted) and enriched all his Army
with Cattle, Money, Plate, and many other things of great worth and value.

Sir Thomas Kyriels valor
Sir Thomas Kyriel also surprised the Dukes Carriages and his Ordnance: all
which booties were brought unto Crotoy, with as much victuals as would
maintain six hundred men for one whole year. And all the residue of those
spoils he sent to the Earl of Warwike; which abundantly supplied his great
wants.

Perjury punished.
The Earl of Mortayne, son to Edmund Duke of Somerset, by violent assaults
took the Castle of Saint Auyan in Main, and slew therein three hundred Scots,
and hanged all the Frenchmen whom he found there; because (having once been
sworn to King Henry) they revolted, and became French.

Thus Fortune every day turned her Wheel, making him who yesterday won
much, to day to lose all; and suddenly advancing those to great honor, whom
former disasters had made miserable and bare. The French King wins by
treachery, not by valor.
But the Frenchmens Treasons and Trecheries daily betrayed more Cities, Towns,
and Castles, to the French King, than either the Englishmen could hold by
Policy, or gain by Strength.

The Dolphin rebelleth against his father.
And albeit that by reason thereof he comforted himself; and prosperous
success accompanied most of his Attempts: yet was he (on a sudden) checked
by the open Rebellion of his eldest son, Vyen: Who (being assisted by the
Dukes of Alanson and of Burbon) usurped the Government of France; and by
public Edicts diuulged the insufficiency of his Father to rule that Kingdom.

The Rebellion is appeased.
This Clowd threatened a shrewd storm; and begat this Question in his Father
and in his Counselors of State: Whether it were better to attempt the curing
of this Malady by Civil War, and by letting of Blood; or by Discretion and
by Policy, without blows? The later Project being entertained public
Proclamations were made in the French Kings Name; by which he prohibited all
his subjects (upon the pains of death) to yield any subjection to the
Dolphins Commands, and pardoned all such, as (by his persuasions) had devoted
themselves to his service. And moreover, sundry Letters were written, diverse
Messengers were sent, and many powerful Mediators so prevailed, that the
Dolphin, with his confederates, were quickly reconciled, and joyfully received
into the Kings favor.

Whilst these unnatural broils breathed fresh hopes into the English Nation,
that Paris might be regayned; The regayning of Paris attempted.
they prepared a great Army for that purpose. But by means of the said
Reconciliation and Agreement, those their designs were strangled in their
birth: their Army was dissolved; and being enforced to sail by a smaller
Compass, they endeavored to effect such things as were proportionable to their
strength, Ponthois surprised.
and to win those things which were within their reach.

About the same time (the ground being covered with a thick Snow, John Lord
Clifford (clothing himself and his followers all in white) passed in the night
season over the Ditches of Ponthois (which not long before was treacherously
yielded to the French King: Policy.
) the Walls they scaled; entered in; slew the Watch; won the Town; killed the
greater part of all the men found there; and took many prisoners, which
yielded them good ransomes in a short time.

This bold Attempt so passionately vexed the French King, The French King
besieges Ponthois
that (in his own Person) he came before the Town with a great Army: with
which, and with many Trenches, Bastyles, Forts, and Rampires, he compassed it
round about, and gave unto it many fierce assaults. In all which he lost much,
and was scorned by the besieged.

And whilst he thus lay before the Town, Richard Beauchampe, Earl of
Warwike, and Regent of France, died; and Richard, A new Regent.
Duke of York, was the second time made Regent of that Kingdom. Who (being
accompanied with the Earl of Oxford, the Lord Bourchier Earl of Ewe, the Lord
Talbot, and many others) raised a great Army, repaired to the Siege, and
dared the French King into the field. Which he refused: and leaving his
Ordnance in the strongest Bastyle of Saint Martyn, which he had erected; He
runs away in the night.
he raised his Siege in the midst of the night, and went unto Poysy. But in
the morning, when the English Army perceived, that their enemies had
fearfully abandoned the place, and had left their Tents behind them; they
possessed them with much joy, and found much riches, and store of all
provisions, with which they comforted themselves and the Town. And leaving
there Sir Geruase Clifton, with a thousand valiant men, to defend it, and
neglecting the Bastyle, which neither could without much loss be suddenly
gotten, nor was able to do any harm: The Regent, with all his Companies,
directed his journey toward Poysie: and being come thither, he set his Army
in a warlike manner; nothing doubting, He is dared, yet plays the Coward.
but that the French King (whose strength was much increased, by the repair of
the chiefest Lords, and gallantrie of France) would have answered him, in the
open field; but he kept himself close within the Town. In so much that when
the Regent perceived that no bold bragging, nor scornful tauntings, could
move his patience, nor make him valiant: He left him there, and by easy
Marches he came to Roan.

Ponthoys besieged the second time.
The French King, as soon as he heard that the English Army was so far off;
entered into a serious consideration of his estate. And (being mindful that the
Parisians, by often scandals, had reproved his faint heart) and that the Town
of Ponthoys was an evil enemy to that City: To regaine his reputation and
Honor, by winning of that Town, he used extraordinary expedition, It is
valiantly defended.
and with a puisant Army he besieged it round about: And (because he feared,
least small delays might deprive him of his hopes) he assaulted it, almost
every hour, and lost before it above three thousand men. It is taken.
But in the end he won the Town, and slaughtered four hundred Englishmen;
the rest of them were taken Prisoners, and ordered according to the French
Kings will. And when he had thus prevailed, diverse other Cities and towns
(greedily embracing all reports of their Kings valor) treacherously revolted,
and became French.

Naturalists have taught us, that when two Lions have by Combat tired
themselves, they do depart proudly each from the other, neither of them
seeming to yield; and both of them expressing many signs of much triumph. A
Parley.
And our Histories do report, that both King Henry, and King Charles, being
wearied with the infinite vexation of their Wars, and with their daily
travails, seemed both of them to be Conquerours: yet were they both easily
persuaded to harken to such indifferent motions for a Truce; as were proposed
by their friends. For this conference, Callice was appointed the place to meet
in, which Town was chosen before any other, because Charles the noble Duke of
Orleance (who ever since the Battle of Agencourt, had continued a Prisoner in
England) was to be conveyed over, that (for his Ransom of three hundred
thousand Crowns if it could be gotten) he might be enlarged and set free. The
Ambassadors which met there about this business, consulted often times, but
at length they adiourned those negotiations until some other time, King
Henry's demands.
because the demands of King Henry were thought to be unreasonable in three
points.

FJrst, in regard of the ouer-great sum of Money, which was demanded for the
Dukes Ransom. Secondly, for that the peaceable, and the quiet possession of
the whole and entire Dutchies of Aquitaine, and of Normandy, was required, and
to be inioyed freely, without any acknowledgement of Homage, or of
Sovereignty of the Crown of France. And thirdly, because the surrendering and
yielding up into King Henry's hands, was urged of all such Cities, towns,
Castles, Forts and Territories in France, The Parley is dissolved.
as the English Nation had enjoyed, at any time within the space of thirty
years then last past.
Yet (not long after this meeting was dissolved) Philip Duke of Burgoine,
pitying the enthrals estate of the Duke of Orleance, The Duke of Orleance is
Ransomed.
and remembering John his father, had cruelly murdered Lewys the father of the
said Duke: paid his Ransom, and (at his own charge) transported him, with
honorable attendance into France.

And now the Regent (purposing to prevent the Frenchmans Wars, 1440.
with which they intended to disturb the Peace of the Normandy) divided all
his Companies into four Troops, which were severally commanded by himself,
Cruel Wars
by the Duke of Sommerset, by Robert Lord Willoughby, and by John Lord Talbot.
All these (in several places) invaded the Territories of France and of
Britain; and prevailed every where: saving at the Town of Deep, which though
they long besieged, yet was it cleared in the end. And in the mean time the
French King with his Son the Dolphin of Vyen, with the Bastard of Orleance, A
huge Army.
surnamed the Lord Dumoys, entered into Aquitaine and Guyan, with an Army of
threescore thousand men, and received many Castles, Towns and Cities into
their bands: which voluntarily, and without blows were yielded unto them, but
they were not long inioyed. For the French Army (being very great; Much is
gotten and l^st again.
and pinched with extreme Famine and diverse wants) was broken up. And
immediately after their departure into France, the Englishmen recovered
whatsoever was formerly gotten by the French King.

Gloucester, Protector of the Kings person, and of this kingdom. Disliked much
the undue proceedings of his Uncle, Dissension between the Protector and the
Cardinal. No redress.
the rich Cardinal of Winchester, and of the Archbishop of York: Who (without
his consent; or the Kings Warrant) attempted, and did many public things for
their own profit and private gain. For the reformation whereof, he preferred
unto the King, certain Articles against them: The consideration of which, was
referred to the Privy Counsel. But because the most of them were Clergymen,
they afforded no manner of redress; where at the Protector was much
displeased. But to requite him with more vexation, and a greater trouble, they
caused the Lady Eleanor his wife, The Protectors wife condemned for witchcraft.
to be accused, and convicted for conspiring of the Kings death with Witches:
and such like graceless people, for which she was enforced three times to do
public Penance in the City of London, and afterward she was committed to
perpetual Imprisonment. But diverse of her condemned associates were Executed,
and put to sundry kinds of death.

French Wars: King Henry (in regard of former services, and of future hopes
of the like performance) Created the Lord John Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie,
John, created Earl of Shrewsbury. A worthy Captain.
and sent him into Normandy, with three thousand selected men, for the better
securing of that Duchy. In which expedition, he worthily demeaned himself,
and won much Honor.

This year the Countess of Coming in Guyen, died without issue: and her
inheritance was claimed by the French King. And likewise the Earl of Arminacke
pretended himself to be her next heir. A marriage offered to King Henry
And to strengthen himself the better to gain his right, he offered his
Daughter in marriage to King Henry, with the gift of much money, and with the
surrendering into his hands, of all such Territories and possessions within the
Duchy of Aquitaine; and Guyen as (either by Conquest, or by descent) did
belong unto him.

The King is offered to the Earl of Arminaks daughter.
This offer was willingly hearkened unto, and accepted by the King, who (by his
Ambassadors) was publikly offered to the said Lady. But the French King,
minding rather to prevent dangers before they come, then to remove them after
they were happened) so suddenly invaded the said Earls Countries and Dominions
with an Army: that (with small or no resistance) he quickly made himself the
Owner of them all. The King refuses her.
The news whereof, so altered and changed the mind, and the affections of
King Henry toward his offered Lady, that he would never after be persuaded to
hearken unto; or to think upon that match.

the lamentable distress of poor France, because the blood of Christians was
so vnmeasurably and so unmercifully shed in those wars, incited them to
mediate both these Kings to make a friendly peace: which was not effected
according to their endeavors and desires, A truce for eighteen months.

The Earl of Suffolk solliciteth another marriage for King Henry, without
authority given to him. A dishonorable match propounded and concluded.

Reasons why this match was disliked.


but a truce only was concluded for eighteen months: In the handling whereof,
the Earl of Suffolk (not warranted by his Commission, nor making his
associates acquainted with his purpose) solicited a marriage betwixt his Lord
and master King Henry, and the Lady Margaret cosen to the French King, and
daughter unto Reyner Duke of Angeow, being the titularie King of Sicilie,
Naples, and Jerusalem. With her he made no demand for any money, because her
father was but poor; nay, (which was much worse) he consented, that if the
said marriage might be effected, King Henry should freely and frankly release
unto her father all his right and title to the said Duchy of Angeow, and to
the Country of Main.

The Lords of France were quickly won to hearken to this motion, and King
Henry was glad at the heart that he should have for his wife such a fair and
fresh Lady, as the Earl of Suffolk could never praise enough. But the
Protector strongly opposed himself against this match, terming her descent to
be but Titularie, and urging much the poverty of her father; and told the
King, Arminaks daughter, unto whom with Angeow, and to the Country of Main,
according to the Earl of Suffolkes unadvised offer. But all his reasons (as
frivolous) were rejected, and his counsel was not cared for. But the King, to
gratify and to please such of his Noblemen as therein inclined themselves to
his humor, Creation of Lords.
bestowed on them new Dignities and honors. For John Lord Holland (Earl of
Huntingdon) was created Duke of Exeter, as his father had been: Humfrey Earl
of Stafford was made Duke of Buckingham: Henry Earl of Warwick was made Duke
of Warwick, and the said Earl of Suffolk was created Marquis of Suffolk.
The new Marquess fetches the young Queen. The King is married.
Ladies, and other personages of great worth and honor) went richly provided
into France, and according to his condition, received the Lady Margaret from
the French King, and from Reyner her father, and conveyed her with great pomp
and princely magnificence into England, where (within few days after) she was
married to the King, and crowned Queen. Now as the prefixed time for the truce
drew toward an end; so King Henry perceived, that this his new alliance with
the French King promised him not any certainty that it should be enlarged, or
that he should have peace. For in France fresh supplies were hourly provided
to revive the former war, A Parliament. The Marquess of Suffolks oration.
His motion.
in which the Marquis of Suffolk (in a powerful, glozing, and tedious
Oration) extolled his own deserts above the skies, as well in his service in
the French wars, as also in moving and in concluding the late truce, and the
Kings marriage. He also admonished his Highness, and the two houses there
assembled, what preparations for war were made in France, and how behoouefull
it was for the King to do the like. And upon this motion (proceeding from his
haughty pride and ambitious mind) the whole assembly became humble suitors to
his Majesty, A Record made of his acts.
that not only his said admonition and advice, but also all his said former
services and doings, might in most ample sort be registered among the Rolls of
Parliament, for the perpetuallizing of his honor and of his name: which with
wonderful applause was consented unto; and shortly after he was created Duke
of Suffolk. He is made a Duke.
Yet for all this, before many years were expired, he was in the same place
accused, convicted, and condemned for sundry treasons, Humana caduca.
misprisions, and offenses; for which he was exiled, taken, and without law put
to death, as hereafter we shall see.

Such is the continual uncertainty, and the assured instabilitie of worldly
glory, and the vanity thereof; that when men do imagine, that they do
securely sleep on the bed of honor, then is their rest most diseasefull, and
their soundest sleep is but an unquiet slumber, troubled with fearful and
strange dreams; rather informing them of approaching dangers, then assertaining
them of the long continuance of that supposed felicity, which so vnmeasurably
they do desire.

France proceeded worse and worse: so that within few years that whole
kingdom, The causes of the loss of France, Normandy, and Aquitaine.
with the Duchies of Aquitaine and Normandy, were utterly lost. The causes of
which misfortunes are principally noted to be these.

1. The first was, the releasement of Lewys the noble Duke of Orleance for his
ransom. For his wisdom instructed the weak Counsel of France. His
persuasions reconciled all such iarres as were too too common among the
Nobility of France: and his valor was put into execution with such
excellency of discretion, that by his example the French cowards became
valiant.

2. The second was this unhappy and this unfortunate marriage betwixt the King
and his Queen: for by means thereof the Earl of Arminake, his kinsmen, and
his friends, became mortal enemies to the English Nation, hating them for
their Kings sake, because he had unfaithfully forsaken his affied wife. And
besides that, the King had not one penny with the Queen for her marriage
portion; but spent on her many thousand pounds before he enjoyed her as his
wife. And by this match also the King did not strengthen himself with any new
friends: for her fathers penury and wants enforced him to live almost as a
private man.

3. Thirdly, the releasement of King Henry's right to his Duchy of Angeow, and
to the Country of Main, which bordered upon Normandy, so weakened the Kings
Army in that Province, that shortly after he was driven out and expulsed from
that Duchy, and all Aquitaine by reason thereof was quite lost.

4. The fourth was the guiltless death and murder of the most noble and good
Duke of Gloucester, whose advice and counsel were the sinews of those wars.

5. To these also may be added the diverse dispositions and qualities of the
King and of the Queen. The description of King Henry.
For King Henry was exceeding mild, courteous, and gentle, patient in all
adversities, moderate in prosperity, a despiser of covetousness, an hater of
oppression, a lover of quietness and of peace. He loathed wars, and the
toil and troubles of the world: he spent much time in his private studies,
and in his religious exercises unto God. He was not desirous to meddle much
with public affairs, nor with the government of his kingdom. He desired not
to revenge any wrong which was done unto him. He was more merciful to such as
transgressed, then willing to extend the rigor of justice against such as had
offended his laws: yea, so little respectfull was he of his own greatness,
and of his knightly dignity and honor, (in regard of his souls health) that
he loved rather to be ruled then to govern as a King.

But the young Queen (who was fair and beautiful, The description of Queen
Margaret.
strong and lusty, proud and haughty, stout and reuengefull, crafty and
politic) was not well pleased with the soft nature and flexible disposition
of the King: neither could her ambitious spirit endure, that he being more then
of full years, should (as a pupil) be ruled and directed by another man.
Being therefore clearly resolved to dismiss the Duke of Gloucester of his
Protectorship and command, The Queen dismisseth the Protector of his office
and charge.
and making a public show of her inward intention to supply his place, she
was encouraged and furthered therein by her trusty friends the Duke of
Buckingham and the Duke of Suffolk, who (by the secret instigation of the rich
Cardinal of Winchester, and of the Archbishop of York, who mortally hated the
Protector) not only removed him from his place, but called him to a strict
account for the expense of the treasure of this kingdom: which justly and
honestly was disbursed by him, for the maintenance and furthering of the French
wars.

And when they perceived that they were unable by that course and practice to
attain unto their purpose, they procured the Queen (in the Kings name) to
assemble his high Court of Parliament at Burye, where the said Duke (surnamed
for his surpassing and heroical virtues, He is called the good Duke of
Gloucester. He is murdered.
with which he was adorned, The good Duke of Gloucester) was attached, and
a^^ested for high treason, and committed unto prison: and the next day he was
found dead and breathless in his bed, being cruelly and inhumanely murdered,
without doubt. As Soon as he was thus dispatched out of the way, Richard Duke
of York secretly conspired with his great allies and trusty friends, to set
on foot his title to the Crown. And likewise the Duke of Suffolk (who with
the Queen ruled all the roast) respected more his own profit, then the benefit
of the commonweal, and used sundry devises and cunning practices to oppress
the people, The French wars are neglected.
that with their coin he might fill up his own purse. By means whereof, no
provision of money was made for the supporting of the Kings wars in France;
no Army was newly raised to assist such as were then abroad; A weak Counsel.
no wages were paid to soldiers, or unto Captains: which made them
discontentedly to murmr. Neither was the Kings Counsel of Estate
sufficiently able to rule and to direct as was needful and necessary for the
Kings profit at home, or for his honor or advantage abroad.

The truce is broken.
Before the last prefixed time of truce was ended, Sir Francis Surrayne (an
Arragonoys, but a Captain over some English troops) by a sudden surprisall in
the night, Fongyers is taken.
took the Town of Fongyers, which standing in the frontier of Normandy,
belonged to the Duke of Britain, where he slew the inhabitants, and rifled
all at his pleasure: for which no recompense was yielded to the Duke; for he
was answered, that the fact was committed by a private Captain, without the
consent of the King, or of the Duke of Somerset, who was then Regent or
Lieu-tenant of the Duchy of Normandy, in which the said Surrayne at that time
lived.

The Frenchmen likewise, by the subtle policy of a Waggoner, (who with his
Cart stopped the Drawbridge until they were entered with their Companies)
took from the Englinshmen the town of Pont-larch, which is distant from Roan
about twelve miles, Pont-larch taken.
and is the kay of entrance from France over the River of Some into Normandy,
where the Englishmen were slain without pity or compassion: and the goods and
substance of the Inhabitants was taken away in like sort, as it was done at
Fongyers.

Thus was the Truce violated on both Parts: And thus were those bloody wars
renewed, which were daily fed with the slaughters of the brauest, and of the
most valiant men. The French King (perceiving that the Englishmen were not now
as puisant in those Countries, as they had been in former times: The French
King prevails.
and being minded to hold fast his good Fortune, which drew him by the hand
into great hope of prosperous success) divided his huge Army into three
parts, with which in few days he took the towns of Louyers, Gerbory, and
Vernoyle. Constance, Gysours, Castle, Gayllard, Ponteau-du mere, S. Loy,
Fesampe, and many others in Normandy, and in Guyan, who were swayed by their
Garrisons, surrendered themselves into his hands. Roan is yielded to the French
King
The Duke of Sommerset likewise, and the Earl of Shrewesbury (being thereunto
violently enforced by the Roanists, by composition yielded unto him that City,
and departed with all their goods and substance to the City of Cane, upon
Hostages left behind them; that sundry other Castles and Towns (according to
their agreement and promise) should also be given up without blows to the
French King. So that within few days, Har-slew is yielded.
the Castle and Town of Har-flew, and many others, became French.

The unhappy news of daily losses in Normandy, Aquitaine, much appaled King
Henry, and troubled his Counsel, A Rebellion in Ireland.
who (being unable to direct, as they had done, whilst the good Duke of
Gloucester lived, and did assist them) knew not what course was best to be
taken, and they were the more perplexed in those affairs, by means of a lewd
and dangerous Rebellion, which (at the same time) happened in Ireland. For the
speedy suppressing whereof, King Henry was constrained to transport the Duke
of York with an Army thither. In which service he so successefully prevailed,
The Duke of York appeaseth it.
that he not only appeased that tumult, but (by his wisdom, courtesy, and
valor) won the favor, and the hearty love of that Nation.

This Expedition much hindered the Kings preparations for the defense of his
Duchy of Normandy; yet he sent thither Sir Thomas Kyriel, a prudent, and a
valiant man, accompanied with fourteen hundred Soldiers, who (with so small a
handful) did as much as could in reason be expected. For he recovered diverse
Towns and Castles, which had been lost: And (had his strength consisted of a
greater number) he would assuredly by his valor, have performed much more.

This worthy Captain, finding himself to be too weak, to encounter many
thousands of his Enemies, United his forces with Matthew Gough, Cane is
besieged.
Sir Henry Norbery, Sir Robert Vere, and some others: So that their Army
consisted of five thousand approved valiant men, all which (with haughty
courage and resolved minds to win honor) encountered with an Army of seven
thousand of their Enemies, as they marched strongly to the siege of the City
of Cane. In the beginning of this fight the Englishmen prevailed according to
their hearts desire: The English are overthrown.
But in the midst of all their hopes, they were deceived. For being
grievously oppressed by Arthur Earl of Richmont, high Constable of France,
James of Luxenburgh Earl of Laualt, and by many other Noble men of France,
(who travailed with many Cornets of Horsemen toward the same siege) and
finding their Countrie-men beaten down, fainting, and on the point to run
out of the field, relieved them with their fresh supplies, and so furiously
assaulted the tired English Army, The first victory in open field which the
French in many years obtained.
that it was quickly overthrown, four thousand of them beieg slain, Sir
Thomas Kyriel, Sir Robert Norbery, with eight hundred more were taken
prisoners: but Matthew Gough, and Sir Robert Vere, and the suruiuors of their
Companies, saved themselves by flight.

Thus were the Englishmen overthrown and miserably wasted: and this was the
first Battle in open field, which the Frenchmen won of the English in many
years before, whereof their Historians do not a little brag. Cane is
b^ttred, assaulted, and st^^^ly defended.
This victory being thus obtained, the City of Cane in Normandy was closely
besieged by the French King: and oftentimes her walls were aduenterously
scaled: The assaylants made many brave and bold attempts, but were manfully
repulsed and beaten back, with the loss of their limbs, and of their lives:
Then were the walls daily battered, and the Frenchmen eagerly endeavored to
enter in: but their presumption was sharply checked by the besieged, who did
cast them off as fast as they enterprized to come in. Thus every man contended
to buy Honor, but none other pa^ment for it (but blood) was current in that
place. The Duke of Somerset (being daily importuned by the fearful
exclamations of his wife and children to surrender the town) debated thereof
seriously with Sir David Hall, The Duke of Somerset would surrender Canc. Sir
David Hall will not suffer it. A valiant Knight.
who was appointed to be the chief Captain and Commander of that City, by
the Duke of York, whose Town it was. But the courageous Knight would not in
any sort consent to the Dukes will, whereat he was much displeased, and
demanded whether the Kings Lieutenant General of that Duchy had not
sufficient authority and power of himself (without his leave) to dispose of
the Towns and Castles of that Province? No, quoth the Knight, the Kings
Lieu-tenant here may not, nor can sell, or yield up any man's right, but his
only, whose person he does represent: and this City being my Lord the Duke of
Yorkes, quoth he, A Mutiny
you have no power to surrender it to the French King, nor shall, on any
composition whatsoever. The Duke being highly displeased with this bold and
peremptory answer, informed the inferior Captains, common soldiers, and
the poorer sort of the Inhabitants, of the approaching dangers, which would
undoubtedly be the destruction of them all: and advised them, not to be
deprived of their lives, and of their liberties, through the desperate folly
and wilfulness of their obstinate and indiscreet Captain. This caveat made
them clamorous, and this counsel so hardened their hearts against Sir David
Hall, that they resolved (in despite of him) to yield the City (upon
composition) to the French King. Cane is l^st.
Thus was the peoples obedience severed and divided from him: and thus was
their courage converted into fear: and on a sudden (upon certain Articles
agreed on) the City was abandoned, and became French: All Normandy is l^st,
and so is France.
so that Roan and Cane (being the chiefest Cities of the Duchy of Normandy)
being lost, all the whole Duchy (in a short time after) revolted from King
Henry, and was lost likewise.

The noble Captain Sir David Hall, being thus wronged and disgraced, forsook
Normandy, and sailed into Ireland, where he informed the Duke of York what
the Duke of Somerset had done; whereat he was so highly displeased, The Duke of
York maliceth the Duke of Somerset.
that he never ceased privately and openly to practice, until the said Duke of
Somerset deservedly had lost his head. For this insupportable and unfortunate
loss of the Duchy of Normandy, the Queen and the Duke of Suffolk were
first secretly blamed by the whispering common people of this kingdom, who
afterward by open slanders, and with public reproachful speeches, exclaimed,
and accused the said Duke of many notable trecheries and gross treasons, 1450.
which chiefly consisted of these particulars.

Treasons objected against the Duke of SVFFOLKE.
FIrst, That by his wicked and ungodly means, the Duke of Gloucester was
deprived both of his Protectorship and of his life. 2 Item, that by his
appointment such Counselors of State were placed about the King and Queen, as
advised all things for their gain, and not for the profit of the Commonweal.
3 Item, that the Queen and the said Duke ruled the whole kingdom as they
listed: so that (by reason thereof) all things succeeded ill and hurtful to
this kingdom. 4 Item, that the said Duke was the means and occasion that the
Kings right to Aquitanie and Guyan were yielded up, which weakened, and at
length lost all the Duchies of Aquitanie and of Normandy. 5 Item, that he had
married his son John to the Lady Margaret, sole daughter and general heir to
John Duke of Somerset; and had reported, that she was the next heir to the
Crown of England, if King Henry happened to die without issue. 6 Jtem, that he
had persuaded the Earl of Dumoys, and other great Lords and Officers of
France, to transport an Army into this Realm, to destroy the King, and
consequently to make his said son John successor to this Crown and kingdom.
7 Item, that he procured the Duke of Orleance to be set at liberty for a
ransom, contrary to the commandment and the last Will and Testament of King
Henry the fifth: by whose means after wards the affairs of France were made
more powerful and fortunate then formerly they had been, and King Henry's
forces were daily enfeebled, and made more weak thereby in those Countries. 8
Item, that he had counseled the said Duke (before his departure out of
England) to persuade the French King to augment and to increase his army, and
to make sharper wars both in Normandy and in France against King Henry; who
so did: by which means the King lost all his possessions in those Countries. 9
Item, that as soon as he came Ambassador into France, he secretly informed King
Charles of the chief points of his Commission, and instructions: by means
whereof he grew obstinate, and refused to conclude any peace. 10 Item, that the
said Duke (at his last being in France) revealed to the French king the
weakness of King Henry's provisions to withstand him: by means whereof the
Frenchmen became more bold and hardy in those wars. 11 Item, that boastingly
and foolishly he had reported, in the presence of many noble and honorable
personages, that he had as high a place in the Counsel house of France as be
had in England, and that by reason of his especial interest in the French
Kings love, he could dispossess the nearest and the greatest of the French
Kings Counselors, if he were disposed so to do. 12 Item, that when men,
money, and munitions were in a readiness to be transported into France, to
aid and to assist King Henry's forces there, the said Duke (being wickedly
corrupted, and being a secret friend to the kings enemies) caused them to be
kept at home, by means whereof the kings armies in those Countries wanting due
and necessary supplies, were vanquished both in Normandy and in France. 13 And
lastly, that by means of his great favor with the Queen, he had deceitfully
and fraudulently enriched himself with the kings lands and treasures, and had
procured to himself a monopoly of all the greatest offices for his own
gain.
These and many more foul and treasonable Articles were (in full Parliament)
publicly objected against him, and laid unto his charge: all which he faintly
denied, but could scarce clear himself of one of them.

The Queens policy to help the Duke of Suffolk.
The Queen (to prevent the Duke of Suffolkes further peril and danger, because
she entirely loved him) caused him to be committed to the Tower, where he had
liberty at his own will: and then concluding the Parliament upon a sudden,
she not only enlarged him, but restored him into high favor with the King;
so that he proudly ietted and swaggered, as formerly he had done.

The Commons are displeased.

A rebellion, but appeased.


The common people repined much thereat, and spoke scandalously and reprochfully
of the Queen, and of her government: and some of them wickedly rebelled,
making a turbulent mate (nicknamed Blew-beard) their chiefest Captain. But
this insurrection was quickly nipped in the budde: their ringleaders were put
to death, and the rest of them received friendly admonition, and the Kings
gracious pardon.

The King and Queen intending to reconcile all discords, and to give some
better contentment to the Commons, held a Parliament at Leicester. The
Parliaments request
But their purpose failed them: for the lower house instantly importuned the
King that justice might be done upon the Duke of Suffolk, and also upon his
associating Conspirators, James Fynes Lord Say and Lord Treasurer of England,
John Bishop of Salisburie, and upon some others.

The King (to pacify this broile, and to weaken their importunity, by doing
of something wherewith he thought he should please them) exiled the said Duke
for five years. The Duke is exiled.

He is taken at Sea, and beheaded.


But as he sailed toward France, he was taken by an English man of war, who
landed him upon Dover Sands, and chopped off his head on a boats side. And thus
was the guiltless blood of Humfrey the good Duke of Gloucester in some measure
revenged: and the rest of those delinquents were sequestered from their Offices,
and imprisoned by the King.

The Duke of York intends to claim the Crown. His practices to further it.
Whilst these things were thus in handling, the Duke of York (albeit resiant
in Ireland) solicited and procured his allies and friends in England (by some
secret plottings, pretending some other ends) to set on foot his claim and
title to the Crown; he being lineally descended from Philip the daughter and
heir of George Duke of Clarence, who was the elder brother of John of Gaunt,
great grandfather to King Henry the sixth. And first of all it was whispered,
France, Normandy, and Aquitaine were lost, because Henry.

Upon these speeches, too too commonly diuulged, A Rebellion in Kent. Jack
Cade.
a Kentish Rebel named Jack Cade, but falsely nominating himself John
Mortimer, made an Insurrection in that Country, and with his rudely-armed
crew, and banners displayed, he marched toward the King, who was then at
Greenwich. His message to the King.
But before he came unto him, by messengers he informed him, that he intended
not any hurt against his Royal Person, but would displace and punish some of
his evil Counselors, who were his flatterers,

When the King and his Counsel had maturely considered of this undutiful and
insolent message, he was advised to encounter them, not with fair words, which
might breed further contempt, but with the Sword, for ensamples sake, that
others might (by their punishment) afterward take better heed. The Kings
Army pursues the Rebels.
And thereupon a strong Army was suddenly prepared; of which when the Rebels
were informed, (to gain advantage by their valor, under a false pretense of
cowardly fear) they retired many miles. The Queen (who was resolved that this
retreat rather proceeded from baseness, then from policy and wit) sent after
them Sir Humfrey Stafford, and William Stafford his brother, they being
accompanied with many lusty Gentlemen and brave Soldiers. Some of the Kings
forces are overthrown.
But most of them were quickly slain by the Rebels, who boldly and
courageously confronted them when opportunity and place gave them good
advantage to return.

This victory being thus obtained, The Rebellion is appeased.
Jack Cade (to whom multitudes of rude and graceless people from many shires
daily resorted) pressed forth again, and boldly came into Black Heath, and
from thence to London, where they did much harm. But at length the Kings
General Pardon was proclaimed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and by the
Bishop of Winchester, A good policy.
to all such as were not the Ringleaders of that ungodly rebellion: by means
whereof the inconstant and fearful multitude left their Captains, and returned
home. Then was Jack Cade proscribed by the King, and proclamation was made, by
which a reward by the gift of one thousand marks was promised to him that
could take him alive or dead. The hope of this payment occasioned very many to
make good inquiries and narrow searches after him: Jack Cade is prescribed and
slain.
so that in the end being found he was slain as he fought desperately for his
life, and his head was presented to the King, who willingly paid the reward
which was promised. Thus was this caitiffe destroyed, and thus was this
commotion appeased, which threatened destruction to the King and Commonweal.

The Duke of York comes into England.
advertised the Duke of York (who remained in Ireland) that a Parliament was
near at hand, and prayed him to consider what was fittest to be done for the
redress thereof, and for his own good. Whereupon he left his deputation in
Ireland, and returned home, and openly conferred with his best friends, John
Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Richard Earl of
Salisburie, Richard Neuill his son Earl of Warwick, Edward Brook Lord
Cobham, and with diverse others, how and by what means he might soberly,
without usurpation, or treason, set forth his right and title to the Crown.

The causes for which he levied an Army.
After this matter had been long debated, it was concluded, that the Duke of
York should raise an Army, under pretense to remove the Duke of Somerset from
the King and Queen, because he ruled them both, and the Commonweal too: and
against England had lost France, Normandy, and Aquitaine,

The King raises an Army.
The King also (fearing the worst) raised another Army; but being certified
from the Duke of York, that he intended nothing against his royal person, nor
against his State, but only craved that in a Parliament the Duke of Somerset
might receive his trial, he committed the said Duke (for a show only) to the
Tower: and thereupon the Duke of York (expecting fitter opportunity)
dissolved his Army, A dissembled pacification.
and privately repaired to the King, where (contrary to his expectation) he
met with the Duke of Somerset, who accused him of treason, The Duke of Somerset
accuses the Duke of York of high Treason. He is imprisoned, and enlarged.
for that (without the Kings leave or commandment) he had raised an Army,
with which he intended to have murdered the King, and to make himself the
inheritor and possessor of his Crown. And though the Kings jealousy (being
grounded upon strong presumptions that it was true) caused the King to detain
and keep the Duke of York as a prisoner, yet within few days after he was
enlarged, because it seemed unlikely to the Kings Counsel, that his aim was
directed to the Crown, seeing that (without compulsion) he had dissolved his
Army upon the Duke of Somersets commitment unto prison, when he was strong
enough to have made his party good against the King by force of Arms in the
open field.

This business was the more easily passed over by the King, Aquitaine (upon
whose fidelities, Guyan and Aquitaine yielded to King Henry, but regained by
the French King.
the French King being departed into France, King Henry much relied) by secret
messengers had made offer to surrender all that Duchy again into his hands, if
he would speedily send unto them a convenient Army to defend and keep it as
his own. And thereupon the Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewesburie, was sent
thither with three thousand selected and valiant men, who received that Duchy
to the Kings use, as it was promised. But as soon as the French King had notice
of this Revolt, he marched thither with an Army of two and twenty thousand
men, fought with the English, John Earl of Shrewesburie slain.
slew the most renowned and brave Earl, and almost all his followers, and in
few days regained all Aquitaine, and almost all Guyen into his own hands.

The Queen was now delivered of a fair son, Prince Edward borne.
who was afterward named Edward, and lived until almost he came to a man's
estate. Creation of Lords.
And near about the same time King Henry created his two brothers by the
mothers side, Edmund Tuthar, who was father to King Henry the Seventh, Earl of
Richmond, and Iaspar Tuthar Earl of Pembroke, but he died without issue.

France, Normandy, and Aquitaine being all lost, York, The Yorkish
Conspiracy.
grievously to complain to diverse Lords of the greatest power, of the manifold
trecheries and treasons of the Duke of Somerset, as formerly he had done. And
at the same time Richard Earl of Salisburie, being the second son of Rafe
Neuil Earl of Westmerland, whose daughter the Duke of York had married, and
Richard his son, who having married Anne the sister and heir of Henry
Beauchampe, first Earl, and afterward Duke of Warwick, and in whose right he
was created Earl, were men of prime honor, and of great power, and for their
valor and their virtues were especially observed and regarded both of the
Nobles and also of the Commons of this Kingdom: but chiefly Richard the son,
Earl of Warwick, whose courtesy, wisdom, and true manhood, had gained him
much love.

These two Earls (among others) faithfully joined themselves and their
fortunes with the Duke of York and his: and chiefly by their means and good
assistance he prevailed, as in the sequel of this History it shall appear.

When the Duke of York had thus strengthened himself with these noble and
powerful friends, Somerset to be arrested of high treason in the Queens great
Chamber, from whence he was drawn and conveyed to the Tower: The Duke of
Somerset is arrested for treason.
and shortly after in the Parliament the Duke of York accused him of all those
treasons which are formerly mentioned.

But because the King indeed fell sick, or fained himself (for the Dukes
good) to be diseased, The Parliament breaks off suddenly.

The Duke of Somerset is enlarged and made Captain of Calice.


the Parliament was suddenly adiourned, and the King by many protestations
faithfully promised, that he should answer those accusations at some other
time. But within few days after he was not only by the Queen set at
liberty, but was graced with the Kings especial and public favor, and was
made chief Captain of the Town and Castle of Calice, whereat the Nobility
and the common people grudged much, and exclaimed upon the unjust proceedings
of the King and Queen.

The Duke of York and his associates supposing that their project would still
be crossed if they remained quiet, and expected fair proceedings against the
Duke of Somerset by the ordinary course of Law; The Duke of York leuieth an
Army.
resolved once again to show themselves with an Army in the field, and by
open war not only to revenge themselves upon their enemies, but also to
settle the Crown upon the Duke of Yorkes head. For which purpose they raised a
puissant Army within the Marches of Wales, and confidently directed their
march toward the City of London.

The King meets him with an Army.

The battle of S. Albons. The King is overthrown.


The King and his Counsel fearing lest the Duke of York and his accomplices
would find too many friends if they came thither, met them with another Army
at S. Albons: and betwixt them a doubtful and a bloody battle was fought,
from which the Duke of Buckingham, and James Butler Earl of Ormond and of
Wilshire, fled: and Edmund Duke of Somerset, Henry the second Earl of
Northumberland, Humfrey Earl of Stafford, son and heir to the Duke of
Buckingham, John Lord Clifford, and more then eight thousand Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen, and common soldiers, were slain on the Kings part, He is taken
prisoner.
and the King himself was taken prisoner and brought to the Duke of York.

The King is used reverently.

A Parliament.

The Duke of York is made Protector.


And albeit he might then have put him to death, and by that means might
quietly have possessed himself of the Crown, yet because his rising in Arms
pretended none other thing but the reforming of some great abuses in the
Commonweal, he reverenced him with all duty, and brought him with great
honor unto London, where he prayed him to assemble his high Court of
Parliament; which he did, and by that great Counsel and honorable estate the
Duke of York was made Protector of the Kings royal person, and of his Realm,
The Earl of Salisburie is made Chancellor.

The Earl of Warwick is made Captain of Calice.

Their good government.


the Earl of Salisburie was made Lord Chancellor of England, and his son the
Earl of Warwick was made Captain of Calice.

And thus all the regiment of the civil estate of this Commonweal was
settled in those former two, and the disposing of warlike affairs and
business was conferred on the third. In the administration of which Offices,
they showed no injustice, used no briberie, oppressed no man, were indifferent
to the poor and rich, and ordered all things in a most commendable and
praisefull fashion, to the good contentment of most of the Nobility, Gentry,
and Commons of this Realm.

But Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, S. Albons had lost his eldest son; and Henry
Beauford the new Duke of Somerset, who then also lost his father; with
reuengefull minds and enraged spirits informed the Queen, that this fair and
glozing show was used but as a subtle mean to set the Crown of England upon
the Duke of Yorkes head: That the Kings life and his sons was secretly
conspired: That her unfortunate miseries approached near unto her: And that all
would be stark naught, except the subtlety and cunning of those three Lords
were wittily prevented, and their haughty and ambitious stomachs were with
force and violence subdued and beaten down.

Hereupon the Queen and they assembled a great Counsel at Greenwich, The Duke
of York and the Earl of Salisburie are removed by the Queen Aspoile on the
Merchant strangers in London.
by the authority whereof the Duke of York and the Earl of Salisburie were
removed from their government. This sudden alteration bred many broiles in the
Commonweal. For the English Merchants in London perceiving that the
Commonweals government was unsettled, quarrelled with the Venetians and
Italians who dwelt among them, and by their trading in merchandising, and by
their parsimonie and sparing waxed rich, and deprived them of their chiefest
means to live. Those strangers they rifled and robbed: for which offense (not
without much trouble and difficulty) the principal offenders were corrected
or put to death.

The Frenchmen also being divided into many warlike Fleetes, The Frenchmen land
and burn.

The Scots invade.

They fly home.


robbed and burnt some Frontier Towns within this Realm. And the Scots (being
conducted by James their King) did much harm to the Duke of Yorkes Countries
in the North. Against whom the Duke himself marched with a brave Army. But
the Scots (fearing the sequel of their unadvised invasion) suddenly fled, and
returned into their own Country.

The Queen dissembleth with the Yorkish Faction.
The Queen (who now ruled the King and almost all other things at her pleasure)
could not be contented until the said three great Lords (either by strength or
policy) were cut off: yet outwardly she seemed in some measure to affect them,
and with her cheerful countenance and smoothing words she made them a little
to be credulous of her love.

A subtle policy, but discovered.
But to effect what earnestly she intended, she caused the King (for recreation,
and for his healths sake) to make his progress toward the North, hunting,
hauking, and using many other pastimes and delightful sports: in the midst
of all which (pretending businesses of great import) she caused letters to be
written to those three Lords, requiring them to come to a speedy conference
with the King: whereupon those Lords (not suspecting any guilefull treachery
to be conspired against them) did as they were commanded, and were with all
cheerful familiarity received by the King and Queen. But being secretly
informed by their friends, that their destruction was near at hand, the Duke
of York fled from thence into Wales, the Earl of Salisburie to his own
Country, and his son (the Earl of Warwick) unto Callice: and yet by their
daily messengers and letters sent mutually the one to the other. New proiects
were devised and put in practice shortly after.

The King labors for unity and peace.

How both the Factions met at London.


endeavored by gentle persuasions to reconcile his discontented Nobles, and to
unite their hearts in true friendship and in love.

For this purpose he appointed a general meeting of all his Lords at London,
whither they resorted, but were attended on by multitudes of their meniall
servants, and by such as for that time were desirous and willing to strengthen
them with their best service.

The Lancastrian Faction lodged themselves in the Suburbs, and consulted daily
what course was best for them to take. The Yorkish Confederates soiourned
within the walls of the City, and met daily, and advised themselves how all
things should be ordered in this business. But neither of the adverse parties
came near unto the other. And the Citizens of London being Neuters, and
fearing the event of blows, furnished every street with armed men both by day
and night, to maintain and to preserve the Kings peace.

Thus whilst every hour bred much suspicion, and when jealousy among the
Noblemen made the hearts of the Commons to be unstable; the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and sundry other Clergymen (by fitting persuasions, and
arguments of great force and consequence) so prevailed, that the King, the
Queen, and all the Lords were pleased, A dissembled friendship.
in friendly and in kind sort to meet and to entertain each other; and all
iarres and discontented humors were outwardly in words, but not inwardly in
heart reconciled: and instruments in writing (for future amity and love) were
mutually subscribed, sealed, and delivered. And for the greater solemnity of
this new friendship, a religious procession was made through the City of
London; in which the Kings head was adorned with the Imperial Crown, and
whereon the Duke of York often times looked with a scornful eye. And one
Lord of either Faction marched together hand in hand. The Duke of York lead
the Queen, and with great familiarity and graceful honor seemed to be
highly respected and esteemed by her. The King likewise reioiced much at this
Union: the Lords made shows of much applauding: and the multitude being
ignorant that secret rancour was dawbed over with counterfeited dissimulation,
skipped, leaped, and gave great shouts for joy.

But within few days after it happened, Warwick, A dangerous affray.
an affray was made near unto the Kings Court, in which the Kings servant was
grievously wounded, and the other fled. Hereupon the Yeomen of the Kings Guard
with Holberds and Swords, and the skullerie with Spits and Forkes, The E^rle of
W^rwi^^e (...) assaulted.
assaulted the Earl and his followers as he came from the Counsel Board to
take his Barge. Betwixt them many a rude blow was given, much blood was shed,
but no man slain. The Queen, who was forward to pick a quarrel to the Earl
upon any small occasion, and knowing that in a whirrie he was passed into
London, gave strait command for his apprehension and commitment to the Tower.
But by reason that his secret friends had forewarned him to look unto
himself, he poasted with all expedition into Yorkshire, He posteth into
Yorkshire.
where he discovered to his father and to the Duke of York, the great injury
and wrong which was done unto him by the Kings servants, and the intention of
the Queen, notwithstanding the late reconcilement and friendship which was
concluded with great protestations and much solemnity betwixt them.

And lest some Carpet favorite might expulse him for his place of trust and
Captainship of Calice, He saileth unto Calice.
he forthwith sailed thither: and as soon as he was gone, his father the Earl
of Salisburie marched toward the Kings Court with an Army of five thousand
men, An Army raised.
to complain unto his Highness, not only of the violence and wrong which his
meniall servants had done unto his son, but also of the sugered and secret
dissimulation of the Queen. But when the Queen had certain notice of his
resolved purpose, she commanded the Lord Awdley to encounter him on his way
with ten thousand men which she had levied: and peremptorily she required him
to bring unto her the said Earl quick or dead. Bloar-heath field.
Her self also with another Army came after him, and in Shropshire in
Bloar-heath the said Earl and the Lord Awdley met each other; where the one
fought for honor, but the Earl for his life, neither of them intending to
yield, or to step back. But at length the Earl and his followers (being in
despair of good success, or pardon if they maintained not the encounter with
bold hearts and strong arms) fought with such resolution and unconquerable
stomachs, The Lord Awdley is overthrown by the Earl of Salisburie.
that the Lord Awdley, with four and twenty hundred of his soldiers and
associates, were slain: the rest fled, and the Earl of Salisburie was Lord
and master of the field.

York perceived plainly, that the lives of him and of his Accomplices were
secretly hunted for: The Duke of York raises an Army, and claims the Crown.
and therefore he now determined no longer to hide and cover his purpose, as
formerly he had done, but by arms in the open field to maintain his claim
and title to the Crown. And therefore himself with the Earl of Salisburie
marched into Wales, and thither the Earl of Warwick repaired to them, and
brought with him for their assistance, Andrew Trollop and John Blunt, two of
the most approved English Captains which then lived, and had been best
exercised in the wars of France. And when they had plentifully increased
their Army, partly in Wales and in the Marches thereof, and partly by such
companies as resorted daily out of the North unto them, The Kings army.
they set onwards, and came unto a little Town called Lud low, where the King
and diverse of his Nobility presented a strong Army to the view of the Yorkish
Faction, so that they lay not far asunder that night. But in the evening the
two brave Captains ( Trollop and Blunt) surueying the Kings forces, Andrew
Trolop and John Blunt fly into the Kings army, and discover all.
espied a certain way and means to endanger the King and all his; so that it
was resolved by the Duke and Earls, that their advice and counsel should
fiercely be executed the next morning before the King should be able to set his
Army in a readiness to fight. But in the first watch those two Captains
(making it a matter burdensome to their consciences, not only to fight against
their Sovereign Lord and King, but also to betray him into the hands of his
own subjects) secretly fled, and came unto the King, to whom they plainly
discovered the project and the intention of his enemies, and advised him of the
best and chiefest means, how not only they might be resisted, but driven to
the worst. And for this service they were gently received, and pardoned, and
rewarded by the King.

The Duke and Earls being certified of their Reuolts, began to be diffident
of their good success: and not daring to set up their rest on the next days
fight, they determined to expect another time, which might afford them more
surety and better hopes. And taking advantage by the darkness of the night,
The Lords fly in the night.
they departed from their Army into several places: for the Duke with his
younger son Edmund Earl of Rutland, retired into Wales, and from thence they
sailed into Ireland. The other two (with Edward Earl of March, eldest son to
the Duke of York) came into Devonshire, and being safely shipped in Ex-mouth
Haven, by the favor and procurement of a worthy Gentleman named John Dynham,
they sailed to Calice, where (notwithstanding their misfortunes) they were
received with much joy.

The King (who reioiced much at their departure) coasted the Countries with
multitudes of Horsemen to overtake them: but all their labors were in vain.
For the present fear which always remained with them, gave them wings to
fly. He also pardoned the ordinary soldiers of the Yorkish Faction, which
were forsaken by their chiefest guides, and as sheep were exposed to a
slaughter. But their Captains who were delivered up into the Kings hands, were
executed in sundry places within this Realm.

He also proclaimed the said Lords to be Arch-traitors to him and to his
Kingdom, confiscated their goods, offices, The Lords are proclaimed Traitors.
and their lands, committed the government of the Northern parts to the Earl
of Northumberland, and to the Lord Clifford, his trusty friends, and made Henry
the young Duke of Somerset Captain and chief Commander of his Town and
Castle of Calice, Henry Duke of Somerset is made Captain of Calice.

He was coursly entertained.


and of the Marches thereof; who sailing thither with a purpose to take
possession of his new charge, and not suspecting that his enemies were there,
was on his first arrival well beaten and battered with the great shot and
ordinance which from the Castle played on him, and by those means he was
compelled to retire and to keep off.

The Queen having intelligence of this rude and unkind entertainment of her
new Captain and great favorite, resolved to send unto him fresh and new
supplies: for which purpose some ships of the Navy Royal were made ready
within the Haven of Sandwich. John Dynham takes some of the Kings ships.
But the before-named John Dynham disposing himself to all services which
might support the Yorkish Faction, and being furthered by the Mariners, who
highly favored and inwardly loved the young and lusty Prince Edward Earl of
March, and being accompanied with many gallant spirits, and brave men, boorded
the said ships as they lay there at anchor, took the Lord Ryuers, who was
appointed Admiral to conduct them, and carried him and those ships to Calice,
from whence the Earl of Warwick sailed in them into Ireland, The Earl of
Warwick saileth into Ireland.
and conferred largely with the Duke of York concerning those affairs. But in
his return the Duke of Exeter being Admiral of the Seas, and having under his
charge a warlike and a strong Fleet, making no doubt to have taken him, was
much deceived: for his own Mariners more adhered to the Yorkish faction then
to the Kings, and showed themselves to be exceeding cold and sparing in the
performance of their duties, He returns to Calice.
when need required their service; so that the Earl of Warwick returned back
again safely unto Calice.

And now the King upon good advice assembled his high Court of Parliament, A
Parliment.

Attainders for Treason. Preparations against the la^^ing of the Lords.


in which he caused all the Lords of the Yorkish Conspiracy to be attainted
of High Treason. And lest this Realm might be disturbed by their invasion or
secret entrance, diverse Captains with their companies were lodged in all
Towns and Ports which near adioined to the Sea, and were the best likely
places for their landing. Sir Simon Mountfort likewise, who was a right worthy
and a valiant Knight, having under his charge diverse of the Kings ships, was
appointed to keep and to defend the Cinque Ports.

But nothing was done in the Kings Chamber, or in any other place of greatest
secrecy or counsel, whereof the said Earls had not certain and quick
intelligence at Calice: wherefore they provided, furnished, and strongly manned
such of the Kings ships as formerly by the said John Dynham had been brought
thither, The Kings Fleet taken in Sandwich.
in which they sailed and safely arrived within the Haven of Sandwich, and
suddenly they took Sir Simon Mountfort prisoner, vanquished the town, and
carried away with them such of the Kings ships as they found there. And having
received good intelligence from their friends, that nothing was more expected
then their return into England, The Lords do land at Sandwich.
they prepared for their journey, and arrived the second time at Sandwich, and
were within few days assisted by the Lord Cobham, and by many Gentlemen and
brave soldiers, insomuch that their Army consisted of more then five and
twenty thousand men, with which they marched toward London. Their Army.
But the Lord Scales was sent against them with a small company to that City,
to defend it, and to secure the King of the fidelity of the Inhabitants
thereof when time should serve. But the Lord Mayor refused to receive them, The
Londoners refuse to receive the Lord Scales.
and told the Lord Scales that he was able enough (without his help or
counsel) to keep that City, which by the King was committed unto his charge;
whereat he was much displeased, and went to the Tower, from which he much
wronged and damnified the inhabitants of London.

The King, to defend himself, The King marches toward the Lords.
and to master his rebellious enemies, being accompanied with the Dukes of
Somerset and of Buckingham, and many other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and a
strong Army, marched toward them. And though the King himself (for
necessities sake) was personally present, yet his mind and cogitations were
more religiously bent to his prayers, and his desires affected nothing more
then quietness and peace.

But the Queen (whose heart was manly, The Queen encourages and threatens.
and whose anger threatened death) with souldier-like terms and speeches
cheared up her followers, debased their enemies, promised rewards if they
deserved well, and the seuerest of all punishments to such as fled.

At length near unto the Town of Northampton the two Armies met: the Earl of
March being very frolic, The Armies do meet. The battle of Northampton.
and in the heat and flower of his youth, by the advice and counsel of the
Earl of Warwick, ordered his Army for the battle. The Queen and her
adherents did the like.

The fight quickly began, and fiercely continued somewhat more then two
hours: but at length the Earls became victors, The King is overthrown. Ten
thousand men slain. Slaughter.
slew more then ten thousand men on the kings part, among which were Humfrey
Duke of Buckingham, John Talbot Earl of Shrewesburie, Thomas Lord Egremont,
John Viscount Beamond, and many others.

The Queen, with the Duke of Somerset and diverse others, Flight.
taking with them the young Prince, fled into the Bishopric of Durham, where
they hoped to raise a new Army, or resolved (in default thereof) to go into
Scotland, and to remain there until fortune and their friends should enable
them to recover what they had lost. The King taken prisoner.

The Tower is delivered to the Lords.




The King (who was left behind) was taken prisoner, and conveyed by the Earls
with great pomp and much honor, unto London, and at their coming thither the
Tower was delivered into their possession by the soldiers, against the liking
and good will of the Lord Scales, who attempted to fly from thence disguised
in a Whirrie. But being discovered by the Watermen, he was by them taken, The
Lord Scales beheaded by the Watermen.

Tho. Thorpe taken and imprisoned. The Duke of York comes into England. A
Parliament.

What the Duke of York did and said in the Parliament house. The Duke of
Yorkes title.


and made shorter by the head, and his body was negligently left upon the
sands. And Thomas Thorpe, the second Baron of the Exchequer, who mortally hated
the house of York, purposing in the habit of a Monk with a shaven Crown, to
fly unto the Queen, was taken, and brought to the Earl of Warwick, who sent
him to the Tower, where he remained long after.

The Duke of York being speedily informed of this victory, left Ireland, and
came to London, and procured a Parliament to be assembled in the Kings name:
and in the presence of all the Lords in the Upper House, he sat himself
down in the Imperial Seat, and in an eloquent and powerful Oration he
discovered to the Nobles his rightful claim and title to the Crown; he being
the son and heir of Anne the daughter and heir of Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, son and heir to Philip the sole daughter and heir of Lionel Duke of
Clarence, the third son of King Edward the Third, and elder brother to John
of Gaunt, who was father to the Usurper King Henry the Fourth, who was father
to King Henry the Fifth, who was father to the King who was untruly named King
Henry the Sixth.

Englands plagues.
He also related unto them, that because God blessed not his unlawful
government, therefore the Commonweal of England had been plagued with many
mischiefs: As first, by the murdering France, Normandy, and elsewhere.
Thirdly, by civil and bloody England, excepting Calice Frenchmen and by the
Scots. And lastly, by all manner of violence, 1460.
extortion, and oppression practiced upon the poorer sort. The title to the
Crown settled by act of Parliament.
nor quiet possession of the Crown, except they found his descent and title to
be infallibly true.

When the Lords and the Commons there assembled had with mature deliberation
and good advice debated soundly of this important business, it was by them all
enacted, that King Henry York should be proclaimed to be the heir of the
Kings person, and also of his dominions and countries; and that the said Duke
should have the present possession of the Crown of this Realm delivered unto
him, if at any time King Henry or his friends, allies, or favorites, in his
behalf attempted the infringing of the said Acts, which were agreed and
confirmed by their oaths.

The Duke of York having by these means gotten the government of the Kings
person, and of all his dominions into his hands, The Lords in Scotland refuse
to come to the Duke of York.
dispatched his letters into Scotland in the Kings name, requiring the Queen,
the Dukes of Somerset and of Exeter, the Earl of Demonshire, the Lords
Clifford and Rosse, and such other great men as were fled, and remained in that
Kingdom, to repair with all expedition to the Kings presence. They come on
with a great Army.
But they all not only refused to obey this peremptory command, but with an
Army of eighteen thousand Englishmen and Scots they marched boldly toward
the Kings Court.

Whereupon the Duke of York, with his younger son the Earl of Rutland, and
the Earl of Salisburie, leaving the King in the custody of the Duke of
Norfolk, and of the Earl of Warwick, and being accompanied with no more then
five thousand men, directed his journey toward the Queen, They are encountered.

The battle of Wakefield. Haste made waste.

The Duke of York overthrown and slain.

A bl^udie fact.


and met her near to the Town of Wakefield, where no persuasions or good
advice could prevail, but the Duke of York, who every hour expected the
approach of Edward Earl of March, his eldest son, with a strong Army, would
forth with fight; which unfortunately he did: for in lesser time then the space
of one hour, himself, with almost three thousand of his company were slain;
and his younger son, Edmund Earl of Rutland, being but twelve years old,
kneeling upon his knees, and desiring mercy, was cruelly and wickedly stabbed
to the heart by the Lord Clifford, who horribly did swear, that by that act he
would be revenged for his fathers death. And the rest of that small Army being
discomforted, confusedly ran away and saved themselves by flight.

The Queen, who had taken the Earl of Salisburie prisoner, caused his head to
be stricken off, and executed many others, The Earl of Salisburie beheaded.
all whose heads (to despite the Yorkish Faction) she caused to be set upon
the walls of the City of York. Which reuengefull deed not long after was
requited by the ruin and destruction of the King, the Queen, the young
Prince, and of the greater number of such as favored and assisted the house of
Lancaster, and opposed themselves against the rightful and just claim of the
Duke of York, as hereafter we shall hear.

The new and brave Duke of York being informed of this overthrow, The new Duke
of Yorkes victory.
and of his fathers death, augmented his Army, which was but small, and
consisted only of three thousand men, with which he fought with the Kings
halfe-brother Iaspar Earl of Pembroke, Owen Tuthar his father, James Butler
Earl of Ormond and of Wiltshire, and their companies. And almost at their
first encounter those two Earls fled, four thousand of their friends were
slain, many others were taken prisoners, Owen Tuthar beheaded.

The Queens Army prevailed.

The King is enlarged.


and among them Owen Tuthar (father in law to King Henry) was one, who with
some others were incontinently put to death. But the Queens Army near about
that time having fought with the Duke of Norfolk and all his forces, compelled
them to fly, and to leave King Henry behind them, whereat she conceived much
joy.

This victory at the first made her insolent and proud: but when she
understood how well the young Duke of York had prevailed, and that his Army
was now winged with the Earl of Warwickes Regiments and Companies, she with
her adherents retired back into the Northern parts of this Realm, and raised
a huge Army of threescore thousand men: The Queens Army of 60000. men.

The Duke of Yorkes Army of 49000. men.

Towton field. 36000. Englishmen slain.

The Dukes victory.


and near unto a Town called Towton, Edward Duke of York, the noble and
victorious Richard Earl of Warwick, and almost nine and forty thousand men,
met with the Queens Army, where they fought a cruel and a fierce battle,
in which more then six and thirty thousand Englishmen were slain; among which
were the Earls of Northumberland and of Westmerland, the Lords Dacres, Wells,
and Clifford, Sir John Neuil, Andrew Trollop, and many others. The two Dukes of
Somerset and of Exeter saved themselves by flight: but the Earl of Devonshire
with sundry more were taken prisoners.

The King and the Queen, with Prince Edward their only son, fled to the
Castle of Barwicke, and from thence into Scotland, where they were courteously
received and friendly entertained by the young King.

In recompense of which favors, and in hope of future assistance, Barwicke
delivered to the King of Scots.
King Henry delivered unto him the Castle and Town of Barwicke, which the
Scots not only much desired, but with exceeding great loss and detriment had
oftentimes (but still in vain) attempted to make their own.

This victory being thus happily obtained, the Duke of York rod triumphantly
to the City of York, from whose walls he took the heads of his deceased
father, and of his friends: and causing the Earl of Devonshire and some others
to be executed, Execution.
he set up their heads in the same places.

King Henry being hopeless of all other help and assistance, The Duke of
York comes triumphantly into London.
sent the Queen his wife, and the young Prince their son, to her father
Reyner, the Titularie King of Sicilia, Naples, and of Jerusalem, praying to use
his best endeavors and diligence to procure him aid and succor from the
French King. And in the mean time he himself remained in Scotland, patiently
expecting the event of his future Fortunes.

THE HISTORY OF KING EDWARD THE FOVRTH.
EDWARD Duke of York having overthrown the King and Queen, Towton Field,
Edward the Fourth proclaimed and crowned King.
returned triumphantly to the City of London, and was proclaimed King of this
Realm the fourth day of March, and was crowned the nineteenth day of June then
next following.

In the beginning of his Reign he removed from all Offices all such as were
voiced to be the oppressors of his people, and carefully provided that all
things might be ordered well for their commodity and profit. And in his high
Court of Parliament many things were established and enacted for the peace and
welfare of the Commonweal. A Parliament.
And all former Statutes which had been made by the last King, Acts for
treasons repealed.
and convicted him and his adherents of High Treason, were defaced, cancelled,
and made void. The Earl of Oxford, and Sir Awbrey Vere his son, and some other
Counselors to King Henry the Sixth, Execution.
being attainted of sundry treasonable practices, lost their heads.

And to strengthen his part with powerful and with faithful friends, he
created his two brothers, George, Duke of Clarence, Lords created.
and Richard, Duke of Gloucester: and Sir John Neuil, brother to the Earl of
Warwick, he created Lord Montacute: and Henry Bourchier (who had married the
Lady Elizabeth, Aunt unto the King, and was brother unto Thomas Bourchier
Archbishop of Canterbury) was created Earl of Essex: and William Lord
Fawconbridge was made Earl of Kent.

Somerset, Sir Ralphe Percie, and diverse others, being the Kings inueterated
enemies, perceiving this settlement of the State, Some of the Kings enemies
submit themselves, but afterward do revolt.
and finding no hope for relief, but only in the Kings grace and mercy,
voluntarily and humbly submitted themselves to his Highness; whereupon they
received his pardon, and were entertained with his love. Queen Margaret (who
with the Prince her son was abiding in France) by her fathers means procured
from the French King certain ships, and an aid of five hundred men, The
Queen landeth, and flies into Scotland.
with which she arrived safely in England at Tyne in the North Country. But her
success was unfortunate: for by the Kings friends four hundred of them were
taken prisoners, and ransomed, and the rest were slain: and the Queen her
self fled, and with much difficulty went into Scotland, where she found such
favor and such friendship, that many a lusty Scot accompanied her, the King,
and the Prince their son, to the Castle of Barwicke, where she left her
son, The Queen raises a new Army.
and with the King began once more to levy a strong Army in Northumberland,
and in the Bishopric of Durham; whereof when the Kings reconciled enemies,
the Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralphe Percie, and some others had intelligence, they
treacherously slunke away, and came unto the Queens aid.

Now when King Edward perceived, that neither his estate nor his succession
could be established without blood, The Kings resolution.
he sent a gallant and a strong Fleet of ships well furnished into the Northern
Seas: and raising a puissant Army, he sent the Lord Montacute with some part
thereof before him, and with the rest he himself speedily followed after. The
Lord. Montacutes brave victory
The said Lord boldly seeking adventures, and longing much to make himself
famous by his valor, courageously did set upon the Lords Hungerford and Roos,
and upon Sir Ralphe Percie and their troops. These Nobles (in the beginning of
the fight) fearing their own shadows, quickly ran away: but Sir Ralphe Percie
and some others (preferring an honorable death before a cowardly and a
shameful flight) disdained to turn their backs, The Lord Montacute sette^^
on the Queens Army.
fought stoutly, and were slain like valiant men of war.

From this victory the Lord Montacute (with much confidence and true
magnanimity) marched toward the King and Queens Army, Exhamf^^ld.
and met with them in Exhamshire. Many prouocations he used to dare them to the
fight, whereof they seemed to take no notice: whereupon he furiously pressed
them in their own Camp, so that despair depriving them of all good hope,
except they fought like men, they confronted their assailants with such
courage, that nothing (for a while) was more uncertain, then unto whom the
honor and victory of that day would fall. But in the end the Lord Montacute
determining to enlarge his fame with the hazard of his life, before King Edward
should enter into the field to succor him, rushed with such violence into the
Kings battle, that he disordered it wholly in a moment.

Then blows were exchanged (with desperate resolution) on both sides; and
either party fought in blood. The King and Queen are overthrown. Great
Prisoners taken.
But in the end the Kings Army was discomforted and overthrown, and such as
were unslain, fled. But in the pursuit there were taken these prisoners, Henry
Duke of Somerset, William Taylboys (who enstiled himself Earl of Kent) the
Lords Roos, Molynes, and Hungerford, Sir Henry Neuil, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and
Sir Richard Tunstal: all which were beheaded in sundry places, A terrible
execution.
and seven and twenty others suffered the like executions shortly after. But
King Henry with fast riding escaped into Scotland: so did his halfe-brother
Iaspar Earl of Pembroke, Sir Ralphe Gray, and some others. And King Edward
when he came forth with his Army, and understood perfectly what was done,
humbly thanked Almighty God, and then praised the Lord Montacute and all his
followers for this honorable and great victory: and with part of his Army he
sent the Earl of Warwick and the Lords Montacute, Fawconbridge, An Army sent
into the North.
and Scrope into Northumberland, for the recovery of such Forts and Castles as
were detained and kept from him: where they won the Castles of Alnewike and
Dunstanburgh, with the Castle of Bambrough, in which was Captain Sir Ralphe
Gray, who had formerly sworn his service to King Edward. Him they beheaded,
Sir Ralphe Gray degraded and executed.
when they had degraded him from the honor of Knighthood, by hewing off his
spurs, renting in pieces of his Coat of Arms, and breaking his sword over his
head. The King, to despite the Earl of Northumberland, who fought against
him, dignified the Lord Montacute with his Title, and gave the Earldom of
Pembroke from Iaspar Tuther unto William Lord Harbert. But within few days
after, the said late Earl of Northumberland in all submissiue manner
reconciled himself to the Kings favor, and was by him restored to his
possessions and estate. And lest he should disgrace and wrong the Lord
Montacute, by taking from him so quickly that dignity which so lately for his
great service he had bestowed on him, he created him Marquess Montacute, The
Lord Montacute is created Marquess Montacute.
and gave him full contentment in that behalf.

After this victory was thus obtained, the King bestowed many rich and
princely gifts upon his Lords and Gentlemen, which served him faithfully and
valiantly in his wars: Captains and soldiers rewarded.

The Kings care of his Commonweal.

He pardons offenders.

He fortifieth.


He also shared and divided the lands and goods of his slain enemies among
his soldiers, and won their hearts by his great bounty. He augmented some
of his coins of silver, and of gold; and with new stampes and inscriptions he
minted others. He published sundry proiects, and effected them for the
commodity and welfare of his people. He pardoned such as had borne arms
against him in the field, or elsewhere, upon their humble submission and
contrition for their offense. He builded strong Forts, Castles, Rampires, and
Bulwarks, upon the Seacoasts, to prohibit his enemies landing within this
Kingdom. And on the maine land he did the like, to hinder all traitorous
Rebels from collecting of new forces to do him harm.

And whilst King Edward was thus disposing of his affairs, and ordering the
businesses of the Commonweal, King Henry is taken and imprisoned.
King Henry, who in a disguised fashion (for some secret purpose) was
traveling toward London, was taken in the North, and brought unto King
Edward, who committed him to a strait imprisonment within the Tower of London.
And when he had settled and ordered his estate and kingdom, The King intends
to m^rte.
because he was young and lusty, about the age of four and twenty years,
he was entreated by his Counsel and Nobility, to consider of his succession,
and to take a wife, whereunto he willingly gave consent. There were nominated
unto him the Lady Margaret, sister to the King of Scots, and Elizabeth the
sister and heir apparent to Henry King of Castile. But the former of those two
was thought to be unfit, because she was continually diseased and infirm. The
latter also was not liked, because she was not seven years old. But the Lady
Bona, daughter to Lewys. Duke of Sauoy, and sister to Queen Carlot, the wife
of King Lewys the eleventh of France, was most of all desired. And for that
purpose the Kings best friend, The Earl of Warwick obtains the Duke of
Sauoyes daughter.
Richard Neuil Earl of Warwick, was sent Ambassador into France, with an
honorable train, where (in the behalf of the King) he won his suit, and
with much joy on all parts obtained his request. But in his absence, the King
(as he hunted in Wich-wood near to Stony-Stratford) came (for his repose)
into the Lordship and Manor of Grafton, where the Lady Iaquet (daughter to
Peter of Luxenburgh, late Earl of S. Paul, and sometimes the widow of John the
renowned Duke of Bedford, and wife to Sir Richard Wooduile Lord Ryuers) then
lay: upon whom there attended her daughter, the fair and fresh Lady
Elizabeth, the widow of Sir John Gray, who was slain as he fought for King
Henry at S. Albons in the last year of his reign. The King in his absence
marieth the Lady Elizabeth Gray.
This Lady was on the sudden so liked, so loved, so fawned and doated on by the
lusty and young King, that (for dalliance sake) he resolved to make her his
wanton play-fellow if he might. But her constant modesty and amorous denials
repulsing him from his unchaste hopes, he (to obtain the fruits of his
desires) without any further delay, advice, or counsel, took her to his wife;
and created the Lord Ryuers, Creation of Lords.
her father, Earl Ryuers, and made him high Constable of England. Her brother
Anthony (whom he had made Lord Anthony) was by his procurement married to the
sole and only daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Scales, and was in her right
dignified with that honor. Her son, Sir Thomas Gray, was created Marquess
Dorset, and was (by the Kings motion) married to the Lady Cicilia, the only
daughter and heir to the Lord Bonuyle and of Harrington.

And though this his marriage with the Queen were pleasing for a time, yet was
it most unhappy and unfortunate in the end. Evil effects of the Kings marriage.
For it occasioned his expulsion out of this Realm. Secondly, the deaths of
his true friend Richard the most eminent and valorous Warwick, and of the
Marquess Montacute, his brother.

When the sudden news of King Edwards hasty marriage was published in France,
1464. 4
every person whom it concerned was highly displeased at this frumpe which
thereby he gave to his worthiest and dearest friend the Earl of Warwick: The
Earl of Warwick hates the King.
and the Earl himself (by reason thereof) conceived such an inward hatred
against the King, that in his heart he resolved (when time should serve) to
depose him if he might: yet notwithstanding he made fair weather, He
dissembleth for a time.
and at his return seemed rather to make sport at his own disgrace, then to
take any discontented notice of it.

The King also (who chiefly by this Earl was seated and settled in his Throne)
endeavored secretly to abridge him of his authority and power, because he
feared lest his greatness might do him harm. And the Earl, although he
stayed a while at the Court after his return out of France, yet as long as he
remained there, he imagined that he stood on thorns. Wherefore he asked leave
of the King to depart unto his Castle of Warwick for his repose, and for
recreations sake: But being come thither, his head was busied with new
proiects, and all his thoughts were employed, how, and by what means he might
subdue and depose the King. The Lady Elizabeth borne.
And at this time was borne the Lady Elizabeth: who was afterward the wife of
King Henry the seventh, and mother unto king Henry the eight.

Lewis the French King, A truce with the Scots.
who threatened to be revenged for the injury which by King Edwards marriage
was done to him, and to the sister of his Queen) concluded a Truce for
fifteen years with the King of Scots: Notwithstanding that (by the delivery
of the Queen Margaret) he detained from him his strong Castle of Barwicke. He
also sent unto Henry King of Castiell, and unto John King of Arragon many
Cotshall Sheep, English sheep sent to the Kings of Castiell, and of Arragon.
which never before upon any entreatie, or request, they, nor any other Prince
could obtain. From which Sheep, such a multitude have increased, that it has
since turned to the unspeakable prejudice, and hurt of this kingdom and
Commonweal.

Warwick) contracted and afterward married his Sister the Lady Margaret unto
Charles the Duke of Burgoine, The Duke of Burgoine marries the Kings Sister.
as formerly he had done two other of his Sisters, to the Dukes of Exeter and
of Suffolk. The Earl of Warwick (who secretly thirsted for revenge; and
thought the time to be long before he had restored king Henry the sixth to his
liberty, York, The Marquis of Montacute, was still a secret friend to king
Edward.
and the Marquis Montacute, to take his part. But the Marquis (who was
exceeding hardly induced to give his consent to so ill an intended action)
performed all things with an unwilling mind: which in the end turned to his
own ruin, and to the destruction of his brethren. The Earl likewise (being
right well assured, that the Kings brother George Duke of Clarence secretly
envied the King, because he had preferred Anthony the Queens brother in
marriage with the sole daughter and heir of the Lord Scales; The Duke of
Clarence joins with the Earl of Warwick against his brother the King.
and Sir Thomas Gray her Son, in marriage with the sole daughter and heir of
the Lord Bonuile and Harrington; and the Lord Hastings, to the sole daughter
and heir of the Lord Hongerford; and was careless of his advancement by such
a match) watched a fit opportunity to complain to the Duke of Clarence of the
Kings sullen ungratefulness toward him. Why, quoth the Duke, can you (my
Lord) think that the King will be thankful to his friend, who is too too
unkind to his own brethren? Think you that friendship or good deserts, can
work in him more virtuous effects, then nature has afforded him? Is he not
now so highly mounted, that he vouchsafes not to cast down an eye upon such
as are of his own blood? Nay, who lay in his own Mothers womb? Are not the
allies and kinsfolks of his Wife preferred by him to all Promotions,
Dignities, Offices and good places? And are not his own brothers, and his
truest friends (who have fought in many assaults, skirmishes and battles, to
make him a Sovereign King) neglected? unrewarded? and discourteously shaken
off? Were my brother of Gloucester of mine humor and disposition (my Lord) we
would (with your assistance and aid) make him to know himself better, and to
set a difference betwixt his ancient and truly dignified Nobility, and such
new Gentlemen, as unworthily do rule and govern all, to our dishonor and
reproach.

The Earl of Warwick (finding the Duke of Clarence thus tractable; The plot
is strengthened by a marriage.
and inclining to his humor) consulted with him oftentimes, touching this
business. And to tie him unto himself by a fast bond of friendship and of
love, He offered to him in marriage one of his daughters, who was named Isabel,
with half the inheritance of his wife. Whereof the Duke in all kindly and
friendly sort accepted.

And thereupon the plot was contrived thus. The plot against King Edward.
The Earl himself, with the Duke of Clarence would go unto Calice, where the
young Lady (who was there) should be married. And (in their absence) as if it
happened without their knowledge or consent; the Earls two brothers, the
Archbishop of York, and the Marquis Montacute, were appointed with their
friends, to raise a Rebellion in the County of York. And this project was put
into Execution in this manner.

The Husbandmen of Yorke-shire (by an ancient custom) in the end of Harvest,
The cause of the Rebellion
used yearly to give a certain quantie of Corn and Grain, toward the
maintenance and relief of diverse poor people, who lived in the Hospital of
Saint Leonard within the City of York. Now, the Earls friends, scandalously,
and falsely reported in the Country thereabout: That the said poor people
were not relieved by the said Alms, but that the Governor and Priests of the
said Hospital, enriched and fatted themselves therewith. So (when the
Proctors, according to their wonted fashion, came abroad, to collect the
peoples devotion in that kind, they were shrewdly beaten by the Rustickes; and
misused beyond measure. Hereupon, many Religious and well disposed people took
part with the Proctors; and with rough words and some blows, they requited the
injury which was done unto them. From this beginning, sprang forth a dangerous
Insurrection: So that (within few days) there were up in Arms, more then
fifteen thousand men. This was done by him, in favor of the King: as it
seems afterward.
Who (with their ringleaders) came proudly before the City of York, and
(with uncivil and rude terms) they threatened the ruin and destruction of
it. But (in the darkness of the night) the Marquis Montacute, being
accompanied with many lusty and brave men, set upon the Rebels, slew many
hundreds of them: and struck off the Captains head; and strongly fortified
that City.

When the King (who was truly informed of this Rebellion) was told this news,
he rested doubtful whether his old friend the Marquis had done this service,
to make an amends for his revolt, Sir John Conyers captain of the Rebels.
or else to color his ill intendements thereby. The Rebels (who still
increased) perceiving that they should loose their labor to linger about the
Town, left the City, and marched toward London, being then conducted by Sir
John Conyors, a worthy and a valiant Knight.

The King (being hereof advertised) commanded the Lord William Herbert Earl of
Pembroke, and Humphrie Lord Stafford of Southweeke (who was nominated in hope
of future good service, but not indeed created, Earl of Devonshire) to leauie
a strong power in Wales, and with all expedition to fight with the Rebels: And
he himself promised to assist them with a fair Army.

The Lord Stafford overthrown.
These Lords, with eight or nine thousand men, right well ordered and appointed,
marched toward these Rebels: And (as they drew near to Northampton) they
understood that they were not far off. Whereupon the Lord Stafford, and Sir
Richard Herbert (a valiant Knight, and brother to the Earl of Pembroke) taking
with them out of the whole Army, two thousand strong and skilful Archers,
plotted a secret Ambush, to take a view of the Northren Rebels as they passed
by, but as soon as they were gone beyond them, these Archers rushed violently
upon their Rereward. But the Rebels (who were nimble, and well ordered by their
careful General) turned about, stuck to their tacklings, and with their
greater numbers, slew most of those Welchmen, and the rest fled hastily to
their own Camp.

An unfortunate dissentio^
And the next night by reason of an unkind division which happened betwixt the
Lord Stafford and the Earl of Pembroke, who at Banburie removed him from a
common Inn, where he used to lodge with an unchaste Queen, the Lord Stafford
with his Archers departed from the Army, and left them to their fortunes among
their foes.

This froward slinking away nothing at all dismayed the noble Earl, though (as
he had just cause) he were much displeased thereat: Banburie field.
but made him to resolve with the more alacrity and courage to set upon the
Rebels, with whom he fought the next day, and with his Welshmen saw many
tokens of victory near at hand.

But suddenly a Gentleman named John Clapham, and servant to the Earl of
Warwick, having his masters Banner with the white Bear, trouped toward the
battle with five hundred men, who were by him collected of the off-skumme of
the rascal and basest sort of the inhabitants of the Town of Northampton, and
of the villages thereabout. All these presenting themselves afar off, and
advancing their Standard, and crying, A Warwick, A Warwick, A policy.
so incredibly daunted and confounded the Welshmen, who supposed that the Earl
of Warwick was come thither with another Army, The Kings forces are
overthrown. 5000. men slain.
that they began to fly, and were on the sudden overthrown, and more then
five thousand of them were slain. And Sir Richard Harbert and eight others
being taken prisoners, were beheaded at Banburie by the Rebels.

This fortunate success animated sundry leaud and ill disposed people of
Northamptonshire to enter into new broiles, insomuch that they (making a
notorious Rascal, named Robin of Riddisdale, The Queens father is beheaded by
the Rebels
their Captain) entered into the Manor of Grafton, where they apprehended the
Earl Ryuers, whom they loved not, and Sir John his son, carried them to
Northampton, and without questioning with them, or any legal proceeding, smote
off their heads. The Lord Stafford beheaded. The King marches toward the
Rebels.

The Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick do some with the Rebels.


And the Lord Stafford, being by the Kings directions taken at Brentmarsh in
Somersetshire, was carried to Bridgewater, and was there executed, because he
trecherously departed with his companies from the Earl of Pembroke, as
formerly we have heard.

The King (notwithstanding these troubles) was so full of courage and heroical
magnanimity, that he was not any thing at all dismayed with any cross or ill
news, but marched confidently with his Army against the Northern Rebels, to
whom the Earl of Warwick had joined himself with a great power; and likewise
the Duke of Clarence brought all his forces to the Earl: so that now a
fearful expectation of unchristian cruelty disquieted the vast and great body
of the Commonweal. But to prevent that mischief, many of the Nobility
endeavored day, and night, to mediate, A parley for peace.
and to conclude a Peace: so that Letters were written from the one part, to
the other: Heralds of Arms were sent, and the word of Peace was so pleasing to
them all, that every circumstance seemed to give warrant that all things
should be qualified, and set in tune.

This parley made the King too secure.

The King is taken in his Bed.


By means of this parlie, King Edward became more careless of himself, and of
his charge then was fitting. Whereof, when the Earl of Warwick was informed;
he resolved (though disloyally, and dishonestly) to make an advantage thereby
unto himself: so that in the midst of the Night, when security suspected none
evil, the said Earl, being accompanied with many of his friends, well armed,
and thoroughly appointed, rushed into the Kings Camp, slew his Watches, He is
sent Prisoner to the Archbishop of York.
and took him in his Bed, and (as secretly as he could) he sent him as a
Prisoner to the Castle of Middleham in Yorkshire, there to be safely kept by
the Archbishop his brother; who either repenting what he had done against the
King, or being won by large promises of great favor, and good rewards,
suffered him (with his Garders) to hunt and to hawke at his pleasure. The King
escapes.
By means whereof, fit opportunity for a rescue was given to Sir William
Stanley, Sir Thomas Burgh, and some others of his faithful friends, who not
only did set him free, but also by their careful help, The King comes to
London.
and assistance, conueighed him from place to place, until the Earl of
Warwick was certainly informed, that he was within the City of London.

This his deliverance much encumbred the said Earl, the Duke of Clarence and
their Confederates, with new troubles, and daily consultations, what course was
fittest for them to take. For they had dissolved their Army, and permitted the
kings to depart from them untouched, when he was taken, supposing that by his
Captivity there had been a final end of all those Civil wars.

But at length, they resolved to raise another Army under color of some
Rebellion in the North, and the King (on his part) was determined by one means
or other, to make them better minded, and more dutiful: or else to root them
and their Posterity out of the Land.

Thus, whilst all things were in a Combustion, and nothing but Civil war was
threatened in every place: The Common Laws were neglected, Justice was laid a
sleep, Robberies and oppressions were too too rife: and open violence (without
correction) was practiced upon the weaker sort. The Lords and Great men of the
Land, once more endeavored to prevent this future mischief: and and upon
solemn oaths received for a quiet and friendly enteruiew, An enteruiew.
the King and the confederated Lords met kindly in the great Hall at
Westminster, where the objections of good deserts and of unthankful requitals,
were with such proud and bitter words repeated, and maintained by the Earl of
Warwick, that in a great fury they all departed one from another. The parley
broken off. An Army raised by the Lords.
Whereupon the King went to Canterbury, and the confederated Lords into
Lincolnshire, where they raised an Army, of which they made Captain Sir
Robert Wells, son and heir apparent to the Lord Wells, because he was a
man right valiant, and of good direction and judgment in the Art of war. An
Army raised by the King.
The King (who was inwardly vexed with this new preparation) was by necessity
enforced to levy another Army; which when he had done, he sent for the Lord
Wells, who with his brother in law Sir Thomas Dymocke, coming toward the
King, took Sanctuary at Westminster, because their hearts failed them to go
forward, A cru^^l aced
for that they heard that the King was exceeding angry. But upon the Kings
solemn word and promise that no wrong should be done unto them, they came into
his presence, and were by him required to command the Knight to desist from his
rebellious purpose, and to repair to the Kings Army for his service: and they
accordingly took much pain and travel to that purpose. But as the King
marched forth toward the Rebels, he was informed, that the said Sir Robert
Wells was resolved to persevere in that action: whereat the King was so
exceedingly enraged, and so forgetful of his princely promise, that in his
unadvised fury he caused the heads of the said Lord and Knight to be smitten
off; for which cruelty he was euilly spoken of by many Nobles and inferior
men, who otherwise wished him good success in all his affairs and actions.

When both these Armies had pitched themselves near to each other, The
battle of (...)
Sir Robert Wills for a while doubted whether he should begin the fight, or
stay till the repair of the confederated Lords, who were within a days
journey of him with an Army. But in the end, deep hatred to revenge his
Fathers and his Uncles deaths, and an ardent desire which inflamed his heart,
with a small number to win much honor, bred in him a constant resolution to
begin the fight; which forthwith he did, and for a long time maintained it
with great discretion and true valor. But the Kings numbers being far the
greater, so tired out the Rebels by their fresh supplies, that they began to
fly, and the King by violent pursuit followed after, until he clearly won the
honor of that day. The Rebels oue^throwen.
This meeting was called the battle of Loose-coats, because the Rebels threw
off their coats, that they might thereby make themselves more active and more
nimble to run away. In this battle were slain above 10000. men. 10000. men
slain. Execution.
And Sir Robert Wells, with some others of good account, being taken
prisoners, lost their heads.

The Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick being informed of this mishap,
Clarence and Warwick d^e fly from their Army, and come before Calice.
mutable, and unconstant, they left their charge, and secretly fled to the
City of Exeter, and from thence to Dartmouth, where they shipped themselves,
and came before Calice with their friends. The King was much grieved, because
they had not been slain, or taken; but especially the safety of the Earl of
Warwick perplexed his mind, because he knew him to be exceeding gracious and
in much favor with the common people, Warwick is exceedingly believed by the
common people.
who indeed were persuaded, that the Sun shined not clear any where, but
where he was; and that they could not miscarrie in any danger if he himself
were present.

Now to prevent his future landing in England with a foreign power, the King
by his letters entreated his brother in law Charles Duke of Burgoine, to
prohibit his subjects and his friends from giving to the said Earl any aid,
Warwick is envied by the Duke of Burgoine.
help or succor, and with a Navy to surprise him. The Duke willingly
consented to the Kings request: First, because the said Earl opposed himself
against his Margaret the Kings sister. Secondly, because Lewys the French King,
whom the Duke English Nation, that when he was at home, he clipped the wings of
the Kings authority in his own Kingdom.

When the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick came before Calice,
Clarence and Warwick ^eatea^^^^ at Calice.

The Duchess delivered (...) a (...) the (...).

M^nsieur de Vawcler made C^ptaine of Calice.

A pe^^i^n is given him.


having their wives and many other Ladies and Gentlewomen with them, in stead
of friendly entertainment, the Earls unkind Deputy, Monsieur de Vawcler,
kept their ships off with the great Ordinance of the Castle. And though the
Duchess was in ship board delivered of a son, yet would he not permit that
it should be landed or Christened there; neither would he afford any thing
needful and necessary in that extremity to the said distressed Lady. The
King took so much joy to hear of this good news, that forthwith by his
Letters Patents, he granted the chief Captainship of that place to the said
Deputy. And the Duke of Burgoine so thanked him that he gave him an yearly
pension of one thousand Crowns. Yet for all this, Monsieur de Vawcler was so
uncertain in all his dealings toward the King, that he advised the said
Earl to direct his course to the King of France, and promised to yeeeld unto
him a good account for Calice, when time and opportunity should it require.
This counsel gave some hope and contentment to the Earl, who intending to do
as he directed, lanched his ships into the sea, The Earl of Warwick takes
the Duke of Burgoines subjects at Sea.

The French King is gracious to the Lords.


where he met with diverse of the Duke of Burgoines subjects, fully laden with
great variety of rich merchandises of all sorts, all which he rifled and took
away, and landed at the Town of Deep: and from thence (by the French Kings
inuitation) they came to the Castle of Amboys, which stands upon the river of
Loyer, where he met them, received them cheerfully, feasted them with great
bounty, supplied their present wants, and faithfully promised to aid and to
assist them (when time should serve) with his best means: all which he did,
not in regard of any grounded love toward them, but because he knew that they
were enemies to his enemies, King Edward and the Duke of Burgoine. Queen
Margaret and Prince Edward her son, together with Iaspar sometimes Earl of
Pembroke, and some others, who with him had broken prison in England, and were
fled into France, understanding that the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of
Warwick, and others of their friends, were friendly entertained in the French
Court, repaired to them, New plotting against K. Edward.
where they entered into new conferences and communications for the restoring of
K. Henry to his Crown and Kingdom, and solemnly took their oaths, never
voluntarily to leave each other, until they had done their best to effect the
same. And the Earl of Warwick (to make his own part the stronger) gave his
second daughter in marriage to Prince Edward, Prince Edward married to Warwick^s
second daughter.

This m^riage m^keth Clarence a secret enemy to Warwick.


whereof when the Duke of Clarence had deliberately considered, and thought
what might be the sequel of this business, he evidently foresaw, that this
marriage and their newly intended wars would be the utter confusion of him and
of the whole family and house of York. For Kings do always look with a
jealous eye upon all such as by any possibility may lay any level toward
their Crown. This consideration (not without good cause) made him very
distrustful of his own fortunes. And to prevent a great mischief, which (as
he thought) began to threaten him and his estate, his love and his heart began
secretly to forsake the Earl of Warwick and that Faction, insomuch that he
gave private intelligence to his brother King Edward, Clarence his m^ssage to
the King.
that at their landing within the Kingdom of England he would be but a faint
and a weak enemy in those affairs. Thus when those Lords had concluded to
return, The L^rds pr^^^^ f^rth for England.
they were with all expedition well furnished with men, munition, money, ships,
and all things fitting, by the French King.

But being in a readiness to pass out of the River of Seyne, the Burgundians
met them with a strong Fleet at the mouth of that River, and purposed to defeat
them if they might. But an evening storm approaching with unwonted rage and
fury, The Burgundians drowned.
compelled the Burgundians to run into the Sea, where many of them were
drowned, some were driven into Scotland, and the rest, being all dispersed,
labored and toiled hardly to save themselves.

The Earl of Warwick, who by letters some few days before received from his
friends, was certified that his landing was hourly expected, and sufficient
strength provided to back him and his, although they came destitute of all
other helps and succors, determined to loose no time: but making a present
benefit to himself and his of the Burgundians mishap and hard fortune. and
leaving the Queen and the Prince her son behind him, the next morning
entered into the Sea, and with much speed and safety he landed with all his
companies and friends at Dartmouth in Devonshire; The Lords do land at
Dartmouth. The King was too secure.
from whence he gave speedy notice of his arrival to his dearest and nearest
friends.

The King so much relied upon the bold service intended by the Burgundians
Fleet, and not knowing what shipwreck and damage it had received, made no
preparation at all, either to withstand their arrival, or to encounter them
after they were landed: but hauked, hunted, and solaced himself (according to
his humor and wonted fashion) in the society and company of young Ladies and
fair maidens, to whom his affections were more obliged then to the wars.

Warwickes Proclamation.
But the Earl of Warwick marshalled his small company in good order, and by
public Proclamations which he made in King Henry's name, he required all men
to repair unto his aid, with money, victual, armor, and all things needful
for that purpose, and valiantly to fight against the Duke of York, who (as he
affirmed) by mere usurpation and bloody tyranny, untruly and falsely called
himself King. He has a ^uge Army.
This politic practice within few days increased his small companies to a
huge Army, with which they marched toward London.

And such were the quick endeavors, and so industrious was King Edward, (who
was compelled by necessity to make provision for his own safety) that he
levied a strong Army, and went forth with an high courage, and with princely
valor, against the Rebels of his Country. But being informed, that all the
Countries, Cities, Towns, and places through which his enemies passed, were
aiders to their fortunes, and hearing them oftentimes with loud voices to cry,
King Henry, King Henry, A Warwick, A Warwick, and distrusting utterly the
inconstant minds and dispositions of his own soldiers, his heart failed him,
The King flies in the night.
so that in secret manner, and in the night, with eight hundred of his best
friends, he left his Army, and posted into Lincolnshire: and when all his
hopes of help and succor there, were spent in vain, they being altogether
destitute of money, and other provisions needful for a journey into a foreign
Country, took shipping, and sailed into Holland, purposing to remain with
the Duke of Burgoine, until they might have good means for their return, and
to be revenged on the Earl of Warwick, and of all other their mortal enemies.

As soon as it was certainly known that King Edward was fled, a rude
multitude of factious Kentishmen (delighting tumultuously and in a braine-sicke
manner to fish in troubled waters) came to the Gates of the City of London,
and would have entered it: A rebellion in Kent.
but being resisted in their purpose, they rifled and robbed the Suburbs,
burnt diverse houses, murdered many people, and at Radcliffe and Lime-house they
did the like. Warwick subdueth them.
But by the Earl of Warwickes power and endeavors, they were quickly
overthrown, and punished sharply for their offense, which won him much
favor and love among the better sort of the common people.

The Earl afterward came to the Tower, King Henry is enlarged.
where he not only enlarged the deposed King Henry, but in most triumphant
fashion conducted him through the City of London to Paul's Church. And when he
had concluded his devotions, and performed his offerings, as the Kings of this
Realm have been accustomed to do, he was brought to the Bishops Palace,
where he kept his Court with great magnificence and much bounty.

He also assembled his high Court of Parliament at Westminster, A Parliament.

A^taindors.


in which the late King Edward the Fourth and all his principal adherents were
attainted of High Treason, and all their goods and possessions were confiscate
and given to the King.

The Duke of Clarence was by the same authority published to be the next heir
of the deceased Richard, late Duke of York, The Duke of Clarence advanced.
his father. And albeit that he was but his second son, yet all that Duchy
was settled in him and in his heirs. The Crown entailed.
The Crown also was entailed to King Henry, and to the heirs males of his
body: and for default of such issue, to the said Duke of Clarence, and to his
heirs. Iaspar Earl of Pembroke was also restored to his honor and his lands,
and so was John Earl of Oxford, and many others. And the Earl of Warwick,
and the Duke of Clarence, who were enstiled friends to the King, and friends to
the Commonweal) were established and made chief rulers in all things under
the King.

The Queen dares not to put into the Sea.
When these affairs were thus ordered, Queen Margaret with the Prince her
son, and their whole train, shipped themselves. But so violent were the
raging storms, and so furious was the troubled sea, that albeit many profers
were made, yet durst they not to adventure for that time. Whereupon the common
people of this Realm (of whom the Queen was not beloved) murmured and
muttered, saying, that God was not pleased that such a woman as had occasioned
so many battles, and such slaughters and executions in England, should
return thither to plot more treachery, and to devise more mischief.

The Duke of Burgoine furnishes King Edward with money, men, munition, and
ships.
The Duke of Burgoine, although he entreated King Edward and his friends kindly,
yet because he himself had warred with France, and feared lest the Earl of
Warwick would busy him with a new war, sent word to King Henry, that he
would not in any sort assist his enemy for his return into England. Yet not
long after, when he understood that King Edwards friends by daily messengers
and by letters importunated his return, and had by their fair promise
strengthened him with good hopes of fortunate success, he delivered to him
fifty thousand Floreines of gold, and furnished him with eighteen tall and
warlike ships, in which he had only two thousand soldiers for service on the
land.

1470.
With these small forces he sailed into England, and landed at Rauen-spurre in
the County of York, where his expectation failed him very much. King Edward
landeth in England. A small hope.
For few or none resorted to him for his help; but all men there acknowledged
themselves to be the friends and subjects of King Henry. This check, though
it much troubled him, yet was he not utterly dismayed thereby: for mere
necessity and danger enforced him to march to the City of York. And in his
passage thither, He only claims his Duchy of York.
he published to the people, and to the inhabitants of that City, that he came
not to lay any claim or to make any challenge to the Crown, but intended only
to possess himself of his Duchy of York, of which unjustly he was
deprived: wherein he affirmed, he ought by the laws of equity and right, to
be assisted and succored by them, and by all good men.

He swears it to the Citizens of York They receive him, and relieve him.
The Citizens at his first repair denied his entrance: but by reason of a
solemn oath which he took before them, that he only intended the regaining of
his Duchy, and would remain a true, faithful, and an obedient subject to
King Henry, he was received, entertained, and monied at his own will. But when
he had stayed in that City a day or two, he forgot the oath which so lately
he had sworn: for he placed a strong Garrison within the Town, He breaks
his oath.

He gets money, and wogeth soldiers.

He had never risen by all likelihood, if he had been defeated by the
Marquess.


and enforced the inhabitants to furnish him with many requisites and
provisions for an Army. And then leaving the City (which was by strength
reserved to his use) he hired soldiers every where for money as he passed by
toward London. And in his march, he came within four miles of the Marquess
Montacute, his old familiar and trusty friend, who being accompanied with
brave troops and companies of valiant men of war to encounter him, gave unto
him free passage (without resistance) to march forth; so that by easy iournies
he came to Nottingham, where diverse Nobles and Gentlemen (who favored his
proceedings) made him liberal offers and tenders of their service, if he would
resoluedly take upon him the style and title of the King, which he then did. He
styles himself King.

He has a powerful Army.


And thus as a river by running far is still augmented by the access of
other brooks and streams which fall into it; so King Edwards small forces
still increased as he marched forwards, until they were indeed a strong Army.

The Earl of Warwick (having in his company the Earl of Oxford, many other
Nobles, and a puissant Army) came to the City of Warwick, and intending to
give battle to King Edward, directed and sent his letters and messengers with
all speed to the Duke of Clarence, certifying him of his purpose, Clarence
fails Warwick in his need.
and praying him quickly to come forward with his forces, and to join with
him. Yet for all this the Duke passed on with a lingering pace, so that the
Earl (suspecting his fidelity) went with his Army into the City of
Couentrie, and King Edward with all his Companies came before the Town, and
dared the Earl into the field. Warwick keeps close in Couentrie with all
his Army.

The King and his brother and their Armies are made friends.


But because he purposed to make some trial what the Duke of Clarence would
do, he therefore kept close within the walls.

The King perceiving that he would not fight, bent his course toward his
brother the Duke of Clarence, who (with his Army) did the like toward the
King; so that a great show was made betwixt them, that many blows should be
given. But the Duke of Gloucester being brother to them both, became an earnest
mediator to reconcile them each to other: wherein he so well prevailed, that
(being unarmed) they courteously met, and publicly proclaimed, that they and
their Armies were good friends.

The three brothers having thus combined themselves, Warwick will not be
allured to love by fair promises.
made trial whether they could by any fair means and liberal promises,
allure the Earl of Warwick to their love. But he (who with many curses and
disgraceful speeches published the Dukes perjury, in forsaking his
Confederates, His answer.
and friends, returned them answer; That he would rather die like himself,
then cease to make civil war, until he had confounded them, as his mortal
Enemies.

The King (who knew well enough that the Earl was as valiant as he himself
was resolute) feared not his power, but wisely considered, The causes why
London received King Edward.
That the daily increasing of his own strength, would be his best means, to
win the victory: Wherefore he departed from Couentrey, and marched toward
London, where (for a time) he was kept out: But when the Citizens had duly
considered of Henry, his small reach, shallow Lancastrian faction were
maintained; Inconstant Multitude. King Henry again is imprisoned.
where he seized again upon King Henry, and committed him to the Tower. Thus
may we see, upon what unsure foundation they build, who do rely upon the
Peoples love, and that nothing is more variable and unconstant then the
Multitude, who (like unto Weather-cocks) are turned about with every wind.

Warwicks last resolution.
The Earl of Warwick, when he perceived, that King Edward was gone from
Couentrey, followed after him with his Army, purposing to have set upon him,
before he should have recovered London. But when he perceived that his
intendments were prevented, he resolved to set his whole fortunes upon one
Battle. For which purpose he marched fourth until he came to the town of
Barnet, which by an equal distance of ten miles, lies betwixt London and S.
Albons; there he stayed, rested, and refreshed his Army for a while.

The Kings resolution.
The King also (being persuaded, that nothing could better procure his future
right, and safety, then once more to try his manhood in the field, and taking
King Henry with him) marched with his army (which by the City of London was
frankely furnished with all things needful) unto Barnet, Barnet field.
and encamped him self near to the Earl all that night: and early in the
morning the Earl of Warwick divided his forces into three parts: The right
wing was commanded by his Brother the Marquis Montacute, (whom by necessity he
was enforced to trust) and by the Earl of Oxford. The left wing was directed
by himself, and by the Duke of Exeter. And his maine battle was led by the
Duke of Somerset and some others. All these the Earl manfully encouraged, The
Earls encouragements to his Army.
by telling them, that they were to fight for their sovereign and lawful
King, for a good man, and for their native Country, against an Usurper, a
Tyrant, a merciless and an ungodly wretch, whom

The King (on his part) made the Duke of Gloucester chief leader Clarence
ordered Henry the Sixth was: and the Hastings, Chamberlain to the King.

What the King said by way of encouragement to his soldiers, we may easily
conjecture: for as he had a wit and a tongue which never did deceive him; so
he wanted not matter nor arguments to maintain his quarrel to be good.

The Fight (after it was begun) was so desperately continued on either part
for the space of five or six hours, The victory was uncertain.
that no man could conjecture to whom the victory would incline: so that some
of those horsemen who were lookers on, and fought not, gallopped amain to the
City of London, and affirmed that King Edward was overthrown. But among them
by and by some others posted with countermanding reports, and assured the
Citizens, that the Earl of Warwick had lost the Field. And thus many men (in
few hours) related what they wished for: and in the mean time, such as were
most valiant, soonest lost their lives, and the best men lay breathless upon
the ground. But when the Earl perceived, that fresh supplies continually
oppressed and pressed upon his wearied and tired friends and soldiers, who
would not yield because he could not then be safe, The Earl of Warwick is
slain.

So is the M^rquesse his brother, wh^m King Edward loved.

The King has the victory.


he dismounted himself quickly from his horse, and making an incredible
slaughter of his enemies, he pressed so far into their battle to be
revenged on his chiefest adversaries, that having no power nor means to
return again, he was slain: and the Marquess Montacute (who ever honored
King Edward, and was his secret friend) rushing into King Edwards Army, not to
do it any harm, but to rescue and to relieve his brother, met with the like
fortune. Thus both of them being dead, their whole Army ran away, and King
Edward was master of the Field. And in the afternoon of the same day (carrying
with him King Henry as his prisoner) he returned triumphantly like a
Conqueror into the City of London; and in Paul's Church he offered up his
Standard, A thanksgiving to God. 10000. men slain.

Sir Humfrey Bourchier.


and rendered thanks to Almighty God for his victory thus happily obtained.
In this battle there were slain at the least ten thousand men: but none
other of any noted name, saving only on the Kings part Sir Humfrey Bourchier,
son to the Lord Barnes, who was a right valiant and an approved man in Arms.

The King sorrowed much, and was grieved exceedingly at the death of the
Marquess Montacute, because he had lost a faithful and a dear friend. Yet
to assure the people that those two brothers were dead indeed, The dead bodies
of the two brethren laid open in Paul's Church. Queen Margaret landeth too late.

Noble men do repair to her.


he caused them to be brought into London in one coffin, and for the space of
three days to lie open faced in Paul's Church: and then among their honorable
Ancestors in the Priorie of Bissam they were both buried in one grave.

Queen Margaret (not hearing of this news, but intending to bring some
succors to the Earl) landed at Waymouth, where these tidings appalled her
senses, and deprived her of all future good hope or good hap. Wherefore in the
Abbey of Beawly in Hampshire she with the Prince her son took Sanctuary:
and thither repaired to her the Duke of Somerset, Iaspar Earl of Pembroke,
Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire, John Lord Wenloke, and diverse others. And
when the Queen and they had thoroughly debated what course was fittest to be
taken, They raise a new Army.
they resolved, once more to adventure their fortunes in the Field: for which
purpose, every one of those Noblemen resorted into their own Countries, where
they prepared such men and furnitures for the war as they could get. The Queen
and the Duke of Somerset levied an Army about Bristow and Gloucester, and from
thence they endeavored to go into Wales, to join their forces with such
companies as the Earl of Pembroke had raised there.

The King preuenteth them.
The King, who was more strong then they, purposed to prevent their meeting if
he might, and so closely followed them, that though the Queen and most of her
associates supposed it to be best to fly disordered into Wales, yet the Duke
of Somerset would not consent thereunto; The Duke of Somersets resolution to
fight. Tewkesburie field.
by reason whereof, both those Armies met near unto Tewkesburie in
Glocestershire, and after a long fight, which with a small company the Duke of
Somerset had maintained against the Duke of Glocesters battle, he (not being
seconded by the Lord Wenloke, by whom their middle Ward was commanded) retired
toward the said Lord, and with cursed words he bitterly reviled him for his
base cowardlinesse, and with his Poleaxe he suddenly struck out his brains.
But within one hour after, King Edward overthrew them all, The King gets
the victory.
having slain above three thousand of them; among whom were the Earl of
Devonshire, the Lord John, brother to the Duke of Somerset, Sir John Lewknor,
Sir John Delues, and many others. Great Prisoners.
There were also taken prisoners the Queen, the Duke, the Prior of S. John's of
Jerusalem, Sir Geruase C^ifton, Sir Thomas Tresham, and twelve others of
eminency and of note: all which (Queen Margaret only excepted) were beheaded
the next day. Execution. Prince Edward cruelly murdered.
And the young Prince Edward (who was taken prisoner by Sir Richard Crofts) was
presented to the King: and because he answered him stoutly to some questions
which he demanded of him, he was slightly stricken by the King, and suddenly
murdered by the Dukes of Clarence and of Gloucester, Queen Margaret is a
prisoner.
and by Thomas Marquess Dorset, and the Lord Hastings. And this was the last
Civil Battle which was fought in England in King Edwards days.

When the King had thus obtained this victory, he returned to London,
carrying with him Queen Margaret as his prisoner, and was with triumphant joy
received into the City, from whence he sent one Roger Vaughan, a powerful
Gentleman, into his Country of Wales, requiring him, by some secret train or
other to entrap the Earl of Pembroke, and to behead him if he could. R^g^
Vaug^an is (...) and b^^^aded.
But the Earl being informed of his coming, and of his errand, caused him
suddenly to be apprehended and put to death. And then the said Earl, with his
nephew Henry the young Earl of Richmond, who was but ten years old, sailed
into Britain, and were courteously received, and lovingly entertained by
Francis the Duke of that Province.

Not long after, Reyner the Titularie King of Naples, Sicilie, Queen Margaret
is ransomed.
and of Jerusalem, with the sale of the Kingdoms of Naples and of Sicilie for
money, ransomed Queen Margaret his daughter: and upon that Title, and none
other, Charles the Eighth, King of France, conquered Naples, as in the History
of those wars it appears. King Henry is found dead in the Tower. The Duke
of Gloucester murdered him.

King Henry brought open faced into Paul's Church.




Now when no man (by reason of King Edwards peace and prosperity) thought of
any evil tidings, suddenly it was noised thorowout the City of London, that
King Henry was found dead in his chamber within the Tower; and so he was
indeed, being cruelly and wickedly murdered and stabbed with a dagger, by
Richard Duke of Gloucester, brother to King Edward, as the report commonly went.
And his body was brought into Paul's Church, where his face lay uncovered one
whole day, that thereby the people might be assured that he was dead. And thus
was King Edward freed from his great enemies. But his two brothers, of Clarence
and of Gloucester, being for their periuries, murders, and evil courses,
punished by Almighty God, embrewed their hands in their own blood not long
after.

Edward for two or three years had enioied an happy peace, his brother in
law, Charles Duke of Burgoine, heartily detesting the French King, The Duke of
Burgoine animateth K. Edward to worre for his title to France.

Reasons moving the King so to do.


and secretly intending to work him some despite, persuaded King Edward to
renew his French wars, for the recovering of his right and title to that
Crown and Kingdom.

The King and his Counsel thereupon quickly resolved to undertake that
business, principally for these reasons.

1. First, because the Crown of France was not ambitiously, but justly desired
by the King, who thought he had good right and title thereunto.

2. Secondly, because French wars enriched English soldiers.

3. Thirdly, because those wars kept them at home, and gave them not any
liberty to invade this Realm.

4. Fourthly, because the French King had assisted Queen Margaret, the Earl
of Warwick, and their Accomplices, against King Edward in the late Civil Wars.

5. And fifthly, because the said French King made wars upon the Duke of
Burgoine, who had formerly aided King Edward for the regaining of his Crown
and Kingdom.

A benevolence craved by King Edward.
But because money wanted for the defraying of so great a charge, King Edward
(without a Parliament) craved a benevolence to be freely enlarged to him by his
Subjects, who gave him some money, but with an evil will. Yet among others, a
rich, yet a sparing and a nigardly widow, did cheerfully give unto him twenty
pounds. A merry jest.
The King himself (who was present, but to her unknown) perceiving that
unexpectedly she had bestowed upon him so good a sum, did not only give her
thanks, but merrily came and kissed her, telling her, that for her money she
should kiss a King. The old woman was so much gladded with that courtesy,
that she told the King his kiss was worth more money, and therefore she added
twenty pounds more to the former sum.

Dover a Fleet of five hundred ships and boats, and having a puissant and a
complete Army of fifteen hundred men at Arms on horseback, The King
transporteth an Army for France.
and fifteen thousand tall Archers, besides all such as attended for other
needful services, departed from England, and landed safely at Calice, where
he was received with great honor and state. But he was much grieved, because
the Duke of Burgoine (upon whose motion, and at whose entreatie and promise to
be met by him at Calice with two thousand men at Arms, The Duke of Burgoine
breaks promise, and aids him not.
he came thither) trifled with his whole Army in the siege of Nuyce, which he
was not likely to win, and at length (after much time spent in vain) had
sent all his forces to Berroys in Lorrayne, to be revenged upon Reyner, Queen
Margarets father, Duke of that Province, for that he had used foul and
unseemly words toward him, when he lay at the siege of Nuyce; whereas if the
said Duke of Burgoine had joined with King Edward against the French King, and
with the Duke of Britain, who sided with King Edward, they would have put into
hazard of winning the whole kingdom of France.

Yet King Edward with his own Companies marched by Bollen to Perone, into the
Duke of Burgoines Country, He breaks his promise again.
where the said Duke had not made any manner of provision for the refreshing of
the English Army, according to his promise, but suffered them to lie without
his Towns in the cold and in the open fields, whereat they were all
displeased. From thence king Edward (with the said Duke) marched toward S.
Quintens, which was secretly promised to be delivered to him, by Lewys of
Luxenburgh, He was Earl of S. Paul, and Constable of France.

The King is kept out of S. Quintens.


great Uncle to king Edwards wife. But when they came before it, their entry
was not only denied, but sallies were made upon them, and the great Ordinance
played from the Town upon the kings Army, so that plainly he perceived, that
nothing was to be obtained there without blows.

To these breaches of promise was added one unkindness more by the Duke of
Burgoine, who to visit his Army, A peace is concluded for nine years.
which then lay in Berroys in Lorrayne, unexpectedly left king Edward, and rode
thither, leaving word behind, that he would come unto him with his whole
Army as soon as he should be able.

The French king being politic and wise, and knowing that if Edward was
highly discontented, by reason of the Duke of Burgoines unfaithful usage, and
knowing that he began to feel

The Articles of peace.
FIrst it was agreed, that the French King should forthwith pay to King Edward
toward his forepassed charges, threescore and fifteen thousand Crowns: and
also the sum of fifty thousand more for an yearly pension so long as King
Edward lived. 2. Secondly, that the French King within one year should send
for the King of Englands daughter, the Lady Elizabeth into France, and marie
her to the Dolphin, for whose maintenance the French King should for nine years
space pay yearly to them fifty thousand Crowns, and at the end of those
years should deliver to them the quiet and peaceable possession of the whole
Duchy of Guyen. 3. And thirdly, that the Lord Haward, and Sir John Cheney
master of the Horses, should stay (as hostages) with the French King, until
the whole Army had quited France, and were landed in the Kingdom of England.
Reasons moving King Edward to conclude this peace.
To these propositions King Edward and his Counsel consented for these reasons.

1. First, as the Duke of Burgoines promises were seldom or never honestly
performed, so with the King (whom he had drawn into those Countries, and into
those wars) he did but gloze and feign.

2. Secondly, because the Earl of S. Paul, Constable of France, did but
dissemble when he protested to deliver to King Edward the Town of S.
Quintens, which he did not, but offered violence to his Army in stead thereof.

3. Thirdly, because the winter (which approached sharply) would have enforced
him for that time to have returned dishonourably into England.

4. And last of all, because the late Civil Wars had consumed most of his
best soldiers and chiefest Leaders, and the greatest part of his treasure; so
that King Edward was hardly able to maintain a great Army any long time.

But the Duke of Gloucester and his friends (who mortally hated the French King)
striued much to dissuade King Edward from these conclusions, but all in vain:
for those Articles were scaled and published, the money was paid, both the
Kings in a familiar and kind enteruiew, by their solemn oaths had sworn to
observe and keep them, and hostage: were delivered accordingly.

It is to be noted, The Duke of Burgoine stormeth at this peace.
that within this peace the Dukes of Burgoine and of Britain were included, if
they would consent thereunto. But when this news was told to the Duke of
Burgoine, he with all celeritie and speed possible hasted to King Edward, and
in his melancholy mood he told him, His objections.
that it was in a high measure dishonorable for him, to return into England,
not having burnt in France one poor cottage, nor having slain as much as a
fly with his whole Army. He told him also, that his Ancestors, King Edward
the Third, and King Henry the fifth, never passed into France to demand their
right, but that they obtained and won it victoriously with their swords; and
swore, that King Edward had lost more glory and honor by his infamous peace
made with France, then he had won by all his victories in nine battles which
he had fought; and that he himself so scorned the French Kings malice and his
power, that he would and did absolutely refuse to be included in the said
dishonorable league, until six months were fully ended after King Edwards
Army was landed again in England.

The King seeing the unfaithful Duke so angry, The Kings answer.
made him this reply: That King Edward the Third and King Henry the Fifth
entered into France with their Armies of their own accord, to gain their
inheritance, and not otherwise, nor for any other purpose, which they performed
with true valor and wisdom: And that he himself would never have departed
out of that Kingdom, until he had done the like, if he had come thither in
that manner of his own accord. But (quoth he) I undertook this journey upon
your request, for your aid, and to assist you and your Territories, by
plucking down the pride of France: and the claim which I made to that
kingdom, was at this time only published, to give me some color to help
you. And albeit you vaunt much of your own strength, and do seem little to
regard the French King and his anger, yet me thinks you cannot well forget,
how by his strength and power he has won from you the fair City of Amyens,
and the strong pile of S. Quintens, and other Castles and Towns within your
dominions; which (notwithstanding all your crakes and brags) you neither dare
to attempt, nor can again win. You know likewise, that your self and mine
Uncle of Luxenburgh (to train me into France) promised to me mountains of
gold, but they quickly changed into snow, and are now dissolved into water. If
your faith, your offers, and your promises had been honestly performed, I
would sooner have lost my life, and have adventured for you my Crown and
Kingdom, rather then I would have been found unfaithful or unthankful to
you. But if any thing be amiss, you your selves have been the occasioners
thereof, and therefore you may thank none others. And so farewell.

Hereupon the angry Duke in a pelting chafe, took his horse, and rode away.
And from that time forward they neither loved nor saw one another.

The French Kings bounty to the English Army.
After the aforesaid Articles were concluded and sealed, and a little before the
enteruiew between the two Kings, the French King (of his own bounty) sent
into the English Army one hundred Wagons laden with the best wines which he
could procure, and licenced the soldiers for the space of three or four days
to disport and recreate themselves within the City of Amyens: and at their
coming thither they found many Tables thorowout both sides of the streets
richly and plentifully furnished with great store of costly dishes both of
flesh and fish, and many Gallants and Bon-companions of purpose were chosen to
make them mirth, and to attend them; so that nine thousand English armed men
were within the same City at one time.

But when the French King was informed how great a number of them were within
the walls of so strong a Town, he reproved and condemned his own kindness,
and feared lest he might loose it by reason of his great love, and by that
means might occasion more iarres betwixt England and his Kingdom of France.

But the Englishmen disdaining to be found false or unthankful, merrily passed
away the time with the Frenchmen; and having sufficiently solaced and refreshed
themselves, they departed out of the City, and quietly returned to their own
Camp. And the French King being well pleased with this their honest and plain
dealing, The French Kings bounty to the English Captains.

The King arriueth in England.


sent unto the English Captains rich presents in plate and in coined silver
and gold. And then King Edward with his whole Army returned to Calice, and
from thence into England, where he was cheerfully received with much joy. And
thereupon the aforesaid Hostages (receiving great gifts and honorable usage)
were set at liberty, and returned home.

French King (if he might) would feign have excluded the Duke of Britain out
of the former league. But in regard that the young Earl of Richmond was in his
possession, and whose return into England to make challenge to the Crown King
Edward ever feared, he would not in any sort agree thereunto.

And not long after, Henry Earl of Richmond delivered by the Duke of Britain
to K. Edwards Ambassadors
King Edward (by his Ambassadors) with much entreatie, rich gifts, and upon
solemn protestation that he only intended to marie one of his own daughters
to the said Earl, obtained his delivery to those messengers, who being glad
at the heart that they had obtained what King Edward so instantly desired,
took their leave of the Duke of Britain, and brought the young Earl of
Richmond to S. Malloes, where they were enforced to stay, expecting a fair and
a good wind.

But in the mean time, Good counsel
the Duke being informed by John Cheuelet his true and faithful servant, that
the said marriage was but colourably pretended, to get the young Earl into King
Edwards hands, and that his death was certainly pretended if he could be
brought home; and being also told, that his honor would perpetually be
obscured by so foul a deed: the said Duke could never be at rest, until
Peter Landoys, his chiefest Treasurer, attempted the repossessing of him with
the said young Earl. Whereupon the said Peter repaired to S. Malloes, Peter
Landoys recouereth the Earl of Richmond into the Duke of Britains possession.
and pretended much love and familiarity with the English Ambassadors, with
whom he pleasantly conuersed and spent his time. But in the mean season the
servants of the said Peter (being thoroughly instructed for that purpose)
conveyed the said Earl into a Sanctuary, whose privileges might not by any
means be infringed. The Englishmen understanding what had happened, were much
displeased, and condemned the said Treasurer for this unfriendly practice and
too much skill. But he (on the other side) assigned the whole fault to their
own negligence and folly. And by this mean, the harmless and silly Sheep
was delivered from the Woolfe. And thus was King Edward defrauded and beguiled
of his money and of his hopes. But upon the Dukes faithful promise that the
said Earl should ever remain with him as a prisoner, the King was somewhat
pacified, and never after attempted to have him in his own power.

King Edward being now at ease, The Duke of Burgoine is thrice in one year
overthrown.
and were very profitable to the Commonweal. But the Duke of Burgoine (who by
nature was unconstant, hasty, turbulent, and wholly addicted to the war) was
in this year overthrown in three several battles which he fought against
the Su^sses.

1. In the first at Granson, where he lost his honor and his wealth.

2. In the second at Morrat, where he lost his honor and his men.

3. And in the third at Nancie, where he lost his honor, his riches, his men,
and his own life.

Clarence, brother to King Edward, was suspected, accused, and condemned of
high Treason, for that he (with many others) had secretly contrived the Kings
death: The Duke of Clarence imprisoned and murdered.
and thereupon he was returned a prisoner to the Tower. But within few days
after, he was wickedly drowned in a Butte of Malmesie, not without the Kings
notice, as most men did suppose. He left behind him but two children, Edward
and Margaret, which Edward was created Earl of Warwick, and was executed for
High Treason in the reign of King Henry the Seventh. And Margaret, who being
wife and Dowager to Richard de la Pole, Earl of Salisburie, was put to death
for Treason in the reign of King Henry the Eighth.

The King changes his form of government of the Commonweal.

Penal laws. He lost the love of his Subjects.


loved magnificence and honorable hospitality; he now began to be so
wretched, covetous, and miserable, that to get money, and to augment his
treasure, he extraordinarily vexed and troubled his subjects, by inflicting
upon them the execution of penal laws; by means whereof, he as quickly
extinguished and quenched their hearty love and good affection toward him, as
water does the fire.

In the twentieth year of his reign, he much desired that the marriage which
the French King had promised, betwixt the Dolphin and his daughter, 1480. 20
might be consummate: for which purpose he sent an honorable Embassage into
France, willing them to tell the French King, that he had broken his promise
and his oath, for that he had not sent for the said Lady into France within
one year after the concluding of the said former Articles. Lewys the eleventh.
But Lewys the French King returned frivolous excuses, and promised very
shortly to send for her, when as indeed he meant nothing less. For such was
his nature, and such were his evil qualities, that where he might procure any
benefit or advantage to himself,

A marriage intended with Scotland.
About this time, James the Third, King of Scots, seeming earnestly to desire
that the Lady Cicilia (one of the Kings daughters) might be given in marriage
to James his eldest son, sent his Ambassadors into England. And King Edward
(supposing that he had meant plainly, and knowing that by such an alliance his
own estate would be the better secured) did not only grant his request, but
forthwith (to supply his present wants) he disbursed to him great sums of
money for part of his said daughters portion, Money is conditionally disbursed.
but yet upon this condition, that the same should be repaied if afterward
king Edward disliked, and would dissolve that match.

When all those things were concluded, security given, Scots (very
treacherously) sent an Army into the Northern parts of this kingdom, which
burnt, spoiled, The Scots invade the Northern parts.

Gloucester marches with an Army against the Scots.

The Castle of Barwicke is besieged.

Gloucester enters Scotland, and spoileth at his own will.

Peace is granted on certain conditions.


and slew in every place as it passed by: whereupon king Edward (as well to
repress his fury, as also to correct his infidelity and folly) sent against
him the Duke of Gloucester with a strong Army of one and twenty thousand men,
who first of all by force entered into the Town of Barwicke, and then besieged
the Castle, which was valiantly kept and defended by the Earl Bothwel.

The Duke (not purposing to employ his whole strength in that place) left the
Lord Stanley there with four thousand men, and with the residue of his forces
he entered into Scotland, whither the Scottish king was for fear retired,
killing, burning, and spoili^^ ^n all places at his pleasure, and compelling
the king to hide him^^^fe in the strong Castle of Maidens within the City of
Edinburgh.

The Nobility of Scotland perceiving the miserable estate of their wasted and
poor Country, sent unto the Duke, and craved peace; which he granted upon
these four conditions.

1. First, that full amends and restitution might be made and given to king
Edwards subjects for all such damage, injury, and wrongs, as by their last
incursions they had sustained.

2. Secondly, that the Scottish king would again restore his own brother the
Duke of Albanie (who was in the English Army) unto his especial favor, and
to all his honors, dignities, offices, and possessions in that kingdom.

3. Thirdly, that the Castle of Barwicke should be yielded up, or not rescued
from the siege wherewith it was then compassed.

4. And lastly, that repaiment might be made of all such sums of money as king
James had received of king Edward upon the motion for marriage with his daughter
to the son and heir apparent of the king of Scots: or that good security
might be given by the Provost and Citizens of Edinburgh for the said repaiment,
if (before a prefixed day) king Edward did give them notice that there should
not be any further prosecution concerning the said marriage.

The Nobility of Scotland, knowing the state of that kingdom to be unable to
perform the first demand, to pacify the Duke of Gloucester, and to prevent the
ruin and destruction of their native kingdom, yielded unto the latter three.
And for the due observing of them, they sent unto him such an Instrument,
sealed and subscribed by the King and them, as he had required. And to the Duke
of Albanie was sent a free pardon, and restitution was made unto him of all
things accordingly as the Duke of Gloucester had desired. Whereupon the said two
Dukes, taking a friendly farewell each of other, departed, the one into
Scotland, and the other unto Barwicke, where the Earl of Athol (being of
nothing more assured, then that by his King and Countrymen he should never be
relieved) by composition surrendered the Castle into the Dukes hand, The Castle
of Barwicke is delivered to the Duke of Gloucester.
who making the Lord Stanley the chiefest Captain and Commander thereof,
returned ioifully with his whole Army, and was much praised and thanked by the
King.

This good news from Scotland was quickly checked with a bad out of France.
The French King breaks all the Articles of Peace.
For the French King not only refused to pay unto King Edward the foresaid
tribute of fifty thousand Crowns by the year, which was granted to him
during his life, but also married his son the Dolphin to the Lady Margaret,
daughter to Maximilian the son of Frederick the Emperor, thereby breaking
his oath, and infringing those Articles which (upon the last conclusion of
peace) he had sworn solemnly to observe and keep. Whereat King Edward justly
conceived such an high displeasure and hatred Lewys, that (after long and
serious consultation with his Counsel, K. Edward resolves to go with an
Army into France.
Nobility, Clergy, and Commons) he did resolve to pass again with a royal
Army into France, and to revenge himself of all those injuries and wrongs.

But whilst those preparations made manifest to the world the Kings intention
to make war, he being either surcharged with deep melancholy, or with some
surfeit, (for excess of diet and of pleasure did oftentimes disquiet him) waxed
exceeding sick, He sickneth. He dies.
and shortly after died, when he had reigned more then two and twenty years.

Profitable Notes extracted out of the troublesome reigns of King HENRY the
Sixth, and of King EDWARD the Fourth.
THe whole Kingdom of France was lost in the seven and twentieth year of King
Henry the Sixth. 27. H. 6.
And the next year after all Normandy was lost. 28. H. 6. 31. H. 6.
And in the one and thirtieth year of his reign the Duchy of Aquitaine was
quite taken from him.

It is likewise to be observed, that whilst he governed and enioied Normandy
and France, these heroical Nobles lost their lives there: that is to say,
Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisburie, 6. H. 6. 12. H. 6. 14. H. 6. 18. H. 6.
31. H. 6.
who was slain at the siege of Orleance; John Earl of Arundel, who was slain
at the siege of Rue; the noble and renowned Lord John Duke of Bedford and
Regent of France, and Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, both which died of
a grievous sickness, and John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewesburie, who was
slain at the battle of Chastilion.

Besides many brave skirmishes and strong encounters, there were fought during
his reign, betwixt the two factions and Confederates of the houses of
Lancaster and of York, five cruel and fierce battles.

1. The first was called the battle of S. Albons, 34. H. 6.
wherein the Yorkish did prevail; and (among others) Edmund Duke of Somerset,
Henry the second Earl of Northumberland, Humfrey Earl of Stafford, and John
Lord Clifford, were then slain.

2. The second was termed the battle of Bloarheath, 37. H. 6.
in which the confederated Lords won the victory, in which the Queens
General the Lord Awdley was slain.

3. The third was the battle of Northampton, 38. H. 6.
in which King Henry was overthrown. In this battle there died above ten
thousand men, among which were these Nobles, Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, John
Earl of Shrewesburie, Thomas Lord Egremont, John Viscount Beamount, and the
Lord Scales was beheaded.

39. H. 6.
4. The fourth was the battle of Wakefield, in which the King was victorious.
In this battle there were slain almost three thousand men, among which was
the renowned and most valiant Richard Duke of York, and many others. And
certain prisoners were then taken, and lost their heads, among which Richard
Neuil Earl of Salisburie, and father to Richard Earl of Warwick, was the
chief. And at the end of that battle, the young Earl of Rutland, named
Edmund, being of the age of twelve years, and second son to the slain Duke
of York, was cruelly murdered by the Lord Clifford.

39. H. 6.
5. The fifth battle was called the battle of Towton, in which the new Duke
of York prevailed: and in the same there were slain almost 37000. Englishmen,
among which were the Earl of Westmerland, Henry Earl of Northumberland, the
Lords Dacres and Wells, and many worthy Gentlemen and Knights. And the Earl
of Devonshire, with some of his Accomplices, being taken prisoners, lost their
heads.

29. H. 6.
Whilst this King lived, there were also executed for diverse Treasons touching
the said two Factions, William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, and James Fynes
Lord Say, High Treasurer of England. And Humfrey, 25. H. 6.
surnamed The good Duke of Gloucester, being Uncle and Protector to the King,
and being unjustly committed to the Tower, for surmised, but not for approved
Treasons, was cruelly murdered in his chamber.

King EDWARD the Fourth.
IN the reign of King Edward the Fourth there were principally fought five
battles betwixt the houses of Lancaster and York.

2. E. 4.
1. The first was the battle of Exham in the North, in which King Edward
obtained the victory, and took these prisoners among many others, Henry Duke
of Somerset, William Taylboys, who named himself Earl of Kent, the Lords
Roos, Molynes, and Hungerford, all which were within few days after put to
death.

8. E. 4.
2. The second was called Banburie Field, in which were slain above 8000. men.

8. E. 4.
3. The third was called the battle of Loose-coats, because the soldiers
threw off their coats to run away the faster. And in it above ten thousand men
lost their lives.

4. The fourth was Barnet field, 10. E. 4.
in which more then ten thousand died, among which were the most renowned
Richard Neuil Earl of Warwick, John Marquess Montacute his brother, whom
King Edward entirely loved. And on King Edwards part there was slain a noble
and a valiant Gentleman, named Sir Humfrey Bourchier, son to the Lord Barnes.

5. And the fifth was called Tewkesburie Field, in which 3000. 10. E. 4.
Englishmen were slain, among which were the Duke of Somerset, and the Lord
John his brother, and the Earl of Devonshire.

In this Kings reign there were beheaded the Lord Stafford, 8. E. 4.
who left the Earl of Pembroke (upon a private falling out) in the Field, and
carried from him part of the Kings Army.

The Lord Wells, and Sir Thomas Dymocke, 8. E. 4.
without any offense at all by them done.

Richard Wooduile Earl Ryuers, and father to Queen Elizabeth, 8. E. 4.
King Edward; wife, was taken by the Rebels, and lost his head.

And the Lord Wenloke was murdered by the Duke of Somerset, 10. E. 4.
because he came not to his rescue with his Companies in the field.

The young Prince Edward, eldest son to King Henry the sixth, 10. E. 4.
(to please King Edward) was cruelly murdered by the two Dukes of Clarence and
of Gloucester, and by some others.

King Henry the sixth was himself stabbed with a dagger, 10. E. 4.
and slain in the Tower of London by the said Richard Duke of Gloucester.

And not long after, 10. E. 4.
the Duke of Clarence was found dead in his bed, he having been drowned in a
Butte of Malmesie, not without the Kings consent, as it was supposed.

And thus open and civil wars by the sword, and the common Executioner with
his axe, and inueterated envy and malice, with bloody hands, bereaved and
took away the lives of the greater number of the most renowned and valiant
Noblemen, Captains, and Gentlemen of this Realm.

THE HISTORY OF KING EDWARD THE FIFTH.
IF our memories be pleased to take a reuiew of the life and actions of Edward
the Fourth, Edward the Fourth described.
we may thereon make this pretty abbreuiate and short collection: That he was
of a goodly personage, and of a kingly presence: That he was very strong, and
passing valiant, not proud in prosperity, nor dejected with adverse fortune:
That he was moderately pleasant and merry: That he was pleasing to his Nobles,
familiar with his soldiers, and amiable to his inferior subjects: That he was
merciful to offenders, and favored all such as did well: That he was very
wise, discreet, provident, and soundly advised in all his actions. Yet was he
somewhat too credulous, and too wanton, and in his latter days more covetous
then formerly he had been.

By many worthy endeavors he expressed how much he longed for his peoples
love: His affability.
and by one action he more particularly declared it, then by all the rest. For
in the next Summer before he died, he required the Lord Mayor of London and
his brethren to repair to his Castle of Windsour, where he then lay. And when
they expected some extraordinary imploiment in State affairs, because so many
of them were called thither, not troubling them with any business, either
great or small, private or public, nor requiring of them any supplies from
their plenty, he royally feasted, banqueted, and entertained them, not only
with the choicest, best, and most costly delicates that could be gotten, but
also he gladded them unspeakably with his own presence and companion-like
behavior. He afterward carried them into his Park, where the thick fall of
fat Dear (besides many other things) gave them warrant of their kind welcome.
And at their departing from him, he sent such great store of venison into the
City, for the friendly feasting of their neighbors there, that nothing ever
won him more hearty love among his subjects of that place.

He left behind him two sons; Edward, who being of the age of thirteen
years, unfortunately succeeded him in this Kingdom; and Richard Duke of
York, who was two years younger; and five daughters, namely Elizabeth, who
afterward married King Henry the seventh, and was mother to King Henry the
eighth, and Cicilie, Bridget, and Katherine, whose fortunes seldom laughed,
and Anne, who married Thomas Lord Haward, who after was created Earl of Surrey.

Richard Duke of Gloucester described.
The said noble King (when he died) left behind him but one brother, namely
Richard Duke of Gloucester, who was (by common report) a monster in nature. For
he had many teeth when he was borne. He was exceedingly deformed in the
composure of his body: for of stature he was but low, crooke-backed; his left
shoulder was much higher then the other: his visage was uncomely, his
complexion swart and brown: he was exceeding strong, yet much withered in his
left arm: he was violent, fierce, and bloudily cruel; a good soldier,
discreet to order well, and politic to rule. He was very hasty and forward
in great expeditions and weighty actions; yet wise, and well advised before
he would attempt to fight. He was ambitious beyond measure, and his desires
for sovereignty had no bounds. What he contrived, were it good or bad, he
would by one means or by another assuredly effect it. He made his conscience
in all things to serve his will, though his will could not be obtained without
the effusion of guiltless blood. He would oftentimes make himself poor by
his lavish bounty to such as wickedly served his turn: and would again
quickly enrich himself by pilling and by polling of civil and of honest men.
He was so cunning a dissembler, that he would accompany most familiarly and
jest pleasantly with such as he inwardly hated in his heart. He spared no
man's death, whose life resisted his ungodly purposes; nor punished any man for
any offense, if his wickedness might be applied to his service. This
ambitious, this fierce, and this cruel man, in his brother King Edwards days
(as wise men did conjecture) directed his aim to make himself a King. 10. E.
4.
For he with others murdered Prince Edward the eldest son of King Henry the
Sixth: 10. E. 4.
and with his own hand he slew the same King when he was a prisoner in the
Tower; and was consenting (as the world blabbed) to the death and destruction
of his elder brother, George Duke of Clarence, in the same place. 10. E. 4.


King Edwards death, and the minority of his two sons, Richard aims to the
Crown.
gave him fit opportunity to work mischief, which first of all he resolved
to prosecute by the reviving of old grudges betwixt the Queens kindred and
the Kings, although the last King in his deathbed had reconciled them, and
made them all friends. For he knew, that where malice and hatred are of
counsel, there no good action or sound conclusion can be expected. And by this
practice he endeavored first to make him self equal with the best, and then
to be the best of all.

We must also now observe, that at the time of King Edwards death the young
Prince in his own person kept his residence and Court at Ludlow in the
dominion of Wales, that by his presence he might restrain the Welshmen from
such outrageous enterprises as oftentimes their licentious and bad manners
incited them to commit. And the protection of his person was by the last King
appointed to Anthony Earl Ryuers the Queens brother, and by the mothers side
Uncle to the said Prince. And her allies and her kinsfolks did now possess
all rooms and offices of honor and of profit about him, he being King: which
the Duke of Gloucester much maligned, and so scorned it, that in his conceits he
contrived how he might thrust them all out of those places. For which purpose
he oftentimes secretly and seriously conferred with Edward Duke of Buckingham,
and Richard Lord Hastings, who was Chamberlain to the last King. To them he
discovered the mean descent of the Queen, and of her kinsfolks in respect of
theirs, and told them plainly, that if those Vpstarts remained so near unto
the King in his youth, they would (through his favor) be so powerful when he
came to his full age, that all their honors, their possessions, and their
lives, would be in danger to be made subject to their wills. And therefore he
advised them to join with him for their remove, and to divide and share
betwixt themselves all such benefits as by those means should be achieved.

These fair persuasions, and their own ambitious humors, quickly wrought the
said two great Lords, His practice against the Queens kindred.
not only to hearken willingly to this discourse, but also to be confederates
with the Duke of Gloucester in that practice, which quickly was attempted in
this manner.

The Queen with the Earl Ryuers her brother, and with her son Richard Lord
Gray, and with her other friends, being guarded with a strong power of armed
men and soldiers, intended to bring the young King from Wales toward London
to be crowned. And the Duke of Gloucester knowing that if his feat were not
wrought before that time, it could not easily be effected after; and
considering likewise, that if he with his confederates should come armed
against the King to meet him, and by open violence attempt to get the Kings
person into their possession, their said enterprise would be censured and
adjudged to be a rebellious action, and no less then Treason. Wherefore he
cunningly directed and sent his letters to the Queen, and called to her
remembrance the hearty love and friendship which the late King her deceased
husband in his deathbed had ratified and confirmed betwixt the Lords of his
own blood and alliance, and the kinsfolks of the Queen. He likewise informed
her, that it was commonly reported, that her brother and her friends which were
near about the Kings person, intended with a strong power and with many armed
men to conduct his Majesty (for his Coronation) from Wales to the City of
London. He protested and swore unto her, that his humble duty to his
Sovereign, and his unfeigned love to her and to her kinsfolks and children,
incited him seriously and earnestly to advise and counsel her and them, to
dismiss those companies of armed men, for that he feared much lest the
gathering of them together would be the occasion of new broiles, and of civil
wars. For seeing (quoth he) that many former battles triumphing in blood,
have now made peace, and seeing that the state of the whole Kingdom hates
Arms, and seeing that the King has no Competitor for his Crown, and that
love and friendship has united and knit together the minds and the hearts of
all his Nobles, and seeing that perfect tranquillity and a secure
reconciliation has quieted and gladded all the people, certainly the Kings
coming toward the City of London with an armed train, will make the Lords
of the deceased Kings blood, and many others, exceeding jealous of their
intention, and to be fearful lest some secret plot be cunningly contrived to
surprise them, when in duty and for service they shall make their access unto
the King; and that such fear and jealousy will occasion them (for their
defense and safety) to raise the like forces, whereof might ensue much danger,
coffeehouse, and perhaps blows.

The Queen and her friends (who meant none ill) taking much comfort in this
advice, The Kings strength is sent away.
because she supposed it sprang from hearty love, and also because the Duke of
Gloucester had at the same time with all respective duty and reverence likewise
written unto the King, and lovingly to the Earl Ryuers her brother, and unto
Richard Lord Gray her son, caused all such strength of armed men as was
provided for the Kings conduction toward London, to be dismissed and sent
away. And the said Earl, and Lord, and some others of their friends, brought
the King forth in his journey to the City of Northampton, and the next day to
Stony Stratford, being ten miles from thence. And because that little Town was
not capable of the whole train, the Earl Ryuers and his private followers
remained that night in Northampton. The Queens kindred is betrayed.
But on the sudden and unlooked for, the Dukes of Gloucester and of Buckingham
(being strongly accompanied with great store of resolute attendants) dismounted
themselves in the Earls Inn, and with all complements of love and friendship
they passed the time with him; and by reason of their extraordinary
familiarity, he secured himself of their hearty and unfeigned love. But
as soon as their companies were in their beds, the two Dukes seized upon all
the keys of the same Inn, and caused all the ways betwixt those two Towns
so to be watched and warded, that no person (of what degree or quality soever
he were) could have any passage there. And they reuealead, that the pretense of
their so doing was because no man before them should in the morning prevent
them for diligence to attend upon the King. Whereof when the Earl Ryuers had
intelligence, necessity compelled him to dissemble, and to seem as if he
suspected none evil, although he knew that by the Dukes policy and crafty
cunning he was overtaken and beguiled. Yet in friendly and in a iocund manner
he came unto the two Dukes, and asked them why they had so done. But suddenly
they entered into a needless and causeless quarrel with the said Earl, They
are imprisoned.
surprised his person, and committed him to safe keeping. And then in good and
quiet manner the two Dukes rode to Stony Stratford, and humbly presented their
duties and their service to the King, who being altogether ignorant of that
which so newly had happened, received them with a cheerful countenance and with
much joy. But presently they also seized upon Richard Lord Gray, the Kings
halfebrother, and upon Sir Thomas Vaughan, and some others, all which they sent
(under a strong Guard) to the Castle of Pomfret in the North, where without any
judicial sentence or legal proceeding against them, they were beheaded upon
the same day that the Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlain (who conspired in that
action with the two Dukes) did lose his head.

The Kings servants are removed.
The two Dukes also and the Lord Chamberlain removed from the King all his
other Officers, and most of his meniall servants, informing all men which
attended the King, or expected the sequel of this business, that the said
Earl, Lord, and Knight, with some others, had resolved to destroy all the
Lords of King Edwards blood, and to rule both the King and Commonweal
according to their own will.

The Queen with her children take Sanctuary.
When the Queen (who at that time lay, with the Kings brother, the young Duke
of York, and with her five daughters, at Westminster) heard of these tumults,
and what had happened to her brother, son, and friends, it repented her much
that she had advised them (upon the Duke of Glocesters cunning letters) to
dismiss and to discharge their soldiers and men of war. And because she had
good cause to fear the event thereof, she with her children entered into the
Sanctuary there. The young King also mourned grecuously to see the woeful
tragedy wherein his friends misfortunes were so unexpectedly acted. But the
two Dukes recomforted him with the expression of their humble duties and
service, and with a thousand protestations of their fidelity and troth toward
his Highness during their lives: The King is brought to London.
and then they brought him with great honor near to the City of London,
where he was met by the Lord Mayor, and five hundred grave Citizens more, in
whose presence the Duke of Gloucester used such humble duty and reverence to
the King, and so discreetly demeaned himself toward him, that none of them
suspected that any thing was done but for the Kings preservation, and for his
good: yea the Nobility and Counselors of Estate were so inwardly persuaded to
rest in the same belief, that (by their general consent) they forthwith made
him the Protector both of the Kings royal person, The Duke of Gloucester is
made Protector.
and of his Kingdom.

When the Duke of Gloucester had procured and obtained this high place which his
heart infinitely desired, (the same being an office of greatest honor, He
possesses himself of the Kings brother the Duke of York.
of confidence, and of trust) he made no doubt but that his purpose would
quickly (though wickedly) be brought to pass as himself wished, if he could
also get the young Duke of York into his hands. And to the end that his
desires might not remain fruitless, he grievously complained to the Kings
Counsel of the froward obstinacy of the Queen, who detained the said young
Duke dishonourably in the Sanctuary as an offender, and in prison, causing
thereby the government of the whole Kingdom, and the Nobles and officers
thereof, to be exceedingly blamed and taxed, not only at home, but also in all
other Christian Provinces and Kingdoms. He urged also, that his Grand-master
the young King was infinitely wronged and disheartened, for that he was not
permitted to enjoy the society and the company of his own and only brother,
whom above all other creatures in the world he respected and longed for.

The Lords having considered of the Dukes motion, resolved that he had spoken
well, and that it was fitting it should be hearkened unto. And thereupon, they
made especial choice of the Cardinal Archbishop of York (upon whose
fidelity and love, the Queen did not a little rely) to go to her, and to
pray her (without further trouble) to send the young Duke her Son to the king
his brother: That he might be comforted with his sight, and be made merry and
iocund with his company. And withal they required him to tell her, that for
many reasons the young Duke might not be detained there.

1. First, Reasons why the young Duke ought not to be in the Sanctuary.
because the whole estate of this Kingdom would be slandered at home and among
foreign Nations, if it should permit so young a child, by birth so noble, so
near unto the King, and so innocent, to live in prison: (for every Sanctuary
is a prison.)

2. Secondly, because none could claim the benefit of such a place, but he
whose conscience did accuse him of some offense, for which he feared to be
punished by the law. But the conscience of this young Duke cannot be so
burdened, because his infancy and his innocence do excuse him of any such
fault, and therefore he needed no protection there.

3. Thirdly, that none might enjoy the privilege of a Sanctuary, but such a
one as is enabled by true discretion to demand it. But the young Duke (by
reason of his infancy) has not sufficient discretion to require it, and
therefore he is not capable of it, nor may enjoy it.

4. And last of all, he was required to assure her, that any person might be
taken out of a Sanctuary, if it be for his good and welfare, and not to his
hurt, or to punish him: and that therefore if the Queen did obstinately refuse
to deliver him, it was resolved and determined, that he should be taken from
thence, and from her without her leave; and the rather, for that great
suspicion and fear was justly conceived, that her frowardness or her
jealousy would persuade her to send him beyond the Sea, as if he should be
more safe there then in his brother the Kings Court.

When this round message was done unto the Queen, though it so nipped her at
the heart, that willingly she would not let him go, alleging that none but
his own mother was more fit to tutor him, or to attend him, he being so
young, sickly, and very weak; and that each of those two brethren was the
others safety so long as they were kept asunder, and that the life of the one
was maintained in the body of the other, and that if one of them did well, the
other was in no peril or danger, and that nothing was more hazardous then to
keep them both in one place together: yet when she perceived which way the
game went, and that it was resolved by the Protector, and by his friends, that
arguments should not prevail, she embraced the lovely young Duke in her
arms, she kissed him many times, she wept bitterly, and praying Almighty God
to preserve and to defend him from all injury and dangers, she delivered him
to the Archbishop, telling him, that she would require that poor and
innocent child at his hands. And thus unwillingly and sorrowfully she did let
him go.

A monstrous dissembler.
When the harmless infant was by the Arch bishop delivered into the Protectors
hands, who with many other Lords attended the Queens answer in the
Star Chamber, he took him (before the whole assembly) in his arms, he
hugged and embraced him, and kissed him once and twice, and again and again,
protesting upon his soul, that no worldly thing (his Majesty only excepted)
was so dear unto him as that young child, when as indeed he meant nothing
more then the destruction and ruin of them both. And having brought him to the
King, who was infinitely ioied with his presence and company, he conveyed
them (within few days after) with princely pomp and attendance through the
City of London to the Tower, The King and his brother sent to the Tower.
under the pretense of an especial care and providence that they should in
safety remain there until the Commonweals troubles were thoroughly quieted
and appeased, whereas in truth and in deed nothing was out of frame, nothing
was ill ordered, but by himself, and by some other great Lords who wholly
applied themselves to his will.

A bloody conspiracy.
When the Protector had thus couped up those two young Princes, he then began
more seriously to determine how he might speedily make himself a King. And
though for a while he staggered whether or no he might make the Duke of
Buckingham acquainted with his purpose, yet in regard that he stood assured of
his love, and knew that his project could not be effected without his priuitie
and assistance, because he was so mighty and so powerful, therefore he found
a fit time and a secret place to confer with him about that business: and
with small persuasions, and by the offer of his daughter to the Dukes son in
marriage, with the gift of the whole Earldome of Hartford, whereunto the Duke
pretended a rightful title, but never could obtain it from King Edward the
Fourth, and by the dividing and sharing of the greater part of the Kings
treasure among themselves, he won him not only to consent unto his villainy,
but also to assist him in that plot.

The Lord Hastings (whom the Protector for old acquaintance, The Lord Hastings
could not be won.
friendship, and love, had newly settled in the office of Chamberlain to the
young King) was ever faithful and trusty to King Edward the Fourth, and had
vowed his heart to the service of his new master, insomuch that the Protector
was not assured whether he might attempt to win him to join with himself
and with the Duke of Buckingham in his conspiracy, or no. But in the end he
fearing lest he could not do that mischief safely, except the said Lord were
either won or destroyed, he resolved upon one of them. Wherefore first of
all by liberal gifts, and by large promises of extraordinary advancement and
preferment, he won to his will one Catesbie, who was both witty, and well
learned in the Laws of this Realm, and was the most inward of all others with
the said Lord Hastings, from whom he had received his best fortunes, and his
chiefest means to gain. Him the Protector employed and instructed, that by
dark speeches and by some mystical propositions, he should afar off feel
and undermine the inclination of the said Lord his dearest friend touching that
matter. Which when he treacherously and craftily had done, he informed the
Protector that there was no possibility ever to win him thereunto.

Hereupon the Protector resolving to cut him short, A plot full of villainy.
called a Grand Counsel of the Lords at the Tower of London, proposing to them
for their task the consideration of all fitting preparations for the speedy
Coronation of the King, when as indeed he intended no such thing.

The Lords being assembled, and set down in their places, and all of them long
expecting the repair of the Protector, who stayed long, at length he came in,
took his chair, saluted them all kindly, excused his long absence, merrily
iested with some of them, and was more then ordinarily pleasant with them all.
But as soon as he had proposed some method to their present conference he told
Doctor Morton, Bishop of Elie, whom he loved not, that he was informed that he
had store of Straberies in his Garden in Holborne, and entreated him to send
for some, which with all expedition he did, being much gladded that he found
the Protector (as he conceived) so kind toward him. But (behold)
unexpectedly and upon a sudden the Protector (faining some necessity of a
short absence) rose up, and requested the Lords to proceed in the matter which
then they had in hand, and promised to make a quick return, which within one
hour after he performed accordingly. But being placed in his chair, the
Lords perceived that some things were amiss: for he bent his brows, bit his
lip, cast his eyes upon the ground, wrung his fists, looked fiercely, sighed
deeply, and by every unpleasing gesture he openly expressed the disquieted
passions of a troubled mind. The Lords (who looked on him sadly, and were
perplexed with sudden perturbations) wondered much at this sudden change, but
knew not what it meant. And when a profound silence had prepared them all to
hearken what would be said, the Protector by way of questioning proposed what
they deserved who wickedly had intended and practiced his destruction, he
being Uncle and Protector to the King? The Lords (who were all free and
absolutely guiltless of any such crime) sat still as men amazed, and not one
of them spoke a word. But at length the Lord Hastings (who by reason of his
great familiarity with the Protector, imagined that he was highest in his
favor) answered thus: My Lord, such as have so transgressed the Law, deserve
the seuerest punishments which by the Law may be inflicted upon them, and all
the Lords assented thereunto. A likely matter.
Then quoth the Protector, that Sorceresse (meaning the Queen) and that
Strumpet Shores wife, have conspired together by witchcraft to deprive me of my
life: and that you may be right well assured that it is true, behold (I pray
you) and see how their villainy has already seized upon my body. For by it
my left arm is already wasted and consumed, and therewithal he stroke up
his sleeue, and showed his arm naked before them Shores wife was King Edwards
Concubine.
she would have consorted with Shores wife above all other women, because she
was the Concubine of King Edward her deceased husband. And besides all this,
they all knew that the in all her actions, hating to revenge although means
and opportunity were offered unto her to do mischief.

The Lord Hastings (who after King Edwards death, The Lord Hastings punished
for his whoredom.
conuersed with Shores wife; using her as his Concubine; and but the same
Morning leaving her in his own bed) being desirous (if he might) to appease
the Protectors rage toward her: And (in some sort) being willing to excuse
her, Replied thus, My Lord, if the Queen and she have so done, and
therewithal the Protectors indignation (waxing intemperate) interrupted him,
thus: Thou Traitor (quoth he) tellest thou me of Iffs and Ands; I tell thee
they have done it, and as he spoke those words with a loud voice, he clapped his
hand rudely upon the Table board; Armed men.
upon the noise whereof, the whole Chamber was suddenly stuffed and filled with
Armed men. And one of them (at his first entrance) struck with his Holbard at
the Lord Stanleys head: who preventing the violence, but not all the blow, to
save his life fell under the Table but did loose much blood. The Protector
himself arrested the said Lord Hastings, and accused him (by general terms)
of high Treason: The Lord Hastings beheaded.
and forthwith without any other proceeding or Judgment, caused him to be
carried out into the Green, and his Head upon a Logge to be chopped off.

And it is to be noted, that this Execution was thus done on him the same day,
and at the same hour, that the Earl Ryuers, the Lord Richard Gray, Sir Thomas
Vaughan, and their other friends, were executed without legal proceeding in
the Castle of Pomfret: Murder punished.
which Execution was appointed by the Protector, by the Duke of Buckingham, and
by the said Lord Hastings, who little dreamed that he should in the like manner
have died at the same time.

This Execution being thus dispatched, the Protector caused those Armed to
seize upon the Cardinal Archbishop of York: and upon the Bishop of Elie, and
upon the Lord Stanley, and some others, all which were severally committed to
several Prisons in that place.

And presently the Protector and the Duke of Buckingham, A had shift.
thrusting themselves into vile and uncomely harness, as if necessity had
compelled them to shift themselves into the first and worst that came unto
their hands: They sent for diverse worthy Citizens of London and required them
with all posting speed to repair thither, which they did. And unto them the
Protector passionately related, that his death was conspired, and that his life
should have been taken from him as he sat that morning in Counsel with the
Lords, by the Lord Hastings, and by his wicked accomplices, if by sudden force
and violence he had not prevented that mischief: and so much they were
required to tell their friends, that they might have true notice of the cause
of this sudden broile and execution in the Tower. And within two hours after
that the Lord Hastings was deprived of his head, a solemn and a long
Proclamation written with a fair hand in parchment, and being under the Great
Seal of England, was brought into the City, and with great solemnity
proclaimed there by an Herald of Arms. But by all circumstances it was
coniectured by all wise men, that the same was indicted, written, and sealed
some days before.

Doctor Shaas Sermon.
Thus when the wicked Protector had impiously cut off the heads of those Lords,
who would still have kept him back from doing of too much mischief if they
had lived, he caused Doctor Shaa (a man more learned then virtuous, and as
wicked in practices as the Protector was, who did instruct him) in a Sermon the
Sunday following at Paul's Cross, to blazon the honorable birth and parentage
of the Protector, to relate his virtues, to commend his valor, to weaken the
fame and honor of the deceased King Edward by reason of his lascivious
wantonness with Shores wife, and with many others, to bastardize all his
children, as being borne in adultery, and out of lawful marriage, for that
King Edward was solemnly contracted (as he affirmed) unto the Lady Elizabeth
Lucie (whom he begat with child) before such time as he married with the Lady
Elizabeth Gray; and also because he was in the person of Richard the great
Earl of Warwick (before his said marriage) affied unto the Lady Bona, sister
to Carlot the wife of the French King.

He also accused the Protectors own mother of great incontinencie, when King
Edward and George Duke of Clarence (his two elder brothers) were begotten. And
thus he striued to make every one crooked besides himself, who was most
crooked of all. And (in conclusion) the Doctor applying his speech to the
worthiness and goodness of the Protector, he supposed that the people could
not choose but receive him for their undoubted sovereign Lord and King, and
therefore he striued to prepare the multitude to have shouted out when the
King came in, and to have cried, King Richard, King Richard: but he failed of
his purpose; for every man was silent, and more surprised with wonder then with
applause, to see and to perceive how cowardly, how unnaturally, and how
wickedly these affairs and businesses were carried, not to continue the
Protector to be a subject any longer, but to be a King.

And the next day in the Guildhall of London the Duke of Buckingham by like
arguments endeavored to make the Protector the rightful and undoubted heir
and inheritor of the Crown. The Duke is now King Richard.
And albeit that the Townsmen took no contentment in this message, nor did by
their voices assent to that which to them was delivered, yet (against their
wills) the Duke of Buckingham procured them the next day to go with him and
with many other Lords to Baynards Castle to the Protector, where they offered to
receive him for their lawful King, and prayed him to undergo that burden. But
oftentimes he refused to grant them their request. But at last he granted it.
And thus he gained and won (by their persuasions) his hearts desire.

THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
WHen King Richard had taken upon him the government Cowardly dissimulation.
be applied himself to all baseness, striving thereby (but all in vain) to
win the love and favor of his people. And not seeming to take any notice
that the Lord Strange, son and heir apparent to the Lord Stanley, intended to
raise an Army in the North, because his father had been wronged, and was then
imprisoned by the King, but pretending that he loved him when he might punish
him, he did not only set him at liberty, but also made him the Steward of his
own house.

He also enlarged the Archbishop of York, D. Morton committed.
but committed Doctor Morton Bishop of Elie as a prisoner to the Duke of
Buckingham, who was afterward a principal means of his confusion, and of
King Richards destruction, as in the sequel of this History more particularly
it shall appear.

Nobles created.
The King, to make himself strong, by conferring of great honors upon others,
created his only child Edward (who was of the age of ten years) Prince of
Wales: and John Howard (who was both valiant in the field, and wise in
counsel) was by him created Duke of Norfolk. And Sir Thomas Howard (his
eldest son) was made Earl of Surrey. The Lord William Barkley was advanced
to the Earldom of Nottingham. And Francis Lord Louel (whom he entirely loved)
was made Viscount Louel.

The French King despises King Richard.
And when he had (as he imagined) so surely settled his estate, that froward
fortune could not change it, by his Ambassadors he made offer to Lewys the
French King to conclude a peace. But Lewys so much detested his bloody
cruelties and his murders, that he would not vouchsafe to see the Ambassadors
which he sent, nor to hear the message which they brought.

This frumpe and some others so pinched him at the heart, and the Devil took
such an advantage of him, by reason of his ambitious and wicked mind, that he
supposed he could never be reputed and truly honored as a King, so long as his
two harmless and poor nephews drew any breath, as though so horrible and so
execrable and bloody a murder could win him love and reputation among his
discontented people. The two young Princes are murdered.


Thus whilst his head forged this vile and villainous conceit, he made his
progress toward the City of Gloucester, as if he only intended by his
presence to honor that place from whence his former title of dignity was
derived, strongly persuading himself, that if this ungodly and heinous fact
were committed in his absence, no man would then repute him to be guilty of
that mischief.

Sir Robert Brackenburie.
We must be informed here, that because from a mean estate he had raised Sir
Robert Brackenburie to the dignity of Knighthood, and had made him Lieu-tenant
of the Tower, he coniectured that those his favors, and many more which he
might hope for, would have incited him (for his sake) to have committed any
villainy whatsoever. But the love which this virtuous and good Knight bare to
virtue, and the great care which he had to keep a quiet and a guiltless
conscience, made him to refuse to perpetrate that murder, which by the Kings
letters he was peremptorily enioined and commanded to perform.

James Terril.
Whereat when the King had stormed, sworn, and cursed like a Fiend, he called
to his remembrance, that in the Tower there lodged one James Terril, a man who
was needy both in virtue, and of good means, to support his haughty and his
ambitious mind, and who was likely (for rewards and promotions sake) to kill
his own father and his friend. To him the King by his letters disclosed the
earnestness of his desires, and promised larger recompense if the fact were
done; then such a hellish service could deserve.

Thus when he had made him pliant to his will, he then by his letters required
the Lieu-tenant to deliver to him the keys of the Tower, which he forthwith
did. And thus every thing being fitted according to his desires, the next night
James Terril sent Miles Forest, John Dighton, and two other graceless and
cruel Executioners, into the poor childrens chamber, where they wickedly
smoothered them in their beds, and buried them at the stairs foot, from whence
they were removed, and obscurely bestowed in an unknown place.

The news which proclaimed that the two young Princes were unfortunately found
dead in their bed, so amazed the Nobles and the common people of this Kingdom,
and so inwardly perplexed the dying Queen, that every place returned Echoes
of lamentations and of sorrow, and every man's eyes sent forth streams of
tears in token of their grief. Only the Tyrant and his Confederates, for a
few months, solaced themselves in this, that Richard was now a complete King,
and with admired policy had surely settled him self and his posterity in
this Kingdom.

But wicked and bloody Tyrant, let such as hate thy vices, demand of thee some
questions; and then thou shall plainly see, and be thine own Judge, whether
this land did ever breed a more ungodly monster then thy self.

1. Could not the infancy and the imbecillitie of those tender and sweet babes
(who were unable to resist or to do thee harm) persuade thee to suffer them
to live?

2. Could not their innocence incline thine heart to pity and to take
compassion on them?

3. Could not their proximitie of blood with thine induce thee to spare theirs?

4. Could not the confidence which by the Commonweal was reposed in thee,
make thee faithful, being trusted?

5. How came it to pass, that thou (by violence and by villainy) should
dare to take away the life of thy Master, nay of thy sovereign Lord and King,
the anointed of the Lord?

6. Could not the shame which the world would spot thee with, when thou had
done it, deter thee from consenting to it?

7. Did thou not foresee how hateful thy self, nay how odious thy name
would be unto all good men, when thy wickedness should be revealed?

8. By Gods Commandment thou were prohibited to do murder. What then made
thee so to neglect and to contemn the precept of thy God, that (in despite of
him and of his Law) thou committedst this execrable murder?

9. Could not the ghastly examples of Gods severe judgments, wrathfully poured
down upon such murderers, make thee afraid to kill thine own kinsmen?

10. Why should the Devil and boundless ambition carry thee headlong into
such a Sea of wickedness, to thine own ruin and destruction?

11. What could thou desire to have, which thou had not?

12. Did thou want riches? Why, the whole treasure of the Kingdom was to
be disposed of as thou listedst.

13. Did thou want lands and livings? Thou could not have wished for any
that the King had, but with a word thou might have had thy share therein.

14. Did thou want authority to command, and to make thee great? No, thou
did not: for thou swaiedst the Kings person and his whole Kingdom at thy
will and pleasure.

15. No, no. But thou wast destitute of the grace of God, which made thee
empty of all goodness. From henceforth when thou art named, the paper, the
tongue, and the care shall sharply accuse thee of innocent blood, yea thine
own conscience shall condemn thee, and (as a hangman) torment and torture
thee with pains and punishments which shall not quickly end.

The punishment of a murderer.
Every man already sees, and reioiceth to see, how thou art perplexed, and
can not be in rest. Thou fear lest thine enemies will subdue thee. Thou
distrustest thy friends, lest they will betray to kill other, because thou art
surprised with continual fear lest every man will kill thee. Thou bendest thy
brows, and

Now when King Richards progress was ended, Good fruits from an evil tree.
and he returned unto London, he endeavored by the making of good Laws, and
by executing of them with favor and with mercy, and by his bounteous
liberality to the poorer sort, and by his humility, gentleness, and
courtesy, to insinuate himself into the love and favor of his people. But
God (who would not suffer him long to enjoy his worldly dignity and honor
without crosses) deprived him of his only child, the young Prince of Wales, K.
Richard is made chillesse.
for whom he was much grieved.

Now must we know, that as Doctor Morton Bishop of Elie, 1484. 2
was singularly well learned, so was he exceeding witty, politic, and
cunning. And of all those his qualities he made such use, Doctor Morton.
that in the end he obtained his liberty, occasioned the Duke of Buckinghams
overthrow, procured the destruction of King Richard, conioined (by marriage) the
two Houses of Lancaster and York, advanced the Earl of Richmond to the
Crown, and also preferred himself to great honor, as hereafter it shall
appear.

The Duke of Buckingham (to whom he was a prisoner) was not only great in
regard of his high dignity and large possessions, He applies himself to the
Dukes humor.
but by his learning and much applauded courtesy he also won the
extraordinary love and favor of all sorts and degrees of people in this
Kingdom. But his witty prisoner perceiving that he was ambitious, and
greedy of his own praise and commendation, as commonly great men are,
insinuated himself into his especial love and favor, by applying his talk
and conference to those humors, They begin to be inwardly familiar.
insomuch that within a short time the Dukes heart conceived nothing which his
tongue revealed not to the Bishop, yea they began to speak their minds freely
each to other touching the bloody villainies and tyranny of the King.

This crafty Bishop likewise, to provoke the Duke not only to a further
detestation of those cruelties, Morton raileth on the Usurper.
but also to a resolved purpose Hartford, according to his promise in that
behalf. Now unto that he remembered him of the jealousy which the King
conceived of the Dukes greatness, so that he rather diminished, then Edward
and the Duke of Clarence, to make himself more legitimate Anthony Lord
Ryuers, Richard Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and of the Lord Hastings, chief
Chamberlain to the two last Kings. Edward, the eldest son of King Henry the
Sixth, and of the same King, and of the Duke of Clarence his own brother. And
last of all, and the worst of all, the bastardizing, deposing, and murdering of
his poor, innocent, and guiltless nephews, which gave him (by wicked
usurpation) his passage to the Crown and Scepter of this Kingdom.

Mortons motives.
All these things when the Bishop had recounted, then (for a full conclusion to
all that had been spoken) he advised the Duke of Buckingham, for the safety
of his own life, and for the preservation of his Country, either to make use
of his own virtues and greatness, and of the extraordinary favor and love
which all the people bare him, and to make himself their King; or otherwise,
to further the uniting of the two houses of Lancaster and of York, by marying
of King Edwards eldest daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, with the Earl of
Richmond, the son and heir apparent of Margaret Countess of Richmond,
daughter and heir to the Duke of Buckinghams great Uncle John Duke of
Somerset, son to John of Gaunt the fourth son of King Edward the Third; and
so to make the said Earl a true and a lawful King, by means whereof the
Crown of this kingdom should not only be settled where justly it ought to be,
but also all future occasions of Factions and of Civil wars would be taken
clean away, and the world should be quited of such a Monster, who was loathed
and hated by all good men.

Buckinghams resolution.
The Duke of Buckingham, although he were ambitious beyond measure, and liked
well to be styled by the great name of a King, yet because usurpation must
needs have been his best title, (and Usurpers never wanted envy) he
therefore employed his wits to conclude that match, and to make the Earl King.

When the Bishop (by often disputes) had thoroughly confirmed the Duke in this
his resolution, Morton would feign be a liberty.
he made him a solemn protestation, that if he would permit him to go into
his I Will of Elie, he then would quickly furnish the said Duke with store of
money and of men. But the Duke was most desirous of his company for two
reasons. First, because his escape would undoubtedly be laid unto

The Bishop knowing that whilst he was a prisoner, Morton escapes.
his head was subject to King Richards command, and that his great familiarity
with the Duke cleared him of all suspicion unmannerly to depart, watched his
fittest time of opportunity, and being disguisefully apparrelled in base
clothes, he secretly stole away, and came to Elie, where he furnished himself
among his friends with store of money and other necessaries, He flies into
Flanders.
and then (without lingering) he sailed into Flanders, where by his counsel
and best means he animated the Earl of Richmond, who was in Britain, His
motion and encouragement to the Earl of Richmond and to others.
to return into England, to take to wife the Lady Elizabeth, King Edwards
eldest daughter, to depose the Tyrant, and to make himself a true and a
lawful King. He also solicited by his letters, and by secret messengers,
diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen of this Realm, to be aiding and assisting to
the said Earl at his return. And the Earl himself so prevailed with Francis
Duke of Britain, that albeit King Richard by his Ambassadors had striued by
the disbursement and gift of much money, rich jewels, K. Richard practices to
get the Earl of Richmond.
and by frank promises, to make him a new Prisoner, and consequently to
deprive him of all good hope, yet the Duke of Britain (as his faithful and
constant friend) began to succor him with his best helps.

And albeit that this plot (devised by Morton) was exceeding secret, as all the
Conspirators did imagine, Richard acquainted therewith as well as they. And
therefore, K. Richard knows Mortons plot.

Buckingham refuses to come to tha Court.


to cut off the Duke of Buckingham from that Faction by violence, or else to
win him by fair promises to take his part, he courteously importuned his
company at the Court. But he having a guilty conscience, and knowing that
King Richard was not niggardly in shedding of blood, nor used to spare any man
of whom he doubted or feared, submissiuely and with humble terms excused his
not coming, by reason of his indisposition to travel, occasioned by the
infirmity of his weak body. The King (who could skilfully cast his water)
perceived that he was not sick in body, but in mind toward him: wherefore
by letters and sharp threatenings, he peremptorily commanded and required him
to come. But the Duke rather desiring to have a public enemy then a
dissembling friend, boldly returned him this answer, that he reputed him to
be a monster, a tyrant, a murderer, his enemy, and an unlawful King, and
therefore that he would not come unto him. Armies are raised.
And knowing that his life was near ended, except he could maintain what he
had said by strength of arms in open field, he went hastily into Wales, and
raised a powerful Army: and in Devonshire, and in Cornwall, Sir Edward
Courtney, and Peter Courtney his brother, being Bishop of Exeter, did the like.
So did Sir Richard Guilford, and some other Gentlemen in Kent. And Thomas Gray
Marquess Dorset, who forsaking the Sanctuary rode into Yorkshire, levied
there much people. Wherefore King Richard (to support his own estate, and to
preserve his life, and to vanquish his stout and bold enemies) raised another
Army.

These preparations being thus made, King Richard marched against the Duke,
because he accounted him to be the head of this conspiracy, and did persuade
himself that he should be quited of all fear, if he could vanquish him
before he joined his forces with his friends.

The Duke perceiving the Kings intention, resolved bravely to confront him, and
to dare him face to face, for which purpose he determined to lead his whole
army through the River of Seuerne at a low foord not far from the City of
Gloucester. This flood hastened the Dukes death, who consented to the murder of
the two young Princes.
But in the night before he should pass over, such an incredible abundance of
rain fell, and the showers so mainly poured down for ten days following,
that not only the River was made impassable, but also the whole Country
thereabout was surrounded with an excessive flood, insomuch that grounds,
villages, towns, and people were drowned or carried away, to the great hurt
and prejudice of the inhabitants, who grievously bewailed and sorrowed for
their loss.

This enforced lingering, together with the Dukes wants of victual, money, and
of other necessaries, so discomforted the wavering and unconstant Welshmen,
that when he thought himself sure of their help, they then ran away, and left
him alone: and he himself (by perilous and hard shifting) was enforced to
harbor himself near unto Shrewesburie in the house of one Humfrey Banaster,
who was his servant, and whom from a low degree he had raised to a fair
estate, authority, and worship. And the rest of the Dukes friends in other
Provinces (when they heard the certainty of the Dukes ill speeding) upon a
sudden dispersed all their companies, and every one of them carefully shifted
for himself, and many of them (by means of their diligence and good fortune)
entered into the Sea, and arrived safely in the Duchy of Britain, among whom
were Sir Edward Courtney, Peter Courtney his brother, Bishop of Exeter, Thomas
Marquess Dorset, John Lord Wells, Sir John Bourchier, Sir Edmund Wooduile the
old Queens brother, Sir Robert Willoughby, Sir Giles Dawbney, Sir Thomas
Arundel, Sir John Cheney, his two brethren, Sir William Barkley, Sir William
Brandon, Sir Richard Edgecombe, and some others.

The King having dispersed this cloud, The Duke is proscribed.
which threatened a terrible storm, proscribed the Duke of Buckingham, and
proposed the gift of a thousand pounds to him that should be the mean to take
him: whereupon his faithless, treacherous, His servant betraieth him.
and unthankful servant Humfrey Banaster betrayed him to John Mitton Sheriff
of Shropshire, who with a strong Guard of armed men conveyed him to
Shrewesburie to the King, who being examined, confessed all in hope of favor,
He is beheaded.
but forthwith and without any legal proceedings or judgment he lost his head.

In the mean time, whilst these things were in doing, Richmond sai^^th for
England.
the Earl of Richmond (who neither beard of this misfortune, nor of the
arrival of his worthy friends, who flying out of England came into Britain)
having in his company almost five thousand men, entered into the Sea, and
directed his course for this Realm. But in the evening after his departure out
of Britain, A storm takes him, and he returns.
he was so cruelly beaten with an hideous storm which so suddenly assailed
him and his, that some of his ships were driven back to the place from whence
they came, others into Normandy, and only one of them (besides that in which
himself was) remained at the Sea. The next day as the Earl came before Pole,
he perceived that all the Coasts and hills adioining were thickly sprinkled
with armed men, who eagerly attended his arrival by the commandment of King
Richard: and diverse practices were used to train him in. But because he feared
the worst, as he had good cause, taking the benefit of a fair wind, he
returned, and landed safely within the Duchy of Normandy, He is relieved by
the French King
from whence he sent to the new and young King of France, Charles the Eighth,
desiring that by his free leave and license he might safely pass through that
Province into Britain; who not only granted his request, but also (pitying his
wants and evil fortune) relieved and furnished him with much money. So he
having collected his dispersed ships, sent them into Britain, and himself by
land went thither, where (to his exceeding comfort and great joy) he met with
his distressed friends, all which were valiant men, and great Commanders in the
times of war. With these Captains he entered into new consultations, and
giving to them his solemn oath to take to his wife the Lady Elizabeth, He
takes an oath.
eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth, if his success were fortunate,
they all became his subjects, and honored him as their King: and all of them
(by the Duke of Britains aid and succors) endeavored to make ready a new
Fleet, and such soldiers as they could get, for his return. In the mean time
King Richard by sundry executions shortened the number of the Earls friends,
and procured him and his associates by an Act of Parliament to be attainted of
High Treason, He is attainted of treason.
and thereby he enabled himself to seize upon all their lands and moueables
which he could find. But his cruelties were so inhumane and barbarous, that
they were condemned in the opinions of all his people, who sharply accused Sir
Richard Ratcliffe, Sir William Catesbie, and the Viscount Louel, his three
minions, and wicked counselors, as furtherers and abettors in those
mischiefs: so that (among others) one Collingborne was executed as a Traitor
for making and dispersing of this short ryme: Collingborne executed.
Richard gave a Hog for his Supporter
The Rat, the Cat, and Louel the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog.


Now though the Duke of Buckingham could not hurt King Richard, (for a dead
dog biteth not) yet he resolved by new friendship and alliance to make
himself more strong, for which purpose he not only concluded a peace with
James then King of Scots, but also a marriage between a niece of his, named the
Lady Anne, and the Prince of Rothsay, the eldest son of the said King. He
also attempted once more (by lavish prodigality) to get into his hands the
worthy and brave Earl of Richmond, He attempteth to get Richmond into his
hands.
and for that purpose he sent his Ambassadors into Britain to the Duke, to
offer to him great store of silver and of gold, and all the Rents and the
Revenues of the said Earl and of his Confederates, if he would be pleased to
give him the quiet and the safe possession of him. The Duke at that time was
exceeding sick, so that his High Treasurer Peter Landoys (who at S. Maloes had
freed the said Earl from the Ambassadors of King Edward the fourth, Peter
Landoys abase slave.
as formerly we have heard) ordered and disposed of all the affairs and
businesses of that Country: wherefore those bribes and promises were made and
tendered unto him, and he (being greedy of so great a prey) did undertake with
great expedition to effect all things according to their desire. But
notwithstanding all this secret practicing and cunning iuggling, this
mischievous plot and intended villainy was by secret messengers revealed to
Doctor Morton Bishop of Elie, he being in Flanders, D. Morton discovers the
danger.
and he with all celeritie and posting speed advertised the Earl of the danger
which he was in, by means whereof, and to save themselves, he with his
chiefest friends and followers as privately as they could departed from Vannes;
and passing through the Country of Britain in great haste, they came into
France, Richmond and his friends escape narrowly.
and presented themselves to the French King, who not only received them
ioifully as his friends, but promised sufficient aid and succor to the Earl
for his relief. But in the mean time Peter Landoys (supposing that the Earl
of Richmond and his associates had left Vannes but for a few days to visit
some inward friends) prepared certain troops of resolved soldiers well armed
at all points, pretending in outward show that they were by him provided to go
into England for the Earls aid; but (to say the truth) they were only fitted
to have surprised him and his Confederates, and to have transported them all to
King Richard. But when he was certainly informed of their escape into France,
he was sore troubled and vexed at the heart, because he was discovered to be
so treacherous, and yet could not effect the mischief which by him was
intended.

Now when it was voiced abroad, that the young French King and his Counsel
would assist the Earl in his enterprise to gain the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, Sir James Blunt Captain of the Castle of Hammes, and Sir John
Fortescue Porter of the Town of Calice, and John Vere Earl of Oxford, who was
a prisoner with the said Sir James, secretly repaired to the Earl, who
(because they were valiant men at arms, and skilled much in martial
discipline) received them courteously, and with much joy.

When King Richard was by his own Ambassadors truly assured in what strange
manner the Earl of Richmond and his friends had saved them selves, by flying
into France, and that he was preparing of new forces to try his fortune when
he should land, and that the French King and his Nobles both favored and
assisted him, and that the Earl of Oxford, with the other two, were with him,
his continual fear gave him no rest, Another villainous practice of King
Richards.
until he had (in some sort) pleased himself by a new device. And his plot
was thus: By subtle and crafty messengers he made large profers of massy
silver and of gold, besides his earnest promise of much advancement and
especial favor to the mother Queen, conditionally, that she would commit
unto his custody and keeping her five daughters, so that by means thereof the
Earl of Richmond might utterly be deprived of all hope to match with the Lady
Elizabeth as he intended: for he strongly persuaded himself, that if that
marriage were by craft and subtlety prevented, few men would then engage
themselves to depose him and make the Earl King.

The old Queens folly and covetousness.
The unconstant and the improvident Queen, whom covetousness and ambition had
made credulous, and willing to believe him, who in the field had formerly
slain Sir John Gray her first husband, unjustly had executed her brother and
her son, and who had not only bastardized her two other sons, K. Richard is
possessed of K. Edwards five daughters.
but had wickedly and villanously caused them both to be murdered in the
Tower, accepted of those his gifts and promises, and delivered unto him her
five daughters.

And no sooner had he gotten them into his custody, but (to make his title to
the Crown more sure) he longed in his heart incestuously to marie with his
own brothers daughter, His incestuous purpose.
the said Lady Elizabeth. But the life of Queen Anne his wife, who was the
daughter of Richard Earl of Warwick, and the former wife of Prince Edward the
son and heir of King Henry the Sixth, and whom himself and his brother the
Duke of Clarence had murdered in King Edwards presence, was the only
impediment to that match.

The Queen suddenly died.
It must now be diligently observed, that suddenly uncertain Authors made
report that Queen Anne (who was not sick) was dead: and moreover, King
Richard himself forsook her company and her bed, pretending much
coffeehouse and great dislike because she was barren, and not likely to have
any more children to establish his succession in the Crown. The Queen (who
shrewdly ghessed at the wicked intention of her graceless husband) much
grieved and vexed her self thereat: and whether her private conceits that her
death was conspired, or whether any poison (as many did imagine) shortened her
days or no, it was uncertain; but within few days after she was suddenly
found dead indeed.

He makes love to his own Niece.
The King so little regarded the death of his said Queen, that presently he
began to make love to the Lady Elizabeth his own Niece, who being discreet
and modest, and hating his detested villainies, and well considering what peril
and danger her self and all her sisters were in, She makes him hopeful.
if the Tyrant should rashly be rejected, tempered her denials with tempting
and alluring looks, and prettily fed his fancy with the music of her sweet
tongue, and instantly requested him, not to urge his suit with too much love,
until he had defeated the Earl of Richmond of all his hopes, and had finished
his own troubles, and that he would with careful diligence make good
provision to defend himself. Thus living in hope of her liking, and pleasing
himself by yielding to her request, he disposed himself wholly in making all
needful preparations to resist. But whilst he was thus busied, he was
informed by such Flatterers as never ceased to abuse him, that his Arch-enemie
the Earl of Richmond and his coadiutors received such small comfort of the
French King, that all their hopes were vanished, and that they were so
infinitely oppressed with many wants, that he needed not to fear any
opposition which they could make.

This news was by him so quickly credited, False news makes him secure.
that too much security made him careless to proceed; nay, he discharged all
his Garrisons, which formerly (with great charge and travail) he had placed
near unto the Seacoasts: so that we may by the way make this profitable use
thereof, A note.
that such is the strength of Gods judgments and justice, that wicked and
ungodly men are evermore least heedfull and vigilant for their own safety and
good, when punishments are nearest at hand to correct them for their grievous
offenses and transgressions against God. Whilst these things were thus acting
in England, the Earl of Richmond was informed that his Lady and her sisters
were by their mother delivered into King Richards hands, that his own Queen was
suddenly found dead, and that the old Lecherer made love and daliance to the
Lady Elizabeth, who was the anchor and the stay of all his hopes. Richmond
saileth into England, being aided by the French King.
Wherefore it is not to be wondered at, that now (with more then wonted
importunity) he solicited the young French King and his Counsel for present
aid. And (to say the truth) so graciously was he favored by them all, that he
obtained a quick supply of money, ships, armor, artillery, and two thousand
men, to make trial if his fortune had determined that he should wear a
Crown. With this little (but resolved) company he arrived and landed at
Milford Haven in Ways, when he was least thought on, He landeth.
where he saw no great appearance of such succors as he hoped for.

But when the Welshmen were put in mind, that (being the son of Owen Tuthar)
he was of their own blood, The Welshmen do stick unto him.
and would be an especial favorer of them all, and that his marriage with the
Lady Elizabeth would settle the whole estate of this Kingdom in perfect
unity and in peace, they flocked unto him, and thronged about him with
resolved minds and willing hearts, under their skillful and hardy Captains,
among which John Savage, Arnold Butler, Richard Griffith, John Morgan, and Rice
A^ Thomas, were the chief. To him also repaired Sir George Stanley, More aid.
who conducted the power and strength of the young Earl of Shrewesburie, (he
being then in ward) which consisted of two thousand men. Sir Walter Hungerford
and Sir Thomas Bourchier (two valiant and worthy Leaders of many a lusty man)
presented unto him their service: so did Thomas Lord Stanley, father in law to
the said Earl of Richmond, who was accompanied with five thousand fighting
men. K. Richards people revolt.
All these forces were first levied and provided for King Richards aid: but
God (who purposed to correct and punish him for his fore passed wicked deeds)
converted their hearts, made them to revolt from a Tyrant, and to submit
themselves to a more lawful power; whereat King Richard grieved and tormented
him self in vain. Yet having levied an Army of more then twenty thousand,
(few of which, besides his true friend John Duke of Norfolk and his followers,
remained firm and faithful) he marched against his enemies, fully resolving
to cast all his fortunes in the adventure of one battle, K Richard is
de^perate.
thereby to establish himself without further fear in his Kingdom, or else
(by his death in the open field) to conclude the woeful tragedy of his wicked
life.

John Duke of Norfolk.
And albeit that many practices were daily used to have withdrawn the Duke of
Norfolk from King Richards service, yet none of them prevailed. Wherefore to
make him jealous and diffident of the case wherein he stood, the night before
the two Armies joined, this ryme was fixed upon his chamber door: Jack of
Norfolk be not too bold,
For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.


August, and in the third year of King Richards reign, Bosworth field.
at Bosworth in Lecestershire the two Armies met and encountered each other, and
fought for the space of two hours.

But when King Richard perceived that the smallest number of his soldiers
contended to win the victory, and that the residue of them either cowardly
left the field, or revolted to his enemy, or stood as Neuters, intending to
join with him who was best likely to overcome, despairing of his fortune, and
knowing that death was readily prepared to attache him, K. Richard is valiant.
he left his own Army, and dashing his spurs into his horses sides, he
rushed furiously into the Earls battle, and with his sword he desperately
made himself a free passage, until he was strongly encountered by Sir William
Brandon, who was Standard Bearer to the Earl: him he slew valiantly. And then
singling out Sir John Cheyney, a right hardy man in arms, by mere courage
and fine strength he tumbled him to the ground, and came to the Earl of
Richmond, The Earl of Richmond staieth King Richard.
with whom he fought with desperate resolution hand to hand, until he was by
him slain. And thus by his death this mortal quarrel ended, the Earl having
lost in this battle not above one hundred men, and King Richard about one
thousand, among which the Duke of Norfolk was the chief.

When King Richard was thus slain, his carrion carcass being found stark
naked in the field, His body rudely used.
and being wounded and filthily polluted with dirt and goarie blood, was cast
upon a horse back behind a Pursuiuant at Arms, Gods judgment on a wicked
murderer.
to be carried to the Town of Lecester, his head and his hands hanging down
on the one side, and his legs on the other side like a calfe: and there it
was interred with as base a funeral as was bestowed upon his two Nephews in
the Tower.

His Crown being found among the spoils and dead men in the field, The Earl
of Richmond is crowned in the field.
was brought to the Earl of Richmond by his father in law the Lord Stanley,
who with the general acclamations of the people, who shouted for joy, and
cried King Henry, King Henry, crowned him therewith in the open field.

And then the Earl with all his Army in the field gave hearty and humble
thanks to Almighty God for this great victory: He thanketh and praises God.
and (with promises of large rewards) the whole Army was dissolved, and the
Earl and his Nobles departed to their rest. Thus lived and thus died King
Richard, when he had reigned as a Tyrant two years, two months, and one day.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE SEVENTH.
AS after a sharp winter men do receive the sweet comforts of a pleasant
England in the succession of King Henry, The King marieth ^he Lady Elizabeth.
who being crowned King, according to his oath and promise, married the fair
and virtuous Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth,
ioining thereby in one the two great Families of Lancaster and of York,
betwixt whom (for Principality and for the Crown) infinite contentions and
mortal wars had formerly consumed and destroyed many thousands of brave and
valiant men.

Now that the state of this Kingdom might be confirmed in its happiness, by
the safety of the Kings person, The King chooses a Guard.
and by other requisites, King Henry (taking his President and ensample from
the Kings of France) selected a certain number of warlike men in all places to
attend upon him, Rewards given. Noblemen created.
whom he termed the Yeomen of his Crown. He also rewarded with great bounty
all such as for his sake had been eminent in his service; and created his
uncle, Iaspar Earl of Pembroke, Duke of Bedford. His father in law, Thomas
Lord Stanley, was made Earl of Darbie. He also made his faithful and firm
friend and favorite, the Lord Chandew of Britain, Earl of Bath. Sir Giles
Dawbeney was made Lord Dawbeney, Sir Robert Willoughbie Lord Brook, and Edward
Stafford the eldest son of Humfrey Duke of Buckingham (who in his quarrel
lost his head) was by him restored to his fathers dignity and possessions.

A Parliament. Acts repealed. The Crown is intailed. New Laws. His Pardons.
Then he assembled his High Court of Parliament at Westminster, in which he
frustrated, cancelled, and made void all former Acts which convicted him and
his adherents as guilty of High Treason. The Crown of this Kingdom was
entailed to him and to the heirs of his body. He also caused such Laws and
such Statutes to be made, as were behoouefull and beneficial to this
Commonweal. He pardoned all such as (having conspired or borne arms against
him) submissiuely by their oaths acknowledged and received him for their true
and lawful King.

His Counselors.
He elected the most noble, grave, and wise men of this Kingdom, to be of his
Privy Counsel, by whose direction and advice the government of this Realm
was established in prosperity and in peace. The Duke of Britain is
recompensed.
He bountifully recompensed the Duke of Britain for all his former courtesies
toward him, and also paid unto him all such sums of money as at any time he
had disbursed for his maintenance and relief. So is the French king.
The like he did to the French King, and thereby redeemed his two Hostages, the
Lord Marquess Dorset, and Sir John Bourchier, whom he left there.

1486. 2
Thus whilst King Henry was careful, willing, and endeavored to please all
men, and by his virtuous imploiments labored to settle things in peace, A
Rebellion.
the malignant spirits of such as tormented themselves at his happiness, and
placed their own hope for preferment in rebellious attempts and seditious
courses, would not permit him to live at rest, and quietly to perform the
duties of a gracious King. For Francis Lord Louel, Humfrey Stafford, and Thomas
his brother, leaving the Sanctuary at Colchester, which for their safety they
had taken, seduced and animated much people in the North against King Henry,
and caused them (upon untrue surmises) rashly and without advice or counsel to
put themselves in arms.

The King (who was not far away from them) being somewhat troubled with this
news, The Kings celeritie in raising an Army.
began to raise an Army to withstand them; and such was his strange and
wonderful celeritie and expedition to prevent the increase of their further
strength, that hastily he sent against them his Uncle the Duke of Bedford with
three thousand men, whose breast-plates were made of tanned leather, for want
of other armor: and he himself travailed day and night to second his
soldiers with a better strength. But when the Lord Louel and his associates
perceived that King Henry resolved to make them fight before they were
sufficiently prepared, and that fresh forces would give them a second onset, if
at the first they should happen to be victorious, their courage failed, The
Rebels fly.
their hearts fainted, so that in the darkness of the night they fled, and
left their unarmed Army to the mercy of King Henry, the two Staffords taking
Sanctuary in the Abbie of Culnham, not far from Oxford, and the Lord Louel
being shrouded by Sir Thomas Broughton in the North.

The next day the poor distressed Rebels (being destitute of their Leaders)
humbly submitted themselves to the Kings mercy, and received his free pardon.
But because no Sanctuary could protect malefactors in cases of High Treason,
therefore the two Staffords were by violence seized on, and the said Humfrey
(being indicted, arraigned, found guilty, Humfrey Stafford is executed.
and condemned) was put to death: but his younger brother was preserved by the
Kings favor, because it was conceived that his transgression was not hatched
by his own malice, but by the peacelesse instigation of his brother.

No sooner was this flame quenched, Richard Symond, a man very leaud, but well
learned, and in all his actions unjust, Richard Symonds conspiracy against K.
Henry.
crafty, and too too cunning. He knowing that Edward Plantagenet Earl of
Warwick, and son and heir unto George Duke of Clarence, brother to King
Edward the Fourth, being now of the age of seventeen years, had from his
infancy been kept as a Prisoner by the two last Kings in the Castle of
Sherry-hutton in the County of York, and that King Henry had secretly removed
him to the Tower, got into his tutorship a young boy, Lambert the counterfeit
Duke of York.
pretty and witty, yet borne of a base parentage and stock, whose name was
Lambert. Him he instructed with as much variety of learning, Court-like
complements, and Gentleman-like behavior, as his years would suffer him to
comprehend; and then he informed him, that by his birth and lineage he was not
only noble, but descended of the royal blood: that he was the only son of
the Duke of Clarence, and the first heir male of the house of York, and
therefore inheritable to the Crown. This lesson, with the daily repetitions of
his heroical Pedigree, he so inculcated into his young Scholar, that he was
as able and as ready to discourse thereof, as if by inspiration that knowledge
had been infused to him from above.

The Irish were too credulous.
Thus when this subtle Priest had prepared his Pupil for his purpose, he
transported him into Ireland, where he first vented and spread abroad this
false and untrue novelty, among the wilder and more barbarous sort of that
fickle and busy Nation, who (being too too credulous and flexible to any
change) gave to the youth all honor and reverence, as unto their sovereign
and liege Lord. And within few days after, diverse of the Nobility of that
Country were taken in the same net of folly, and believed as the Commons did,
among whom the Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Gerandine, was the chief, who
having had much familiar conference with the young counterfeit, and finding his
amiable aspect, the trim composure of his body, his princely presence, his
pregnancie of wit, his sufficient learning, his ingenious capacity, his quick
spirit, his discreet speech, and seemly complements, to be answerable and
fitting to a Prince, not only censured him to be the true and the undoubted
son and heir of the Duke of Clarence, and pitied his estate, but
(endeavoring to do him good) disbursed unto him for the enlargement of his
expenses, train, and honor, diverse and sundry great sums of money, and
persuaded many other great Lords of Ireland to do the like. He also with great
speed and secrecy informed the Lady Margaret, The malice of Margaret Duchess
D^wager of Burgoine to K. Henry.
sister to King Edward the Fourth, and Duchess Dowager unto Charles the
deceased Duke of Burgoine, and the supposed Aunt of this counterfeit, of his
being there. And albeit that she was well assured that this news was false,
yet because (being of the house of York) she mortally hated and envied King
Henry, who was the head and the chief of the Family of Lancaster, she not
only gladded her heart to hear thereof, but also pleased her conceits with
infinite delectation, that now an opportunity was presented to her to execute
her fury upon King Henry, and that she might by this plot (if it succeeded
well) enlarge her true Nephew the young Warwick, and make him King. First of
all therefore she caused the false report of this young counterfeit to be
noised thorowout England, that thereby she might unsettle the minds of such
as were credulous, and might be inclined to take his part. She Irish Nobility
and Nation had not only received him for their Lord and Sovereign, and would
take his

These vain and fabulous reports carried unto her into Flanders Francis Lord
Louel, and her nephew the Earl of Lincoln, son and heir to John de la Pole
Duke of Suffolk, and of Elizabeth one other of the sisters of King Edward the
Fourth, The Traitors land in England.
Sir Thomas Broughton, and some others: and after many speeches and much
conference touching those affairs and businesses, the Duchess caused to be
levied in her Country about two thousand men, which were conducted by Martin
Sward an approved Captain of great resolution and much skill. All these (with
quick expedition) sailed into Ireland, and joined with Sir Thomas Gerardine
the Chancellor, who was in a readiness with more then two thousand men of his
own Nation: and they all determined to transport themselves into England with
all speed.

We may not imagine that King Henry (who was valiant, provident, and wise) was
secure, careless, or negligent in these affairs and weighty businesses. A
politic act.
For (to the end that certainly it might be known that Lambert was but a
counterfeit) he caused Edward the young Earl of Warwick to be publicly
brought through the streets of London from the Tower unto Paul's Church, where
infinite numbers of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this Kingdom had
the sight and view of him, and many of them spent some time in conferring with
him. The King prepares against Lambert. Lambert landeth in England.
He also made great preparations to repel and to subdue all such as (in
Lamberts aid) should either attempt any civil war, or invade his land. And
thus (when he had ordered all things well) these foreign powers arrived near
unto Lincoln, where they expected more succor then they found, or were in any
possibility to have. But when the King was informed that they were come, he
marched toward them with a constant resolution to try the utmost of his
fortune in the field, insomuch that it was now too late for those Inuaders to
step back: for urgent necessity did require, The battle of Stoke.
that either they must fly, fight, or yield. But the truth is, though they
were not strong, yet they were no cowards. The Irish people were strangely
active, and passing valiant, but they wanted Arms: and their brave resolution
so animated their courage, that with haughty stomachs and Lions hearts they
joined in battle with the King. But within less space then one hour,
Lambert is overthrown.
the unprovided and unfurnished Irish with their Captains, the Earl of
Lincoln, Francis Lord Louel, Sir Thomas Gerardine, Martin Sward, Lambert is
made a Skullian, and then the Kings Faulcone^.
and Sir Thomas Broughton, were all slain, and the rest submitted themselves
to the King, who pardoned their offense, and committed the Priest, Sir Richard
Symond, unto perpetual imprisonment: and his counterfeited Pupil (being first
abased in the Skullerie) was within few years after chief Faulconer to the
King. Then was the Kings wife with all honor and princely solemnities crowned
Queen, The Queen is crowned. D. Morton made Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Lord Chancellor, and a Cardinal.
and Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterbury died, and was succeeded by John
Morton Bishop of Elie, who was also made Lord Chancellor of this Kingdom: and
not long after he was dignified with the Hat and habit of a Cardinal by Pope
Alexander the Sixth.

Now though King Henry (through the benefit of a general peace at home) was
made fortunate and happy, yet foreign iarres among his neighbors provoked
him to new imploiments, upon this occasion.

The French King quarrelleth with the Duke of Britain.
Charles the French King having warred successefully against Maximilian King of
the Romans, complained that he was much wronged by Lewys Duke of Orleance, who
had married the Lady Jane his sister, and was his next heir apparent to the
French Crown, for that he with some others took part against him with his
enemy. But in the end when King Charles had affied himself to the Lady
Margaret, daughter to Maximilian, and had concluded a peace between
themselves, the said Duke of Orleance and his accomplices fled into Britain to
Duke Francis, who gave them courteous entertainment, and kindly supplied all
their wants.

The French King (apprehending this as a fit occasion offered to him to quarrel
with the Duke of Britain, because he longed to possess his Country) without
any parley or conference touching that matter, proclaimed wars against him.
And before it was notified that he had raised an Army, he entered into
Britain, and planted a strong siege before the strong and fair City of
Nantz. And by his Ambassadors he importuned King Henry either to Henry being
at the first doubtful what course to take, King Henry mediateth a peace.
because he had received much comfort and many courtesies from them both,
resolved at the last to requite some part of both their loves, by mediating of
a friendly peace, which (with his utmost endeavors) he labored to effect.

The French King (who was both witty and crafty) made an outward show as if
he seemed heartily to desire it, and was thankful for it, although in truth
and in deed he intended nothing less. But the Duke of Britain (following
the directions of his French guests) refused plainly to consent unto that
motion. And within few days after, Some English do aid the Duke.
Edward Lord Wooduile, Captain of the I Will of Wight, and uncle to the Queen,
without the Kings knowledge or license, being accompanied with four hundred of
his most expert and skillful soldiers, sailed into Britain for the Dukes
aid. And soon after his arrival, and near unto Fongiers, a battle was
appointed to be fought between King Charles and the Britons. And (the more to
have terrified the French) seventeen hundred Britons, being clad in coats with
red crosses, as if they had been Englishmen, were joined to the Lord Wooduiles
companies, and were subjected to his command. But the contrary was to the
Frenchmen too well known. Then (at the appointed time and place) the two
Armies met together, The Britons are overthrown. The Lord Wooduile is slain.
and fought fiercely for a season. But in the end the poor Britons being found
counterfets as they were, and their whole Army being unable to resist so great
a puissance as encountered them, were slain together with the Lord Wooduile,
and the greater number of his associates, and the victory fell to the French
part.

Within few days after, K. Henry aideth the Britons against the French King.
in England it was concluded by Parliament, that albeit King Henry had lovingly
been aided by the French King for the recovery of his Crown, yet in regard
that the Duke of Britain for many years together had in all friendly, gentle,
and liberal sort, entertained, protected, and maintained him when he was
unable to relieve himself, and likewise because it was considered, that if
King Charles should win and annex that Duchy to the Crown of France,
himself and his posterity might and were likely to prove bad neighbors to
this Kingdom, King Henry should take part with the Dude of Britain.

This business being so determined, An army is sent into Britain.
the King sent into that Province an Army which consisted of eight thousand
men, under the conduct of the Lord Brook. And for the maintenance of those
wars, A Tax which occasioneth a Rebellion.
a tax (by the same Parliament) of the tenth penny of the value of all the
moveable goods and chattels of the Subjects was granted to the King.

No sooner was the English Army arrived in Britain, but the Duke (who had
been long sickly) died: A sudden peace is concluded.
and therefore (upon a composition made betwixt his Nobles and King Charles)
he was affied to the Lady Anne, the sole daughter and heir to the deceased
Duke, who was formerly betrothed to Maximilian King of the Romans, and so was
the said French King likewise assured to the Lady Margaret daughter to
Maximilian. And thus the British wars were at an end: and the Englishmen
having only seen thar Country, and done nothing, returned safely into England.

Now must we understand, York, and of the Bishopric of Durham, A Rebellion.
not only refused peremptorily to pay any part of the Tax which was granted
to King Henry for the maintenance of the British wars, but also that in a most
rebellious fashion they boldly rushed upon and cruelly murdered Henry the
fourth Earl of Northumberland, The Earl of Northumberland is murdered.
who by the King was appointed to cause the extracts of that Subsidy to be
levied by distress upon the goods of all such as he found slack or obstinate
in those paiments: which when they had done, trusting to their own strength
and numbers, they began a civil war, so that as they passed through those
Countries, they forcibly compelled Gentlemen and others to take their parts.

The King (to repress and punish the Ringleaders of this tumultuous
insurrection) sent against them a strong and a well provided Army, under the
especial command of Thomas Earl of Surrey, who having been taken prisoner as
he fought for King Richard at Bosworth field, was now enlarged, and delivered
out of prison, and received into the Kings favor: and the King himself in his
own person followed after him. But the foolish Rebels (as men amazed, The
Rebels fly.
witless, and wanting counsel to direct their actions, and cowardly
distrusting their own power and ability to resist) threw off their armor,
shifted hardly to save themselves, and fled every man to his own home. But the
King (who resolved by severe executions to terrify such others as otherwise
were likely to contemn him, They are punished.
and to despise his government) by exquisite and sharp enquiries, found out
and apprehended the chiefest authors of this mischief, who (in sundry places
of this Realm) were punished by death. But the multitude and the baser sort
obtained the Kings gracious favor.

1490.
The British Nobles calling to mind that their young Duchess Maximilian King
of the Romans, and secondly to Charles the French King, and perceiving (upon
more sound consideration) that the French King would always bear a heavy
hand over them, if indeed he were once married to her, began to revolt from
their promise, and to resist his intention and desire by strength of arms.

But the Frenchmen (according to their custom) being more victorious by their
prodigal gifts then by their true valor, corrupted the British Nobility, and
such Matrons as daily attended upon their young Duchess, in such sort, that
King Charles got her into his possession. And then he published, that his own
former contract with the Lady Margaret, daughter to Maximilian King of the
Romans, and also that the other contract made by the said Maximilian with the
said Duchess of Britain, were nullities, void, and frustrate in the Law, for
that the said two Ladies (at the times of those affiances made) were too young,
and wanted good discretion to make their choice. And thereupon King Charles
returned the said Lady Margaret to her father, and was forthwith married to the
said Duchess: and by this mean he joined that Province to the Crown of
France.

The King of the Romans (scorning and disdaining thus to be disgraced, The
King of the Romans craves aid, and obtains it of King Henry.
and that his daughter should so unkindly be sent home) seemed eager, and
resolved to revenge those injuries and wrongs: and finding his own strength to
be too weak for so great an enterprise, solicited King Henry (by his
Ambassadors) to assist him in those wars. Whereupon King Henry (partly in
regard of the love which he bare to the said King Maximilian, and partly
because he saw that the French King was not only become Lord of Britain, but
attempted likewise to bring the Low Countries under his subjection) concluded
so to do, by the general assent of his Nobility and Commons in full
Parliament at Westminster assembled. And because the poorer and the inferior
sort should not be grieved with any tax to support those wars, the King
solicited his Nobles, Gentry, and rich men only, by way of a Benevolence to
enlarge their bounty toward that charge, A Benevolence.
as formerly (in the like case) they had done to his Predecessor King Edward
the Fourth. By this motion and device he gathered much money, but lost more
love: for many men gave somewhat with their hands, whose hearts were unwilling,
and repined to depart with such gifts.

The King (for the expediting of this weighty business) caused a gallant
Fleet of warlike ships to be apparrelled, Maximilian is unable to perform his
promise.
and committed them to the general command of his Uncle Iaspar Duke of
Bedford, and of John Earl of Oxford.

But when all things were prepared, and the Army ready to be embarked, the
King (by his own Ambassadors which were in Flanders) was informed, that
Maximilian was altogether unprovided of armor, men, money, munition, victuals,
and of all other things requisite for the war, and that King Henry might not
depend to be aided by him with one man.

This news vexed and perplexed him at the heart: for wisely he considered,
that if suddenly he should desist from his enterprise, and dismiss his Army,
then these inconveniences would ensue.

First, his enemies (being elated thereby) would deride, mock, and scorn him,
and perhaps endeavor to brand him with the infamous title of a coward.



King Henry saileth with an Army into France.
These cogitations persuaded him to take sound advice of his Nobles in this
business, and to purge himself, which in such a fashion, and with such a
martial resolution he did, that in the end (according to his own hearts
desire) it was concluded by a Parliament, that he alone, with his own Nation,
should war upon the French King, to revenge many disgraceful wrongs which of
latter times he had offered to King Henry.

When this news was diuulged, and publicly known, and the valorous
determination of the King by certain demonstrations notified to his people,
they not only applauded his courage, and reioiced in it, but (by the ready
and voluntary profers of their best service) they much increased his Army,
with which King Henry himself landed safely at his Town of Calice. And (to
set his Army in an order answerable to his mind) he marshalled his whole
numbers into four battles, and marched from thence until he came before
Bulloigne, K. Henry besieges Bul^en.
which he girded about with a strong siege, and daily battered and assaulted it
without ceasing.

We must now know, that the French King, though he were the absolute Lord of
the Duchy of Britain by his late marriage, yet the Nobles and the Commons of
that Province disliked and grudged at many things which he attempted (against
their wills) to innouate among them, because they tended much to their
dishonor, K. Charles desires peace.
detriment, and wrong, insomuch that King Charles feared lest they (ioining
with King Henry) might shake off his yoke, and set up another Duke. Wherefore
by his Ambassadors he proposed to King Henry certain Articles of peace, which
were both honorable and also profitable unto him.

An honorable peace concluded.
This unexpected news crossed the humors of most men in the English Army,
whose hopes were confident that the French wars would make them rich. But
when King Henry had thoroughly considered that the right to the Duchy of
Britain was so inseparably united and knit by the said marriage to the Crown
of France, and that no possibility appeared to divide them, and that in regard
that he alone had undertaken those wars chiefly for the preservation of his
name and honor, he should immortalize his fame, if upon kind entreaties, and
terms of credit and of gain, he should return, he not only hearkened
attentively to that motion, but within few days after he concluded a peace
with the French King, to continue during both their joint lives, and received
(to defray his charge) seven hundred forty and five thousand Ducats, which in
our sterling money amounts to the sum of one hundred fourscore and six
thousand and two hundred pounds, or thereabout, besides an yearly pension of
five and twenty thousand Crowns, which were always duly paid so long as King
Henry lived. Thus the King (having concluded all things for his honor and
profit, and to his own good liking and contentment) raised his siege, returned
to Calice, and safely from thence into England.

About the time in which King Henry assumed to take part with Maximilian
against the French King, the Lady Margaret, A new practice by the Duchess
Dowager of Britain against King Henry.
Duchess of Burgoine, his ancient enemy, as we have heard, never ceasing to
contriue hurtful and malicious practices against King Henry, not for any wrong
or injury which ever he had done her, but only because he was the highest
of the house of Lancaster, which was opposite to her lineage, had gotten into
her possession a young Dutch boy, who was very comely, learned, and witty, but
descended from base and unworthy parentage. His true name was Peter Warbecke,
Perkin Warbecke.
but he was nicke named in scorn by the English, who called him Parkin, which
in the Dutch Tongue signifies weakness, or such a one as is unable, impotent,
or infirm.

This youngling did perfectly speak the English tongue, and was by this Lady
received into great favor, and not only instructed by her provision in
literature and good manners, but he was also diligently and carefully trained
up in the imitation of all princely entertainment, complements, and behavior,
so that all such as beheld him and his Heroical Qualities, pronounced their
sentence, that be was descended of a Noble Family, and that some
extraordinary Fortune was at hand, and attended to make him more happy then a
thousand others.

Thus when this Lady had procured her counterfeited Idol to be adored and
wondered at, by reason of his maiesticall carriage and behavior, she informed
him, that under the name of Richard Duke of York, second son to King Edward
the Fourth her brother, she intended to advance him to the Crown of England,
and to make him King, which that she might with the more ease and facility
effect, she secretly and so substantially taught him in the whole Pedigrees of
the Houses of Lancaster and York, that within few days no Englishman was more
expert and cunning therein then he.

Perkin is aided by the Irishmen.
When she had thus furnished him according to her will, she caused him to be
transported into Ireland, where he made himself known among those Nobles to
be by his birth a great Prince; and therein he so artificially demeaned
himself, that by the whole Nation of the Irish he was received, reverenced,
and maintained as their sovereign and rightful Lord.

The French King sends for Perkin Warbecke.
About the same time the French King (who daily expected the landing of an
English Army within his Duchy of Britain, or in some other place subject to
his dominion, as formerly we have heard) intended to disturb the intention
and purpose of King Henry, by setting up of another King in this Realm; for
which purpose he sent for Perkin Warbecke into France, and promised with all
kind of friendly entertainment to receive, help, relieve and succor him,
until he had invested him into his right and Kingdom.

No sooner was this mocke-prince come to the French Court, but such was the
general applause of the Frenchmen, and so extraordinary was their madness
and braine-sicke joy, that the poor Swad could in no wise choose but imagine
strongly that he was borne to be a King. But in the midst of his flattering,
vain, and foolish hopes, the aforesaid peace betwixt the two Kings of England
and of France was concluded, and this young Nouice (fearing lest he should be
delivered to King Henry) ran secretly away, Perkin flies out of France The
Duchess honors and maintains him.
and came to his Titularie Aunt the Duchess of Burgoine, who received him with
great joy and much honor, giving unto him princely entertainment, filling his
purse with gold, clothing his body with costly and with rich apparel, and
appointing thirty gentlemen of worth and quality (as his Guard) to give their
daily attendance upon his fantastical person.

Her practice for assistance in England.
Then she caused it newly to be published in England, that her Nephew Richard
Duke of York was yet alive, and lived in her Court, and that he (according to
his right and title to the Crown of England, as being the heir male of the
House of York) expected the assistance of all his true and loving subjects
toward his attaining thereof.

Perkin is favored in England.
No sooner did this news wax common among the Vulgar, but it was generally
believed by them, and also by diverse others of better rank and fashion,
insomuch that many for malice only, Lancaster, others because they deemed
themselves not to be sufficiently Henry's wars against King Richard, others
because they were ambitious, and saw none other Robert Clifford, a man of much
valor, wisdom, Sir Robert Clifford.
and great discretion, into Flanders, to enquire and to search out the truth of
the conception, birth, and parentage of this newfound Duke.

This Knight, after his arrival, and when he had conferred again and again
with the busie-headed Duchess of Burgoine touching this business, and with an
observing eye had beheld the young counterfeit, and had communed oftentimes with
him, persuaded himself that he was the very true, natural, and youngest son
of King Edward the Fourth, and so he certified his friends in England by his
letters, and by means thereof, every day fresh reports gat greater strength
and credit among such as were willing to be partakers in his fortunes. King
Henry's preparations against Perkins invasion.
Wherefore as a sharp Fever suffers not the Patient to take any rest, so this
fantastical dream and vain imagination troubled King Henry above measure:
and wisdom made him provident to prepare for future storms, so that he
strongly guarded and fortified all places which bordered upon the Sea, and by
his letters he informed the Burgundians and Flemings of the vanity and
falsitie of this devised foolerie, and of this fained King, using his best
means both to prevent all civil wars, and also to withstand all invasions
which might be attempted against his Crown and Kingdom.

And to make himself more strong, 1493. 9
he selected and appointed diverse men of wisdom and of worth, secretly to
fly out of England into Flanders to the Duchess, and to this fained Duke, A
witty policy.
that by their means and endeavors be might have true intelligence of such as
(being of name and quality) conspired to join with this ignoble counterfeit;
upon whose information, and after legal trials, the chiefest actors in that
business (as Traitors) were put to death.

King Henry also recounting how that by the late breach of promise Maximilian
the King of the Romans failed to assist him in his wars against Charles the
French King, and finding that his son Philip, Arch duke of Austria, and Duke
of Burgoine, secretly fauouuoured the attempts of the Lady Margaret concerning
Perkin Warbeckes conspiracy, The English Mart is removed from Flanders to
Calice. A restraint of wares and merchandises.
removed his Mart of English merchandising from Flanders to his own Town of
Calice, and also he prohibited all men whatsoever to bring any Flemish
commodities or wares into this Kingdom. This restraint notwithstanding, the
bribing Easterlings were under hand permitted to bring into England what they
would. And likewise King Maximilian and his son by strong Edicts forbade and
published the confiscation of all English commodities, as leather, tallow,
woolles, lead, tin, and such like, if they were brought into those Countries.

An assault on the Flemings in London.
This restraining of the Kings own subjects, and that liberty which was
allowed to those strangers, vexed and grieved the English

These extremities occasioned multitudes of Apprentices and of Journey men
(without the procurement or allowance of their Masters) to run with great
violence and fury to the Stilliard in London, where they brake up and robbed
many Warehouses and shops, and rifled whatsoever did come athwart their hands.
And besides all this, they offered much violence (in a strange manner) to the
Easterlings, being the owners of those commodities and wares, until the
coming thither of the Lord Mayor with a band of armed men both terrified them,
and also made them fly. Of these malefactors some were taken and imprisoned in
the Tower, and (due examination being taken of them, and of their offense) the
principal Ring leaders among them (being in number about fourscore) were
continued prisoners for many weeks. But in the end they all were freed, and
received the Kings Pardon.

Robert Clifford (upon his repentant motion, Sir Robert Clifford forsak^th
Perkin Warbecke. A notable policy.
and by the mediation of his friends at home) procured leave for his return,
and pardon for his offense, so that when notice was given of his landing, the
King appointed him to meet him at the Tower, that there before him and his
Nobility he might discover plainly and at large the whole practice, device
and purpose of the Lady Margaret, and of her base nephew Perkin Warbecke, and
of all other the Conspirators in that business. And this place of meeting
(above all others) the King in policy appointed, because if any of his Lords
or great ones were by the said Sir Robert Clifford accused as being guilty of
that offense, they might (without blows or civil wars) be apprehended and
committed in the same place.

The Knight (at his first appearance in the Kings presence) humbly kneeled
down, confessed his transgression, expressed many true signs of hearty and
unfeigned repentance, and received the Kings favor.

Among the great men attending on the King, Sir William Stanley is accused by
Sir Robert Clifford.
he only accused Sir William Stanley, whereat the King much marvelled, because
he not only entirely loved him, but also had by his bounteous liberality
increased his possessions, made him honorable, and Lord Chamberlain to his
own person.

This fault was so plainly and so particularly discovered before the King, that
the accused Gentleman (not being able to excuse himself) was forthwith
committed to prison, Sir William Stanley is beheaded.
and within few days after, being by the due course of Law condemned, (for
examples sake unto others) he lost his head.

Yet for all this, so desirous were many of novelties, others of spoils, some
of revenge, and others of civil wars, that they began to speak
contumeliously, despightfully, and too too leaudly against the King. But for
this malady he quickly provided a double remedy: First, by making of himself
strong with such Forces as he had levied, and secondly by taking of a strait
account, and by severe punishing of some of those, whose tongues (as Rasours)
had deeply wounded his honor and his good name. And by their ensamples he
reduced the rest to more conformity, and compelled them to obey.

He also sent an Army into Ireland, Edward Po^nings, to correct and punish
with great severity such of the Irish Nation, An army is transported into
Ireland.
as two years before had given and assistance to Perkin Warbecke. But the
offenders being for the most part wild, rude barbarous, and savage people,
delighting in war, and being never better contented, then when they were
tumultuous, and in horrid actions, assembled themselves in great multitudes,
and (according to their use and fashion) they ran into the woods, mountains,
and bogges, whom the Knight was the more unable to pursue, because the
Nobility of that Island (who promised to send him much aid) performed nothing,
which carelessness he imputed to Gerald Earl of Kyldare, who as he was a man
by his birth, possessions, and friends, most powerful among the Irish, so was
he chief Deputy of that Country to the King. Him (upon the false and
slanderous accusations of his malignant enemies) the Knight apprehended as a
Traitor, and brought him into England. But (before the King) his fidelity and
his innocence freely delivered him from further trouble and danger: so that
being graced, thanked, and rewarded for his true and honorable service, he was
not only enlarged, but obtained the continuance of his Deputation as before.

Perkin Warbecke landeth some of his men in Kent.
In this mean time Perkin Warbecke (being by the Lady Margaret furnished with
a Fleet of ships, and being accompanied with Roagues, Vacabonds, Slaves,
Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, Banke-rupts, seditious Varlats, and with the
off-scumme of many Nations) came upon the Kentish Coast, where they cast
Anchors, and landed some of those Vassals, who endeavored to inform themselves
whether the people determined to follow poor Perkin Warbecke or no. The answer
made by the multitude (who began to rise in arms) gave good contentment: for
outwardly they firmly promised (until death) to support and to maintain him
and his quarrel against the King. But when (by fair words and soothing
speeches) they had trained those Rascals up into the land, His men are slain
and executed.
they fiercely set upon them, slew many, and took one hundred and threescore
prisoners, whom they delivered into the custody of Sir John Peachy high
Sheriff of that Province, who railed them in ropes (like unto horses drawing
carts) and conveyed them in that fashion to the City of London, where they
received their trials, and were executed in sundry places of this Realm. And
the counterfeited Duke of York (expecting better fortune at another time)
returned into Flanders to his pensive and careful Aunt, He returns into
Flanders
where (because he supposed that delays would prove dangerous, and that much
lingering would be unprofitable for him) he speedily collected such numbers of
base and unworthy Pesants, as by necessity were compelled to enter into his
service: which being done, He landeth in Ireland.
he embarked them, hoised his Anchors, and sailed into Ireland, purposing with
those wild and savage men to augment his numbers, and then to land in the
Western parts of this Kingdom.

But when experience assured him that he might have men enough, He comes into
Scotland
but little arms, he then resolved, not to make war by the help of such as
were naked: wherefore he left them, and came into Scotland, and presented both
himself and his cause to James the Fourth who at that time was very young, and
swaied the Scepter of that Kingdom.

The Scots, although they knew that Perkin was a counterfeit, The Scots invade
England, under a color to aid Perkin Warbecke.
yet they reioiced that opportunity had offered them that occasion to invade
England; not to make a conquest thereof, nor to help Warbecke, but only by
valuable booties and large spoils to enrich themselves. Whereupon the young
King, being accompanied with his foolish guest, and many thousands of lusty
and tall men, marched forth, and entered into Northumberland, where they
exercised all kind of rigor, violence, and wrong, burning, robbing, Their
cruelty.
rifling, stealing, and spoiling in all places, and destroying with the sword
both young and old, strong and feeble, healthie and infirm, rich and poor,
with such barbarous inhumanitie, and strange cruelty, as never was committed
before by that Nation. And as soon as they had almost desolated all that
Province, finding no help nor succor from the English to assist their new
King, they returned into Scotland, and neglected to give unto him any more aid.

King Henry understanding what rapine, spoil, Scots unto his people, and being
sick until he had requited those wrongs with severe and sharp revenge, A
puissant Army is levied to go into Scotland
summoned his High Court of Parliament, in which it was concluded, that
forthwith an Army should be sent against those enemies, lest perhaps long
forbearance might encourage them at another time to do the like mischief. And
for the maintenance of those wars a small tax or subsidy was granted to the
King, A Tax which occasioned a rebellion.
which occasioned him much trouble. The King (who used great expedition in this
business) raised a puissant Army, which he committed to the charge and
government of his Chamberlain Giles Lord Dawbeney, who was a wise and a
valiant man. But no sooner was this Army on foot marching toward the North,
but suddenly it was recalled to withstand as great a mischief, which otherwise
might give a deadly blow to the state of this Kingdom and Commonweal. For
the Cornishmen (who were strong, stout, and courageous, The Cornishmen rebel.
yet poor, and oppressed with many wants) not only refused to pay the said
Subsidy and tax, but in a braine-sicke and sullen humor they accused John
Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Reinold Bray, (who were two of the
grauest, wisest, and most honest Counselors above others to the King) that
they (as enemies to their Country) oppressed the inferior sort, and were
prollers, pillars and pollers for their private commodity and gain: And that
they seduced the King by leaud advice and bad directions, and were the Authors
of much evil: And that therefore they would take it on themselves, not only
to remove them from the King, but also to correct and punish them as evil
doers, and as foes and enemies to their Native Country and Commonweal. And
pleasing their unadvised passions with this fantastical and untruly grounded
resolution, they (by the prouokement and incitation of Michael Joseph a sturdie
Blacke-smith, and of Thomas Flamocke, a man learned in the Law, yet factious,
and of a tumultuous disposition) put themselves in Arms, and determined to
effect their purpose, though with violence, yea in the presence of the King.
Wherefore having augmented their numbers, and hoping that as they marched a
long journey, so their forces would daily be increased; and nothing doubting
but that (according to the common voice and fame) the Kentishmen would be
partakers with them in their Rebellion, They march toward London. The Lord
Audley is their chief Captain.
they pressed and passed forth toward London, and in their journey were much
comforted by James Twichet Lord Audley, who (with many others being his
adherents) joined with those Rebels, and gained from them the chiefest
authority to command.

In this mean while the King perceiving their intentions, and having recalled
his Army which was traveling toward the North, handled this business with
such policy, that he would not suffer one man to move one foot toward the
West, for these

The Kentishmen are against them.
The Cornishmen after much labor and pain, coming into Kent, not only failed
of their expected aid, but also found the Kentishmen armed, resolved to
withstand their force, and by their best endeavors to subdue them. Yet were not
the audacious and bold Cornishmen affrighted with this check, but retired
strongly to Blacke-heath, Black Heath field.
not many miles from London, intending there to abide the utmost of their
fortune, and either like men to be victorious, or at a dear price to sell
their lives.

The King with his Army drawing near toward them divided it into three
parts. Two of them he placed upon the sides of the Rebels, and those were
commanded and directed by John Earl of Oxford, Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex,
Edmund de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir Humfrey Stanley,
and diverse others. The King himself led the third, and bravely charged the
Rebels in the face, and the residue did the like on either side, The Rebels are
overthrown.
and though the poor sturdie and stout Cornishmen, were oppressed with
multitudes on every part, yet they fainted not, but fought like men for a long
time, still pressing forth and making no stay, but as they were compelled by
the sword. The Lord Dawbenie was at length taken prisoner by them, but they
enlarged him incontinently of their own accord, thinking by his means to find
some mercy. This fight and battle was courageously maintained for some
hours, during which space, there were slain on the Kings part about three
hundred, and of the Rebels more then two thousand. Their chiefest Captains,
and many hundreds besides were taken Prisoners: the rest fled, and King
Henry won the field.

And within few days after, Traitors heads and quarters set up in Cities and
in towns.
the Ringleaders of that rebellious insurrection, were in sundry places of
this Realm executed as Traitors, and their heads and quarters were sent, and
disposed in sundry Towns, Cities, and Castles of this Realm, for a terror
to all such as should attempt the like enormious offense against their
Sovereign.

Now must we be informed, that though the King had recalled the Lord Dawbenie,
and his Army to withstand these Rebels, Scots (in the mean time expecting
punishment, except he could by force of Arms avoid it) made great provision
and daily preparations to defend himself. Which forces would again invade the
Northern parts of this Kingdom, as soon as they were informed of King Henry's
imploiment against his own Subjects: Provision against the Scots.
wherefore (to prevent that emminent and like danger) he by his letters
required Thomas Lord Howard, Earl of Surrey, and Richard Fox, sometimes
Bishop of Exeter, and then promoted to the Sea of Durham, to raise a strong
Army: and to withstand the Scots (if they endeavored to attempt any such
thing) until he sent another power to aid and to assist them, which thing
should with all celeritie and diligence be performed, as soon as he had
vanquished the Cornishmen who so desperately opposed themselves against him.

Now as the King imagined, so fell it out true indeed. The Scots invade England
For the Scots (proudly insulting at his troubles, and expecting the worst that
he could do when he should be in peace at home) resolved, by anticipating
war, to enrich themselves with new Rapines, and Spoils, and to make havoc
upon the Borderers: that by means thereof they might the more weaken him, and
the better enable themselves, to make resistance when time and opportunity
should serve.

With the same resolution, the King of Scots and his Army again entered upon
the English Pale. But ere they could proceed far, or do much harm, the
aforesaid Earl, and Bishop, and many other Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen
of the North) assembled themselves and their friends, to the number of twenty
thousand fighting men, and marched boldly toward the Scottish Army: unto
which when they drew near, their King (upon good occasion being timorous and
fearful) retired hastily, The Scots fly.
and fled into his own Country. But the English forces with brave courage and
manly resolution entered into his Kingdom, The English Army hauaketh in
Scotland.
and battered, assaulted, won, and razed to the ground many of his strongest
Towns, Castles, and Holds, and were not resisted, albeit the Scottish King
with all his Army was not distant from them above one mile. Only he
challenged the field the next day, which was accepted, but in the night before
he raised his Army, and dispersed them, who ran into the Woods, and high
Mountains, and were to no purpose pursued and hunted by the Englishmen, six or
seven days.

But so barren was that Country, and so poor and destitute of all good
things, and so unseasonable was the weather there, which abounded with
continual Rain, Wind, Snow, Hail, Thunder, and Hideous storms, and
tempests, that the Earl and the Bishop returning brake up their Armies, and
themselves went to Barwick, where they attended directions from the King.

Whilst these things were thus in action, Peter Hyalus, who was sent
Ambassador from Ferdinando King of Castile, to mediate a peace betwixt the
kings of England and of Scotland, A truce with Scotland. Perkin Warbeck is sent
out of Scotland.

The peace with France newly ratified.


could not effect that business according to his mind. Yet a Truce was
concluded betwixt them, to endure for certain years, conditionally that
Perkin Warbecke were forthwith banished and exiled out of that Country.

The French King also, at the same time sent his Ambassadors into England, to
ratify the former peace established betwixt the King and him, which was
performed with much honor, and solemnity; to the great contentment, and joy,
of all the People of both those Kingdoms.

The English trade is restored to the flemings, and their joy thereas.
Likewise, Philip the Archduke of Austria, and Duke of Burgoine, son to
Maximilian, King of the Romans, by his Ambassadors importuned the restitution
of the English trade, and the return of the Merchants into his Country of
Flanders, because his subjects were exceedingly impouerished, by them and did
obtain his suit: whereat such comfort was conceived, that when the Englishmen
were for trade returned again unto Antwerpe: they were received into the City
with solemn Processions, Princely Triumphs, Sumptuous Feastings, Rare
Banquettings, and with the expression of great love, and of much joy.

And thus was King Henry (at this time) made fortunate, and happy: for he
enjoyed peace, and friendship, both at home and abroad, saving only with
Perkin Warbeck; Perkin Warbeck saileth into Cornwall.
who ceased not to vex and trouble him for a while, to his own overthrow and
destruction. For being compelled to forsake Scotland, and understanding that
though the Cornishmen had lately been overthrown, yet were they not pacified
or appeased, he with four ships only, and with six score ragged landing
Soldiers, and no more, sailed into Cornwall; where he was received by the
rusticke, The Cornish men rebel, and do take Perkin Warbecks part. Exeter is
befieged.
and meanest sort of the Inhabitants of that Province, with joyful
acclamations, and with good welcome. And within few days after, they aided him
with three thousand men.

With these, and with some others he marched Eastwards, and came as far as
the City of Exeter, where he used many persuasiue and rethoricall arguments,
and speeches, to incite the Inhabitants, voluntarily to become his subjects,
and to surrender the City into his hands. But finding that the fidelity of
the Citizens was constant and unremovable from their King: And that their
resolutions (to endure extremities, if otherwise they could not be avoided) was
strongly settled and unchangeable, they besieged the City round about. And
because they wanted artillery, and great Ordinance to make batteries upon
their walls: therefore (with Ladders, Crookes, Ropes, and other Engines,) they
desperately attempted to scale them in many places, at one instant. But still
and every where (with manlike Courage and with approved Valor) they were
repulsed, ouerborne, and tumbled into the Ditches, and deep Trenches, with
which that City is environed on all parts. So that (in those assaults) many of
those Rebels with great obstinacy lost their lives.

Now when they perceived, Fire encountered by fire.
that those their attempts daily failed, and succeeded not: they desperately
approached, unto the City gates, which they endeavored by many slights to
open, or to overthrow. But when none of their practices, could prevail, then
they caused great fires to be kindled against the^: so that by consuming of
them they might make an easy passage, and entrance into the City.

This stratagem of war (because it was unusual) did at the first somewhat
abash the Citizens. But they (considering with themselves, that base
cowardlinesse was the betraier of true manhood, and that perfect valor
despaired not in any danger) assumed the hearts of undaunted men, and by their
endeuourous attempts and imploiments, they ceased not to provide for their own
present safety: insomuch that with fire they encountered fire, and made greater
fires within their Gates then the Rebels did without, which they maintained by
adding store of matter and of fuel for a long time, until that with
rampires, banks, bulwarks, and other defensive fortifications, they had
secured those places from the entry of their enemies.

When this their practice auailed not, then they again busied the Citizens
with daily scalings and climings against their walls. But the inhabitants so
confidently persisted to defend themselves, that poor Perkin began to hang
down his head; and being troubled with melancholicke passions, filled the air
with sighs and groans, and was perplexed at the heart, being weary of his
match.

The King comes into the West Country with an Army.
The King, who had been speedily informed how violently that City was
environed, and how courageously the Rebels were resisted, so carefully regarded
it, and the inhabitants thereof, that with a fair Army he himself (in his
own person) marched toward the Rebels with all speed. But before he could
come near unto them, Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, and the Lord William
his son, Sir Wymond Carew, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir William Courtney, Sir
Thomas Fulford, Sir John Halwell, Sir John Crocker, Walter Courtney, Peter
Edgecombe, and their lusty followers, repaired to the said City of Exeter,
and intended to give such good help and assistance to the inhabitants thereof,
that the Rebels (leaving the siege) marched into Somersetshire, The siege of
Exet^r is ^ed. Perkin W^^be^^^ ^^eg^ Tawnton.
where they besieged the Town of Tawnton. But the King understanding that they
were removed from the City, and where they then were, directed his course
toward Tawnton, he having with him in his Army Edward the young Duke of
Buckingham, who was a Prince of haughty courage, and of a gallant resolution,
Giles Lord Dawbeney his chiefest Chamberlain, Robert Lord Brook, Lord Steward
of his house, Sir Alexander Baynam, Sir Maurice Barkley, Sir Robert Tame, Sir
John Guise, Sir Robert Points, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir John Mor^^mer, Sir Thomas
Tremaile, Sir Edward Sutton, Sir Amias Paulet, Sir John Sapcots, Sir Hugh
Lutterel, Sir Francis Cheyney, and sundry other Knights and Gentlemen of great
place and valor.

Perkin and the Rebels site.
But when Perkin Warbecke and his fellow Captains heard of the Kings approach,
they fled with threescore horse unto Beauly near to South-hampton, where poor
Perkin and most of those his companions entered into the Sanctuary, and
registered their names there: but the residue of them were taken prisoners by
the Kings light horsemen, and being brought into the Kings Army (for examples
sake unto others) they were ordered and executed by the martial law in sundry
places in the Western parts. But the rude rabble which were left behind
(perceiving that their Ringleaders had left them, The common sort of Rebels
are pardoned.
and were run away) fell down upon their knees, craved mercy, promised faith
and loyalty in future times, and not only received the Kings pardon, but were
revived by his expressing of much favor and gra^e toward them.

This victory being thus obtained without blows, the King, King Henry comes
to the City of Exeter.
with his greatest Lords, and the brauest Gallants in his train; came to the
City of Exceter; and was lodged in it certain days, where he commended and
thanked the inhabitants, for their faithful and valiant service, promised them
the fullness of his favor, The King gives his Sword to the City of Exeter.
and (for an addition of Honor to that City) gave unto them his sword from his
own side, and commanded that in future times and in all public places within
that City, it should be borne before the Mayor, as formerly and for the like
purpose his noble predecessor King Edward the fourth had done.

Then the King (intending to make a final end of these civil wars) sent
some of his chosen Captains, Perkin Warbecke is brought to the King.
with certain bands of armed men, to apprehend poor Perkin, who compassed the
Sanctuary at Bewly round about, so that he (recounting with himself his
sundry mishaps, and his hopeless fortunes to be a King) yielded himself, and
was brought unto the King, who carried him as his prisoner unto London: Perkin
escapes, and is taken again.
he voluntarily committed himself to the Abbot of Shene, near to the Kings
Palace of Richmond, entreating him to have compassion on him, and to procure
for him the Kings pardon, He is stocked He is committed to the Tower.
which he did. Then was he brought to the Kings Court at Whitehall, where all
his base descent and ignoble pedigree being in a paper fully written, and
pinned upon his back, he was stocked one whole day: London, from whence he
was committed a close prisoner to the Tower. He practices to escape and to
convey away the young Earl of Warwick.


He being in prison there, corrupted (by infinite promises of honorable
advancement) the servants of Sir John Digbie Lieutenant of the Tower, to suffer
him and Edward the young Farle of Warwick (who had been a prisoner from his
infancy) to escape. But this plot being discovered, Perkin Warbecke was
shortly after by the due course of Law condemned for High Treason, Perkin
Warbecke beheaded.
and was executed at Tyburne within two days after: and the young Earl of
Warwick, who consented to have escaped likewise, being altogether innocent of
all crime, and only affecting liberty, which men, beasts, birds, and fishes
do naturally desire, was indicted, arraigned, convicted, and adjudged guilty
of the like offense, and was executed on a Scaffold at the Tower Hill. The
young Earl of Warwick is beheaded.
His death much blemished the fame and reputation of King Henry, who being
merciful and compassionate by nature, and having extended it oftentimes unto
notorious malefactors, now (to work his own security, and without any just
offense) would not pardon him who all his life time had been so secret a
prisoner, restrained from all company, and from the view of this vain and
transitory world, that he scarcely knew a Capon from a Goose, nor ever
attempted any thing which might offend the King, saving only to set himself at
large.

1500.
As soon as these businesses were thus ended, Arthur the noble Wales, being of
the age of fifteen years, was by an honorable deputation betrothed to the
Lady Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spain, Prince Arthur marieth
Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Aragon.
she being of the age of eighteen years; and the next year after with
triumphant joy and princely entertainment he received her into England, and was
married to her in Paul's Church within the City of London.

And not long after, James the Fourth, King of the Scots, used the mediation of
Richard Fox, 1501.
then Bishop of Durham, but shortly after Winchester, that he might have to
wife the Lady Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry the Seventh. The
Kings eldest daughter affied and after married to James the fourth, King of
Scots.
And though the King (for many important reasons) might have bestowed her upon
the greatest and most honorable Kings or Potentates in the Christian world, yet
for these good respects he cheerfully consented to his request. First,
because (by all likelihood and probable conjecture) this marriage would
establish a perpetual Margaret, and to her issue, would draw the Scottish King
into England, as unto an estate of greater power, magnificence, honor, and
riches; whereas if she were joined to a Prince equal, or exceeding her father
in those respects, this Kingdom would then wait upon the greater and more
worthy, and so might be guided, governed, directed, and commanded by a
Deputy, or a Substitute, which would be derogatorie from the majesty of such
a Monarchy and Commonweal.

These Halcyon days, Prince Arthur dies.
which made King Henry fortunate and happy, were suddenly exchanged into days
of heaviness and of sorrow: for Prince Arthur, within five months after he
was married, departed out of this troublesome and transitory vale of misery,
and was buried with great pomp and incredible lamentation both of the Nobles,
Gentlemen, and common people, in the Cathedral Church within the City of
Winchester: by whose decease without issue, his brother Henry Duke of York
(without Creation) was Prince of Wales, 1502.
as unto him (of right) that dignity did belong and appertain: and the next
year after he was created Chester by his Father.

The King not long after (by an honorable attendance of Lords, Knights, Ladies,
and men and women of especial note and quality) sent his eldest daughter, the
Lady Margaret, into Scotland, to her espoused husband James the Fourth, who
received her upon the limits of his own Kingdom, from the Earls of Surrey
and Northumberland, and was the next day married to her in his City of
Edinburgh, 1503.
to the great reioicing of the people of both those Nations.

Now when King Henry had thus overcome his enemies and the Rebels, and had
settled himself in peace, 1504.
he determined to The King takes advantage of forfeitures upon Penal Laws.
supposing that their wealth and riches occasioned their rebellions, and was
the cause that many enormous insolences were done and committed in the
Commonweal. And by that mean he also intended to enrich himself. And the
plot whereby he intended to effect it, was, by taking of the advantage of the
breach of Penal Laws. Empson and Dudley.
And the principal charge of that polling business he committed to Sir
Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley, men learned in the Law, but ready enough to
execute the Kings commands in a worser matter, if occasion did so require.

These two being attended by troops of base Informers, Promoters, Catch-poles,
Cheaters, Knaves, and cousening Rascals, Many are undone.
prosecuted and persecuted many of the Kings good Subjects, to their utter
ruin and overthrow; insomuch that many people in every Shire of this Kingdom
(by their oppressions) waxed poor, and were utterly decayed in their estates.
But the Kings Coffers were filled, his Bags were stuffed, and those two
graceless and cruel Cormorants got to themselves the Devil and all. But no
remedy there was to cure this malady: for the King authorized them: and they
so rigorously, and so unconscionably executed their tyranny, that no man could
assure himself, that he was free, and without the danger of their lash.

1605.
In the 21. year of K. Henry's reign, Elizabeth Q. of Castile, and wife
Ferdinando K. of Aragon and Spain, died without issue male of her body, so
that her Kingdom not being deuidable among sisters (according to the custom of
that Country) descended to her eldest daughter the Lady Jane, The King and
Queen of Castile do come into England by a storm.
wife to Philip Archduke of Austria, and Duke of Burgoine, so that he (being
King of Castile in her right) prepared a Navy of strong, and well appointed
ships, and entered into the Sea, purposing to take the possession of his new
Kingdom. But (by the violence of an outrageous storm) himself with his
Queen was driven into Waymouth in Dorset shire: where (at his landing) he was
received by Sir Thomas Trenchard a worthy, Sir Thomas Trenchard entertaineth
them at his house.
and a complete Knight who instantly importuned the King to accept of the
entertainment of his house, until King Henry were certified of his being
there, which courteously he did. Whereof when he had lovingly accepted he was
conducted thither, and feasted like (as he was) a King. The Knight forthwith
sent diverse Posters to King Henry, who (being much gladded by this news)
because the said King, and he were unfeigned and faithful friends, They are
entertained by the King.
forthwith sent for his better direction, and attendance, the Earl of Arundell
and some others, who invited him and his Queen, and their Company to the
Kings Court, which was then at his Castle of Windsor, of which great courtesy
he accepted with a kind heart: and as he came within five miles of the Castle;
he was met by the Noble Henry Prince of Wales, who was accompanied by diverse
Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of choice reckoning aad account: and
within half a mile of his iournies end, the King himself with the greatest
part of his Nobility, Ladies, and Personages of great worth and honor (being
richly apparrelled, and bravely mounted) met him likewise, where kind
salutations, and friendly greetings proceeded from the heart; and were
performed with most exquisite complements of love, that by any could be
imagined.

From the Kings Castle of Windsor. the King conducted him and his Queen to the
City of London: where nothing was omitted, that any devise, or cost, could
make sumptuous: thereby to express the hearty welcome of such beloved guests.
And thus when (with great contentment, mirth, and pastime) the King and he had
spent some days, they renewed the League which was betwixt them, and taking
kind farewels, each of other, the said King and Queen, embarked themselves
again, lanched into the Sea, and safety arrived according to their own wills.
But not long after, King Philip and his wife died, and that Kingdom descended
to Charles his eldest son.

From this time forwards King Henry waxed sickly, weak, 1506.
and infirm, and by means thereof, the two scourgers of the Commonweal
Empson, and Dudley, took larger liberty to extend their villainies, then was
given to them, and did oppress, torment, and vex the People of this land.

But when the King perceived that his time was short, 1507.
he deprived them of their authority: remitted and pardoned all offenses, The
King waxes sickly. His deeds of charity.
which were in durance for any offense (treason and murder excepted only) he
also paid the debts of all such, as for trifling and small sums, were
prisoners in any Ward, and gave certain sums of money unto some poor
folks, who had been unconscionably devoured, robbed, and spoiled, He
repents of his exactions by the penal laws.
by those two graceless and ungodly Cormorants. He also was exceeding penitent
and sorrowful for those wrongs and injuries which (with too much severity)
they had done unto many: 1508.
and he disbursed by way of loan freely, and without reward, diverse great
sums of money to his Merchants. A notable policy.
By means whereof their gains and his custom were The King dies.
and was buried with great solemnity and honor by Queen Elizabeth his wife,
in his own Chapel at Westminster: which he had with great cost and skill
founded, and caused to be built not long before.

THE HISTORY OF KING HENRY THE EIGHT.
KIng HENRY the Eight, 1509. The King marieth his brothers wife.
being of the Age of eighteen years, began to Reign the two and twentieth
day of April, in the year of our Lord God 1509. And being dispensed with by
Pope July the second, he married the Lady Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando
King of Aragon, Aunt to Prince Charles of Castile, who afterward was Emperor;
when as not long before she had been his brother Prince Arthures wife: by
which match, much trouble afterward ensued, as in this discourse of his
government it will appear.

In his first beginnings he seemed tenderly to affect his peoples love, and to
execute his Laws with mercy, and with compassion. The King is gracious to
such as were oppressed by Emp^on and Dudley.
And whereas oppression (in the end of his Fathers days) had much vexed and
grieved the Subjects of this Land, He (by open Proclamations) made it known,
that he would not only hear the lamentable complaints of such as by the
Tyrannous Rapine, and greedy Covetousness of Empson and Dudley, and of some
other tormenting Promoters had been undone; but would also redress and
recompense their wrongs. By means whereof great throngs of People daily
resorted, flocked, and rushed into the Kings Court: Among whom many complained
most who had least cause, but they received sharp punishment for their
impudency and boldness; and, to the rest, the King gave liberal restitution
and amends. And the more frankely and freely to content such as had been
justly offended by those extremities, after all legal proceedings finished,
he caused the heads of those two devouring Caterpillars to be stricken off at
the Tower hill: Empson and Dudley put to death.
and the rest of that rascal rabble were disgracefully corrected by the stocks
and pillories in sundry places of this Realm.

1511. 3
Thus when the King had well busied himself in the settlement of his Kingdom
the first two years of his reign, he was by his wives father, Ferdinando
craves and obtains aid, but did nothing.
Ferdinando King of Aragon, entreated to enter into more turbulent actions, by
aiding and assisting him against the Moors, which willingly he did. But by
reason of a cessation of those iarres, the Englishmen returned out of Spain,
having been rudely entertained, and spent all.

The French King warreth on the Pope.
About the same time the French King Lewys the twelfth (by reason of some
private quarrellings betwixt himself and Pope July the second) transported an
Army into Italy, and by strength and violence (as a Conqueror) he possessed
himself of the fair and rich City of Bologna la Grassa, and insolently did
much harm.

Whereupon King Henry (in favor to the Pope, because he dispensed with his
late marriage, and was united unto him by more then by the ordinary bonds of
friendship and of love, and because the Pope himself was unable to resist,
King Henry mediateth a peace, but he is neglected. Wars betwixt King Henry
and Lewys the twelfth.
or to maintain his own quarrel) interposed himself as an indifferent
mediator, and as an intercessor for amity and for peace.

But the French King (tasting the pleasant and the profitable fruits of his
successful fortune, and longing to extend his government into so rich a
Country) turned the deaf ear, and would not hearken to this motion.
Whereupon King Henry (whose body was young and lusty, and whose high heart
was replenished with true fortitude, magnanimity, and valor) made it known
to the Christian world, that as he scorned to be neglected in so good a suit,
so he loathed to be idle, and a looker on, in a time of such negotiation and
imploiment, and therefore would attempt by his best means to withdraw the
French Kings wars from the Popes Countries. Upon which resolution, forthwith,
by his Ambassadors he required the French King to give unto him the full and
peaceable possession of his two Duchies of Guyen and of Normandy, together
with his ancient inheritance of Angeow and of Main, which wrongfully was kept
and detained from his Ancestors and from him.

The small acquaintance which at that time the French King had with King Henry,
and the contempt of his youthful years, made him to return a scornful
denial to his demand; insomuch that King Henry proclaimed war against him,
and prepared daily to send a puissant Army into Guyan. Upon which occasion,
and others, Defender of the faith.
and in regard that those broiles were chiefly undertaken to relieve the Pope,
King Henry was by him enstiled with this addition to his kingly Title, Defender
of the Faith.

This resolution being notified to his father in law Ferdinando King of Aragon,
(who was crafty, and cunningly intended, Fer^inando promises aid to King
Henry.
under the color of much friendship, to usurp, and treacherously to win
unto himself the Kingdom of Navarre, for which immoderately his ambitious
heart did thirst) he made unto King Henry a large profer of great assistance
and help, with horses, tents, carriages, ordinance, and sundry other things
needful and expedient for those wars, if he would land his Army within his
Country of Biskey, and march from thence into Guyan.

The King (who dreamt not of any fraud, The Kings Army landeth in Biskey.
but was persuaded of good performance of more then had been offered) most
thankfully accepted of this great courtesy, and sent (for the aforesaid
purpose) ten thousand men into Biskey, under the principal command of Thomas
Gray Marquess Dorset, who was their General in that war.

But Ferdinando (whose own plot touching the surprisall of Navarre was not
fully perfected, Ferdinando yeel^s no help.
and who intended nothing less then according to his promise to aid the
English Army) by flattering messages to the Marquess maintained his hopes,
but yet suffered both him and his (without imploiment or succor) to lie idle,
to their great dishonor and reproach.

In the end he prepared a strong Army, The Kingdom of Navarre taken and
conquered by the Spaniards.
which was conducted by the Duke D'Alva, and outwardly pretended to unite them
to the English forces. But as a River growing outrageous by the abundance of
much rain, ouerfloweth the low adjacent grounds, so this Army with great
violence and strength unexpectedly rushed into the unprovided Territories of
Navarre, surprised the City of Pampalona, and treacherously (without blows or
resistance) subdued the greatest part of that Kingdom, which (without right or
title) the Spaniards do hold and enjoy at this day.

And although that King Ferdinando (by this unjust and deceitful practice) had
easily attained to the height of his ambitious desires concerning that
conquest, Ferdinando a^^^r^s no help or assistance at last.
yet did he continue false and unkind to the English Army, whom he assisted
not at the last, but suffered them for the space of four months to be
oppressed with a thousand wants, and to be consumed by the flux and other
calamities in the open field: by means whereof, the common soldiers (being
heartlesse, The Englishmen return home without leave.
and hopeless of better usage from the King of Aragon) forsook the field, and
(without the license of their General) returned straglingly into England. And
thus was K. Henry grossly abused and wronged by his father in law the second
time.

English Army was thus unkindly deluded in Biskey, the right valiant Knight
Sir Edward Howard (Lord Admiral of England, Sir Edward Howard plagueth the
Brittons.
and a younger son to the Earl of Surrey) with a well appointed Fleet of
ships (which were well furnished with brave and lusty men) kept and commanded
the Narrow Seas, daily took the French Merchants, oftentimes landed in sundry
places within the Duchy of Britain, forraged their Fields, ransacked their
Villages and their Towns, set them on fire, and enriched his companies with
great spoils.

The Brittons dare him, but run away.
The Brittons (being hourly endammaged, and knowing that no better fortune
would attend them, except by true valor and manhood they encountered the
English assailants) braggingly dared the Admiral into the Field; of which
challenge he ioifully accepted, although that with six and twenty hundred (and
no more) he was to fight against more then ten thousand men. And incontinently
with martial skill and policy he ordered his battle in the open field. But
when the Brittons approached near, and with judicious eyes beheld the order and
the courage of the English soldiers, their hearts fainted, their Leaders
retired, their common soldiers fled, and would not once look on an English
face.

The King sends him more aid.
The King being advertised of the valor of his Admiral, and of the haughty
courage of his men, and intending to give them strength which should be
answerable to their desires, did send unto them some of his ships royal, and
many others, which were well ordinanced, and plentifully manned, both for the
Sea, and also for the Land.

When the Admiral was thus provided, and had reduced all his ships into one
Fleet, He fights at Sea with the French Fleet.
within few days after he met and fought with the French Navy; at which time
death was despised, in regard that every man sought by blood to purchase honor
and renown: until the Regent of England, and in her Sir John Carew of
Devonshire, and Sir Thomas Knyuet, with seven hundred more, and the great
Carricke of Breast, and in her Sir Pierce Morgan, and nine hundred men of war,
(both those ships being fast grapped together) were unfortunately burnt, The
Regent and the Carricke are burned.
slain, and drowned in the Sea. The view whereof being unusual, was so
terrible, that whilst men fearfully looked on, the fight ceased, and the
Frenchmen (scattering themselves) returned into the Sea.

The French King (to make his match the better with the English Navy)
augmented the number of his ships and men, The French Fleet enters into the
Haven of Breast.
and sent them thoroughly provided with ordinance, powder, shot, and other
necessaries, into the Haven of Breast. And King Henry (who scorned that his
Admiral should be oppressed with a greater strength then he should be well
able to resist) rigged up the most part of his Royal Fleet, and some others,
King Henry augmenteth his Fleet.
which safely arrived in Bartram Bay within the Duchy of Britain. With these,
and with all the rest, the brave Admiral attempted to assail the French
Bottoms as they lay at ancors within the Haven of Breast. But as he was entering
in, the foremost ship, which Arthur Plantagenet did command, was splitted in
sunder upon a rock, which made the rest doubtful to proceed, except with
better guidance they might safely enter in.

The French Captains perceiving the Englishmens intent, The Frenchmen do
fortify the Haven.
ancoured as near to the Castle of Breast as they were able, and placed four
and twenty old Flemish Hulkes toward the mouth of the Haven, betwixt
themselves and the English Fleet, which they appointed to be set on fire, and
to be vnmoared when the ships of England did approach toward them, that by
them they might be endangered. They also raised and fortified diverse Rampires
and Bulwarks upon the entrance of the Haven, from which their great Ordinance
might play upon their enemies.

The Lord Admiral of England (doubting lest the Haven of Breast was too shallow
to support his ships of greatest strength and The Admiral in Boats enters
into the Haven.
and finding that the French cowards meant nothing less then to express their
manhood by a resolute encounter) resolved with oared Barges to be rowed into
the Harbrough, and there to do some memorable exploit upon his enemies ships.
With this determination (which more manfully then advisedly he did put in
practice) he with such an haughty courage and with such violence assailed the
three great Galleys of the Rhoads, He takes the three Galleys of the Rhoads.
which were brought thither by a gallant Knight, named Prior John, that he
won them quickly, and possessed them as his own. But when the Frenchmen
perceived that the English Barges were gone out of the Haven, and were returned
to their own Fleet, they then with great numbers of well armed men rushed into
the said Galleys, where the brave Admiral with that small remnant which were
with him, defended themselves a long time with great courage. But being
ouer-mastered, and too much wearied with fresh supplies, which every minute did
assail them, He is drowned.
the greater part of his men were slain, the Admiral with a pike was
violently borne over board, and drowned in the Sea, and the rest of them were
taken prisoners by their enemies. And thus were they overthrown, who (if they
had been more provident, and better counseled) might have triumphed in their
victories. And within few days after, the Lord Thomas Howard, the eldest
brother of the said deceased Knight, His brother is made Lord Admiral.
was by the King made Admiral, who with all the extremity of war became a
cruel revenger of his brothers death.

The King (not minding any longer to trifle or to dally with the French King)
levied two Armies. Two Armies sent into France.
In the one of them were eight thousand men, and in the other six thousand. The
former of them was commanded by George Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewesburie, and
the other by Sir Charles Somerset, Lord Harbert, Chamberlain to the King.
These two Generals with their companies (departing from Portsmouth) arrived
safely at Calice, from whence they marched to the strong City of Tyrwyn,
Tyrwyn is besieged.
and besieged it on every side. And within few weeks after, the King himself
(having first committed the government of this Kingdom to the general charge
of the Queen his wife, and the particular protection of the Northern parts
unto the noble and worthy Lord Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, The King with a
third Army comes before Tyrwyn.
if peradventure the Scots, according to their custom, should in his absence
beyond the Seas, enter into those Countries) being accompanied with many of his
Nobles and Gentry, and having an Army of eleven thousand lusty and gallant
men, departed out of England, came to his Town of Calice, and marched forth in
warlike order, until he had joined himself with all his other force, which
lay strongly encamped before Tyrwyn.

Now whilst King Henry thus lay in this siege, the inhabitants oftentimes
sallied out of their gates, and with great resolution skirmished with their
enemies, but were always loosers in their Retreats.

The French Army attempteth to raise the siege.
By the Englishmen likewise daily batteries and hourly assaults were made, and
manfully resisted by the Citizens, until the French King (to raise the siege)
caused a huge Army to be levied, which appeared, and approached near to the
English Camp, and made many a boasting and a proud brag, as if they were
determined to do much: but still and still they trifled, not doing any thing
which might merit praise. But in the end (they being provoked more by the
taunting reproaches of their own Nation, and by the daily scorns which for
their want of courage they received from the sharp tongues of their daring
enemies, then by their own valor) they attempted to raise the siege by strong
blows: In so much, that the two Armies met together, fought stoutly, and on
either part performed many brave deeds of Chivalry, with great courage: But
the presence of King Henry, and his example of good Knighthood, so animated
his men of War, that with undaunted spirits, they redoubled their strength,
in times and in places of greatest need and extremities, so that at the last,
The French Army is overthrown. Tyrwyn is yeel^ed and burnt.
the Frenchmen being dissolved into many heaps of breathless carcasses, and
many of their Nobles and Gentry being taken prisoners, the rest fled; and
within few days after, the City of Tyrwin (by composition) was yielded to
King Henry, who (only preserving the Bishops Palace, in which he lodged, and
the Cathedral Church) razed the Walls, Towers, Bulwarks, and Fortresses
thereof to the ground: and consumed the rest of that City with fire.

In this siege Maximilian the Emperor, The Emperor ^rue^l under King Henry.
with thirty approved men at Arms, repaired to the Kings camp; and (after his
great welcome, amply expressed by his Princely entertainment) he with them
were al enrolled into the Kings pay.

This victory, and the said City, being thus won, Torray is bes^^ged and
yeel^ed.
King Henry (with all convenient expedition) besieged the strong and the
warlike City of Tournay, which (for a while) was by the Inhabitants manfully
defended and preserved: But (after many bitter and sharp assaults, and bloody
skirmishes) when they perceived that their hopes for succor and help were
frustrated and in vain: they then, by composition, yielded themselves to the
Kings mercy; who, for the sum of ten thousand pounds, graciously received
them as his own subjects, and by his Almoner, Thomas Wolsey, took the oaths
of their fidelity and allegiance, as to their sovereign Lord and King. And
then King Henry (leaving there a strong Garrison) he committed the
government and safety of that City to Sir Edward Poynings, who was valiant,
King Henry re^^^ne^ into England. The Lord Admiral vexet^ the Fre^h nation.
James the 4. King of S^^ts (in the ab^^^ o^ his brother, king Henry) riv^^ieth
England.
and a worthy Knight. And (dissoluing his Army, because the cold winter was
unfit for the continuance of warlike employments) he safely returned to
England, where he was received by his subjects with lovely acclamation and
great joy.

Now must we understand, that whilst the king was thus busied in France, the
Lord Thomas Howard, his chiefest Admiral, intollerably tormented, vexed, and
daily grieved the French Nation, both by Sea and Land.

And likewise at the same time, James the Fourth, king of the Scots (although
he had married with the Lady Margaret, the eldest sister of king Henry) made
open war, and wilful breach of his Promise, and of the Peace, which had been
confirmed by his solemn Oath; and began unjustly to pick quarrels against
the King. In so much, that (upon notice given to the Earl of Surrey, that in
Scotland daily preparations and provisions were made for war) He commanded
Sir William Bulmer, Sir William Bulmer, a valiant Knight.
a valiant Knight, with two hundred lusty and tall Archers, to harbor in some
Town, or Village, near to the Scottish Pale; to the intent, that he might
not only give speedy notice and intelligence how things passed, but also might
do his best, to withstand and to resist their power.

Within few days after, the Lord Humes, Chamberlain to the King of Scots,
entered with an Army of eight thousand men into the Kingdom of England: slew
the Inhabitants, burned their houses, ransacked their goods, and foraged their
fields: And having enriched himself and his soldiers with money, and great
spoils, he returned securely, not thinking that any reckoning was to be made
for his good speeding. But on a sudden, and unexpectedly he was encountered by
Sir William Bulmer, who with one thousand Archers, and no more, so thickly
showred arrows upon the Scots, and with their swords in such a desperate and
strange manner assailed, and assaulted them, that quickly they were
overthrown: and five hundred of them being slain, and four hundred at the
least taken prisoners, the rest fled, leaving their spoils and their booties
behind them, and so returned beggarly into Scotland.

The King of Scots (who not only meant to revenge this disgrace, but also to
work wonders, if he might, in the absence of King Henry) entered into this
Realm with an Army, in which were more then one hundred thousand fighting
men; 100000. fighting men.
and besieged the strong Castle of Norham, which (through the Captains
prodigal expense, of all his powder and shot, to little, or no purpose) he
took, and kept it as his own.

The Earl of Surrey marches against the King of Scots.
The valiant and renowned Earl of Surrey, was no idle person in this business:
But (being aided and assisted by his eldest son the Admiral, who
understanding of his Fathers preparations for those wars, came from the Sea
to New Castle, and brought with him one thousand Mariners, and lusty fighting
men) and by the Lords Dacres, Clifford, Conyers, Latymer, Scrope, Ogel, and
Lomley, and by Sir Edward Stanley, Sir William Bulmer, Sir Nicholas Apple-yard,
Sir William Sydney, Sir Stephen Bull, Sir John Everningham, Sir Henry
Sherborne, Sir Thomas Metham, Sir Marmaduke Constable, Sir William Percy, Sir
Christopher Ward, Sir Philip Tylney, Sir William Gascoyne, Sir Thomas Barkeby,
Sir Walter Griffeth, Sir George Darcy, Sir Christopher Pickering, Sir Thomas
Butler, Sir Guy Dawney, Sir John Booth, Sir John Rowcliffe, Sir John Stanley,
Sir John Normauile, Sir Lionel Percie, Sir John Willoughby, Sir Edward
Echingham, and Sir Brian Stapleton, Knights; and by Ralfe Brearton, John
Laurence, Brian Tunstall, Richard Bold, John Done, John Bygod, John Claruis,
Thomas Fitz-Williams, Brian Stapleton, Robert Warcop, and Richard Cholmley,
Esquires, and by many other Gentlemen or worthy reputation and great valor.
26000. fighting men.
And having in his Army six and twenty thousand men, able and fit for war,
he marched toward the King of Scots: and upon the ninth day of September, in
the year of our Lord God 1513. in a Field which was called Flodden, Flodden
field
both the Armies came in view each of other. English forces (being marshalled
in good order) made two maine battles, both which were politickly and
strongly guarded by their wings. And the Scottish Army was divided into four
battles. The Scots are overthrown,
All these (after some few skirmishes, and the expense of much shot, both small
and great) joined together pell mell, and fell to handie strokes, and made such
an incredible expression of their manhood, by the indifferent exchange of
blows and wounds, that many a strong and lusty man was quickly deprived of
his life. Nobility and Gentry were no privileges to protect any man from
danger, nay from death; insomuch that King James himself fighting courageously
among his people as a common soldier, The King of Scots is slain.
triumphed over the dead carcases or such as (by his sword) he had prepared
for the grave. But in the end he himself was also slain, and so were two
Bishops, twelve Earls, fourteen Lords, and twelve thousand Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, and common soldiers of the Scottish Nation. And on the English
part, fifteen hundred and no more were slain. Thus was this Field won by
the blessing of Almighty God, and by the victorious courage and true manhood
of the Earl of Surrey, and of his son, and of such Nobles, Knights,
Gentlemen, and brave soldiers, as in that battle approved themselves hardy
and strong in Arms. And the suruiuing Scots (finding their chiefest help and
safety to consist in the agilitie and nimblenesse of their light heels)
forsook the Field, and with more then posting speed they fled, and returned
with heavy hearts into their own Country.

King Henry (after his return into England) bountifully rewarded such as in
France, and against the Scots in England, Noblemen created.
had done him the best service, and some of them he advanced to higher places,
by giving to them an increase of dignity and of honor. For he created Thomas
Howard (who was then Earl of Surrey) Duke of Norfolk, and the Admiral his
son was made Earl of Surrey. Sir Charles Brandon (being Viscount Lysle) was
made Duke of Suffolk. Sir Charles Somerset (being then Lord Harbert, and
Chamberlain to the King) was created Earl of Worcester. Sir Edward Stanley
was made Lord Mountegle. And the Kings Almoner Thomas Wolsey was created Bishop
of Lincoln, which favor he unthankfully requited, The enclosures about
London thrown down.
to his own ruin, as hereafter we shall see.

In the end of this year, the inhabitants of Islington, Hoxston, Shordich, and
of other Towns and Villages bordering near to the City of London, enclosed
their Champion Fields (in which the Citizens were accustomed, for their
recreation and pastimes sake, to walk, run, shoot, leap, and to use such
like sports at their wills and pleasures) with high hedges, and wide ditches,
because they would more privately appropriate the commodities of those grounds
unto themselves. But multitudes of the meaner sort of the Citizens issued forth
with mattockes, spades, shouels, and such like tools of husbandry, with which
they overthrew the said hedges, filled up those ditches, and leuelled the said
grounds, using in them their former exercises and pastimes, and so they are
enioied at this day.

1514. 6
Not long after the Kings return into England, the before named Prior John,
with his Galleys, and some Foists, being well manned and provided, Prior John
landeth, but is well beaten.
arrived in Sussex, and landed in the night, and burnt a poor Village named
Brigh-helmston. But being discovered, himself wounded in the face with an
arrow, and diverse of his men slain, he with the rest were compelled to run
into the Sea, out of which, being drawn into their vessels, they returned with
small gain.

Spoils in Normandy by Sir John Wallop.
But to requite their boldness, the Lord Admiral of England, with some few
ships, and eight hundred soldiers besides the Mariners, sent Sir John Wallop
to the Sea, whose often landing in Normandy was very prejudicial to the
inhabitants: for he burnt one and twenty of their Villages and Towns, and
many boats and ships which were ancoured in Traport, and in other Havens,
ransacked the Country, and slew much people. And much wondering there was, how
with so small a number he could land so often, and perform such great things.

A peace concluded. The French king marieth with the Kings sister.
The old French King Lewys the twelfth (understanding that the Flemings would
not, according to their former agreements, receive into their Country, the
goodly, fair, and virtuous Lady Marie, sister to King Henry, to be espoused
unto Charles, the young Prince of Castile, because the Spaniards had not
consented to that match; by his Ambassadors craved peace: and became an earnest
suter to the King, that she might be his wife: whereupon (to settle love and
amity betwixt those two Kings, and their kingdoms: and to make the said Lady
so great a Queen, and that she might be endowed with an yearly pension of
ten thousand marks during her England if the French King died) Longvyle, and
such other Frenchmen, Tyrwyn, were now released and set free. And within few
days after, the said Lady (being by the King and Queen accompanied to Dover,
and there shipped, and attended on by Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Marquis
Dorset, and his four brethren, the Earl of Surrey, the Lords De la ware,
Barnes, and Mountegle, Sir Mawrice Barkley, Sir John Peche, Sir William Sands,
Sir Thomas Bulleyn, Sir John Carre, and by many other Knights, Gentlemen, and
Ladies of great worth: She landed at Bollen, where (with great magnificence
and honor) she was received by the Dolphin, and by many Lords of France, who
brought her to Abuyle, where she met with, and was married to the King: And
(within few days after) at Paris, The French King dies. Francis the First.
The French Queen returns into England. The peace with France renewed.
she was crowned Queen; The French Nation thinking their King and Country to
be happy, who to their Queen had the fairest Lady in the world.

And at her Coronation, the Dolphin (upon a general challenge formerly made by
himself, Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, Thomas Gray Marquis Dorset, his
four brethren, and two others, against all comers) erected many honorable and
martial games, as the lusts, Turnay, Barriers, and such like: All which were
performed with great valor, and to the great pleasure of the King and Queen.
But within twelve weeks after the said marriage, Lewys dyed, and Francis the
first succeeded him in that kingdom. And by the Duke of Suffolk the said
Queen Mary was brought again into England, where he won her love, All the
deeds and actions of Cardinal Wolsey, touching this story are here set
together, because the discourse of the rest would otherwise by them be too much
interrupted.
and married her with the Kings consent.

In the seventh year of King Henry's reign, the former peace betwixt him and
King Lewys the twelfth, was renewed and confirmed with King Francis the first,
and great amity and love was exchanged between those two kings.

It now so chanced that Thomas Wolsey (who was borne of base Parentage in the
Town of Ipswich, and was first made the Kings Almoner; then Bishop of
Lincoln, and then of the Privy Counsel) succeeded the Archbishop and
Cardinal of York, who was named Doctor Benbrike, in the said Archbishopric.
And not long after he was made Cardinal of York, by the mediation and
procurement of those two Kings.

And now, because the Kings affections toward him were extraordinary: His
authority above all others eminent; his covetousness insatiable, and his
excessive Pride and Ambition boundless and unlimited, which made him bold and
peremptory, to do all in all; From henceforth (for many years) all things
were commanded and governed, according to his directions and will, until his
monstrous oppressions and saucy practizes brought him to ruin, and to
destruction. And least his deeds and his actions by often interviewing should
interrupt the other discourse of other occurrences and negotiations, happening in
this Kings Reign: We have therefore thought it convenient, yea necessary, to
prosecute the History of his proceedings to a conclusion, before we
intermedle much with the Narration of other passages and things.

He intermedles in other men's offices.
This proud Cardinal, so egerly hunted after authority and power, to rule and
to command all others: that (not contenting himself with his own offices,
though they were great) He intruded malepertly into the Inquiry and
determining of such things, as properly belonged unto others, but especially
into the Chancelorship of this Realm.

He is made Lord Chancellor.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, unto whom it appertayned, was much troubled with
those his intermedlings. But (being old and perceiving that the Kings
affections were fast bound to his humors: and that to cross with him, it was
the ready way to cross himself) he therefore delivered up the Great Seal
into the Kings hands, who no sooner accepted of it, but he bestowed it upon
Wolsey: which favor and dignity might well have satisfied his proud humor,
but nothing could. For now he (being an Archbishop, a counsailor of Estate, a
Cardinal, Chancellor of England, and the Kings especial Favorite) directed
all, commanded all, and did all.

He demands accounts and enriched him self thereby. He erecteth new Courts.
Enriched him, and left themselves poor. Others whose Estates were more
powerful, to please him, shared that which unjustly they had gotten. And some
others, who had deceived the King, and had prodigally spent all, had nothing
left, and therefore were punished publicly, and exposed to open shame.

He also erected sundry Courts of equity (which might more truly be termed
Courts of Iniquity) under a color and pretense to hear and to determine the
cases of distressed and poor people: By means whereof the seats of Justice,
belonging to the common Laws, were little frequented for a while, and by them
he gained a mass of treasure to himself, until the people (perceiving that
by them he waxed rich, and they poor; and that the Sentences and Judgments
of those Courts were not final, but controlable, They (of their own accord)
forsook them, and commended their Controversies to the censure of the common
Laws.

In the ninth year of King Henry's reign, 1517. 9
Pope Leo sent unto him Cardinal Campeius as his Legate, to solicit him (as
likewise he had done to the Kings of France and Spain, By subtlety he is made
a Legate.
and the Princes of Germany) to make war upon the Turks. But so outrageous
was the ocean of Wolseys pride, that (because he knew that Campeius, in regard
of his power Legantine, was to have the Precedence of place when they two met)
he cunningly informed him by certain Bishops (who went unto him to Calice,
under a fained color to visit him) that his journey would not be
successful, but come to none effect, except Wolsey were joined in equal
authority with him in that business: whereupon Campeius (with all expedition)
dispatched Messengers unto Rome, by whom within forty days he received a new
Commission; by which Wolsey was also made the Popes Legate and Commissioner as
well as he. Cardinal Campeius.
Then was Campeius admitted to come into this Realm, and both those two
Legates (within few days after) repaired to the Kings Court at Greenwich
(having two silver Crosses, and two Pillars of the same mettel, two Axes gilted
with fine gold, and two imbrodered Cushions borne before them: But the
Cardinal of York preferred his elder brother to the inferior place. And by
an eloquent Oration (which by an Italian was made unto the King) he was
informed of the substance of their message; But to make answer thereunto, The
King desired respit for a few days, in which he might be advised and
counseled in that matter. The Court Legantine.
Then did Wolsey (by his authority Legantine) erect an honorable Court,
without the Kings notice or license, and called it the Legantine Court. By the
authority whereof, he visited all Bishops and their Diocesses, and other
Clergy men; punishing such as were poor and unable to give bribes, but
enriching himself by the enforced bounty of such as had store of money, and
of faults.

By the same authority, Wolseys intolerable pride.
he also sequestered unto himself the probate of all Wills and Testaments: and
such was his intolerable pride, by reason of his Legantine authority, that
when (before and after meat) he washed his greasy fists, he was at his
Lauatorie attended and served by Dukes and Earls, for that purpose.

This his example of haughtiness, made the Clergy of this Land so proud and
insolent, that their industrious labors, which formerly they applied to the
studies of moral Virtues, and of Divinity, were now employed to devise
curious fashions in their behavior, in their apparel, and in their diet.

1520.
King Henry and his Queen, in the twelfth year of his Reign, France, for
love and friendships sake, to glad themselves with the society of the French
King, King Henry and his queen go into France.
Francis the first, and of his Queen. For which journey, it cannot well be
reported what cost in apparel, what provision for attendance, what furniture
for horses, what charges for jewels, and what preparations for rare
banquetings, and Princely gifts, were made both in England, and in France.

And when the appointed time drew near, the King and the Queen (being
accompanied with the Cardinal of York, and with many Dukes, Earls, Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, and fair Ladies of principal reckoning and account,
sailed from Dover, and safely came to Calice, and the French King and his
Queen, with their Royal and goodly train, came to Arde.

And (because it was intended, that the peace which was betwixt the two Kings,
should be enlarged and confirmed) King Henry appointed the Cardinal to go
before him to the French King, and to confer with him touching that matter.
For which purpose, he gave unto him (by his Letters Patents, Two large
commissions.
under the great Seal of his Kingdom of England) full power and absolute
authority, in all points, to do therein as he himself listed.

The Cardinal going to the French king.
The Cardinal (being infinitely prided by reason of this unreasonable, and
unlimited authority and power, which he had gotten) took his journey toward
Arde, being attended on by some hundreds of Lords, Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen: all which were clothed in crimson Velvet, and ware chains of gold;
and with as many Yeomen and Grooms, whose apparel was made of rich Skarlet.

Now, when he came unto Arde, he was Royally entertained by the French King,
and also by all the Nobility of his Court, who gave their attendance on the
King. But when the French Counsel had viewed his Commission, and the unlimited
extent thereof: The French King (by their advise and counsel) granted to him
the like authority and commission, A Princely meeting.
in all respects, under the great Scale of France: which he dissemblingly
refused, until he was licenced by King Henry to accept thereof. After this
great honor unto him done, both the said Kings and their Queens met together
diverse days in the Valley of Andren, where they feasted, banqueted, cheered,
and gladded each other, and with great bounty communicating their rich gifts
each one to the other, and to the great men and Ladies of each others Nation,
they took an unwilling and a friendly leave, and King Henry, with his Queen
and honorable train, returned to Calice, and from thence into England, where
they were received with much joy. But in the mean time the Cardinal so
earnestly gaped after honor, and the reverence of the people, that he did
little or nothing touching the said peace.

Now must we understand, French King, The Cardinals ^ar^e Commission.
with both which Princes King Henry was in league; by means whereof, King
Henry solicited amity and peace. Whereupon it was concluded, that the
Commissioners of those three great Princes should meet together at Calice,
where that matter should be debated and concluded, if possibly it might be.

King Henry, the more to honor and to exalt his Cardinal, gave unto him, and
to the Earl of Worcester, and to the Lords S. John, Ferrers, and Harbert, and
to the Bishops of Durham and Elie, and to Sir Thomas Bulleine, Sir John Peche,
Sir John Hussy, Sir Richard ^yngfield, and Sir Henry Guilford Knights, and
unto such others as he made Commissioners for that purpose, as large and as
ample power and authority touching that business, as by any means could be
devised, or by any words be uttered: and then (being fully furnished and
provided) this proud Cardinal with his Colleagues (whom he respected as his
underlings) passed to the Tower Wharfe through the City of London, The
Car^^na^^ is ^^^ored.
and in his passage was met by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and by the Companies
in their several Liueries, who did unto him all honor and reverence; and then
proceeding forwards, he with the rest of the Commissioners and their Attendants
took their Barges, landed at Grauesend, and coming to the City of
Canterbury, the Archbishop, The Cardinal is recei^ed with Pr^^^ssi^n. The
King (...) he should be honored.
and the prime ones of the Clergy of England, met the proud Cardinal without
the Cities Gates, with a solemn Procession, and magnified him as a King. Then
being shipped at Dou^r, he with his company safely arrived at Calice, where
he was too much elated, and made too arrogantly proud, by receiving of too
much reverence and honor: yet all was done by the Kings command. Thither also
resorted the other Ambassadors, and betwixt them often conferences were had.
But the Commissioners of the Emperor were stiff, and the French were stout.

The Cardinal goes to the Emperors Court.
The proud Cardinal (not contenting himself with such honors as formerly had
been given to him) would needs proclaim and publish his greatness in the
Emperor Maximilians Court at Brudges, where he hoped to receive the greater
esteem, because he had with him the Great Seal of the Kingdom of England,
He had the great Seal of England with him.
which never before that time any Chancellor dared to transport beyond the Seas
out of this Realm. For this purpose he entreated some few days absence of
the Commissioners of the two other Princes, that in the mean time he might
visit the Emperor: for he pretended that their personal presence and
conference might greatly further and expedite that business. Wherefore being
accompanied with four hundred and threescore horse, he passed by Graueling,
His great state.

The Emperor meets him.


Dunkerke, Newport, and by Odenburgh, and was every where met and saluted by
the Noblemen and Gentry of those Countries. And coming toward Brudges, he
was met one mile out of the Town by the Emperor himself, and by the Prime
and Flower of all his Court: where the Emperor did him the more reverence
principally for two causes: First, because he was informed of the large extent
of his commission, granted by King Henry. And secondly, because the great seal
of the Kingdom of England was in those Countries borne with great state before
him, which seemed to be the chiefest mark and badge by which King Henry would
express the extraordinary trust and confidence which he reposed in him; when
as in truth and indeed he foolishly and unadvisedly carried the said Seal with
him for his own glory, without the Kings leave: so that in his absence no
Sherifs could be made, nor any Writs, Commissions, or Patents could be sealed,
which wronged many particular men, and was very prejudicial to the present
estate of the whole Kingdom.

His Oration.
Within a day or two after the Cardinals coming to Brudges, the Emperor with
his Counsel, and Wolsey with his Associates, seriously disputed and debated of
the causes of the iarres and wars intended betwixt his Majesty and the French
King. But when the Cardinal perceived that the Emperor (without restitution
unto him made of such of his Castles, Forts, Towns, Cities, and Territories,
as by the French King were detained from him) would not incline to any peace,
he then (like a learned and like a witty Orator) discoursed largely of the
happiness of peace, and of the unspeakable and insupportable miseries of
bloody war, and forgot not to show unto the Emperor the kingly strength and
puissance of his Sovereign, both in men, and also in horses, ships, armor,
ordinance, and all other materials for the war. And further adding, that in
regard of the league which was betwixt those two Kings, his Lord and master
should be urged to take part with the French King, if any violence by any other
Prince should be offered to him.

The Emperor, The Emperors answer.
acknowledging all to be true whatsoever the Cardinal had spoken touching the
benefits of peace, and the incommodities of war, answered, that God, who had
given honors and possessions unto Emperors and Kings, had (includedly in the
same gifts) appropriated such an inheritable right in them unto those to whom
they were so given, that he doubted not but (with the pleasure of Almighty
God) they might not only defend and keep them with the sword from all
Usurpers and Intruders, but might also by force and violence regaine them, if
injuriously and besides right they were kept and detained. And seeing that all
Kings and Princes were bounden to support right, and to suppress al injuries
and wrongs, he said he doubted little of his uncle King Henry's help and
comfort, if betwixt himself and the French King there were no peace to be made
without blows. The Emperors greeuances.
He also informed the English Commissioners, that when his forces (he being at
that time but Archduke of Austria) had overthrown the Army of K. Charles the
eighth at Gingate, then the said King (to procure his peace) desired and
espoused the Lady Margaret his daughter (now wife to the Duke of Sauoy) and
upon the same conclusion of the said marriage, he gave with her to the said
French King a good portion in Piccardie, which were still detained and kept
from him, notwithstanding that the said King Charles perfidiously refused
afterward to marie her, and sent her home.

He told them likewise, that he himself being lawfully betrothed Jane, the
young Duches of Britaigne; he trecherously gate her from him, and took her to
his own wife.

He showed them also, that whereas the Duke of Gue^ders was French King) stood
out as a Rebel, Refusing to be reformed without blows.

He complained also that the French King trecherously surprised Castile the
Realm of Naples, but should restore it again by friendship or by war.

Thus when the Emperor had discoursed, and had made an end of speaking: the
Cardinal replied little, leaving him to his own will; and taking a friendly
and a kind farewell, he returned to Calice: where he again (but more coldly
then before) debated with those Ambassadors upon the conclusions of a peace:
But when he perceived that no such matter could be effected, he took his
leave and returned into England, and was graciously welcomed as a friend, and
liberally feasted as a stranger, by the King.

Henry's Reign: this proud Cardinal (under the color of the Kings partaking
with the Emperor in his wars against the French king) of his own authority,
England, He grants strange commissions for taxes.
and gave unto them private instructions, how, and in what sort, they should
proceed, and demean themselves in the execution of that business. And by the
same Commissions, every man was required to depose the certain and true value
of his Estate: And then, Of every fifty pounds and upward, there was demanded
four shillings the pound; And for every pound, above twenty, and under
fifty, two shillings; And for every pound, above twenty shillings, and under
twenty pounds, twelve pence. The payment thereof to be in money, or in plate.
And in London, he made himself the chief Commissioner: In which he behaved
himself insolently as a Tyrant, not so much to enrich the King, as to stuff
up his own purse. The like Commissions he granted forth against all the
Clergy of this Land, of whom he demanded four shillings the pound of all
their livings.

The commons will not obey.
These unjust proceedings grieved the Clergy, and common People at the heart;
and generally they refused to submit themselves in that business.

Their reasons
1. First, because those Commissions were not established, nor were grounded
upon the Laws of this Kingdom and commonweal.

2. Secondly, because the execution of them would be a dangerous president
against the liberty and freedom of this kingdom, in time to come.

3. Thirdly, because many men's credits exceeded their estates; and to discover
their inabilities, either upon their oaths or otherwise; it might, and would
tend to the subversion and utter overthrow, both of them, and of their Families.

4. And lastly, because the thing demanded and required to be paid was so much,
That not one man (among ten generally) had that value in money, or in plate,
though he were worth much more: And therefore if the King, by force of these
Commissions, should get into his hands all his Subjects plate and money; they
then should for necessities sake be constrained to barter, and to exchange and
chop Lead for Clothes, Tin for Bread, and Cloth for Cheese.

But these reasons prevailed not with the Cardinal: but contrariwise, he
(being by a general Petition entreated to persuade the King, to de^ist from
that course, and by the Laws to devise some other: made this froward and
sullen answer: That he would rather have his tongue plucked out of his mouth
with pinsers, His tyranny.
then he would move any such matter; and that the said sums demanded should
be paid, or levied, whether they would or no. And in Hampshire, the common
people so much repyned and grudged at these demands, That the Lord Viscount
Lysle, and Sir Richard Weston, and the other Commissioners for that business,
greatly doubted, what would ensue thereof. Wherefore (to pacify the people)
He, by his letters, most humbly entreated the Cardinal, that the twelfth
penny, proportioned with the sums before demanded, might suffice, that thereby
future dangers and troubles might be avoided. But when the Cardinal with
malignant eyes had perused the Viscounts letters, he deeply swore, that they
should cost him his head; because in them his presumption did manifestly
appear, taking to himself leave and liberty, to differ from those
instructions which were given him. Thus was he requited and recompensed for
his good service to the King: And for his dutious desire to preserve the peace
and quietness of his Country, and of this commonweal.

The Cardinal perceiving, New commissions.
that the People would not support this heavy burden, recalled those
Commissions, and sent forth others; whereby a sixth part of their substance was
demanded, according to the aforesaid rates, The Cardinallis cursed.
whereto he doubted not but willingly they would yield: but they refused not
only to submit themselves therein, but in every Shire they cursed the Cardinal
to the pit of Hell; and were so incensed, that much trouble among them was
likely to ensue. The King, who was informed in what strange sort, and fashion,
his people were used: The commissions are recalled.
and understanding that every place was filled with clamors, with
coffeehouse, and with danger, grieved thereat exceedingly. And being
resolved to reform what was amiss: with all expedition, he (by his letters,
which were directed into every County within his kingdom) commanded a present
cessation of all executions of the said Commissions, and protested that they
were granted forth without his knowledge or consent, and that he would not (but
by the course of Law) require any thing from his people, though his wants were
great to maintain his wars. A Benevolence.
But if by way of a Benevolence they would of their own accord enlarge
themselves toward him, he then would accept thereof, and take it as an
infallible proof of their love and duty toward their King.

The Cardinals base flattery.
The ambitious Cardinal privately grudging that the King in his Letters had
includedly laid the fault on him, and intending to rob his Majesty of his
peoples good affections toward him, and practicing to win it unto himself,
required the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London to come before him, to whom by a
subtle and a cunning speech he protested, that because he saw and perceived
that those Taxes were too heavy for them to bear, and because in his heart he
loved them, he therefore had kneeled to the King, and had persuaded him to
revoke the said Commissions, and wholly to rely upon their free benevolence
and good will. Wherefore he courteously advised them to be voluntarily
bountiful and liberal of their own accord. Then with great expedition he
dispatched his Letters to that effect into every Shire and County of this
Kingdom. But in regard that the King in his Letters had protested his
ignorance touching the said former taxes, therefore the proud Cardinal was
still condemned, and mortally hated by the people.

Commissions for the Benevolence.
Then forthwith (by the incitation of the Cardinal) new Commissions for the
said benevolence were made. And in the execution of them some of the
Commissioners endeavored fairly to persuade, but others of them by rough and
unkind speeches procured men to give largely, whether they would or no. Yet
they prevailed little: for the greatest part of the people refused to give any
thing, some of them alleging the Statute which was made against the demanding
of Beneuolences in the first year of the reign of King Richard the Third, and
some others alleging for their excuse, their poverty and their want.

The Cardinal suppresseth some Religious Houses.
It is now seriously to be observed, that the Cardinal having newly erected two
Colleges, the one in Ipswich, where he was borne, and the other in Oxford,
and intending to make their possessions fair and great, as their foundations
were wide and large, procured a license from the Pope, by virtue whereof (as
he was authorized) he plucked down certain small Abbeys, Note this.
Frieries, and Religious Houses, to appropriate their Lands and Revenues to
those Colleges: which example and president first moved the King, for other
respects, within few years after to pluck down all such Religious Houses.
For if it were religious in the Pope and Cardinal so to do, the King little
doubted (seeing the gross enormities and evil life of most of those men) but
it was likewise lawful for him to pluck them down.

And because the busy head of the Cardinal could not be idle, He reformeth
the Kings household.
therefore he made the King to believe, that the estate and condition of his
own house was unprofitably disordered, and out of tune. Whereupon, for the
reformation thereof, he removed diverse of the Kings menial servants and
household officers from their places, and bestowed them upon others, whom he
more fancied, although they deserved worse. He also bestowed his Manor of
Hampton Court, Hampton Court.
with all such costly buildings as he had erected there, upon the King; in
regard whereof, the King gave him leave to keep his Court in his Palace of
Richmond, wherein King Henry the Seventh did extraordinarily delight. These his
two actions made him hateful to the Commons, who mutteringly repined, saying
that the King and they were much abused, so to be used by a Butchers Dog.

At this time the French King became an earnest suter to King Henry, to have in
marriage for the Dolphin, the Lady Mary, The Kings marriage called into question.
But the said motion was crossed by a double encounter. The first was, the
dislike which the Statesmen and the Commons of this Realm had conceived
touching that match, which publicly they declared Henry should die without
issue male of his body lawfully begotten, as he then had none, they would not
receive a Frenchman to be their King, because he possessing a greater estate
and Kingdom, would make this but a servant and an attendant upon that. The
second was a scruple cast in the way (as most men Paris, who made it
questionable, whether or no the Lady Mary were legitimate, and borne in
lawful matrimony, because the King had begotten her upon the body of the
Lady Katherine, Aunt to the Emperor, and who had sometimes been his brother
Prince Arthurs wife. And from this doubt and from this scruple (which before
that time was not thought on) infinite vexation and trouble did ensue, as in
this discourse it shall appear. For thereupon the Kings Confessor, Doctor
Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, and many other profound Divines, informed the
King, that almost twenty years he had lived incestuously with the Queen,
and that now (for his conscience sake) he ought truly and heartily to repent
for that great sin, and to leave her bed.

The Cardinallis Ambassador for France.
The Cardinal, who (as he thought) had a long time laien lazily at home, would
now be gadding into France, in an Embassage to the French King, the substance
whereof was only known to the King and him. And at his departure, the King (in
the presence of all his Lords) embraced him as his familiar friend. He is made
proud.
And at that time such was his great estate, that passing through the City of
London, he was attended by twelve hundred horse. And when he came to Calice,
he was received with as much honor as by the Town and Garrison could be
presented unto him. And at Bulleine (among many other devices to magnify his
greatness) he was entertained with two ridiculous Pageants.

Two ridiculous Pageants.
1. In the one of them there was a Nun (called the holy Church) unto whose
person and chastity three Spaniards and three Amaines attempted to offer
violence, but by a Cardinal she was rescued and delivered from them all.

2. And in the other there was represented a Pope lying on the ground, and an
Emperor sitting in an Imperial Throne; but a Cardinal plucked him from his
seat, raised the Pope, and placed him therein.

The French king meets him.
From Bolleine as he came toward Amyens, he was met upon the way by the Provost
and the most substantial Citizens on horseback, and by them he was saluted
and reverenced as a King. And when he came within half a mile of the City,
the King himself with his Nobles met him, cheerfully embraced him, and in a
wonderful and magnificent pomp conducted him to his lodging, on the gates
whereof was written in large and fair letters, Cardinalis pacificus, The
peaceable Cardinal, or The Cardinal of peace. And at their departure the
proud Cardinal would have vouchsafed to have brought the King to his Court,
but the King would not suffer him so to do. Thus Kings, Nobles, Times and
Places conspired (if it had been possible) to have made him more proud, whose
heart was so haughty, that he supposed he could never be humbled and brought
low.

Then daily almost for the space of three weeks together, the French King, his
Counsel, and the Cardinal (with his Associates, who were obscured by his
greatness, He concludes a peace.
as the Moon is by the direct opposition of the Sun) conferred seriously:
and in the end he concluded a peace betwixt the two Kings, in the honor
whereof, and of the proud Cardinal, the instrument in which the Articles of
the said peace were contained, was sealed with a seal purposely made of fine
gold, whereof he boastingly bragged the next Term in the Star Chamber,
affirming before the whole Assembly, that the peace which by him was
concluded, was such an absolute, perfect, and sound peace, that it would
continue in secula seculorum, world without end. But the people mutteringly
repined thereat, saying that England never long enioied any benefit by any
peace which was concluded with the French, whose property it was (for their
advantage, without cause) to start aside from any thing which they had said,
and sworn to perform. They also said, that to enter into a fained league with
the French King, the Emperor and his friendship was abandoned, and that old
enemies were entertained, and old friends were unadvisedly (by the Cardinals
means) cast off. And therein they spoke truly: for by the Cardinals
enticement, and secret persuasions, the King (without good cause) showed
himself an enemy to the Emperor, and to the Flemings, and unto others of his
people, although the Emperor by all fitting and beseeming means had wooed him
to obtain and to keep his love.

By these iarres, thus cunningly broached by the Cardinal, French King, the
question touching the lawfulness or nullitie of the Kings marriage was
smoothered for a while. But not long after, The marriage in question.
such as seemed to be tender over the Kings conscience, and provident to
establish the true succession of this Kingdom in a lawful heir, revived the
scruple, and therewithal so busied the Kings cogitations and thoughts, that a
religious sorrow began to seize upon him. And (to avoid the continuance in that
incestuous sin, until by a judicial sentence the doubts were cleared) he
refrained from the Queens bed. And the Cardinal (to make himself more great
then he was) procured a commission from the Pope, to be directed to him, A
power Legantine is granted.
and unto his ancient brother Campeius, that before them, as supreme Judges,
that question (by legal processes and proceedings) might be heard, debated
on, and censured, according to the Laws of God and the Laws of man.

These two Legates (having received this commission) informed the Queen of
their authority and power: Wolsey is accused.
and she (in some passion) accused Wolsey as the principal brocher of that
doubt, and the maintainer of that contention, partly to be revenged thereby
upon her Nephew the Emperor, because he would not make him Pope (as secretly
he had requested him) and partly, because often times in a most secret, loving,
and gentle fashion, she had admonished and warned him of his covetousness and
tyranny; of his extortions and oppressions, and of his pride and lechery: But
he excused himself, as if he had been an honest man.

The Queen chooses Counselors.
The King (pretending nothing in this business, but Truth, sincerity and
justice, according to the Laws of God and Man) was well contented, that the
Queen should make choice of the greatest Clerks, and of the best learned men
within his Kingdom, to defend and to maintain her cause: Whereupon he
elected William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, And Nicholas West Bishop of
Ely, who were Doctors of the Laws; and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and
Henry Standish Bishop of Alssaph, who were Doctors of Divinity, and some
others: And they (as occasions did require) did for her as much therein, as by
wit and learning could be done.

Blackfriars in the great Hal, In which (for them) were placed two Chaires and
two great Cushions, The King and Queen are summoned.
covered over with cloth of gold: And (at the appointed day) the two Legates
took their places; but the Cardinal of York (as his custom was) preferred
his elder brother Campeius to the left hand: and then, having caused their
commission publicly to be read, the King and the Queen were cited in their
own persons, or by their Proctors to appear. The King by his Proctors
submitted himself to the Apostolical authority and power, which by the Pope
to the two Legates was given. But the Queen her self (being accompanied with
many Lords, The Queen appealeth.
Knights, Gentlemen, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and having first done great
reverence to the Legates) appealed from them (as from Judges which were not
competent, and indifferent to determine betwixt the Queen and King) to the
Court at Rome. This appeal they allowed not: but in the same Court they sat
weekly. And before them many learned and subtle disputations touching the
lawfullnesse, and also concerning the insufficiency of that marriage, were
daily made before them.

But the King (perceiving, that no quick dispatch was used, though oftentimes
deliberately they consulted) came with the Queen into the said Court, The
Kings protestation.
where his Majesty solemnly protested his infinite love toward her;
acknowledging her to be the most amiable, loving, kind, dutious, modest, and
sweetest wife, that (he thought) was in the whole world; And that therefore he
should not take so much joy and comfort, in any thing else whatsoever, as he
should do in her, if by the laws of God and Man she might remain his wife:
and therefore, for the determining of that question, and for the quieting of
his troubled conscience, he instantly importuned a quick dispatch and a final
end. He desires a quick end.
Then was the Queen demanded, whether she would stick to her appeal or no?
who answered yea: yet (for all that) the Court proceeded weekly (though safely)
as before.

Within few days after, the King being informed, The King is delaied.
that after the last day of that month of July, the Legates would not sit any
more, until the fourth day of October, He was thereat vexed and troubled
above measure: Wherefore (at the next sitting) he sent the Dukes of Norfolk,
and of Suffolk, with some other Lords to the Legates; requesting them to
dispatch their judicial sentence one way or other, that long delays might not
augment the anguish of his troubled conscience. The Dukes, in a reverent, and
in an earnest manner delivered their message in the open Court. But by Campeius
it was answered, That there was yearly, and of custom a cessation in the Court
of Rome, betwixt the aforesaid days, from all Legal proceedings whatsoever:
And that, if any sentence in the Interim were given, it was utterly void in Law
and of no force at all: And therefore, seeing that their Court was a branch of
the Court of Rome, they could not (until the prefixed day) intermedle any
further in that business. This answer so much offended Charles the Duke of
Suffolk, The Duke of Suffolk is angry.
that (striking his fist upon the board) he swore, that the old saying was too
too true: That never Cardinal or Legate did any good in England, and
therewithal the offended Lords departed, and so did almost the whole company,
leaving the two Legates to look one upon the other.

The King being thus troubled with an enforced delay, Campeius is bound for
Rome.
contented himself as patiently as he was able, hoping that in October that
business would have an end. But within few days after, He was informed, that
Campeius (being sent for by the Pope) made great preparations for his return
to Rome: Two crafty mates.
Whereby he perceived plainly, that the two Legates had grossly dissembled with
him; and that they had secretly plotted these delays; that the matter should
not be definitiuely censured and sentenced by them. But in the Court at Rome,
where infinite costs and charges would be expended: The business would be
lingered on with arguments, and long disputes, and that his conscience should
be unsettled in the mean time. And for this cause, from this time forward, The
King hates Wolsey.
the King in his heart hated and maligned his unthankful and dissembling
creature base Wolsey, whom (from a contemptible birth and estate) he had
preferred, and made Abbot of S. Albons, his Almoner, a Counsailor of Estate,
Bishop of Winchester, and of Durham, Archbishop of York, an Ambassador to
Kings and Princes, his Chancellor, and a Cardinal.

And thus, this business which be plotted, to make himself gracious with the
King, eminent above others, and to be revenged upon his enemies, turned to his
own ruin and utter destruction in the end.

Articles against Wolsey.
For the Kings Counsel and the Nobles of this Land (perceiving that the Kings
heart was changed from him) were not a little glad, because generally he was
hated. And (to press him down in his falling) they framed against him diverse
Articles, some demonstrating his excessive pride, others his insulting
tyranny, others his grievous oppressions, others his monstrous injustice,
others his insatiable covetousness, others his abominable lechery, others his
eager and sharp courses to revenge, and others his secret and his cunning
dealing betwixt the Pope and him, whereby his Majesty's regal authority and
his prerogative royal in all things touching the Clergy and Church, was made
void. And thereupon they concluded that he was guilty of the Praemunire,
Praemunire.
and consequently bad forfeited all his promotions, lands, goods, chattels, and
his liberty to the King. These Articles being reduced into good form, and fit
order, were by the Nobility engrossed into a book, subscribed with their
hands, and then it was delivered to the King, who concealed it for a few days.

Campeius takes his leave.
The two Legates (not knowing what had passed) came to Woodstock to the King,
where Campeius took his leave to go to Rome: and Wolsey (who purposed to have
left him, and to have remained with the King) was frowningly commanded to
accompany his honest brother unto London, where he should be further informed
of the Kings mind. When they were come thither, and from thence were iournying
toward the Sea coasts: By order and direction from the Council, His chests
are broken.
Campeius his truncks and chests were broken up, and a diligent search was
made, to find such letters, as they coniectured were by Wolsey sent to Rome:
But none were found: For by a Post, they were sent a way a day or two before.

The Cardinal is indicted.
The next Term, the King caused his Attorney General, named Sir Christopher
Hales, to prefer into the Kings Bench, an indictment upon the Statute of
Praemunire, against the Cardinal, upon the aforesaid Articles, which he
performed accordingly: And by the Grand Jury, The great Seal is taken from
him.
it was found against the Cardinal. Then forthwith the Dukes of Norfolk, and
of Suffolk, were required to take from him the great Seal, His goods are
seized.
which the King bestowed upon Sir Thomas Moore: he also caused Sir William
Fitz-Williams, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of his Majesty's household,
and Doctor Stephen Gardener his new Secretary, so to guard, and so to watch his
House and Palace at Westminster, that none of his moueables, whatsoever, might
be imbeaseled, or purloined, or carried away from thence. And the Cardinal
himself being confined to Asher, He is confined.
not far from Kingston, and most of his Attendants being displaced, and
removed from him: a small allowance of things needful was appointed to him for
his necessary use, whereat he infinitely greiued.

Then was he required by the King, He confesses this indictment.

His dignities taken from him.


to plead to the said indictment: but by his Atturnie (sufficiently authorized
under his hand and seal) he confessed every material point thereof.

Then the king conferred the Abbie of Saint Albones upon the Prior of Norwich,
the Bishopric of Durham upon Doctor Tonstall, and the Chancellorship was
ratified to Sir Thomas Moore. But the king (of his gentleness, and in regard
of his former favors toward the Cardinal) left unto him the Arch bishopric
of York: and the Bishopric of Winchester, and sent unto him much plate,
housholdstuffe, and many other things (part of that which had bin taken from
him) to a great value. Yet in his heart, he remained unthankful, grudging, and
malicious toward the king.

The king (in former times) had intermedled very little with the government of
this Commonweal, for he was almost altogether ruled and directed by the
Cardinal, and by the Clergy of this Land. But he now began to be sensible of
that error, and to cast away that yoke: so that he took the raines into his
own hand. And (first of all) he assembled his high Court of Parliament, in
which the Commons of the Lower house sharply complained of the misdemeanors of
the Clergy: But especially in these six things.

Articles against the Clergy.
FIrst, because (with great extremity) they exacted unreasonable sums of
money, as due fees, for the Probate of men's last Wills, and Testaments. 2
Secondly, Because they were excessiuely covetous, and cruel, in demanding for
Mortuaries, especial of such poor people, as skarsly left two kine, for the
maintenance of their wives and children. 3 Thirdly, Because their full purses
made them to become Farmors of great Granges, Bartons, and temporal farms,
taking them in lease in every Shire, and become Husbandmen and Graziers, to the
prejudice and hurt of such as were trained and brought up only to be
husbandmen. 4 Fourthly, Because many of them kept Tanning houses for their
private gain, and were Brokers, Buyers, and Jngrossers of Wool, Cloth, and
other marchandizes, snatching up all, and enforcing tradesmen, and clothiers to
buy those commodities at the second, or third hand, and at unreasonable prices.
5 Fifthly, Because such Clergy men as had the best, and the greatest Spiritual
livings, did (with great extremity) take the utmost of their rights: And yet
they lived in the Court, or in the houses of Noblemen, and Bishops; so that
they spent nothing in Hospitality among their Neighbors, Nor did feed their
flock with the milk of Gods most holy and sacred Word. 6 And last of all,
Because diverse ignorant men among them, held and enjoyed eight, ten, twelve,
yea more Benefices and Spiritual promotions to themselves severally; and yet
lived not upon any one of them: but kept great Scholars and learned men, at a
short commons, in one of the Universities, who were better able to do more
good then they.
Doctor Fisher wrongeth the lower house of Parliament.
The Bishops perceiving that these matters much concerned them, and the whole
Clergy of this Land, strongly opposed themselves against such as exhibited the
same complaints. In so much that Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester (being more
earnest, then well advised) desired the Lords to remember well, and to
consider, that when the Bohemians abused the estate and dignity of their
Clergy, they then ruinated and destroyed their Kingdom, and Common weal:
Wherefore he instantly requested them, to be well advised, before they
entertained these objections: For (quoth he) they are not religious, nor do
proceed from Faith.

When the Commons had understood what the Bishop of Rochester had spoken: Then
by Thomas Audley their speaker, and by thirty others of the house, They
informed the King of the said injury and wrong: Alleging that if the lower
house of Parliament were reputed to want Faith, then they were esteemed to be
Heretics, and consequently, that all such Bills as they preferred, or did
pass, should be preferred and concluded on by Panims, Pagans, and Faithless
men, and so were unlawful, and unfit to rule, and to govern Christians, and
such as truly, and sincerely honored, and adored God.

The King (who was much offended, They complain to the King.
and grieved at the Bishops speech) gave them this gentle answer; That he
would understand his meaning, concerning those words, and that (with all
convenient expedition) he would inform them of his answer. And within a day
or two after, the said Bishop and six others were sent for, and the Bishop of
Rochester was reprehended by the King. But with many solemn protestations, he
assured the King, that he referred those words. They proceeded not from faith;
to the doing deeds and actions of the Bohemians, and not to the doings of the
lower House, which likewise was affirmed by the rest. This his excuse was by
the King sent to the Commons; who spoke liberally of the Bishop, and repaied
their debt with unseeming terms. A bad (...).
In so much, that at a Committee (in which the Bishops strongly persisted, to
maintain, and to justify, the taking of their Fees for probates of
Testaments, to be lawful) because the same paiments had been of a long time
used; a Gentleman of the lower House replied to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
That Thieves on Shooters Hill used to take purses there: Ergo, it was lawful.
This speech pleased the Commons well: For they thought, That they had now
angered the Bishops, as the Bishop of Rochester had angered them. Then were the
matters aforesaid comprised in the same complaint, reduced into formal Bill:
which (being long, and substantially disputed on, and in some points qualified)
were assented unto by both the Houses, and afterward (for Laws) established
by the King.

The Book also, which contained the Articles, The articles against Wolsey
which were drawn against the Cardinal, was sent by the Lords to the lower
House. In which (among diverse other things) he was principally accused of these
great faults.

1 FIrst, That by dishonest and cunning reasons, he had deceitfully induced
the King, to consent that he should be made a Legate to the Pope, which
authority did (indeed and in effect) frustrate and make void, all the
authority and jurisdiction of all other Bishops and Clergy men within this
Kingdom, and also the authority of the King in Ecclesiastical things and
causes. 2 Item, That in all his letters, and other passages to foreign Estates
and Princes, his phrase in writing was, Ego, and Rex meus; I, and my King: as
if the kings Majesty had been his inferior, and at his command. 3 Item, That
(to induce the Pope to give unto him a power legantine) he in his letters for
that purpose had this phrase: ecclesia Anglicana facta est in reprobum sensum,
The Church of England is become reprobate: whereby he unchristianly disgraced
and abominably slandred the Church of England, as being faithless. And that
therefore necessity did instantly urge and require, that by a power Legantine,
to be granted unto him, it might be reduced to a right belief. 4 Item, That
when he was sent an Ambassador to Calice, there to confer with the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of the French king, He carried with him,
without the kings leave, the great Seal of this kingdom: and from thence he
also carried it into Flanders to the Emperors court for his own honor, and
vain glory. 5 Item, That without the kings knowledge or consent, he had sent
a commission sealed with the great Seal of England, to Sir Gregory de
Cassado, authorizing him thereby in the kings name, to conclude a peace betwixt
the Duke of Ferrara, and the kings Majesty. 6 Item, that he, being filthily
powdered with the french pocks, by reason of his excessive lechery, and
dishonest life, did oftentimes presume to talk with, and to cast his unwholesome
breath into the kings face. 7 Item, That to magnify his own power both at
home, and with foreign Nations, he caused a Cardinals hat to be stamped on some
of the the Kings coin, without his Majesty's appointment or consent. 8. Item,
that he would not suffer the Kings Clerk of the market to execute his office
in S. Albons, because the same Town was parcel of his Abbey. 9. Jtem, that
(to obtain his dignities, and to continue the love and favor of the Pope and
of his Cardinals toward him) he had in sixteen barrels conveyed to Pope
Clement the seventh, and to his Cardinals toward their redemption out of
prison, wherein after the sacking of Rome they were kept by the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and to the French king in the Popes behalf, to make wars
upon the Emperor, so much gold as did amount to the sum of two hundred and
forty thousand pounds at one time, and incredible sums of other money at
other times, to the great impouerishing of this kingdom and Commonweal: and
to enrich the king again, had of his own accord sent out such Commissions
into all Shires within this kingdom, for the exacting of infinite sums of
money, as quenched the peoples love toward the king, and made them
rebelliously to disturb the peace of this kingdom in Norfolk and elsewhere.
These Articles and many more being comprised in the said book, Wolsey
confesses the Articles.
the Cardinal by a subscription written with his own hand, frankly and freely
confessed, and submitted himself to the Kings mercy.

About the same time the King (for honorable and good service) created Sir
Thomas Bulleine (who was Viscount Rochford) Earl of Wilshire, Noblemen created.
and Viscount Fitz-water was made Earl of Sussex, and the Lord Hastings was
created Earl of Huntingdon.

The King (because he was informed that the Emperor and the Pope were together
in Bononie) sent thither (as Ambassadors) the said Earl of Wilshire and some
others, An embassage.
protesting that the question touching his marriage was not begotten nor
motioned by him, nor by his consent, but first by the President of Paris, who
received it (as he affirmed) from the Counsel of Spain, and since by the
grauest and the best learned Divines within his Kingdom, and not upon any
dislike which he conceived against his Queen, nor for any desire to change:
and therefore he earnestly entreated them, The King craves a sentence.
that for the clearing of his troubled conscience, the same matter might one
way or other receive a speedy and a final end by a sentence or judgment
declaratorie in the Consistory of Rome. The Emperor said little, but only
answered, that the judgment of the Law should content and satisfy him in that
point. And the Pope said, that when he came to Rome, the matter should receive
an end; but yet he meant nothing less: for he knew right well, that if he
pronounced sentence against the dispensation granted by Pope Iulie his
predecessor, although he knew well that it was flatly against the Law of God,
then the Popes future dispensations would be little or nothing at all respected
or regarded. And he likewise knew, that by giving of sentence against the
Queen, he should again make the Emperor his enemy, who was now newly become
his friend. Thus this unthankful Pope flattered and dallied with the Kings
Ambassadors, making them hopeful, but in vain; yet with this answer they
returned to the King, who (fearing lest the Pope and his Cardinals would
indeed by long delays abuse and dally with him) employed diverse Lords, and
the greatest Divines within his Kingdom, at his exceeding great costs and
charges, to travel into all the Universities in the Christian world, and there
to be resolved of their opinions touching the validity or nullitie of his said
marriage. And when they all returned, they brought with them twelve Instruments,
sealed with the public Seals of so many Universities, and also the opinions
of sundry great and famous learned men, The opinion of Universities
by all which it appeared that they agreed and consented in one, that the Kings
marriage with his brothers wife was utterly void, and contrary to the Laws of
God and man, notwithstanding the dispensation of the Pope.

Wolsey is licensed to go to York.
The King at this time (by the advice of his Counsel) licensed Wolsey to live
within his Diocese of York, for which cause he went thither. But diverse of
his servants (by their friends means) got into the Kings service; among whom
Thomas Cromwell (being a wise and a discreet man) was one, whom the King
entertained with public demonstration of his good affections toward him, and
of his favor.

The Cardinals Colleges.
Now though such of the Cardinals lands as he intended to have bestowed upon his
two Colleges were clearly forfetted unto the King, yet his Majesty in regard
of his great love which he bare to learning, and unto learned men, bestowed the
same wholly upon his College founded in Oxford, called the Cardinals College,
but then newly named the Kings College, but now it is called Christ's Church.
And the other of his Colleges (founded at Ipswich) the King destroyed, as
being unprofitable, and serving to no purpose.

The King being secretly informed that the Cardinal had gotten a Bull from
Rome, to curse him, 1530.
except he would restore him A Bull from the Pope.

A proclamation.


and that none but he (no not the King himself) should for any offense
whatsoever correct or punish any Clergy man, proclaimed that all provisions,
appeals, and instruments, within the space of one year next before that time
procured, or which at any time from thenceforth should be procured from the Sea
of Rome, whereby the authority royal and prerogative of the King might in any
jot be lessened or diminished, should be utterly void and frustrate in all
respects, and that the procurers of them should be punished at the Kings will.

The proud Cardinal, Wolsey writes to Rome.
scorning to be humbled and trodden down, and purposing to set new broiles
and disturbances in the Commonweal, to molest the King, wrote secret letters
to the Pope and to his Cardinals, to animate and to exasperate them against the
King. And they (understanding in what a disgraceful plight the Cardinal then
stood) encouraged him not to faint, The answer.
nor to show himself a coward, and a heartlesse man, by yielding to the
perverseness of his present fortune, promising his restoration, and that (for
his sake) the King should be effectually crossed in his weighty business
betwixt the Queen and him.

Hereupon the Cardinal began to take heart: His pride.
and nothing doubting but that he should again be advanced, if not by the
Kings consent, yet volens nolens, and against his will, made great preparation
for his enstalment into his Archbishopricke at York, which he intended to
solemnize with such magnificence and pomp, as the like before had never been
seen in that place. For which purpose he erected in that Cathedral Church a
stately seat, of an extraordinary height, not much unlike to a Kings Throne.
He also wrote to the Nobles, Knights, and chiefest Gentlemen in the North, many
fawning, flattering, and kind letters, entreating and inuiting them at a
prefixed day to accompany him (at his Instalment) to the City of York, where
he provided for them great cheer, not sparing any cost.

The King (who was advertised what he had written to Rome, and what answer was
made thereunto, and perceiving that he intended with extraordinary pomp and
state to be installed, for which his doings he had no license from his
Majesty) imagined (and therein he was not deceived) that those great
preparations were made of purpose, and in an out-facing fashion, to confront
him.

Wolsey is arrested.
Wherefore, to prevent his said instalment, he sent a commission under his great
Seal of England, whereby he required Henry the sixth Earl of Northumberland,
to attach and to arrest the body of the said Cardinal, to bring him to the
Castle of Sheffield, and there to deliver him to the safe custody and keeping
of the Earl of Shrewsbury, which he did: Although the Cardinal prowdly
checked him, and told him that he was a member of the College of Cardinals in
Rome, and that neither the King, nor any other temporal Prince under heaven
could, or ought to intermedle with him for any cause, or matter whatsoever. Yet
for all this (as soon as he was gone) all his plate, His goods are attached.
goods, horses, and household stuff were seized on to the Kings use: his
Officers were discharged, and his Physician Doctor Augustine, was by Sir Walter
Welsh, one of the Kings chamber, convayed to the Tower.

As Soon as the King was informed of the executing of his commission, he sent
Sir William Kingston, the Captain of his Guard, and Constable of the Tower,
with certain Yeomen of his Guard, to fetch the Cardinal to that prison.

The sight of this Messenger more danted and appaled the Cardinal then all the
rest: For now he was right well assured, that his head was in great danger.
This fear made him to fall into a sudden sickness, so that (purposely, as it
was coniectured, to dispatch himself out of this life) he took a purgation,
which was more strong, He dies.
then the weakness of his nature could control, by reason whereof he dyed two
nights after.

Thus lived, and thus died this Cardinal, who was Proud and Ambitious, Wanton
and Lecherous, Rich and Covetous, a Liar and a Flatterer, His description.
a Tyrant and Merciless: Forgetful of his beginnings, Disdainefull in his
prosperity, and wretched in his end: Whose death made the King joyful, his
Nobles iocund, and the People glad.

The Clergy feared the Praemunire.
He being thus dead, the King by his Council was informed, that all the
Clergy of England were guilty of the Praemunire; because (in all things) they
had supported and maintained the authority, 100000 pounds. The Kings
Supremacy acknowledged.
and power Legantine of the Cardinal: Wherefore (to prevent a mischief before
it fell upon them) They gave to the King for their redemption, and for their
pardon, the sum of one hundred thousand pounds: And by a public instrument
in writing, subscribed, and scaled by all the Bishops and Fathers of the
Church, they plainly, voluntarily, and willingly acknowledged the King (within
his own Kingdoms and Dominions) to be the supreme Head of the Church, as well
in all matters Ecclesiastical, as in all Temporal things and cases
whatsoever. Yet not long after the King diminished their number and their
strength, as hereafter it shall appear.

The Cardinal being thus gone, Opinions showed.
the King intending nothing less then to dance attendance in the Court at
Rome, caused the said instruments procured from so many Universities, together
with the opinions of so many learned men, and of his two Universities of Oxford
and of Cambridge, publicly to be showed in both the houses of his Parliament:
which being done by diverse honorable Lords, both spiritual and temporal, he
caused them to be showed to the Queen, and the question to be demanded of
her, whether she would relinquish her appeal to the Sea of Rome, and refer
her self and her cause to any Nobles and Bishops within this Kingdom? whose
answer was, that she would not: The King marieth Anne Bullen.
that his said marriage was void in Law, began to bend his love and kind
affections to a goodly, fair, and beautiful Lady in his Court, named Anne
Bullen. Her he created a Marchioness of Pembroke, The King is divorced from
Queen Katherine.
the Archbishop of Canterbury (being accompanied with the Bishops of London,
Bath, Lincoln, and some others, together with diverse Doctors, Advocates,
Proctors, and Officers of the Ecclesiastical Court) repaired to Dunstable, The
Author returns to the history, which is interrupted by the relation and
connecting together of the deeds and actions of Cardinal Wolsey.
and the like he did for fifteen days together. And then upon the default and
contumacie of the said Princess, the Archbishop pronounced the said marriage
(being against the Law of God) to be merely and utterly void, the Popes
dispensation notwithstanding.

Having discoursed of all things memorable which were done by Thomas Wolsey
Cardinal of York, and concluded the contention touching the marriage of King
Henry with Lady Katherine his brothers wife, it will be very expedient and
fitting that we now return to the narration of such other things as are
worthy to be comprised in this Story, and which were done whilst King Henry
lived.

First therefore we may understand, A riot on Merchant strangers.
that in the end of the eighth year, and in the beginning of the ninth year
of his reign, the Citizens of London heartily hated such Merchant strangers
and strangers Artificers as dwelt among them; partly because by their great
wealth and extraordinary labor and industry they took from them the
greatest means whereby they were to live, and partly because their riches made
them so proud, that in derision and in scorn, privately and publicly, they
would deprave and abuse the Citizens with many mockes and frumpes: so that they
(being resolved no longer to endure or to bear them) upon May day many
hundreds of them riotously assembled themselves together, Evil May day.
and with great outrage and violence rifled, robbed, and ransacked the houses
and the shops of all strangers, and intended to have done more mischief, if
the provident care and industry of the Lord Mayor and chiefest Citizens had
not suppressed them. For some of the malefactors (by flying) shifted for
themselves, and many (who were most of all notoriously faulty) were committed
to several Gaoles and prisons; Treason.
and being afterward indicted, arraigned, and found guilty, were condemned of
high Treason, because their injury and wrong tended to the breach of the
League which was betwixt the King and their Sovereigns. Wherefore some of them
were executed as Traitors, according to their judgment; and the residue of
them (being about four hundred) were pardoned by the King, who in his own
person sat in the Guild Hall of London. And then all things were again settled
in prosperity and in peace.

French King now longed to be again owner of the fair City of Tourney, which
by conquest was possessed by King Henry. Wherefore by his Ambassadors he not
only desired the ratification of the peace which was betwixt the King and him,
A peace with the French King.

Tourney is delivered up by composition.


but also a restitution of the said City, for money to be unto him paid. The
King so lovingly accepted of this message, that forthwith the peace was
confirmed, and further it was concluded, that for 60000. Crowns to be paid for
the Town, and for 400000. Crowns more to be paid for the Castle, which by
King Henry was erected, and almost finished, and for 24000. pounds sterling to
be paid in discharge of a debt due and owing by the Citizens for the
preservation and redemption of their Liberties, according to the composition
and their own agreement, the Town and Castle should be surrendered up into the
hands of the French King. Whereupon four great hostages (for the true payment
of the said sums of money at the appointed days) were sent over, Hostages.
and accepted by the King. And then the Earl of Worcester, Sir Edward Belknap,
and some others, were sent over, who delivered the Town and Castle (according
to both the said Kings Commissions) to Monsieur Chastilion, who was not
suffered to make his entry with Banners displaied, but rolled up, because it
was not won, nor conquered, but yielded up by composition.

The surrendering of this City was much disliked by many wise and prudent men
for two reasons. First, because that the holding French Nation. And secondly,

About the same time the Emperor Maximilian died, Maximilian dies.

Charles is elected Emperor.

He comes into England


and Charles King of Castile (Nephew to Queen Katherine) was elected in his
stead; who shortly after coming out of Spain toward the City of Acon, where
he was to receive his first Crown, came into England, and was with all pomp
and princely magnificence welcomed and entertained by the King and Queen, to
his good liking and contentment.

The Lords of the Counsel of Estate perceiving that certain Gentlemen of the
Kings Privy Chamber (who were the Kings A rare example.
that they were scoffed and derided by all wise men, and that they were over
bold, saucie, and malapertly familiar with the King, to his great disgrace,
besought his Majesty to reform them and himself therein. A wise King.
The King not only thanked them heartily for this their friendly admonition and
fatherly care of his well-doing, but also referred to them the absolute
ordering and disposing of those metamorphized Gentlemen. Wherefore they
banished them from the Court, and placed in their rooms Sir Richard Wingfield,
Sir Richard Ierningham, Sir Richard Weston, and Sir William Kingston, who were
discreet, temperate, and valiant men, of whom the King graciously accepted, and
received them into his extraordinary favor.

The King and Queen having made large and costly provision for the meeting of
the French King and Queen, 1520.
according to promise, Arde, shipped themselves at Dover, The King and Queen
sail into France.
and with their stately and honorable train they landed at Calice, and
afterward effected their journey in princely fashion, as formerly in this
discourse it is more particularly set down.

Within few days after the King and Queens return from Arde unto Calice, The
King visits the Emperor.
he with an honorable train rode to the Town of Graueling in the Low
Countries, to see and to visit the Emperor, and his great Aunt the Lady
Margaret Duchess of Sauoy, by whom he was received with great familiarity and
bounty, They come to Calice.
and was by them both brought back again to Calice, where their welcome,
cheer, and entertainment far exceeded measure and their own desires and
expectation. But this exchange of love and of kindness grieved the French King
at the heart, The French King is angry.
who was inwardly displeased and reuengefull, because he practiced, but could
not be elected Emperor according to his hopes. Yet because he could flatter
and dissemble, therefore he sent unto them the Lord de la Roch, not only to
congratulate for former courtesies received, but also to conclude a peace
betwixt them three, A peace.
which for his part he never intended to observe. But the peace was fully
agreed unto, A condition.
with this condition, that he who first made breach thereof, should be warred
on by the other two.

England, he was secretly informed (and it was true) that by a Monk the
haughty and ambitious Duke of Buckingham was much abused in this, The Duke of
Buckinghams overthrow.
that he was by him persuaded, and did believe, that he should be the King of
this Realm, which could not be, but by usurpation, and the confusion of the
Kings royal person. And this conceit so pleased him, that he now and then
would babble and reveal it to some of his inward and familiar friends, and
some of them discovered it, to his destruction and utter overthrow. Likewise
this hope framed him to a more ambitious course in his carriage, and made him
negligent of his service and duty to the King; insomuch that his Majesty, by
his Letters, required him with all convenient expedition (privately) to repair
unto the Court. But as he was in his Barge upon the Thames, he was by Sir
Henry Marney Captain of the Kings Guard (who had with him an hundred of the
Kings Yeomen subject to his command) attached and arrested of high treason, and
as a prisoner conveyed to the Tower. And being afterward legally and according
to the due form of Law indicted by sundry Knights and Gentlemen, for that (as
much as in him lay) he had conspired and contrived the Kings death, to make
himself his successor, he was brought to a Bar at Westminster Hall, before
the Duke of Norfolk, high Steward of England, and his chiefest Judge. And
having holden up his hand, he was arraigned of treason upon the said
indictment, and pleaded thereunto that he was not guilty, and did refer
himself for his trial to God and to his Peers, who were these, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Marquess Dorset, the Earls of Oxford, Deuon, Darbie,
Shrewesburie, Essex, Worcester, and Kent, and the Lords De la Ware,
Fitz-Warren, Willoughbie, Harbert, Cobham, Brook, and Morley. These Noble men,
in the presence of the Prisoner, had witnesses face to face, (who were all
prisoners for concealments of the same offense) and deposition in writing;
which when they had done, they arose from the Bench, retired into a private
room, and after a short absence returned again to their places: and the Duke
of Buckingham being again brought unto the Bar, the said Lords, one by one,
protested with great solemnity, and protestations on their honor, that they
thought him to be guilty, according to the indictment. And thereupon the Lord
high Steward, with many tears, pronounced against him that judgment which
against meaner offenders in that nature is given. Whereupon he was taken from
the Bar, and having an Axe borne before him, with the edge thereof turned
toward him, because he had his judgment to die, he was conveyed by water to
the Temple stairs, and was there received on land by Sir Nicholas Vaux and Sir
William Sands, both Baronets, who conducted him through the City of London to
the Tower: and within two or three days after he was beheaded on a Scaffold at
the Tower Hill.

About the same time the King himself wrote and published in the Latin tongue
a book against Martin Luthers Assertions, The King writes against Martin
Luther.
Disputes, and Arguments, touching Indulgences and the Sacraments of the
Church; for which cause he was by the Pope enstiled Defensor Fidei, Defender of
the Faith. Yet some do affirm that he was so entitled in requital of the
aid and succor which by the gift of excessive sums of money (when he and
his Cardinals were prisoners to the Emperor) was extended to him and them.
Defensor Fidei.


We have already heard, how that Cardinal Wolsey, Calice, to ratify, and to
confirm the Peace, which not long before was concluded there betwixt the
Emperor and the two Kings, The French King first breaks the peace.
did therein little good. And we must now know, that the first breach of that
peace was made by the French King, who began to war sharply on the Emperor,
both by Sea and Land: And because he suspected that King Henry (partly for
affinities sake, and partly by reason of the condition of part-taking, annexed
to the said peace) did secretly side with the Emperor against him, therefore he
dealt thus unkindly with King Henry.

1 First of all (contrary to his faith and promise) he sent John Duke of
Albanie into Scotland, to raise new wars, The French King wrongeth King Henry.
and many mischiefs against this Realm, to the end, that the King might not
have any leisure to join with the Emperor, and to make war upon him.

2 Secondly, he detayned and kept from the King, that yearly Tribute, which
for Normandy, Aquitaine, and other the Kings inheritance in those Countries,
was due and payable by the Kings of France.

3 Thirdly, contrary to his promise, and safe conduct given to the Merchants
of England, no war betwixt the two Kings being proclaimed, he seized on all
their wares, and marchandizes in Bordeaux, and committed them to prison.

4 Fourthly, upon the Seas he riffled, robbed, and spoiled the Merchants of
England daily; and upon complaints promised liberal restitution, but made none.

5 Fifthly, he refused to pay to Queen Mary, Dowager of France, her yearly
pension, contrary to the agreement made betwixt king Henry, and the whole
estate of France.

6 And last of all (neglecting his Hostages, and making a wilful breach of his
promise) he would not pay those sums of money which were concluded to be
paid, for the surrendering and yielding up of the City and Castle of Tourney
into his hands.

King Henry's course for requital.
These injuries and wrongs, first of all procured the King to make general
Musters through his whole kingdom, and then to apparel, provide, and furnish
his Navy Royal, and to commit them to the charge and government of the Earl
of Surrey, his high Admiral, the scourger of the French King for all his
faults. To him he gave ample and large commission to vex, and to annoy the
French King, and his Subjects, both by Sea and Land.

French Ambassador of his liberty, not permitting him to go abroad without
his leave.

Frenchmen within his kingdom (not being Denizens) to be attached to his own
use.

France.

A French Army vanishes.
King Henry (being informed that the French King having levied an Army,
houered up and down, near unto the marches of Calice) to prevent danger, and
to meet with him at all assaies, sent many thousands of gallant, and brave
Soldiers, to the Sea, which were by the Admiral received into his Fleet, so
that (upon any occasion or need) they might quickly be set on land. But when
they perceived that Calice was not in any hazard, for that the French Army was
vanished and dissolved: then the Admiral (because he loathed to be idle)
landed many of his men upon the coast of Britain, Morleys taken and burnt.
and with great confidence and resolution, conducted them to Morleys, where (a
principal gate of the City being battered and beaten open with some great
shot) the brave English men boldly entered in, riffled, ransacked, and spoiled
the town, and by the commandment of the Admiral, they consumed it with fire,
and razed it to the ground. This service was by diverse Gentlemen so gallantly
performed, that in honor thereof the Admiral dignified with the honor of
Knighthood, these worthy Gentlemen, Francis Brian, John Russel, Anthony
Brown, John Rainsford, George Cobham, Giles Hussy, Richard Cornwall, John
Cornwallis, Thomas Moore, and some others. And daily other brave and warlike
exploits, were still made and performed in Britain, near unto the Sea
coasts: Of which it will be too tedious to make particular relation, neither
will we much busy our selves with the discourse of such things as happened
betwixt the Emperor, and the French king, in their wars; because they do
not properly belong to the History of this kingdom.

The King (who was informed that the Duke of Albanie intended to invade the
Northren marches of his Realm) commanded the Lord Roos. The Scots are
troublesome.
and the Lord Dacres of the South (by an anticipating war) to enter into the
Borders of Scotland, with a slight Army, which they did, and burnt fourscore
Hamblets, Villages, and Towns, razed, and destroyed diverse Castles, Bulwarks,
and Towers; forraged their fields, and without any encounter returned into
England. The King likewise made the Earl of Shrewsbury Lieftenant general of
the North, whose charge was, to make strong provision, to withstand all sudden
invasions, which the Scots should attempt to make.

And likewise, he levied an Army of twelve thousand men, Another Army sent
into France.
which he commended to the Government of the Admiral, for the supply and
maintenance of his wars in France.

Thus the King, being daily employed, and wanting money to defray his charge;
by way of loan upon privy Seals, Privy seals.
he borrowed of the City of London twenty thousand pounds. And of many
others great sums of money; In all Shires and Provinces within his kingdom,
whereat his Subjects much grieved: But afterward they were much more
displeased thereat, because the said loanes by an Act of Parliament, They are
released.
were clearly released to the King. And yet for all this, Wolsey (by strange
commissions, and by other unlawful means, without the Kings consent or
notice) endeavored to raise, and to leauie more money, as formerly we have
heard.

The Admiral, who (maugre his Enemies, Brave service in France.
having landed his Army at Callice) Marched from thence, and passed in good
order of Battle over Newnam Bridge, wasting, spoiling, burning, and
ransacking sundry Towns, Villages, Castles, and Forts; as namely Selloys,
Brunbridge, Senkerke, Frynge, Blanioy, Dorlans, and other places as they passed
by) so terrified the people, that they would not abide his sight. And in those
services these Gentlemen (as chief Captains, Chief Gentlemen of service.
and worthy of the best praise) are principally to be noted, Sir William
Sands, Sir William Fitz-William, Sir Maurice Barkley, Sir John Wallop, Sir
Richard Ierningham, Captain Coo, and Captain Thwayts. The three former of
them (among other imploiments) were by the Admiral sent with three thousand
men to the strong Town of Marquison, which was newly builded, fortified, and
well defended for a while. But at length they took it, ransacked it, and
utterly consumed it with fire. The like they did at the Towns of S. John's
Rhode, and Temple, A great booty.
and with great spoils returned to their General. Then all the Army being
collected, the Admiral marched unto Calice, and brought thither with him
14000. Sheep, 1400. Oxen and Kine, 1300. Hogs, and 700. Horses, Geldings,
and Mares. And then he commended and rewarded his soldiers, dissolved his
Army, and with great honor, and in the especial favor of his Sovereign, he
returned into England.

The Scots invade.
Whilst these things were thus ordered in France, the Kings professed enemy,
John Duke of Albanie, Protector to the young King, and of his Realm, by the
procurement of the French King, levied a great Army, purposing with fire and
sword to have entered into the West Marches of England. But the Lord Dacres, and
the Lord Roos, and many other Knights and Gentlemen, having carefully provided
and well furnished an Army of eight and twenty thousand men, They will not
fight.
to make head against him; and likewise the Earl of Shrewesburie having levied
another Army of great strength, and appearing boldly into the Scots sight, the
Scots began wisely to doubt of their success, and the rather because the most
of them knew not the cause or ground of that quarrel, and therefore would not
fight, but (leaving to assist their Captain) they returned home, and were not
pursued by the English, who by their Commission were not authorized to invade,
but to defend themselves.

The Duke of Suffolk warreth in France. Bell Castle.
The next year, Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, was sent to Calice with an
Army of thirteen thousand men, with which he marched forth, burning,
spoiling, and foraging without compassion, until he came to the strong Castle
of Bell, which (after many gallant and brave assaults) was yielded, and razed
to the ground.

Thither repaired to the Dukes Army, Aid from the Emperor.
as servants to the Emperor, three thousand footmen, and five hundred
horsemen, being Burgundians, Flemings, and of their neighboring Nations: all
which besieged the strong Town of Bray, Bray.
which was well fortified, and furnished with goodly Ordinance, and with two
thousand men. This Town they took, not by composition, but by assault. But
because the Frenchmen themselves had first fired it, and were run away, the
Englishmen and their friends (besides the winning of it) received small
commodity thereby.

Then with undaunted courage they passed over the River of Some into France:
Roy.
and to them (upon several summons) were yielded up the Towns of Roy and
Lyhome. Lyhome. Mount dedyer.
But they were compelled to besiege the warlike Town of Mount dedyer, in which
were two thousand men, and five hundred horse. This Town they daily battered
with the continual shot of their great Ordinance, so that it was made
assaultable, and then the Frenchmen (upon composition to depart with bag,
baggage, and with their Arms) yielded the Town to the Dukes forces, in which
there was exceeding plenty of costly linen, arras, tapestrie, bedding, and of
choice household stuff. Afterward they took the Castle of Boghan, Boghan.
which (had not the Marshes been excessiuely hardened by a continual frost)
was not accessable, nor pregnable by any strength. This Castle they razed to
the ground, because it was not commodious to their service.

These atchieuements being thus manfully and honorably performed, the English
soldiers (by reason of the extremity of the weather, and the sharpness of
the Winter, English soldiers return without leave of the General.
long nights, and short days) were altogether unwilling to proceed any further
at that time, and the rather for these two other causes: First, for that the
Duke of Burbon (who was revolted from the French King to the Marcelles, and by
them they had no help. And secondly, because the Burgundians, and their
companions, having Carts, Wagons, and other carriages, and being near unto
their own Countries, took and were able to carry away the greater and the
better part of all their spoils, and yet they would seldom fight, as the
Englishmen were compelled and enforced to do. The Duke (not knowing what
allowance the King would give to the dissoluing of the Army without his
consent) sent the Lord Sands and Sir Richard Ierningham to the King, to inform
him of the state of his Army, and also to know his pleasure touching the
breaking of it up. But the King would not in any sort assent to their return,
but prepared the Lord Mountioy with an Army of 6000. men, money, and store of
victuals, and of other necessaries, to hasten unto their aid. But before the
return of those two messengers, the soldiers (without the Dukes leave)
wilfully departed home through Burgundy and Flanders. And because the greater
number of them had so done, The Army is dissolved.
therefore the Duke was compelled to break up his whole Army; whereat the
King was highly displeased for a while: but at length (finding the Duke and
chiefest Captains faultlesse) they returned home, and were by his Majesty
received into his especial grace and favor.

The Scots are again busy.
Whilst the Duke of Suffolk was thus busied in France, the Duke of Albanie
raised another Army of 80000. men. But to resist and to fight with them, the
Lord Admiral and Treasurer of England marched forth with an Army of forty
thousand. But the Scots (not well enduring the sight of such powerful and well
appointed enemies) presently ran away, and would not strike one stroke. And had
the Earls commission been enlarged, and given them leave to have followed
them into their own Country, undoubtedly the Scots had received a fatal blow
at that time: but by quick message, A truce.
the Queen of Scots (who was the Kings eldest sister) again obtained a truce:
so that in the mean time a trial might be made, whether a peace would be
concluded, and agreed on, or no. Betwixt the Marches of Bulleyn, and of Calice,
diverse feats of Arms were evermore valiantly performed for honors sake: in
which, sometimes the vanquished were again victors, and such as prevailed now,
were by and by overcome.

Albanie perceiving, that the Nobility of Scotland would no longer endure,
that he (being a Frenchman borne, and (next to the King) the inheritor of that
Crown) should have the rule and government of their King and Country: The
Duke of Albanie forsakes Scotland.
Feared, least any mischief might befall him, or least by some devise, he
should be delivered to the King: Wherefore he secretly fled into France, upon
whose departure, much peace and quietness ensued betwixt the King and that
kingdom. For the Queen and Nobles of the Realm of Scotland, The Scots desire
peace.
by their Ambassadors desired Peace: And that the Lady Marie (who was then the
only daughter of King Henry, and Heir apparent to his Crown) might be given
in marriage to James their young King. To this motion, it was answered: that
touching the said Peace (if honorable and fit conditions might be proposed and
concluded) the King would willingly assent thereto: But concerning the other
point of their demand, he said: That he was not yet resolved how to dispose
of his said daughter, for that she was but young: yet in the end a peace was
assented unto, and proclaimed in both those Realms.

Likewise the Lady Margaret, Duches of Sauoy, The Emperors Regent craves
peace.
and great Aunt to the Emperor, and (in his absence) the Governor of the Low
Countries, by her Ambassadors, proposed to his Majesty these requests.

First, that the Lady Marie, his daughter, might be given in

Secondly, that (because the Emperor intended to give unto

Thirdly, that such sums of money as the King intended to

And last of all, that the King himself would be pleased (in his France, upon
the territories of the French King, who (in contempt of them both) did diverse
injuries and wrongs unto their Subjects, and had made the first breach of the
Peace, which was concluded, and by their oaths confirmed betwixt them three.

But, because King Henry was secretly displeased with the Emperor, for that he
(by the raising and enhauncing of the prices and value of this gold, and other
coins, within the Provinces of the Low Countries) had politikely drawn the
greatest part of his money out of this Realm, and in some other things, had
not respected him, as his inleagued friend, therefore he only returned thanks
for a fashions sake: but made answer, That his daughter was too young to be
married to the Emperor, and was (as yet) unfit to be coupled with any Prince.

At the same time also, the French King, by his Ambassadors, The French desire
to renew the peace
desired, that the said Lady might be espoused to his son the Dolphin. And
that the former peace (betwixt the King and him) might be renewed, and reviued,
during both their lives.

These his motions (to speak truly) were best received and digested, and were
most likely to have taken place, if the French king him self, and his
children, had not (shortly after) been taken prisoners, by the Duke of Burbons
Army, and by the Marquis of Pescarie, as he lay at the siege of Paura, where
he lost fourteen thousand men, and was defeated: although he had then in his
Army almost fifty thousand men.

The King in danger of death.
Among these friendly motions for peace and marriages, an evil chance happened to
the King. For one day, as he hawked for his recreation and delight, he offered
to leap over a wide and a watrie ditch, but his staff brake in sunder, and his
head pitched fast into the clay; so that he had assuredly dyed there, if a
footman of his own, named Edmund Moody, had not quickly plucked his head out
of the dirt.

About this time dyed the most Noble, and Victorious, Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, and was honorably buried at Thetford in his own Country.

Elizabeth Blunt) begat on her a son, Noble men created.
who by the King was called Henry Fitz Roy: This young Gentleman (being now of
the age of six years) was by the King created Earl of Nottingham, and
forthwith Duke of Richmond. And at the same time the Lord Henry Courtney,
Cosen german to the King, was made Marquis of Exeter: the Lord Henry Brandon,
the eldest son of the Duke of Suffolk, and of the French Queen Marie his
wife (being but two years old) was created Earl of Lincoln. Sir Thomas
Manners Lord Roos, was made Earl of Rutland: and Sir Henry Clifford was
created Earl of Cumberland: and Sir Robert Ratclife, Lord Fitz Water, was made
Earl of Sussex: and Sir Thomas Bullein, the Treasurer of the Kings household,
was made Lord Rochford: And thus, in regard of great services honorably
performed, the king requited them with such honors, as were answerable to
their deserts and callings.

The French were humble to serve their own turns.
The Queen Regent of France (foreseeing what present misery was likely to
ruinate that Estate and Kingdom, if in time by careful providence it were not
prevented) sent Monsieur de Bryond, chief President of Paris, and some other
Lords, Ambassadors into England: who not only (according to their commission)
in a most submissiue and an humble sort confessed the injuries, and the wrongs
done by the French Nation, to King Henry, and to his subjects, both by sea and
land, in the absence of King Francis, but (for a requital and satisfaction
thereof) and for the arrerage of his tribute, they made offer to pay unto the
King the sum of twenty hundred thousand crowns, whereof fifty thousand
pounds sterling should be paid in hand, and fitting security should be given
for the rest: they also promised the continuance of the said tribute, and
assumed to pay Queen Marie her dowry, and all the arrerages thereof, if the
King would grant them peace, and receive them into his love and favor.

The King and his Counsel having seriously considered of these motions and
large offers (for many important causes) assented to their requests, Peace
concluded.
and caused those his conclusions and agreements to be proclaimed solemnly,
both in England and in France, and received both money and good security
accordingly.

But betwixt King Henry and his nephew the Emperor (by the subtle practices
and crafty jugglings of Thomas Wolsey, York) wars were denounced with evil
terms, Wars between the Emperor and King Henry
but little or nothing was done thereon, saving that in England, Spain, and in
the Low Countries, the Merchants of either Nation, and their goods and
substance were attached, to the infinite loss and damage of them all: but upon
several truces oftentimes concluded, and again broken, they were released,
and again arrested; Merchants vexed.
whereby the ancient saying of the Poet was truly verified: Quicquid Delirant
Reges, Plectuntur Achiui:
When Princes jar, and for revenge do seek,
The meaner sort must pay for their dislike.
But in this place we must now observe, That in regard of those often concluded
truces, and in regard of the peace which united the kingdoms of England,
France and Scotland in one mind; little or nothing worthy of our discourse
(more then has formerly been written) happened in six of the next ensuing
years, for the greater part of that time was spent and consumed in debatings,
enquirings, ordering, handling, and disposing of the business of the Kings
marriage with the Lady Katherine of Spain, sometime his brothers wife.

And now the King (who in a manner was wholly guided and directed by the
private advice and counsel of his chief favorite, Thomas Cromwell (sometimes
servant to Cardinal Wolsey) whom he had made a Baron, and a Counselor of
State, The Popes authority curbed.
proceeded daily more and more to diminish, nay (by succeeding degrees)
clearly and absolutely to abrogate, and to make void the claimed power and
authority of the Pope within this Realm. In so much, that in his Parliament
he procured it to be enacted for a law, That the penalty of the Praemunire
should be inflicted upon the bodies, lands and goods of every such person, as
for any matter, thing, or cause whatsoever, appealed to the Sea of Rome, or did
procure from thence any Process, Citation, Inhibition, Suspension, Sentence,
or Judgment whatsoever.

And in the next Session of the same Parliament (to please, and to content him)
the whole Clergy of this kingdom freely submitted themselves to the King,
touching their Spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs and business: and the
Pope was utterly deprived of all Annates and first fruits; which formerly for
Bishoprics, and other spiritual promotions and dignities, had usually been
paid unto him: and likewise to establish and to confirm the lawfulnes of his
marriage with Queen Anne, and to settle the inheritance of his Crown upon her
issue: he procured it by Parliament to be enacted, That his former marriage
with his brothers wife was absolutely void, The Kings marriage made void. The
Crown entailed.
and of none effect in Law, because it was contrary to the Law of God, and
that the Popes dispensation had none effect or power to make it good: and by
the same Act, the Crown of this kingdom was entailed to the King, and to his
heirs of his body (out of which the Lady Marie was inclusiuely excluded) and
to this Act all the Lords and Burgesses there present, were particularly
sworn, B. Fisher.
saving Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moore Knight
(sometimes Chancellor of England) who some few years before disliking the
Kings proceeding against Queen Katherine, Sir Thomas Moore.
and against the authority and jurisdiction of the Pope, had delivered up the
great Seal of England into the kings hands. These two not only refused to
swear, as the rest did; but publicly contested, and protested, against the
said Act of Parliament, which nullified the kings said first marriage, by reason
of the Popes dispensation given to enable the same, and to make it lawful. For
which causes the said Bishop, and Knight, were sent unto the Tower, where they
remained, until (as Traitors) they lost their heads, They are beheaded.
for denying of the kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical things and causes, and
attributing it to the Pope of Rome: of which the kings supremacy a Statute was
made in Parliament the next year after.

About this time, diverse treasonable practizes (by malicious and lewd
Conspirators) were surmised and intimated to have been intended, and
contrived, against the kings person, by the Lord Dacres of the North. The Lord
Dacres.
And thereupon he was Indicted and arraigned; but the guiltless and well
affected Lord (with such a temperate boldness, and with such a modest courage)
so discreetly, and so wisely defended his innocence, against those false
suggesters, that he was freely acquitted, and discharged, from all suspicion,
and from all blame. But (by the whole Parliament) Elizabeth Burton (nicknamed
the holy maid of Kent) and her Companions in mischief (who under an
hipocriticall show and shadow of Religious devotion, The holy maid of Kent
and of holiness, had conspired the Kings death) being attainted and
condemned, were executed as Traitors according to their deserts.

The next year the King in Parliament was made and acknowledged to be the
supreme head of the Church within all his Countries The Supremacy of the King.
in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and causes: and the Popes Bulls,
Pardons, Indulgences, and other Instruments of the like nature, were utterly
banished, frustrated, made void, and of none effect, validity, or force,
concerning the King and his Subjects. And likewise the First Fruits and Tenths
of all Benefices and Ecclesiastical dignities and promotions were in the same
Parliament given and granted to the King, and to his heirs and successors for
ever.

And not long after, Anne (sometimes the Kings dearest wife) was beheaded; yet
innocently, as at her death she religiously protested, and as all men present
did believe, Queen Anne Bulleine beheaded.
for that it was unjustly surmised, and falsely testified, that she had
incestuously conuersed with and prostituted her body to the Lord Rochford, her
own brother, Execution.
who likewise (with some others) received the like sentence, and were put to
death.

This Tragedy being thus ended, The King marieth.
the King (within twenty days after) married a virtuous and a fair
Gentlewoman, whose name was Jane, the daughter of Sir John Seymor Knight, who
bare unto him a goodly Prince, named Edward, who succeeded, and was King. But
within few days after his birth the good Queen died.

We have formerly heard, that James the Fourth, King of Scots, was slain at
Flodden Field. And we must now know, that Queen Margaret his wife, being the
eldest sister of King Henry, was married afterward unto Archibald Douglas Earl
of Angus, who by her had a daughter named Margaret. This Lady, the Lord Howard
(without the Kings notice or consent) took to wife; The Lord Th. Howard is
beheaded.
for which unadvised boldness and offense (she being of the blood royal) he
was condemned as a Traitor, and lost his head.

The King, who within his own Territories and Dominions daily furthered his
own intentions to abrogate the authority, power, and jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, The 32. Commissioners.
procured it by Parliament to be enacted, that thirty and two such persons
spiritual and temporal as his Majesty should under his great Seal nominate
and appoint, should have authority and power to make and establish Laws and
Ordinances Ecclesiastical, which should bind the Subjects of this Kingdom
And by the same Parliament all religious houses, Petit houses of Religion
suppressed.
whose possessions in yearly revenue exceeded not the sum of two hundred
pounds, were suppressed and dissolved, and all their scites and possessions
whatsoever were given for ever to the King.

The book of Articles.
The Clergy also (at the same time, of their own accord, and to insinuate
themselves into grace and favor with the King) composed and published in
printed books, certain Articles for the ordering and governing of the Church,
in which mention was made of three Sacraments only: and the rest of them (which
former times superstitiously received and did maintain) were left out of the
said books.

A rebellion in Lincolnshire.
These proceedings of the King and Clergy against the Pope and holy Church,
were so generally disliked by the rude, ignorant, and wilful people, that in
many places their lavish tongues were witnesses of their inward grief and
discontent, so that they publicly affirmed, that the Kings Counsel
irreligiously and absurdly advised and directed him amiss, and that the
soothing, smoothing, and temporizing Clergy of this Land, profanely and
wickedly practiced by all means possible to extinguish all devotion, and
utterly to subvert the ancient rites, ceremonies, and commendable government of
the Church. And in mad humor, and frantic fashion, the rude and unruly
people in Lincolnshire, to the number of 20000. assembled themselves in arms,
taking upon themselves to frame and to devise better orders for the governing
of the Church and Commonweal.

The King marches against the Rebels.
The King (who scorned to be thus checked by his own Vassals, and loathing to
prove himself a coward at home, seeing that foreign Nations had found him to
be valiant and full of courage) levied a strong and a puissant Army, with
which (in his own person) he marched with princely magnanimity against those
rebellious people, The Rebels petition.
who (as he drew toward them) by their petition craved a reformation of those
things which lately had been done and concluded against Religious Houses, and
against the former and ancient government of the Church; which things being
consented and yielded to, they solemnly protested their humble duty and
service to the King.

The King is stout.
But he (who highly disdained that such plain Swads and rusticke people should
presume to give instructions unto him, and unto his whole Clergy and Court of
Parliament, in matters so far above their understanding and capacity)
rejected their petition, and resolved (by an exemplarie course of justice, to
be by the sword martially used in the open Field) to punish and to correct
them, except one hundred of those their chiefest Conspirators might be sent and
delivered absolutely into his hands. This resolution and quick demand so
appalled the fainting hearts of the rude and headless multitude, that they
(suspecting each other of being to be sent unto the King) forsook the Field,
The Rebels fly. Captain Cobbler. Execution.
and with all speed resorted to their own houses. But Captain Cobbler (their
chiefest Ringleader being indeed Doctor Makarell) with some others, were
shortly after apprehended, and executed according to their merits and deserts.

The King (who now supposed that all things had been settled in a sure and in
a firm peace) was suddenly informed of another Insurrection in the North, A
rebellion in the North.
and that their greeuance was grounded upon the same points, and that the
number of those Rebels exceeded the number of 40000. men, The holy Pilgrims.
who termed themselves the Holy Pilgrims, who intended nothing but the
establishing of true Religion, and the reformation of great abuses, which
defaced the government of the Church.

To encounter these men, The Kings Army.
and to correct their braine-sicke humor and foolish madness, the King
appointed the two Dukes of Norfolk and of Suffolk, and some other Lords, with
a strong and well appointed Army, to march against them with all speed. And
the Rebels (expressing much joy because they were to fight) came near unto the
Dukes Army, and before them expressed many signs and tokens of undaunted
courage and desperate boldness. But in the night before the two Armies
intended to have joined together in handie strokes, A strange accident.
a little brook which ran betwixt them, and which with a dry foot might the
day before have been passed over, grew so outragiously great and violent, by
the fall of immoderate and continual showers of rain, that the Armies could
not meet as they determined. This miraculous pity, and this merciful
compassion, which by Almighty God himself was immediately extended toward
his people for the preservation of their lives, so effectually wrought in the
hearts and minds of the two Armies, that (upon the faithful promise of the
two Dukes, The Rebels quietly do depart home.
that the Kings free and ample pardon should remit and acquit them all) the
Rebels left the Field, and quietly departed to their own houses. And thus was
this Kingdom and Commonweal delivered the second time without blows, from
as great danger and peril as at any time before had threatened the ruin and
destruction of the people of this Land. By means whereof the King waxed more
absolute and more strong in his government then he was in former times,
especially concerning his Clergy, and the ordering of the Church, wherein he
disposed of all things (uncontrolled) according to his own will.

A third rebellion.
Yet as a lightning, so on a sudden in Westmerland Thomas Tilbie and Nicholas
Musgraue, with some others, (for the only causes above mentioned, and for none
other) brake forth into an open Rebellion, with eight thousand men, against the
King. But by the Duke of Norfolk many of them were slain, The Rebels
overthrown.
the rest were overthrown, and threescore and fourteen of their Commanders
and chiefest Actors in that Rebellion, were (as Traitors) by Martial Law and
Judgment executed in sundry places in the North. Execution.


Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, Marquess of Exeter, cosen german to the
King, and Lord High Steward for that day) were brought, The Lord Darcy.

The Lord Hussy.

Execution touching the Supremacy.


arraigned, found guilty, and condemned, the Lord Darcy, and the Lord Hussy,
and both of them were executed accordingly; the former for a Murder, and the
latter for High Treason. Likewise Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir
Francis Bigot, Sir Steven Hambleton, and Sir John Bulmer, Knights, William
Lomley, Nicholas Tempest, Robert Ask, two Abbots, and some others, being
condemned as Traitors for denying of the Kings Supremacy, were executed in
diverse places of this Realm: Friar Forest.
and Friar Forest for the same matter, and also for maintaining certain
Heresies with an obstinate and unrepentant resolution, received the judgment
of a Traitor, and of an Heretic, and (being hanged in irons upon a Gibbet) he
was burnt.

Noblemen created.
The King being gracious to some whom he much favored, and who had deserved
well, bestowed Titles of Honor on them. For the Viscount Beauchampe was
created Earl of Hartford, Sir William Fitz-William, high Admiral of England,
was made Earl of South-hampton, Sir William Paulet, Treasurer of the Kings
household, was made Lord S. John, The Lord Cromwell is made Vicegerent in
Ecclesiastical matters and things.
Sir John Russel Knight was made Lord Russel, and Sir Thomas Cromwell, a
Counselor of Estate, Knight of the Garter, Lord Privy Scale, Lord Cromwell,
was made the Kings Vicegerent in all cases and matters Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, by virtue whereof, both in Parliament and elsewhere, he had the
precedence of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and (almost in all things) did
all in all: so that (by reason of that authority) he utterly defaced, Images
and Shrines are suppressed.
Inuocations, or Pilgrimages, were fantastically and foolishly made. He also
suppressed the Orders of Begging and Crafty Friars, and Puling Nuns, whose
houses and possessions came unto the King. And about the same time, the
Marquess of Exeter, Attainders
Henry Poole, Lord Montagne, and Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington in the
County of Surrey, Knight of the Garter, and master of the Kings horses, were
attainted and executed for high Treasons, especially because that with
Cardinal Fool (brother to the Lord Montagne) they endeavored to procure
foreign Princes (in the Popes aid) to invade this Land, and to reform the
businesses of the Church by the Apostolical authority of the Sea of Rome. For
this offense the said Cardinal (being beyond the Seas) was by Parliament
attainted: and within a few months after, his mother, the Lady Margaret
Countess of Salisburie, (who was the last of the princely line of the
Plantagenets, the said Cardinal only excepted; for she was the daughter of
George the last Duke of Clarence) together with Gerthrude the widow of the late
Marquess of Exeter, Sir Adrian Foskew, and diverse others, were also attainted
of high Treason for the same Conspiracy: and so were the Abbots of Reading,
Colchester, and Glastenburie, with many Monks, Friars, and religious men,
because they obstinately denied the Kings Supremacy, and confidently
attributed it unto the Pope. And all these (except the Cardinal, who came not
home whilst the King lived) were afterward executed in sundry places of this
Realm. Many others also (for the same offense) suffered the like deaths, whose
names (by reason of their mean estate, and vndignified qualities) may not (in
this our History) challenge a place of particular remembrance.

Whilst the King was thus busily employed in cutting off his Subjects heads,
the great Oneyle and Odoneyle, Irishmen, A rebellion in Ireland.
entered more then twenty miles within the English Pale, and did much
mischief. But by the Lord Deputy (being the Lord Leonard Gray, brother to the
Marquess Dorset) they were so well fought with in the open field, that he
obtained the victory. But such was the nimblenesse of those Rebels, that when
by blows they failed to maintain their match, then (according to their common
use and custom) they swiftly ran over the bogges and marshes into the woods
and rocks, unto which the more sober and well ordered Englishmen could not
approach, without apparent hazard and danger to their lives.

The King (who in a manner was wholly directed and governed by the Lord Cromwell
now Earl of Essex, Religious houses suppressed.
and made high Chamberlain of England) pretended many quarrels against the fat
Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and Cloisterers of this Kingdom. for
many exorbitant misdemeanors daily by them committed and done, especially
because they were abominably lecherous, and vnmeasurably idle, and
slow-bellies, fruges consumere nati, unprofitable, yea a burden to the Church
and Commonweal.

Those faults the King endeavored not (like a good Magistrate) by correction to
amend, but he resolved, with the deluge of his displeasure to wash them clean
away. And so he did indeed. For his high Court of Parliament (which was then
holden at Westminster) utterly dissolved and clearly suppressed all Abbeys,
Monasteries, Priories, and other religious houses, (some few being only
excepted) and gave their houses, scites, Lordships, and possessions (which in
yearly revenue amounted to more then two hundred thousand pounds) unto the
King, who with his worldly policy (to the intent that future posterity should
not be enabled to restore them back again to their former uses) exchanged
them liberally for other lands, Policy.
with his Nobles and Gentry of his Kingdom, many of whose Estates at this day
do wholly consist of possessions of that nature, or else are greatly advanced
by those lands.

This havoc thus made on Churchmen, and of their possessions, proceeded not
(as most men thought) from the love which the King bare unto the reformation of
Religion, out of extraordinary devotion, nor from the purity of his mind,
desiring the extirpation of that wickedness and sin, which indeed
abundantly reigned and ruled among those irreligious religious men, but from
the covetous humor of his Nobles, and from the secret grudge and
unreconcilable hatred which he bare unto the Pope. But thus the world then
fared, and thus was the Church pared, and pruned, and made a prey, every bird
being desirous to beautify her self with her fair feathers.

Cromwels match for the King with Anne of Cleue.
When the Lord Cromwell had thus effected that great business, then he
undertook another, which in the end brake his own neck. For upon his
perswasiue motions, strengthened by the view of flattering pictures, and of
vnmerited immoderate commendations, the King took to wife the Lady Anne of
Cleue, who was exceeding religious, and replenished with many virtues: but in
her person and countenance, she was neither well composed, fair, nor lovely.

The King likes not his match.
Her religion and her virtues were not much respected by the King. For when he
first saw her, he liked her not; insomuch that albeit he were married unto her
four months and somewhat more, yet his amorous appetite toward her was so
amated, and so insensible was he of wanton passions when he was private in her
company, that he never did nor could know her as his wife.

Whereupon the Bishops and Clergy of this Land (who for fear of after-claps,
were well pleased to dance after the Kings pipe) in their solemn Convocation,
His marriage is dissolved.
published an authentical Instrument in writing, under the Scales of the two
Archbishops, by which they made it known to the Christian world, that the
Kings marriage with the said Lady Anne of Clean, was a nullitie, void,
frustrate, and of none effect, because the said Lady (under her own hand) had
(upon due examination) confessed, that the king never had nor could perform to
her that benevolence which by a husband was due unto his wife.

The like sentence was enacted, pronounced, and published by the Parliament,
with these additions, that it was lawful for his Majesty, whenever and with
whomsoever, to marie and to take another wife, according to the Ecclesiastical
Law of this Realm: and likewise that it was lawful for the said Lady Anne
of Cleue, to marie and take another husband when she should please, according
to the Laws of the holy Church. Treason.
And further it was then enacted, that all such as (by writing, printing,
speaking, or by any other ouert act) did express or maintain the contrary,
should be guilty of Treason, and receive punishment accordingly. The King (who
was thus enlarged and freed from his bonds of discontented matrimony) took to
wife (within twenty days after) Katherine Howard, the daughter of the Lord
Edmund Howard, The King marieth again. The King frowneth on Cromwell.
brother to the Duke of Norfolk: and from thenceforth he began to alter the
copy of his countenance, and looked discontentedly upon his great favorite
and inward Counselor the Lord Cromwell, who had fettered him in those his
former troubles. And because this alteration in the King was quickly perceived
by many, who longed for his ruin and his downfall, a long and a tedious Bill
(by some of them) was unexpectedly preferred against him into the Parliament,
Cromwels downfall.
in which (rather in a generality then by many particulars) he was accused of
sundry Treasons, Misprisions, and of Heresy. And among other objections laid
unto his charge, it was suggested, that (ioining with the last Queen Anne) he
favored the Lutherans above measure, and so strongly supported them against
the Catholic Priests and Prelates of this Kingdom, that when by some of the
Clergy he was told, that they doubted not but that the King would shortly
curb their boldness and presumption, the said Lord Cromwell did reply, that
the King should allow of their Religion whether he would or no. But how true or
how false soever these surmises were, the said bill was found. Yet was he not
called to make his answer or defense thereto; so that being by the said
Parliament attainted of Heresy and of Treason: He with the Lord Hungerford was
beheaded on a scaffold, on the Tower hill, whereat his enemies did rejoice:
some of them attributing the cause to his haughtiness, and pride; and some of
them affirming, that it was Gods revenge and punishment for his hateful
defacing and wasting of the Church.

The Lord Leonard Gray executed.
And near about the same time, the Lord Leonard Gray (who not long before had
been the kings deputy in Ireland) was condemned for many treasons, by him
committed in that Country, during the time of his Government: especially, for
that secretly he had once procured the Irish Rebels, to enter into, and to make
havoc within the English Pale; all which he (of his own accord) confessed to
be true: wherefore he received his judgment, and lost his head.

Katherine) was now informed by some who presumed that they knew it well, that
before her marriage with the King, Queen Katherine beheaded.
she had lived a licentious, and an evil life, with a Gentleman named Francis
Dyrham: And furthermore, it was much presumed and suspected, that since she
was the Kings wife, Francis Dyrham, Thomas Culpeper, The Lady Rochford.
she had unchastly conversed with another Gentleman, whose name was Thomas
Culpeper, for it was fully proved, that in her last Progress, the said Thomas
was secretly brought by the Lady Rochford into the Queens chamber, at eleven
of the clock in the night, and that he remained there almost five hours: And
that (at his departure) he was gifted with a chain of gold, and a rich wrought
cap. For these offenses, the said two Gentlemen, at Tyborne suffered death. And
not long after, the Queen by Parliament was attainted, and so was the Lady
Rochford, and some others, and lost their heads for the said offense. And in
the same Parliament, King of Ireland. The King marieth again.
the King was proclaimed King of Ireland, which Title his Predecessors never
had.

The King likewise, took to wife the Lady Katherine Parre, sister to the
Marquis of Northampton, and sometimes the wife of the Lord Lattimer: who in the
latter end of the Kings reign, was in a fair possibility to have lost her
head, if her own virtue, modesty, and the Kings sudden sickness and death,
had not reserved her for a better fortune.

Eustace the Great Oneyl, and Matthias his son, repaired to the Kings Court,
and (with all submissiue, and humble contrition) they confessed their late
rebellion, Earl of Tyron.
and treasons; and so gracious was the King unto them both, that he not only
gave them his free pardon, but (in hope of future service according to their
promise) he created him Earl of Tyron, and made his son Lord of Duncan.

The Scots (who for a long time had been quiet) did now begin to swagger,
and by sudden invasions, to hurt, Contention with the Scottish King.
and damnifie the Subjects of this Land; which occasioned the King.

1 To require of their king James the Fifth, and Nephew to the king, these
things. First, That the said king James, should do his homage, and his
fealty, to king Henry, for his kingdom of Scotland, as his Ancestors in
former times had often done: But the Scottish king (with great obstinacy, and
with froward messages) refused to yield thereunto.

2 King Henry likewise required the delivery of some small, and triffling
Territories, bordering close upon the inheritance of the said Scottish king.
And for the proof of his rightful Title thereunto: He caused certain
ancient and old evidences to be showed forth: But the Scottish Commissioners
(with taunts and skornes) rejected them: Saying, that they were written and
sealed by Englishmen, who (for their own profit and gain) might write and
seal what they listed.

3 Upon these, and some other grieuances, king Henry (who rather desired a
friendly reconciliation, betwixt himself and his Nephew, then by the dint of
sword to shed Christian blood) concluded to meet, and to confer with king
James in kind manner, upon the borders of either kingdom: For which purpose,
king Henry made his Progress unto York; and was there certified, that the
Scottish king intended not (according to his promise) to meet with him: But
would (by Commission) authorize some of his Counselors of estate, to confer,
and to conclude with his Majesty's Commissioners of England, touching the
matters, then in difference betwixt them two.

4 The king (though he were thus deluded) yet did he not express any touch of
impacience for that wrong, but (authorizing certain Commissioners in that
behalf) he ended his Progress and returned home. All these Commissioners
met; but whilst they were in Parlee, two notorious and great despights were
offered to king Henry.

5 For though the Commissioners daily communed of unity, and of peace, yet at
the same time the Scots invaded the Western marches of this Realm, burnt,
slew, spoiled, and riffled, beyond charity and reason; and yet no war was
then denounced betwixt the said two kings. For this injury, and for this
wrong, sufficient, and liberal amends, and recompense was promised, by the
said Commissioners, but no manner of restitution, or satisfaction, was made in
that behalf.

6 And lastly, although the King of Scots commission was very large and ample,
and authorized those his Agents, to do (almost) whatsoever they themselves
pleased, yet did the said Commissioners so strictly stand upon sundry points
(which were too too much unreasonable, and dishonorable for king Henry to
yield unto) that by the English Commissioners (who had thoroughly viewed and
perused their authority and power) they were condemned as enemies to the
peace, and to their own Country: For that (by the means of their
frowardness) there would be wars. Whereupon, the Scottish Commissioners (to
clear themselves of this blame, imputed to their obstinacy and folly) showed
forth their private instructions from their King, which (for fear of death)
they dared not to exceed: By which instructions it appeared plainly, that
their authority, expressed in their said Commission, was (in all things)
curbed, and made of little, or of no force; except the said English
Commissioners would yield to such demands, as were unprofitable, and
dishonorable, to their king.

Wars in Scotland.
These notorious injuries and wrongs, and this daliance, and crafty
dissimulation, enforced King Henry, to send an Army of twenty thousand men
into Scotland, under the command of the Duke of Northfolk, who was accompanied
by the Earls of Shrewsburie, Darby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hertford, Angus, and
Rutland, and with the greatest part of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the
North: All these marched on their journey, and for eight days space (being
unresisted, and unfought with) they killed, riffled, burned, forraged, and
spoiled the Scottish Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Houses, and Fields, with as
much cruelty, violence, and fury, The English Army returns.
as the extremity of wars could execute in so short a time: Which when they
had done, the Army retired, was dissolved, and every man repaired (laden with
spoils) to his own home.

The Scots invade England.
With this deserved and severe revenge, the King of Scots was infinitely
grieved, and perplexed, at the heart; In so much, that he caused (with all
expedition) to be raised an Army of fifteen thousand men, which was sent into
the West marches of this kingdom; where they began to spoil, and did much
mischief. But Thomas, the Bastard Dacres; William Musgraue, and the Lord
Thomas Wharton (having at a short warning collected a small number of approved,
A notable overthrow.
and valiant men at arms) taking with them some part thereof, and leaving the
rest for a secret stale, or ambush, to annoy their enemies, when time should
serve, encountered unexpectedly with the Scots, upon whom in the Rereward, the
said ambush, valiantly issued; which did so terrify and affright them, that
they supposed verily, the Duke of Norfolk, with a great Army did fall on
them, wherefore (to save themselves) they fled; and in the pursuit there were
taken prisoners, the Earls of Cassels, Prisoners.
and Glancarne; the Lords Maxwel, Fleming, Sommerwel, Oliphant, Gray, and
Oragy, and the Lord Carre of Gredon; two hundred Gentlemen, and about eight
hundred common Soldiers; so that every English man had two or three prisoners,
to recompense their adventerous pains, and travail: The Englishmen also
took, and brought away, four and twenty pieces of Ordinance, and four Carts
laden with Spears: this overthrow, many men then imputed (and peradventure
truly) to the Scottish Kings unadvised and indiscreet direction, Disdain.
who made so mean a Springall the General in that army, in which so many
Lords, Earls, and worthy Captains were, who scorned to be commanded by such
an Underling; and therefore hazarded their own lives, by a willing flight,
rather then (by obtaining the Victory) to lay on him such honor as they knew,
he was not able to deserve.

Of these prisoners, four and twenty of the chiefest, were sent to the Tower
of London; from whence (after two days) they were removed, and committed to
the care and custody of diverse Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of worth: at
whose hands, they received such kind welcome, and bountiful entertainment,
that (with multiplied words of extraordinary praise and commendation) they
ceased not to extol their friendly, and good usage, to the skies.

This unexpected, strange, The King of Scots dies.
and unfortunate overthrow of so fair an Army, with so small a handful: so
much disturbed the patient disposition of the Scottish King, that (with
melancholy, and inward grief) he dyed within few weeks after. Marie queen of
Scots.
Leaving behind him (as to succeed) his only daughter and heir Queen Marie;
a child who was then but newly borne.

When the news of this Kings death was voiced to the Scottish Prisoners, it is
not to be maruailed at, if pensive sorrow and anguish much appaled them for a
while: But at length (making a virtue of necessity, and recomforting
themselves with some hope which they conceived of future happiness) they
counseled king Henry to procure their said young Queen, to be by the State of
Scotland, A motion for marriage.
given in marriage unto Prince Edward his son: For the furtherance whereof, they
all protested, swore, and promised, to employ their best travails, and their
chiefest friends.

Scottish prisoners released.
The King so thankfully entertained this their motion, and proffered service for
the furtherance thereof, that he not only enlarged them all without ransoms;
but also gave unto them rich and great gifts, for which they were exceeding
thankful; and departed joyfully into their own Country.

The French men break the peace.
Now must we know, that as the Scots without cause, had made breach of the
former peace; so did the French King: who suffered his subjects (upon the Seas)
to rob and spoil the Merchants of this kingdom. And thereupon King Henry
permitted his subjects to do the like. Diverse complaints for these injuries
and wrongs, The Merchants are vexed.
were first made unto the French King; because his subjects had first
transgressed: but he neither afforded answer, redress, or recompense therein.
And by reason of this debate and variance betwixt the two Kings, the Merchants
of either Nation were arrested and imprisoned, and their goods, and
marchandizes were attached, and seized on in each Kingdom. Likewise the French
and English Ambassadors, were (for a time) restrained of their liberties, but
were quickly set at large again: yet still, the poor Merchants on either
part, were compelled to pay the reckoning, although they fared ill, and were
enforced to sustain punishment for the faults of other men. Such was the
iniquity of those times, wherein War and Rapine did bear the chiefest sway,
Unthankful Frenchmen.
and such were the miseries which harmless men sustained: because Peace and
Justice were not suffered to moderate, betwixt Right and Wrong. French King did
utterly forget, in what a desperate case his kingdom stood, when King Henry
(upon the humble supplication of the Queen Regent, and of his Nobles, when he,
and his children were prisoners in Italy) gave unto him peace. Wherefore, to
correct his monsterous ingratitude, and to be revenged of daily wrongs, The
King (to defy him) sent his Heralds toward France. But the French King would
not in any sort permit them, An Army sent into France.
to come into his kingdom: Whereupon King Henry (under the principal command
of Sir John Wallop, Sir Thomas Seymour, and Sir Richard Cromwell) transported a
strong Army, who (presently upon their landing) besieged the Town of
Landersey, Landersey besieged.
and by continual battries, and fierce assaults, brought it into some
necessities, and danger: but the French king knowing well the distressed estate
in which the Town then stood; in his own person, with a huge Army, came to
relieve it: by means whereof, the English Generals raised the siege, The siege
abandoned.
and made themselves strong, and ready to encounter the French King in
battle: of which, he made great brags. This expectation of a bloody
skirmish, caused the English Army (who would not then disorder nor incumber
themselves with other imploiments) to suffer the said Town to be newly
victualled and relieved. But in the midst of the night before it was intended
by the English Army that this battle should have been fought, the French
King (being shrouded in the dark) ran away, and all his companies returned
with speed unto their own Countries; insomuch that for that time no more was
done, but (by command) the English Army returned into England.

In this mean while, A marriage concluded with Scotland.
the aforesaid motion concerning the marriage of the young Prince with the
Infant Queen of Scotland, was so well applauded and entertained by the Scots,
that in their Parliament it was first concluded, and then confirmed by an
Instrument in writing, under the hands and seals of their Nobility, and
ratified by their oaths, that the said intended match should be effected, and
that their young Queen (for that purpose) should be conveyed into England.
But within few months after, by the secret and cunning plots and practices of
the French King, the Nobility of Scotland neglected their Law, their promise,
and their oath, which occasioned King Henry with all speed to make new and
unwonted preparations and provisions, The Scots do break their oath.
not only to invade that Country, but also to make war upon his enemy the
King of France.

And to effect his purpose in that behalf, Scotland, An Army spoileth
Scotland.
under the general command (by Sea) of his high Admiral the Viscount Lisle,
and under the general command (by land) of the noble and right valiant Earl
of Hartford.

All these ships safely entered into the Fryth, where they took many good
Vessels, which were exceeding serviceable to their proceedings. And then was
the whole Army set on land: and being well ordered into three battles, and
marching toward Leyth, they first took view of six thousand Scottish
horsemen, with whom they encountered for a while. But when the Scots perceived
that the Englishmen took more delight to fight with courage, then to dally,
as being fearful of their lives, they made a quick retrait, and suddenly
fled away, leaving their Artillery and that Town to their enemies, who
appropriated to themselves every good thing which they found there, and then
consumed the town with fire. From thence they marched toward Edenborough, the
principal City of that Kingdom. But on the way the Provost and some of the
chiefest Burgesses of that Town, made offer to the Earl of Hartford (General
of the Field) to deliver to him the keys, conditionally that he would preserve
it from fire, and suffer the soldiers and the Inhabitants thereof with bag
and baggage to depart.

But the General made answer thus: That he was sent into that Country to
take revenge upon that Nation, because their Nobility (with one consent) by
the perverse and unfriendly instigation of the French King, had violated their
own Law, their promise, and their oath, touching the marriage agreed on, to be
solemnized between Prince Edward and their young Queen. And therefore if all
the Soldiers and all the Inhabitants of that City would come disarmed into
the open Field, and yield their substance and their lives to be ordered
according to his pleasure and will, he then would do as he thought good: but
if they refused so to do, he then protested to visit the Town and them with
all the extremities which were incident to such a war.

This quick answer so little pleased the Townsmen, that they returned,
purposing to resist: and so they did. But by strong batteries and fierce
assaults, their gates and their walls were beaten down and entered, so that
many thousands of the Scots were slain, their riches were possessed by the
English Army, and a great part of that City was consumed by fire. Now whilst
the Army was thus busied, there came unto them from the King four thousand
English horsemen: so that when the spoils and booties were by the soldiers
embarked, and by water sent into England, the English Army coasted through a
great part of those Countries, unfought with, burning, killing, and foraging in
all places, as they pleased: so that they having taken, ransacked, and burnt a
good part of the City of Edenborough, Holy-rood house, and the Kings Palace
there, and having rifled and defaced the Towns of Leyth, Haddington, Dumbarre,
Dyrlaw, Broughton, Dudiston, Beuerton, Markle, Hatherwike, Bowland, Blackborne,
West-Crage, Chester-fels, Stone-house, Trauent, Trapren, Belton, Butterden,
Raunto, Enderleigh, Crawenden, Shenston, the Fycket, East-barne, Kyrklandhill,
Quickwood, part of Muskelborough, and many other Villages, besides Abbeys,
Monasteries, and Religious Houses, (which particularly we cannot name) they
returned powerfully, with rich booties, and with the only loss of forty men,
into England.

Two Armies sent into France.
And thus did King Henry in some sharp measure correct and punish the unstable
dealings of the Scots. Which troubles when he had finished, he then forthwith
made such plentiful preparations to invade France, that he sent unto the
French Kings Dominions two strong Armies, of which the one was commanded by the
Duke of Norfolk, and by the gentle Lord Russel, who was then newly made Lord
Privy Seal, who therewithal besieged the strong Town of Muttrell, where
they lost much time, Muttrell besieged and abandoned.
and much labor, and were enforced to leave it in the end. And the other of
the said two Armies was commanded by the Duke of Suffolk, with which the said
former Army inbodied it self: and then they all encamped about the strong and
warlike City of Bulleine, Bulleine is besieged.
and after many sharp conflicts and hot skirmishes, they first took the Old
man, and shortly after base Bulleine.

To this siege King Henry himself (being attended by many a worthy man)
repaired, and after his coming thither, The King comes to Bulleine.
so long as the light gave leave, for the space of one whole month together,
he caused the walls of the Town and Castle so cruelly to be battered, and the
Town it self to be so beaten, and the breaches and the trenches to be so
furiously assulted, that the walls in many places lay almost level with the
ground. No house escaped vnhurted: and the Inhabitants with continual labor,
vexation, Bulleine is yielded.
and travel, were almost tired and worn out: so that at length, upon
composition that all the Soldiers and Inhabitants should safely depart with
bag and baggage, the strong and stately Town and Castle of Bulleine was
delivered into the Kings hands: out of which issued (upon the said agreement)
threescore and seven horsemen, fifteen hundred, threescore and three footmen,
eight hundred Gunners, fourscore and seven men who were hurt, and nineteen
hundred twenty and seven men, women, and children, they all being in number
4444. souls. But many (who by reason of their grievous wounds could not
depart) were found, and well cherished and relieved in the Town.

Now whilst the King thus lay at the siege of Bulleine, King Henry returns.
the Emperor (without the Kings knowledge or consent) secretly concluded a
peace with the French King; whereat King Henry much grieved: so that (after he
had taken an exact order for the repairing and fortifying of that Town and
Castle) be dismissed his Army, and with great joy, honor, and triumph, he
returned into England.

And because his daily wars (which required continual supplies) had wasted
and consumed his treasure, John Stow. 993.
which (for the preventing of future mischiefs, and in especial such as were
daily offered unto him by the Scots) he endeavored to augment, he therefore
demanded a Benevolence of all his Subjects both Spiritual and Temporal. For
which purpose Sir Thomas Wryothesley, A Benevolence.
Lord Chancellor of England, the Duke of Suffolk, and others of his Majesty's
Counsel of Estate, (sitting as Commissioners in Bainards Castle in London)
taxed the Citizens and Inhabitants according to their wisdoms and discretions.
And because one Alderman (whose name was Richard Read) refused to pay what they
had ordered, Alderman Read.
he was therefore by them required (on a great pain) personally to serve the
King in his wars against the Scots; which cheerfully be performed, and was
(with many others) taken prisoner and detained by his enemies, until that for
his ransom he was enlarged and set free.

The Dolphins success.
After the King was departed home, the Dolphin (taking the benefit to a dark
night) came with a great power so suddenly into Base Bulleine, that he took
it. But such as fled, and had saved their lives, being aided by the soldiers
of the upper Town and Castle, came fiercely on the Dolphin, and so manfully
assailed him, that (to save himself and his) he in all the haste departed, and
left the Town with his great loss.

The French are overthrown.
Within few days after, Monsieur de Bees came on the other side of the water
before the Town, with an Army of fifteen thousand men, and began to erect a
Fortress there. But by the valiant Earl of Hartford, the Viscount Lisle, the
Lord Gray, and diverse others, they were assailed, fought with, and shamefully
put to flight, and were compelled to leave behind them their Ordinance, Tents,
and other good provisions, to their great ignominy and reproach.

French King (intending to work wonders in England, by way of a revenge, for
that his strong Town of Bulleine was lost) sent to the Sea a mighty Fleet,
The French Kings Navy does nothing.
of two hundred tall ships, and seven and twenty strong Galleys, all which
were stuffed (as it was reported) with threescore thousand men. All these came
in good order, and ancoured before the Isle of Wight, and were oftentimes
beaten with the great Ordinance which the Admiral of England liberally
bestowed on them. But as the English Fleet passed out of the Haven of
Portsmouth into the Sea, a stately, strong, and a goodly ship, named the Marie
Rose, The Marie Rose drowned
belonging to the King, (in which was Captain Sir George Carew Knight, with
more then four hundred men besides) was drowned almost in an instant, by the
gross folly of the Gunners, and of the Mariners, the former of them having
left their Ordinance vntrigged, and the latter having left the under port holes
open, by means whereof when the ship turned, the Ordinance ran back to the
one side, and bare the port holes under water, so that the sea violently and
abundantly flowed in, and in a moment swallowed up both ship, Captain, Men,
Ordinance, and all other things there to the great grief and sorrow of the
King himself, and of all such as were present, and beheld it.

The Lord Dambalt, high Admiral of France, being by certain poor Fishermen,
whom he had taken, informed, that the King in his own person, being
accompanied with an infinite number of valiant men of war; expected and
longed to be made victorious and rich by their landing, feared to hazard all
his fortunes in so desperate and hot a service: Wherefore be hoised Ancors, and
without Fame or Honor, returned basely into France.

Now must we know, The Scots invade England.
that no sooner was King Henry departed out of England to the siege of Bullein
(as we have heard) but the Scottish Nation (observing their old custom)
entered, riffled, spoiled, and burnt many Houses, Villages, and small Towns, in
the marches of England, without pity: Wherefore, King Henry (after his
return) resolved to correct their madness, and their folly, and to take
revenge for those injuries and wrongs: And for that purpose, he sent the Noble
Earl of Hartford into that Kingdom, An Army sent into Scotland.
with an Army of twelve thousand men, where he hauoked Men, Towns, Castles,
and the Country, in such a furious and fierce manner, that the Scots were
extremely damnified thereby; and thousands of them were utterly undone.

About the same time, the valiant Lord Lisle, Lord high Admiral of England,
Treport.
entered into and landed within the Haven of Treport, and burnt the suburbs of
that town, and many other houses, Villages, and Towns, which bordered upon
the Sea coasts: And at his return from thence (as a rich prey) he carried with
him many Ships, Barges, Boats, and Vessels, which he found there.

Now (like as after many ruff and boisterous storms, a sweet, The Duke of
Northfolke and the Earl of Surrey committed.
whereof we have already taken a perfect view: A peace was lovingly concluded,
and joyfully proclaimed, between the two kingdoms of England and of France.
But this joy (as in humane affairs it often happens) was quickly checked with
an other sorrow: for the most victorious, faithful, and ever to be honored
Captain, the Duke of Northfolke, and his son, the most illustrious Earl of
Surrey (both which, in this Kings reign, performed many memorable, and brave
services, in Scotland, England, and in France) were suddenly apprehended, and
sent unto the Tower; For none other thing, but because they quartered, and bare
in their Escoucheon certain Arms, which were pretended, properly, and only to
belong unto the King and Prince (which Arms notwithstanding, they and their
Auncesters timeout of mind had so borne without controlment, reproof, or
check. For this offense, the said Earl was indicted of high Treason, arraigned
thereon, and tried by a Jury of Knights, and Gentlemen, The Earl of Surrey
beheaded.
(and not by his peers) because he was no Lord of the Parliament) by whom he
was found guilty, and then received his judgment, and lost his head, to the
great grief and sorrow of many thousands, who lamented the causeless death of
such a worthy man, as had so well deserved of the King, and of the common weal.

The King dies.
But the Duke his father (by reason of the Kings sickness, and death, which
followed shortly after) was preserved by God from that danger, for better
fortunes.

He is described.
The Presence of this King was amiable, and Princely: for he was somewhat more
then ordinary tall, strongly limmed, proportionably composed, fair in his
complexion, nimble, and full of agilitie in his younger years; and always as
resolutely valiant as a man might be: He had a pregnant and a sharp wit, and
was generally held to be well learned, because he could, and used to speak
well: He was exceeding humble, and passing stout; applying the former to gentle
spirits; and opposing the latter against proud, insolent, and rough Mates: He
was bountiful, and magnificently liberal (if occasion so required) Yet in
regard that he was a man: He was not free from all faults; For he was too too
much familiar and conversant with wanton and light women: And delighted too
much in variety, and in change, as most men did conjecture, because he had
six wives. From two of them he was severed, because his marriages were held to
be void, frustrate, and of no force: other two of them (for the objected crime
of incontinencie) lost their heads: A fifth died in her childbed: and the sixth
escaped fairly by his death. Finally, he (oftentimes) much pleased himself,
to be ouer-familiar in the swaggering company of loose Fellows; yet in most
respects, he was a famous, a worthy, and a most noble King: Thus ended he his
life; and thus do I conclude this History of these twenty Kings; hoping that
some other (who shall be better able) will (with more sufficiency) write the
rest.

FINIS.
THE SVCCESSIONS OF THE DVKES AND EARLS OF THIS KINGDOM OF ENGLAND: FROM THE
CONQVEST until the twelfth year of the famous Reign of the mighty Monarch
King JAMES THE FIRST.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Henry Fetherstone. 1615.

Princes of Wales since the Conquest. John Speed 97

1 EDward Caer-Nervon, son to King Edward the First, afterward king Edward
the Second. 2 Edward of Windsour, son to king Edward the Second, afterward
king Edward the Third. 3 Edward the Black Prince, son to king Edward the
Third. 4 Richard of Bordeaux, son to the Black Prince, afterward king
Richard the Second. 5 Henry of Monmoth, son to king Henry the Fourth,
afterward king Henry the Fifth. 6 Henry of Windsour, son to king Henry
the Fifth, afterward king Henry the Sixth. 7 Edward of Westminster, son to
king Henry the Sixth. 8 Edward of Westminster, son to king Edward the
Fourth, afterward king Edward the Fifth. 9 Edward Plantagenet, son to king
Richard the Third. 10 Arthur Tuther, son to king Henry the Seventh. 11
Henry Tuther, son to king Henry the Seventh, afterward king Henry the
Eighth. 12 Edward, the son of king Henry the Eighth, afterward king Edward
the Sixth. 13 Henry, the son of king James. 14 Charles, the son of king
James.
THE SVCCESSIONS OF THE DVKES AND EARLS OF THIS KINGDOM OF ENGLAND. From the
Conquest until the twelfth year of the famous Reign of the mighty Monarch
King JAMES the First.
Albemarle and Holdernes.
EVDO (Son to the Earl of Champagne) married one of the Conquerours sisters,
Conq.
and was by him created Earl of Albemarle, and of Holdernes.

Stephen, their son, succeeded, and was Earl of Albemarle, and of Holdernes.

William surnamed Le Gross (being his son) succeeded, K. Steph.
and was Earl of Albemarle and of Holdernes.

William de Fortibus, married Hawse or Avice, the daughter and heir of the
aforenamed Stephen, and was in her right created Earl of Albemarle, and of
Holdernes, by King Stephen.

William de Fortibus, their son succeeded, and was Earl of Albemarle and of
Holdernesse.

William de Fortibus, his son, was Earl of Albemarle and Holdernes, and dyed
without issue Male.

R. 2.
Thomas Plantagenet, otherwise called Thomas of Woodstock, a younger son of
King Edward the Third, was by his Nephew King Richard the Second, created Earl
of Albemarle, Holdernes, Darby, Lancaster, and Leicester.

Henry Plantagenet his son, was Earl of Albemarle, Holdernes, Darby,
Lancaster, and of Leicester.

R. 2.
Edmund Plantagenet, the son of Edmund of Langley, another of the younger
sons of King Edward the Third, and Duke of York, was by king Richard the
Second, his Cosen, created Earl of Rutland, and Duke of Albemarle.

Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and son to King Henry the Fourth, was
by him created Earl of Warwick, and of Albemarle.

Arundell.
Conq.
ROger Mountgomery, was by William the Conqueror, created Earl of Arundell,
and of Shrewsbury.

Hugh Mountgomery, his son, succeeded him, and died without issue.

Robert Mountgomery, his brother, (being Earl of Belesme) succeeded, and dyed
without issue.

Wiliam de Albeney, was by Mawld the Empress created Earl of Arundell, Mauld.
and Sussex, because he took her part against King Stephen, he married Adeliza,
the widow of King Henry the First, and was confirmed in his honors, H. 2.
by king Henry the Second.

William de Albeney, his son, succeeded in those honors:

R. 1.
William de Albeney, his son, was by King Richard the First, restored to the
said Earledomes, which for displeasure had been kept from him by Henry the
Second.

William de Albeney, his son, succeeded in those Earledomes.

Hugh de Albeney, was Earl after his brother, and dyed without issue.

H. 3.
William de Albenetto, was created Earl of Arundell, by king Henry the Third,
and dyed without issue.

E. 1.
Richard Fitz-Alen, married Isabel, (who was one of the daughters of the last
Earl William) and was by king Edward the First, created Earl of Arundell, he
was (before that time) Lord of Clun, and Oswaldstry.

Edmund Fitz-Alen, their son, was Lord of Clun and Oswaldstry, and succeeded
in the Earldom of Arundell; but was beheaded on displeasure, and by the
commandment of Queen Isabel, the wife of king Edward the second.

Richard Fitz-Alen, his son, succeeded in all those honors, he was also
Earl of Warren, and of Surrey.

Richard Fitz-Alen, his son, was Lord of Clun and Oswaldstry, and Earl of
Arundell, Warren, and of Surrey: he was also Lord of Bromfield, and Yale; and
was beheaded at Bristow, whilst king Richard the second lived.

Thomas Fitz-Alen, his son, was Lord of Clun, Oswaldstry, Bromflet, and Yale,
and Earl of Arundell, Warren, and of Surrey, and died without issue Male.

John Fitz-Alen, and Lord Maltrauers, H. 6.
being the next heir Male to the said Thomas, was by King Henry the sixth
created Earl of Arundell, and Duke of Torayne.

Humfrey Fitz-Alen, his son, was Earl of Arundell, and dyed without issue.

William Fitz-Alen, his Uncle, and brother to the last Earl John, was Lord of
Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earl of Arundell.

Thomas Fitz-Alen, his son, succeeded, and was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers,
and Earl of Arundell.

William Fitz-Alen, his son, was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earl of
Arundell.

Henry Fitz-Alen, his son, was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earl of
Arundell, and dyed without issue Male.

Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, and the fourth and last Duke of Northfolke,
married Marie, one of the daughters and coheires of the said Henry Fitz-Alen,
and was in her right Lord Maltrauers, and Earl of Arundell. The other moytie
descended to the Lord Barkley.

Philip Howard, his son, was Lord Maltrauers, and Earl of Arundell, and of
Surrey.

Thomas Arundell, his son, is Lord Maltrauers, K. Ia.
and Earl of Arundell: to which honors he was restored by the mighty Prince
King James.

Bathe.
PHilbert de Chandew, a Britton borne, H. 1.
was by King Henry the first created Earl of Bath: he dyed without issue Male.

John Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock in Deuon, being the son of
Foulke Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren, who was the son of William Bourchier,
Lord Fitz-Warren, who was the younger son of William Bourchier, H. 8.
Earl of Ewe in Normandy; who was the younger brother of Henry the first Earl
of Ewe, was by king Henry the eight, created Earl of Bath.

John Bourchier, his son, was Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock, and Earl of Bath.

William Bourchier, the son of John Bourchier, who was the son of the said
John, last Earl of Bath, is now Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock, and has issue
one son only, who is named Edward, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock.

Bedford.
E. 3.
INgram, Lord Concy, a Frenchman borne, married Isabel, the daughter of king
Edward the third: and being by him created Earl of Bedford, he dyed without
issue Male.

John Plantagenet, the third son of king Henry the fourth, was (by his
father) created Duke of Bedford; H. 4.
and whilst king Henry the sixth lived (to whom he was Uncle) he was Regent of
France, Ruled it with great wisdom, and valor; and dyed without issue.

George Neuil, was by king Edward the fourth, created Duke of Bedford, E. 4.
and dyed without issue.

Iaspar Tuthar, surnamed Iaspar of Hatfield, son to Owen Tuthar, and of
Queen Katherine, the widow of king Henry the fifth, was (by his half
brother, king Henry the sixth) created Earl of Pembroke, H. 7.
and was after (by his Nephew, king Henry the seventh) created Duke of
Bedford, and dyed without issue.

John Russel, was by king Henry the eight, made Lord Russel, and by king
Edward the sixth, E. 6.
he was created Earl of Bedford.

Francis, Lord Russel, his son, succeeded, and was Earl of Bedford.

Edward, Lord Russel, his sons son, viz. the son of Francis third son
to the said Earl Francis, is now Earl of Bedford.

Bridgewater.
GIles Dawbeney was by king Henry the Seventh made Lord Dawbeney, H. 8.
and his son Henry was (after his fathers death) created Earl of
Bridgewater by king Henry the Eighth, and died without issue. But Alice his
sister and heir was married to John Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstocke in
Deuon, from whom William Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstocke and Earl of Bath is
descended.

Buckingham.
WAlter Gifford, Earl of Longuile in Normandy, Conq.
and cosen to the Conqueror, was by him created Earl of Buckingham and
Pembroke.

Walter Gifford his son succeeded, and died without issue.

Thomas Plantagenet, surnamed Thomas of Woodstocke, the sixth son of King
Edward the Third, was by his nephew King Richard the Second created Earl of
Buckingham, Northampton, and Essex: R. 2.
and afterward he made him Duke of Gloucester. And for his good counsel to the
same King, he was sent prisoner to Calice, and there murdered.

Humfrey Plantagenet, his son, was Earl of Buckingham, Northhampton, and
Essex, and died without issue.

Humfrey Stafford, Lord of Brecknocke and Holdernes, H. 6.
and being Earl of Stafford, was by King Henry the Sixth created the first
Duke of Buckingham.

Henry Stafford his son, being Lord of Brecknocke and Holdernes, was Earl
of Stafford, and Duke of Buckingham, and was beheaded by King Richard the Third.

Edward Stafford his son, being Lord of Brecknocke and Holdernes, and Earl
of Stafford, by restitution from King Henry the eight, was the third and last
Duke of Buckingham, H. 7.
and was beheaded whilst King Henry the Eighth reigned.

Cambridge.
E. 3.
John of Henault, brother to William Earl of Henault, and uncle to Queen
Philip the wife of King Edward the Third, was by him created Earl of
Cambridge. But he revolted to the French King, and thereby lost his honor.

E. 3.
William Marquess of Iulier, Bergen, and Cleueland, was by King Edward the
Third created Earl of Cambridge.

E. 3.
Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Edmund of Langley, being the fifth son of King
Edward the Third, and Duke of York, was by his father created Earl of
Cambridge.

Edward Plantagenet his son, was Duke of York and Albemarle, Earl of
Rutland and of Cambridge, and being slain in the battle of Edgingcourt, he
died without issue.

Richard Plantagenet, his brother, was Earl of Cambridge, and had issue,
Richard.

Richard Plantagenet was Lord of Clare, and of Wigmore, Duke of York, and
Earl of Vlster, March, and Cambridge, and was slain in his wars against
King Henry the Sixth.

Edward Plantegenet his son succeeded him in all those honorable dignities,
and was afterward King Edward the Fourth.

Chester.
Conq.
HVgo Lupus, Viscount of Aurenges in Normandy, nephew to the Conqueror, was
by him created Earl Palatine of Chester.

Richard Lupus his son succeeded, and died without issue.

Ralphe Meschynes (being the son of Margaret the sister and heir of Hugo
Lupus) was by King Henry the First created Earl of Chester. H. 1.


Ralphe Meschynes his son succeeded, and was Earl of Chester.

Hugh Meschynes, surnamed Keuelitocke, because he was there borne, succeeded
his father in the Earldom of Chester.

Ralphe Meschynes, surnamed Blundeuile, his son, being Lord of Little
Britain, was Earl of Chester, Lincoln, and of Richmond.

K. John.
John, surnamed Scot, was by King John created Earl of Chester, and died
without issue male.

Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, the second son of king Henry the
Third, and brother to king Edward the First, H. 3.
was by his father created Earl Palatine of Chester.

Edward the Prince, son and heir apparent to king Edward the First, was by
his father created Earl Palatine of Chester, E. 1.
Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales. He was afterward king Edward the
Second.

Edward the Third was in his fathers days created Earl Palatine of Chester,
Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales, E. 2.
and was afterward king Edward the Third.

Edward Plantagenet, surnamed The Black Prince, the eldest son of king
Edward the Third, was in Parliament created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,
and Earl Palatine of Chester.

Richard Plantagenet, son to the Black Prince, was Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and was after that king Richard the
Second.

Henry Plantagenet, the eldest son of king Henry the Fourth, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he was king
Henry the Fifth.

Edward the son of king Henry the Sixth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he was shamefully murdered.

Edward Plantagenet, the son of king Richard the Third, was Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and died without issue.

Arthur Tuther, the eldest son of king Henry the Seventh, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and died without issue.

Henry Tuther, the second son of king Henry the Seventh, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he was king
Henry the Eighth.

Edward Tuther, his son, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
Palatine of Chester, until he was king Edward the Sixth. He died without issue.

Henry Stewart, the eldest son of the illustrious Prince, King James the
First, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester,
and died without issue.

Charles Stewart, his brother, is Prince of Wales, Duke of York, Cornwall, and
Rossay, and Earl Palatine of Chester.

Clarence.
K. Steph.
GIlbert de Clare was by king Stephen created Earl of Clarence.

Roger de Clare, his brother, succeeded, and was Earl of Clare.

Richard de Clare, his son, succeeded, and was Earl of Clare.

E. 3.
Lionel Plantagenet, the third son of king Edward the Third, was by his
father created Duke of Clarence. He had no issue male: but his daughter and
heir Philip was married to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, from whom the
Family of York did lineally descend.

H. 4.
Thomas Plantagenet, the second son of king Henry the Fourth, was by his
father created Earl of Albemarle, and Duke of Clarence.

George Plantagenet, the third son of Richard Duke of York, and brother to
king Edward the Fourth, was by him created Duke of Clarence, and was murdered
in the Tower.

Cornwall.
CAndor a Briton was Earl of Cornwall at the time of the Conquest, and did
homage to the Conqueror for the same.

Candor his son was the second Earl of Cornwall.

Conq.
Robert Earl of Mortaigne in Normandy was by the Conqueror created Earl of
Cornwall.

William his son, being Earl of Mortaigne, was also Earl of Cornwall.

K. Steph.
Reynold the base son of king Henry the First, was by king Steven created
Earl of Cornwall.

H. 2.
John the second son of king Henry the Second, was by his father created
Earl of Cornwall. He was afterward king John.

H. 3.
Richard, the second son of king John, was by his brother king Henry the
Third created Earl of Cornwall. He was also king of the Romans.

Henry Plantagenet his son succeeded, and was Earl of Cornwall, and died
without issue.

E. 1.
Edward Plantagenet, the eldest son of king Edward the First, was by his
father created Prince of Wales, Earl Palatine of Chester, and Duke of
Cornwall, and he was afterward king Edward the Second.

Pierce Gaueston, a Gascoigne borne, E. 2.
was by king Edward the Second created Lord of Wallingfold, and Earl of
Cornwall and Gloucester. He was beheaded by the Barons, because he misse-lead
the king. He died without issue.

John Plantagenet, second son to king Edward the second, E. 2.
was by his father created Earl of Cornwall. He died without issue.

Edward Plantagenet, the eldest son of king Edward the Second, E. 2.
was by his father created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester, which he enioied until he was king Edward the Third.

Edward Plantagenet, surnamed The Black Prince, E. 3.
was by his father king Edward the Third in Parliament created Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester.

Richard Plantagenet, son to the black Prince, E. 3.
was by his Grandfather king Edward the Third created Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, which he enioied until he was King
Richard the Second.

Henry Plantagenet, the eldest son of king Henry the Fourth, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he was king
Henry the Fifth.

Edward, the son of king Henry the Sixth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and was murdered.

Edward, the son and heir apparent of King Richard the third, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and died without issue.

Arthur Tuther, the eldest son of king Henry the Seventh, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, and died without issue.

Henry Tuther, his brother, enioied the Principality of Wales, the Duchy of
Cornwall, and the Earldom of the Palatinate of Chester, until he was king
Henry the Eighth.

Edward Tuther, the son of king Henry the Eighth, was Prince of Wales, Duke
of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he was King Edward the
Sixth.

Henry Stewart, the eldest son of King James the First, was Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl Palatine of Chester, until he died without issue.

Charles Stewart, his brother, is Earl Palatine of Chester, Duke of Rossay,
York, and Cornwall, and Prince of Wales.

Cumberland.
Conq.
RAlphe Meschynes, a Norman, was by the Conqueror created Earl of Cumberland
and Carlisle.

H. 8.
Henry, Lord Clifford, Bromflet, and Vessey, was by King Henry the Eighth
created Earl of Cumberland.

George, Lord Clifford, Bromflet, and Vessey, being his son, was Earl of
Cumberland, and died without issue male.

Francis, Lord Clifford, his brother, is Earl of Cumberland.

Darbie.
Conq.
WIlliam Peuerell, base son to the Conqueror, was by him created Earl of
Darbie and of Nottingham.

William Peuerell, his son, succeeded in those Earledomes.

K. Steph.
Robert de Ferrers, Lord of Tedburie, and Earl of Ferrers and of Nottingham,
was also Earl of Darbie.

William de Ferrers succeeded his father in those honors.

William de Ferrers, his son, was Lord of Tedburie, Chartley, and Groby, and
Earl of Ferrers, Nottingham, and of Darbie.

Robert de Ferrers, his son, possessed his fathers dignities. He was
disherited, because he sided with the Barons against King Henry the Third.

Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, being Earl of Lancaster, second
son to King Henry the Third, and brother to king Edward the First, H. 3.
was by his said father created Earl of Lecester and of Darbie.

Thomas Plantagenet, his son, being Earl of Lancaster, Lecester, Lincoln,
and Salisburie, was by descent Earl of Darbie, and died without issue.

Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was dignified with all those honors.

Henry Plantagenet, his son, enjoying those Earledomes, together with the
Earledomes of Albemarle and Holdernes, was by king Edward the Third created
Duke of Lancaster. E. 3.
And his daughter and heir, named Blanch, was married to John of Gaunt, the
fourth son of the same King.

John Plantagenet, surnamed John of Gaunt, being Duke of Lancaster, Earl of
Leicester, Lincoln, and Salisbury, was also Earl of Darby.

Henry Plantagenet, surnamed Bullingbroke, being his son, was Duke of
Lancaster, and Hereford, and Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, and of Salisbury; he
was likewise Earl of Darby, and was king, by the name of king Henry the
Fourth.

Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, (whose Father Thomas was by king Henry the
Sixth, made Lord Stanley) was by king Henry the Seventh, created Earl of
Darby. H. 7.


Thomas Stanley, his Grandchild, viz. the son of his son Henry, who
married Ione, the daughter and heir of John, Lord Strange, and Knoking; being
Lord Stanley, and Strange, was also Earl of Darby.

Edward, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his son, succeeded, and
was Earl of Darby.

Henry, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his son, was Earl of
Darby.

Ferdinando, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his son, was Earl of
Darby, and dyed without issue Male.

William, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, his brother, is now Earl of
Darby.

Devonshire.
RIchard de Bruer, surnamed Richard of the Heath, being a Norman, was by the
Conqueror created Earl of Devonshire, Conq.
he dyed without issue.

Adela de Bruer, his sister and heir, Conq.
was by the Conqueror created Viscountesse of Devonshire.

Baldwine de Rivers, being Earl of Exeter, H. 2.
was by King Henry the second created Earl of Devonshire.

Richard Rivers, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Baldwine Rivers, his son, was Earl after him, and dyed without issue.

Richard Rivers, his brother, was Earl, and dyed without issue.

William Rivers, surnamed de Valentia, was their Nephew, and heir, was after
them Earl of Devonshire.

Baldwine Rivers, his son, was Earl of Deuon.

John Rivers, his son, being Earl, dyed without issue.

Isabel Rivers, surnamed de Fortibus, being the General heir of the Earls of
Devonshire, did enjoy the said Earldom. She married one who was named
William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle and Lord of Holdernes; by whom she had
a plentiful issue. But King Edward the Third would not permit them to enjoy
the said Earldom of Devonshire.

Hugh Courtney Knight, who was descended from the before named Earls of
Devonshire, E. 3.
was by King Edward the Third created Earl of Devonshire.

Hugh Courtney, his son, was Earl after him.

Edward Courtney, surnamed the Blind, (who was the son of Edward, the son
of the last Hugh Courtney) was Earl of Devonshire.

Hugh Courtney, his son, was Earl of Devonshire.

Thomas Courtney, his son, being Lord of Okehampt, in Deuon, was also Earl
of Devonshire. He took part in the wars with King Henry the sixth, and
being taken prisoner at the battle of Towton in Yorkshire, he lost his head.

E. 4.
Humfrey Stafford Esquire, was by King Edward the Fourth, first made Lord
Stafford of Southweeke, and afterward Earl of Devonshire: and because he
cowardly left the field at Banbury in the civil wars; at Bridgewater he was
beheaded by the commandment of the said King.

Edward Courtney, Lord of Hackham, being Cosen and heir to the said Thomas
Courtney, H. 7.
was by king Henry the seventh created Earl of Devonshire.

William Courtney, his son, married the Lady Katherine (one of the daughters
of king Edward the Fourth) and was Earl of Devonshire.

Henry Courtney, his son, was Earl of Devonshire, and by his Cosen German
king Henry the Eight, H. 8.
he was created Marquis of Exeter, but lost his head.

Q. Ma.
Edward Courtney, his son, was by Queen Marie restored to the Earldom of
Devonshire, but dyed at Padua without issue.

K. Ia.
Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, was by King James the First created Earl of
Deuon; he dyed without issue.

Dorset.
Conq.
OSmond a Norman, being by the Conqueror created Earl of Dorset, dyed without
issue.

Thomas Beauford, the son of John of Gaunt, John of Gaunt called all his
Children by that Wife, by the name of Beaufords.
by Katherine Swinsford, his third wife, was by king Richard the Second created
Earl of Somerset, and Marquis Dorset, which latter dignity was taken from him
in Parliament, in An. 1. H. 4.

John Beauford, his brother, was Earl of Somerset only, and was afterward by
king Henry the Fourth created Marquis Dorset, H 4.
and by king Henry the Sixth he was created Duke of Somerset. His daughter and
heir named Margaret, was married to Edmund Tuther, Earl of Richmond; and they
two had issue king Henry the seventh.

Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Earl of Somerset, and by king Henry the
Fifth he was created Earl of Mortoigne in Normandy, and by king Henry the
Sixth, Marquis Dorset, H. 6.
and Duke of Somerset.

Henry Beauford, his son, was Earl of Mortaigne, Marquis Dorset, and Duke
of Somerset, and dyed without issue.

Thomas Gray, the son of Sir John Gray knight, and of the Lady Elizabeth his
wife, and widow; who was afterward married to king Edward the Fourth, E. 4.
was by the same king created Marquis Dorset: he was also Lord of Groby,
Astley, Bonduile, and Harrington.

Thomas Gray, succeeded his Father in those honors.

Henry Gray, his son, being Lord Ferrers of Groby, Lord Harrington,
Bonduile, and Astley, was after his fathers death Marquis Dorset, and by king
Edward the Sixth, he was created Duke of Suffolk, and was executed in Queen
Mary's reign.

Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst, and Lord Treasuror of England, was by king
James created Earl of Dorset. K. Ia.


Robert Sackvile, his son, was Lord Buckhurst, and Earl of Dorset.

Richard Sackvile, his son, is Lord Buckhurst, and Earl of Dorset.

Essex.
GEoffrey de Magna Villa, otherwise Mandevile, K. Steph.
was by king Stephen created Earl of Essex.

Geoffrey, his son, was Earl of Essex, and dyed without issue.

William, his brother, was Earl of Essex, and dyed without issue.

Geoffrey Fitz-Pearce, otherwise Ludgarshall, married Beatrice the heir of the
said William Mandevile, K. Ioh.
and was by king John created Earl of Essex, she had by him two sons,
Geoffrey and William, whom (at his wives request) he named Mandeviles,
according to the name of their Grandfather.

Geoffrey Mandevile, their son, was Earl, and dyed without issue.

William Mandevile, his brother, was Earl, and died without issue

H. 3.
Humfrey Bohun, was by King Henry the Third, created Earl of Essex, and of
Hereford.

Humfrey Bohun, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Humfrey Bohun, his son, was Earl after him.

Humfrey Bohun, his son, was Earl of Essex and of Hereford.

John Bohun, his son, was Earl, and dyed without issue.

Humfrey Bohun, the son of William Bohun, who was the son of the last
Humfrey, was Earl of Essex, Hereford, and Northampton, and died without issue
Male. And Eleanor, his eldest sister, was married unto Thomas of Woodstock, one
of the sons of king Edward the Third.

E. 3.
Thomas of Woodstock, the sixth son of King Edward the Third, was by his
father created Earl of Essex, Buckingham, Hereford, and Northampton, and by
his Nephew king Richard the Second, he was created Duke of Gloucester, and
murdered in prison at Calice, because he had warned the king friendly of his
faults.

Humfrey Plantagenet, his son, succeeded in those Earledomes, and dyed
without issue Male.

Henry de Bargo Caro, otherwise Bourchier, being Earl of Ewe in Normandy,
who was the son of William Bourchier, who by king Henry the Fifth, was at
Maunt in Normandy, created Earl of Ewe, was by king Edward the Fourth, E. 4.
created Viscount Bourchier, and Earl of Essex, his son William had issue
Henry, and dyed whilst his father lived.

Henry Bourchier, was Viscount, and Earl, and died without issue.

H. 8.
Thomas Cromwell, was by King Henry the eighth, made Lord Cromwell, and was by
him created Earl of Essex, but lost his head.

H. 8.
William Parre, was by king Henry the eighth, made Lord Parre of Kendall, and
Earl of Essex; and by king Edward the Sixth, he was made Marquis of
Northampton, and dyed without issue.

Walter Deuereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartly, and Viscount Hereford, was by Queen
Elizabeth, Q. Eliz.
created Earl of Essex.

Robert Deuereux, his son, was Lord Ferrers of Chartly, Viscount Hereford,
and Earl of Essex.

Robert Deuereux, his son, was restored to all his fathers honors, by king
James the First, K. Ia.
and now lives.

Exeter.
John Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second, R. 2.
was by him created Earl of Huntington, and Duke of Exeter. He was executed
because he conspired against King Henry the Fourth.

Thomas Beauford, one of the sons of John of Gaunt, H. 4.
by his third wife, Katherine Swinford, was by his brother K. Henry the Fourth
created Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Exeter. He died without issue.

John Holland, the son of the aforenamed John, H. 6.
was by King Henry the Fifth restored to his Earldom of Huntington, and by
King Henry the Sixth to his Duchy of Exeter.

Henry Holland, his son, was attainted when King Edward the Fourth reigned,
and was drowned on Calice Sands.

Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, H. 8.
was by king Henry the Eighth created Marquess of Exeter, and lost his head.

Thomas Cecil, Lord Burleigh, K. James.
was by King James the First created Earl of Exeter, and yet lives.

Gloucester.
WIlliam Fitz-Eustace, Conq.
being by the Conqueror created Earl of Gloucester, died without issue.

Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Astreuile in Normandy, Conq.
was by the Conqueror created Earl of Gloucester.

William Fitz-Hamon, his son, was Earl of Gloucester.

Robert de Millent, base son to king Henry the First, H. 1.
was by him created Earl of Gloucester. He died without issue. H. 2.


John Plantagenet, the son of king Henry the Second, was by his father
created Duke of Gloucester. But he was afterward King of England.

Geoffrey Mandeuile, the last of that name, Earl of Essex, K. John.
was by King John created Earl of Gloucester, and died without issue.

Almericus, Earl of Eureux, K. John.
was by King John created Earl of Gloucester, and died without issue.

Gilbert de Clare, being Earl of Hartford, H. 3.
was created Earl of Gloucester by King Henry the Third.

Richard, his son, was Earl of Clare, and Gloucester, and Hartford.

Gilbert de Clare, his son, had those three Earledomes.

Gilbert de Clare, his son, was Earl of Hartford, Clare, and Gloucester, and
died without issue male.

E. 1.
Ralphe Mounthermer, who married Ione of Acres, one of the daughters of King
Edward the First, and who was widow to the last Gilbert de Clare, was by the
same King created Earl of Hartford and Gloucester, and died without issue.

E. 2.
Pierce Gaueston, a Gascoigne borne, was by King Edward the Second, created
Lord of Wallingford, Earl of Cornwall and Gloucester, and died without issue,
being executed by the Barons.

Hugh Spencer, the younger, was by King Edward the Second created Earl of
Gloucester, and was executed at London.

E. 3.
Hugh Awdley, Lord Awdley of Helie Castle, was by King Edward the Third created
Earl of Gloucester, and died without issue.

R. 2.
Thomas Plantagenet, surnamed Thomas of Woodstocke, the sixth son of King
Edward the Third, was by his father created Earl of Essex, Buckingham, and
Northampton, and by King Richard the Second, his nephew, he was created Duke
of Gloucester: but was murdered at Calice in prison for reproving the King
friendly of his faults.

R. 2.
Thomas Lord Spencer, the grandchild of the aforenamed Hugh Spencer, was by
King Richard the Second created Earl of Gloucester, and died without issue male.

H. 4.
Humfrey Plantagenet, the fourth son of king Henry the Fourth, being Earl
of Pembroke, was by his father created Duke of Gloucester, and died without
issue.

E. 4.
Richard Plantagenet, the son of Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, and
brother to King Edward the Fourth, was by the same King created Duke of
Gloucester. He was also King Richard the Third, and died without issue.

Hartford.
H. 2.
ROger de Clare, Earl of Clarence, was by King Henry the Second created Earl
of Hartford.

Richard de Clare, his son, enioied both those Earledomes.

Gilbert de Clare, his son, was Earl of Clare, Hartford, and of Gloucester.

Richard de Clare, his son, enioied those three Earledomes.

Gilbert de Clare, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Gilbert de Clare, his son, succeeded, and died without issue male.

Ralphe de Mounthermer, who married Ione of Acres, one of the daughters of king
Edward the First, E. 1.
was by him created Earl of Gloucester, and of Hartford, he dyed without issue.

Edward Saint-Maure, alias Seymour, H. 8.
was by king Henry the Eight made Viscount Beauchamp, and Earl of Hartford;
he was Uncle and Protector to king Edward the Sixth, by whom he was created
Duke of Somerset, and lost his head.

Edward Saint-Maure, alias Seymour, his son, Q. Eliz.
was by Queen Elizabeth created Viscount Beauchamp, and Earl of Hartford, and
he now lives.

Hereford.
WIlliam Fitz Osborne, Conq.
who first persuaded the Conqueror to undertake that weighty business, was by
him created Earl of Hereford, and Lord of the Isle of Weight; because he made
the first Conquest thereof.

Roger Fitz-Osborne, his son, who succeeded, was attainted of Treason, and
dyed a prisoner without issue.

Miles Fitz-Water, was by King Henry the First, H. 1.
created Earl of Hereford.

Roger Fitz-Water, his son, succeeded, and dyed without issue.

Walter Fitz-Water, his brother, was Earl, and dyed without issue.

Henry Fitz-Water, his brother, succeeded, and dyed without issue.

Humfrey Bohun, was by king Henry the Third, H. 3.
created Earl of Hereford, and of Essex.

Humfrey Bohun, succeeded his father in those Earledomes.

Humfrey Bohun, his son, was Earl after him.

Humfrey Bohun, his son, was his successor in those Dignities.

John Bohun, his son, was Earl, and dyed without issue.

Hurmfrey Bohun, his Nephew, viz. the son of William, brother to the said
John, was Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and dyed without issue
Male.

Thomas of Woodstock, the sixth son of king Edward the Third, E. 3.
married Eleanor, the eldest sister of the said Humfrey, and was by his Father
created Earl of Hereford, Essex, Buckingham, and Northampton: he was
afterward by his Nephew, king Richard the Second, created Duke of Gloucester,
and was murdered in prison at Calice, because he informed the king friendly of
his faults.

Humfrey Plantagenet, his son, was Earl, and dyed without issue Male.

Henry Plantagenet, surnamed Bullingbroke, the son and heir apparent of
John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, being Earl of Darby, was by his Cosen, R. 2.
king Richard the Second, created Duke of Hereford, and was afterward king
Henry the Fourth.

Humfrey Stafford, was Earl of Stafford, Northampton, and Hereford, and was by
king Henry the Sixth, created Duke of Buckingham, but he lost his head.

Huntington.
Conq.
WAldolf a Saxon, married Judith, the Conquerors Niece, and was by him created
Earl of Huntington; he dyed without issue Male.

Simon de S. Lize, otherwise Saint-Leger, married Mawld, one of the daughters
of Waldolf, Rufus.
and was by William Rufus, created Earl of Huntington, and Northompton: and
(having issue Simon) he dyed.

David, Prince of Scotland, and son to Malcolme the Third, being Earl of
Northumberland, Steph.
and Cumberland, was by king Stephen made Earl of Huntington, for Simon was
but a child, and unjustly kept from his Inheritance.

Henry, Prince of Wales, (as soon as David his father was king of Scotland)
enjoyed the Earledomes of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington.

After the death of King Stephen, the said Simon (being son to the said
Simon) entered into his Earledomes of Huntington and Northampton, and enjoyed
the same in peace, during his life.

Malcolme, Prince of Scotland, and son to the before named Henry (because
the rightful Earl of Huntington was in his minority) was by king Henry the
Second, H. 2.
made Earl of Huntington, as he was Earl of Northumberland, and of Camberland.

William, his brother, being Prince of Scotland, and Earl of Northumberland,
Cumberland, and of Huntington, made wars upon King Henry the Second, after
he was king of the Scots, and was taken prisoner in the field, ransomed, and
lost those honors.

Simon de S. Lize, otherwise Saint-Leger, the third of that name, was by king
Henry the Second, restored to his Earldom of Huntington, and was also Earl
of Northampton, and died without issue.

David, the brother of the aforenamed William, was by the favor of king
Richard the Second restored to the Earldom of Huntington. R. 1.


John, his son, succeeded, and was Earl of Huntington, and died without
issue male. He was surnamed Scot.

William Clinton was by king Edward the Third created Earl of Huntington, and
died without issue. E. 3.


Guischard, a Gascoigne borne in Angolesme, R. 2.
was by king Richard the Second created Earl of Huntington, and died without
issue.

John Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second, R. 2.
was by him created Earl of Huntington, and Duke of Exeter, and lost his head
for conspiring against king Henry the Fourth.

John Holland, his son, was restored to his Earldom by King Henry the
Fifth, H. 5.
and by king Henry the Sixth to his Duchy of Exeter.

Henry Holland, his son, was attainted when king Edward the Fourth reigned,
and was drowned on the coast of Calice.

Thomas Gray, son in Law to king Edward the Fourth, was by him created
Marquess Dorset, and Earl of Huntington.

Thomas Gray, his son, succeeded in those honors.

William Herbert, the eldest son of William Herbert, whom king Edward the
Fourth had made Earl of Pembroke, E. 4.
was by the same King made Earl of Huntington.

George Hastings, Lord Hastings, Botreaux, and Molines, was by king Henry the
Eighth created Earl of Huntington. H. 8.


Francis Hastings, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Henry Hastings, his son, being Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaux, Molines,
and Moeles, was also Earl of Huntington.

George Hastings, his brother, succeeded, and died without issue.

Henry Hastings, the son of Francis Hastings, who was the son of the said
George, now lives, and does enjoy the said Lordships, and Earldom of
Huntington.

Kendall.
GAscoigne de Fois, a Gascoigne borne, was at Maunt in Normandy created by
king Henry the Fifth Earl of Longuile and Kendall. He revolted, and became
French. H. 5.


John de Foys, his son, married the Niece of William de la Pole Duke of
Suffolk, H. 6.
by whose mediation he was by king Henry the Sixth restored. But he became
French.

H. 6.
Capdaw de Beuffs was by king Henry the Sixth created Earl of Kendall. But he
revolted to the French King.

Kent.
WIlnotus (at the Conquest being brother to King Harold) was Earl of Kent. But
(for fear) he fled into Denmark, and died without issue.

Conq.
Odo, Bishop of Bayon, and halfe-brother to the Conqueror, was by him created
Earl of Kent, and he died without issue.

K. Steph.
William de Ipre, Earl of Flanders, was by King Stephen created Earl of Kent,
and died without issue.

Hubert de Burgh, being Lord chief Justice of England, was by king Henry the
Third created Earl of Kent, H. 3.
and died without issue male.

Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Edmund of Woodstocke, being son to king Edward
the First, E. 2.
and brother to king Edward the Second, was by his brother created Earl of
Kent, but lost his head in the reign of his nephew king Edward the Third.

R. 2.
Thomas Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second, was by him created
Earl of Kent, and Duke of Surrey.

Thomas Holland, his son, was Earl of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, and died
without issue.

Edmund Holland, brother to the said Thomas, was Earl of Kent, and Duke of
Surrey, and died without issue.

William Neuil, Lord Fawconbridge, a younger brother to Ralphe Neuil, E. 4.
the first of that Family, Earl of Westmorland, was by king Edward the Fourth
created Earl of Kent, and died without issue male.

Edmund Gray, Lord Gray of Ruthen, was by king Edward the Fourth created Earl
of Kent. E. 4.


Richard Gray, his son, succeeded, and died without issue.

Reynold Gray, who was descended lineally from the said Edmund, Q. Eliz.
was restored to the Earldom of Kent by Queen Elizabeth, and died without
issue.

Henry Gray, his brother, is now Earl of Kent.

Lancaster.
John Plantagenet, brother to king Richard the First, R. 1.
was by him created Earl of Lancaster, Lecester, and Darbie. He was
afterward King of England.

Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, the second son of king Henry the
Third, was by his father created Earl of Lancaster, H. 3.
Lecester, and Darbie. He married Blanch the Queen of Navarre, and had issue by
her, Thomas and Henry.

Thomas Plantagenet, his son, was Earl of Lancaster, Lecester, Lincoln,
Salisburie, and Dorset, and died without issue.

Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was dignified with all those honors.

Henry Plantagenet, his son, enjoying all those Earledomes, together with the
Earledomes of Albemarle and Holdernes, was by king Edward the Third created
Duke of Lancaster. E. 3.
His daughter and heir, named Blanch, married John of Gaunt, the fourth son
of king Edward the Third.

John Plantagenet, surnamed John of Gaunt, enioied all those Earledomes, and
was Duke of Lancaster.

Henry Plantagenet, his son, surnamed Bolingbroke, held all those Earledomes,
and was Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, and was king Henry the Fourth, by
deposing of king Richard the Second.

Lecester.
LEofrick was Earl of Lecester when Edward the Confessor lived.

Algarus, his son, succeeded in that Earldom.

Edwin, his son, was Earl at the Conquest.

Robert de Beamont was created Earl of Lecester by king Henry the First. H. 1.


Robert de Beamont, his son, was Earl after him.

Robert, his son, surnamed Blanch-Maynes, was his successor.

Robert, his son, was Earl, and died without issue.

Simon de Mountfort was by king John created Earl of Lecester, K. John.
and was slain at the siege of Toulouse.

Simon de Mountfort was Earl of Lecester. He took king Henry the Third
prisoner in the Barons wars. But the young Prince Edward, set his Father at
liberty, and slew this Simon, with many more, at the battle of Eversham, and
his possessions were confiscate to the king.

Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowchback, second son to king Henry the
Third, was by his Father created Earl of Lecester, Lancaster. etc.

Thomas Plantagenet, his son, succeeded, and died without issue.

Henry Planagenet, his brother, possessed all those honors.

Henry Plantagenet, his son, was Earl of Lecester, etc. and was by King
Edward the Third, E. 3.
created Duke of Lancaster; his daughter and heir, named Blanch, was married
to John of Gaunt.

John Plantagenet, surnamed John of Gaunt, the fourth son of king Edward the
Third, married Blanch, and was Earl of Lecester, etc. and Duke of Lancaster.

Henry of Bullingbroke, his son, was Earl of Lecester, etc. and Duke of
Lancaster, and of Hereford, and was afterward king Henry the Fourth.

Robert Sutton, otherwise Dudley, a younger son to John Duke of
Northumberland, was by Queen Elizabeth, created Earl of Lecester, and dyed
without any lawful issue.

Lincoln.
MArcarus, being Earl of Lincoln, and Northumberland, at the time of the
Conquest, rebelled, and dyed in prison without issue.

Rufus.
William de Romara, was by King William Rufus created Earl of Lincoln, and
died without issue.

Steph.
Gilbert de Gaunt, was in the right of Avis, his wife created Earl of
Lincoln, and died without issue Male.

Lewis.
Gilbert de Gaunt, in the troublesome times of King John, was created Earl of
Lincoln, by the Dolphin Jews, son to the French King.

Ralf de Meschynes, surnamed Blundevile, being the sixth Earl of Chester, H. 3.
was by king Henry the Third, created Earl of Lincoln, and of Richmond,
because he took his part against the Barons: he dyed without issue.

John Lacy, Baron of Haulton, was by king Henry the Third, created Earl of
Lincoln.

Henry Lacy, the son of Edmund Lacy, son to the said John, succeeded, and
was Earl of Lincoln.

Thomas Plantagenet, the son of Edmund Crowchback, was Earl of Lancaster,
Leicester, Darby, and Salisbury: He married Alice the daughter and heir of
Henry Lacy, and was (in her right) Earl of Lincoln, and died without issue.

John de la Pole, the son of John de la Pole, the second of that name, Duke
of Suffolk, was created Earl of Lincoln, E. 4.
by king Edward the Fourth, and dyed without issue.

Henry Brandon, the son and heir apparent of Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk, was by his Uncle king Henry the eighth, H. 8.
created Earl of Lincoln, he dyed a child without issue.

Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, was by Queen Elizabeth, Q. Eliz.
created Earl of Lincoln.

Henry Fines, Lord Clinton, the son of the said Edward, was Earl of
Lincoln after his Father, and yet lives.

March.
EDwin a Saxon, at the time of the Conquest, was Earl of March; he with
Marcarus and Swardus, kept the Isle of Weight, against the Conqueror, and was
banished.

Roger Mortimer, Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, E. 3.
was by king Edward the Third, created Earl of March, and was executed for
Treason.

Roger Mortimer, the son of Edmund Mortimer, who was the son of the said
Earl Roger, E. 3.
was by the same king restored to the Baronie of Wigmore, and to the Earldom
of March.

Edmund Mortimer, his son, married Philip, the daughter and heir of Lionel,
Duke of Clarence, the third son of king Edward the Third, and was Earl of
March, and from them two, did descend the heirs of the Family of York.

Roger Mortimer, their son, was Earl of March, and of Vlster in Ireland, and
by king Richard the Second, was proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown of
England, and was slain long after in Ireland.

Edmund Mortimer, his son, was Earl of March, and after one and twenty
years imprisonment in Wales, and elsewhere: he died without issue.

Richard Plantagenet, Earl of Cambridge, was the son of Edmund of Langley,
Duke of York, the fifth son of King Edward the third) he married Anne. the
sister and heir of the said Edmund, and daughter to the said last Earl Roger,
and in her right, he was Earl of March, and they two had issue, Richard Duke
of York, who was father to King Edward the fourth.

Richard Plantagenet, son to Richard Earl of Cambridge, was Earl of March,
and Duke of York, and had issue Edward the fourth.

Edward his son was first, Earl of March, then by his Fathers death, he was
Duke of York, and by his victory at Barnet field he attained the Kingdom of
England, and was King Edward the fourth.

Mountgomery.
K. Ia.
SIr Philip Herbert Knight, the second son of Henry late Earl of Pembroke,
and younger brother to William Lord Herbert now Earl of Pembroke, was by K.
James created Earl of Mountgomery.

Northfolke.
RAlph Waer, at the time of the Conquest, was Earl of Norfolk, and Suffolk,
and fled for treason.

Conq.
Ralph Bygot, President of the East Angles, was by the Conqueror, created Earl
of Northfolke, but he was disherited for conspiring against him.

H. 1.
Hugh Bygot, was by King Henry the first, created Earl of Northfolke,

Roger Bygot, his son was Earl after him.

Hugh Bygot, his son, was Earl of Northfolke.

Roger Bygot, his son, succeeded in that Earldom.

Roger Bygot, (his Nephew, vizt. the son of his brother Robert) was Earl of
Northfolke, and dyed without issue.

E. 2.
Thomas Plantagenet surnamed Brotherton, who was a younger son to King Edward
the first, and brother to King Edward the second, was by his brother created
Earl of Northfolk, he had one daughter and heir; who was named Margaret.

John Lord Segraue married the said Margaret, and they two had issue Margaret,
R. 2.
which Margaret was by King Richard the second created Duchess of Northfolke
after her husbands death, and then she married John Lord Mowbray.

Thomas Lord Mowbray, their son, R. 2.
was by King Richard the second created Earl of Nottingham, Marshall of
England, and Duke of Norfolk, he dyed without issue. He complained of Henry
of Bullinbrooke to King Richard the second, and should have fought a combat
with him, but died at Venice in his banishment.

Thomas Lord Mowbray, his son, was never Duke of Northfolk, but was in his
fathers life time only Earl of Nottingham, and was executed for treason with
Richard Scroop Archbishop of York by King Henry the fourth, and his brother
John succeeded their father and was Marshall of England, Earl of Nottingham,
and Duke of Northfolke.

John Lord Mowbray, his son, was Earl of Nottingham, Warren, and Surrey,
High Marshall of England, and Duke of Northfolke.

John Lord Mowbray, his son, succeeded his father in all those honorable
Dignities, he died, and had issue Anne.

Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, and second son to King Edward the
fourth, was married in his childhood to the said Anne, and was in her right
possessor of all those honors. But he was murdered by his Uncle King Richard the
third, and died without issue. The said Anne also died without issue, whereby
all the Lordshippes of the Mowbrays, by course of inheritance was devolued to
John Lord Howard, and to William Lord Barkley.

John Lord Howard, who by his mothers side, R. 3.
was descended from the before named Mowbrayes, was by King Richard the third
created Duke of Northfolke, and lost his life in the said Kings quarrel at
Bosworth field. H. 8.


Thomas Howard, his son, who by King Richard the third was made Earl of
Surrey, was created Duke of Northfolke, by King Henry the eighth.

Thomas Howard, his son, succeeded and was Duke of Northfolk.

Thomas Howard, (the son of Henry, who was the son of the last Thomas Duke
of Northfolke) was Duke of Northfolke, and Earl Marshall of England. He was
also (in the right of his wife Marie the eldest daughter of Henry Fitz-Allen)
Earl of Arundell.

Northumberland.
MArcarus, at the time of the Conquest, was Earl of Northumberland and
Lincoln, he with others kept the I Will of Wighte against the Conqueror, and was
taken, dyed in prison, and had no issue.

Conq.
Robert de Cumine, was by the Conqueror created Earl of Northumberland, but
was slain by the Northumbers.

Conq.
Gospatrick, was created Earl of Northumberland by the Conqueror, but he took
it from him again.

Conq.
Waldrofe, was by the Conqueror created Earl of Northumberland, but lost his
head for treason.

Conq.
Walcher, Bishop of Durham, bought the Earldom of Northumberland of the
Conqueror, and died without issue.

Conq.
Robert de Mowbray, was by the Conqueror created Earl of Northumberland, but
he rebelled, and lost it.

Steph.
David, Prince of Scotland, son to King Malcolme the third, was Earl of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington.

Henry, his son (as soon as his father was King) enjoyed all those
Earledomes.

Malcolme, his son, was Earl of Northumberland, and of Cumberland, and
Huntington.

William, his brother, succeeded him in his Kingdom, and was Earl of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington, he warred against King Henry the
second, was taken Prisoner, ransomed, and lost those honors.

R. 1
Hugh de Puddsey, Bishop of Durham, was by King Richard the first created Earl
of Northumberland, and died without issue.

R. 2.
Henry Percy, was by King Richard the second, created Earl of Northumberland,
he was father to Henry surnamed Hotspurre, who was slain in their rebellion
against King Henry the fourth.

H. 5.
Henry, the son of Henry Hotspur, was by King Henry the fifth restored to the
Earldom of Northumberland.

Henry Percy his son, was Earl of Northumberland. He and his son Henry
took part with King Henry the sixth, and in his quarrel he was slain at
Towton field, but Henry his son fled with the king into Scotland.

John, Lord Mountacute, brother to Richard Earl of Warwick, was by king Edward
the fourth created Earl of Northumberland, E. 4.
but the said Henry Percy obtained the kings favor, by his friends mediation,
so that John Lord Mountacute surrendered his Patent to the King, And was created
Marquis Mountacute.

Henry Percy, was by King Edward the fourth, E. 4.
restored to the Earldom of Northumberland, and was slain by the Common
People there, because he levied a tax for the King which much displeased them.

Henry Percy, Lord Percy, Crockermouth, Petworth, Poynings, Fitz-Payne, and
Brian, his son succeeded and was Earl of Northumberland.

Henry Percy, his son, enjoyed all those honorable titles and possessions,
and died without issue.

John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, and Viscount Lissle, Lord Basset and Ties, was
created Duke of Northumberland by King Edward the sixth, and lost his head in
the reign of Queen Mary.

Thomas Percy, being the heir male of the house of the Earls Percies was
restored by Queen Mary, Q. Ma.
to the Earldom of Northumberland, and for default of issue male of his
body, it was entayled to his Brother Henry Percy, and to the heirs males of
his body. And whilst Queen Elizabeth reigned, the said Thomas died without
issue male.

Henry Percy, his brother (according to the aforesaid entailement) was Earl of
Northumberland and died.

Henry Percy, his son, is now Lord of Petworth, Crockermouth, Poynings,
Fitz-Paine, and Brian, and Earl of Northumberland.

Nottingham,
William Peuerel, base son to the Conqueror, Conq.
was by him created Earl of Nottingham, and of Darby.

William Peuerel, his son, was Earl of Nottingham, and Darby.

Robert, Earl of Ferrers in Normandy, K. Steph.
and Lord of Tedbery in Staffordshire, was by King Stephen created Earl of
Nottingham.

William his son, was Earl of Nottingham, and by King John, he was also
created Earl of Darby.

John de Mowbray, was by King Richard the second, R. 2.
created Earl of Nottingham, and died without issue.

Thomas de Mowbray, his brother, was by K. Richard the second, R. 2.
first created Earl of Nottingham, and then Duke of Northfolk: he was
challenged by Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of Hereford, to a single combat, for
his false reports to the King, and was banished, and died in his exile.

Thomas Mowbray, his son, was Earl of Nottingham, and executed for treason
with Richard Scroop, Archbishop of York, In the Reign of King Henry the
fourth.

John Mowbray, his brother, was by King Henry the sixth, created Earl of
Nottingham, H. 6.
and Duke of Northfolke.

John Mowbray, his son, was Earl of Nottingham, Warren, and Surrey, and Duke
of Northfolke.

John Mowbray, his son, enjoyed all those honors, and died without issue
male.

R. 3.
William, Lord Barkley, being one of his General heirs, was by King Edward
the fourth, made Viscount Barkley, and by King Richard the third, he was
created Earl of Nottingham, and by King Henry the seventh, Marquis Barkley.

Henry Fitz-Roy, the base son of King Henry the eighth, and of Elizabeth
Blount, was by the same King created Earl of Nottingham, H. 8.
and Duke of Richmond, and died without issue.

Charles Lord Howard, of Effingham, was by King James, created Earl of
Nottingham.

Oxford.
EDgar Atheling, (the son of Edward the Outlaw, who was the son of Edmund
Ironside) was at the Conquest Earl of Oxford, and was by the Conqueror
deprived of that honor.

Mauld.
Awbrey de Vere, was by Mauld the Empress created, and by her son King Henry
the second, confirmed Lord High Chamberlain of England in feee and Earl of
Oxford.

Awbrey de Vere, his son enjoyed those honors, and dyed in the days of King
John, without issue.

Robert de Vere, his brother was High Chamberlain of England, and Earl of
Oxford, and sided with the Barons in their wars, against King John, when they
took part with the Dolphin of France, by reason of the Popes Curse.

Hugh de Vere, his son, was high Chamberlain of England, and Earl of
Oxford; he was Viscount Bolbeck, and Lord Samford.

Robert de Vere, his son, succeeded in those Honors.

Robert de Vere, his son, enjoyed the same, and dyed without issue.

John de Vere, the son of Alphonsus de Vere, brother to the last Robert, was
Lord Samford, Vicount Bolbeck, High Chamberlain of England, and Earl of
Oxford.

Thomas de Vere, his son, held all those honorable dignities.

Robert de Vere, his son, being Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, Earl of
Oxford, and high Chamberlain of England, was by king Richard the Second,
created Marquis of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: he died without issue.

Awbrey de Vere, his Uncle, was Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, and Earl of
Oxford: But the inheritance of his high Chamberlainship of England, he
voluntarily surrendered to king Richard the Second, who gave it to his half
brother, John Holland, Duke of Exeter.

Richard de Vere, his son, was Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, and Earl of
Oxferd.

John de Vere, his son, enjoyed those Honors: He and his eldest son Awbrey
de Vere, were attainted, and executed in the time of king Edward the Fourth.

John de Vere, his son, was by King Henry the Seventh, H. 7.
restored to the honors of Bolbeck, Samford, and Scales, was made high
Chamberlain of England, and Earl of Oxford.

John de Vere, his Nephew, by George his brother, succeeded him in all those
Honors: and dyed without issue.

John de Vere, the son of John de Vere, who was the son of Robert de Vere,
who was brother to John de Vere, the twelfth Earl of Oxford, of that name, who
was Father to the before named George, enjoyed all those dignities.

John de Vere, being the heir male of that Family, was the sixth Earl of
that Christian name: He was also Lord Samford, and Badilsmere, Viscount
Bolbeck, and high Chamberlain of England.

Edward de Vere, his son, enjoyed all those Honors.

Henry de Vere, his son, is Lord Samford, and Badilsmere, Viscount Bolbeck,
High Chamberlain of Engl ^d, and Earl of Oxford.

Pembroke.
WAlter Gifford, was by the Conqueror, Conq.
created Earl of Pembroke, and Buckingham.

Walter Gifford, his son, succeeded and died without issue.

Gilbert de Clare was by King Stephen created Earl of Pembroke.

Richard de Clare, surnamed Strongbow, being his son, was Earl of Pembroke,
and died without issue male.

K. John.
William Marshall, Earl Marshall of England, was by King John created Earl of
Pembroke.

William Marshall, his son, enioied all those honors, and died without issue.

Richard Marshall, his brother, succeeded him, and was slain, and died in
Ireland without issue.

Gilbert Marshall, his brother, was Earl Marshall, and of Pembroke, and died
without issue.

Walter Marshall, his brother, was Earl Marshall, and of Pembroke, and died
without issue.

William de Valentia, the son of King John's wife Isabel, and of her second
husband Hugh de Brun, H. 3.
was by his halfe-brother King Henry the Third created Earl of Pembroke.

Aymer de Valentia, his son, was Earl of Pembroke, and was by King Edward
the First made Viceroy of Scotland, and died without issue.

Laurence, Lord Hastings, was by King Edward the Third created Lord of
Abergauenny and Earl of Pembroke.

John Lord Hastings and Abergauenny, was Earl of Pembroke.

John his son succeeded, and died without issue.

Humfrey Plantagenet, the youngest son of King Henry the Fourth, H. 5.
and brother to King Henry the Fifth, was by his brother created Earl of
Pembroke, and Duke of Gloucester. He was also Protector to his Nephew King
Henry the Sixth, and died without issue.

H. 6.
William de la Pole was by King Henry the Sixth created Earl of Pembroke,
Earl, Marquess, and Duke of Suffolk.

Iaspar of Hatfield, the second son of Owen Tuthar, and of Queen Katherine
his wife (widow to King Henry the Fifth) and being halfe-brother to King Henry
the Sixth, H. 6.
was by him created Earl of Pembroke, and by King Henry the Seventh Duke of
Bedford. He died without issue.

E. 4.
William Herbert was by King Edward the Fourth made Lord of Cardisse, and Earl
of Pembroke, and was slain at Banbarie field.

William Herbert, his son, succeeded, and resigned the said Earldom to King
Edward the Fourth.

Edward the Prince, being son and heir apparent to King Edward the fourth, E
4.
was by his father created Earl of Pembroke, Flint, and March. He was King
Edward the Fifth.

Anne Bullen, H. 8.
who was afterward married to King Henry the Eighth, was by him created
Marchioness of Pembroke, and lost her head.

William Lord Herbert, son to Richard Herbert, who was brother to the last
Earl William, E. 6.
was by King Edward the Sixth created Earl of Pembroke.

Henry Lord Herbert, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Williom Lord Herbert, his son, is Lord of Cardiffe, Fitzhugh, Marmion, and
S. Quintens, and Earl of Pembroke.

Richmond.
EVdo was by the Conqueror made Lord of Middleham and Earl of Richmond. Conq.


Allen Fergaunt, surnamed The Red, being his son, was Lord of Middleham, and
Earl of Britain, and of Richmond. He died without issue.

Allen, surnamed The Black, being his brother, succeeded him, and died without
issue.

Stephen, his brother, possessed all those honors.

Allen, his son, by descent enioied the said dignities.

Conan, his son, succeeded him, and had issue, Constance.

Geoffrey Plantagenet, the third son of King Henry the Second, married the
said Constance, and was in her right Earl of Richmond.

Arthur Plantagenet, his son, was Earl of Richmond, and died without issue.

Ralphe Blundeuile, being Count Palatine of Chester, K. John.
was by King John created Earl of Richmond.

Peter Earl of Sauoy, who built the Sauoy, H. 3.
was by King Henry the Third created Earl of Richmond.

John de Dreux, Duke of Britain, son to John the first Duke of Britain, was
by King Edward the First created Earl of Richmond. E. 1.


John de Dreux, his son, was Earl of Richmond.

John de Dreux, his son, succeeded, and died without issue.

Robert de Arthoys, sometimes Earl of Arthoys, but disinherited by Philip de
Valoys the French King, E. 3.
was by King Edward the Third created Earl of Richmond.

John Plantagenet, the son of King Edward the Third, being surnamed John of
Gaunt, being Duke of Lancaster, E. 3.
was by his father created Earl of Richmond.

Henry of Bollingbroke, his son, was Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, and
Earl of Richmond, until he was King Henry the Fourth.

Ralphe Lord Neuil of Rabie Castle, the first Earl of Westmorland, was by King
Henry the Fourth created Earl of Pembroke for his life only. H. 4.


John Plantagenet, Duke of Bedford, and brother to King Henry the Fifth, H. 4.
was by his father created Earl of Richmond. He died without issue.

H. 6.
Edmund of Hadham, called Edmund Tuthar, the eldest son of Owen Tuthar, and
of Queen Katherine his wife, the widow of King Henry the Fifth, and daughter
to Charles the Sixth of France, and half brother to King Henry the Sixth, was
by him created Earl of Richmond. He married Margaret the daughter and heir of
John Beauford, Marquess Dorset, and Duke of Somerset, who was the son of
John Beauford, who was the son of John of Gaunt, by Katherine Swinsford his
third wife, and had issue Henry, who was king Henry the Seventh.

Henry Tuthar, their son, was Earl of Richmond, until he obtained the
Crown, and was King Henry the Seventh.

H. 8.
Henry Fitz-Roy, base son to King Henry the Eighth, was by him created Earl
of Nottingham, and Duke of Richmond, and died without issue in the sixteenth
year of his age.

Rutland.
EDward Plantagenet, the son of Edmund of Langley, the fifth son of King
Edward the Third, and Duke of York, was by his cosen King Richard the Second
created Earl of Rutland, R. 2.
and Duke of Albemarle. After his fathers death he was Duke of York, and was
slain at Agencourt field.

Edmund Plantagenet, brother to Edward, who was afterward King Edward the
Fourth, was Earl of Rutland, and died in his childhood, without issue, being
slain.

H. 8.
Thomas Manors, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Beluoyr, and Trusbut, was created Earl
of Rutland by King Henry the Eighth.

Henry Manors, his son, succeeded his said father.

Edward Manors, his son, enioied those honors, and died without issue male.

John Manors, his brother, succeeded him.

Roger Manors, his son, enioied those honors, and died without issue.

Sir Francis Manors, his brother, is now Lord Roos, Hamlake, and Trusbote, and
Earl of Rutland.

Ryuers.
RIchard Wooduile of Grafton, Knight, married Iaquet the widow of John Duke of
Bedford, Regent of France, and daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh, Earl of S.
Paul. He was by King Henry the sixth made Lord Ryuers. Afterward king Edward
the Fourth married his daughter, the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the widow of Sir John
Gray deceased, by whom he was made Lord Treasurer of England, and Earl Ryuers.
He and his son John were slain by the Commons in an uproar.

Anthony Wooduile, his son, being Lord Scales, and Earl Ryuers, was by King
Richard the Third beheaded unjustly at Pomfret Castle, and died withour issue.

Richard Wooduile, his brother, succeeded him in that Earldom, and died
without issue.

Salisburie.
STephen Patrick of Eureux was by the Conqueror created Earl of Salisburie.
Conq.


William, his son, was Earl of Salisburie, and died without issue male.

William Longspee, the base son of King Henry the Second, by the fair
Rosamond Clifford his Concubine, R. 1.
was by King Richard the First, his halfe-brother, created Earl of Salisburie.

William Longspee, his son, was Earl of Salisburie after his father, and was
slain in the wars in the Holy Land.

Henry Lacy was by King Henry the Third created Earl of Salisburie, H. 3.
and died without issue.

Thomas Plantagenet, the son of Edmund Crowch-backe, being Earl of
Lancaster, was also Earl of Salisburie, Lecester, and Lincoln, and died
without issue.

Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was Earl of Salisburie, Lecester, Lincoln,
and Lancaster.

Henry Plantagenet, his son, was created Duke of Lancaster. He was also
inheritor to all those Earledomes. His daughter and heir, called Blanch, was
married to John of Gaunt: and from them descended the house of the Lancastrians.

E. 4.
William Mountague, Lord of the I Will of Man, was by King Edward the Fourth
created Earl of Salisburie.

William Mountague, his son, being Lord of the I Will of Man, and Lord
Mounthermer, was also Earl of Salisburie, and died without issue.

John Mountague, son to Sir John Mountague, brother to the said William, was
Lord Mounthermer, and Earl of Salisburie. He with others conspired the death
of King Edward the Fourth at Oxford, and was slain.

Thomas Mountague, his son, was Lord Mounthermer, and Earl of Salisburie.

Richard Neuil, the second son of Ralphe Neuil, who was the first Earl of
Westmorland, H. 6.
married Alice the eldest daughter and coheire of the said Thomas, and was by
King Henry the Sixth created Earl of Salisburie. He was taken prisoner in the
battle of Wakefield, by Queen Margaret, wife to King Henry the Sixth, and
lost his head.

Richard Neuil, his son, was Earl of Salisburie, and of Warwick also in the
right of Anne his wife, who was the daughter and heir of William Beauchampe
Earl of Warwick. This was that great Earl of Warwick, who deposed and
raised King Henry the Sixth, and was slain at Barnet Field by King Edward the
Fourth.

Richard Pole, a Knight of Wales, married Margaret Plantagenet, the daughter of
George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the Fourth, which the said
George begot on Isabel the eldest daughter and coheire of the last Richard
Earl of Warwick and Salisburie. She was by Parliament in the fifth year of
King Henry the Eighth restored to those Earledomes: H. 8.
but in Parliament in the one and thirtieth year of King Henry the Eighth,
she with Gerthrude the widow of Henry Courtney, Marquess of Exeter, Reynold
Pole Cardinal, being her son, and others, were attainted of treason, and she
lost her head. She was the last of the name and royal stock of the Family of
the Plantagenets, out of which had issued successively fourteen Kings of
England.

Robert Cecil, the second son of William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, and Treasurer
of England, was by King James created Lord Cecil of Essendeu, in Rutlandshire,
Viscount Cranborne, in Dorsetshire, and Earl of Salisbury.

William Cecil, his son is now Lord of Essenden, Viscount Cranborne, and
Earl of Salisbury.

Shrewsburie.
EDrick, a Saxon surnamed the wild, being Earl of Shrewsbury, was by the
Conqueror dishinherited.

Roger de Mountgomery, Earl of Belesme, in Normandy, Conq.
was by the Conqueror made Earl of Arundel, and of Shrewsbury.

Hugh de Mountgomery, his son, succeeded, and died without issue.

Robert Mountgomery, his brother, being Earl of Shrewsbury, and of Arundel,
was taken by king Henry the first, and deprived of his eyes.

John, Lord Talbot, Strange, Blackmore, Furnivall, and Verdon, H. 6.
was by Henry the sixth, created Earl of Shrewsbury.

John Talbot, his son succeeded in those honors.

John Talbot, his son, was Lord, etc and Earl of Shrewsbury.

George Talbot, his son, was Lord, etc. and Earl of Shrewsbury.

Francis Talbot, his son, was Lord, etc. and Earl of Salisbury.

George, Lord Talbot, his son, succeeded in those honors.

Gilbert, Lord Talbot, his son, is Lord Talbot, Strange, Blackmore, Furnival,
and Verdon, and Earl of Shrewsbury.

Somerset.
OSmond, Bishop of Salisbury, was by the Conqueror, Conq.
made earl of Somerset.

William de Mohun, was by King Henry the first, H. 1
created Earl of Somerset.

Reynold de Mohun, in King John's time, K. Ioh.
received the inheritance of his Grandfather Earl William, and was created
Earl of Somerset, he was disinherited by King Henry the third, because he
took part against him with the Barons in their wars.

John Beauford, the son of John of Gaunt, by Katherine Swinsford his thitd
wife, was by King Richard the second, created Earl of Somerset, and Marquis
Dorset, but the latter of those two, he voluntarily did renounce.

H. 5.
Henry Beauford, his son, was Earl after him.

John Beauford, his brother, was created Earl of Somerset, by K. Henry the
fifth.

H. 6.
Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Earl of Somerset, and by king Henry the
sixth, was created Marquis Dorset, and Duke of Somerset, and was slain at Saint
Albons by Richard Duke of York.

Henry Beauford, his son, was Duke of Somerset, he revolted from King H. the
sixth, to King Edward the fourth, and afterward from King Edward the fourth, to
King H. the sixth, and was by the Yorkish faction, taken Prisoner at
Hexhamfield, and lost his head.

Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Duke of Somerset, and being taken prisoner
at Tewkisbery-field by king Edward the fourth, he lost his head, and had no
issue.

H. 7.
Edmund Tuther, a younger son to king Henry the seventh, was at five years of
his age, created Duke of Somerset, and died without issue at that age.

Henry Fitz-Roy, base son to king H. the eight, was created earl of
Nottingham, and Duke of Somerset, and Richmond, and died without issue.

Edward Seymour, Earl of Hartford, was by his Nephew King Edward the sixth,
created Duke of Somerset, and lost his head.

Sir Robert Carre, was by king James created Viscount Rochester, and Earl of
Somerset.

Southampton.
BEavoys, was (at the Conquest) Earl of Southampton.

E. 1. H. 8.
William Gobion, was by Kng Edward the first, created Earl of Southampton, and
died without issue male.

William Fitz-William, was by King Henry the eight, created Earl of
Southampton, and died without issue male.

E. 6.
Thomas Wryothesley, Lord Chancellor of England, was by King Henry the eighth,
created Baron of Tichfield in Hamshire, and by King Edward the sixth, he was
created Earl of Southampton.

Henry Wryothesley, his son, was Lord Tichfield, and Earl of Southampton.

Henry Wryothesley, his son, is Lord Tichfield, and Earl of Southamton.

Stafford.
RAlph Stafford, was by King Edward the third, E. 3.
created Earl of Stafford.

Hugh Stafford, his son succeeded in that Earldom.

Thomas Stafford, his Grandchild, by Ralph his son, was Earl of Stafford.

William Stafford, his brother, was Earl of Stafford after him.

Edmund Stafford, his brother, was Earl and died without issue.

Humfrey Stafford, his son, was Earl, and by king Henry the sixth, he was
created Duke of Buckingham, and was slain in Yorkshire, in the said kings
quarrel.

Humfrey Stafford, his son, was dignified with those honors.

Humfrey Stafford, his son, H. 7.
succeeded and was beheaded by king Richard the third.

Edward Stafford, his son, was restored by king Henry the seventh, and lost his
head in the reign of king Henry the eighth.

Suffolk.
RAlph Glandvile, Lord of Bromhelme, H. 2.
was by king Henry the second, created Earl of Suffolk.

William Glandvile, his son, being Lord of Bromhelme was Earl of Suffolk.

Gilbert Glandvile, his son, enjoyed those Honors.

Ralph Glandvile, his son, was Lord Bromhelme, and Earl of Suffolk, and died
without issue.

William de Vessey, who married Mauld his Daughter and Heir, E. 2.
was by King Edward the second, created Earl of Suffolk.

Robert de Vfford who married Sarah daughter and heir of the said William, was
by King Edward the third, E. 3.
created Earl of Sufolke.

William de Vfford, his son, being Lord of Eay, and Framlingham, was Earl of
Suffolk.

Michael de la Poole, a man more rich then honorably descended, R. 2.
was Chancellor to king Richard the second, R. 2.
and by him created Earl of Suffolk, and was banished as a corrupter of him,
by his lewd counsel, he died with grief at Paris.

Michael de la Poole, his son, was Lord Wingfield, and Earl of Suffolk, and
dyed at the siege of Harflew.

Michael de l^ Poole, his son, succeeded his father, but died within one month
after.

H. 6.
William de la Poole, his brother was Lord Wingfield, and Earl of Suffolk, he
was by king Henry the sixth, created Earl of Pembrooke, then Marquis of
Suffolk, and last of all Duke of Suffolk, he was banished, taken at Sea, and
lost his head on a boats side.

John de la Poole, his son, was Lord Wingfield, Earl of Pembrooke, and Duke
of Suffolk.

Edmund de la Poole, his son was of a turbulent disposition, and in the fifth
year of Henry the eighth, he was executed for treason.

H. 7.
Charles Brandon, the son of Sir William Brandon, knight (who was
Standard Bearer to the Earl of Richmond, in Bosworth field, and was slain by
king Richard the third) was by Henry the seventh, made Viscount Lisle, H. 8.
and having married king Henry the eight his second sister Mary Queen Dowager of
France, he was by Henry the eight created Duke of Suffolk.

Henry Brandon, his son, was Earl of Lincoln, and Duke of Suffolk, and
died without issue.

Henry Gray, Lord Ferrers of Groby, Lord of Astley, Harington, and Bonvile,
being also Marquis Dorset, and having married Francis who was one of the
Daughters and Coheires of Charles Brandon, E 6.
was by king Edward the sixth, created Duke of Suffolk, and was attainted of
treason whilst Queen Mary reigned: their daughter was the Lady Jane, who
married Guilford Dudley the fourth son of the Earl of Northumberland, K. Ia.
who lost her head.

Thomas Lord Howard, of Walden, second son to Thomas the last Duke of
Northfolke, was by king James created Earl of Suffolk.

Surrey.
Rufus.
William Warren, Earl of Warren in Normandy, married one of the Conquerors
daughters named Goundred, and was by king William Rufus, created Earl of
Surrey.

William Warren, his son, succeeded and was Earl of Surrey.

William Warren, his son, was Earl, and dyed without issue male.

William de Blois, son to king Stephen, being Earl of Mortaigne, Bolloigne,
and Eagle, and being Lord of Lancaster, married Isabel the daughter and heir of
the last Earl William, and was in her right Earl of Surrey, and died without
issue,

Hamlyn Plantagenet, brother to king Henry the second, married the said Lady
Isabel, and was in her right Earl of Surrey, and king Henry the second created
him Earl of Warwick.

William Plantagenet, their son, was Earl of Surrey, and of Warwick.

John Flantagenet, his son, was Earl of Surrey, Warren, and Sussex, and died
without issue male.

John Flantagenet, his brother succeeded him in those Earledomes and died
without issue.

Edmund Fitz-allen, Earl of Arundel, married Alice the daughter of the
aforesaid William, and was in her right Earl of Surrey, and of Warren.

Richard Fitz-allen, their son was earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Sussex.

Richard Fitz-allen, his son, was earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Sussex.

Thomas Fitz-allen, his son, was earl of Surrey, Arundel, and Sussex, and
died without issue.

Thomas Holland, R. 2.
half brother to king Richard the second was by him created earl of Kent, and
Duke of Surrey.

Edmund Holland, his son, was earl and Duke.

John, Lord Mowbray, son to the Duke of Northfolke, was descended from the
earls of Warren and Surrey, H. 6.
and was by king Henry the sixth, dignified with those honors, and also after
his fathers death, he was Duke of Northfolke.

Thomas Howard, the son of John Howard, R. 3.
whom King Richard the third had created Duke of Northfolke, was by the same
King created earl of Surrey, and by king Henry the eighth, Duke of Northfolke.

Thomas Howard, his son, E. 4.
by Anne daughter to king Edward the fourth, was by the same King created earl
Marshal of England, and earl of Surrey.

Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, was in his fathers life time, attainted and
executed and had issue Thomas.

Thomas Howard, his son was Duke of Northfolke, Q. Ma.
and earl of Surrey, after his Grandfathers death, being restored by Q. Mary.

Philip Howard, his son, was Earl of Surrey, and of Arundel.

Thomas Howard, his son, is Earl of Arundel, and of Surrey.

Sussex.
H. 2.
William de Albaney, was Earl of Sussex, and of Arundel, by his marriage with
Queen Adeliza, the widow of king H. the first, which Earledomes were her
jointure, and those honors were given to him by king Henry the second.

William de Albaney, their son succeeded and was Earl.

William de Albaney, his son, was Earl of Sussex, and of Arundel.

William de Albaney, his son, succeeded his father.

Hugh de Albaney, his brother enjoyed those Earledomes, and died without issue.

John Plantagenet, the seventh Earl of Surrey, was Earl of Sussex, and died
without issue male.

John Plantagenet, his brother enjoyed those honors, and died without issue.

H. 8.
Robert Ratclife Lord Fitzwater, Egremount and Burnel, was by King Henry the
eighth, created Viscount Fitzwater, and Earl of Sussex.

Henry Ratclife, his son, enjoyed all those honors.

Thomas Ratclife, his son, was Lord, Viscount, and Earl, and died without
issue.

Henry Ratclife, his brother succeeded in those dignities.

Robert Ratclife, his son, is Lord Egremount and Burnel, Viscount Fitz-water,
and Earl of Sussex.

Warwick.
TArquinius, a Saxon, was Earl of Warwick at the Conquest, he was banished
and died without issue.

Conq.
Henry Beamount, alias Newburgh (brother to Robert Earl of Millent, and of
Leicester) was by the Conqueror created Earl of Warwick.

Roger Beamount, alias Newburgh his son was Earl of Warwick.

William Beamont, alias Newburgh, his son, was Earl of Warwick.

Walteran Beamount, alias Newburgh, his brother, was Earl of Warwick after
him.

Henry Beamount, alias Newburgh, his son, was Earl of Warwick.

Thomas Beamount, alias Newburgh, his son, succeeded his father.

John Marshall married Margerie the sister and heir of the said Thomas, and was
Earl of Warwick in her right, but died without issue.

John de Plessetis, the second husband of the said Margerie, was in her right
Earl of Warwick.

Hugh de Plessetis, their son, succeeded, and died without issue.

William Maledoctus, otherwise Manduyt, Lord of Hanslop, cosen and heir to the
said Margerie, Countess of Warwick, was Earl of Warwick, and died without
issue.

William de Beauchampe married Isabel, sister and heir to the said William, and
had issue, William.

William Beauchampe, their son, was Earl of Warwick.

Guido de Beauchampe, his son, succeeded his father.

Thomas de Beauchampe, his son, was Earl of Warwick.

Thomas de Beauchampe, his son, was Earl of Warwick.

Richard de Beauchampe, his son, was Earl of Warwick. He was Lieu-tenant of
Munster in Ireland, and a great Warrior in France in the days of King Henry
the Fifth, and King Henry the Sixth.

Henry Beauchampe, his son, was Earl of Warwick, and by King Henry the
Sixth he was created Duke of Warwick. H. 6.
He died without issue male.

Richard Neuil, the eldest son of Richard Neuil Earl of Salisburie, married
Anne the daughter and heir of Richard Beauchampe, and was (in her right) Earl
of Warwick. He is termed, The great Earl of Warwick: for he was so
powerful, that he advanced King Edward the Fourth, deposed King Henry the
Sixth, and made him King again; but was at last slain by King Edward the
Fourth at Barnet Field.

George Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and brother to King Edward the Fourth,
married Isabel, the eldest daughter of the said Earl Richard, and was (in her
right) Earl of Warwick. They had issue, Edward, who was beheaded by King
Henry the Seventh, and Margaret, married to Sir Richard Pole. She lost her head
in the one and thirtieth year of the reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Edward Plantagenet, their son, was Earl of Warwick. He lived a prisoner
from his infancy, and was beheaded by King Henry the Seventh, because he
sought to escape with Perkin Warbecke out of the Tower: and died without issue.

John Dudley, Lord Somery, Basset, and Tays, and Viscount Lisle, was by King
Edward the Sixth created Earl of Warwick, E. 6.
and Duke of Northumberland. But in Queen Mary's days he lost his head.

John Dudley, his son, died in his fathers life time, but was Earl of
Warwick, and had issue, Ambrose.

Ambrose Dudley, his son, was Lord Somery, Basset, and Tays, and Earl of
Warwick, and died without issue.

Westmorland.
RAlphe Neuil, Lord Neuil of Rabie Castle, Standrop, and Branspeth, was by King
Richard the Second created Earl of Westmorland.

Ralphe Neuil, his grandchild, viz. the son of Sir John Neuil, was Lord
Neuil of Rabie, Standrop, Branspeth, Warkworth, and Sherrie-hutton, and was
Earl of Warwick.

Ralphe Neuil, his Nephew, by Sir John Neuil his brother, succeeded his uncle
in all those honors.

Ralphe Neuil, his grandchild, by Ralphe Lord Neuil his son, enioied those
Lordships, and was the fourth Earl of Westmorland.

Henry Neuil, his son, was Lord Neuil of Rabie, Standrop, Branspeth, Warkley,
Sherrie-hutton, and Middleham, and Earl of Westmorland.

Charles Neuil, his son, succeeded in all those honors, and was in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth attainted of Treason (by Parliament) with others.

Wilshire.
R. 2.
WIlliam le Scrope was an evil Counselor to King Richard the Second, and was
by him created Earl of Wilshire. But he lost his head.

Aymer Butler, the son and heir apparent of James Butler, the fourth Earl
of Ormond in Ireland, H. 6.
was by King Henry the Sixth created Earl of Wilshire. He died without issue.

John Stafford, the younger son of Humfrey the first Duke of Buckingham, was
by K. Edward the Fourth created Earl of Wilshire. E. 4.


Edward Stafford, his son, was Earl after him, and died without issue.

Henry Stafford, of the house of Buckingham, H. 8.
was by King Henry the Eighth created Earl of Wilshire.

Thomas Bullen was by King Henry the Eighth made Viscount Bullen, and Earl of
Wilshire. H. 8.
He was father to Queen Anne Bullen, and grandfather to Queen Elizabeth.

William Pawlet was by King Henry the Eighth made Lord S. John of Basing, E. 6.
and by King Edward the Sixth he was created Earl of Wilshire, and Marquess
of Winchester.

John Lord S. John, his son, enioied all those honors.

William Pawlet, his son, succeeded his father, and was Lord S. John of
Basing, Earl of Wilshire, and Marquess of Winchester.

William Pawlet, his son, is Lord S. John of Basing, Earl of Wilshire, and
Marquess of Winchester.

Winchester.
CLyton, a Saxon, was at the Conquest Earl of Winchester, and was banished,
and died without issue.

Saer de Quincy, Lord Quincy of Groby, K. John.
was by King John created Earl of Winchester.

Ralphe Quincy, his son, was Earl after him, and died without issue male.

Hugh, Lord le Despencer, E. 2.
was by King Edward the Second created Earl of Winchester, and died without
issue, being beheaded.

Lewys de Burgh, a Burgundian, and Lord of Granthouse, was by King Edward the
Fourth in Parliament created Earl of Winchester, E. 4.
because he had highly favored and relieved King Edward when he fled from the
great Earl of Warwick, and from King Henry the Sixth. This Earldom he
afterward surrendered to King Henry the Seventh.

William Pawlet was by King Henry the eighth made Lord S. John of Basing, and
by King Edward the Sixth Earl of Wilshire, E. 6.
and Marquess of Winchester.

John Pawlet, his son, succeeded in those honors.

William Pawlet succeeded, and was Lord, Earl, and Marquess.

William Pawlet, his son, is Lord S. John of Basing, Earl of Wilshire, and
Marquess of Winchester.

Worcester.
Rufus.
VRsus de Abtot was by King William Rufus created Earl of Worcester.

Walteran de Beamount, Earl of Millent in Normandy, was by King Stephen
created Earl of Worcester. K. Steph.


Thomas Percie, brother to Henry, the first Earl of Northumberland, R. 2.
was by King Richard the Second created Earl of Worcester. He conspired with
his Nephew, Henry Hotspurre, against King Henry the Fourth, and lost his head.

H. 5.
Richard Beauchampe was by King Henry the Fifth created Earl of Worcester, and
died without issue male.

H. 6.
John, Lord Tiptost, was by King Henry the Sixth created first Viscount, and
then Earl of Worcester, but was beheaded for taking part against the said
King, with Edward Earl of March, who was afterward king Edward the Fourth.

E. 4.
Edward Tiptost, his son, was by King Edward the Fourth restored to his
Viscountship, and to the Earldom of Worcester, and died without issue.

H. 8.
Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert and Gower, was by King Henry the eighth
created Earl of Worcester.

Henry Somerset, his son, was Lord Herbert, Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower, and
was also Earl of Worcester.

William Somerset, his son, succeeded in all those honors.

Edward Somerset, his son, is Lord Herbert, Chepstow, Gower, and Ragland, and
Earl of Worcester.

York.
EDrick, a Saxon, was Earl of York at the Conquest. He lost his eyes, and
died a prisoner.

H. 1.
Robert Escouyle was by King Henry the First created Viscount of York.

Robert Escouyle, his son, was Viscount of York.

Edmund Plantagenet, otherwise Edmund of Langley, the fifth son of King
Edward the Third, R. 2.
was by his father created Earl of Cambridge: and by his Nephew, King Richard
the Second, he was made Duke of York.

Edward Plantagenet, his son, was Earl of Rutland, and Duke of Albemarle,
and of York, and was slain at Agincourt Field.

Richard Plantagenet, his brother, another of the sons of the said Edmund,
was Earl of Cambridge, March, and Clare.

Richard Plantagenet, his brother, was Duke of York, etc. and was father to
King Edward the Fourth, and was slain in the wars against King Henry the
Sixth.

Edward, his son, was Earl of March and Vlster, and Duke of York. He
deposed King Henry the Sixth, and was himself King Edward the Fourth.

Richard Plantagenet, his younger son, was Duke of York, E. 4.
and was with his brother King Edward the Fifth murdered in the Tower by king
Richard the Third.

Henry Tuthar, the second son of King Henry the Seventh, H. 7.
was by his father created Duke of York, and himself was King Henry the
Eighth.

Charles Stewart, the only son, and heir apparent of the illustrious Prince,
King James the First, is now Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, York, and
Rossay, and Earl Palatine of Chester.

The Nobility of ENGLAND, ranked according to their degrees and creations.
THe Marquess of Winchester.

EARLS.
1 Earl of Arundell. 2 Earl of Oxford. 3 Earl of Northumberland. 4 Earl of
Shrewesburie. 5 Earl of Kent. 6 Earl of Darbie. 7 Earl of Worcester. 8 Earl
of Rutland. 9 Earl of Cumberland. 10 Earl of Sussex. 11 Earl of Huntington.
12 Earl of Bathe. 13 Earl of Southampton. 14 Earl of Bedsord. 15 Earl of
Penbroke. 16 Earl of Hartford. 17 Earl of Essex. 18 Earl of Lincoln. 19
Earl of Nottingham. 20 Earl of Suffolk. 21 Earl of Northampton. 22 Earl of
Dorset. 23 Earl of Salisburie. 24 Earl of Exeter. 25 Earl of Mountgomerie.
VICECOVNTS.
1 VIcecount Mountague. 2 Vicecount Lisley. 3 Vicecount Rochester. 4 Vicecount
Cramborne.
BARONS.
1 LOrd Abergauennie. 2 Lord Audeley. 3 Lord Zouch. 4 Lord Willoughbie of
Eresbie. 5 Lord Laware. 6 Lord Barkley. 7 Lord Morley. 8 Lord Stafford. 9 Lord
Scroope. 10 Lord Dudley. 11 Lord Sturton. 12 Lord Herbert of Chepstow. 13 Lord
Darcy of the North. 14 Lord Mounteagle. 15 Lord Sands. 16 Lord Vaux. 17 Lord
Wyndsor. 18 Lord Wentworth. 19 Lord Mordant. 20 Lord Cromwell. 21 Lord Euers.
22 Lord Wharton. 23 Lord Rich. 24 Lord Willoughbie of Parham. 25 Lord
Sheffield. 26 Lord Paget. 27 Lord Darcy of Chiche. 28 Lord Howard of Effingham.
29 Lord North. 30 Lord Chandos. 31 Lord Hunsdon. 32 Lord S. John of Bletsho. 33
Lord Burleigh. 34 Lord Compton. 35 Lord Norris. 36 Lord Howard of Walden. 37
Lord Knowles. 38 Lord Wotton. 39 Lord Elsmer, Lord Chancellor of England. 40
Lord Russell. 41 Lord Gray of Groby. 42 Lord Peter. 43 Lord Harrington. 44 Lord
Danvers. 45 Lord Gerard. 46 Lord Spencer. 47 Lord Say and Sele. 48 Lord Denny.
49 Lord Stanhope. 50 Lord Carew. 51 Lord Arundell of Warden. 52 Lord Cauendish.
53 Lord Knyuet. 54 Lord Clifton.
The names of Baronets made by his Majesty at several times, as follows.
1 SIr Nicholas Bacon, of Redgraue, in the County of Suff. Knight. 2 Sir
Richard Molleneux, of Sefton, in the County of Lancaster, knight. 3 Sir Thomas
Manucel, of Margan, in the County of Clamorgan, knight. 4 George Sherley, of
Staunton, in the County of Leicester, Esquire. 5 Sir John Stradling, of S.
Donats, in the County of Clamorgan, knight. 6 Sir Francis Leake, of Sutton, in
the County of Darby, knight. 7 Thomas Pelham, of Laughton, in the County of
Sussex, Esquire. 8 Sir Thomas Howghton, of Howghton Tower in the County of
Lancaster, knight. 9 Sir Henry Hobart, of Intwod, in the County of Northfolk,
knight. 10 Sir George Booth, of Dunham Massy, in the County of Chester,
knight. 11 Sir John Payton, of Iselham, in the County of Cambridge knight. 12
Lyonel Talmach, of Helmingham, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire. 13 Sir
Gervase Clifton, of Clifton in the County of Notting^ knight. 14 Sir Thomas
Gerard, of Bryn, in the County of Lancaster, knight. 15 Sir Walter Aston, of
Tyxhal, in the County of Stafford, knight. 16 Sir George Trenchard, of
Wolu^ton in the County of Dors. knig. 17 Philip Knevit, of Buckinham, in the
County of Northfolk, Esquire. 18 Sir John Strangewayes of Melbury, in the
County of -- knight. 19 Sir John S. John of Lydeard Tregos^, in the County of
Wiltesh. knight. 20 John Shelley, of Michelgroue, in the County of Sussex,
Esquire.
1 SIr John Savage, of Rock-Sauage, in the County of Chest. knight. 2 Sir
Francis Barrington, of Barrington Hall in Essex, Knight. 3 Henry Barkley, of
Wymondham, in the County of Leicest. Esquire. 4 William Wentworth, of
Wentworth Woodhouse, in the County of York Esquire. 5 Sir Richard Musgraue,
of Hartley Castle in the County of Westmerland, knight. 6 Edward Seymor of
Bury Castle, in the County of Devon. Esquire. 7 Sir Moyle Fince, of Castwel,
in the County of Kent, knight. 8 Sir Anthony Coap, of Hanwel, in the County
of Oxford, knight. 9 Sir Thomas Vavasor, of Skellingthorp, in the County of
Lincoln, knight. 10 George Greysley, of Drakelow, in the County of Darby,
Esquire. 11 Paul Tracy, of Stanway, in the County of Gloucester, Esquire. 12 Sir
John Wentworth, of Gosfield, in the County of Essex, knight. 13 Sir Henry
Bellasis, of Newborough, in the County of York, Knight. 14 William Constable,
of Flamborough, in the County of York, Esquire. 15 Sir Thomas Leigh, of
Stoneley, in the County of Warw. knight. 16 Sir Edward Noel, of Brook, in the
County of Rutland, knight. 17 Sir Robert Cotton, of Cunnington, in the County
of Huntington, Knight. 18 Sir Robert Cholmondleigh, of Cholmondleigh, in the
County of Chester, knight. 19 John Molleneux of Teuershalt, in the County of
Notting. Esquire. 20 Sir Francis Wortley, of Wortley, in the County of York,
knight. 21 Sir George Sauile, the elder of Thornhil, in the County of York,
knight. 22 William Knyneton, of Myrraston, in the County of Darb. Esquire: 23
Sir Philip Woodhouse, of Kemberley Hall, in the County of Northfolke, knight.
24 Sir William Pope, of Wilcot, in the County of Oxford, knight. 25 Sir James
Harington, of Ridlington, in the County of Rutl. knight. 26 Sir Henry Sauile,
of Metherley, in the County of York, knight. 27 Henry Willoughby, of Ryseley,
in the County of Darby, Esquire. 28 Sir Robert Dormer, of Wing, in the County
of Bucking. knight. 29 Lodwick Tresham, of Rushton, in the County of
Northampton. Esquire. 30 Thomas Blundeuel of Dene, in the County of Northampt.
Esquire. 31 Sir George Saint Paul of Snacrefford in the County of Lincoln,
knight. 32 Sir Philip Tirwhite of Stamesfield, in the County of Linc. knight.
33 Sir Roger Dallison, of Lawghton, in the County of Linc. knight. 34 Sir
Edward Carre, of Slesford, in the County of Lincoln, knight. 35 Sir Edward
Hussy, of Hommington, in the County of Lincoln, knight 36 Le Strange
Mordont, of Massingham parua, in the County of Northfolke, Esquire. 37 Thomas
Bendish, of Steeple Bamsteed, in the County of Essex, Esquire 38 Sir John Win,
of Guidder, in the County of Carnaruon, knight. 39 Sir William Throgmorton, of
Tortworth, in the County of Gloucester, knight. 40 Sir Richard Worsley, of
Appl. dorcombe, in the County of Southampton, knight. 41 John Read of Mitton
in the County of Worcester, Esquire. 42 Richard Fleetwood, of Calwish, in the
County of Stafford, Esquire. 43 Thomas Spencer, of Y^^^^ngton, in the County
of Oxford, Esquire 44 Sir John Tuffton, of Hothefield, in the County of Kent
knight. 45 Sir ^amuel Payton, of Knowleton in, the County of Kent knight. 46
Sir Charles Morrison, of Coshiobury, in the County of Hertford, knight. 47 Sir
Henry Baker, of Sissingburst, in the County of Kent knight. 48 Roger Appleton,
of Southbemflete, in the County of Essex Esquire. 49 Sir William Sidley, of
Alisford, in the County of Kent knight. 50 Sir William Twisden, of East
Peckham, in the County of Kent, Knight. 51 Sir Edward Hales, of Woodchurch, in
the County of Kent, knight. 52 William Monings, of Walwarcher, in the County
of Kent, Esquire. 53 Thomas Mildemay, of Masham, in the County of Essex,
Esquire. 54 Sir Will. Mainard, of Easton parua, in the County of Essex,
knight. 55 Henry Lee, of Quarrendam, in the County of Bucking. Esquire.
1 John Portman, of Orchard, in the County of Somerset, Esquire. 2 Sir
Nicholas Saunderson, of Saxby, in the County of Lin. knight. 3 Sir Miles Sands
of Willerton, in the I Will of Elie. 4 William Goswick, of Willington, in the
County of Bedf. Esquire, 5 Thomas Puckering of Weston, in the County of
Hartford, Esquire. 6 John W^ay, of Glentworth, in the County of Lincoln,
Esquire. 7 Sir William Ayloffe, of Braxsteed magna in the County of Essex,
Knight. 8 Sir Marmaduke Wyuell, of Constable Burton, in the County of York,
Knight. 9 John Peshall, of Horsley in the County of Stafford, Esquire. 10
Francis Inglefield of Wotton Basset, in the County of Wilt. Esquire. 11 Sir
Thomas Ridgway of Torre, in the County of Deuon. Knight. 12 William Essex, of
Beaucot, in the County of Berk. Esquire. 13 Sir Edward Gorges, of Langford, in
the County of Wilt. Knight. 14 Edward Deuereux, of Castle Bramwide, in the
County of Warwick, Esquire. 15 Sir Reynold Methum, of Buckconnock, in the
County of Cornwall, Knight. 16 Sir Thomas Holte, of Aston, near Brimingham, in
the County of Warwick Knight. 17 Sir Harbotle Grimston, of (...) in the
County of Essex, Knight.
Honor virtutis praemium. John Speed, 5.
Bishoprics. Counties subject to their several Jurisdictions. Parishes in each
several Bishopric. Canterbury Arch. Bish. Kent. 257 Rochester. 98 London.
Essex, Middlesex, Hertfordshire part
623 Lincoln. Lincolneshire, Leicestershire, Huntington, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire part.
1255 Chichester. Hertfordshire part, Sussex.
250 Winchester. Hamshire, Surrey, Weight Isle, Gernsey Isle, Iersey Isle.
362 Salisbury. Wilshire, Barkshire.
248 Exeter. Devon, Cornwall, Exeter City.
623 Bath and Wells. Somerset. 388 Gloucester. Glocestershire. 267 Worcester.
Worcestershire, Warwickshire part
241 Lichfield and Couentrey. Warwickshire part Staffordshire, Darbyshire,
Shropshire part.
557 Hereford. Shropshire part. Herefordshire.
313 Ely. Cambridgeshire, Ely Isle.
141 Norwich. Northfolke, Suffolk.
1121 Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195 Peterborough Northamptonshire Rutlandshire.
293 Bristow. Dorsetshire, Bristow.
236 Landaff. Glamorganshire, Monmothshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire.
177 S. David. Pembrokeshire, Caermardenshire.
308 Bangor. Caernervonshire, Anglesey Isle, Merioneth, and Denbighshire part.
107 S. Assaph. Denbighshire part. Flintshire part.
121

York Province.
Bishoprics. Counties subject to their several Jurisdictions. Parishes in
each several Bishopric. York Archbish. Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire.
581 Chester. Chesshire, Richmondshire, Cumberland part, Lancashire, Flintshire
part.
256 Carelyell. Cumberlandshire part. Westmerland.
93 Durham. Durham, Northumberland, Man Isle,
135

Bishoprics in England and Wales Shires in England and in Wales Parishes in
England and in Wales 26. 63. 8083.

John Speed, 801.
At the time of the first dissoluing of Religious houses in England, there were
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, 21. Deanries, 11. Arch-deaconries, 60.
Dignities and Prebends in Cathed: Churches, 364. Benefices, 8803. Religious
Houses, 65: Hospitals, 110. Colleges, 96. Chauntries and free-Chappells, 2374.
Their Rates were per annum 320180.
A Table containing the provisions of the Spanish Armado, against England, in
Anno Domini 1588. and Anno ELIZ. REG. 30.
Leaders Provinces ayding. Galliasses and gallions Ships and Hulks. Pinaces and
Caruels Great Ordinance. Saylors. Soldiers. Galley slaves. John Speed, 858.
Richard Hakluyt.
D. Medina Sidonia. Portugal. 10 2 300 1300 3300 Diego de Mandrana. Portugal. 4
20 360 888 Ioh. Martynes de Richaldes. Biscai, 10 4 250 700 2000 Michael de
Oquendo, Guipusco, 10 4 310 700 2000 Pedro de Valdez, Andolozia. 10 1 280 800
2400 Martin de Vertendona, Italy, 10 310 800 2000 Diego Floris de Valdez,
C^stile 14 2 380 1700 2400 John Lopez de Medina, Medina, 23 400 700 3200 Hugo
de Moncado. Naples 4 200 460 870 1200 Antonio Buccado. Mendoza. 22 193 574 488

Shires in England.
BArkeshire. Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Cambridgeshire. Cheshire. Cornwall.
Cumberlandshire. Darbyshire. Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Durham, B. Essex.
Gloucester. Hampshire. Herefordshire. Hertfordshire. Huntingtonshire. Kent.
Lancaster. Le^^istershire. Lincolneshire Middlesex. Northamptonshire.
Northfolke. Northumberland. Nottinghamshire. Oxfordshire. Rutlandshire.
Shropshire. Somersetshire. Staffordshire. Suffolk. Surrey. Sussex. Warwick.
Westmerland. Wilshire. Worcestershire. Yorkshire.
Shires in Wales.
ANglesey. Brecknock. Carmarden. Carnaruon. Cardigan. Denbigh. Flint.
Clamorgan. Merioneth. Monmoth. Mountgomery. Pembroke. Radnor.
The battle betwixt the Conqueror, 1. Conq.
and King Harold, was stricken the 14 of October 1066. in which were slain
about 68000 English men. Speed, 415- and almost above 6000. Stow. 128.
48 H. 3. Lewis. 1263 49 H. 3. Euersham. 1264 25 Edw. 1. Barwick. 1296 7 Edw.
2. Estriuelin. 1313 13 Edw. 2. Burgh-bridge. 1320 27 Edw. 2. Fanrike. 1298 20
Edw. 3. Cressey. 1345 30 Edw. 3. Poyters. 1355 3 H. 4 Shrewsbury. 1401 3 H. 5.
Agencourt. 1414 9 H. 5. Blangy. 1420 3 H. 6. Vernoyle. 1423 6 H. 6. Herings.
1427 34 H. 6. Saint Albons. 1456 37 H. 6. Bloar-heath. 1459 38 H. 6.
Northampton. 1460 39 H. 6. Wakefield. 1460 39 H. 6. Saint Albons. 1460 39 H. 6.
Towton 1460 in which were 109000. Englishmen and of them were slain 37000.
men. 2 Edw. 4. Exham. 1462 8 Edw. 4. Banbery. 1468 8 Edw. 4. Looscotes. 1468 in
it 10000 men were slain. 10 Edw. 4. Barnet. 1470 in it were slain 10000. men.
10 Edw. 4. Tewksbury. 1470 3 Rich. 3. Bosworth. 1485 3 H. 7. Stoke. 1487 5 H.
7. Fongiers. 1488 12 H. 7. Black Heath. 1496 5 H. 8. Flodden. 1513 34 H. 8.
Solemn Mass. 1542

Especial notes worthy of observation.
13 H. 1. The first parliament was in Anno 1112 19 H. 2. Ireland was conquered
in Anno 1172 4 Iohannis, Normandy was lost by King John 1202 43 H. 3. and the
title thereto released 1258 11 E. 1. Wales was subdued Anno 1283 25 E. 1.
Scotland surrndred to King E. the third as to the supreme Lord thereof. 1296
19 E. 3 The order of the Garter devised 1344 14 E. 3. England first quartred
the arms of France 1339 21 E. 3. Calice was won in Anno 1346 5 Mariae.
Calice was lost in Anno 1557 34 E. 3. The French title on Composition was
released 1359 5 H. 5 Normandy was won in Anno 1416 8 H. 5 King H. the fifth
was proclaimed heir apparent and Regent of France in Anno 1419 10 H. 6. Henry
the sixth was crowned King of France in the City of Paris. 1431 27 H. 6.
France was lost in Anno 1449 28 H. 6. Normandy was lost in Anno 1449 31 H. 6.
Aquitaine, etc. were lost in Anno 1453 4 R. 2. Wat Tylors rebellion 1380 29 H.
6. Jack Cades Rebellion 1450 4 H. 8. Navarre surprised by the Spaniards 1512
A TABLE FOR THE READY finding of all the material things which are contained
in the Histories of the before named TWENTY KINGS.
A
ADela. 8 Affability. 297 Agencourt. 182 Aid pur file marrier. 23 Albanie Duke
forsakes Scotland. 398 Alexander King of Scots. 81 Ambush. 184 Anne Bullen.
389. 403 Anne of Cleue. 408 Anselmus. 14. 15. 20 Appeals to Rome. 14. 54
Appleyard. 362 Archb. strive. 7 Archers. 184 Arms of France. 109 Arms of
London. 140 Armies great. 182. 235. 260. 145 Armies. 3. in France. 361 Armies
afflicted. 98 Armies two in France. 416 Arthur Plantagenet. 51 He is drowned.
53 Articles of peace. 129. 200. 286 335 Articles against King Richard the
Second. 156 Articles against King Henry the Fourth. 169 Articles against the
Duke of Somerset. 244 Articles against the Clergy. 381. 404 Articles against
Wolsey. 383 Arundell beheaded. 100 Arundell Archb. 144 Ask. Robert. 406
Assifes. 34 Auricular confession. 58 Awdley. 254
B
BAgot. 155 Bailiol. 82. 83 Banishment. 86. 91 95. 152. 150 154. 157. 246
Bardolph. 173. 365 Barkley. 362. 365. 396 Barons wars. 66. Distressed, 58.
Overthrown, 72. 74. 96. Executed, 97 Barnes. Lord. 365 Basset. 69 Battles of
The Conqueror, in which were slain of the English 67974. and of the Normans
6013. John Stow, page 128. Nice. 22 Lewys. 72. 74 Euersham. 74 Fanrike. 85
Estryulin. 93 Cressey. 119 Poyters. 126 Shrewesburie. 191 Agencourt. 182
Blangy. 206 Vernoyle. 215 Herings. 221 S. Albons. 250 Bloar-heath. 254
Wakefield. 259 Northampton. 257 Exham. 264 Banburie. 271 Loose-coats. 273
Barnet. 280 Tewkesburie. 283 Bosworth. 324 Stoke. 331 Blackheath. 344 Flodden.
363
Beauchampe. 231. 233 Beauchamp Duke of Warwick. 237 Beamount. 183. 257
Becket, and his doings. 37. etc. Belasme. 20 Benevolence. 284. 335. 374. 417.
Betrayed. 301 Bishop made an Earl. 10 Blunt. 254 Body of King Edward the
Fourth. 178 Bold. 363 Bolleyn, 336. taken. 417 Bolleyn. Anne. 389. 403 Bolleyn.
Sir Tho. 365 Bolleyn. Lord Rochford. 400 Bollingbroke in Arms. 155 Boothe. 363
Booty, rich. 396 Borrowing. 109 Bounty. 45. 18. 121. 128 186. 288 Bourchier.
198. 282. 233 363. 344. 392 Brandon. 325. 365 Is valiant in France. 396
Brandon, Henry Earl of Lincoln. 400 Breast yielded up. 151 Brearton. 363
Brembere. 147. 149 Briberie. 99 Bristow. 100 Britain. Brook, Lo. Cobham. 248
256. Lo. Brook. 392 Buckingham Duke. 257 Buckingham Duke beheaded. 393
Buildings of Forts. 4. 28 Bulls from Rome. 68. 69 387 Bull, Sir Stephen. 362
Bulmer. 362. 406 Burbon ransomed. 227 Burgh, Lord. 62 Burgoine, 285. is angry,
286 Burial denied. 8 Burial maligned. 228 Burnell, Lord. 181 Burning. 358
Butler. 324. 363 Bygot, Sir Fra. 406
C
CAde Jack. 247 Calice. 121. 123. 124 173. 230 Cambridge, Richard. 180 Camoys,
Lord. 174 Campeius, 367. etc. 379 380 Cane. 190. 243 Captain Cobbler. 405
Carre. 365 Cardinal of Winchester. 217. 218 Cardinal Wolsey. 365. etc.
Cardinal Poole. 406. 407 Carew, Sir John. 358 Carew, Sir Nicholas. 406 Carew,
Sir George. 418 Castles builded. 28. 178 Castles razed. 35 Challenges. 173. 223
Charles is Emperor. 391 Charters. 208 Chair of Scotland. 86 Chester Palatine.
64 Children disobedient. 36 Cholmley. 363 Churches robbed, and wronged. 4. 14.
49. 80. 138 Circuits. 34 Clare, Gilbert. 76 Clarence. 268. 275. 290 Clarvys.
363 Clergy articled. 381 Clergy fear the Praemunire. 388. and are liberal.
388 Clifford. 138. 260. 281. 339. 340 Clifford Earl of Cumberland. 400
Clifton, Sir Geruase. 233 282 Colleges, of W^olsey. 386 Combats. 125. 154
Commission de les douz pyers. 67. etc. Commissioners Traitors. 145. 368
Commissioners. 114. 152 32. 32 Commissioners, 403 Compassion, 44 Complaint of
the Parliament, 133 Coniers, 270 Constable, 262. 406 Constable of London, 71
Constancy, 279 Contention with the Scots 411 Coo, 396 Copland, 122 Cornwall,
89 Cornish Rebels, 345 Cover le fiew, 4 Counsel received, 91. 391
Counterfeits, Poydras, 93 Magdalen, 165. Lambert, 234. Warbecke, 333. etc.
Courtney, E. of Devo^. 392 Courtesy. 297 Cowardice. 84 Courage. 171. 223. 233
234 Croffts 289 Crown. 164. 225. 258. 277. 328. 402 Crowned twice. 49 Crown
resigned. 156 Crown on the pillow. 174 Cornwall. 406. 407. 409 Cruelty. 138.
13. 343 Cuer de Lion. 44 Culpepper. 410 Cumberland Scottish. 28 Curse. 41. 55.
57. 62 67 107 Curthose rebelleth. 7. invadeth and compoundeth. 9. He rebelleth
and compoundeth. 12. 19 He is subdued. 19. and dis-eyed. 20 Cyprus. 46. 47
D
DAcres acquitted, 402 Dacres. 412 Damnation. 58 Danes. 6 Dane gelt. 18. 28
Dacres. 260 Darcie. 262 Dartmouth. 136. 276 Dartwell. 110. 114 115 Dawney. 363
Defensor fidei. 357. 393 Degrading. 265 Delawarre, Lord 392 Delues. 283
Demands. 235. 411 Depopulation. 5 Deposed. 101. 160 Derby. E. 392
Descriptions. 8. 59. 239 297 298. 420 Deuorce. 389 Disarming. 3 Discipline
Warlike. 35 Discord. 73. 132 Disdained. 413 Disobedient children. 36
Disobedience punished. 36 49 Dissension. 89. 128 189 191. 229 Distrust. 64
Dolphin scoffeth. 179 Donn. 363 Dorset Marquis 392 Douglas marriage 430 Douz
Pyers. 66. 69 Drunkenness. 22 Drowned. 22. 30. 53. 359 H. 8. almost drowned.
400. Mary Rose. 118 Dudly. 351. 356 Duglas 171 Duke of Guyan. 68 Duke of
Ireland. 149 Durant. 55 Durham burnt. 111 Diet moderate. 18. 28 Dymock. 273
Dynham. 256 Dyrham executed. 410
E
EAarnesly, 84 Echinham. 363 Egremount. 257 Elianor Queen 43 Emperor debased
59. and excommunicated. 14 Emperor Charles. 391 Empson. 351. 356 England given
to the Pope 56 England is admired. 225 Englishmen oppressed. 6 10. 14
Enclosures 364 Enlargement. 73. 85. 128 277 Enteruiew. 200 227. 273 Escape. 272
Escape of Morton. 317 Escape of King Edward the fourth, page 271 Escape of
W^rbeck 350 Escape of Edward E. of W. 350 Estrevlin. 85 Eueringham 362
Excommunication. 14. 58 Execution of Lluellin. 81 Arundel. 100. 152 Spencers.
100 Gaueston. 91 Poydras. 93 Warbeck, 350 Edward Earl of Warw. 350 Two and
twenty Barons. 92 Harkley, Earl of Carlyel. 98 Stapleton, D. of Exeter, 99
Earl of Kent. 104 Mortimer. 104. 105 Fifteen hundred Rebels, 141 Brembre, 149
Trefilian, 149 Green, 155 Bush, 155 Scroop, Earl of Wilshire, 155 Earl of
Worcester, 171 Scroop Archbishop of York 173 Mowbrey D. of Norfolk, 173 Percy
Earl of Northum. 171. 174 Hastings Lord. 173 Fawconbridge, 173 Bardolf, 174
Rich. Earl of Cambridge, 180 Henry Lord Scroop, 180 Sir Thomas Gray, 18
Inhabitants of Cane, 191 At Montz. 219 Frr Perjury, 232 Michael de la Poole,
246 Lord Scales, 258 Rich. Neuil, Earl of Salisbury, 259 Owen Tuthar, 260
Courtney, Earl of Devon. 260 Suffolk, 244 Earl of Oxford, 263 Sir Awbrey de
Vere, 263 Hen. D. of Somerset, 265 Tayboys, 265 Roos, 265 Molines, 265
Hungerford, 265. 410 Henry Neuil, 265 Wentworth, 265 Tunstall, 265 Sir Ralph
Gray, 265 Earl Rivers, 271 Humfrey Lord Stafford, 171 Lord Wels, 273 Sir
Thomas Dymock, 273 Sir Robert Wells, 274 Sir Henry Stafford, 529 L. Hastings in
the Tower, 307 Earl Rivers, 307 Richard Lord Gray, 307 Sir Thomas Vaughan, 307
Duke of Buckingham, 317 393 Sir William Stanley, 341 Humfrey Stafford, 329
Empson, 356 Dudly, 356 Sir Thomas Moore, 402 Fisher Bishop of Rochester 402
Queen Anne Bullen, 403 and Queen Katherine Howard, 410 Lord Howard for his
marriage, 403 Execution of Rebels, 406 Marquis of Exeter, 406 Lord Dacres, 406
Lord Hussy, 406 Friar Forest, 406 Carew, Sir Nich. 406 Margaret Countess of
Salisbury, 407 Gerthrude Marchiones of Exeter, 407 Leonard Lord Gray, 410
Cromwell, 410 Francis Dyrham, and Thomas Culpeper, 410 Lady Rochford. 410 Thomas
Earl of Surrey, 420
Exeter, 349. 347 Exeter Marquess, 400 Exton, Sir Nich. 142 Extortion, 86
F
FAlse friend, 153 Famine, 172. 94. 193 Fanhope 183 Fastolfe, 183 Fawconbridge,
165. 173 131. 164 Feast solemn, 113 Ferdinando, 357 Fisher wrongs the
Parliament, 382 Fifteenes denied, 142 Fifteenes conditional. 144 Fitz-William.
161. 196. 406 Fitz-Warren. 192 Fitz-Water. 112. 206 Flatterers. 18 Flattery.
151 Flight. 277 Flodden Field. 161 Forgusa. 206 French title. 105. 178
Frenchmen in Wales. 167 French faint-harted. 181 French unthankful. 414 Friar
Forest. 406 Funerals. 178
G
Guard, Yeomen. 327 Gascoine recovered. 63 Gascoine, Sir William. 362 Gauelkind.
3 Gaueston. 86. 89. 90. 91. 92 Glendor. 166. 172 Glocesters practices. 299
Gloucester murdered. 240 Glottenry. 18 Government changed. 290 Gough. 242 Green.
155 Gray degraded. 265 Gray, Sir Thomas. 180 Gray, Lord Richard. 307 Gray, Lord
Leonard. 407 410 Griffith. 324. 362 Grobyn of Grace. 118
H
HAll, Sir Philip, 215 Hall, Sir David, 243 Hampton Court. 375 Harflew. 241
Harkley. 98 Harold. 1. 2 Hartford Earl. 406 415 Hastings. 173. 307 Hastings,
Lord. 305 Hastings Earls of Huntington. 385 Henalt reuolteth. 156 Henry
Hotspurre. 167. 169 Henry Fitz-Roy. 400 Herbert, Earl of Pembroke. 270
Herbert, Lord. 392 Herings. 221 Holland, Sir Thomas, 117 153. 164. 181 Holland,
Sir John. Holy Land. 45. 77. 108. 174. 141. 153. 164. 189 Holy Pilgrims. 405
Hongerford. 222. 265 Hostages. 3. 73. 130. 390 Howard, Sir Edw. 358 359 Howard,
Sir Tho. Earl of Surrey. 360. 361. 394. He dies. 400 Howard, Lord, executed
for marying, etc. 403 Hunters. 5. 6. 16 Hunting. 5
I
Jack Cade. 247 Jane, Countess of Henalt. 109. 111 Jacques Dartuell. 110. 114
115 Ierningham. 396. 397 Jerusalem. 17. 47 Jest. 284 Jewels. 90 Images defaced.
406 John of Gaunt. 132. 150 Ingratitude. 14. 44 Insanum Parliamentu^. 66
Interdiction. 55. 58 Inuesture of Bishop. 22. 23 Ireland conquered. 36.
rebelleth. 407. King of Ireland. 410 Judges followed the Court. 5 Judges and
Justices. 355 Judges banished. 150
K
KEntishmen. 3 Holy maid of Kent. 402 King Henry the Eighth stout. 404 Keryell.
232. 242 King Knighted. 217 King Richard the Second called to a reckoning. 143
King of Castile entertained. 352 King of Ireland. 410 Knights Fees. 6 Knowles.
132. 166 Knyuet, Sir Thomas. 358
L
LAmbert. 324 Landoys. 289. 317 Langton. 54 Lanfrank. 9 Laterane. 58 Laws
severe. 4 Laws mitigated. 18 Laws restored. 18. 63 Laws against robbers. 18
Laws refined. 34 Lawrence. 363 League broken. 64. 213 Legates. 38 41. 55
Lewknor. 283 Liberality. 18. 45. 121 128. 186. 288 Little John. 50 Lluellen.
80 Lomley. 406 London against Mauld the Empress. 29 London with the Barons,
70. 149 Londoners submit themselves. 75 London should have been burnt. 74 A
rebellion in London. 71. 76 Londons liberties restored. 85 London pleases the
Rebels. 138 Londons Arms. 140 Constables of London. 71 London receives King
Edward the Fourth. 280 London. 84. 140. 148. 180 Londoners graced by king
Edward the Fourth. 297 Londons Mayor. 59 London bridge. 59 Longchampe. 46. 47.
48 Louell, Lord. 329 331 Luther. 393 Lion, Richard. 138
M
MAgistrates over Priests. 28. 38 Magna Charta. 63 Malcolme slain. 11 Manners
Earl of Rutland. 400 Manors. 5 Manny, Sir Walter. 124 Merchants, 353. vexed,
401. 414 Merchant strangers. 34 251. 389. 489 Marquess Dorset. 357 Marriages of
Wards. 63 Marriage of K. Henry the Seventh. 327 Marriage of K. Edward the Fourth.
267 Marriage of Prince Arthur. 350 King Henry the Eighth his widow. 355 Marriage
with Scotland, 351 Marriage with Anne of Cleue. 404 Marriage with Lewys the 12.
of France. 364 Marriage with Scotland broken off. 415 Mart in Flanders. 125 340.
346 Marney, Sir Henry. 392 Martial feats. 103 Martin Sward, 331 Mary Rose
drowned. 418 Mauld marieth Plantagenet. 24 Mauld the Empress. 19 23. 24. 29
Measures. 18 Mercy. 44 Metham. 362 Miracle. 405 Michael de la Pole. 142 144
Molynes. 181. 265 Money scarce. 108 Money borrowed. 109 Morbeck. 127 Morgan.
324 Morley, Lord. 392 Morleys taken and burnt. 393 Morton, 332. 311. 315. 317.
331 Mortimer, Sir Roger. 71 103 Mortimer beheaded. 105 Mortimer proclaimed, 141
Mortmaine, 82 Mountague, or Mountacute, 216. 220 216 265. 266 Mountford, 72
Mountioy, 398 Murders of. Becket, 41 Edward the second, page 101. 105 Jacques
Dartwell, 114 Richard the second, page 160 Ho. D. of Gloucester, 240 158 Lord
Scales, 258 Archbishop of Canterbury, 139 John Duke of Burgoine, 199 Henry the
sixth page 283 George Duke of Clarence, 290. 295 Lord Wenlock, 295 Prince
Edward, 293 Edward the fifth, and Richard Duke of York, 312 Rutland, 281
Murder by the Lord Darcy, 406 Murder revenged, 307 318. 328 Musgraue William,
412
N
Navarre taken, 357 Neck broken, 8. 81 Neuill Sir John, 260 New Forest, 5
Nobles created, 152 240. 363. 267. 327. 385 400. 406 Nobility despised, 142
Nobility wasted, 497 Mowbray, 242 Normandy, 53. 68. 117 Normandy lost 53.
won 168. lost 238 Normauile, 363 Northfolk Duke High Steward, 392 Notes
especial, 293 Niceness banished, 18
O
Oath to the succession, and of fidelity, 24 56. 69 Oath to observe etc, 24
Oath broken, 27. 145. 279 34 Oath of the Scots, 86 Oath touching Gaveston, 89
Obstinacy, 41 Odo, 10 Officers examined in Parliament, 144 Officers evil, 133
Officers displaced, 144 170 Opinion of the Universities, 386. 389 Overthrows
of Harold, 2 Rebels, 6. 7. 273 Scots, 11. 83. 171 Welshmen, 11. 12 13 Robert
Mowbray, 13 Barons, 20. 96 Prince Edwnrd, 71 King Stephen, 29 Fifteen thousand
Genowayes, 119 French, 58. 371. 120. 187 King Edward 2, page 93 94 Percies, 171
English, 206. 222. 242 Miraculous, 216 King H. 6. page 250. 257 266. 280 Duke
of York, 259 James the fourth King of Scots, 362 Frenchmen, 418
Owen Glendor, 166. famished, 172 Owen Tuthar, 260 Earl of Oxford, 133 Duke of
Burgundy thrice overthrown in one year. 289 John Earl of Oxford, 144 Oxford
Earl,
P
PAgeants, 376 Pandulphus. 55. 56 Partiality, 71 Pardon crafty, 153 Parents
honored, 43 Paris is English, 204. and reuolteth, 229 Parliament and the King
strive, 142. 143 Parliament the first, 23 Parliament once a year, 142
Parliament complains, 133 Parliament threatened 143 Parliament makes a King,
160 Parliamentum insanum, 60 Parliament breaks up suddenly, 256 Parliament
wronged by Bishop Fisher 382 Pawlet made Lord Saint John, 406 Peace, 52. 64.
285. 333 336. 364. 392 Penal laws, 290. 351 Penance, 42 People wasted, 14
Percies, 171. 362. 363 Percies will not deliver Scottish Prisoners, 67 Percies
do ransom Edmund Mortimer, 169 Percie Sir Thomas, 406 Perjury, 232 Perkin
Werbeck, 337. etc. Peter Landoys, 289. 315 Petition of the Rebels, 404
Pickering, 363 Pilgrims holy, 405 Piracie, 96 Pity, 44 Plantagenet Geoffry, 24
Plantagenet Arthur, 51 53 Plymouth, 136 Poydras, 93 Policies, 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
12. 18 23. 29. 35. 82. 117. 140 212. 215. 233. 246. 250 299. 331. 339. 340 408.
Policies touching Warbeck, 339. 340. 341 Policies touching Lambert, 331
Policy touching Cade, 247 Policy by fire, 347 Pomfret, 301 Pontlarch, 241
Popham, Sir John, 113 Pope, 14. 15. 18. 53. 150 curbed, 401 Popish blindness,
57 Popish pride, 54 Poynings, 341. 361 Poisoned, 59 Poyters, 63 Practices of
Richard Duke of Gloucester, 299. etc. Praemunire, 380. feared by the Clergy, 388
Prerogative crossed, 66 Presumption, 140 Prey rich, 395 Pride, 396 Pride of
Longchamp, 46 47. 48 Primacie, 7 Prince of Chester. Prince imprisoned, 86 177
Prince of Wales, 114 Prince reclaimed, 177 Prior John, 364 Prisoners: Marcarus,
7 Edwinus, 7 Egelwinus, 7 Mowbray, 13 Curthose, 20 Belesme, 20 King Stephen, 29
Queen Elianor, 43 King Richard the first, p. 48 Bayliol, 84 The Prince, 86.
177 Queen Isabel, 105 King David, 122 King John of France, 127 Earl of
Pembroke, 132 King Richard the second page 156 Edmund Mortimer, 166 French
Pris. slain, 185 Lord Talbot, 222 Lord Scales, 222 Lord Hongerford, 222 Duke
of Suffolk, 222 King Henry the Sixth, 257. 266. 281 King Edward the fourth,
271 Duke of Burbon, 277 Duke of Orleance, 235 Scottish prisoners, 413 Mordack
Earl of Fife, 167 Archibald Douglas, 167 Earl Murrey, 167
Privy Seals, 397. 398 Proclamations, 192. 276 387 Proclaimed heir of Fra.
141. 200. 204 Proscribed, 248. 319 Protector, 61. 251 Protector displaced, 240
Q
QVartered, 345 Queen Anne beheaded, 403 Queen Katherine beheaded, 410
R
RAgman, 104 Ramsey, 136 King Richard the First ransomed, 48 Douglas
ransomelesse, 171 King of Scots ransomed, 214 Duke of Burbon ransomed, 227 Duke
of Orleance ransomed, 235 Edmund Mortimer ransomed, 164 Queen Margaret
ransomed. 283 Rain, 405 Rebellions, 6. 7. 10. 11. 12 13. 20. 22. In London,
71. 76. Lluellen, 80 Wat Tilar, 137. In Kent, 277. Owen Glendor, 166. Percies,
170 171. In Ireland, 241. Jack Cade, 247. 264. 273. 328. 334 Cornishmen, 345.
347. 349. In Yorkshire, 269. In Lincolnshire, 404. In the North, 405. In
Ireland, 407 Rebels fly, 405. quietly depart, 405 Reconcilement, 64. 279
Reformation, 66. 69. 64 153 Regents, 43. 201 Regent dies, 228 Regent drowned,
358 Religious houses, 178. 374 403. 403 Repayment, 327 Repeales, 4. 263. 328
Repentance, 8. 353 Reprofe, 167 Reseisure, 35. 34 Resolution 15. 34. 95
Restitution, 18 Return vnlicenced, 358 359 Revenge, 49 Revolt, 214. 242. 244
Renulph, 81 Ribamont, 124 Riceap Thomas, 344 King Richard the First valiant,
46 47 Rich Soldiers, 191 King Henry the Second Rich, 37 Richmond Earl in
danger, 289. 317. swears, 320. landeth, 323 and is victorious, 325 Rifling,
389 Roan, 192. 193. 197. 241 Robberies, 14. 18. 33 Robin Hood, 50 Robinet of
Bonuile, 187 Rochford, 400. 410. 411 Bolloigne, Viscount Rochford, 385
Rokesbie, 174 Rosamond Clifford, 37 Rosbrough, 112. 130 Rowclif, 363 Rufus
stain, 16 Russell, Lord, 406 Rutland murdered, 281 Rutland Earl, 400 Ryuers,
256
S
Sanctuary, 302. 303 304 Saluo honor Dei, 41 Sands, 365. 396. 397 Sarum
secundum vsum 7 Sauadge, 324 Scales, 218. 222. 257. 258 Scot, Earl of Chester,
64 Scottish homage, 11. 214 Scots, 25000. slain, 83 Scots swear obedience. 86
Scots overthrown in Ireland, 97 Scots overthrow K. Edw. the Second, 93 94
Scots invade England, 11 28. 111. 122. 167. 171. 251. 291. 361. their cruelty,
343. They invade, 345. and are slain, 346. 412 Scots misuse the French, 147
Scots aid Warbecke, 342 345 Scottish King slain, 363 Scotland surrendered, 81
82. 84 Scotland governed by England, 84 Scotland wasted, 346 Scotland invaded,
97. 103 306. 111 147. 174. 412. 415. 416. 419 Scotland disposed by King Edward
the Third. 106 Scotland claimed by the Pope, 86 Scottish King ransomed, 214
Scottish tenure released, 106 Scottish chair, 86 Scottish prisoners, 413
Scroope, 155. 173. 180. 265 Sea victories, 62. 110. 125 188. 189 Seals Privy,
394 Secrecy, 107 Secundum vsum Sarum, 7 Security, 221. 271 Seizure, 3. 35
Seymour, Earl of Hartford, 406. 415 Seymor, Sir John, and Lady Jane, 403
Shawes Sermon, 408 Shepard Jack, 137 Sherborne, Sir Henry, 361 Ships, 300.
taken, 56 500. Ships, 188 1200. Ships, 146 Ships in Sandwitch, 256 Sheep, 268
Sheriff of Northumberland, 174 Shoreswife, 309 Shrewesburie, Earl, 392
Shrines destroyed, 406 Sickness, 181 Slain, King William Rufus. 5. 16
Malcolme. 11 King Edward the Second. 101 King Richard the first. 50 King
Richard the second. 160 Simon Montfort. 74 Lord Beamont. 113 Peter of Castile.
131 Wat Tilar. 140 Vere, Duke of Ireland. 149 Prisoners, French. 185 Thirty
six slain by King Henry the Fourth. 171 Edward Duke of York. 187 Richard Duke
of York. 259 Duke of Suffolk. 187 John Earl of Shrewesburie. 249 Earl of
Salisburie. 220 Clarence. 206 Earl of Warwick. 281 Arundell. 226 Marquess
Montacute. 281 Courtney, Earl of Deuon. 283 Wooduile. 333 James the Fourth,
King of Scots. 362 Stafford. 329 Humfrey Duke of Buckingham. 257 Thomas, Lo.
Egremount. 257 John, Viscount Beamont. 257 Northumberland. 260 Westmorland. 260
Lord Dacres. 260 Lord Wells. 260 Lord Clifford. 260 Somerset, Sir Charles. 360
Spencers. 92. 94. 96. 99 Northumberland. 334 Spencer, chief Justice. 74. 68
Speeches. 194 195. 209 Spencers executed. 100 Soldiers unlicensed return.
358. 397 Sons disobedient. 36 Southampton Earl. 406 Stafford Earl. 181
Stakes. 183 Stanley. 341. 344 Stapleton B. of Exeter. 99 Stapleton. 363
Stoutnesse of K. H. 8. 404 Strangers Merchants. 34 251. 138 Subjects duty. 35
Submissio^ of K. Io 56. 66 Submission of the Barons. 58 Submission of King
Richard the Second. 155 Submission of Londoners. 75 Submission of Lluellen. 80
Supremacy. 403 Duke of Suffolk. 237. 238. 244. 392. 418 Duke of Suffolk
warreth val^antly in France. 396 Surfeit. 24 Surrey beheaded. 420 Surprisall.
173 Sussex, Earl. 385 Swanus. 6 Swimming. 48 149 Sword given to Exeter. 349
Sydney. 362
T
TAle-bearers. 227 Talbots name terrible. 226 Talbot. 106. 324 Talbot slain.
220 Talbot, Gilbert. 192 Talbot, Lord George. 360 Taxes. 5. 10. 97. 109 Taxes
causing rebellions: 6. 7. 136. 333. 335. 343 Taxes lost Aquitaine, etc. 130
Taxes pleasing. 12. 52. 189 Taxes released. 18. 28 Taxes not demanded. 37 45
Tax on Wools and Hides. 83 Tempest, Nicholas. 406 Temporalties. 20. 21 Terryll.
312 Terwyn. 360. 361 Thankfulness. 24. 297 Thanksgiving. 171. 186 190. 282.
325 Thieves. 50. 93 Thorp. 258 Thwaits. 396 Title to France, 105. 107
relinquished. 129 Title, King of Ireland. 410 Title, Defensor Fidei. 357. 393
Tournay taken. 361. redeliuered. 380 Trade restored. 346 Translation. 7
Transubstantiation. 58 Traitor, Archb. of Cant. 151 Treasons. 64. 164. 180 226
Treason to speak, etc. 409 Treason at Oxford. 164 Traitors. 145. 173
Treachery. 152. 213 252 Trenchard. 352 Treport. 364 Tresham. 283 Tresilian.
147. 149 Troyl-Baston. 86 Tuthar. 260. 249 Tylar, Wat. 137 Tylney. 362 Tyron,
Earl. 410 Tyrwyn taken and burnt. 361
V
Valor. 33. 46. 47. 124 Vaughan. 283. 307 Vere. 142. 149. 242 Vernoyle. 205
Vicar general. 107 Victory in Castile. 130 King Edward the Fourth victorious.
281 Victory without blows. 168 Victory miraculous. 216 Victory over the
Percies. 171 Victories at Sea. 62. 110 125. 188. 189 Vicegerent Cromwell 406
Victuals cheap. 108 Visited by three Kings. 130 Vmfreuyle. 192. 206
University opinions. 386 Unthankfulness. 14. 44 Unthankful Frenchmen. 414
Usurpers. Rufus, 9 Henricus Primus, 17 Stephanus, 27 Edwardus Tertius, 101
Henricus Quartus, 160 Henricus Quintus. 177 Henricus Sextus, 211 Richardus
Tertius, 311

W
WAights, 18 Wales, 86. Prince, 114 Wallop, 364. 396 Wars in the Holy Land,
45. etc. 77 Wars with Arthur Plantagenet, 51 He is drowned, 53
Wars incommodious, 272 Wars with Charles the Emperor. 401 Ward, Sir
Christopher, 362 Wardships, 63 Warbeck, 337. etc. Warlike discipline, 35
Warwick Protector, 251 Warwick slain, 281 Warrens, 18 Watermen, 258 Wells,
260. 273 Welshmen rebel, 11. 12. 13. 22. 80. 81. 83. 84. 85 166 Wenlocke, 283
Wharton, Lord, 412 Whipped, 42 Wife, a good one, 43 Willoughbie, 363. 183. 392
Witchcraft, 236 Wives paid for, 24 Wooduile, 231. 333 Woods in Wales burnt, 81
Woolsey, 365. etc. until page 388 Wounding, 77 Worcester Earl, 392
Wryothesley, 417
Errata.
Page 305. lin. 4. for daughter to the Dukes son, read son to the Dukes
daughter. Page 324. lin. 3. for George Stanley read George Talbot.


