A RELATION OF MARYLAND;

Together, With A Map of the Country, The Conditions of Plantation, His
Majesty's Charter to the Lord Baltemore, translated into English.


These Books are to be had, at Master William Peasley Esquire his house, on the
backside of Drury Lane, near the Cockpit Playhouse; or in his absence, at
Master John Morgans house in high Holbourne, over against the Dolphin, London.

September the 8. Anno Dom. 1635.

CHAP. I.
A RELATION Of the Lord BALTEMORE'S Plantation in Maryland.

HIs most Excellent Majesty Having by His Letters Patents, under the Great
Seal of England, granted a certain Country in America (now called Maryland,
in honor of our gracious Queen) unto the Lord Baltemore, with diverse
Privileges, and encouragements to all those that should adventure with his
Lordship in the planting of that Co^ntrey: the benefit and honor of such an
action was readily apprehended by diverse Gentlemen, of good birth and quality,
who thereupon resolved to adventure their persons, and a good part of their
fortunes with his Lordship, in the pursuit of so noble and (in all likelihood)
so aduantagious an enterprise. His Lordship was at first resolved to go in
person; but the more important reasons persuading his stay at home, he
appointed his brother, Mr. Leonard Caluert to go Governor in his stead, with
whom he joined in Commission, Mr. Jerome Hawley, and Mr. Thomas Cornwallis (two
worthy and able Gentlemen.) These with the other Gentlemen adventurers, and
their servants, to the number of near 200. people, embarked themselves for the
voyage, in the good ship called the Arc, of 300. tun and upward, which was
attended by his Lordships Pinnace, called the Dove, of about 50. tun. And so
on Friday, the 22. of November, 1633. a small gale of wind coming gently from
the North-West, they weighed from the Cowes in the Isle of Wight, about ten in
the morning; And having stayed by the way Twenty days at the Barbada's, and
Fourteen days at Saint Christophers (upon some necessary occasions) they
arrived at Point Comfort in Virginia, on the four and twentyeth of February
following. They had Letters from his Majesty, in favor of them, to the
Governor of Virginia, in obedience whereunto, he used them with much courtesy
and humanity. At this time, one Captain Cleyborne (one of the Council of
Virginia) coming from the parts whether they intended to go, told them that
all the Natives were in preparation of defense by reason of a rumor some had
raised amongst them, that 6. ships were to come with many people, who would
drive all the inhabitants out of the Country.

On the 3. of March, they left Point Comfort, Patowmeck, is a great River of
the Province of Maryland* on which they intend^d, to seat the first Colony.
and 2. days after, they came to Patowmeck river, which is about 24. leagues
distant, there they began to give names to places, and called the Southern
point of that River, Saint Gregory's; and the Northern point, Saint Michaels.

They sailed up the River, till they came to Heron Island, which is about 14.
leagues, and So called from the abundance of that Foul there.
there came to an Anchor under an Island near unto it, which they called S.
Clements. Where they set up a Cross, and took possession of this Country for
our Savior, and for our Sovereign Lord the King of England.

Here the Governor thought fit for the ship to stay, until he had discovered
more of the Country: and so he took two Pinnaces, and The Dove, and one
hired in Virgin^a.
went up the River some 4. leagues, and landed on the South side, where he
found the Indians fled for fear, from thence he sailed some 9. leagues higher
to Patowmeck Town where the Werowance being a child, Archibau his uncle So
they call their Princes.
(who governed him and his Country for him) gave all the company good
welcome, and one of the company having entered into a little discourse with
him, touching the errors of their religion, he seemed well pleased therewith;
and at his going away, desired him to return thither again, saying he should
live with him, his men should hunt for him, and he would divide all with him.

From hence the Governor went to Pasehatoway, about 20. leagues higher, where
he found many Indians assembled, and here he met with one Captain Henry
Fleet an Englishman, who had lived many years among the Indians, and by that
means spoke the Country language very well, and was much esteemed of by the
natives. Him our Governor sent a shore to invite the Werowance to a parley,
who thereupon came with him aboard privately, where he was courteously
entertained, and after some parley being demanded by the Governor, whether he
would be content that he and his people should set down in his Country, in
case he should find a place convenient for him, his answer was, that he would
not bid him go, neither would and he bid him stay, but that he might use his
own discretion.

While this Werowance was aboard, many of his people came to the water side,
fearing that he might be surprised, whereupon the Werowance commanded two
Indians that came with him, to go on shore, to quit them of this fear, but
they answered, they feared they would kill them; The Werowance therefore showed
himself upon the deck, and told them he was in safety, wherewith they were
satisfied.

Whilst the Governor was abroad, the neighboring Indians, where the ship
lay, began to cast off fear, and to come to their Court of guard, which they
kept night and day upon Saint Clements I Will, partly to defend their barge, which
was brought in pieces out of England, and there made up; and partly to defend
their men which were employed in felling of trees, and cleaving pales for a
Palizado, and at last they ventured to come aboard the ship.

The Governor finding it not fit, for many reasons, to seat himself as yet
so high in the River, resolved to return back again, and to take a more
exact view of the lower parts, and so leaving the Ship and Pinnaces there, he
took his Barge (as most fit to search the Creekes, and small rivers) and was
conducted by Captain Fleet (who knew well the Country) to a River on the
North-side of Patomeck river, within 4. or 5. leagues from the mouth thereof,
which they called Saint Georges River. They went up this river about 4.
Leagues, and anchored at the Town of Yoacomaco: from whence the Indians of
that part of the Country, are called the Yoacomacoes:

At their coming to this place, the Governor went on shore, and treated
friendly with the Werowance there, and acquainted him with the intent of his
coming thither, to which he made little answer (as it is their manner, to
any new or sudden question) but entertained him, and his company that night
in his house, and gave him his own bed to lie on (which is a matt laid on
boords) and the next day, went to show him the country; and that day being
spent in viewing the places about that town, and the fresh waters, which there
are very plentiful, and excellent good (but the maine rivers are salt) the
Governor determined to make the first Colony there, and so gave order for the
Ship and Pinnaces to come thither.

This place he found to be a very commodious situation for a Town, in regard
the land is good* the air wholesome and pleasant, the River affords a safe
harbor for ships of any burden, and a very bold shore; fresh water, and
wood there is in great plenty, and the place so naturally fortified, as with
little difficulty, it will be defended from any enemy.

To make his entry peaceable and safe, he thought fit to present the Werowance
and the Wisoes of the Town with some English Cloth, So they call the chief
men of Account amongst them.
(such as is used in trade with the Indians) Axes, Howes, and Knives, which
they accepted very kindly, and freely gave consent that he and his company
should dwell in one part of their Town, and reserved the other for themselves:
and those Indians that dwelt in that part of the Town, which was allotted for
the English* freely left them their houses, and some corn that they had begun
to plant: It was also agreed between them, that at the end of harvest they
should leave the whole town; which they did accordingly: And they made mutual
promises to each other, to live friendly and peaceably together, and if any
injury should happen to be done on any part, that satisfaction should be made
for the same, and thus upon the 27. day of March, Anno Domini, 1634. the
Governor took possession of the place, and named the Town Saint Mary's.

There was an occasion that much facilitated their treaty with these Indians,
which was this: The Sasquehanocks (a warlike people that inhabit between
Chesopeack bay, and Delaware bay) did usually make wars, and incursions upon
the neighboring Indians, partly for superiority, partly for to get their
Women, and what other purchase they could meet with, which these Indians of
Yocomaco fearing, had the year before our arivall there, made a resolution,
for their safety, to remove themselves higher into the Country where it was
more populous, and many of them were gone thither before the English arrived.

Three days after their coming to Yoacomaco the Arc with the two Pinaces
arived there. The Indians much wondered to see such ships, and at the thundering
of the Ordnance when they came to an Anchor.

The next day they began to prepare for their houses, and first o^ all a Court
of Guard, and a Storehouse; in the mean time they lay abord the ship: They
had not been there many days before Sir John Haruie the governor of V^rginea
came thither to visit them; Also some Indian Werowances, and many other Indians
from several parts came to see them, amongst others the Werowance of Patuxent
came to visit the Governor, and being brought into the great Cabin of the
ship, was placed between the Governor of Virginea, and the Governor of
Maryland; and a Patuxent Indian that came with him, coming into the Cabin,
and finding the Werowance thus sitting between the two Governors, started
back, fearing the Werowance was surprised, and was ready to have leapt
overboard, and could not be persuaded to come into the Cabin, until the
Werowance came himself unto him; for he remembered how the said Werowance had
formerly been taken prisoner by the English of Virginia.

After they had finished the storehouse, and unladed the ship, the Governor
thought fit to bring the Colors on shore, which were attended by all the
Gentlemen, and the rest of the servants in arms; who received the Colors with
a volley of shot, which was answered by the Ordnance from the ships; At this
Ceremony were present, the Werowances of Patuxent, and Yoacomaco, with many
other Indians; and the Werowance of Patuxent hereupon took occasion to advise
the Indians of Yoacomaco to be careful to keep the league that they had made
with the English. He stayed with them diverse days, and used many Indian
Complements, and at his departure he said to the Governor. I love the English
so well, that if they should go about to kill me, if I had but so much breath
as to speak; I would command the people, not to revenge my death* for I know
they would not do such a thing, except it were through mine own default.

They brought thither with them some store of Indian Corn, from the Barbado's,
which at their first arivall they began to use (thinking fit to reserve their
English provision of Meal and Oatemeale) and the Indian women seeing their
servants to be unacquainted with the manner of dressing it, would make bread
thereof for them, and teach them how to do the like: They found also the
country well stored with Corn (which they bought with truck, such as there is
desired, the Natives having no knowledge of the use of money) whereof they sold
them such plenty, as that they sent 1000. bushells of it to New England, to
provide them some salt-fish, and other commodities which they wanted.

During the time that the Indians stayed by the English at Yoacomaco, they went
daily to hunt with them for Dear and Turkies, whereof some they gave them for
Presents, and the meaner sort would sell them to them, for knives, beads and
the like: Also of Fish, the natives brought them great store, and in all things
dealt very friendly with them; their women and children came very frequently
amongst them, which was a certain sign of their confidence of them, it being
found by experience, that they never attempt any ill, where the women are, or
may be in danger.

Their coming thus to seat upon an Indian Town, where they found ground
cleared to their hands, gave them opportunity (although they came late in the
year) to plant some Corn, and to make them gardens, which they sowed with
English seeds of all sorts, and they prospered exceeding well. They also made
what haste they could to finish their houses; but before they could accomplish
all these things, one Captain Cleyborne (who had a desire to appropriate the
trade of those parts unto himself) began to cast out words amongst the
Indians, saying, That those of Yoacomaco were Spaniards and his enemies; and by
this means endeavored to alienate the minds of the Natives from them, so
that they did not receive them so friendly as formerly they had done. This
caused them to lay aside all other works, and to finish their Fort, which they
did within the space of one month; where they mounted some Ordnance, and
furnished it with some murderers, and such other means of defense as they
thought fit for their safeties: which being done, they proceeded with their
Houses and finished them, with convenient accommodations belonging thereto: And
although they had thus put themselves in safety, yet they ceased not to procure
to put these jealousies out of the Natives minds, by treating and using them in
the most courteous manner they could, and at last prevailed therein, and settled
a very firm peace and friendship with them. They procured from Virginia,
Hogs, Poultrey, and some Cowes, and some male cattle, which has given them
a foundation for breed and increase; and whosoever desires it, may furnish himself
with store of Cattle from thence, but the hogs and Poultrey are already
increased in Maryland, to a great stock, sufficient to serve the Colonie very
plentifully. They have also set up a Water-mill for the grinding of Corn,
adjoining to the Town.

Thus within the space of six months, was laid the foundation of the Colonie
in Maryland; and whosoever intends now to go thither, shall find the way so
trodden, that he may proceed with much more ease and confidence then these
first adventurers could, who were ignorant both of Place, People, and all
things else, and could expect to find nothing but what nature produced:
besides, they could not in reason but think, the Natives would oppose them;
whereas now the Country is discovered, and friendship with the Natives is
assured, houses built, and many other accommodations, as Cattle, Hogs,
Poultry, Fruits and the like brought thither from England, Virginea, and other
places, which are useful, both for profit and Pleasure: and without boasting
it may be said, that this Colony has arived to more in six months, then
Virginia did in as many years. If any man say, they are beholding to Virginea
for so speedy a supply of many of those things which they of Virginia were
forced to fetch from England and other remote places, they will confess it,
and acknowledge themselves glad that Virginea is so near a neighbor, and that
it is so well stored of all necessaries for to make those parts happy, and the
people to live as plentifully as in any other part of the world, only they wish
that they would be content their neighbors might live in peace by them, and
then no doubt they should find a great comfort each in other.

Noua TERRAE-MARIAE tabula
map of Maryland This Northern part of Virginia (the limitts whereof extend
many degrees farther Southwards) is here inserted for the better description
of the entrance into the Bay of Chesapeack.



CHAP. II.
A description of the Country.

THe precedent discourse gives you to understand, how the first Colony sat
down in Maryland, what progress they made, and in what estate it is at this
present: Now my purpose is to speak of the Country in general, that who so
looks that way, may beforehand know something thereof. It is seated between
the degrees of 38 and 40 of North-Latitude, Virginia bounds it on the South,
New England on the North, and the Ocean on the East, but the Western parts are
not yet discovered.

The temper of the Air is very good, and agrees well with the English, as
appeared at their first coming thither, when they had no houses to shelter
them, and their people were enforced, not only to labor in the day, but to
watch in their turns at night, yet had their healths exceeding well: In Summer
its hot as in Spain, and in Winter there is frost and snow, but it seldom
lasts long* this last Winter was the coldest that had been known in many
years: but the year before, there was scarce any sign of Winter, only that
the leaves fell from the trees, in all other things it appeared to be Summer;
and yet the last Winter, both their Cattle and Hoggs kept themselves in the
woods, without any fodder, or other help, and the Hoggs thrived so well, that
some of them were killed out of the woods for Porke and Bacon, which was
excellent good and fat.

The Winds there are variable; from the South comes Heat, Gusts, and Thunder;
from the North, or North-west, cold-weather, and in winter, Frost and Snow;
from the East and South-east, Rain.

The ordinary entrance by Sea into this Country, is between two Capes, which
are distant each from other, about 7 or 8 leagves, the South-Cape is called
Cape-Henry; the North, Cape-Charles, When you are come within the Capes, you
enter into a fair Bay, which is navigable for at least 200 miles, and is
called Chesopeack Bay, and runs Northerly: Into this Bay fall many goodly
navigable Rivers, the chief whereof is Patomack, where the Colony is now
seated. It Is navigable for 140 miles, it begins to be fresh about 2 leagves
above Patomack Town. The next River Northward is Patuxent, which at the
entrance is distant from the other, about 20 miles, and is a very pleasant and
commodious River; It Is fit for habitation, and easy to be defended, by reason
of the Islands, and other places of advantage, that may command it; from thence,
until you come to the head of the Bay, there are no more Rivers that are
inhabited: There dwell the Sasquehanocks* upon a River that is not navigable
for our Boats, by reason of Sholes and Rocks; but they pass it in A term
they use for their Boats.
Canoos; At the entrance thereof, there is an Island which will command that
River. Upon the East side of this Bay lie very many Islands which are not
inhabited, where are store of Dear.

On the Eastern shore of the Country, which lies upon the maine Ocean, are
sundry small Creekes, and one likely to prove a very commodious harbor,
called Matsopongue; near the mouth whereof, lies an Island of about 20 miles
in length, and thence about 6 leagues more Northerly, another Island called
Chingoto; and about seven leagues beyond that, to the North, opens another
very large fair Bay, called Delaware Bay. This Bay is about 8 leagues wide at
the entrance, and into it, there falls a very fair navigable River.

The Country is generally plain and even, and yet has some pretty small
hills and risings; It Is full of Rivers and Creekes, and has store of Springs
and small Brooks: The Woods for the most part are free from underwood, so that
a man may travel on horseback, almost any-where, or hunt for his recreation.

CHAP. III.
The Commodities which this Country affords naturally.

THis Country affords naturally, many excellent things for Physic and
Surgery, the perfect use of which, the English cannot yet learn from the
Natives: They have a root which is an excellent preseruative against Poison,
called by the English, the Snake root. Other herbs and roots they have,
wherewith they cure all manner of wounds; also Saxafras, Gummes, and Balsum.
An Indian seeing one of the English, much troubled with the tooth-ake, fetched
of the root of a tree, and gave the party some of it to hold in his mouth, and
it eased the pain presently. They have other roots fit for dies, wherewith
they make colors to paint themselves.

The Timber of these parts is very good, and in abundance, it is useful for
building of houses, and ships; the white Oak is good for Pipe-staves, the
red Oak for wainescot. There is also Walnut, Cedar, Pine, and Cipresse,
Chestnut, Elm, Ash, and Popler, all which are for Building, and Husbandry.
Also there are diverse sorts of Fruit Trees, as Mulberries, Persimons, with
several other kind of Plummes, and Vines, in great abundance. The Mast and
the Chestnuts, and what roots they find in the woods, do feed the Swine very
fat, and will breed great store, both for their own provision, or for
merchandise, and such as is not inferior to the Bacon of Westphalia.

Of Strawberries, there is plenty, which are ripe in April: Mulberries in May;
and Raspices in June; Maracocks which is somewhat like a Limon, are ripe in
August.

In the Spring, there are several sorts of herbs, as Corn-sallet, Violets,
Sorrel, Purslaine, all which are very good and wholesome, and by the English,
used for sallets, and in broth.

In the upper parts of the Country, there are Bufeloes, Elkes, Lions, Bears,
Wolves, and Dear there are great store, in all places that are not too much
frequented, as also Beavers, Foxes, Otters, and many other sorts of Beasts.

Of Birds, there is the Eagle, Goshawke, Falcon, Lanner, Sparrow-hawke, and
Merlin, also wild Turkeys in great abundance, whereof many weigh 50. pounds,
and upwards; and of Partridge plenty: There are likewise sundry sorts of Birds
which sing, whereof some are red, some blew, others black and yellow, some
like our Black-birds, others like Thrushes, but not of the same kind, with many
more, for which we know no names.

In Winter there is great plenty of Swannes, Cranes, Geese, Herons, Ducke,
Teale, Widgeon, Brants, and Pigeons, with other sorts, whereof there are none
in England.

The Sea, the Bays of Chesopeack, and Delaware, and generally all the Rivers,
do abound with Fish of several sorts; for many of them we have no English
names: There are Whales, Sturgeons uery large and good, and in great
abundance; Grampuses, Porpuses, Mullets, Ttouts, Souls, Place, Mackerell,
Perch, Crabs, Oysters, Cockles, and Mussles; But above all these, the fish that
have no English names, are the best except the Sturgeons: There is also a fish
like the Thornebacke in England, which has a tail a yard long, wherein are
sharp prickles, with which if it strike a man, it will put him to much pain
and torment, but it is very good meat: also the Tode-fish, which will swell
till it be ready to burst, if it be taken out of the water.

The Mineralls have not yet been much searched after, yet there is discovered
Iron Oar; and Earth fit to make Alum, Terra lemnia, and a red soil like
Bolearmonicke, with sundry other sorts of Mineralls, which we have not yet
been able to make any trial of.

The soil generally is very rich, like that which is about Cheesweeke near
London, where it is worth 20. shillings an Acre yearly to Tillage in the
Common-fields, and in very many places, you shall have two foot of black rich
mould, wherein you shall scarce find a stone, it is like a sifted Garden-mould,
and is so rich, that if it be not first planted with Indian corn, Tobacco,
Hemp, or some such thing that may take off the rankness thereof, it will not
be fit for any English grain; and under that, there is found good loame,
whereof we have made as good brick as any in England; there is great store of
Marish ground also, that with good husbandry, will make as rich Meadow, as any
in the world: There is store of Marle, both blue, and white, and in many
places, excellent clay for pots, and tyles; and to conclude, there is nothing
that can be reasonably expected in a place lying in the latitude which this
does, but you shall either find it here to grow naturally: or Industry, and
good husbandry will produce it.

CHAP. IIII.
The commodities that may be procured in Maryland by industry.

He that well considers the situation of this Country, and finds it placed
between Virginia and New England, cannot but, by his own reason, conclude
that it must needs participate of the natural commodities of both places, and
be capable of those which industry brings into either, the distances being so
small between them: you shall find in the Southern parts of Maryland, all
that Virginia has naturally; and in the Northern parts, what New England
produces; and he that reads Captain John Smith shall see at large discoursed
what is in Virginia, and in Master William Wood, who this year has written a
treatise of New England, he may know what is there to be expected.

Yet to say something of it in particular.

IN the first place I name Corn, as the thing most necessary to sustain man;
That which the Natives use in the Country, makes very good bread, and also a
meat which they call Omene, it is like our Furmety, and is very savory and
wholesome; it will Malt and make good Beer. Also the Natives have a sort of
Pulse, which we call Pease and Beans, that are very good. This Corn yields a
great increase, so does the Pease and Beans: One man may in a season, well
plant so much as will yield a hundred bushells of this Corn, 20 bushells of
Beans and Pease, and yet attend a crop of Tobacco: which according to the
goodness of the ground may be more or less, but is ordinarily accounted
between 800 and 1000 pound weight.

They have made trial of English Pease, and they grow very well, also
Musk-mellons, Watermellons, Com-cumbers, with all sorts of garden Roots and
Herbs, as Carrots, Parsenips, Turnips, Cabbages Radish* with many more; and in
Virginia they have sowed English Wheat and Barley, and it yields twice as much
increase as in England; and although there be not many that do apply
themselves to plant Gardens and Orchards, yet those that do it, find much
profit and pleasure thereby: They have Pears, Apples, and several sorts of
Plummes, Peaches in abundance, and as good as those of Italy; so are the
Mellons and Pumpions: Apricocks, Figgs and Pomegranates prosper exceedingly;
they have lately planted Orange and Limon trees which thrive very well: and in
fine, there is scarce any fruit that grows in England, France, Spain, or
Italy, but has been tried there, and prospers well. You may there also have
Hemp and Flax, Pitch and Tar, with little labor; it is apt for Rapeseed, and
Annis-seed, Woad, Madder, Saffron, etc. There may be had, Silke-wormes, the
Country being stored with Mulberries: and the superfluity of wood will produce
Potashes.

And for Wine, there is no doubt but it will be made there in plenty, for the
ground does naturally bring forth Vines, in such abundance, that they are as
frequent there, as Brambles are here. Iron may be made there with little
charge; Brave ships may be built, without requiring any materials from other
parts: Clabboard, Wainscott, Pipestaves and Masts for ships the woods will
afford plentifully. In fine, Butter and Cheese, Porke and Bacon, to transport
to other countries will be no small commodity, which by industry may be quickly
had there in great plenty, etc. And if there were no other staple commodities
to be hoped for, but Silk and Linen (the materials of which, apparently will
grow there) it were sufficient to enrich the inhabitants.

CHAP. V.
Of the Natural disposition of the Indians which Inhabit the parts of
Maryland where the English are seated: And their manner of living.

HE that has a Curiosity to know all that has been observed of the Customs
and manners of the Indians, may find large discourses thereof in Captain
Smiths Book of Virginia, and Mr. Woods of New England: but he that is desirous
to go to Maryland, shall here find enough to inform him of what is necessary
for him to know touching them. By Captain Smith's, and many other Relations
you may be informed, that the People are War-licke, and have done much harm to
the English; and thereby are made very terrible. Others say that they are a
base and cowardly People, and to be contemned: and it is thought by some who
would be esteemed Statesmen, that the only point of policy that the English
can use, is, to destroy the Indians, or to drive them out of the Country,
without which, it is not to be hoped that they can be secure. The truth is, if
they be injured, they may well be feared, they being People that have able
bodies, and generally, taller, and bigger limbed then the English, and want not
courage; but the odds we have of them in our weapons, keeps them in awe,
otherwise they would not fly from the English, as they have done in the time
of Wars with those of Virginia, and out of that respect* a small number of
our men being armed, will adventure upon a great troop of theirs, and for no
other reason, for they are resolute and subtle enough: But from hence to
conclude, that there can be no safety to live with them, is a very great
error. Experience has taught us, that by kind and fair usage, the Natives
are not only become peaceable, but also friendly, and have upon all occasions
performed as many friendly Offices to the English in Maryland, and New England,
as any neighbor or friend uses to do in the most Civil parts of
Christendom: Therefore any wise man will hold it a far more just and
reasonable way to treat the People of the Country well, thereby to induce them
to civility, and to teach them the use of husbandry, and Mechanic trades,
whereof they are capable, which may in time be very useful to the English; and
the Planters to keep themselves strong, and united in Towns, at least for a
competent number, and then noe man can reasonably doubt, either surprise, or
any other ill dealing from them.

But to proceed, he that sees them, may know how men lived whilst the world
was under the Law of Nature; and as by nature, so amongst them, all men are
free, but yet subject to command for the public defense. Their Government is
Monarchical, he that governes in chief, is called the Werowance, and is
assisted by some that consult with him of the common affairs, who are called
Wisoes: They have no Laws, but the Law of Nature and discretion, by which all
things are ruled, only Custom has introduced a law for the Succession of the
Government, which is this; when a Werowance dies* his eldest son succeeds,
and after him the second, and so the rest, each for their* lives, and when all
the sons are dead, then the sons of the Werowances eldest daughter shall
succeed, and so if he have more daughters; for they hold, that the issue of
the daughters has more of his blood in them than the issue of his sons. The
Wisoes are chosen at the pleasure of the Werowance, yet commonly they are
chosen of the same family, if they be of years capable: The young men generally
bear a very great respect to the elder.

They have also C^ck^r^^ses that are their Captains in time of war, to whom
they are very obedient; But the Werowance himself plants Corn, makes his own
Bow and Arrows, his Canoo, his Mantle, Shoes, and what ever else belongs unto
him, as any other common Indian; and commonly the Commanders are the best and
most ingenious and active in all those things which are in esteem amongst
them. The women serve their husbands, make their bread, dress their meat,
such as they kill in hunting, or get by fishing; and if they have more wives
then one, as some of them have (but that is not general) then the best beloved
wife performs all the offices of the house, and they take great coment
therein. The women also (beside the household business) use to make Matts,
which serve to cover their houses, and for beds; also they make baskets, some
of Rushes, others of Silke-grasse, which are very handsome.

The Children live with their Parents; the Boys until they come to the full
growth of men; (for they reckon not by years, as we do) then they are put
into the number of Bow-men, and are called Blacke-boyes (and so continue until
they take them wives) When they are to be made Black-boyes, the ancient men
that govern the younger, tell them, That if they will be valiant and obedient
to the Werowance, Wisos and C^kc^r^^ses, then their god will love them, all men
will esteem of them, and they shall kill Dear, and Turkies, catch Fish, and
all things shall go well with them; but if otherwise, then shall all go
contrary: which persuasion mooves in them an incredible obedience to their
commands; If they bid them take fire in their hands or mouths, they will do
it, or any other desperate thing, although with the apparent danger of their
lives.

The women remain with their Parents until they have husbands, and if the
Parents be dead, then with some other of their friends. If the husband die, he
leaves all that he has to his wife, except his bow and arrows, and some
Beads (which they usually bury with them) and she is to keep the children
until the sons come to be men, and then they live where they please, for all
men's houses are free unto them; and the daughters until they have husbands.
The manner of their marriages is thus; he that would have a wife, treates with
the father, or if he be dead, with the friend that takes care of her whom he
desires to have to wife, and agrees with him for a quantity of Beads, or some
such other thing which is accepted amongst them; which he is to give for her,
and must be paid at the day of their marriage; and then the day being
appointed, all the friends of both parts meet at the man's house that is to have
the wife, and each one brings a present of meat and the woman that is to be
married also brings her present: when the company is all come, the man he sits
at the upper end of the house, and the woman's friends lead her up, and place
her by him, then all the company sit down upon mats, on the ground (as their
manner is) and the woman rises and serves dinner, First to her husband, then
to all the company; the rest of the day they spend in singing and dancing
(which is not unpleasant) at night the company leaves the^, and commonly they
live very peaceably and lovingly together; Yet it falls out sometimes, that a
man puts away one wife and takes another; then she and her children return to
her friends again. They are generally very obedient to their husbands, and you
shall seldom hear a woman speak in the presence of her husband, except he
ask her some question.

This people live to a great age, which appears, in that although they marry
not so young as we do in England, yet you may see many of them
great-grandfathers to children of good bigness; and continue at that age, very
able and strong men: The Men and Women have all black hair, which is much
bigger and harsher then ours, it is rare to see any of them to wax gray,
although they be very old, but never bauld: It is seldom seen that any of the
men have beards, but they wear long locks, which reach to their shoulders, and
some of them to their wastes: they are of a comely stature, well favored, and
excellently well limbed, and seldom any deformed. In their wars, and
hunting, they use Bows and Arrows (but the Arrows are not poisoned, as in
other places.) The Arrow-heads are made of a Flint-stone, the top of a Deares
horn, or some Fish-bone, which they fasten with a sort of glue, which they
make. They also use in wars, a short club of a cubite long, which they call a
Tomahawk.

They live for the most part in Towns, like Country Villages in England;
Their houses are made like our Arboures, covered some with matts, others with
bark of trees, which defend them from the injury of the weather: The fires are
in the midst of the house, and a hole in the top for the smoke to go out at.
In length, some of them are 30. others 40. some a 100. foot; and in breadth
about 12. foot. They have some things amongst them which may well become
Christians to imitate, as their temperance in eating and drinking, their
Justice each to other, for it is never heard of, that those of a Nation will
rob or steal one from another; and the English do often trust them with
truck, to deal for them as factors, and they have performed it very justly:
Also they have sent letters by them to Virginia, and into other parts of the
Country, unto their servants that have been trading abroad, and they have
delivered them, and brought back answer thereof unto those that sent them;
Also their conversation each with other, is peaceable, and free from all
scurrulous words, which may give offense; They are very hospitable to their
own people, and to strangers; they are also of a grave comportment: Some of
the Adventurers at a time, was at one of their feasts, when Two hundred of them
did meet together; they eat of but one dish at a meal, and every man,
although there be never so many, is served in a dish by himself; their dishes
are made of wood, but handsomely wrought: The dinner lasted two hours; and
after dinner, they sung and danced about two hours more, in all which time,
not one word or action past amongst them that could give the least disturbance
to the company; In the most grave assembly, no man can expect to find so much
time past with more silence and gravitie: Some Indians coming on a time to
James Town in Virginia, it happened, that there then sat the Council to
hear causes, and the Indians seeing such an assembly, asked what it meant?
Answer was made, there was held a Match-c^mac^ (which the Indians call their
place of Council) the Indian replied, that they all talk at once, but we do
not so in our Match-comac^.

Their attire is decent and modest; about their wastes, they wear a covering of
Deares skins, which reaches to their knees, and upon their shoulders a large
mantle of skins, which comes down to the middle of the leg, and some to
the heel; in winter they wear it furred, in summer without; When men hunt
they put off their Mantles, so do the women when they work, if the weather be
hot: The women affect to wear chains and bracelets of beads, some of the
better sort of them, wear ropes of Pearl about their necks, and some hanging
in their ears, which are of a large sort, but spoiled with burning the Oysters
in the fire, and the rude boaring of them. And they and the young men use to
paint their faces with several colors, but since the English came thither,
those about them have quite left it; and in many things show a great
inclination to conform themselves to the English manner of living. The
werowance of Paschatoway desired the Governor to send him a man that could
build him a house like the English, and in sundry respects, commended our
manner of living, as much better then their own: The Werowance of Patuxent,
goes frequently in English Attire, so does he of Port^back, and many others
that have bought Clothes of the English: These Werowances have made request,
that some of their children may be brought up amongst the English, and every
way, show great demonstrations of friendship, and good affection unto them.

These People acknowledge a God, who is Their Religion.
the giver of all the good things, wherewith their life is maintained; and to
him they sacrifice of the first fruits of their Corn, and of that which they
get by hunting, and fishing: The sacrifice is performed by an Ancient man, who
makes a speech unto their God (not without something of Barbarism) which being
ended, he bu^^es part of the sacrifice, and then eats of the rest, then the
People that are present, eat also, and until the Ceremony be performed, they
will not touch one bit thereof: They hold the Immortality of the soul, and
that there is a place of Joy, and another of torment after death, and that
those which kill, steal, or lie, shall go to the place of torment, but those
which do no harm, to the good place; where they shall have all sorts of
pleasure.

It happened the last year, that some of the Sasquehanocks and the Wicomesses
(who are enemies) met at the Island of Monop^nson, where Captain Cleyborne
lives, they all came to trade, and one of the Sasquehanocks did an Injury to a
Wicomesse, whereat some of Cleybornes people that saw it, did laugh. The
Wicomesses seeing themselves thus injured and despised (as they thought) went
away, and lay in ambush for the return of the Sasquehanocks, and killed five
of them, only two escaped; and then they returned again, and killed three of
Cleybornes People, and some of his Cattle; about two months after this was
done, the Wicomesses sent a messenger unto his Lordships Governor, to excuse
the fact, and to offer satisfaction for the harm that was done to the English:
The Wicomesse that came with the message, brought in his company an Indian, of
the Town of Patuxent, which is the next neighboring Town unto the English at
Saint Mary's, with whom they have good correspondence, and he spoke to the
Governor in this manner.

I Am a Native of Patuxent, as this man (whom you know) can tell you, true it
is, I married a wife amongst the Wicomesses, where I have lived ever since, and
they have sent me to tell you, that they are sorry for the harm, which was
lately done by some of their people, to the English at Monaponson; and hope you
will not make the rash act of a few young men, (which was done in heat) a
quarrel to their Nation, who desire to live in peace and love with you, and
are ready to make satisfaction for the Injury, desiring to know what will give
you content, and that they will return such things as were then taken from
thence; But withal, they desire you not to think that they do this for
fear, for they have wars with the Sasquehanocks, who have by a surprise,
lately killed many of their men, but they would not sue to them for peace,
intending to revenge the injuries, as they could find opportunity, yet their
desire was to have peace with the English.

The Governor returned answer to the Wicomesse; since you acknowledge the
Injury, and are sorry for it, and only desire to know what I expect for
satisfaction; I tell you I expect that those men, who have done this outrage,
should be delivered unto me, to do with them as I shall think fit, and
likewise that you restore all such things as you then took from the English;
and withal, charged him with a second Injury attempted upon some of his own
People, since that time, by the Wicomesses.

The Wicomesse after a little pause, replied; It is the manner amongst us
Indians, that if any such like accident happen, we do redeem the life of a
man that is so slain, with a 100. arms length of Roaroke (which is a sort of
Beads that they make, and use for money) and since that you are here
strangers, and come into our Country, you should rather conform your selves
to the Customs of our Country, then impose yours upon us; But as for the
second matter, I know nothing of it, nor can give any answer thereunto.

The Governor then told him; It seems you come not sufficiently instructed in
the business which we have with the Wicomesses, therefore tell them what I
have said; and that I expect a speedy answer; and so dismissed him.

It fell in the way of my discourse, to speak of the Indian money of those
parts, It is of two sorts, Wompompeag and Roanoake; both of them are made of a
Fish-shell, that they gather by the Sea side, Wompompeag is of the greater
sort, and Roanoake of the lesser, and the Wompompeag is three times the value
of Roanoake; and these serve as Gold and Silver do here; they barter also one
commodity for another, and are very glad of traffic and commerce, so far
as to supply their necessities: They show no great desire of heaping wealth,
yet some they will have to be buried with them; If they were Christians, and
would live so free from covetousness, and many other vices which abound in
Christendom, they would be a brave people.

I therefore conclude, that since God Almighty has made this Country so large
and fruitful, and that the people be such as you have heard them described; It
is much more Prudence and Charity, to Civilize, and make them Christians, then
to kill, rob, and hunt them from place to place, as you would do a wolf. By
reducing of them, God shall be served, his Majesty's Empire enlarged by the
addition of many thousand Subjects, as well as of large Territories, our Nation
honored, and the Planters themselves enriched by the traffic and commerce
which may be had with them; and in many other things, they may be useful, but
prejudicial they cannot be, if it be not through their own faults, by
negligence of fortifying themselves, and not conseruing military discipline.

CHAP. VI.
Conditions propounded by the Lord Baltemore, to such as shall go, or
adventure into Maryland.

I.
WHAT person soever, subject to our sovereign Lord the King of England* shall
be at the charge to transport into the Province of Maryland himself or his
deputy, with any number of able men, between the ages of 16 and 50, each man
being provided in all things necessary for a Plantatio^ (which, together with
their transportation, will amount to about 20 l. a man, as by an aestimate
hereafter following may appear) there shall be assigned unto every such
adventurer, for every five men which he shall so transport thither, a
proportion of good land within the said Province, containing in quantity 1000
acres of English measure, which shall be erected into a Manor, and be conveyed
to him, his heirs, and assigns for ever, with all such royalties and
privileges, as are usually belonging to Manors in England; rendering and
paying yearly unto his Lordship, and his heirs for every such Manor, a quit
rent of 20 shillings, (to be paid in the Commodities of the Country) and such
other services as shall be generally agreed upon for public uses, and the
common good.

II.
What person soever, as aforesaid, shall transport himself, or any less
number of servants then five (aged, and provided as aforesaid) he shall have
assigned to him, his heirs and assigns for ever, for himself, 100 acres of
good land within the said Province; and for and in respect of every such
servant, 100 acres more, be be holden of his Lordship in freehold, paying
therefore, a yearly quit rent of 2 shillings for every hundred acres, in the
Commodities of the Country.

III.
Any married man that shall transport himself, his wife and children; shall
have assigned unto him, his heirs and assigns for ever, in freehold, (as
aforesaid) for himself 100 acres; and for his wife 100 acres; and for every
child that he shall carry over, under the age of 16 years, 50 acres; paying
for a quit rent 12 pence for every fifty acres.

IIII.
Any woman that shall transport herself or any children, under the age of six
years, shall have the like Conditions as aforesaid.

V.
Any one that shall carry over any women servants, under the age of forty
years, shall have for and in respect of every such woman servant, 50 acres;
paying only a quit rent, as aforesaid.

CHAP. VII.
Instructions and advertisements, for such as shall intend to go, or send, to
plant in Maryland.

THis Country of Maryland, lies from England to the Southwest, about 1200
leagues by Sea: the voyage is sometimes performed thither in 5 or 6 weeks, but
ordinarily it is two months voyage, and oftener within that time then beyond
it. The return from thence to England, is ordinarily made in a month, and
seldom exceeds six weeks.

The best time of the year for going thither, is to be there by Michaelmas, or
at furthest by Christmas, for he that comes by that time shall have time enough
to build him a house, and to prepare ground sufficient to plant in the spring
following. But there is convenience of passage thither in most months of the
year; and any one that will send unto Mr. Peasleys, or Master Morgans house,
may there be informed of the certain time when any of his Lordships company is
to go away, and so save the charge of unnecessary attendance here in London.

A particular of such necessary provisions as every Adventurer must carry,
according to the number of his servants: together with an estimate of their
prices.

In Victuals.
For one man, for a year,

l. s d Imprimis, eight bushells of meal 2 8 0 Item, two bushellls of Oatmeale
0 9 0 Item, one bushel of Pease 0 4 0 Item, one gallon of Oil 0 3 6 Item, two
gallons of Vinegar 0 2 0 Item, one gallon of Aquavitae 0 2 6 Item, one bushel
of Bay Salt 0 2 0 Item, in Sugar, Spice and Fruit 0 6 8 Sum. 3 17 8

In Apparel.
For one man,

l s d Item, two Munm^th caps or hats 0 4 0 Item, three falling Bands 0 1 3
Item, three shirts 0 7 6 Item, one Wastc^^^e 0 2 2 Item, one suite of Canvas 0
7 6 Item, one suite of Frize 0 10 0 Item, one suite of Cloth 0 16 0 Item, one
course cloth, or frize coat 0 15 0 Item, three pair of stockings 0 4 0 Item,
six pair of shoes 0 13 0 Item, Inkle for garters 0 0 2 Item, one dozen of
points 0 0 3 Sum. 4 0 10

In Bedding.
For two men.

l s d Item, two pair of Canvas sheets 0 16 0 Item, seven else of Canvas to
make a bed and boulster to be filled in the country 0 8 0 Item, one Rugg for a
bed 0 8 0 Item, five else of course Canvas to make a bed at Sea, to be filled
with straw 0 4 0 Item, one course Rugg at Sea 0 6 0 Su(...). 2 2 0 whereof one
man's part is, 1 ^ 0

In Arms.
For one man,

l ^ d Item, one musket 1 0 0 Item, 10 pound of Powder 0 11 0 Item, 40 pound of
Lead, Bullets, Pistol and Goose shot, of each sort some. 0 4 0 Item, one
sword, 0 5 0 Item, one belt 0 1 0 Item, one bandeleere and flaske 0 2 0 Item,
in Match 0 2 6 Sum. 2 5 6

In Tools.
For five persons, and so after the rate for more or less.

l s d Item, 5 broad Howes, at 2s. a piece 0 10 0 Item, 5 narrow Howes, at 16d.
a piece 0 6 8 Item, 2 broad Axes* at 3s. 8d. a piece 0 7 4 Item, 5 felling
Axes, at 1s. 6d. a piece 0 7 6 Item, 2 steel Hand sawes, at 1s. 4d. 0 2 8
Item, 2 Two-handsawes at 5s. 0 10 0 Item, a Whip-saw set and filed, with box,
file and wre^ 0 10 0 Item, 2 Hammers, at 12d. 0 2 0 Item, 3 Shovells, at 1s.
6d. 0 4 6 Item, 3 Spades, at 1s. 6d. 0 4 6 Item, 2 Awgurs* at 6d. 0 1 0 Item, 6
Chissells, at 6d. 0 3 0 Item, 2 Piercers stocked, at 4d. 0 0 8 Item, 3 Gimlets,
at 2d. 0 0 6 Item, 2 Hatchets, at 1s. 9d. 0 3 6 Item, 2 Frowes to cleave Pales,
at 1s. 6d. 0 3 0 Item, 2 Hand-bills, at 1s. 8d. 0 3 4 Item, one Grindstone 0 4
0 Item, Nails of all sorts 2 0 0 Item, 2 Pickaxes, at 2s. 6d. 0 3 0 Sum. 6 7
2 whereof one man's part is 1 5 8

Household Implements.
For 6 persons, and so after the rate, for more

l s d Item, one Iron pot 0 7 0 Item, one Iron kettle 0 6 0 Item, one large
Drying Pan 0 2 6 Item, one Gridiron 0 1 6 Item, two Skillets 0 5 0 Item, one
Spit 0 2 0 Item, Platters, Dishes, and spoones of wood 0 4 0 Sum. 1 8 0
whereof one man's part is, 0 4 8

An estimate of the whole charge of transporting one servant, and providing him
of all necessaries for one year.

l. s. d. Inprimis, In Victuals 3 17 8 Item, In apparel 4 0 10 Item, In
bedding 1 1 0 Item, In Arms 2 5 6 Item, In tools 1 5 8 Item, In household
Implements 0 4 8 Item, Caske to put his goods in 0 10 0 Item, freight for his
goods at half a tun 1 10 0 Item, For his Victual, and passage by Sea 6 0 0
20. 15. 4

Of which charge, the Aduenturer having the greatest part of it in provision
and goods; in case any servant die by the way, or shortly after his coming
thither, the goods of that servant being sold in the Country, will return all
his charge again, with advantage.

A Computation of a servants labor, and the profit that may arise by it, by
instance in some particulars, which may be put in practice the first year.

l. s. d. One man may at the season plant so much corn, as ordinarily yields
of Wheat 100. bushels, worth upon the place, at Two shillings a Bushel. 10 0
0 Of Beans and Pease, 20. bushels, worth at three shillings a bushel. 3 0 0
The same man will plant of Tobacco, between 800. and a 1000. weight, which at
the lowest rate, at two pound 10. shil. the hundred, is worth, 20 0 0 The same
man may within the same year, in the winter, make 4000. of Pipe-staves, worth
upon the place four pound the thousand. 16 0 0 49. 00 00.

Beside all their other labors in building, fencing, clearing of ground,
raising of Cattle, gardening, etc.

If a man's labor be employed in Hemp and Flax, it will yield him as much
profit, as Tobacco at this rate; and so in many other Commodities, whereof this
Country is capable.

No man need to doubt of the vent of these Commodities, for Merchants send
shipping to those parts, who will buy off these Commodities at the aforesaid
rates, in as great a quantity, as they shall be able to make ready for them;
because they yield a great increase of profit in other Countries, which the
Planters themselves may make advantage of to themselves, if they have shipping,
and think fit to deal in such a kind of trade. As for instance, a 1000. of
Pipe-staves, which are rated upon the place at four pound, being carried to
the Canaries, will yield 15. or 20. l. Where likewise, and at the Western
Islands, the Indian Corn will yield a great increase of benefit. The benefit
also which may be raised by trade out of Swine only, may easily be conceived
to be very great, seeing they multiply exceedingly, ask little tendance, and
less charge of keeping in that Country, so abounding with Mast, Chestnuts,
etc. For Porke being transported into Spain, or the Western Islands will yield
about 6. pence a pound, and Bacon, 8. pence. or 9. pence.

A note for the Adventurers memory, of such things as he may (if he please)
carry with him, either for his own better accommodation (on Shipboard, or for
some time after his arrival in Maryland) or for trade, according to his
ability.

Provision for Shipboard.
FIne Wheate-flower, close and well packed, to make puddings, etc. Clarret-wine
burnt. Canary Sack. Conserues, Marmalades, Suckets, and Spices. Sallet Oil.
Prunes to stew. Live Poultry. Rice, Butter, Holland-cheese, or old Cheshire,
gammons of Bacon, Porke, dried Neates-tongues* Beef packed up in Vinegar, some
Weather-sheepe, meats baked in earthen potts, Legs of Mutton minced, and
stewed, and close packed up in tried Sewet, or Butter, in earthen pots: Juice
of Limons, etc.

Provision for trade in Virginia, or Maryland.
If he be minded to furnish himself with Cattle in Virginia, his best way is
to carry a superfluity of woollen, or linen cloth, callicoes, says, hatts,
shoes, stockings, and all sorts of clothing; of Wine, Sugar, Prunes, Rasins,
Currance, Honey, Spice, and Grocery wares, with which he may procure himself
cattle there, according to the stock he deals withal. About 4. or 5. Pound
laid out here in commodities*, will there buy a Cow; and between 20. and 30.
shillings, a breeding Sow. The like Commodities will furnish him either there,
or in Maryland, with Hogs, Poultry, and Corn. He may do well also to carry
a superfluity of Knives, Combs, and Bracelets, to trade with the women
Natives; and some Hatchets, Howes, and Axes, to trade with the men for Venison,
Fish, Turkies, Corn, Fawnes to store a Park, etc.

Provision for his House.
Iron, and Locks, and Hinges, and bolts; etc. Mustard-seede, Glass and Lead
for his windows, Malt for beer, a Hogshead of Beef or Porke: Two or three
Firkins of Butter, a hundred or two of old Cheeses; a gallon of honey, Soape
and Candles, Iron wedges, Pookes for Rennet to make cheese: a good Mastiffe,
etc.

Provision for Husbandry.
Seed Wheat, Rye, Barley, and Oats (the best way to preserve it from heating
at sea, is to carry it in the ear) Kernells of Pears and Apples (especially
of Pepins, Pearemaines, and Dusons) for the making hereafter of Cider, and
Perry; the stones and seeds of all those fruits and roots, and herbs, which
he desires to have. Good store of claver grass seed, to make good meadow.

Provision for Fishing and Fowling.
Inprimis, necessaries for a boat of 3. or 4. Tun; as Spikes, Nails, Pitch,
Tar, Ocome, Canuis for a sail, Ropes, Anchor, Iron for the Ruther:
Fishing-lines for Cod and Macrills, etc. Cod-hookes, and Macrill-hookes, a
Seane or Basse-net, Herring-netts, Lead, Fowling-pieces of six foot; Powder
and Shot, and Flint Stones; a good Water-Spaniell, etc.

A direction for choice of servants.
IN the taking of servants, he may do well to furnish himself with as many as
he can, of useful and necessary Arts: A Carpenter, of all others the most
necessary; A Mill-wright, Ship-wright, Boate-wright, Wheele-wright,
Brick-maker, Brick-layer, Potter; one that can cleave Lath and Pale, and make
Pipe-slaves, etc. A Ioyner, Cooper, Turner, Sawyer, Smith, Cutler,
Leather-dresser, Miller, Fisherman, and Gardener. These will be of most use;
but any lusty young able man, that is willing to labor and take pains,
although he have no particular trade, will be beneficial enough to his Master.

And in case any Adventurer shall be unprovided of such men to supply his
number, he may have directions at the place where these books are to be had,
how and where he may provide himself of as many as he please.

The form of binding a servant.
This Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the (...) day of (...) year of
our Sovereign Lord King Charles, etc. between (...) day of (...) of the one
party, and (...) day of (...) on the other party, Witnesses, that the said
(...) does hereby covenant promise, and grant, to and with the said (...) his
Executors and Assigns, to serve him from the day of the date hereof, ^^till
his first and next arrival in Maryland; and after for and during the term of
(...) years, in such service and employment, as he the said (...) or his
assigns shall there employ him, according to the custom of the Country in
the like kind. In consideration whereof, the said (...) does promise and grant,
to and with the said (...) to pay for his passing, and to find him with Meat,
Drink, Apparel and Lodging, with other necessaries during the said term; and
at the end of the said term, to give him one whole years provision of Corn,
and fifty acres of Land, according to the order of the country. In witness
whereof, the said (...) has hereunto put his hand and seal, the day and year
above written.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of H(...)

The usual term of binding a servant, is for five years; but for any
artificer, or one that shall deserve more then ordinary, the Adventurer shall
do well to shorten that time, and add encouragements of another nature (as he
shall see cause) rather then to want such useful men.

A Form of a Bill of Lading, to be taken from the Master of the Sip, by every
Aduenterer, for the better securing of the transportation of his goods.
SHipped by the grace of God in good order, and well conditioned by (...) in
and upon the good Ship, called the (...) whereof is master, under God, for this
present voyage (...) and now riding at anchor in the (...) and by Gods grace,
bound for (...) to say being marked and numbered, as in the margent, and are to
be delivered in the like good order and well conditioned, at the Port of Saint
Mary's, in Maryland (the danger of the Seas only excepted) unto (...) or to
assigns, paying fraught for the said goods with primage and avarage
accustomed. In witness whereof, the Master or Purser of the said ship has
affirmed to three Bills of Lading, all of this tenor and date, the one of which
three bills being accomplished, the other two to stand void. And so God send
the good Ship to her desired Port in safety. Amen. Dated in (...)

There is order taken for convenient houses to be set up at Saint Mary's, where
all strangers may at their first coming be entertained, with lodging and
other fitting accommodations, for themselves and their goods, till they can
better provide for themselves.

The names of the Gentlemen adventurers that are gone in person to this
Plantation.
Mr.
his Lordships brothers.
Leonard Calvert, the governor George Calvert.
Commissioners.
Jerome Hawley. Esquire Thomas Cornewallis. Esquire
Richard Gerard, son to Sir Thomas Gerard Knight and Baronet. sons of the
Lady Anne Wintour.
Edward Wintour. Freder: Wintour.
Henry Wiseman, son to Sir Thomas Wiseman Knight. John Saunders. Edward
Cranfield. Henry Green. Nicholas Ferfax. John Baxter. Thomas Dorrell. Captain
John Hill. John Medcalfe. William Saire.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE CHARTER OF MARY LAND.
CHARLES By the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come greeting.

WHEREAS Our right Trusty and Wellbeloved Subject Cecilius Caluert, Baron of
Baltemore in our Kingdom of Ireland, Son and heir of Sir George Caluert
Knight, late Baron of Baltemore in the same Kingdom of Ireland, pursuing his
Fathers intentions, being excited with a laudable and pious zeal for the
propagation of the Christian Faith, and the enlargement of our Empire and
Dominion, has humbly besought leave of Us, by his industry and charge, to
transport an ample Colony of the English Nation unto a certain Country
hereafter described, in the parts of America, not yet cultivated and planted,
though in some parts thereof inhabited by certain barbarous people, having no
knowledge of Almighty God, and has humbly besought our Royal Majesty to
give, grant, and confirm all the said Country, with certain Privileges and
Jurisdictions, requisite for the good government, and state of his Colony, and
Country aforesaid, to him and his heirs for ever.

KNOW YE therefore, that We favoring The bounds.
the Pious, and Noble purpose of the said Barons of Baltemore, of our special
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given, granted, and
confirmed, and by this our present Charter, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
do give, grant and confirm unto the said Cecilius, now Baron of Baltemore,
his heirs and Assigns, all that part of a Penjnsula, lying in the parts of
America, between the Ocean on the East, and the Bay of Chesopeack on the West,
and divided from the other part thereof, by a right line drawn from the
Promontory or Cape of Land called Watkins Point (situate in the foresaid Bay,
near the river of Wigh^^) on the West, unto the maine Ocean on the East; and
between that bound on the South, unto that part of Delaware Bay on the North,
which lies under the fortieth degree of Northerly Latitude from the
Equinoctial, where New England ends; And all that tract of land between the
bounds aforesaid; that is to say, passing from the foresaid Bay, called
Delaware Bay, in a right line by the degree aforesaid, unto the true Meridian
of the first fountain of the River of Pattowmeck, and from thence trending
toward the South unto the farther bank of the foresaid River, and following
the West and South side thereof unto a certain place called Cinquack, situate
near the mouth of the said River, where it falls into the Bay of Chesopeack,
and from thence by a straight line unto the foresaid Promontory, and place
called Watkins Point* (So that all that tract of land divided by the line
aforesaid, drawn between the maine Ocean, and Watkins Point unto the
Promontory called Cape Charles, and all its apurtenances, do remain entirely
excepted to us, our heirs, and Successors for ever.)

WE DO also grant and confirm unto the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs
and Assigns, all Islands, and Iletts within the limitts aforesaid, and all and
singular the Islands and Iletts, which are, or shall be in the Ocean, within 10.
Leagues from the Eastern shore of the said Country, toward the East, with
all and singular Ports, Harbors, Bays, Rivers, and Inletts, belonging unto the
Country, or Islands aforesaid: And all the Soil, lands, Fields, Woods,
Mountains, Fennes, Lakes, Rivers, Bays, and Inletts, situate, or being within
the bounds, and limits aforesaid, with the fishing of all sorts of fish,
Whales, Sturgeons, and all other royal fishes in the Sea, Bays, Inletts, or
Rivers, within the premises: and the fish therein taken: and moreover all
Veins, Mines, and Quarries, as well discovered, as not discovered, of Gold,
Silver, Gemmes, and precious stones, and all other whatsoever, be it of Stones,
Mettalls, or of any other thing, or matter whatsoever, found, or to be found
within the Country, Isles, and limits aforesaid. And Furthermore the Patronages
and Aduowsons of all Churches, which (as Christian Religion shall increase
within the Country, Isles, Iletts, and limits aforesaid) shall happen hereafter
to be erected: together with license and power, to build and found Churches,
Chappells, and Oratories, in convenient and fit places within the premises, and
to cause them to be dedicated, and consecrated according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws of our Kingdom of England: Together with all and singular the like, and
as ample rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties
Immunities, Royal rights, and franchises of what kind soever temporal, as
well by Sea, as by land, within the Country, Isles, Iletts, and limits
aforesaid; To have, exercise, Jurisdiction of a Count Palatine.
use and enjoy the same, as amply as any Bishop of Durham, within the
Bishopric, or County Palatine of Durham, in our Kingdom of England, has at
any time heretofore had, held, used, or enjoyed, or of right ought, or might
have had, held, used, or enjoyed.

AND HIM the said now Lord Baltemore, his Heirs and Assigns, We do by these
Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, make, create, and constitute the
true and absolute Lords, and Proprietaries of the Country aforesaid, and of
all other the Premises, (except before excepted) saving always, the faith and
allegiance, and Sovereign dominion due unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors.

TO HAVE, hold, possess, and enjoy the said Country, Isles, Iletts, and other
the Premises, unto the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and assigns, to the
sole and proper use and behoof of him the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs
and assigns for ever.

TO BE holden of Us, Our Heirs, and Tenure.
Successors, Kings of England, as of Our Castle of Windsor, in Our County of
Berkshire, in free and common soccage, by fealty only, for all services, and
not in Capite, or by Knights service: YIELDING and paying therefore to Us, our
Heirs and Successors, two Indian Rent.
Arrows of those parts, to be delivered at Our said Castle of Windsor, every
year on the Tuesday in Easter week; and also the fifth part of all Gold and
Silver Oar within the limits aforesaid, which shall from time to time happen
to be found.

NOW THAT the said Country thus by Us granted, and described, may be eminent
above all other parts of the said territory, and dignified with larger titles:
Know ye that we of our further grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
have thought fit to erect the same Country and Islands into a Province, as out
of the fulness of Our royal Power, and Prerogative, We do, for Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors, erect, and incorporate them into a Province, and do
call it Mary land, and so from henceforth will have it called.

AND FORASMVCH as We have hereby made, and ordained the foresaid now Lord
Baltemore, the true Lord, and Proprietary of all the Province aforesaid: Know
ye therefore moreover, that We, reposing especial trust and confidence in
the fidelity, wisdom, Justice, and Provident circumspection of the said now
Lord Power to enact Laws.
Baltemore, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors* do grant free, full, and
absolute power, by virtue of these Presents, to him and his heirs, for the
good and happy government of the said Province, to ordain, make, enact, and
under his and their seals to publish any Laws whatsoever, appertaining either
unto the public State of the said Province, or unto the private utility of
particular Persons, according unto their best discretions, of and with the advice assent and approbation of the Freemen of the said Province, or the
greater part of them* or of their delegates or deputies, whom for the enacting
of the said Laws, when, and as often as need shall require, We will that the
said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, shall assemble in such sort and form,
as to him or them shall seem best: And the same laws duly to execute upon all
people, within the said Province, and limits thereof, for the time being, or
that shall be constituted under the government, and power of him or them,
either sailing toward Maryland, or returning from thence toward England or
any other of Ours, or foreign Dominions, by imposition of Penalties,
Imprisonment, or any other punishment; yea, if it shall be needful, and that
the quality of the offense require it, by taking away member or life, either by
him the said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, or by his or their Deputies,
Lievtenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Officers, and Ministers to be
ordained or appointed, according to the Tenor, and true intention of these
Presents: And likewise to appoint and establish any Judges and Justices,
Magistrates and Officers whatsoever, at sea and Land, for what causes soever,
and with what power soever, and in such form, as to the said now Lord
Baltemore, or his heirs, shall seem most convenient: Also to remit, release,
pardon, and abolish, whether before Judgment, or after, all crimes or offenses
whatsoever, against the said Laws: and to do all and every other thing or
things, which unto the complete establishment of Justice, unto Courts,
Praetories, and Tribunals, forms of Judicature and manners of proceeding, do
belong: although in these Presents, express mention be not made thereof, and
by Judges by them delegated, to award Process, hold Pleas, and determine in
all the said Courts and Tribunalls, all actions, suits, and causes whatsoever,
as well criminal as civil, personal, real, mixed, and praetoriall; which
laws, so as aforsaid to be published, Our pleasure is, and so We enjoin,
require, and command, shall be most absolute and available in Law, and that all
the Liege people, and subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do observe and
keep the same inuiolably, in those parts, so far as they concern them,
under the pains therein expressed, or to be expressed: Provided nevertheless,
that the said Laws be consonant to reason, and be not repugnant or contrary,
but as near as conveniently may be, agreeable to the Laws, Statutes,
Customs, and Rights of this our Kingdom of England.

AND FORASMVCH, as in the Government of so great a Province, sudden accidents
do often happen, whereunto it will be necessary to apply a remedy, before the
Freeholders of the said Province, their Delegates, or Deputies, can be
assembled to the making of Laws, neither will it be convenient, that instantly
upon every such emergent occasion, so great a multitude should be called
together: Therefore for the better government of the said Province, We will
and ordain, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do
grant unto the said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, that the said now Lord
Baltemore and his heirs, by themselves, or by their Magistrates and Officers
in that behalf duly to be ordained as aforesaid, may make and constitute, fit
and wholesome Ordinances, from time to time, within the said Province, to be
kept and observed, as well for the preservation of the Peace, as for the better
government of the people there inhabiting, and publicly to notify the same to
all persons, whom the same does, or any way may concern; which Ordinances, Our
pleasure is, shall be observed inviolably within the said Province, under the
pains therein to be expressed. So as the said Ordinances be consonant to
reason, and be not repugnant nor contrary, but so far as conveniently may be,
agreeable with the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdom of England, and so as the
said Ordinances be not extended, in any sort to bind, charge, or take away the
right or interest of any person, or persons, of, or in their Life, Member,
Freehold, Goods, or Chattells.

FVRTHERMORE, that this new Colony License to go to Mary land.
may the more happily increase by the multitude of people resorting thither,
and may likewise be the more strongly defended from the incursions of Saluages,
or other enemies, Pirates and Robbers: Therefore We, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do give and grant by these Presents, Power, license, and liberty
unto all the liege people, and subjects, both present, and future, of Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors (excepting those who shall be specially forbidden) to
transport themselves and families unto the said Province, with convenient
shipping* and fitting provisions, and there to settle themselves, dwell and
inhabit, and to build, and fortify Castles, Forts, and other places of
strength for the public, and their own private defense, at the appointment of
the said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, the Statute of fugitives, or any
other whatsoever, to the contrary of the premises, in any wise notwithstanding.

AND WE will also, and of Our more People borne in Maryland, made Denizens of
England.
special grace, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, we do straightly
enjoin, constitute, ordain, and command, that the said Province shall be of
Our Allegiance, and that all and singular the Subjects, and Liege people of Us,
Our Heirs, and Successors, transported, or to be transported into the said
Province, and the children of them, and of such as shall descend from them,
there already borne, or hereafter to be borne, be, and shall be Denizens, and
Lieges of Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, of Our Kingdom of England, and
Ireland, and be in all things held, treated, reputed, and esteemed as the liege
faithful people of Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, borne within Our Kingdom
of England: and likewise any Lands, Tenements, Revenues, Services, and other
hereditaments whatsoever, within Our Kingdom of England, and other Our
Dominions, may inherit, or otherwise purchase, receive, take, have, hold* buy,
and possess, and them may occupy, and enjoy, give, sell, aliene, and bequeath,
as likewise, all Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges, of this Our Kingdom
of England, freely, quietly, and peaceably, have and possess, occupy and
enjoy, as Our liege people, borne, or to be borne within Our said Kingdom of
England, without the let, molestation, vexation, trouble, or grievance of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors: any Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Provision to the
contrary hereof notwithstanding.

AND FVRTHERMORE, That Lincence to transport goods and merchandise
Our Subjects may be the rather encouraged to undertake this expedition, with
ready and cheerful minds; KNOW YE, that We of Our special grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, do give and grant, by virtue of these presents,
as well unto the said now Lord Baltemore and his Heirs, as to all other that
shall from time to time repair unto that province, with a purpose to inhabit
there, or to trade with the Natives of the said Province, full license to Lade
and Freight in any Ports whatsoever, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and into
the said Province of Maryland, by them, their servants or assigns, to
transport, all and singular, their Goods, Wares, and Merchandise; as likewise
all sorts of grain whatsoever and any other things whatsoever, necessary for
food or clothing (not prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of our Kingdoms and
Dominions to be carried out of the said kingdoms) without any let, or
molestation of Us, Our Heirs, or Successors, or of any of the officers of Us,
Our Heirs, or Successors; (saving always, to Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
the Impositions, Customs, and other duties and payments for the said Wares and
Merchandise) any Statute, Act, Ordinance or other thing whatsoever to the
contrary notwithstanding.

AND because in so remote a Country, and Power of war and peace.
situate amongst so many barbarous nations, the incursions as well of the
salvages themselves, as of other enemies, pirates and robbers, may probably be
feared: Therefore We have given, and for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do
give power by these presents, unto the now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and
assigns, by themselves, or their Captains, or other their officers, to Leauy,
Muster and Train, all sorts of men, of what condition, or wheresoever borne,
in the said Province of Maryland for the time being, and to make war, and to
pursue the Enemies and Robbers aforesaid, as well by sea as by land, yea, even
without the limits of the said Province, and (by Gods assistance) to vanquish
and take them, and being taken, to put them to death by the Law of war, or to
save them at their pleasure, and to do all and every other thing which unto
the charge and office of a Captain General of an Army belongs, or has
accustomed to belong, as fully and freely, as any Captain General of an army
has ever had the same.

ALSO, Our Will and Pleasure is, and by Martial Law.
this Our Charter, We do give unto the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs,
and assigns, full power, liberty, and authority, in case of Rebellion, Tumult,
or Sedition, if any should happen (which God forbid) either upon the land
within the Province aforesaid, or upon the maine sea, in making a voyage
thither, or returning from thence, by themselves, or their captains, deputies
or other officers, to be authorized under their seals for that purpose (to
whom we also, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant by these
presents, full power and authority) to exercise Martial Law against mutinous
and seditious persons of those parts, such as shall refuse to submit themselves
to his, or their government, or shall refuse to serve in the wars, or shall
fly to the Enemy, or forsake their Ensigns, or be loyterers, or straglers, or
otherwise how soever offending against the Law, Custom, and Discipline
military, as freely, and in as ample manner and form, as any Captain general
of an army by virtue of his office might, or has accustomed to use the same.

FVRTHERMORE, That the way to Power to confer honor.
honors and dignities, may not seem to be altogether precluded and shut up, to
men well borne, and such as shall prepare themselves unto this present
Plantation, and shall desire to deserve well of Us, and Our Kingdoms, both in
peace and war, in so far distant and remote a Country: Therefore We, for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, do give free, and absolute power, unto the said now
Lord Baltemore, his heirs and assigns, to confer favors, rewards, and
honors, upon such inhabitants within the Province aforesaid, as shall deserve
the same; and to invest them, with what titles and dignities soever, as he
shall think fit, (so as they be not such as are now used in England) As
likewise to erect and incorporate, Towns into Boroughes and Boroughs into
Cities, with convenient privileges and immunities, according to the merit of
the inhabitants, and the fitness of the places, and to do all and every other
thing or things, touching the premises, which to him, or them, shall seem
meet and requisite; albeit they be such as of their own nature might
otherwise require a more special commandment and warrant, then in these
Presents is expressed.

WE will also, and by these Presents, for Us Our Heirs and Successors, We do
give and grant license, by this Our Charter, unto the said now Lord Baltemore,
his heirs and assigns, and to all the inhabitants and dwellers in the
Province aforesaid, both present and to come, to import, or unlade, by
themselves, or their servants factors, or assigns, all Merchandises and goods
whatsoever, that shall arise of the fruits and commodities of the said
Province, either by land or sea, into any of the ports of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, in Our kingdoms of England, or Ireland, or otherwise to dispose of
the said goods, in the said Ports, and if need be, within one year next after
the unlading of the same, to lade the said merchandises and goods again, into
the same or other ships, and to export the same into any other Countries,
either of our Dominion or foreign, (being in Amity with Us, Our Heirs and
Successors) Provided always, that they pay such Customs, Impositions*
Subsidies and Duties for the same, to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as the
rest of Our Subjects of Our Kingdom of England, for the time being, shall be
bound to pay: beyond which, We will not that the inhabitants of the foresaid
Province of Maryland, shall be any way charged.

AND furthermore, of Our more ample and special Grace, certain knowledge, and
mere motion, We do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said
now Lord Baltemore* his heirs and assigns full and absolute power and
authority, to make, erect, and constitute* within the Province of Maryland,
and the Isles and Iletts aforesaid, such, and so many Seaports, Harbors,
Creekes, and other places, for discharge and unlading of goods and
merchandises, out of Ships, Boats, and other vessels, and lading them, and in
such and so many places, and with such Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties and
Privileges unto the said ports belonging, as to him or them shall seem most
expedient. And that all and singular the Ships, Boats, and other Vessels,
which shall come for merchandise and trade unto the said Province, or out of
the same shall depart; shall be laden and unladen only at such Ports as shall
be so erected and constituted by the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs or
assigns, any Use, Custom, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding;
saving always unto Us, Our heirs and Successors, and to all the Subjects (of
Our Kingdom of England and Ireland) of Us, Our Heirs and Successors free
liberty of fishing for Seafish, as well in the Sea, Bays, Inletts, and
navigable Rivers as in the Harbors, Bays and Creekes of the Province
aforesaid, and the Privileges of salting and drying their fish on the shore of
the said Province; and for the same cause, to cut and take underwood, or twiggs
there growing, and to build Cottages and Shedds necessary in this behalf, as
they heretofore have, or might reasonably have used; which Liberties and
Privileges, nevertheless, the Subjects aforesaid, of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, shall enjoy without any notable damage, or injury, to be done to
the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs, or assigns, or to the dwellers and
inhabitants of the said Province, in the Ports, Creekes and shores aforesaid,
and especially in the woods and Copses growing within the said Province: And if
any shall do any such damage, or injury, he shall incur the heavy
displeasure of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the punishment of the Laws; and
shall moreover make satisfaction.

WE do furthermore, will, appoint, and ordain, and by these Presents, for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the said now Lord Baltemore,
his heirs and assigns, that he the said Lord Baltemore, his heirs and
assigns, may from time to time for ever, have and enjoy the Customs and
Subsidies, in the Ports, Harbors, and other Creekes and places aforesaid,
within the Province aforesaid; payable, or due for merchandises and wares,
there to be laded or unladed, the said Customs and Subsidies to be reasonably
assessed (upon any occasion) by themselves and the people there, as aforesaid;
to whom we give power by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors upon
just cause* and in a due proportion, to assesse and impose the same.

AND FVRTHER, of Our special Power to create Tenures.
grace, and of Our certain knowledge, and mere motion, We have given
granted, and confirmed, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do give, grant, and confirm unto the said now Lord Baltemore, his
heirs and assigns, full and absolute license, power, and authority, that he
the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and assigns, from time to time
hereafter for ever, at his, or their will, and pleasure, may assign, aliene,
grant, demise, or enfeoffe of the Premises so many, and such parts and
parcells, to him or them that shall be willing to purchase the same, as they
shall think fit, TO HAVE and to hold to them the said person, or persons,
willing to take or purchase the same, their heirs and assigns in fee simple,
or fee tail, or for term of life, or lives, or years, to be held of the
said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs, and assigns, by such services, customs,
and rents, as shall seem fit to the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and
assigns; and not immediately of Us, Our Heirs or Successors: and to the same
person or persons, and to all and every of them. We do give and grant by
these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, license, authority, and
power, that such person or persons may take the premises, or any parcel
thereof, of the foresaid now Lord Baltemore* his heirs or assigns, and the
same hold to themselves, their heirs, or assigns, (in what estate of
inheritance soever, in fee simple, or in fee tail, or otherwise, as to them,
and the now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and assigns, shall seem expedient) of
the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and assigns; the statute made in the
Parliament of Edward, Son of King Henry, late King of England, Our
Predecessor, commonly called the Statute Quia emptores terrarum, lately
published in Our Kingdom of England, or any other Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Use, Law, or Custom, or any other thing, cause, or matter thereupon heretofore
had, done published, ordained, or provided to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding; And by these Presents, We give, and grant license unto the
said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, to erect any parcells of land within
the Province aforesaid, into Manors, and in every of the said Manors, to
have, and to hold a Court Baron, with all things whatsoever, which to a Court
Baron do belong, and to have and hold view of Franck-pledge, (for the
conservation of the peace, and the better government of those Parts*) by
themselves or their stewards, or by the Lords for the time being of other
Manors, to be deputed, when they shall be erected: and in the same to use
all things belonging to View of Franck-Pledge.

AND FVRTHER, Our pleasure is, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and
Successors, we do covenant and grant to and with the said now Lord Baltemore,
his heirs and assigns; That We, Our Heirs and Successors, shall at no time
hereafter, set, or make, or cause to be set, any Imposition, Custom, or other
Taxation, Rate, or Contribution whatsoever, in or upon the dwellers and
inhabitants of the foresaid Province, for their Lands, Tenements, goods or
Chattells within the said Province, or in or upon any goods or merchandises,
within the said Province, or to be laden, or unladen within any the Ports or
harbors of the said Province: And Our pleasure is, and for Us, Our Heirs, and
Successors, We charge and command, that this Our Declaration shall be hence
forward from time to time received, and allowed in all Our Courts, and before
all the Judges of Us Our Heirs and Successors, for a sufficient and lawful
discharge payment, and acquittance; Commanding all and singular, our Officers
and Ministers of Us, our Heirs and Successors, and enjoining them upon pain
of Our high displeasure, that they do not presume at any time to attempt any
thing to the contrary of the premises, or that they do in any sort with stand
the same, but that they be at all times ayding and assisting, as is fitting,
unto the said now Lord Baltemore, and his heirs, and to the Inhabitants, and
Merchants of Maryland aforesaid, their servants, ministers, factors and
assigns, in the full use and fruition of the benefit of this Our Charter.

AND FVRTHER, Our pleasure is, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, We do grant unto the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs and
assigns, and to the Tenants, and Inhabitants of the said Province of
Maryland, both present, and to come, and to every of them, that the said
Province, Tenants, and Inhabitants of the said Colony or Country, shall not
from henceforth be held or reputed as a member, or a part of the land of
Virginia, or of any other Colony whatsoever, now transported, or hereafter to
be transported, nor shall be depending on, or subject to their government in
any thing, from whom We do separate that, and them, and Our pleasure is, by
these Presents that they be separated, and that they be subject immediately to
Our Crown of England, as depending thereof for ever.

AND IF PERCHANCE hereafter it should happen, that any doubts or questions
should arise, concerning the true sense and understanding of any word, clause,
or sentence contained in this Our present Charter, We will, ordain, and
command, that at all times, and in all things, such Interpretation be made
thereof, and allowed in any of Our Courts whatsoever, as shall be judged most
aduantagious, and favorable unto the the said now Lord Baltemore, his heirs
and assigns. PROVIDED always, that no Interpretation be admitted thereof, by
which Gods Holy and Truly Christian Religion, or the allegiance due unto Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, may in any thing suffer any prejudice, or diminution.

ALTHOUGH express mention be not made in these Presents, of the true yearly
value, or certainty of the premises, or of any part thereof, or of other gifts
and grants, made by Us, Our Heirs, and Predecessors, unto the said now Lord
Baltemore, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or
restraint heretofore had, made, published, ordained, or provided, or any other
thing, cause, or matter whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Pattents.
Witness Our self at Westminster, the Twentieth day of June, In the Eighth
year of Our Reign.


