A DISCOVERY OF THE MANIFOLD CORRVPTIONS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES BY THE
Heretics of our days, specially the English Sectaries, and of their foul
dealing herein, by partial and false translations to the advantage of their
he^^sies, in their English Bibles used and authorized since the time of Schism.

By GREGORY MARTIN one of the readers of Divinity in the ENGLISH COLLEGE OF
RHEMES.

2 Cor. 2. Non sumus sicut plurimi, adulterantes verbum Dei, sed ex sinceritate
sed sicut ex Deo, coram Deo, in Christo loquimur.

That is,

We are not as very many, adulterating the word of God, but of sincerity, and
as of God, before God, in Christ we speak.

Printed at RHEMES, By John Fogny.

1582.

THE PREFACE CONTAINING FIVE SUNDRY ABUSES OR CORRVPTIONS OF HOLY Scriptures,
common to al Heretics, and agreing specially to these of our time: with many
other necessary aduertisements to the reader.
Heretics five ways specially abuse the Scriptures.
AS it has been alvvaies the fashion of Heretics to pretend Scriptures, for
show of their cause: so has it been also their custom and property to abuse
the said Scriptures many ways, in favor of their errors.

1 Denying certain books or parts of books.
1 One way is, to deny whole books thereof or parts of books, when they
are evidently against them. So did (for example) Ebion al S. Paul's epistles,
Manicheus the Acts of the Apostles, Alogiani S. John's Gospel, Marcion many
pieces of S. Lukes Gospel, and so did both these and other heretics in other
books, denying and allowing what they list, as is evident by S. Ireneus, S.
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and al antiquity.

2 Doubting of their authority, and calling them into question
2 An other way is, to call into question at the least and make some doubt of
the authority of certain books of holy Scriptures, thereby to diminish their
credit. so did Manicheus affirm of the whole new Testament, that it was
not written by the Apostles: and peculiarly of S. Matthevves Gospel, that it
was some other ma^s under his name: and therefore not of such credit, but that
it might in some part be refused. so did Marcio^ and the Aria^s deny the
epistle to the Hebrews to be S. Paul's, Epiphan. li. 2. haer. 69: Eusebius. li. 4.
hist. c. 27. and Alogiani the Apocalypse to be S. John's the Evangelist. Epiph.
and August. in haer. Alogianorum.

3 Voluntary expositions according to every ones fancy or heresy.
3 An other way is, to expound the Scriptures after their own private conceit
and fantasy, not according to the approved sense of the holy ancient fathers
and Catholic Church. so did Theodorus Mopsuestites (Act. Synod. 5.) affirm of
all the books of the Prophets, and of the Psalms, that they spoke not
evidently of Christ, but that the ancient fathers did voluntarily dravv those
sayings unto Christ which were spoken of other matters. so did al heretics,
that would seem to ground their heresies upon Scriptures, and to avouch them
by Scriptures expounded according to their own sense and imagination.

4 Changing some words or sentences of the very original text. Tertul. cont.
Marcio. li. 1. in princ.
4 An other way is, to alter the very original text of the holy Scripture, by
adding, taking away or changing it here and there for their purpose. so did the
Arians in sundry places, and the Nestoria^s in the first epistle of S. John,
and especially Marcion, who was therefore called, Mus Ponticus, the mouse of
Pontus, because he had gnavven (as it were) certain places with his
corruptions, whereof some are said to remain in the Greek text until this
day. Tertull. li. 5.


5 False and heretical translation.
5 An other way is, to make false translations of the Scriptures for the
maintenance of error and heresy. so did the Arians (as S. Hierom notes in
26. Esa.) read and translate Proverb. 8. Dominus creauit me in initio viarum
suarum. that is, The Lord created me in the beginning of his ways, (...),
possedit. (...)
so to make Christ the wisdoms of God, a more creature. S. Augustine also li.
5. Cont. Julian. c. 2. notes it as the interpretation of some Pelagian Genesis 3.
Fecerunt sibi vesti menta, for, perizomata or campestria. that is, They made
them selves garments. whereas the word of the Scripture is, breeches or aprons
proper and peculiar to cover the secret parts. Again, the self same
Heretics did read falsely To. 5. Aug. ep. 89. and lib. 1. de pec. mer. ca 11.
(...).
Regnauit mors ab Adam vsque ad Moysen etia^ in eos qui peccaueru^t in
similitudine^ praeuaricationis Adae, that is, Death reigned from Adam to Moses
even on them that sinned after the similitude of the preuarication of Adam, to
maintain their heresy against original sin, that none were infected
therewith, or subject to death and damnation, but by sinning actually as Adam
did. Thus did the old Heretics.

6 what these of our days? is it credible that being so well warned by the
condemnation and detestation of them, they also would be as mad and as impious
as those? Heretics (gentle Reader) be alvvaies like Heretics, and howsoever
they differ in opinions or names, yet in this point they agree, to abuse the
Scriptures for their purpose by all means possibly. I vvil but touch four
points of the five before mentioned, because my purpose is to stay upon the
last only, and to discipher their corrupt translations. That the Protestants
and Caluinistes use the foresaid five means of defacing the Scriptures.
But if I would stand upon the other also, were it not easy to show the
manner of their proceeding against the Scriptures to have been thus: to deny some
whole books and parts of books, to call other some into question, to expound
the rest at their pleasure, to pick quarrels to the very original and Canonical
text, to fester and infect the whole body of the Bible with cankred
translations?

7 Did not Luther deny S. James epistle and so contemn it that he called it an
epistle of straw, and not vvorthie of an Apostolical spirit? must I prove this
to M. Vvhitakers, who would never have * Cont. rat. Edm. Camp. page 11.
denied it so vehemently in the superlatiue degree for shame, if he had not
thought it more shame to grant it? I need not go far for the matter: Ask M.
Fulke, Retent. page 32. did. of the Rock p. 307. Luther. in nouo Test. Germa.
in Pref. Jacob.
and he vvil flatly confess it was so. Ask Calvin in arg. ep. Iacobi. ask
Flaccus Illyricus, in argum. ep. Iacobi. and you shall perceive it is very true.
I vvil not send you to the Catholic Germans and others, both of his own time
and after, that vvrote against him in the question of justification: among
whom not one omitteth this, being a thing so famous and infamous to the
confusion of that Arch heretic.

8 To let this pass: Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees are they not
most certainly rejected? and yet they were allowed and received for
Canonical, by the same authority that S. James epistle was. This epistle the
Caluinists are content to admit, because * Co^c. Carth. 3 can. 47.
so it pleased Calvin: those books they reject, because so also it pleased
him. And why did it so please Calvin? under pretense forsooth that they
vvereonce doubted of, and not taken for Canonical. but is that the true cause
in deed? How do they then * Argum. in ep. Iac.
receive S. James epistle as Canonical, having been before doubted of also, yea
(as * Whitaker. p. 10. ibid.
they say) rejected?

9 Mark gentle Reader for thy souls sake, and thou shall find, that heresy
and only heresy is the cause of their denying these books: so far, that
against the orders and Hierarchies and particular patronages of Angels, one of
them vvriteth thus in the name of the rest, ibid. p. 17. M Whitak. by these
words condemns their own Service book, which appointe^h these books of
Tobie and Ecclesiasticus, to be readde for holy Scripture, as the other. Do
they readde in their Churches Apocryphal and superstitious books for holy
Scripture? or is he a Puritan, that thus disgraceth their order of daily
Service?
We pass not for that Raphael of Tobie, neither do we acknovvledge those
seven Angels which he speaks of. all this is far from Canonical Scriptures
that the same Raphael records, and sauoureth I vvot not what superstition.
Against free vvil thus: I little care for the place of Ecclesiasticus, neither
vvil I believe free vvil, though he affirm an hundred times, That before men
is life and death. And against prayer for the dead, and intercession of
Saints, thus: As for the book of the Machabees, I do care less for it then
for the other. Judas dream concerning Onias I let pass as a dream. This is
their reverence of the Scriptures which have universally been reverenced for
Canonical in the Church of God above 1100 years, Conc. Carth. 3. and
particularly of many fathers long before. August. de doct. Christ. lib. 2 ca. 8.

10 As for parts of books do they not reject certain pieces of Daniel and of
Hester, because they are not in the Hebrew, which reason S. Augustine
rejects: or because they were once doubted of by certain of the fathers? by
which reason some part of S. Mark and S. Lukes Gospel might now also be
called in controversy, specially if it be true which M. Vvhitakers by a
figurative speech more then insinuates, That he can not see by what right
that which once was not in credit, page 10.
should by time win authority. Forgetting him self by and by, and in the
very next lines admitting S. James epistle (though before doubted of) for
Canonical Scriptures. M. Whitaker. book.
unless they receive it but of their courtesy, and so may refuse it when it
shall please them, which must needs be gathered of his words, as also many
other notorious absurdities, contradictions, and dumme bla^ckes. Which only to
note, were to confute M. whitakers by him self, being the Ansvverer for both
Universities.

11 For the second point, which is not the gross denial of books, but yet
calling of them in question, moving scruples about them, and diminishing their
authority and credit, I vvil go no further then to S. Paul's epistle to the
Hebrews, In the argument Bib. an. 1579.
which I vvil not ask why they doubt of, or rather think it not to be S.
Paul's, for they vvil tell me, because it was once in doubt (not considering
that it was in like manner doubted whether it were Canonical, and yet they
vvil not now deny but it is Canonical) but I must ask them and request them
to make a reasonable answer, why in their English Bible of the year 1579 and
1580 they presume to leave out S. Paul's name out of the very title of the said
epistle, which name is * (...)
in the Greek, and in Bezas Latin translation, both which they profess to
follow. See the title of the new Test. an. 1580. Does not the title tell them
that it is S. Paul's? why seek they further: or why do they change the
title, striking out S. Paul's name, if they meant to deal simply and
sincerely? and what an heretical peeuishnes is this, because Beza tells them
of one obscure Greek copy that has not Paul's name, and only one: that they
vvil rather follow it then al other copies both Greek and Latin? I report me
to al indifferent men of common sense, whether they do it not to diminish the
credit of the epistle.

12 I know very well that the authority of Canonical Scripture stands not
upon the certainty of the author, but yet to be Paul's or not Paul's,
Apostolical or not Apostolical, makes great difference of credit and
estimation. For, what made S. James epistle doubted of sometime, or the second
of S. Peter, and the rest, but that they were not thought to be the epistles
of those Apostles? This Luther savv very well, when he denied S. James epistle
to be sames the Apostles vvriting: If titles of books be of no importance,
then leave out Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, leave out Paul in his other
epistles also, and you shall much pleasure the Manichees and other old
Heretics: and if the titles make no difference, urge no more the title of the
Apocalypse, S. John the Divines, as though it were not S. John's the
Evangelists, and you shall much displeasure some Heretics now a days.
breefely, most certain it is, and they know it best by their own usual
doings, that it is a principal way to the discredit of any book* to deny it
to be that authors, under whose name it has been received.

13 But I come to the third point of volu^tarie expositions of the Scripture,
that is when every man expounds according to his error and Heresy. This
needs no proof, for we see it with our eyes. Look upon the Caluinists and
Puritanes at home, the Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluinists abroad: read their
books written vehemently, one sect against an other: are not their
expositions of one and the same Scripture as diverse and contrary, as their
opinions differ one from an other? Let the example at home be, their
controversy about the distinction of Ecclesiastical degrees, Archbishop,
Bishop, and minister: the example abroad, their diverse imaginations and
fantasies upon these most sacred words, Hoc est corpus meum.

14 And if you vvil yet have a further demonstration, this one may suffice for all. They reject Councels, and Fathers, and the Catholic Churches
interpretation, unless it be agreeable to Gods word, and whether it be agreeable
or no that Luther shall judge for the Lutherans, Calvin for the Caluinists,
Cartwright for the Puritanes, and an other for the Brethren of love: breefely
* Whitaker. pa. 17. and 120.
them selves vvil be judges both of Councels and Fathers whether they expound
the Scriptures well or no, and every youth among them upon confidence of his
spirit and knowledge vvil saucily control not only one but all the fathers
co^senting together, if it be against that which they imagine to be the truth.

15 Whereupon it rises that one of them defends this as very well said of
Luther, lb. page 101.
that he esteemed not the vvorth of a rush a thousand Augustines, Cyprians,
Churches, against him self. And an other very finely and figuratively, (as he
thought) against the holy Doctor and Martyr S. Cyprian affirming that the
Church of Rome can not err in faith, Praef. ad 6 theses Oxon page 25.
says thus: Pardon me Cyprian, I would gladly believe thee, but that
believing thee, I should not believe the Gospel. This is that which S.
Augustine says of the like men, Li. Confess. 1. ca. 14. li. 7. c. 20.
dulcissime vanos esse, non peritos sed perituros, nectam disertos in errore,
qua^ desertos a veritate. And I think verily that not only we, but the vviser
men among them selves smile at such eloquence, or pity it, saying this or the
like most truly, Cicero de Senect.
Prodierunt oratores noui, stulti adolescentuli.

16 The 4 point is, of picking quarrels to the very original text: for alter and
change it I hope they shall not be able in this vvatchful world of most
vigilant Catholics. But what they would do, if al Bibles were only in
their hands and at their commandment, Beza the mouse of Geneua, gnavveth the
text of Scripture.
guess by this: that Beza against the evidence of al copies both Greek and
Latin, (In his Annot. upon the new Test. set forth in the year 1556.) thinks
(...) is more then should be in the text Mat. 10: and (...) Luc. 22. and (...)
Act. 7: the first, against Peter's supremacy: the second, against the real
presence of Christ's blood in the B. Sacrament: the third, against the making of
whatsoever images, whether they be adored or no. Thus you see how the mouse
of Geneua (as I told you before of Marcion the mouse of Pontus) knibbleth and
gnavveth about it, though he can not bite it of altogether.

17 He does the like in sundry places which you may see in his Annotations
Act. 7. v. 16. Where he is saucie against al copies Greek and Latin to
pronounce corruption, corruption, auouching and endeavoring to prove that it
must be so, and that with these words. To what purpose should the holy
Ghost, or Luke, add this? Act. 8. v. 26. But because those places concern no
controversy, I say no more but that he biteth at the text, and would change
it according to his imagination, if he might: which is to proud an enterprise
for Beza, and small reverence of the holy scriptures, so to call the very text
into controversy, that whatsoever pleases not him, crept out of the margent
into the text, which is his common and almost his only conjecture.

18 He biteth sore at the word (...) Luc. 1. v. 78. and vvil not translate
that, (...)
but the Hebrew word of the old Testament. but at (...) (Act. 2. v. 24.) much
more, and at (...) (Act 7. v. 14.) excedingly: but yet after he has said all that he could against it, he concludes, that he durst not, and that he had a
conscience, upon conjecture to change any thing. And therefore all this is
gnavving only. no. Test. an. 1556. (...). Beza reconcileth the Greek text of
the new Testament with the Hebrew text of the old, by putting out of the
Greek text so much as pleases him.
but in the 3 of Luke he makes no conscience at al, to leave out these words
verse. 36, Qui fuit Cainan, not only in his own translation, but in the vulgar
Latin which is joined therewith, saying in his Annot. Non dubitauimus
expungere, that is, We doubted not to put it out: and why? by the authority
of Moses Genesis 11. Whereby he signifies* that it is not in the Hebrew Genesis
11. where this posterity of Sem is reckened: and so to maintain the Hebrew
verity (as they call it) in the old Testament he ca^^th not what become of
the Greek in the new Testament: which yet at other times, against the vulgar
Latin text, they call the Greek verity, and the pure fountain, and that text
whereby al translations must be tried.

19 But if he have no other way to reconcile both Testaments, but by striking
out in the Greek of the new, all that agrees not with the Hebrew of the old
Testament, then let him alter and change so many words of our Savior him
self, of the Evangelists, and of the Apostles, as are cited out of the old
Testament, and are not in Hebrew. Which places they know are very many, and
when need is, they shall be gathered to their hands. Let him strike out (Mat.
13. v. 14.15. and Act. 28. v. 26.27) the words of our Savior and S. Paul,
Esa. 6, 9.10. Gal 3, 13. (...).
cited out of Esaias, because they are far otherwise in the Hebrew. Strike out of
the epistle to the Galatia^s these words, upon a tree: because in the Hebrew
it is only thus. Cursed is he that is hanged. Deuteronomy. 21 in fine. Yea strike out
of David's Psalms that which concerns our redemption upon the Cross much
nearer, They have pierced my hands and my feet, Ps. 21. because in the Hebrew
there is no such thing. Let them co^ntroule the Apostle, (...)
Ephesians. 4, for saying, dedit he gave gifts: because it is both in the Hebrew and
Greek, (Psalm. 67) Accepisti, thou tookest gifts. and (Hebr. 10) for, corpus
aptasti, let them put, aures perforasti, because it is so in the Hebrew Psalm.
40. To be short, if al must be reformed according to the Hebrew, why does he
not in S. Steuens sermon cut of the number of five souls from seventy five,
because it is not in the Hebrew?

20 Must such difficulties and diversities be resolved by chopping and
changing, hacking and hewing the sacred text of holy Scripture? See into what
perplexities wilful heresy and arroga^cie has driven them. To discredit the
vulgar Latin translation of the Bible, and the fathers expositios according to
the same (for that is the original cause of this) and besides, that they may
have always this evasion, It is not so in the Hebrew, it is otherwise in the
Greek, and so seem ioly fellows and great clerks unto the ignorant people,
what do they? they admit only the Hebrew in the old Test. and the Greek in
the new, to be the true and authentical text of the Scripture. Vvherevpo^ this
follows, that they reject, and must needs reject the Greek of the old Test.
(called the Septuaginta) as false, because it differs from the Hebrew. Their
perplexity in defending both the hebrew text of the old Testament, and Greek
text of the new.
Which being rejected, thereupon it follows again, that wheresoever those
places so disagreing from the Hebrew are cited by Christ or the Evangelists
and Apostles, there also they must be rejected, because they disagree from the
Hebrew. and so yet again it follows, that the Greek text of the new
Testament is not true, because it is not according to the Hebrew verity: and
consequently the words of our Savior, and vvritings of his Apostles must be
reformed (to say the lest) because they speak according to the Septuaginta,
and not according to the Hebrew.

21 Al which must needs follow, if this be a good consequence, I find it not
in Moses, nor in the Hebrew, therefore I struck it out, as Beza does and says
concerning the foresaid words, Qui fuit Cainan. This consequence therefore let
us see how they vvil justify: and vvithal let them tell us, whether they vvil
discredit the new Testament, because of the Septuaginta, or credit the
Septuaginta, because of the new Testament, or how they ca^ credit one, and
discredit the other, where both agree and consent together: or, whether they
vvil discredit both, for credit of the Hebrew: or rather, whether there be
not some other way to reconcile both Hebrew and Greek, better then Bezas
impudent presumption. Which if they vvil not maintain, let them flatly
confess that he did wickedly, and not (as they do) defend every word and
deed of their Masters, be it never so heinous, or salve it at the least.

How the fathers reconcile the said Hebrew and Greek.
22 Alas how far are these men from the modesty of the ancient fathers, who
seek al other means to resolve difficulties, rather then to do violence to
the sacred Scripture, and when they find no way, Li. 18. de Ciuit c. 43. 2
Lib. de Doct. Chr. c. 15.
they leave it to God. S. Augustine concerning the difference of the Hebrew and
the Greek, says often to this effect, that it pleased the holy Ghost to utter
by the one, that which he would not utter by the other. And S. Ambrose thus,
Hexam. li. 3. cap. 6.
We have found many things not idly added of the 70 Greek interpreters. S.
Hierom, though an earnest patron of the Hebrew (not without cause, In Prooem.
li. Paralip.
being at that time perhaps the Hebrew verity in deed) yet gives many
reasons for the differences of the Septuaginta, and concerning the foresaid
places of S. Luke, he does give a reason thereof, Comment. in 28. Esa. and in
quaestion. Hebrai.
both for the 70, and for the Evangelist that followed them, neither doubting
of the truth thereof, nor controuling them by the authority of Moses (as Beza
speaks) that is, by the Hebrew. Others say concerning Cainan, that Moses
might leave him out in the Genealogy of Sem, by the instinct of the same
Spirit, Mat. c. 1.
that S. Matthew left out three kings in the genealogy of our Savior. Where
if a man would control the Evangelist by the Hebrew of the old Testament
that is read in the books of the kings, he should be as wise and as honest a
man as Beza. Praef. in Act. Apost.
Lastly, Venerable Bede thinks it sufficient in this very difficulty of
Cainan, to marvel at it reverently, rather then to search it dangerously. And
thus far of picking quarrels to the original text, and their good vvil to alter
and change it as they list, if they might be suffered.

The 5. abuse of Scriptures, Corrupt translation. which is the argument and
purpose of this book.
23 Which also may be proved by all their false translations (being the
principal point I mean to speak of) most evidently. For as now they
translate falsely to their purpose, because they can not alter the text: so
would they, if it were possible, have the text agreeable to their translation.
For example, he that translateth, ordinances, when it is in the original
Greek text, iustifications, and, traditions, he would rather that it were,
ordinances, also in the Greek: but because he cannot bring that about, he does
at the least what he can, to make the ignorant believe it is so, by so
translating it.

24 And this of al other is the most fine and subtle treachery against the
Scriptures, to deceive the ignorant readers vvithal, 2 Cor. 4.
(which S. Paul calls the secret things of dishonestie, and adulterating of
the word of God, as it were mingling water with wine like false vinteners)
when they give them for Gods word, and under the name of Gods word, their
own words, and not Gods, forged and framed, altered and changed, according
to differences of times, and variety of new opinions, and diversity of
humors and spirits, diuersely and differently, one Heretic not only correcting
his fellovv every day, The Heretics dissension about their translations.
but one egrely refuting and resol^ing an other. Dial. cont. Melancth. Lind.
dubit. page 84, 96.98.
Bucer, and the Osiandrians and See Zuingl. resp. 1. and Confess. Tigurinorum.
Sacramentaries against Luther for false translations: Luther against Munster,
Beza against Castaleo, Castaleo against Beza, Calvin against Seruetus,
Illyricus both against Calvin and Beza: The Puritanes co^troule the grosser
Caluinistes of our Country, yea the later translations of the self same
Heretics control the former excedingly, not only of ouersights, but of
willful falsifications, as it is notorious in the * ibid. page 83.97.
later editions of Luther and Beza, and in our English Bibles set forth in
diverse years, from Tindal their first translatour until this day: The new
Test. of the year 1580.
yea (which is more) the English tra^slatours of Bezas new Testament,
control him and his translation which they protest to follow, Luc. 3, 36.
being afraid sometime and ashamed to express in English his false
translations in the Latin.

25 But in this Catalogue of dissentions falsifiers and disagreing
translatours, Act. 1, 14, and 2, 23. Act. 3, 21.
I vvil not greatly rippe up old faults neither abroad, nor at home. I leave
Luthers false translations into the German tongue, The Germa^, French, and
English corruptions of the new Testament
to the credit of Staphylus, Apolog. part. 2. and Emserus. praef. Annot. in
no. Test. Luth. and other German vvriters of his own time, that savv them and
readde them, and reckened the number of them in the new Testament only, about
See Lind. Dubit. p. 84 85, etc.
1400 heretical corruptions: I leave Caluins and Bezas french corruptions, to
so many vvorthie men as Vigor and the rest.
have noted them in their french books against the said heretics: Tindals
and his companions corruptions in their first English bible, to our learned
cou^triemen of that age, and namely to the right Reverend Father and Confessor
Bishop Tonstal, who in a sermon openly protested that he had found in the new
Testament only, no less then two thousand. If we know it not, or vvil not
believe it, Lind. dub. page 98.
strangers in their Latin vvritings testify it to the world.

The authors intent in this book.
26 But I omit these as unknown to our country, or to this age, and vvil
deal principally with the English translations of our time, which are in
every man's hands within our country the corruptions whereof, as they are
partly touched here and there in the Annotations upon the late new English
Testament Catholikely translated and printed at Rhemes, so by occasion thereof,
I vvil by Gods help, to the better commodity of the reader, and evidence of
the thing, lay them closer together, and more largely display them, not
counting the number, because it were hard, but esteeming the weight and
importance of so many as I thought good to note, specially in the new
Testament. Where I have to advertise the Reader of certain special things,
which he must observe.

Certain aduertiseme^ts to the Reader.
27 First, that in this book he may not look for the proof or explication and
deciding of controversies, Which is done in the Annotations upon the new
Testament, but only the refuting or controuling of their false translations
concerning the said controversies, which is the peculiar argume^^ of this
treatise.

28 Secondly, that we refute sometime one of their translations, sometime an
other, and every one as their falshod gives occasion. Neither is it a good
defense for the falshod of one, that it is truly translated in an other: the
reader being deceived by any one, because commonly he reads but one. Yea one
of them is a condemnation of the other.

29 Thirdly, that we speak indifferently against Protestants, Caluinistes,
Bezites, and Puritans, without any curious distinction of them, being al among
them selves brethren and pew fellows, and sometime the one sort of them,
sometime the other, more or less corrupting the holy Scriptures.

30 Fourthly, that we give but a taste of their corruptions, not seeing so far,
nor marking also narrowly and skilfully, as them selves know their own
subtelties and meanings, who vvil smile at the places which we have not
espied.

31 Fifthly, that the very use and affectation of certain terms, and avoiding
other some, though it be no demonstration against them, but that they may seem
to defend it for true translation, yet was it necessary to be noted, because
it is and has been alvvaies a token of heretical meaning.

32 Sixthly, that in explicating these things, we have endeavored to avoid (as
much as was possible) the tediousnes of Greek and Hebrew words. which are
only for the learned in these tongues, and which made some little doubt
whether this matter (which of necessity must be examined by them) were to
be written in English or no. but being persuaded by those (who them selves
have no skill in the said tongues) that every reader might reap commodity
thereby, to the understanding and detesting of such false and Heretical
translations, it was thought good to make it vulgar and common to al our decre
country men, as the new Testament it self is common, whereof this Discovery
is as it were an handmaid, attending thereupon for the larger explication and
proof of corruptions there breefely touched, and for supply of other some not
there mentioned.

33 Seventhly, that all the English corruptions here noted and refuted, are
either in all or some of their English bibles printed in these years, 1562.
1577.1579. And if the corruption be in one Bible, not in an other, commonly the
said Bible or bibles are noted in the margent: if not, yet sure it is that it
is in one of them, and so the reader shall find it, if he find it not alvvaies
in his own Bible. And in this case the reader must be very wise and
circu^spect, that he think not by and by we charge them falsely, because they
can show him some later edition that has it not so as we say, for it is
their common and known fashion, not only in their translations of the Bible,
but in their other books and writings, to alter and change, add and put
out, in their later editio^s, according as either them selves are ashamed of
the former, or their scholars that print them again, dissent and disagree from
their Masters. So has Luthers, Caluins, and Bezas writings and translations
been changed both by them selves and their scholars in many places, so that
Catholic men when they confute that which they find evident faults in this
or that edition, fear nothing more then that the reader has some other
edition, where they are corrected for very shame, and so may conceive that
there is no such thing, but that they are accused wrongfully. for example.
Call to mind the late pretended conference in the tower, Touching S. James
epistle.
where that matter was denied and faced out for Luthers credit, by some one
book or edition of his, which them selves, and all the world knows was most
truly laid to his charge.

34 Eighthly, in citing Beza, I mean alvvaies (unless I note otherwise) his
Latin translation of the new Testament with his annotations adjoined
thereunto, printed in the year 1556.

We charge them not with forsaking the old approved Latin text, though it be
an il sign, and to their evident confusion.
35 Lastly and principally is to be noted that we will not charge them with
falsifying that which in deed is the true and authentical Scripture, I mean
the vulgar Latin Bible, which so many years has been of so great authority
in the Church of God, and with all the ancient fathers of the Latin Church, as
is declared in the preface of the New Testament: though it is much to be
noted, that as Luther, only in favor of his heresies did vvilfully forsake it,
so the rest followed and do follow him at this day, for no other cause in the
world but that it is against them. and therefore they inueigh against it,
Kemnitius. Calvin.
and against the holy Council of Trent for confirming the authority thereof,
both in their special treatises thereof, and in all their writings, where
they can take any occasion.

36 And concerning their willful and heretical avoiding thereof in their new
translations, what greater argument can there be then this, that Luther, who
before alvvaies had readde with the Gath. Church and with al antiquity,
these words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 9. Mulicrem sororem. 2 Pet. 1.
Have not we power to lead about A WOMAN A SISTER, as also the rest of the
Apostles? and in S. Peter, these words, Labor that BY GOOD WORKS you may
make sure your vocation and election: suddenly, after he had contrary to his
profession taken a wife (as he called her) and preached that al other votaries
might do the same, and that faith only justified, good works were not
necessary to salvation: suddenly (I say) after he fell to these heresies, he
began to read and translate the former Scriptures accordingly, thus: Have not
we power to lead about a SISTER A WIFE, as the rest of the Apostles? and,
Labor that you may make sure your vocation and election: leaving out the other
words, by good works. And so do both the Caluinists abroad, and our
English Protestants at home read and translate at this day, because they hold
the self same heresies.

37 So do they in infinite places alter the old text, which pleased them
well before they were Heretics, and they do it with brazen faces, and
plain protestation, having no shame nor remorse at al, in fleeing from that
which all antiquity with one consent allowed and embraced until their
unhappy days. Which though it be an evident condemnation of their novelties
in the sight of any reasonable man that has any grace, yet as I began to
admonish thee (gentle Reader) we vvil not charge them for altering the
ancient approved Latin translation, because they pretend to follow the Hebrew
and Greek, and our purpose is not here, to prove that they should not follow
the Hebrew and Greek that now is, before the ancient approved Latin text,
which is done breifely already in the preface to the new Testament.

We charge them not with forsaking the Greek copies that agree with the
ancient approved Latin text, though this be a sign of their incredible
partiality.
38 Neither vvil we burden them, for not following the vulgar Latin text, when
the same agrees with most ancient Greek copies: which notvvithsta^ding is
great partiality in them, and must needs be of an heretical willful humor,
that among the Greek copies them selves, they reject that which most agrees
with the vulgar Latin text, in places of controversies. Yet vvil we not I
say, neither in this case, lay falshod and corruption to their charge, because
they pretend to translate the common Greek text of the new Testament, that is
one certain copy, but here at the least let them show their fidelity, and
that they be true and exact translatours, for here only shall they be examined
and called to account.

We charge them for forsaking and false translating their own Hebrew and
Greek text.
39 And if they follow sincerely their Greek and Hebrew text, which they
profess to follow, and which they esteem the only authentical text, so far
we accuse them not of heretical corruption. but if it shall be evidently
proved, that they shrink from the same also, and translate an other thing, and
that vvilfully, and of full intention to countenance their false religion and
wicked opinions, making the Scriptures to speak as they list: then we trust,
the indifferent reader for his own souls sake, vvil easily see and conclude,
that they have no fear of God, no reverence of the Scriptures, no conscience
to deceive their readers: He vvil perceive that the Scriptures make against
them, which they so pervert and corrupt for their purpose: that neither the
Hebrew nor Greek text is for them, which they dare not translate truly and
sincerely: that their cause is naught, which needs such foul shifts: that
they must needs know all this, and therefore do vvilfully against their
conscience, and consequently are obstinate Heretics.

40 And the more to understand their misery and vvretchednes, before we enter
to examine their tra^slations, mark and gather of all that which I have said
in this preface, their manifold flightes and iumpes, from one shift to an
other, and how Catholic writers have pursued and chased them, and followed
them, and driven them even to this extreme refuge and seely covert of false
translation, where also they must of necessity yield, or devise some new
evasion, which we can not yet imagine.

The diverse shifts and flightes that the Protestants are driven unto by the
Catholics, as it were the iumpes and turnings of an hare before the bounds.
41 First we are wont to make this offer (as we think) most reasonable and
indifferent: that forasmuch as the Scriptures are diuersely expounded of us and
of them, they neither be tied to our interpretation, nor we to theirs, but to
put it to the arbitrament and judgment of the ancient fathers, of general
Councels, of universal custom of times and places in the Catholic Church. No,
say they, we will be our own judges and interpreters, or follow Luther, if we
be Lutherans: Calvin, if we be Caluinistes: and so forth.

42 This being of it self a shameless shift, unless it be better colored, the
next is to say, that the Scriptures are easy and plain and sufficient of them
selves to determine every matter, and therefore they will be tried by the
Scriptures only. we are content, because they will needs have it so, and we
allege unto them the books of Toble, Ecclesiasticus, Machabees. No, say they:
we admit none of these for Scripture. Why so? are they not approved Canonical
by the same authority of the Church, of ancient Councels and fathers, that
the other books are? No matter, say they, Luther admits them not, Calvin
does not allow them.

43 Well, let us go forvvard in their own dance. You allow at the least the
Jews Canonical books of the old Testament, that is, all that are extant in
the Hebrew Bible: and al of the new Testament without exception. Yea, that we
do. In these books then, will you be tried by the vulgar ancient Latin Bible,
only used in all the west Church above a thousand years? No. Vvil you be tried
by the Greek Bible of the Septuaginta interpreters, so renowned and
authorized, in our Saviors own speeches, in the Evangelists and Apostles
writings, in the whole Greek Church evermore? No. How then will you be tried?
They answer, Only by the Hebrew Bible that now is, and as now it is pointed
with vovvels. Vvil you so? and do you think that only, the true authentical
Hebrew which the holy Ghost did first put into the pens of those sacred
writers? We do think it (say they) and esteem it the only authentical and
true Scripture of the old Testament.

44 We ask them again, what say you then to that place of the psalm, (...)
where in the Hebrew it is thus, As a lion my hands and my feet: for that
which in truth should be thus, They dug or pierced my hands and my feet:
being an evident prophecy of Christ's nailing to the Cross. There in deed
(say they) we follow not the Hebrew, but the Greek text. Sometime then you
follow the Greek and not the Hebrew only. And what if the same Greek text make
for the Catholics, as in these places for example, I have inclined my heart to
keep thy iustifications for revvard: and, Redeem thy sins with alms:
might we not obtain here the like favor at your hands for the Greek text,
specially when the Hebrew does not disagree? No, say they, nor in no other
place where the Greek is never so plain, if the Hebrew word at the least may
be any otherwise interpreted, and draw on to an other signification.

45 We reply again and say unto them, why, Is not the credit of those
Septuaginta interpreters, who them selves were Jews, and best learned in
their own tongue, and (as S. Augustine often, and other ancient fathers say)
were inspired with the holy Ghost, in translating the Hebrew bible into
Greek: Is not their credit (I say) in determining and defining the
signification of the Hebrew word, far greater then yours? No. Is not the
authority of all the ancient fathers both Greek and Latin, that followed
them, equivalent in this case to your judgment? No, say they, but because we
find some ambiguitie in the Hebrew, we will take the advantage, and we will
determine and limite it to our purpose.

46 A gain we condescend to their vvilfulnes, and say: what if the Hebrew be
not ambiguous, but so plain and certain to signify onething, Psalm. 15. (...)
that it can not be plainer? As, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, which
proves for us, that Christ in soul descended into Hell. Is not the one Hebrew
word as proper for soul, as anima in Latin, the other as proper and usual for
Hell, as Infeunus in Latin? Here then at the least vvil you yield? No, say they,
not here neither. for Beza tells us that the Hebrew word, which commonly
and usually signifies, soul, yet for a purpose, of a man vvil strain it, may
signify, not only body, but also, carcas and so he translate that. But Beza
(say we) being admonished by his friends, corrected it in his later edition.
Yea, say they, he was content to change his translation, but not his opinion
concerning the Hebrew word, as himself protests.

47 Well then, does it like you to read thus according to Bezas translation,
Thou shall not leave my carcas in the grave? No, we are content to alter the
word carcas (which is not a seemly word for our Saviors body) and yet we are
loath to say soul, but if we might, we would say rather, life, person, as
appears in the margent of our Bibles. but as for the Hebrew word that
signifies Hell, though the Greek and Latin Bible through out, the Greek and
Latin fathers in all their writings, as occasion serves, do so read it and
understand it, yet will we never so translate it: but for Hell, we vvil say
grave, in all such places of Scripture as might infer Limbus patrum, if we
should translate, Hell. These are their shifts, and turninges, and windinges,
in the old Testament.

48 In the new Testament, we ask them, will you be tried by the ancient Latin
translation, which is the text of the fathers and the whole Church? No, but we
appeal to the Greek. What Greek, say we, for there be sundry copies, and
the best of them (as Beza confesses) agree with the said ancient Latin. for
example in S. Peter's words, 2 Pet. ca. 1.
Labor that by good works you may make sure your vocation and election. does
this Greek copy please you? No, say they: we appeal to that Greek copy,
which has not those words, by good works, for otherwise we should grant
the merit and efficacy of good works tovvard salvation. and generally to tell
you at once, by what Greek we will be tried, we like best the vulgar Greek
text of the new Testament, which is most common and in every man's hands.

49 Well, say we, if you will needs have it so, take your pleasure in choosing
your text. and if you will stand to it, grant us that Peter was chief among
the Apostles, because your own Greek text says, The first, Peter. No, says
Beza: Mat. 10.
we vvil grant you no such thing, for these words were added to the Greek
text by one that favored Peter's primacie. Is it so? then you will not stand to
this Greek text neither. Not in this place, says Beza.

50 Let us see an other place. You must grant us (say we) by this Greek text,
that Christ's very blood which was shed for us, is really in the chalice,
because S. Luke says so in the Greek text. No, says Beza, those Greek
words came out of the margent into the text, and therefore I translate not
according to them, but according to that which I think the truer Greek text,
although I find it in no copies in the world, and this his doing See chap. 1.
nu. 37. chap. 17. nu. 11.
is maintained and justified by our English Protestants in their writings of
late.

51 Well yet, say we, there are places in the same Greek text, as plain for
us as these now cited, where you can not say, it came out of the margent, or,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
it was added falsely to the text. As, Stand and hold fast the traditions etc.
by this text we require that you grant us traditions delivered by word of
mouth, as well as the written word, that is, the Scriptures. No, say they, we
know the Greek word signifies tradition as plain as possibly, but here and
in the like places, we rather translate it, ordinances, instructions, and what
else soever. Nay Sirs, say we, you can not so answer the matter, for in other
places, you translate it duly and truly, tradition: and why more in one
place then in an other? They are ashamed to tell why, but they must tell, and
shame both them selves and the Devil, if ever they think it good to answer
this treatise, as also why they changed congregation, which was alvvaies in
their first translation, into Church, in their later translations, and did not
change likewise ordinances into traditions, Elders into Priests.

52 The cause is, that the name of Church was at the first odious unto them,
because of the Catholic Church which stood against them: but afterward this
name grevve into more favor with them, because of their English Church, so at
length called and termed. but their hatred of Priests and traditions continues
still, as it first began, and therefore their translation also remains as
before, suppressing the names both of the one and of the other. But of al these
their dealings they shall be told in their several chapters and places.

53 To conclude as I began, concerning their shifts, and iumpes, and
vvindinges, and turninges every way, from one thing to an other, til they are
driven to the extreme refuge of palpable corruptions and false translations:
consider with me in this one case only of traditions, as may be likewise
considered in all other controversies, that the ancient fathers, councels,
antiquity, universality, and custom of the whole Church allow traditions:
the canonical Scriptures have them, the Latin text has them, the Greek text
has them: only their translations have them not. Likewise in the old
Testament, the approved latin text has such and such speeches that make for
us, the renowned Greek text has it, the Hebrew text has it: only their
translations have it not.

These are the translations which we call heretical and willful, and which
shall be examined and discussed in this book.

THE ARGVMENTS OF EVERY CHAPTER, WITH THE PAGE VVHEReuery Chapter begins.
CHAP. 1. THAT the Protestants translate the holy Scripture falsel^ of purpose,
in favor of their heresies, through out (...) controversies. page 2. CHAP. 2
Against Apostolical Traditions. page 25. CHAP. 3 Against sacred Images. page
32. CHAP. 4 The Ecclesiastical use of words turned into their original an^
profane significations. page 58. CHAP. 5 Against the CHVRCH. page 63. CHAP. 6
Against Priest and Priesthod, Where much also is said of their profaning of
Ecclesiastical words. page 72. CHAP. 7 Against Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and
Christ's descending in^^ Hell. page 98. CHAP. 8 Concerning Justification, and
Gods justice in revvarding goo^ works. page 133. CHAP. 9 Against Merits,
meritorious works, and the revvard for the same. page 140. CHAP. 10 Against
Free vvil. page 163. CHAP. 11 For Imputatius justice against true inherent
justice. page 180. CHAP. 12 For Special faith, vain security, and only faith.
page 187. CHAP. 13 Against Penance and Satisfaction. page 196. CHAP. 14 Against
the holy Sacraments, namely Baptism and Confession page 213. CHAP. 15 Against
the Sacrament of Holy Orders. and for the Marriage o^ Priests and Votaries. page
220. CHAP. 16 Against the Sacrament of Matrimony. page 244. CHAP. 17 Against
the B. Sacrament, and Sacrifice, and alians. page 249. CHAP. 18 Against the
honor of Saints, namely of our B. LADIE^ page 273. CHAP. 19 Against the
distinction of Dulia and Latria. page 285. CHAP. 20 Adding to the text. page
290. CHAP. 21 Other heretical treacheries and corruptions vvorthie of
obseru^tion. page 298. CHAP. 22 Other faults Iudaical, profane, more vanities,
follies, and novelties page 306.
A DISCOVERY OF THE MANIFOLD CORRVPTIONS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES, by the
Heretics of our days, specially the English Sectaries, and of their foul
dealing herein, by partial and false translations to the advantage of their
heresies, in their English Bibles used and authorized since the time of Schism.
CHAP. I. That the Protestants translate the holy Scriptures falsely of
purpose, in favor of their heresies.
1 THOUGH this shall evidently appear through out this whole book in every
place that shall be objected unto them: yet because it is an observation of
greatest importance in this case, and which stingeth them sore, and touches
their credit excedingly, in so much that one of them setting a good face upon
the matter, Confutation of Io. Hovvlet fol. 35. page 2.
says confidently, that all the Papists in the world are not able to show one
place of Scripture mistra^slated wilfully and of purpose: therefore I vvil give
the reader, certain breife observations and evident marks to know willful
corruptions, as it were an abridgement and sum of this treatise.

2 The first mark and most general is: If they translate else where not
amiss, Evident marks or signs to know willful corruptions in translating.
and in places of controversy between them and us, most falsely: it is an
evident argument that they do it not of negligence, or ignorance, but of
partiality to the matter in controversy. This is to be seen through the
whole Bible, where the faults of their translations are altogether, or
specially, in those Scriptures that concern the causes in question between
us. For other small faults, or rather ouersightes, we vvil no further note
unto them, then to the end, that they may the more easily pardon us the like,
if they find them.

3. If, as in their opinions and heresies, they forsake the ancient fathers:
so also in their translations, they go from that text and ancient reading of
holy Scriptures, which all the fathers used and expounded: is it not plain
that their translation follows the vein and humor of their heresy? And
again if they that so abhor from the ancient expositions of the fathers,
yet if it seem to serve for them, stick not to make the exposition of any one
Doctor, the very text of holy Scripture: what is this but heretical wilfulnes?
See this 1. chap. nu. 43. chapter 10. nu. 1.2. cha. 18. numb. 10.11. and chap. 19.
nu. 1.

4 Again, if they that profess to translate the Hebrew and Greek, and that
because it makes more for them (as they say) and therefore in all co^ferences
and disputations appeal unto it as to the fountain and touchstone, if they (I
say) in translating places of controversy, flee from the Hebrew and the
Greek, it is a most certain argument of willful corruption. This is done many
ways, and is to be observed also through out the whole Bible, and in all this
book.

5 If the Greek be, Idololatria, and idololatra: (...). Ephesians. 5. Col. 3 Bib.
an. 1577.
and they translate not, Idolatry, and, idolater: but, worshipping of images,
and worshipper of images, and that so absurdly, that they make the Apostle
say, Covetousness is worshipping of images: this none would do but fools or
mad men, unless it were of purpose against sacred images. See chap. 3. numb.
1.2.

6 If the Apostle say, A pagan idolater, 1 Cor. 5.
and a Christian idolater, by one and the same Greek word, in one and the
same meaning: (...).
and they translate, A pagan idolater, Bib. an. 1562
and a Christian worshipper of images, by two distinct words and diverse
meanings: it must needs be done vvilfully to the foresaid purpose. See chap.
3. nu. 8.9.

7 If they translate one and the same Greek word, (...)
Tradition, whensoever the Scripture speaks of evil traditions: and never
translate it so, whensoever it speaks of good and Apostolical traditions:
their intention is evident against the authority of Traditions. See chap. 2.
numb. 1.2.3.

Yea if they translate, Tradition, taken in il part, (...).
where it is not in the Greek: and translate it not so, where it is in the
Greek, taken in good part: Col. 2. v. 20.
it is more evidence of the foresaid wicked intention. See chap. 2. nu. 5.6.

9 If they make this a good rule, to translate according to the usual
signification, and not the original deriuation of words, as Beza and Page 209.
M. Vvhitakers do: and if they translate contrary to this rule, what is it
but willful corruption? So they do in translating, idolum, an image,
Presbyter, an elder: and the like. See chap. 4. and chap. 6. nu. 6.7.8. etc.
nu. 13. etc.

10 If Presbyter, by Ecclesiastical use, be appropriated to signify a Priest,
no less then, Episcopus, to signify a Bishop, or Diaconus, a Deacon: and if
they translate these two ^ater accordingly, and the first never in all the new
Testament: what can it be but willful corruption in favor of this heresy,
(...) That there are no Priests of the new Testament? Whitaker. p. 199.
See chap. 6. numb. 12.

11 If for Gods altar, they translate, Temple: and for Bells idololatrical
table, they translate, altar: judge whether it be not of purpose against our
altars, and in favor of their communion table. See chap. 17. numb. 15.16.

12 If at the beginning of their heresy, when sacred images were broken in
pieces, altars dug down, the Catholic Churches authority defaced, Bib.
in king Edw. time. printed again 1562.
the king made supreme head, then their translation was made accordingly, and
if afterward when these errors were well established in the realm, and had
taken root in the peoples hearts, al was altered and changed in their later
translations, and now they could not find that in the Greek, which was in
the former translation: what was it at the first but willful corruption to
serve the time that then was? See chap. 3.5. chap. 17. nu. 15. chap. 15. nu.
22.

13 If at the first revolt, when none were noted for Heretics and
Schismatikes, but them selves, they did not once put the names of Schism or
Heresy in the Bible, but in steed thereof, division, and, sect, in so much
that for an Heretic, they said, an author of Sects, Bib. 1562. Tit. 3.
what may we judge of it but as of willful corruption? See chap. 4. numb. 3.

14 If they translate so absurdly at the first, that them selves are driven to
change it for shame: it must needs be at the first willful corruption. for
example, when it was in the first, Temple, and in the later, Altar: in the
first alvvaies, Congregation, in the later alvvaies, Church: in the first, To
the king as chief head, in the later, To the king as having preeminence. So
did Beza first translate, carcas, and afterward, soul. Which alteration in all
these places is so great, that it could not be negligence at the first or
ignorance, but a plain heretical intention. See chap. 17. numb. 15. chap. 5.
nu. 4.5. chap. 15. numb. 22. chap. 7. nu. 2.

15 If they vvil not stand to al their translations, but flee to that namely
which now is readde in their churches: and if that which is now read in
their churches, differ in the points aforesaid, from that that was readde in
their churches in king Edward's time: and if from both these, they flee to the
Geneua Bible, and from that again, to the other aforesaid: what shall we
judge of the one or the other, but that al is voluntary and as they list? See
chap. 3. numb. 10.11.12. cha. 10. numb. 12.

16 If they gladly use these words in il part, where they are not in the
original text, Procession, shrines, devotions, excommunicate, images: and avoid
these words, which are in the original, Hymns, grace, mystery. Sacrament,
Church, altar, Priests, Catholic, traditions, iustifications: is it not plain
that they do it of purpose to disgrace, or suppress the said things and
speeches used in the Catholic Church? See chap. 21. numb. 5. and seq. chap.
12. numb. 3.

17 If in a case that makes for them, they strain the very original
signification of the word, and in a case that makes against them, they
neglect it altogether: what is this but willful and of purpose? See chap. 7.
nu. 36.

18 If in words of ambiguous and diverse signification, they vvil have it
signify here or there, as it pleases them: and that so vehemently, that here
it must needs so signify, and there it must not: and both this, and that, to
one end and in favor of one and the same opinion: Beza in 1. Cor. 7. v. 1. and
9. v. 5.
what is this but willful translation? So does Beza urge (...) to signify,
wife, and not to signify, wife, both against virginity and chastity of
Priests: and the English Bible translateth accordingly. Bib. an. 1579
See chap. 15. nu. 11.12.

19 If the Puritanes and grosser Caluinistes disagree about the translations,
one part preferring the Geneua English Bible, the other the Bible read in their
Church: and if the Lutherans condemn the Zuinglians and Caluinistes
translations, and contrariwise: and if al Sectaries reprove each an others
translation: What does it argue, but that the translations differ according to
their diverse opinions? See their books written one against an other. Luc. 3.
v. 36. Act. 1. v. 14. c. 2. v. 23. c. 3. v. 21. c. 26. v. 20. 2 These. 2. v. 15.
etc. 5. v. 6.


20 If the English Geneua Bibles the^ selves dare not follow their Master
Beza, whom they profess to translate, because in their opinion he goes
vvide, and that in places of controversy: how willful was he in so
translating? See chap. 12. numb. 6.8. cha. 13. numb. 1.

21 If for the most part they reprehend the old vulgar translation, and appeal
to the Greek: and yet in places of controversy sometime for their more
advantage (as they think) they leave the Greek, and follow our Latin
translation: what is it else, but voluntary and partial translation? See chap.
2. nu. 8. chap. 6. nu. 10.21. chap. 7. nu. 39. chap. 10. nu. 6.

22 If otherwise they avoid this word, iustificationes, Peza Luc. 1. To. 2.
Apoc. 19.8.
altogether, and yet translate it When they can not choose, but with a
co^me^tarie * Beza in c. 19. Apoc. v. 8.
that it signifies good works that are testimonies of a lively faith: does
not this heretical commentary show their heretical meaning, when they avoid
the word altogether? See chap. 8. nu. 1.2.3.

23 When by adding to the text at their pleasure, they make the Apostle say,
To. 5. v. 18. No. Test. an. 1580. Bib. 1579.
that by Adams offense, sin came on al men, but that by Christ's justice, the
benefit only abounded tovvard al men, not that justice came on al, whereas
the Apostle makes the case alike, without any such diverse additions, to wit,
* To. 5. v. 18.
that we are truly made just by Christ, as by Adam we are made sinners: is
not this most willful corruption for their heresy of imputative and
fantastical justice. See chap. 11. nu. 1.

24 But if in this case of justification, when the question is whether only
faith justify, and we say no, having the express words of S James: they
say, yea, having no express scripture for it: if in this case they vvil add,
only, to the very text: is it not most horrible and devilish corruption? So did
Luther, * Ia. 2. v. 24. To. 3. v. 28. Luth. tom. 2. fol. 405. edit. Witteb. an.
1551. Whitak. page 198.
whom our English Protestants honor as their father, and in this heresy of
only faith, are his own children. See chap. 12.

Their ignorance of the Greek and Hebrew tongue, or their false and wilful
translation thereof against their knowledge.
25 If these that account them selves the great Grecians and Hebricians of the
world, vvil so translate for the advantage of their cause, as though they had
no skill in the world, and as though they knevv neither the signification of
words, nor propriety of phrases in the said languages: is it not to be
esteemed shamlesse corruption?

26 I vvil not speak of the German Heretics, Bre^tius Melancth. See Linda.
Dubi. Dial. 1. c. 12 Psalm. 51.
who to maintain this heresy, that al our works, be they never so good,
are sin, translated, for Tibi soli peccaui, to the only have I sinned, (...)
Whitak. page 198.
thus, Tibi solum peccaui. that is, I have nothing else but sinned: whatsoever
I do, I sin: whereas neither the Greek nor the Hebrew vvil possibly admit
that sense. Let these pass as Lutherans, yet willful corrupters, * To. 5, v. 6.
and acknowledged of our English Protestants for their good brethren. But if
Beza translate, (...), when we were yet of no strength, as the Geneua
English Bible also does interpret it, whereas every young Grecian knovveth
that (...) is vveake, feeble, infirm, and not altogether without strength: is
not this of purpose to take away man's free vvil altogether? See chap. 10. nu.
13.

27 If Calvin translate, 1 Cor. 15. (...).
Non ego, sed gratia Dei quae mihi aderat: may not mean Grecians control
him, that he also translateth falsely against free vvil, because the
preposition (...) does require some other participle to be understood, that
should signify a cooperation with free vvil to wit, (...), which labored
with me? See chap. 10. nu. 2.

28 If, when the Hebrew bears in differe^tly, to say, Sin lies at the
door: and, unto thee the desire thereof shall be subject, Genesis 4. v. 7.
and thou I halt rule over it: an. 1579.
the Geneua English Bible translate the first without scruple, and the later
not, because of the Hebrew grammar: is not this also most willful against free
vvil? See chap. 10. nu. 9.

29 If Calvin affirm that (...) cannot signify, propter reuerentiam, Calu. in
5. Hebr.
because (...) is not so used, and Beza avouches the same more earnestly, Bib.
an. 1579
and the English Bible translateth accordingly, which may be confuted by
infinite examples in the Scripture it self, and is confuted by Illyricus the
Lutheran: is it not a sign either of passing ignorance, or of most wilful
corruption, to maintain the blasphemy that hereupon they conclude? See chap.
7. nu. 42.43,

30 If Beza in the self same place contend, that (...) does not signify
reverence or piety, but such a fear as has horror and astonishme^t of
mind: and in an other place says of this self same word, clean contrary:
what is it but of purpose to uphold the said blasphemy? See cha. 7. nu. 39.40.

31 If he translate for, Gods foreknovvledge, Gods providence, for soul,
carcas, for hell, grave: (...) Act. 2. v. 23. (...). ibid. v. 27.
to what end is this but for certain heretical conclusions? And if upon
admonition he alter his translation for shame, and yet * Annota. in no. Test.
post. edit.
protests that he understands it as he did before, did he not translate
before vvilfully according to his obstinate opinion? See chap. 7.

32 If to this purpose he avouch that, Annot. in Act. 2. v. 24. (...)
Sheol, signifies nothing else in Hebrew but a grave, whereas al Hebricians
know that it is the most proper and usual word in the Scripture for Hell, (...)
as the other word Keber, is for a grave: who would think he would so
endanger his estimation in the Hebrew tongue, but that an heretical purpose
against Christ's descending into hell, blinded him? See chap. 7.

33 And if all the English Bibles translate accordingly, to wit, for Hell,
grave, wheresoever the Scripture may mean any lower place that is not the Hell
of the damned: and where it must needs signify that Hell, there they never
avoid so to translate it: is it not an evident argument that they know very
well the proper signification, but of purpose they will never use it to their
disadvantage in the questions of Limbus, Purgatory, Christ's descending into
Hell? cha. 7.

34 If further yet in this kind of controversy, Beza would be bold to
affirm (for so he says) if the Grammarians would give him leave, that *
Annot. in Act. 2. v. 24. (...)
Chebel with five points signifies, funem, (...) That is, he would
translate, Solutis funibus mortis, not, Solutis doloribus inferni.
no less then Chebel with six points: is he not wonderfully set to
maintain his opinion, that will change the nature of words, if he might, for
his purpose?

35 If passiues must be turned into actiues, and actiues into passiues,
participles disagree in case from their substantives, or rather be plucked and
separated from their true substantives, soloecismes imagined, where the
construction is most agreeable, errors divised to creep out of the marge^t,
and such like: who would so presume in the text of holy Scripture, to have al
Grammar, and words, and phrases, and constructions at his commandment, but
Beza and his like, for the advantage of their cause? See chap. 5. nu. 6. and
the numbers next following in this chapter.

36 For example S. Peter says, Act. 3, 21. (...)
Heaven must receive Christ. He translateth, Christ must be contained in
heaven, which Calvin him self misliketh, the Geneua English Bible is afraid to
follow, Illyricus the Lutheran reprehendeth: and yet M. Vvhitakers takes the
advantage of this translation, Page 43.
to prove that Christ's natural body is so contained in heaven, that it can not
be upon the altar. For he knevv that this was his marsters purpose and intent
in so translating. This it is, when the blind follow the blind, yea rather
when they see and vvil be blind: for certain it is (and I appeal to their
greatest Graecia^s) that howsoever it be taken for good in their divinity, it
will be esteemed most false in their Greek schools both of Oxford and
Ca^bridge: and howsoever they may presume to translate the holy Scriptures
after this sort, surely no man, no not them selves, would so translate
Demosthenes, for saving their credit and estimation in the Greek tongue. See
chap. 17. nu. 7.8.9.

37 But there is yet worse stuff behind: to wit, the famous place Luc. 22.
where Beza translateth thus, Hoc poculum nouum testamentu^ per meu^ sanguine^,
qui pro vobis funditur: whereas in the Greek, in all copies without exception,
he confesses that in true Grammatical construction it must needs be said,
quod pro vobis funditur, and therefore he says it is either a plain
soloecophanes, (and according to that presumption he boldly translateth) or a
corruption crept out of the margent into the text. And as for the word
soloecophanes, we understand him that he means a plain soloecisme and fault
in grammar, and so does M. Vvhitakers: Page 34.35.
but M. Fulke says that he means no such thing, Against D. Sand. Rock page
308.
but that it is an elegancie and figurative speech, used of most eloquent
authors: and it is a world to see, and a Grecian must needs smile at his
devises, striving to make S. Lukes speech here as he co^strueth the words,
See Com. Bud. Figurata co^structio, or, (...).
an elegancie in the Greek tongue. He sends us first to Budees commentaries,
where there are examples of soloecophanes: and in deed Budee takes the word
for that which may seem a soloecisme, and yet is an elegancie, and al his
examples are of most fine and figurative phrases, but alas how unlike to that
in S. Luke. and here M. Fulke was very foully deceived, thinking that Beza and
Budee took the word in one sense: and so taking his mark amiss, as it were
a counter for gold, where he found soloecophanes in Budee, there he thought al
was like to S. Lukes sentence, and that which Beza meant to be a plain
soloecisme, he makes it like to Budees elegancies. Much like to those good
searchers in Oxford (as it is said) masters of art, who having to seek for
Papistical books in a lawyers study, and seeing there books with read
letters, cried out, Mass books, Mass books: whereas it was the Code or
some other book of the Civil or Canon Law.

38 This was lack of judgment in M. Fulke at the least, and no great sign of
skill in Greek phrases, and he must no more call D. Sanders unlearned for not
understanding Bezas meaning, but him self, who in deed understood him not.
For, if Beza meant that it was an elegancie used of the finest authors, and
such as Budee does exemplify of, why does he say, that he sees not why Luke
should use soloecophanes, but thinks rather, it is a corruption crept into
the margent? Tell us, M. Fulke we beseech you, whether is the better and
honester defense, to say, that it is an elega^cie and fine phrase in S. Luke,
or to say, it is afault in the text, it came out of the margent, the Gospel is
here corrupted. Think you Beza such a fool, that he would rather stand upon
this later, if he might have used the former, and had so meant by
soloecophanes? yea what needed any defense at al, if it had been an usual and
knovve^ elegancie, as you would prove it?

39 For you say further, that (...) is taken for (...), and (...) is
understood, and that this is a common thing in the best Greek authors, but you
must add, that the said relative must always be referred to the antecedent of
the same case, as this speech (...) may be resolved thus. (...), or rather
(...). but that (...), may be resolved, (...), you shall never be able to bring
one example, and you vvilfully abuse whatsoever knowledge you have of the
Greek tongue, to deceive the ignorant, or else you have no skill at al, that
speak so barbarously and rustically of Greek elegancies. for if you have
skill, you know in your conscience, that (...), is as great a soloecisme in
Greek, and no more elegancie, then to say in Latin, In meo sanguine fusus pro
vobis, which in the schole deserves whipping. And yet you ask very
vehemently (concerning these words, Hic calix nouum Testamentum in meo
sanguine qui pro vobis fundetur:) what mean Grammarian would refer, qui, to
calix, and not to sanguis? I answer, that a mere latinist, for ignorance of
the Greek tongue, would refer it rather as you say: but he that knovveth
the Greek, as you seem to do, though he be a very young Grammarian, vvil
easily see it can not so be referred: as in the like Act. 14. Sacerdos quoque
Iouis qui erat ante ciuitatem eorum. Here, qui, is ambiguous, (...).
but in the Greek we see that, qui, must be referred to, Iouis, and can not
be referred to, Sacerdos.

40 And this is one commodity among others, that we reap of the Greek text,
to resolve the ambiguitie that is sometime in the Latin: whereas you neither
admit the one nor the other, but as you list, neither does the Greek satisfy
you, be it never so plain and infallible, but you vvil devise that it is
corrupted, that there is a soloecisme, that the same soloecisme is an
elegancie, and therevpo^ you translate your own devise, and not the word of
God. which whence can it proceed, but of most willful corruption? See chap.
17. nu. 10.11.12.

41 If in ambiguous Hebrew words of doubtful signification, where the Greek
gives one certain sense, you refuse the Greek, and take your advantage of
the other sense: what is this but willful partiality? so you do in, Redime
eleemosynis peccata tua. Dan. 4. and Inclinaui cor meu^ ad faciendas
iustificationes tuas propter retributione^. Ps. 118 Octon. Nun. Ps. 138.
and, Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus etc. and yet at an other time you
follow the determination of the Greek for an other advantage: as Psalm. 98.
Adore his footestoole, because he is holy. Whereas in the Hebrew it may be as
in our Latin, (...)
because it is holy. See cha. 13. nu. 18. chap. 9. nu. 23.24. chap. 18. nu.
1.2. So you flee from the Hebrew to the Greek, and from this to that again,
from both to the vulgar Latin, as is shevved in other places: and as S.
Augustine says to Faustus the Manichee, Li. 11. cont. Faust. c. 2.
You are the rule of truth: whatsoever is for you, is true: whatsoever is
against you, is not true.

42 What shall I speak of the Hebrew particle vau? (...)
which (Genesis 14. v. 18) must in no case be translated, because, lest it should
prove that Melchisedec offered sacrifice of bread and wine, as all the fathers
expound it: but (Luc. 1. v. 42) where they translate the equivalent Greek
particle (...), there Beza proves the said particle to signify, because, Quia
benedictus, for, and benedictus fructus ventris tui.
and translateth accordingly, and the English Bezites likewise. I vvil not
urge them why, we like the sense well, and Theophylacte so expounds it. but
if the Greek copulative may be so translated, why not the Hebrew copulative
much more, which often in the Scripture is used in that sense? See chap. 17.
nu. 13.14.

43 But I would ask rather, Luc. 1. v. 28.
why (...) may not in any case be translated, full of grace: whereas (...) is
translated, Luc. 16. v. 20
full of sores. both words being of like form and force. See chap. 18. nu.
4.5.

(...)
44 Again, why say they (Hebr. 13) Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and say not, Let marriage be honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled. both being expressed a like by the Apostle, and by way of
exhortation, as the rest that goes before and follows? See chap. 15. nu. 15.

45 Are we to suspicious think you? Hebr. 5. v. 7.
how can fear, be translated, that which he feared: Beza. Act. 26. v. 20. 2
These. 2 and 3.
repentance, them that repent or amend their life: tradition, the doctrine
delivered: temples, shrines: idols, devotions: every humane creature, al
ordinances of man: foreknovvledge, providence: soul, carcas: hell, grave: altar,
temple: table, altar: and such like?

46 What caused these strange speeches in their English Bibles, Psalm. 86, 13.
Bib. 1579.
Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave. Thou have delivered my soul from
the lowest grave. A covetous man is a worshipper of images. By laying on of the
hands of the Eldership. Hail freely beloved. SIN lies at the door, and
thou shall rule over HIM. Break of thy sins with righteousness. for, Redeem
with alms. Jealousy is cruel as the grave. for, as hell. Cant. Cant. 8. Bib.
an 1579. The greifes of the grave caught me. Psalm. 116. And, God vvil redeem
my soul from the power of the grave. Psalm. 48.
O grave I vvil be thy destruction. Os. 13. and such like? what made Calvin so
translate into Latin, that if you turn it into English, the sense is, that God
povvred water upon us abundantly, Tit. 3.
meaning the holy Ghost: what else but because he would take away the
necessity of material water in Baptism, as in his commentary and Bezas, it
is evident?

47 I had meant to have but breifely skimmed over these things, but multitude
of matter makes me to long, as it chances to a man that vvadeth through
myrie and foul places, and yet the greatest demonstration that they are
willful corrupters, is behind, which only I vvil add, and for the rest,
refer the reader to the whole book.

48 Doubt you whether they translate of purpose and partiality, infauour of
their opinions? you shall hear them selves say so and protest it. If I dealt
with Lutherans, this one testimony of Luther were sufficient, who being
asked why he added, Tom. 2. fol. 405. edit. Vvitteb. an. 1551.
only, into the text To. 3: ansvvered that he did it to explicate the Apostles
sense more plainly. that is, to make the Apostle say more plainly, that faith
only justified. and his disciple Illyricus disputes the matter, that the
Apostle saying, by faith without works, The express testimonies of Beza
(whom the English Heretical translatio^s follow herein) that he does Wilfully
and of purpose translate against such and such Catholic assertions.
says in deed, only faith. but because I deal rather with our English
Caluinistes, and Beza is their chief tra^slatour, and a captain among them,
whom they profess to follow in the title of the new Test. an. 1580, and by the
very name of their Geneua Bibles, let us see what he says.

49 First concerning, (...), which the vulgar Latin and Erasmus translate,
Agite poenitentiam, Repent, or, Do penance. This interpretation (says he) I
refuse for many causes, but for this especially, that many ignorant persons have
taken hereby an occasion of the false opinions of SATISFACTION, vvherevvith the
Church is troubled at this day. Lo, of purpose against satisfaction he vvil
not translate the Greek word, as it ought to be, and as it is proved to
signify, both in this book, and in the Annotations upon the new Testament.
Mat. 3. v. 8.
A little after speaking of the same word, he says, why I have changed the
name, poenitentia, I have told a little before, * Loco supra citato.
protesting that he vvil never use those words, but resipiscere, and
resipiscentia, that is, amendment of life: because of their heresy, that
repentance is nothing else but a mere amendment of former life, without
recompense or satisfaction or penance for the sins before committed. See
chap. 13.

50 Again concerning the word, (...).
Iustifications, which in the Scripture very often signify the
commandments, he says thus. The Greek interpreters of the Bible (meaning
the Septuaginta) applied this word to signify the whole Law of God, Luc. 1.
v. 6.
and therefore commonly it is wont to be translated word for word,
Iustificationes: which interpretation therefore only I rejected, that I might
take away this occasion also of cauilling against justification by faith. and
so for, iustificationes, he puts constituta, Tullies word forsooth, as he
says. Can you have a more plain testimony of his heretical purpose?

51 Again, when he had rejected this translation (Act. 2. v. 27) Non
derelinques animan meam in inferno, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell:
because (as he says) hereupon grevve the errors of Christ's descending into
Hell, of Limbus, and of Purgatory: at length he concludes thus, Whereas the
doubtful iuterpretation of one or two words has brought forth so many
monsters, I chose rather Lo how simply: Anima, carcas. Infernus, grave.
simply, for foul, to say, carcas, for hell, (...). Act. 3. v. 21.
grave: then to foster these foul errors.

52 Again, when he had translated for, Whom heaven mustreceiue, thus, who
must be contained in heaven: he says, whereas we have used the passive kind
of speech, rather then the active (which is in the Greek:) we did it to
avoid al ambiguitie. for it is very expedient, that there should be in the
Church of God, this perspicuous testimony, against them, that for ascending by
faith into heaven, so to be joined to our head, obstinatly maintain that
Christ must be called again out of heaven unto us. Meaning his presence in the
B. Sacrament, and inueighing no less against the Lutherans then the
Catholics, as the * Flac. Illyr.
Luthera^s do here against him for this willful interpretation, and that by
Caluins own judgment, who thinks it a forced translation.

53 But Beza goes forvvard still in this kind. To. 5. v. 18. whereas Erasmus
had put propagatum est, indifferently, both of Adams sin which made us
truly sinners, and of Christ's justice, which makes us truly just: he
rejecting it, among other causes why it displeased him, says: That old error
of the Sophists (meaning Catholics) which for imputative justice put an
inherent quality in the place, is so great, and so execrable to al good men,
that I think nothing is so much to be avoided as it.

54 These fevv examples prove unto us that the Scriptures translated verbatim,
exactly, and according to the proper use and signification of the words, do
by the Heretics confession make for the Catholics, and therefore Beza says he
alters the words into other: and (I think) it may suffice any indifferent
reader to judge of his purpose and meaning in other places of his translation,
and consequently of theirs that either allow him, or follow him, which are
our English Caluinists, and Bezites. Many other ways there are to make most
certain proof of their Wilfulnes, as when * Calu. Heb. 5, 7 and Tit. 3, 6.
Beza 2 Thessal. 2, 15. and 1, 6.
the translation is framed according to their false and heretical commentary:
and, When they vvil avouch their translations out of profane vvriters, Homer,
Plutarch, Pliny, Tullie, Virgil, and Terence, and reject the Ecclesiastical
use of words in the Scriptures and fathers: which Beza does for the most
part alvvaies. but it were infinite to note all the marks, and by these, the
wise reader may conceive the rest.

55 But would you think that these men could notvvithstanding speak very
gravely and honestly against voluntary and willful translations of Scripture,
that so notoriously offend therein them selves? Harken what Beza says against
Castaleo and the like: Annot. act. 10. v. 46.
The matter (says he) is now come to this point, that the traslatours of
Scripture out of the Greek into Latin, or into any other tongue, think that
they may lavvfully do any thing in translating Whom if a man reprehend; he
shall be ansvvered by and by, that they do the office of a manslatour, not that
translateth word for word, but that expresses the sense. So it comes to
pass, that, vvhiles every man vvil rather freely follow his own judgment,
then be a religious interpreter of the Holy Ghost, he does rather pervert many
things then ^ranslate them. Is not this vvel-said, if he had done accordingly?
but doing the clean contrary, as has been proved, he is a dissembling
hypocrite in so saying, and a willful Heretic in so doing, and condemned by
his own judgment.

56 But after this general vewe of their wilful purpose and heretical
intention, let us examine their false translations more particularly, and argue
the case with them more at large, and press them to answer, whether in
their conscience it be so or no, as hitherto is said: and that by several
chapters of such CONTROVERSIES as their corruptions concern: and first of al
(without further curiosity whence to begin, in cases so indifferent) of
TRADITIONS.

CHAP. II. Heretical translation of holy Scripture against Apostolical
TRADITIONS.
1 THIS is a matter of such importance, that if they should grant any
traditions of the Apostles, and not pretend the written word only: they know
that by See the annotations of the new Testament 2 Thessalonians, 2, 15.
such traditions mentioned in all antiquity, their religion were wholy
defaced and overthrown. for remedy whereof, and for the defacing of al such
traditions, they bend their translations against them in this wonderful manner.
Wheresoever the Holy, Scripture speaks against certain traditions of the
Jews, partly frivolous, partly repugnant to the Law of God, there all the
English translations follow the Greek exactly, (...)
never omitting this word, tradition. Contrarievvise wheresoever the holy
Scripture speaks in the commendation of Traditions, to wit, such traditions
as the Apostles delivered to the Church, there al their said tra^slations
agree, not to follow the Greek, which is still the self same word, but for,
traditions, they translate, ordinances, or instructions. Why so and to what
purpose? we appeal to the worm of their conscience, which continually
accuses them of an heretical meaning, whether, by urging the word,
traditions, wheresoever they are discommended, and by suppressing the word,
wheresoever they are commended, their purpose and intent be not, to signify
to the Reader, that al traditions are naught, and none good, al reprouable,
none allowable.

2 For example. Mat. 15. Thus they translate, Why do thy disciples transgress
the TRADITION of the Elders? (...)
And again, Why do you also transgress the commandment of God by your
TRADITION? And again, Thus have you made the commandment of God of no effect
by your TRADITION: here (I vvarant you) all the belles sound tradition, and the
word is never omitted, and it is very well and honestly translated, for so the
Greek word does proprely signify. But now on the other side, concerning
good traditions, let us see their dealing. The Apostle by the self same word
both in Greek and Latin, says thus: 2 These. 2. v. 15 (...), traditiones. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 6.
Therefore, brethren, stand and hold fast the TRADITIONS which you have learned
either by word, or by our epistle. And again, Withdraw your selves from
every brother walking inordinatly, and not according to the TRADITION which
they have received of us. 1 Cor. 11, 2. (...).
And again (according to the Greek which they profess to follow:) I praise
you brethren, that in all things you are mindeful of me, and as I have delivered
unto you, you keep my TRADITIONS.

3 Here we see plain mention of S. Paul's traditions, and consequently of
Apostolical traditions, yea and traditions by word of mouth, delivered to the
said Churches without vvriting or Scripture. In all which places look, gentle
reader, and seek al their English translations, and thou shall Yet M. Fulke
says, it is found there. page 153 against D. Sand. Rock. If he give not us an
instance. let him give him self the lie.
not once find the word, tradition, but in steed thereof, ordinances,
instructions, preachings, institutions, and any word else rather then,
tradition, in so much that Beza their master tra^slateth it traditam
doctrina^, the doctrine delivered, (...).
putting the singular number for the plural, and adding, doctrine, of his
own. so framing the text of holy Scripture according to his false
co^me^tarie, or rather putting his co^me^tarie in the text, and making it the
text of Scripture. Who would think their malice and partiality against
traditions were so great, that they should al agree with one consent so duly
and exactly in these and these places to co^ceale the word, which in other
places do so gladly use it, the Greek word being al one in all the said places?

4 Yea they do else where so gladly use this word, tradition, when it may
tend to the discredit thereof: that they put the said word in all their
English Bibles, with the like full consent as before, when it is not in the
Greek at al. As when they translate thus, Col. 2.20.
If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world: (...).
why as though living in the world, ARE YE LED WITH TRADITIONS? and as an
other of the year 1579.
English translation of theirs reads more heretically, Why are ye burdened
with traditions? Tell us sincerely you that profess to have skill in the
Greek, and to translate according to the Greek? tell us we beseech you,
whether this Greek word (...) do signify tradition, and (...), to be led
or burdened with traditions. You can not be ignorant that it does not so
signify, Col. 2, 14. Ephesians. 2, 15. (...).
but as a little before in the same chapter, and in other places, your selves
translate (...), ordinances, decrees: so (...), must be (as in the vulgar Latin
it is) Quid decernitis? Why do you ordain or decree, or, why are you led
with decrees?

5 Justify your translation if you can, either out of Scriptures, fathers, or
Lexicon. and make us a good reason why you put the word, traditions, here,
(...) they translate, ordinance: and (...), tradition: clean contrary.
where it is not in the Greek: and would not put it in the places before,
where you know it is most evidently in the Greek. Yea you must tell us, why
you translate for tradition, ordinance, and contrary for ordinance, tradition:
so turning catte in pan (as they say) at your pleasure, and wresting both the
one and the other to one end, that you may make the very name of traditions
odious among the people, be they never so authentical, even from the Apostles:
which your conscience knovveth, and you shall answer for it at the dreadful
day.

6 Somevvhat more excusable it is, but yet proceeding of the same heretical
humor, and on your part (that should exactly follow the Greek) falsely
translated, when you translate in S. Peter's Epistle thus: 1 Pet. 1, 18.
You were not redeemed with corruptible things from your vain conversation
received by the tradition of the fathers. Where the Greek is thus rather to
be translated, (...).
from your vain conversation delivered by the fathers. but your fingers itched
to foist in the word, tradition, and for, delivered, to say, received, because
it is the phrase of the Catholic church, that it has received many things by
tradition, which you would here control by likeness of words in this false
translation.

7 But concerning the word tradition, you vvil say perhaps the sense thereof
is included in the Greek word, delivered We grant. but would you be
content, if we should alvvaies expressly add, tradition, where it is so
included? then should we say 1 Cor. 11, 2. Tradidi (...)
I praise you that as I have delivered you (by tradition,) you keep my
precepts or traditions. And again v. 23. For I received of our Lord, which
also I delivered unto you (by tradition) etc. And Luc. 1. v. 2. As they (by
tradition) delivered unto us, which from the beginning savv etc. and such
like, by your example, we should translate in this sort. but we use not this
licentious manner in tra^slating holy Scriptures, neither is it a translators
part, but an interpreters, and his that makes a commentary: neither does a
good cause need other translation then the express text of the Scripture
gives.

8 And if you vvil yet say, that our vulgar Latin translation has here the
word, tradition: we grant it has so, and therefore we also translate
accordingly. but you profess to translate the Greek, and not the vulgar
Latin, which you in England condemn as Papistical, and * Discover. of the
Rock. page 147.
say it is the vvorst of al, though * Prefat. in no. Test. 1556.
Beza your master pronounce it to be the very best: and vvil you
notvvithstanding follow the said vulgar Latin rather then the Greek, to make
traditions odious? Yea such is your partiality one way, and inconstancy an
other way, that for your heretical purpose you are content to follow the old
Latin translation, though it differ from the Greek, and again an other time
you vvil not follow it, though it be al one with the Greek most exactly. as
in the place before alleged, where the vulgar Latin translation has nothing
of traditions, but, Quid decernitis, as it is in the Greek: you translate,
Why are ye burdened with traditions? Col. 2, 20.


9 So that a blind man may see, you frame your translations to bolster your
errors and heresies, without al respect of following sincerely either the
Greek or the Latin. But for the Latin no marvel, the Greek at the least why
do you not follow? (...).
Is it the Greek that induces you to say ordinances for traditions,
traditions for decrees, ordinances for iustifications, Elder for Priest, grave
for hell, (...)
image for idol? tell us before God and in your conscience whether it be,
because you will exactly follow the Greek: nay tell us truly, and shame the
Devil, whether the Greek words do not sound and signify most properly that,
which you of purpose vvil not translate, for disaduantaging your heresies? And
first let us see concerning the question of Images.

CHAP. III. Heretical translation against sacred IMAGES.
1 I BESEECH you what is the next and readiest and most proper English of
Idolum, idololatra, (...).
idoloratria? is it not Idol, idolater, idolatry? are not these plain English
words, and well known in our language? Why sought you further for other
terms and words, if you had meant faithfully? What needed that circumstance
of three words for one, worshipper of images, Bib. 1577. Ephesians. 5. Col. 3.
and, worshipping of images? whether (I pray you) is the more natural and
convenient speech, either in our English tongue, or for the truth of the
thing, to say as the holy Scripture does, Covetousness is idolatry, and
consequently, The covetous man is an idolater: or as you translate, Covetousness
is worshipping of images, and The covetous man is a worshipper of images?

The absurdity of this translation, A covetous man is a Worshipper of images.
2 We say commonly in English, Such a rich man makes his money his God: and
the Apostle says in like manner of some, Whose belly is their God. Phil. 3.
and generally every creature is our idol, when we esteem it so excedingly
that we make it our God. but who ever heard in English, that our money, or
belly, were our images, and that by esteeming of them to much, we become
worshippers of ima^ges? Among your selves are there not some even of your
Superintendents, of whom the Apostle speaks, that make an idol of their
money and belly, by covetousness and belly cheer? Yet can we not call you
therefore in any true sense, worshippers of images, neither would you abide it.
You see then that there is a great difference betwixt idol and image,
idolatry and worshipping of images: and even so great difference is there
betwixt S. Paul's words and your translation.

3. Vvil you see more yet to this purpose? In the English Bible printed the
year 1562 you read thus: 2 Cor. 6.
How agrees the Temple of God with images? Can we be ignorant of Satan's
cogitations herein, that it was translated of purpose to delude the simple
people and to make them believe that the Apostle speaks against sacred images
in the churches, which were then in plucking down in England, when this
your translation was first published in print? Whereas in very truth you
know, that the Apostle here partly interprets him self to speak of men,
Salomons Temple did well agree with images, but not with idols.
as of Gods temples wherein he dwells, partly alludeth to Salomons Temple,
which did very well agree with images (for it had the Cherubins, which
were the representations of Angels, and the figures of oxen to bear up the
lauatorie) but with idols it could not agree: and therefore the Apostles
words are these, (...) The brazen serpent, first an image, and lavvful:
afterward an idol, and unlawful.
How agrees the Temple of God with idols?

4 When Moses by Gods appointement erected a brazen serpent, and commanded
the people that were stung with serpents, to behold it, and thereby they
were healed: this was an image only, and as an image was it erected and kept
and used by Gods commandment. number. 21.
but when it grevve to be an idol (says S. Augustine) that is, Li- 10 de
Ciuit. c. 8.
when the people began to adore it as God, then king Ezechias brake it in
pieces to the great commendation of his piety and godly zeal. 4 Reg. 18.
So when the children of Israel in the absence of Moses made a calfe, Exodus
32.
and said, These are thy Gods o Israel that brought thee out of Egypt, The
molten calfe, an idol.
was it but an image which they made? was that so heinous a matter that God
would so have punished them as he did? No they made it an idol also, saying,
These are thy gods o Israel. And therefore the Apostle says to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 10. (...).
Be not idolaters, as some of them. Which also you translate most falsely, Be
not worshippers of images, as some of them.

5 We see then that the Jews had images without sin, but not idols.
Again for having idols they were accounted like unto the Gentiles, as the
Psalm says, They learned their works, and served their graven idols. Psalm.
164.
but they were not accounted like unto the Gentiles for having images, which
they had in Salomons Temple, and in the brazen serpent. In c. 25. Ezech. The
Protestants are like to the Ammonites and Moabites.
S. Hierom vvriteth of the Ammonites and Moabites (who were Gentiles and
Idolaters) that coming into the temple of Jerusalem, and seeing the Angelical
images of the Cherubins covering the Propitiatory, they said, Lo, even as the
Gentiles, so Judah also has idols of their religion. These men did put no
difference between their own idols, and the Jews lavvful images. and are
not you ashamed to be like to these? They accused Salomons Temple of Idols,
because they savv there lavvful images: you accuse the Churches of God of
idolatry, because you see there the sacred images of Christ and his Saints.

6 But tell us yet I pray you, do the holy Scriptures of either Testament
speak of al manner of images, The holy Scripture speaks against the idols of
the Gentiles, not against almaner of images.
or rather of the idols of the Gentiles? your conscience knows that they
speak directly against the idols and the idolatry that was among the Pagans
and Infidels: from which as the Jews in the old Testament, so the first
Christians in the new Testament were to be prohibited. but vvil you have a
demonstration that your own conscience condemns you herein, and that you
apply al translation to your heresy? What caused you being otherwise in all
places so ready to translate, images: yet Esa. 31 and Zachar. 13 to translate,
idols, in all your Bibles with full consent? Why in these places specially and
so advisedly? No doubt because God says there, speaking of this time of the
new Testament: In that day every man shall cast out his idols of silver and
idols of gold. And, I vvil destroy the names of the idols out of the earth, so
that they shall no more be had in remembrance. In which places if you had
translated, images, you had made the prophecy false, because images have not
been destroyed out of the world, but are, and have been in Christian countries
with honor and reverence, even since Christ's time. Mary in the idols of the
Gentiles we see it verified, which are destroyed in all the world so far as
Gentilitie is converted to Christ.

7 And what were the Pagans idols or their idolatry? S. Paul tells us,
saying: To. 1.
They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the
image of a corruptible man, What were the idols of the Pagans.
and of birds and beasts and creeping things: and they served (or
worshipped) the creature more then the creator. Does he charge them for making
the image of man or beast? Your selves have hangings and clothes full of such
paintings and embroderings of imagirie. Where with then are they charged?
with giving the glory of God to such creatures, which was to make them
idols, and them selves idolaters.

8 The case being thus, 1 Cor. 5. Bib. 1562.
why do you make it two distinct things in S. Paul, calling the Pagans,
idolaters: and the Christians doing the same, worshippers of images: and that
in one sentence, whereas the Apostle uses but one and the self same Greek
word in speaking both of Pagans and Christians? It is a marvelous and willful
corruption, and well to be marked, and therefore I vvil put down the whole
sentence, as it is in your English translation. I vvrote to you that you should
not company with fornicators: and I meant not at al of the fornicators of
this world, either of the covetous, or extortioners, either (...)
the idolaters etc. but that ye company not together, if any that is called a
brother, be afornicator or covetous, or (...).
A WORSHIPPER or IMAGES, or an extortioner. In the first, speaking of Pagans,
your translatour names idolater according to the text, but in the later part
speaking of Christians, you translate the very self same Greek word,
worshipper of images. Why so? for sooth to make the reader think that S.
Paul speaks here, not only of Pagan idolaters, but also of Catholic
Christians that reverently kneel in prayer before the Cross, the holy Roode,
the images of our Savior Christ and his Saints: as though the Apostle had
commanded such to be avoided.

9 Where if you have yet the face to deny this your malicious and heretical
intent, tell us, why al these other words are translated and repeated alike
in both places, covetous, fornicators, extortioners, both Pagans and
Christians: and only this word (idolaters) not so, but Pagans, idolaters: and
Christians, worshippers of images. At the least you can not deny but it was
of purpose done, to make both seem al one, yea and to signify that the
Christians doing the foresaid reverence before sacred images (which you call
worshipping of images) are more to be avoided then the Pagan idolaters.

Whereas the Apostle speaking of Pagans and Christians that committed one and
the self same heinous sin whatsoever, commands the Christian in that case
to be avoided for his amendment, leaving the Pagan to him self and to God, as
having not to do to judge of him.

10 But to this the answer belike vvil be made, W. Fulke, Confut. of John
Hovvlet so. 35.
as one of them has already ansvvered in the like case, that in the English
Bible appointed to be read in their churches it is otherwise, and even as we
would have it corrected: and therefore (says he) it had been good before we
entered into such beinous accusations, to have examined our grounds that they
had been true. As though we accuse them not truly of false translation, unless
it be false in that one Bible which for the present is read in their churches:
or as though it pertained not to the^ how their other English Bibles be
translated: or as though the people read not al indifferently without
prohibition, and may be abused by every one of them: or as though the Bible
which now is read (as we think) in their churches, Bib. 1577. Col. 3. v. 5.
have not the like absurd translations, yea more absurd, even in this matter of
images, as is before declared: or as though we must first learn what English
translation is read in their church (which were hard to know, it changes so
often) before we may be bold to accuse them of false translation: or as though
it were not the same Bible that Was for many years read in their churches, and
is yet in every man's hands, which has this absurd translation whereof we
have last spoken.

11 Surely the Bible that we most accuse not only in this point, Bib. 1562.
but for sundry other most gross faults and heretical translations, spoken
of in other places, is that Bible which was authorized by Cramner their
Archbishop of Canterbury, and read al king Edward's time in their churches,
and (as it seems by the late printing thereof again an. 1562) a great part
of this Queens reign. And certain it is, that it was so long read in all
their churches with this venomous and corrupt translation of images alvvaies
in steed of idols, that it made the deceived people of their sect, to
despise, contemn, and abandon the very sign and image of their salvation, the
cross of Christ, the holy roode or crucifixe representing the manner of his
bitter passion and death, the sacred images of the blessed Virgin Marie the
mother of God, and of S. John Evangelist, representing their standing by the
Cross at the very time of his Passion. Io. 19. v. 26.
in so much that now by experience we see the foul inconvenience thereof, to
wit, that al other images and pictures of infamous harlots and Heretics, of
Heathen tyrants and persecutors, are lavvful in England at this day, and their
houses, parlours and chambers are garnished with them: only sacred images,
and representations of the holy mystery of our redemption, are esteemed
idolatrous, and have been openly defaced in most spiteful manner and burned, to
the great dishonor of our Savior Christ and his Saints.

12 And as concerning the bible that at this day is read in their churches, if
it be that of the year 1577, it is worse sometime in this matter of images,
then the other. for where the other reads, Col. 3. v. 5.
Covetousness, which is worshipping of idols: there this later (whereunto
they appeal) reads thus, Covetousness, which is worshipping of images. and
Ephesians. 5. it reads as absurdly as the other, W. Fulke Confut. fol. 35.
A covetous man, which is a worshipper of images. Lo this is the English
bible which they refer us unto, as better translated, and as correcting the
fault of the former. But because it is evident by these places, that his also
is partly worse, and partly as il as the other, therefore this great co^futer
of M. John Houlet flees once more, Fol. 36. Bib. 1579.
to the Geneua English Bible, saying, Thus we read, and so we translate: to
wit, A covetous person, which is an idolater. Where shall we have these good
fellows, and how shall we be sure that they will stand to any of their
translations? from the first readde in their churches, they flee to that that
is now readde, and from this again, to the later Geneua English Bibles,
neither readde in their churches (as we suppose) nor of greatest authority
among them: and we doubt not but they vvil as fast flee from this, to the
former again, when this shall be proved in some places more false and absurd
then the other.

13 But what matter is it how they read in their churches, or how they
correct their former tra^slations by the later: when the old corruption
remains still, being set of purpose in the top of every door within their
churches, in these words: Babes keep your selves from images? 1 Io. 5.
Why remains that written so often and so conspicuously in the wales of
their churches, which in their Bibles they correct as a fault? their later
bibles say, keep your selves from idols: their church wales say, keep your
selves from images. S. John speaking to the lately converted Gentiles, bids
them beware of the idols from whence they were converted: they speaking to
the old instructed Christians, bid them bevvare of the sacred image of Christ
our Savior, of the holy Crucifixe, of the cross, of every such representation
and monument of Christ's passion, and our redemption. And therefore in the very
same place where these holy monuments were wont to stand in Catholic times,
to wit, in the roode loft and partition of the Church and chauncel: there now
stand these words as confronting and co^demning the foresaid holy momuments,
Babes keep your selves from images. Which words whosoever esteems as the
words of Scripture, and the words of S. John, spoken against Christ's image,
is made a very babe in deed, and sottishly abused by their scribled doors,
and false translations, to count that idolatry, which is in deed to no other
purpose then to the great honor of him whose image and picture it is.

14 But the gay confuter with whom I began, says for further answer: W.
Fulke. Fo. 35.
Admit that in some of our translations it be, Children keep your selves from
images (for so he would have said if it were truly printed) What great
crime of corruption is here committed? And when it is said again, this is the
crime and fault thereof, that they mean by so translating to make the simple
believe that idols and images are al one, which is absurd he replieth that it
is no more absurdity, then in steed of a Greek word, to use a Latin of the
same signification. And upon this position he grants that according to the
property of the Greek word a man may say, Genesis 1. (...)
God made man according to his idol, and that generally, idolum may as truly
be translated an image, as Tyrannus a king (which is very true, both being
absurd) and here he cites many authors and dictionaries idly, (...)
to prove that idolum may signify the same that Image.

15 But I beseech you Sir, if the dictionaries tell you that (...) may by the
original property of the word signify an image, (which no man denies) do
they tell you also that you may commonly and ordinarily translate it so, as the
common usual signification thereof? or do they tell you that image and idol are
so al one, that wheresoever you find this word image, you may truly call
it, idol? for these are the points that you should defend in your answer. for
an example, do they teach you to translate in these places thus, Romans 8.
imagini. 1 Cor. 15. imaginem
God has predestined us to be made conformable to the idol of his son. And
again, As we have borne the idol of the earthly (Adam:) so let us bear the
idol of the heavenly (CHRIST). And again, We are transformed into the same
idol, even as of our Lords spirit. 2 Cor. 3. Hebr. 10.
And again, The Law having a shadovv of the good things to come, not the very
idol of the things. And again, Christ who is the idol of the invisible God?
Col. 1. 2 Cor. 4.
Is this (I pray you) a true translation? yea, say you, according to the
property of the word: but because the name of idols, in the English tongue,
for the great dishonor done to God in worshipping of images, is become
odious, no Christian man would say so.

16 First note how folishly and unadvisedly he speaks here, because he
would confound images and idols, and make them falsely to signify one thing:
when he says, the name of idol, is become odious in the English tongue
because of worshipping of Images, He should have said, The dishonor done to
God in worshipping Idols, made the name of Idols odious. As in his own
example of Tyrant, and king: he meant to tell us that Tyrant sometime was an
usual name for every king, and because certain such Tyrants abused their
power, therefore the name of Tyrant became odious. for he vvil not say (I
trow) that for the fault of kings, the name of Tyrant became odious. Likewise
the Romans took away the name of Manlius for the crime of one Ma^lius, not
for the crime of John at Nokes, or of any other name. The name of Judas is so
odious that men now commonly are not so called. Why so? because he that
betrayed Christ, was called Judas: not because he was also Iscariote. The
very name of Ministers is odious and contemptible. why? because Ministers are
so lewd, wicked, and unlearned, not because some Priests be naught. Even so
the name of idol grevve to be odious, because of the idols of the Gentiles, not
because of holy images. For if the reverence done by Christians to holy images
were evil, as it is not, it should in this case have made the name of images
odious: and not the name of Idols. But God be thanked, the name of Images is no
odious name among Catholic Christians, but only among heretics and
Imagebreakers, such as the second general Council of Nice has condemned
therefore with the sentence of Anathema. No more then the Cross is odious,
which to al good Christians is honorable, because our Savior Christ died on a
Cross.

17 But to omit this man's extraordinary and unadvised speeches which be to
many and to tedious (as when he says in the same sentence, Howsoever the name
idol is grown odious in the English tongue, as though it were not also
odious in the Latin and Greek tongues, but that in Latin and Greek a man might
say according to his fond opinion, Fecit honem ad idolum suum, and so in the
other places where is imago) to omit these rash assertions I say, and to
return to his other words where he says, that though the original
property of the words has that signification, yet no Christian man would
say that God made man according to his idol, no more then a good subject would
call his lavvful Prince a tyrant. does he not here tell us that, which we
would have, to wit, that we may not speak or translate according to the
original property of the word, but according to the common usual and
accustomed signification thereof? As we may not translate, Phalaris tyrannus,
Phalaris the king, as sometime tyrannus did signify, and in ancient authors
does signify: but, Phalaris the tyrant, as now this word tyrannus is
commonly taken and understood. Even so we may not now translate, My children
keep your selves from images, as the word may and does sometime signify
according to the original property thereof, ab idolis (...) 1 Io. 5.
but we must translate, keep yourselues from idols, according to the common
use and signification of the word in vulgar speech, and in the holy
Scriptures. Where the Greek word is so notoriously and usually peculiar to
idols, and not unto images: that the holy fathers of the second Nicene Council
(which knevv right well the signification of the Greek word, them selves
being Graecians) do pronounce Anathema to al such as interpret those places of
the holy Scripture that concern idols, of images or against sacred images, as
now these Caluinists do, not only in their Commentaries upon the holy
Scriptures, but even in their translations of the text.

18 This then being so, that words must be translated as their common use and
signification requires, Loco citato fo. 35.
if you ask your old question, what great crime of corruption is committed in
translating, keep your selves from images, the Greek being (...)? you have
ansvvered your self, that in so translating, idol and image are made to
signify one thing, which may not be done, no more then Tyrant and king can be
made to signify al one. And how can you say then, that this is no more
absurdity, then in steed of a Greek word, to use a latin of the same
signification. Are you not here contrary to your self? Are idol and image,
tyrant and king, of one signification? said you not that in the English tongue,
idol is grown to an other signification, then image, as tyrant is grown to
an other signification then king? Your false translatio^s therefore that in so
many places make idols and images al one, not only forcing the word in the
holy Scriptures, but disgracing the sentence thereby (as Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3)
are they not in your own judgment very corrupt: Ephesians. 5. A covetous man is a
worshipper of images. and Col. 3. Covetousness is Worshipping of images.
and as your own consciences must confess, of a malicious intent corrupted,
to disgrace thereby the Churches holy images by pretense of the holy Scriptures
that speak only of the Pagans idols.

19 But of the usual, and original signification of words (whereof you take
occasion of manifold corruptions) we vvil speak more anon, if first we
touch some other your falsifications against holy images: as, where you
affectate to thrust the word image into the text, when there is no such thing
in the Hebrew or Greek, as in that notorious example 2. Par. 36. (Bib. 1562.)
Carved images that were laid to his charge. (...). subaud. (...) Number. c. 22.
Again, To. 11. To the image of Baal. and Act. 19. The image that came down
from Jupiter. Where you are not content to understand image rather then idol,
(...)
but also to thrust it into the text, being not in the Greek, as you know
very well.

20 Of this kind of falsification is that which is crept as a leprosy
through out al your bibles, translating, Sculptile and conflatile, graven
image, molten image, namely in the first commandment, where you know in the
Greek it is idol, and in the Hebrew, (...)
such a word as signifies only a graven thing, not including this word
image: and you know that God commanded to make the images of Cherubins, and of
oxen in the Temple, and of the brazen serpent in the desert, and therefore your
vvisedomes might have considered, that he forbadde not al graven images, The
meaning of the 1. Commandment concerning false gods and graven idols
but such as the Gentiles made and worshipped as gods: and therefore Non
facies tibi sculptile, concurreth with those words that go before, Thou
shall have none other gods but me. For so to have an image as to make it a god,
is to make it more then an image: and therefore, when it is an Idol, as were
the Idols of the Gentiles, then it is forbid by this commandment. Otherwise,
when the Cross stood many years upon the Table in the Queens Chapel, The
Cross in the Q. Chapel.
was it against this commandment? or was it idolatry in the Queen's
Majesty and her Counselors, that appointed it there, being the supreme head
of your church? Or do the Lutherans your puefellowes, at this day commit
idolatry against this commandment, that have in their churches the
crucifixe, and the holy Images of the mother of God, Images in the Lutheran
Churches.
and of S. John the Evangelist? Or if the whole story of the Gospel
concerning our savior Christ, were drawn in pictures and Images in your
churches, as it is in many of ours, were it (trow you) against this
commandment? fie for shame, that you should thus with intolerable impudency
and deceit abuse and bevvitch the ignorant people, against your own
knowledge and conscience. For, vvot you not, that God many times expressly
forbade the Jews both marriages and other conversation with the Gentiles,
lest they might fall to worship their idols, as Solomon did, 3 Reg. 11. Ps.
105. v. 35.
and as the Psalm reports of them? This then is the meaning of the
commandment, neither to make the idols of the Gentiles, nor any other like
unto them, and to that end, as did Jeroboam in Dan and Bethel. Hebr. Teraphim.
Marsebah. Temunah. Maschith. Pesel. Tselamim. Tabaith. Hamanim. Saemel.
Massecah. Nesachim. Gillulim. Miphletseth Gr. (...) Al image and images, in
their translations.


21 This being a thing so plain as nothing more in all the holy Scriptures,
yet your itching humor of deceit and falsehod, for the most part does
translate still, images, images, when the Latin and Greek and Hebrew have
diverse other words, and very seldom that which answers to image. for when
it is image in the Latin, or Greek or Hebrew textes, your translation is not
reprehended: for we also translate sometimes, images, when the text of the
holy scripture requiteth it. and we are not ignorant that there were images,
which the Pagans adored for their gods: and we know that some idols are
images, but not al images, idols. but when the holy Scriptures call them by so
many names, rather then images, because they were not only images, but made
idols: why do your translations, like cuckoes birds, sound continually,
images, images, more then idols, or other words equivalent to idols, which
are there meant?

22 Two places only we will at this time ask you the reason of: first why
you translate the Hebrew and Greek that answers to statua, image, so often
as you do: Whereas this word in the said tongues, is taken also in the better
part, as when lacob set up a stone and erected it for a * Matsebah. (...)
title, povvring oil upon it: and the prophet says, our Lords altar shall be
in Argypt, and his * Genesis 28. v. 22
title beside it. Esa. 19. v. 19.
So that the word does signify generally a sign erected of good or evil, and
therefore might very well (if it pleased you) have some other English then,
image. Unless you will say that Jacob also set up an image: and, Our Lords
image shall be in Egypt: which you will not say, though you might with more
reason then in other places.

Of the year 1579.
23 Secondly we demand, why your very last English Bible has (Esa. 30, 22:)
For two Hebrew words, Pesilim. Massechoth. (...).
which are in Latin Sculptilia and conflatilia, twice, images, images:
neither word being Hebrew for an image: no more then if a man would ask,
what is Latin for an image, and you would tell him sculptile. Whereupon he
seeing a fair painted image in a table, might happily say, Ecce egregium
sculptile. Which every boy in the Grammar school would laugh at. Which
therefore we tell you, because we perceive your translations en devour and as
it were affectat, (...). Of the year 1579.
to make Sculptile and image al one. Which is most evidently false and to your
great confusion appears Abac. 2. v. 13. Where for these words, Quid
prodest sculptile, quia sculpsit illud fictor suus conflatile and imagine^
falsam? Which is according to the Hebrew and Greek: your later English
translation has, What profits the image? for the maker thereof has made it
an image, and a teacher of lies.

24 I would every common Reader were able to discern your falshod in this
place. First, you make sculpere sculptile, no more then, to make an image:
Which being absurd you know (because the painter or embroderer making an
image, can not be said sculpere sculptile) might teach you that the Hebrew has
in it no signification of image, no more then sculpere can signify, to make an
image: and therefore the Greek and the Latin precisely (for the most part)
express neither more nor less, then a thing graue^: Sculptile. (...)
but yet mean alvvaies by these words, a graven idol, to which
signification they are appropriated by use of holy Scripture, as Simulacrum
idolum, conflatile, and sometime imago. In which sense of signifying I dols,
if you also did repeat images so often, although the translation were not
precise, yet it were in some part tolerable, because the sense were so: but
when you do it to bring al holy images into contempt, even the image of our
Savior Christ crucified, you may justly be controuled for false and heretical
translators.

25 As in this very place (which is an other falls hod like to the other)
conflatile you translate image, Abac. 2.
as you did sculptile, and so here again in Abacucke (as before in Esaias is
noted) for two distinct words, each signifying an other diverse thing from
image, you translate, images, images. Thirdly, for imaginem falsam, a false
image, you translate an other thing, without any necessary pretense either of
Hebrew or Greek, avoiding here the name of image, because this place tells
you that the holy Scripture speaks against false images, or as the Greek
has, false fantasies, (...)
or as you translate the Hebrew, such images as teach lies, representing false
Gods which are not, as the Apostle says, Idolum nihil est, 1 Cor. 8. Act. 19.
And, Non sunt Dij qui manibus fiunt. Which distinction of false and true
images you vvil not have, because you condemn al images, even holy and sacred
also, and therefore you make the holy Scriptures to speak herein according to
your own fancy.

26 Wherein you proceed so far, that when Daniel said to the king, Dan. 14.
v. 4.
I worship not idols made with hands ((...)) you make him say thus, I
worship not things that be made with hands. Bib. 1562.1577.
leaving out the word idols altogether as though he had said, nothing made
with hand were to be adored, not the Arc, the propitiatory, no nor the holy
Cross it self that our Savior shed his blood upon. As before you added to the
text, so here you diminish and take from it at your pleasure.

27 But concerning the word image, which you make to be the English of all the
Latin, Hebrew, and Greek words, be they never so many and so distinct, I
beseech you what reason had you to translate (...), images, Sap. 15. v. 13:
does the Greek word so signify? does not the sentence following tell you that
it should have been translated, graven idols? for thus it says, They judged all the idols of the nations to be Gods. lo your images, or rather lo the true
names of the Pagans gods, which it pleases you to call, images, images.

28 But (to conclude this point) you might, and it would have well becommed
you, in translating or expounding the foresaid words, to have followed S.
Hierom the great famous translator and interpreter of the holy Scriptures:
Comment. in Abac. 2.
who tells you two senses of the foresaid words: the one literal, of the
idols of the Gentiles: the other mystical, of Heresies and errors. Sculptile,
says he, and conflatile: I take to be perverse opinions, which are adored of
the authors that made them. See Arius, that graued to him self this idol, that
Christ was only a creature, and adored that which he had graven. behold
Eunomius, how he molted and cast a false image, and bovved to that which he
had molten. Suppose he had exemplified of the two condemned heretics Iouinian
and Vigila^tius also: had he not touched your idols, that is, the old condemned
heresies which you at this day adore?

29 These only (I mean heresies and heretics) are the idols and idolaters (by
the ancient Doctors judgment) which have been among Christians, since the
idolatry of the Gentiles ceased according to the prophets. Zach. 13.
Therefore S. Hierom says again, If thou see a man that will not yield to the
truth, Loco citato.
but when the falshod of his opinions is once shevved, perseuereth still in
that he began: thou may aptly say, Sperat in figmento suo, Osee 11.
and he makes dumme or deaf idols. And again, Al Heretics have their gods:
and whatsoever they have forged, they adore the same as sculptile and
conflatile: Osee 12.
that is, as a graven and molten idol. And again, He says well, I have found
unto my self an idol: For, all the forgeries of heretics are as the idols of
the Gentiles: neither do they much differ in impiety, though in name they seem
to differ. In 5. Amos.
And again, Whatsoever according to the letter is spoken against the
idolatry of the Jews, do thou refer all this unto them which under the
name of Christ worship idols, and forging to them selves perverse opinions,
carry the tabernacle of their king the Devil, and the image of their idols. For
they worship not an idol, but for variety of their doctrine they adore
diverse Gods. And he put in very well, which you made to your selves: for
they received them not of God, but forged them of their own mind. And of the
idol of Samaria he says, In 8. Amos.
we alvvaies understand Samaria (and the idol of Samaria) in the person of
Heretics, the same Prophet saying, VVO BE TO THEM THAT DESPISE SION, c. 6.
AND TRUST IN THE MOUNT OF SAMARIA. For Heretics despise the Church of God,
and trust in the falshod of their opinions, erecting them selves against the
knowledge of God: and saying, when they have divided the people (by schism,)
we have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isay.

30 Thus the Reader may see that the holy Scriptures which the Adversaries
falsely translate against the holy images of our Savior Christ and his
saints, to make us idolaters, do in deed concern their idols, and condemn
them as idolaters, which forge new opinions to them selves, such as the
ancient fathers knevv not, and adore them and their own sense and
interpretation of Scriptures, so far and so vehemently, that they prefer it
before the approved judgment of all the general councels and holy Doctors,
and for maintenance of the same, corrupt the holy Scriptures at their pleasure,
and make them speak according to there fancies, as we have partly shevved, and
now are to declare further.

CHAP. IIII. The ECCLESIASTICAL use of words turned into their ORIGINAL and
PROFANE signification.
1 WE spoke a little before of the double signification of words, the one
according to the original property, the other according to the usual taking
thereof in all vulgar speech and vvriting. These words (as by the way we
shevved before upon occasion of the Adversaries grant) are to be translated in
their vulgar and usual signification, Chap. 3. nu. 17.18. See also M. Whitaker
page 209. and the 6 chap. of this book (nu. 6.7.8. and nu. 13. etc.) much more
of this matter.
not as they signify by their original property. As for example: Mayor in the
original signification is, greater. But when we say, The Mayor of London,
now it is taken and sounds in every man's ear for such an Officer: and no
man will say, The Greater of London, according to the original property of
it. likewise Episcopus a Greek word, in the original sense is every
ouerseer, as Tullie uses it and other profane vvriters: but among Christians
in Ecclesiastical speech it is a Bishop. and no man vvil say, My Lord ouerseer
of London, for my L. Bishop. Likewise we say, Seven Deacons, S. Steven a
Deacon. no man will say, Seven Ministers, S. Steven a Minister. although that
be the original signification of the word Deacon* but by Ecclesiastical use
and appropriation being taken for a certain degree of the Clergy, so it
sounds in every man's ear, and so it must be translated. As we say, Nero
made many Martyrs: not, Nero made many vvitnesses: and yet Martyr by the first
original property of the word is nothing else but a witness. We say Baptism
is a Sacrament: not, Washing is a Sacrament. Yet Baptism and washing by the
first original property of the word is all one.

2 Now then to come to our purpose, such are the absurd translations of the
English Bibles, and altogether like unto these. Namely, when they translate
congregation for Church, Elder for Priest, image for idol, dissension for
schism, General for Catholic, secret for Sacrament, ouer-seer for Bishop,
See chap. 15. nu. 18. and 3.4. and chap. 21. nu
messenger for Angel, ambassador for Apostle, minister for Deacon, and such
like: to what other end be these deceitful translations but to conceal and
obscure the name of the Church and dignities thereof mentioned in the holy
Scriptures: to dissemble the word schism (as they do also * Gal. 5. Tit. 3. 1
Cor. 11. Bib. 1562.
Heresy and Heretic) for fear of disgracing their schisms and Heresies, to
say of Matrimony, neither Sacrament which is the Latin, nor mystery which is
the Greek, but to go as far as they can possibly from the common usual and
Ecclesiastical words, Ephesians. 5. v. 32.
saying, This is a great secret: in favor of their heresy, that Matrimony
is no Sacrament.

3 S. Paul says as plain as he can speak, 1 Cor. 1. v. 10
I beseech you brethren, that you all say one thing and that there be no
schisms among you. They translate for schisms, dissentions: which may be in
profane and vvorldly things, as well as in matters of religion. but schisms
are those that divide the unity of the Church, vvherof they know them selves
guilty. S. Paul says as plainly as is possible, Tit. 3 (...). Gal. 5.
A man that is an Heretic avoid after the first and second admonition. they
translated in their Bible of the year 1562, A man that is an author of Sects.
and where the Greek is, Heresy, reckened among damnable sins, they say,
Sects: favoring that name for their own sakes, and dissembling it, as though
the holy Scriptures spoke not against Heresy or Heretics, Schism or
Schismatikes.

4 As also they suppress the very name Catholic, when it is expressly in the
Greek, for malice tovvard Catholics and Catholic religion, because they
know, them selves never shall be called or known by that name. An. 1562. 1577.
And therefore their two English Bibles accustomed to be read in their
church (therefore by like most authentical) leave it clean out in the title of
al those Epistles, Eusebius. li. 2. Ec. hist. c. 22 in fine. 1579.
which have been known by the name of Catholicae Epistolae ever since the
Apostles time: and their later English Bible (dealing somevvhat more honestly)
has turned the word Catholic into General: saying, The General Epistle of
James, of Peter, etc. As if a man should say in his Creed, I believe the
general Church, because he would not say, the Catholic Church: as the
Lutheran Catechismes say for that purpose, I believe the Christian Church.
Lind. in Dubitautio.
So that by this rule, when S. Augustine tells that the manner was in cities
where there was liberty of religion, to ask, Qua itur ad Catholicam? We
must translate it, Which is the way to the General? And when S. Hierom
says, If we agree in faith with the B. of Rome, ergo Catholicisumus: we
must traslate it, Then we are Generals. Is not this good stuff? Are they not
ashamed thus to inuert and pervert al words against common sense and use and
reason? Catholic and General or Universal (we know) is by the original
property of the word al one: but according to the use of both, as it is
ridiculous to say, A Catholic Council, for a general Council: so is it
ridiculous and impious to say, General for Catholic, in derogation thereof,
and for to hide it under a bushel.

5 Is it because they would follow the Greek, Catholica.
that they turn (...), general? even as just, as when they turn (...) image,
(...) instruction, (...) ordinance, (...) dissension, (...) sect, (...)
secret, and such like, where they go as far from the Greek as they can, and
will be glad to pretend for answer of their word, sect, that they follow
our Latin translation. Alas poor shift for them that otherwise pretend
nothing but the Greek, to be tried by that Latin which them selves condemn.
But we honor the said text, and translate it sects also, as we there find
it, and as we do in other places follow the Latin text, and take not our
advantage of the Greek text, because we know the Latin translation is good
also and sincere, and approved in the Church by long antiquity, and it is in
sense al one to us with the Greek: but not so to them, who in these days of
controversy about the Greek and Latin text, by not following the Greek,
which they profess sincerely to follovv, bewray them selves that they do it
for a malicious purpose.

CHAP. V. Heretical translation against the CHVRCH.
1 AS they suppress the name, Catholic, even so did they in their first
English bible the name of Church it self: because at their first revolt and
apostasy from that that was universally known to be the only true
Catholic Church: it was a great objection against their schismatical
procedings, and it stuck much in the peoples consciences, that they forsook
the Church, and that the Church condemned them. Whereupon very vvilely they
suppressed the name Church in their English translation, so, Bib. 1562.
that in all that Bible so long read in their co^gregatio^s, we can not once
find the name thereof. Ludge by these places which seem of most importance
for the dignity preeminence and authority of the Church.

2 Our Savior says, Mat. 16.
Upon this Rock I vvil build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. They make him to say, Upon this rock I will build my congregation.
Again, Mat. 18.
If he hear not them, tell the Church: and if he hear not the Church, let him
be to thee as an Heathen and as a publicane. they say, Congregation. Again,
who would think they would have altered the word Church in the epistle to
the Ephesians? Ephesians. 5.
their English translation for many years read thus, Ye husbands love your
vviues, as Christ loved the congregation, and cleansed it to make it unto him
self a glorious congregation without spot or vvrinkle. And, This is a great
secret, but I speak of Christ and of the congregation. And to Timothee, The
house of God, which is the congregation of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.
the pillar and ground of truth. Here is no word of Church, which in Latin
and Greek is, Ecclesia Dei viui, columna and firmamentum veritatis. Likewise
to the Ephesians again, He has made him head of the congregation, Ephesians. 1.
which is his body. And to the Hebrews they are al bold to translate: Heb. 12.
v. 23
The congregation of the firstborn, where the Apostle names heavenly
Jerusalem, the city of the living God, etc.

3 So that by this translation, there is no more Church militant and
triumphant, but congregation, and he is not head of the Church, but of the
congregation: and this congregation at the time of the making of this
translation, was in a fevv new brethren of England, for whose sake the name
Church was left out of the English Bible, to commend the name of congregation
above the name of church. whereas S. Augustine tells them, In ps. 81 in
ioitio. (...).
that the Jews Synagogue, was a congregation: the Church, a convocation: and
that a congregation, is of beasts also: a convocation, of reasonable creatures
only: and that the Jews congregation is sometime called the Church, but the
Apostles never called the Church, Congregation. do you see then what a goodly
change they have made, for Church, to say congregation: so making them selves a
very Synagogue, and that by the property of the Greek word, which yet (as
S. Augustine tells them most truly) signifies rather a convocation?

4 If they appeal here to their later translations, we must obtain of them
to condemn the former, and to confess this was a gross fault committed
therein. and that the Catholic Church of our contrie did not il to forbid and
burn such books which were so translated by Tyndal and the like, as being
not in deed Gods book, word, or Scripture, but the Devils word. Yea they
must confess, that the leaving out of this word Church altogether, was of an
heretical spirit against the Catholic Roman Church, because then they had no
Caluinistical church in any like form of religion and government to theirs
now. Neither vvil it serve them to say after their manner, And if a man should
translate Ecclesiam, congregation: this is no more absurdity, then in steed
of a Greek word, Confut. of M. Houlet so. 35.
to use a Latin of the same signification. This (we trow) vvil not suffice
them in the judgment of the simplest indifferent Reader.

5 But, my Masters, if you would confess the former faults and corruptions
never so plainly, is that enough to justify your corrupt dealing in the holy
Scriptures? Is it not an horrible fault so vvilfully to falsify and corrupt
the word of God written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost? May you abuse
the people for certain years with false translations, and afterward say, Lo
we have amended it in our later translations? See his new Test. in Latin of
the year 1556, printed by Robert Steven in fol. Act. 2. v. 27.
Then might the Heretic Beza be excused for translating in steed of Christ's
soul in hell, his carcas in the grave. and because some freende told him of that
corruption, and he corrected it in the later editions, he should nevertheless
in your judgment, be counted a right honest man. No (be ye sure) the discrete
Reader can not be so abused, but the vvil easily see, that there is a great
difference in mending some ouersightes which may escape the best men: and in
your gross false translations, who at the first falsfie of a prepensed
malice, and afterward alter it for very shame. Howbeit, to say the truth, in
the cheifest and principal place that concerns the Churches perpetuity and
stabilitie, you have not yet altered the former translation, but it remains
as before, and is at this day readde in your churches thus, Upon this rock 1
vvil build my congregation. Mat. 16. v. 18. Bib. 1577.
Can it be without some heretical subreltie, that in this place specially and
(I think) only you change not the word congregation into Church? Give us a
reason and discharge your credit.

6 What shall I say of Beza, whom the English bibles also follow, translating
actiuely that Greek word, (which in common use, and by S. Chrysostoms and
the Greek Doctors exposition is a plain passive) to signify, as in his
Annotations is clear, that Christ may be without his Church, that is, a head
without a body. The words be these in the heretical translation, Ephesians. 1. v.
21.23. (...).
He gave him to be the head over al things to the Church, which (Church) is
his body, the fulness of him that fills all in all. S. Chrysostom, says Beza,
(he might have said all the Greek and Latin ancient fathers) takes it
passiuely, in this sense, that Christ is filled al in all, because all faithful
men as members, and the whole Church as the body, concur to the fulness and
accomplishme^t of Christ the head. But this (says he) seems unto me a forced
interpretation. Why so beza?

7 Mark his Doctors whom he opposes to the fathers both Greek and Latin.
Because Xenophon (says he) in such a place, and Plato in such a place, use the
said Greek word actiuely. Iomit this miserable match, and unworthy names of
Xenophon and Plato in trial of S. Paul's words, against all the glorious
Doctors: this is his common custom. I ask him rather of these his own
doctors, how they use the Greek word in other places of their works? how
use they it most commonly? yea how do al other Greek vvriters either profane
or sacred use it? What say the Greek readers of al universities? Surely not
only they, but their scholars for the most part, can not be ignorant, (...)
that the use of this word and the like, is passive, though sometime it may
also signify actiuely: but that is so rare in comparison of the other, that no
man lightly vvil use it, and I am well assured it would be counted a fault and
some lack of skill, if one now in his writings that would express this in
Greek, God fills al things with his blessing, should say, (...): and The
wine fills the cup,(...). Ask them that have skill, and control me.
Contrarievvise, if one would say passiuely, Al things are filled with Gods
blessing, The cup is filled with wine, Such a prophecy is fulfilled, What
mean Grecian would not say, as S. Chrysostom here expounds this word,
(...), using it passiuely?

8 Yet (says Beza) this is a forced interpretation, because Xenophon forsooth
and Plato (once perhaps in all their whole works) use it otherwise. O
heretical blindness or rather stubburnenes, that calls that forced, which is
most common and usual: and sees not that his own translation is forced,
because it is against the common use of the word. but no marvel. For he that
in other places thinks it no forced interpretation, Recipere.
to translate (...), to be contained, Which neither Xenophon, nor Plato, nor
any Greek author will allow him to do, and (...), carcas, and (...),
Animam. Prescientia^. Poenitentia^.
pouidence, and (...), them that amend their lives, may much more in this place
dissemble his forced interpretation of (...). But why he should call S.
Chrysostoms interpretation forced, which is the common and usual
interpretation, that has no more reason, then if a very thief should say to
an honest man, Thou art a thief, and not I.

9 Is it forced Beza, that Christ is filled al in all by the Church? does not S.
Paul in the very next words before, call the Church the fulness of Christ,
saying, Ephesians. 1.
Which is the fulness of him that is filled al in all? If the Church be the
fulness of him, then is he filled or has his fulness of the Church, so that he
is not a maimed head without a body. This would S. Paul say, if you would
give him leave, and this he does say, whether you will or no. But what is
the cause that they vvil not suffer the Apostle to say so? because (says Beza)
Christ needs no such complement. And if he need it not, then may he be
without a Church, and consequently it is no absurdity, if the Church has
been for many years not only invisible, but also not at all. Would a man
easily at the first imagine or conceive that there were such secret poison in
their translation?

10 Again, it comes from the same puddle of Geneua, Bib. 1579.
that in their bibles so called, the English Bezites translate against the
unity of the Catholic Church. For whereas them selves are full of sects and
dissensions, and the true Church is known by unity, and has this mark
given her by Christ him self, Cant. 6. v. 8. (...)
in whose person Solomon speaking says, Vnaest columba mea, that is, One is
my dove, or, My dove is one. therefore in steed hereof, the foresaid bible
says, My dove is alone: Neither Hebrew not Greek word having that
signification, but being as proper to signify one, as Vnus in latin.

11 But we beseech every indifferent Reader, even for his souls health to
consider that one point specially before mentioned of their abandoning the name
of Church for so many years out of their English Bibles: thereby to defeat the
strongest argument that might and may possibly be brought against them and all
other Heretics: to wit, the authority of the Church which is so many ways
and so greatly recommended unto all Christians in holy Scriptures. consider (I
pray you) what a malicious inte^tion they had herein. First, that the name
Church should never found in the common peoples ears out of the Scriptures:
secondly, that as in other things, so in this also it might seem to the
ignorant a good argument against the authority of the Church, to say, We
sinde not this word (Church) in all the holy Scriptures. For as in other
articles they say so, because they find not the express word in the holy
scripture, so did they well provide, that the word (Church) in the holy
Scriptures should not stay or hinder their schismatic and heretical
procedings, as long as that was the only English translation, that was read
and liked among the people; that is, so long till they had by preaching taken
away the Catholic Churches credit and authority altogether, among the
ignorant by opposing the Scriptures thereunto, which them selves had thus
falsely translated.

CHAP. VI. Heretical translation against PRIEST and PRIESTHOD.
1 BUT because it may be, they will stand here upon their later translations,
which have the name Church, (because by that time they savv the absurdity of
changing the name, and now their number was increased, and themselves began to
challenge to be the true Church, though not the Catholic: and for former times
when they were not, they devised an invisible Church) If then they will
stand upon their later tra^slations, and refuse to justify the former: let us
demand of them concerning al their English translations, why and to what end
they suppress the name Priest, translating it Elder, in all places where the
holy Scripture would signify by Presbyter and Presbyterium, the Priests and
Priesthod of the new Testament?

2 Understand gentle Reader, their vvylie policy therein is this. To take
away the holy sacrifice of the Mass, they take away both altar and Priest,
because they know right well that these three (Priest, sacrifice, and altar)
are dependents and consequents one of an other, so that they can not be
separated. If there be an external sacrifice, there must be an external
Priesthod to offer it, an altar to offer the same upon. so had the Gentiles
their sacrifices, Priests, and altars: so had the Jews: so Christ him self
being a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec, had a sacrifice, his
body: and an altar, his Cross: upon the which he offered it. And because he
instituted this sacrifice to continue in his Church for ever in commemoration
and representation of his death, therefore did he vvithal ordain his Apostles
Priests at his last supper, there and then instituted the holy order of
Priesthod and Priests (saying, hocfacite, Do this: Luc. c. 22. v. 19.
) to offer the self same sacrifice in a mystical and vnblouddy manner, until the
worlds end.

3 To defeat all this and to take away all external Priesthod and sacrifice,
they by corrupt translation of the holy Scriptures, make them clean dumme as
though they had not a word of any such Priests or Priesthod as we speak of.
Their Bibles (we grant) have the name of Priests very often, but that is
when mention is made either of the Priests of the Jews, or of the Priests of
the Gentiles (specially when they are reprehended and blamed in the holy
Scriptures) and in such places our Adversaries have the name Priests in there
translations to make the very name of Priest odious among the common ignorant
people. Again they have also the name Priests, when they are taken for all
manner of men, women, or children, that offer internal and spiritual
sacrifices, whereby our Adversaries would falsely signify that there are no
other Priests, Vvhitakers. p. 199.
as one of them of late freshly avouches, directly against S. Augustine, who
in one breife sentence distinguishes Priests proprely so called in the Church,
and Priests as it is a common name to al Christians. Lib. 20 de Ciuit. Dei cap.
10. This name then of Priest and Priesthod proprely so called (as S. Augustine
faith, which is an order distinct from the laity and vulgar people, ordained
to offer Christ in an unbloody manner in sacrifice to his heavenly father for
us, to preach and minister the Sacraments, and to be the Pastors of the people)
they wholy suppress in their translations, and in all places where the holy
Scripture calls them, Presbyteros, there they never translate Priests, but
Elders. and that they do observe so duly and so warily and with so full and
general consent in all their English Bibles as the Puritans do plainly
confess, See the puritans reply. page 159. and vvhitgifts defense against the
Puritans page 722.
and M. whitgift denies it not, that a man would vvonder to see how
careful they are, that the people may not once hear the name of any such
Priest in all the holy Scriptures.

4 As for example in their translations. when there fell a question about
circumcision, They determined that Paul and Barnabas should go up to
Jerusalem unto the Apostles and ELDERS, (...). Presbyteros.
about this question. Act. 15. And again, They were received of the The later
Bibles read Church.
congregation and of the Apostles and ELDERS. Again, The Apostles and Elders
came together to reason of this matter. Again, Then pleased it the Apostles
and Elders with the whole congregation to send etc. Again, The Apostles and
Elders and brethren send greating etc. Again, They delivered them the decrees
for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and ELDERS. Act. 16.
If in all these places they had translated Priests (as in deed they should
have done according to the Greek word) it had then disaduantaged them this
much, that men would have thought, both the dignity of Priests to be great,
and also their authority in Councels, as being here joined with the Apostles,
to be greatly reverenced and obeyed. To keep the people from all such holy and
reverent cogitatio^s of Priests, they put Elders, a name vvherevvith our holy
Christian forefathers ears were never acquainted, in that sense.

5 But let us go forvvard. We have heard often and of old time, of making of
Priests: and of late years also, of making Ministers: but did ye ever hear in all England of making Elders? Yet by these men's translations it has been in
England a phrase of Scripture this thirty year: but it must needs be very
strange, that this making of elders has not all this while been practiced and
knovve^, no not among them selves in any of their churches within the realm
of England. To Titus they make the Apostle say thus, Tit. 1.
For this cause left I thee in Creta, that thou should ordain ELDERS in
every city, (...). Presbyteros
etc. Again of Paul and Barnabas: When they had ordained Elders by election,
in every Bib. an. 1562.
congregation. Act. 14. If they had said plainly as it is in the Greek, and
as our forefathers were wont to speak, and the truth is: Titus was leaft in
Creta to ordain Priests in every city: and, Paul and Barnabas made Priests in
every Church: then the people would have understood them: they know such
speeches of old, and it had been their joy and comfort to hear it specified in
holy Scriptures. Now they are told another thing, in such nevvnesse of
speeches and words, of Elders to be made in every city and congregation, and
yet not one city nor congregation to have any Elders in all England, that we
know not what is profane novelty of words, 1 Timothy 6.
which the Apostle wills to be avoided, if this be not an exceeding profane
novelty.

6 That it is novelty to all English Christian ears, it is evident. And it is
also profane, because they do so English the Greek word of ordaining (for of
the word Presbyter we will speak more anon) as if they should translate
Demosthenes, (...) Act. 14.
or the laws of Athens concerning their choosing of Magistrates, which was
by giving voices with lifti^g up their hands. so do they force this word
here, to induce the peoples election, and yet in their churches in England the
people elect not ministers, but their bishop. whereas the holy Scripture
says, (...).
they ordained to the people: and whatsoever force the word has, it is here
spoken of the Apostles, and pertains not to the people, (...) Tit. 1.
and therefore in the place to Titus it is another word which cannot be forced
further, then to ordain and appoint. And they might know (if malice and
Heresy would suffer them to see and confess it) that the holy Scriptures,
and fathers, and Ecclesiastical custom, has drawn this and the like words
from their profane and common signification, to a more peculiar and
Ecclesiastical speech: as Episcopus, an ouerseer in Tullie, is a Bishop in the
new Testament.

7 And concerning (...) which we now speak of, S. Hierom tells them (in
c. 58. Esai.) that it signifies Clericorum ordinationem, that is, giving of
holy orders, which is done not only by prayer of the voice, Greg. Nazia^. in
titul. Ser. 1.4.5. (...). and, (...). Ignat. ep. 10. says of Bishops, (...)
but by imposition of the hand: according to S. Paul unto Timothee, Manus cito
nemini imposueris. Impose or put hands quickly on no man that is, be not hasty
or easy to give holy orders. Where these great etymologistes, that so strain
the original nature of this word to profane stretching forth the hand in
elections, may learn an other Ecclesiastical etymology thereof, as proper and
as well deduced of the word as the other, to wit, putting forth the hand to
give orders: and so they shall find it is al one with that which the Apostle
calls imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 1: and consequently, for,
ordaining Elders by election, they should have said, ordaining or making
Priests by imposition of hands: as else where S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. and the Acts
of the Apostles (Act. 6. and 13.) do speak in the ordaining of the seven
Deacons and of SS. Paul and Barnabas.

8 But they are so profane and secular, that they translate the Greek word
(...) in all the new Testament, as if it had the old profane signification
still, and were indifferent to signify the ancients of the Jews, the
Senators of Rome, the elders of Lacedemonia, and the Christian Clergy. in so
much that they say, (...)
Paul sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church: Act. 20, and yet
they were such as had their flocks, and cure of souls, as follovveth in the
same place. They make S. Paul speak thus to Timothee, (...)
Neglect not the gift (so they had rather say then grace, Bib. 1579.1577.
lest holy orders should be a Sacrament) given thee with the laying on of the
hands of the Eldership. or, by the authority of the Eldership. 1 Timothy 4. (...)
Presbyterij.
What is this company of Eldership? Somevvhat they would say like to the
Apostles word, but they vvil not speak plainly, lest the world might hear
out of the Scriptures, that Timothee was made Priest or Bishop even as the use
is in the Catholic Church at this day. ca. 3 in the year 436. Where S.
Augustine was present and subscribed.
let the 4 Council of Carthage speak for both parts indifferently, and tell
us the Apostles meaning, A Priest when he takes his orders, the Bishop
blessing him and holding his hand upon his head, let all the Priests also that
are present, hold their hands by the Bishops hand upon his head. So do our
Priests at this day, when a bishop makes priests: and this is the laying on
of the hands of the company of Priests, which S. Paul speaks of, and which
they translate, the company of the Eldership. Only their former translation
of 1562 in this place (by what chance or consideration we know not) let
fall out of the pen, by the authority of Priesthod.

9 Otherwise in all their English Bibles all the belles ring one note as, The
Elders that rule well, are vvorthie of double honor. And, Against an Elder
receive no accusation, but under two or three vvitnesses. (...). lib. 3. de
Sacerdotio.
1 Timothy 5. And, If any be diseased among you, let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray over him, and anoint him with oil, etc. Jacob.
5. Whereas S. Chrisostom out of this place proves the high dignity of
Priests in remitting sins, in his book entitled, Of Priesthod, (...).
unless they will translate that title also, Of Eldership. Again they make S.
Peter say thus: The Elders which are among you, I exhort which am also an
Elder, feed ye Christ's flock, as much as lies in you, etc. 1 Pet. 5.

S. Hierom reads, Presbyteros ego compresbyter. Ep. 85. ad Euagr. and in 1 ad
Gal: proving the dignity of Priests. and yet in 4 Gal. he reads according to
the vulgar Latin text, Seniores in vobis rogo consenior and ipse. Whereby it
is evident, that Senior here and in the Acts is a Priest, and not contrary,
Presbyter, an elder.
10 Where if they will tell us (as also in certain other places) that our
Latin translation has Seniores and maiores natu: we tell them, as heretofore
we have told them, that this is nothing to them, who profess to translate
the Greek. Again we say that if they meant no worse then the old Latin
translatour did, they would be as indifferent as he, to have said sometime
Priests and Priesthod, when he has the words Presbyteros and Presbyterium:
as we are indifferent in our translation, saying Seniors and Ancients, when
we find it so in our Latin: being well assured that by sundry words he
meant but one thing, as in Greek it is but one, and as both Erasmus, and also
Beza him self alvvaies translate it, keeping the name Presbyter and Presbyteri:
of vvho^ by reason they should have learned, rather then of our Latin
tra^slatour, whom otherwise they condemn. And if they say, they do follow
them, and not him, because they translate not Senior and mayor natu, but the
word Presbyter or (...), an Elder, in all places: we tell them, and herein we
convent their conscience, that they do it to take away the external Priesthod
of the new Testament, and to suppress the name Priest, against the
Ecclesiastical, and (as now since Christ) very proper and usual signification
thereof, in the new Testament, councels, and fathers, in all common vvriting
and speaking: specially the Latin Presbyter, which grevve to this
signification out of the Greek in the foresaid places of holy Scripture.

11 In so much that immediately in the first Canons and Councels of the Apostles
and their successors, nothing is more common then this distinction of
Ecclesiastical degrees and names, Si Episcopus, vel Presbyter, See can. Apost.
Conc. 1 Nic. Epistol. Ignat. Conc. Carth. 4.
vel Diaconus etc. If any Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon do this or that. Which
if the Protestants or Caluinists vvil translate after their manner thus, If a
Bishop, or Elder, or Deacon etc: Beza in 1 Pet. 5.
they do against them selves, which make Presbyter or Elder a common name to
all Ecclesiastical persons: and not a peculiar degree, next unto a Bishop. So
that either they must condemn al antiquity for placing Presbyter in the
second degree after a Bishop, or they must translate it Priest as we do, or
they must make Elder to be their second degree, and so put Minister out of
place.

12 And here we must ask them, how this name Minister came to be a degree
distinct from Deacon, (...) Diaconus.
whereas by their own rule of translation, Deacon is nothing else but a
minister: and why keep they the old and usual Ecclesiastical name of Deacon
in translating Diaconus, 1 Timothy 3. Bib. 1577.1579.
and not the name of Priest, in translating Presbyter? does not Priest come of
Presbyter as certainly and as agreably as Deacon of Diaconus? Prebstre. Prete.
does not also the french and Italian word for Priest come directly from the
same? will you alvvaies follow fancy and not reason, do what you list,
translate as you list, and not as the truth is, and that in the holy
Scriptures, which you boast and vaunt so much of? Because your selves have
them whom you call Bishops, the name Bishop is in your English Bibles, which
otherwise by your own rule of translation, should be called an Ouerseer or
Superintendent: likewise Deacon you are content to use as an Ecclesiastical
word so used in antiquity, because you also have those whom you call
Deacons: Only Priests must be turned contemptuously out of the text of the
holy Scriptures, and Elders put in their place, because you have no Priests,
not vvil none of them, and because that is in controversy between us. and as
for Elders, you have none permitted in England, for fear of ouerthrovving your
Bishops office and the Queens supreme government in all spiritual things and
causes. Is not this to follow the humor of your heresy, by Machiauels
politic rules without any fear of God?

13 Apostles you say for the most part in your translations (not alvvaies) as
we do, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Angels, and such like, and
wheresoever there is no matter of controversy between you and us, there you
can plead very gravely for keeping the ancient Ecclesiastical words, Beza in
c. 9. Mat. nu. 25. etc. 10. nu. 2
as your master Beza for example, beside many other places where he bitterly
rebukes his fellovv Castaleons translation, in one place vvriteth thus: in 3
ca. Mat. nu. 11.
I cannot in this place dissemble the boldness of certain men, which would
God it rested within the compass of words only. these men therefore
concerning the word Baptizing, Baptizo.
though used of sacred vvriters in the mystery or Sacrament of the new
Testament, and for so many years after, by the secret consent of al Churches,
consecrated to this one Sacrament, Baptism.
so that it is now grown into the vulgar speeches almost of al nations, yet
they dare presume rashly to change it, and in place thereof to use the word
washing. delicate men forsooth, which neither are moved with the perpetual
authority of so many ages; nor by the daily custom of the vulgar speech, can
be brought to think that lavvful for Divines, which al men grant to other
Masters and professors of arts: that is, to retain and hold that as their
own, which by long use and in good faith they have truly possessed. Neither
may they pretend the authority of some ancient vvriters, as that Cyprian
says TINGENTES for BAPTIZANTES, and Tertullian in a certain place calls
SEQVESTREM for MEDIATOREM. For that which was to those ancients as it were
new, to us is old: and even then, that the self same words which we now
use, were familiar to the Church, Baptizo. Mediator.
it is evident, because it is very seldom that they speak otherwise. but
these men by this novelty seek after vain glory, etc.

14 He speaks against Castaleon, who in his new Latin translation of the
Bible, changed al Ecclesiastical words into profane and Heathenish, as
Angelos in to genios, Prophetas into Fatidicos, Templum into fanum, and so
forth. But that which he did for folish affectation of finenesse and style, do
not our English Caluinists the very same when they list, for furthering their
Heresies? When the holy Scripture says idols according as Christians have
alvvaies understood it for false gods, they come and tell us out of Homer and
the Lexico^s, (...). Confut. of the Reas. 10.35.
that it may signify an image, and therefore so they translate it. do they not
the like in the Greek word that by Ecclesiastical use signifies, penance,
(...).
and doing penance, when they argue out of Plutarche, and by the profane sense
thereof, that it is nothing else but cha^ging of the mind or amendment of life?
Whereas in the Greek Church, Poenitentes, that is, they that were in the
course of penance, and excluded from the Church as Catechumeni, and Energumeni,
till they had accomplished their penance; the very same are called in the
Greek (...). Dionys. Ec. Hier. c. 5.


15 They therefore leaving this Ecclesiastical signification, and translating it
according to Plutarche, do they not much like to Castaleo? Do they not the
same, against the famous and ancient distinction of Latria and Dulia, Latria.
Dulia. Beza in ^ Mat. nu. 10.
when they tell us out of Eustathius upon Homer, and Aristophanes the
Grammarian, that these two are al one? Whereas we prove out of S. Augustine
in many places, the second Council of Nice, Venerable Bede, and the long custom
of the Church, (...) in the Scriptures, almost alvvaies used for the service
and honor proper to God. August. de Ciuit. Dei. li. 10. c, 1.
that according to the Ecclesiastical sense and use deduced out of the
Scriptures, they differ very much. Do they not the like in Mysterium and
Sacramentum, which they translate a Secret in the profane sense, vvheras they
know how these words are otherwise taken both in Greek and Latin, in the
Church of God? did they not the like in the word Ecclesia, Bib. an. 1562.
when they translated it nothing else but congregation? Do they not the like in
(...), which they translate, ordaining by election, as it was in the profane
court of Athens: whereas S. Hierom tells them, that Ecclesiastical vvriters
take it for giving holy orders by imposition of hands? Do they not the like in
many other words, wheresoever it serves their heretical purpose? And as
for profane translation, is there any more profane then Beza him self, that so
often in his Annotations reprehendeth the old Translation by the authority of
Tullie and Terence, Homer and Aristophanes, and the like profane authors? yea
so fondly and childishly, that for Olfactum which Erasmus uses as Plinies
word, he will needs say odoratum, because it is Tullies word.

16 But to return to our English Translatours: do not they the like to profane
Castaleo, and do they not the very same that Beza their Master so largely
reprehendeth, when they translate Presbyterum, an Elder? Is it not al one
fault to translate so, and to translate, as Castaleo does Baptismum, washing?
Has not Presbyter been a peculiar and usual word for a Priest, as long as
Baptismus for the Sacrament of regeneration, which Castaleo altering into a
common and profane word, is vvorthely reprehended? We will prove it has,
not for their sake, who know it well enough, but for the Readers sake, whom
they abuse, as if they knevv it not.

17 In the first and second Cano^ of the Apostles we read thus, That Presbyter
has signified a Priest, from the Apostles time, not an Elder.
Episcopus a duobus aut tribus Episcopis ordinetur. Presbyter ab vno Episcopo
ordinetur, and Diaconus, and alij Clerici. that is, Let a Bishop be consecrated
or ordained by two or three Bishops. let a Priest be made by one Bishop. See
in the 4 Counsel of Carthage the diverse manner of co^secrating Bishops,
Priests, Deaco^s, Can. 2.3.4.
etc. Where S. Augustine was present and subscribed. Again, Can. Apost. 32.
Si quis Presbyter contemnens Episcopum suum etc. If any Priest contemning his
Bishop, make a several congregation, and erect another altar, (that is, make a
Schism or Heresy), let him be deposed. So did Arius being a Priest against
his Bishop Alexander. Again, Priests and Deacons, Can. 40.
let them attempt to do nothing without the Bishop. The first Council of Nice
says, Can. 3.
The holy Synod by all means forbids, that neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor
Deacon etc. have with them any foreign woman, but the mother, or sister, etc.
in whom there is no suspicion. Again, It is told the holy Council, Can. 14.
that in certain places and cities, Deacons give the Sacraments to Priests.
This neither rule nor custom has delivered, that they which have not
authority to offer the sacrifice, should give to them that offer, the body of
Christ. The 3 Council of Carthage wherein S. Augustine was, and to the which
he subscribed, decrees, Can. 24.
That in the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, there be no more
offered, then our Lord him self delivered, that is, bread and wine mingled
with water. Which the sixth general Council of Constantinople repeating and
confirming, adds: If therefore any Bishop or Priest do not according to the
order given by the Apostles, (...).
mingling water with wine, but offer an unmingled sacrifice, let him be
deposed etc. But of these speeches al Councels be full: where we would
gladly know of these new Translatours, how Presbyter must be translated:
either an Elder, or a Priest.

18 Do not all the fathers speak after the same manner, making alvvaies this
distinction of Bishop and Priest, as of the first and second degree? Ep. 2. ad
Trallianos. (...).
S. Ignatius the Apostles scholar does he not place Presbyterium as he calls
it, and Presbyteros (Priests, or the College of Priests) next after Bishops,
and Deacons in the third place, repeating it no less then thrice in one
Epistle, and commending the dignity of all three unto the people? Comment. in
c. 7. Micheae.
does not S. Hierom the very same, saying, Let us honor a Bishop, do reverence
to a Priest, rise up to a Deacon? Ep. 85. ad Euagrium.
And when he says, that as Aaron and his sons and the Levites were in the
Temple, so are Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Church, for place and
degree. And in an other place, speaking of the outrages done by the Vandals and
such like, Epitaph. Nepotiani c. 9.
Bishops were taken, Priests slain, and diverse of other Ecclesiastical
orders: Churches overthrown, the altars of Christ made stables for horses,
the relikes of Martyrs dug up etc. When he says of Nepotian, fit Clericus,
and per solitos gradus Presbyter ordinatur: he becomes a man of the Clergy,
and by the accustomed degrees is made, what? a Priest, or an Elder? when he
says, Mihi ante Presbyterum sedere non licet etc. does he mean he could not
sit above an Elder, or above a Priest, him self as then being not Priest? When
he, and Vincentius (as S. Epiphanius vvriteth) of reverence to the degree, Ep.
60 apud Hiero. ca. 1.
were hardly induced to be made Presbyteri: did they refuse the Eldership?
What was the matter that John the B. of Jerusalem, seemed to be so much
offended with Epiphanius and S. Hierom? Ep. 1 ad Heliod.
was it not because Epiphanius made Paulianus, S. Hieroms brother, Priest
within the said John's Diocese?

19 When al antiquity says, Hieronymus Presbyter, Cecilius Presbyter,
Ruffinus Presbyter, Philippus, Iuuencus, Hesychius, Beda, Presbyteri: and when
S. Hierom so often in his Cataloge says, Such a man Presbyter: is it not for
distinction of a certain order, to signify that they were Priests, and not
Bishops? namely when he says of S. Chrysostom, Ioannes Presbyter Antiochenus,
does he not mean, he was as then but a Priest of Antioche? Would he have
said so, if he had written of him, after he was Bishop of Constantinople?

20 But of al other places, we would desire these gay tra^slatours to
translate this one place of S. Augustine, speaking of him self a Bishop and S.
Hierom a Priest: Inter Epistolas Hiero. Ep. 97 in fine.
Quanqua^ enim secundum honorum vocabula, quaeiam Ecclesia vsus obtinuit,
Episcopatus Presbyterio mayor sit: tamen in multis rebus, Augustinus Hieronymo
minor est. Is not this the English thereof? For although according to the
titles or names of honor, which now by use of the Church have prevailed, the
degree of Bishop be greater the^ Priesthod, yet in many things, Augustine is
less the^ Hierom. or, does it like the^ to translate it thus, The degree of
Bishop is greater then Eldership etc? Again, against Julian the Heretic when
he has brought many testimonies of the holy Doctors that were all Bishops, as
of SS. Cyprian, Ambrose, Basil, Nazianzene, Chrysostom: at length he comes to
S. Hierom who was no Bishop, Lib. 1. ca. 2. in fine.
and says: Nec sanctum Hieronymum, quia Presbyter fuit, contemnendum
arbitreris that is, Neither must thou think that S. Hierom, because he was
but a Priest, therefore is to be contemned: whose divine eloquence, has shined
to us from the East even to the west, like a lamp, and so forth to his great
commendation. Here is a plain distinction of an inferior degree to a Bishop,
for the which the Heretic Iulia^n did easily contemn him. Is not S. Cyprian
full of the like places? is not al antiquity so full, that vvhiles I prove
this, me thinks I prove nothing else but that snow is white?

21 In all which places if they vvil translate Elder, and yet make the same a
common name to all Ecclesiastical degrees, Annot. in 1 Pet. 5.
as Beza defines it, let the indifferent Reader consider the absurd
confusion, or rather the impossibility thereof: if not, but they will grant
in all these places it signifies Priest, and so is meant: then we must beat
them with Bezaes rod of reprehension against Castaleon: Bezaes words in the
place above alleged.
that we can not dissemble the boldness of these me^. which would God it
rested within the custom of words only, and were not important matter,
concerning their Heresy. These men therefore touching the word Priest, though
used of sacred vvriters in the mystery of the new Testament, and for so many
years after by the secret consent of al Churches, consecrated to this one
Sacra^ment, so that it is now grown to be the proper vulgar speech almost of
al Nations: Prete Prebstre Priest.
yet they dare presume rashly to change it, and in place thereof to use the
word Elder. delicate men forsooth (yea worse a great deal, because these do
it for heresy and not for delicacie) which neither are moved with the
perpetual authority of so many ages, nor by the daily custom of the vulgar
speech can be brought to think that lavvful for Divines, which all men grant
to other Masters and Professors of arts, that is, to retain and hold that as
their own, which by long use and in good faith they have truly possessed.
Neither may they pretend the authority of any ancient writer (as that the
old Latin Translatour says Senior, and Seniores:) for * Presbyter for a
Priest. Baptismus for the Sacrament of Baptism.
that which was to them as it were new, to us is old: and even then, that
the self same words which we now use, were more familiar to the Church, it
is evident, because it is very seldom that they speak otherwise.

22 Thus we have repeated Bezaes words again, only changing the word
Baptism into Priest, because the case is all one: and so un vvittingly Beza
the successor of Calvin in Geneua, has given plain sentence against our
English Translatours in all such cases, as they go from the common received and
usual sense to another profane sense, and out of use: as namely in this point
of Priest and Priesthod. Where we must needs add a word or two, though
we be to long, because their folly and malice is to to great herein. For
whereas the very name Priest never came into our English tongue but of the
Latin Presbyter (for there upon sacerdos also was so called only by a
consequence) they translate sacerdos, See M. Whitgifts defense against the
Puritans reply. page 721 where he affirms that this word Priest, comes
of the word Presbyter, and not of the word Sacerdos.
Priest, and Presbyter, not Priest, but Elder, as vvisely and as reasonably, as
if a man should translate Praetor Londini, Maire of London: and Mayor Londini,
not Maire of London: but Greater of London: or Academia Oxoniensis, the
University of Oxford: and Vniuersitas, Oxoniensis, not the University, but
the Generality of Oxford: and such like.

23 Again, what exceeding folly is it, to think that by false and profane
translation of Presbyter into Elder, they might take away the external
Priesthod of the new restame^r, whereas their own word Sacerdos which they
do and must needs translate Priest, is as common and as usual in all
antiquity, as Presbyter: and so much the more, for that it is used in
differe^tly to signify both Bishops and Priests, which Presbyter lightly does
not but in the new Testament. as when Constantine the Great said to the
Bishops assembled in the Counsel of Nice, Ruffin li. 1. ca. 2.
Deus vos constituit sacerdotes, etc. God has ordained you priests, and has
given you power to judge of us also. Epist. 32. ad Valentinianum Imp.
And S. Ambrose, When did thou ever hear, most Clement Prince, that lay men
have judged Bishops. Shall we bend by flattery so far, that forgetting the
right of our Priesthod, we should yield up to others, Iuris Sacerdotalis.
that which God has commended to us? And therefore does S Chrisosto^ entitle
his six books De Sacerdotio, Of Priesthod, concerning the dignity and
calling, not only of mere Priests, in Apolog. pro sua fug. orat. 1.
but also of Bishops: and S. Gregory Nazianzene handling the same argument
says, (...). Epist. 10. ad Hieronem. Sacerdotes.
that they execute Priesthod together with CHRIST. and S. Ignatius says, Do
nothing without the Bishops, for they are priests, but thou the Deacon of the
priests. And in the Greek Liturgies or Masses, so often, (...), Then the
priest says this, and that, (...).
signifying also the Bishop when he says Mass: and Ec. Hiera. c. 3.
S. Denis says sometime Archisacerdotem cum sacerdotibus* the high Priest or
Bishop with the Priests: whereof come the words (...), in the ancient
Greek fathers, for the sacred function of Priesthod, and executing of the same.

24 If then the Heretics could possibly have extinguished priesthod in the
word presbyter, yet you see, it would have remained still in the words
Sacerdos and Sacerdotiu^, which them selves translate Priest and Priesthod:
and therefore we must desire them to translate us a place or two after their
own manner: first S. Augustine speaking thus, Quis vnquam audiuit sacerdotem
ad altar stante^ etiam super reliquias Martyrum, Li. 8. cap 27. De Ciu. Dei.
dicere: offero tibi Petre, and Paul, vel Cypriane? Who ever heard that a
PRIEST standing at the altar, even over the relikes of the Martyrs, said, I
offer to thee Peter, and Paul, or Cyprian? So (we trow) they must translate
it. Li. 22 Ciuit. c. 10.
Again, Nos vni Deo and Martyru^ and nostro, sacrificiu^ immolamus, ad quod
sacrificium sicut homines Dei, suoloco and ordine nomina^tur, non tamen a
sacerdote inuocantur. Deo quippe, non ipsis sacrificat, quamuis in memoria
sacrificet little, quia Dei sacerdos est, non illorum. Ipsum vero sacrificium
corpus est Christi. We think they will and must translate it thus: We offer
sacrifice to the one only God both of Martyrs and ours, at the which
Sacrifice, as men of God they (Martyrs) are named in their place and order: yet
are they * So as he said before, I offer to thee Pener, etc.
not inuocated of the priest that sacrifices. For he sacrifices to God, and
not to them (though (...) sacrifice in the memory of them) because he is Gods
Priest, and not theirs. And the sacrifice it self is the body of Christ.

25 Likewise when S. Ambrose says, Li. 4. de Saceam. c. 4.
The consecration (of the body of Christ) with what words is it, and by
whose speech? of our Lord Jesus. For in the rest that is said, there is
praise given to God, prayer made for the people, for kings and others: but
when it comes that the venerable sacrament must be consecrated, now the
Priest uses not his own words, Sacerdos.
but he uses the words of Christ. Ho. 2 in 2 Timotin.
And S. Chrisostom in very many places says, The sacred oblation it self,
whether Peter or Paul, or any meaner Priest whatsoever offer it, Sacerdos.
is the very same that Christ gave to his disciples, Sacerdotu
and which now the priests do make or cosecrate* why so I pray thee? because
not men do sanctify this, but Christ him self, which before consecrated the
same. And again, It is not man that makes the body and blood of Christ, but
he that was crucified for us, Christ: the words are uttered by the Priests
mouth, Sacerdotis
and by Gods power and grace are the things proposed, consecrated. For this,
says he, is my body. With this word are the things proposed, consecrated.

26 And so by these places, where them selves translate Sacerdos a Priest,
they may learn also how to translate Presbyteros in S. Hierom saying the very
same thing, Presbyteri
that at their prayers, the body and blood of our Lord is made. and in an other
place, that with their sacred mouth, they make our Lords body. Likewise
when they read S. Ambrose against the Nouatians, that God has granted
license to his Priests to release and forgive as well great sins as little
without exception: Sacerdotibas
and in the Ecclesiastical history, how the Nouatian Heretics taught that
such as were fallen into great sins, should not ask for remission of the
Priest, but of God only: a Sacordote
they may learn how to translate Presbyteros in S. Hierom and in the
Ecclesiastical history, where the one says thus: Episcopus and Presbyter,
cum peccatorum audierit varietates, scit qui ligandus sit, qui soluendus: and
the other speaks de Presbytero Poenitentiario, Sozom. li. 7 c. 16.
of an extraordinary Priest that heard confessions and enjoined penance,
Socrat. li. 5 c. 19.
who afterward was taken away, and the people went to diverse ghostly
fathers as before. And especially S. Chrysostom will make them understand what
these Presbyteri were, and how they are to be called in English, who tells
them in their own word, that Sacerdotes, the Priests of the new law have
power not only to know, Li. 3. de Sacerd.
but to purge the filth of the soul, therefore whosoever despises them, is
more vvorthie to be punished then the rebel Dathan and his accomplices.

27 Now then (to conclude this point) seeing we have such a cloud of
vvitnesses (as the Apostle speaks) even from Christ's time, Hebr. 12.
that testify not only for the name, but for the very principal functions of
external Priesthod, in offering the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, in
remitting sins, and so forth: what a peevish, malicious, and impudent
corruption is this, for the defacing of the testimonies of the holy Scriptures
tending there unto, to seek to scrarch advantage of the word Presbyter, and
to make it signify an Elder, not a Priest: Presbyterium Eldership rather then
Priesthod: as if other nevvfangled companions that would forge an Heresy that
there were no Apostles, should for that purpose translate it always legates:
or that there were no Angels, and should translate it always Messengers: and
that Baptism were but a Iudaical ceremony, and should translate it washing:
which Castalio did much more to lerably in his translation then any of these
should, if he did it only of curiosity and folly. And if to take away al
distinction of clergy and laity the Protestants should alvvaies translate
clerum, Clerics.
lotte or lotterie, as they do translate it for the same purpose parish and
heritage: might not In 1 Pet ^. See S. Hierom ad Nepot. de vit. Clericorum ep.
2. c. 5.
Beza him self controull them, saing, that the ancient fathers transferred the
name clerus to the College of Ecclesiastical Ministers?

28 But alas, the effect of this corruption and heresy concerning Priests,
has it not wrought within these fevv years such contempt of al Priests, that
nothing is more odious in our country then that name: which before was so
honorable and Venerable, and now is, among all good men? If ministry or
Eldership were grown to estimation in steed thereof, somevvhat they had to
say: but that is yet more contemprible, and especially Elders and Eldership for
the Queens Majesty and her Cou^sellors will permit none in government of
any Church in England, and so they have brought al, to nothing else, but profane
laity. And no marvel of these horrible inconveniences, for as the Sacrifice
and Priesthod go together, and therefore were both honorable together: so
when they had according to Daniels Prophecy, abolis head the daily sacrifice,
out of the Church, what remained, but the contempt of Priests and Clergy and
their offices, so far forth, that for the holy Sacrifice sake, Priests are
called in great despite, Massing Priests. of them that little consider, or less
care, what notable holy learned fathers of al ages since Christ's time, this
their reproach touches and concerns, as by the testimonies before alleged
is manifest, and whereof the Reader may see a peculiar Chapter in the late
Apology of the English Seminaries. Chap. 6.


CHAP. VII. Heretical translation against PVRGATORIS, LIMBVS PATRVM, CHRIST'S
DESCENDING INTO HELL.
1 HAVING now discovered their corrupt translations for defacing of the
Churches name, and abolishing of Priest and Priesthod: let us come to another
point of very great importance also, and which by the wonted consequence or
sequel of error, includes in it many erroneous branches. Their principal
malice then being bent against Purgatory, that is, against a place where
Christian souls be purged by suffering of temporal pains after this life, for
surer maintenance of their erroneous denial hereof, they take away and deny
al third places, saying that there was never from the beginning of the world
any other place for souls after this life, but only two: to wit, heaven for
the blessed: and hell for the damned. And so it follows by their heretical
doctrine, that the Patriarchs, Prophets, and other good holy men of the old
Testament, went not after their deaths, to the place called Abraham's bosom,
or limbus patrum, but immediately to heaven: and so again by their erroneous
doctrine it follows, that the fathers of the old Testament were in heaven,
before our savior Christ had suffered death for their redemption: and also by
their erroneous doctrine it follows, that our sauiout Christ was not the
first man that ascended and entered into heaven: and moreover by their heretical
doctrine it follows, that our savior Christ descended not into any such
third place, to deliver the fathers of the old Testament out of their prison,
and to bring them triumpha^tly with him into heaven, because by their
erroneous doctrine they were never there: and so that article of the Apostles
Creed concerning our savior Christ his descending into hell, must either be
put out by the Caluinists, as Beza did in his Confession of his faith printed
an. 1564, or it has some other meaning, to wit, either the lying of his body
in the grave, or (as Calvin and the purer Caluinists his scholars will have
it) the suffering of hell pains and distresses upon the Cross. Caluins
Institutions li. 2. c. 16. Sect. 10. and in his Catechism.
Lo the consequence and coherence of these errors and heresies.

2 These now being the heretical doctrines which they mean to avouch and
defend whatsoever come of it: first, they are at a point not to care a rush
for all the ancient holy Doctors, Beza in 1 Pet. 3, 19.
that write with full consent to the contrary (as them selves confess,
Caluins Institut. li. 2. c. 16. Sect. 9.
calling it their common error) secondly, they translate the holy scriptures
in favor thereof, most corruptly and vvilfully, as in Bezaes false translation
(who is Caluins successor in Geneua) it is notorious, for he in his new
Testament of the year 1556. printed by Robertus Stephanus in folio, with
Annotations, makes our savior Christ say thus to his father, Non derelinques
cadauer meum in sepulchro, thou shall not leave my carcass in the grave, Act.
2. for that which the Hebrew, and the Greek, and the Latin, Hiero. in Ps.
verso ex Hebraeo.
and S. Hierom according to the Hebrew, say: No^ derelinques anima^ meam in
inferno, as plainly as we say in English, Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell. Thus the Prophet David spoke it in Hebrew, (...).
Ps. 15. thus the Septuaginta uttered it in Greek, thus the Apostle S. Peter
alleges it, thus the holy Evangelist S. Luke in the Act. of the Apostles,
cap. 2. records it, and for this, S. Augustine calls him an infidel that
denies it: yet all this would not suffice to make Beza translate it so,
because of certain errors ( See his Annot. in 2. Act.
as he heretically terms them) which he would full gladly avoid hereby,
namely, the Catholic true doctrine of limbus patrum, and Purgatory. What
need we say more? he translateth animam, a Carcass: (so calling our savior
Christ's body, irreuerently, and wickedly) he translateth infernum, grave.

3 Need we take any great labor to prove this to be a foul corruption, or
that it is done purposely, when he confesses that he thus tra^slateth because
else it would serve the Papists? Which is as much to say, as, the word of God
if it be truly and sincerely translated, makes in deed for them. For the
first part, we will not stand upon it, partly because it is of it self most
absurd, and they are ashamed of it: partly, because it shall suffice to confute
Beza, that two other as famous heretics as he, Castalio and Flaccus Illyricus
write against him in this point, and confute him: partly also, because we
speak not here universally of al heretical tra^slations, but of the English
corruptions specially, and therefore we may only note here, how gladly they
also would say somevvhat else for, soul, even in the text, if they durst for
shame: for in the margent of that English translation, Bib. an. 1579
they say, or life, or person: there by aduertising the Reader, that he may
read thus, if it please him, Thou shall not leave my life in the grave, or,
Thou shall not leave my person. As though either man's soul or life were in
the grave, or, anima, might be translated person, which the self same English
Bible does not, Act. 7. v. 14.
no not in those places where it is evident that it signifies the whole
person. For though this word soul, by a figure, is sometime taken for the
whole man, yet even there they do not, nor must not translate it otherwise
then soul: because our tongue bears that figure as well as Latin, Greek,
or Hebrew: but here, where it can not signify the whole person, it is
wicked to translate it so.

4 But as for the word grave, that they put boldly in the text, to signify
that howsoever you interpret, soul, or whatsoever you put for it, it is not
mea^t according to S. August. and the faith of the whole Catholic Church, that
his soul descended into Hell, vvhiles his body was in the grave: but that his
soul also, was in the grave, howsoever that is to be understood. So making it
a certain and resolute conclusion, that the holy Scripture in this place
speaks not of Christ's being in Hell, but in the grave: and that according to
his soul, or life, or person, or (as Beza will have it) His Carcass or body:
and so his soul in Hell, as the holy Scripture speaks, shall be, his body in
the grave, as Beza plainly speaks, See Vigors sermons page 110. 115. and
deinceps.
and the Bezites covertly insinuate: and white shall be black, and chaulke
shall be cheese, and every thing shall be any thing that they will have it. And all this their evident false translation, must be to our miserable deceived poor
souls, the holy Scripture and Gods word.

5 Where we can not but marvel, why they are afraid to translate the words
plainly in this place, of his soul being in Hell: Vvvhereas in the Creed they
admit the words, and interpret them, that by suffering Hell pains upon the
Cross, so he descended into Hell, and no otherwise. Why did they not here
also keep the words for the credit of their translation, and afterward (if
they would needs) give them that gloss for maintenance of their heresy? This
mystery we know not, and we would gladly learn it of the Puritan
Caluinists, whose English translation perhaps this is. for, the grosser
Caluinists (being not so pure and precise in following Calvin as the Puritans
be, that have well deserved that name above their fellows) they in their
other English Bibles have in this place discharged the^ selves of false
translation, Bib. an. 1562. and 1577.
saying plainly, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell. But See lind. dubit.
pa. 19.
in what sense they say so, it is very hard to guess: and perhaps them selves
can not tell yet what to make of it, as appears by M. Vvhitakers answer to
F. Campion. Whitaker. page 165. M. Hues B. of S. Asaph in Wales.
And he is now called a Bishop among them, and proceeded Doctor in Oxford,
that could not obtain his grace to proceed Doctor in Cambridge, because he
preached Christ's descending into Hell, and the Puritans in their second
admonition to the Parliament, page 43. cry out against the politic
Caluinists, for that in the Creed of the Apostles (made in English meeter and
song openly in their Churches in these words: His spirit did after this
descend, into the lovver parts, to them that long in darkness were the true
light of their hearts) they favor his descending into Hell very much, and so
consequently may thereby build Limbus Patrum, and Purgatory. And the Puritans
in their second reply against M. Whitegifts defense page 7. reprehend one of
their chefest Caluimstical martyrs for affirming (as they term it) a gross
desce^ding of our Savior Christ into Hell. Thus the Puritanes confess plainly
their heretical doctrine against Christ's descending into Hell.

6 The truth is, howsoever the politic Caluinists speak, or write in this
point more plausibly and covertly to the people, and more agreably to the
Article of our faith, then either Calvin or their earnest brethren the
Puritans do, which write and speak as phantastically and madly as they
think: yet neither do they believe this Article of the Apostles Creed, or
interpret it, as the Catholic Church and ancient holy fathers alvvaies have
done, neither can it stand with their new profession so to do, or with
their English translations in other places. It can not stand with their
profession: for then it would follow that the Patriarchs and other just men
of the old Testament were in some third place of rest, called Abraham's bosom,
or Limbus Patrum, til our Savior Christ descended thither, and delivered them
from thence, which they deny in their doctrine, though they sing it in their
meeters. Neither can it stand with their English translations: because in
other places where the holy Scriptures evidently speak of such a place,
calling it Hell (because that was a common name for every place and state of
souls departed, in the old Testament, til our Savior Christ by his
Resurrection and Ascension had opened heaven) there, for Hell, they translate
Grave.

7 As when Jacob says, Genesis 37.
Descendam ad filium meum lugens in infernum: I vvil go down to my son
into Hell, mourning: they translate, I vvil go down into the grave unto my
son, mourning: as though Jacob thought, that his son Joseph had been buried
in a grave, whereas Jacob thought, and said immediately before, as appears in
the holy Scripture, that a vvilde beast had devoured him, and so could not be
presumed to be in any grave: or as though, if Joseph had been in a grave, Jacob
would have gone down to him into the same grave. For so the words must
needs import, if they take grave properly: but if they take grave improperly
for the state of dead men after this life, why do they call it grave, (...).
Infernus.
and not Hell, as the word is in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin? No doubt they do
it, to make the ignorant Reader believe that the Patriarch Jacob spoke of his
body only to descend into the grave to Joseph's body: for as concerning Jacobs
soul, that was by their opinion, to asce^d immediately after his death to
heaven, and not to desce^d into the grave. But if Jacob were to ascend
forthwith in soul, how could he say as they translate, I will go down
into the grave unto my son? As if according to their opinion he should say,
My sons body is devoured of a beast, and his soul is gone up into heaven:
well, I vvil go down to him into the grave.

8 Gentile Reader, that thou may the better conceive these absurdities, and
the more detest their guilefull corruptions, understand (as we began to tell
thee before) that in the old Testament, because there was yet no ascending
into heaven, the way of the holies (as the Apostle in his epistle to the
Hebrews speaks) being not yet made open,because our savior Christ was to *
Hebr. 9. v. 8.
dedicate and begin the entera^ce in his own person, and by his passion to
open heaven: Hebr. 10. v. 20.
therefore (we say) in the old Testament the common phrase of the holy
Scripture is, even of the best men, as well as of others, that dying they went
down ad inferos, or ad infernum: to signify that such was the state of the
old Testament before our savior Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, that every
man went down, and not up: descended, and not ascended: by descending I
mean not to the grave, which received their bodies only: but ad inferos, that
is, to bell, a common receptacle or place for their souls also departed, as well
of those souls that were to be in rest, as those that were to be in pains
and torments. All the souls both good and bad that then died, went
dovvnevvard, and therefore the place of both sorts was called in all the
tongues, by a word answerable to this word, hell, to signify a lovver place
beneath, not only of torments, but also of rest.

9 So we say in our Creed, that our savior Christ him self descended into
hell, according to his soul: Epitaph. Nepot. c. 3.
So S. Hierom speaking of the state of the old Testament, says: Si Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob in inferno, quis in calorum regno* that is, If Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob were in hell, who was in the kingdom of heaven? And again, Ante
Christum, Abraham apud inferos: post Christum latro in Paradiso. that is,
before the coming of Christ, Abraham was in hell: after his coming, the
thief was in Paradise. And lest a man might object, Luc. 16.
that Lazarus being in Abraham's bosom, savv the rich glotton a far of in hell,
and therefore both Abraham and Lazarus seem to have been in heaven: See S. Aug.
in Psalm. 85. v. 13.
the said holy doctor resolves it, that Abraham and Lazarus also were in hell,
but i^ a place of great rest and refreshing, and therefore very far of from the
miserable vvretched glotton that lay in torments.

10 His words be these in effect: If a man vvil say unto me, that Lazarus
was seen in Abraham's bosom, and a place of refreshing even before Christ's
coming: true it is, but what is that in comparison? Quid simile infernus and
regna calorum? What has hell and heaven like? As if he should say, Abraham in
deed and Lazarus (and consequently many other) were in place of rest, but yet
in hell, til Christ came, and in such rest, as has no comparison with the
joys of heaven. And S. Augustine disputing this matter sometime, Epist. 99. ad
Euod. and de Genesis ad lit. li. 12. c. 33.
and doubting whether Abraham's bosom be called hell in the scripture, and
whether the name of hell be taken at any time in the good part (for of Christ's
descending into hell, and of a third place where the Patriarchs remained until
Christ's coming, not heaven, but called Abraham's bosom, he doubted not, but was
most assured) the same holy doctor in an other place, as being better resolved,
doubts not, upon these words of the Psalm, In Psalm. 85. v. 13.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lovver hell, to make this one good sense
of this place, that the lovver hell is it, wherein the damned are tormented:
the higher hell is that, wherein the souls of the just rested, calling both
places by the name of hell.

11 And surely of his marvelous humility and wisdoms, he would have been
much more resolute herein, if he had hard the opinion of S. Hierom, whom he
often consulted in such questions, and of other fathers, who in this point
speak most plainly, that Abraham's bosom or the place where the Patriarchs
rested, was some part of hell. Ioco citato.
Tertullian, ( Li. 4. aduers. Marcion.) Says, I know that the bosom of
Abraham was no heavenly place, but only the higher hell, or, the higher part of
hell. Of which speech of the fathers, rose afterward that other name, limbus
patrum, that is the very brimme or uppermost and outmost part of hell, where
the fathers of the old Testament rested. Thus we see that the Patriarchs them
selves were as then in hell, though they were there in a place of rest: in so
much that S. Hierom says again, Ante Resurrectionem Christi not us in Iudaea
Deus, and ipsi qui nouerant eum, tamen ad inferos trahebantur. that is, Before
the Resurrection of Christ, God was known in Jury, and they them selves
that knevv him yet were drawn unto hell. Hom. quod Christus sit Deus to. 5.
S. Chrysostom upon that place of Esaias, I vvil break the brazen gates, and
bruise the iron bars in pieces, and will open the treasures darkened, etc.
(...). Infernus.
So he calls hell, says he, for although it were hell, yet it held the holy
souls, and precious vessels, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Mark that he says,
though it were hell, yet there were the just men at that time, til our savior
Christ came to deliver them from thence.

12 Therefore did Jacob say, I will go down to my son unto Hell. And again
he says, Genesis 42.
If any misfortune happen to (Benjamin) by the way, you shall bring my gray
head with sorrow unto Hell, which is repeated again twice in the Chapter 44.
by which phrase the holy Scripture vvil signify, not only death, but also
the descending at that time of al sorts of souls into Hell, both good and bad.
And therefore it is spoken of al sorts in the holy Scripture, 3 Reg. 2.
both of good and of bad. for all went then into Hell, but some into a place
there of rest, others into other places there of torments. And therefore S.
Hierom says, speaking of Hell according to the old Testament, Hell is a place
wherein souls are included: In c. 13 Osee. Aug. in Psalm. 85. v. 13.
either in rest, or in pains, according to the quality of their deserts.

13 And in this sense it is also often said in the holy Scriptures, that such
and such were gathered or laid to their fathers, The Scriptures speak of an
other Hell, besides that of the damned.
though they were buried in diverse places, and died not in the same state of
salvation or damnation: In that sense Samuel being raised up to speak with
Saul, said, To morovv thou and thy sons shall be with me. that is, dead and
in Hell, though not in the same place or state there: in this sense al such
places of the holy Scripture as have the word Inferi, or Infernus
correspondent both to the Greek and Hebrew, ought to be, and may be most
conveniently translated by the word, Hell. as when it is said, ab inferno
inferiori.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lovver hell. Ps. 85. v. 13. that is as S.
Augustine expounds it, Thou have preserved me from mortal sins that would
have brought me into the lovver Hell which is for the damned. which place of
holy Scripture and the like when they translate grave, see how miserably it
sou^deth: Bib. 1579.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. which they would never
say for very shame, but that they are afraid to say in any place (be the holy
Scriptures never so plain) that any soul was delivered or returned from hell,
lest thereof it might follow by and by, that the Patriarchs, and our savior
Christ were in such a Hell.

14 And that this is their fear, it is evident, because in all other places
where it is plain that the holy Scriptures speak of the Hell of the damned,
from vvhe^ce is no return, there they translate the very same word Hell, and
not grave. As for example, The way of life is on high to the prudent, Proverb.
15.24.
to avoid from Hell beneath. lo, here that is translated Hell beneath, which
before was translated the lowest grave. And again, Hell and destruction are
before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sons of men? But when in
the holy Scriptures there is mention of delivery of a soul from Hell, then thus
they translate: Bib. 1579. De manu inferi.
God shall deliver my soul from the power of the grave: for he will receive
me. Can you tell what they would say? does God deliver them from the grave,
or from temporal death, whom he receives to his mercy? or has the grave any
power over the soul? Again when they say, Ps. 89, 48.
What man lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave?

15 If they take grave properly, where man's body is buried: it is not true
either that every soul, yea or every body is buried in a grave. But if in all
such places, they will say they mean nothing else but to signify death, and
that to go down into the grave, and to die, is al one: we ask them why
they follow not the words of the holy Scripture to signify the same thing,
which call it, going down to Hell, not, going down to the grave? Here they
must needs open the mystery of Antichrist vvorking in their translations, and
say, that so they should make Hell a common place to all that departed in the
old Testament, which they will not, no not in the most important places of
our belief concerning our savior Christ's descending into Hell, and triumphing
over the same. Yea, therefore of purpose they will not, only for to defeat
that part of our Christian Creed.

16 As when the Prophet first, Osee 13. and afterward the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.
in the Greek, say thus: (...).
Ero mors tua o mors, morsus tuus ero inferne. Vbiest, mors, stimulus tuus?
Vbiest, infer, victoria tua? O death, I will be thy death: I will be thy
sting, o Hell. Where is, o death, thy sting? Where is, o hell, thy victory?
They translate in both places, Bibl. 1579.
O grave, instead of, o Hell. What else can be their meaning hereby, but to
dravv the Reader from the common sense of our savior Christ's descending into
Hell, and conquering the same, and bringing out the fathers and just men
triumphantly from thence into heaven? Which sense has all ways been the
common sense of the Catholic Church and holy Doctors, See S. Hier. Comment. in
13. Osee.
specially upon this place of the Prophet. And what a kind of speech is this,
and out of all tune, to make our savior Christ say, O grave I will be thy
destruction? as though he had triumphed over the grave, and not over Hell: or
over the grave, that is, over death: and so the Prophet should say death
twice, and Hell not at all.

17 Why, my Masters, you that are so wonderful precise translatours, admit
that our savior Christ descended not into Hell beneath, as you say, yet I
think you will grant that he triumphed over Hell, and was conqueror of the
same. Why then did it not please you to suffer the Prophet to say so at the
least, rather then that he had conquest only of death and the grave? You abuse
your ignorant reader very impudently, and your own selves very damnably, not
only in this, but in that you make grave, and death, al one, and so where the
holy Scripture often joins together death and Hell, as things different and
distinct: you make them speak but one thing twice, idely and superfluously.

18 But will you know that you should not confound them, but that Mors, and
Infernus, which are the words of the holy Scripture in all tongues, are
distinct: hear what S. Hierom says, or if you vvil not hear, because you
are of them which have stopped their ears, let the indifferent Christian
Reader harken to this holy Doctor, and great interpreter of the holy Scriptures
according to his singular knowledge in all the learned tongues. Upon the
foresaid place of the Prophet, after he had spoken of our savior Christ's
desce^ding into Hell, and ouercomming of death, he adds: Hierom. in Osee ca.
13.
Between death and Hell this is the difference, that death is that whereby the
soul is separated from the body: Hell is the place where souls are included,
either in rest, or else in pains, according to the quality of their deserts.
And that death is one thing, and Hell is another: the Psalmist also declares,
saying: THERE IS not in death, that is mindeful of thee, Psalm. 6.
but in Hell who shall confess to thee? And in an other place. Let death come
upon them, and let them go down into Hell alive. Thus far S. Hierom.

19 By which differences of death and Hell, (whereof we must often advertise
the Reader) are meant two things: death, and the going down of the soul
into some receptacle of Hell, in that state of the old Testament, at what time
the holy Scriptures used this phrase so often. Now, these impudent tra^slators
in all these places, translate it grave, Bib. 1579.
of purpose to confound it and death together, and to make it but one thing,
which S. Hierom shows to be different, in the very same sense that we have
declared.

20 But alas, is it the very nature of the Hebrew, (...) Infernus.
Greek, or Latin, that forces them so much to English it grave, rather then
Hell we appeal to all Hebricians, Grecians, and Latinists in the world:
first, if a man would ask, what is Hebrew, or Greek, or Latin for Hell:
whether they would not answer, these three words, as the very proper
words to signify it, even as Panis signifies bread: secondly, if a man
would ask, what is Hebrew, (...) Sepulchrum.
or Greek, or Latin for a grave: whether they would answer these words,
and not three other which they know are as proper words for grave, as lac,
is for milk.

21 Yea, note and consider diligently what we will say. let them show me
out of all the Bible one place, where it is certain and agreed among all, that
it must needs signify grave, let them show me in any one such place, that
the holy Scripture uses any of those former three words for grave. As when
Abraham bought a place of burial, whether he bought Infernum: Genesis c. 49.
or when it is said the kings of Israel were buried in the monuments or
sepulchers of their fathers, whether it say, in infernit patrum suorum. So
that not only Divines by this observation, but Grammatians also and children
may easily see, that the proper and children may easily see, that the proper
and natural signification of the said words, is in English Hell, and not grave.

Annot. in Act. 2, 25.27. and in 1 Cor. 15, 55.
22 And therefore Beza does strangely abuse his Reader, more then in one place,
saying that the Hebrew word does properly signify grave, being deduced of a
verb that signifies, to crave or ask, because it craves alvvaies new
coarses, as though the grave craved more then Hell does, Bib. 1579. Prouer. 1,
12.3, 15.16.
or vvallovved more, or were more hardly satisfied and filled then Hell* for in all such places they translate grave. And in one such place they say, Prou. 27,
30.
The grave and destruction can never be full. Whereas them selves a little
before, translate the very same words, cap. 15, 11.
Hell and destruction: and therefore it might have pleased them to have said
also, Hell and destruction can never be full, Bib. 1562. 1577. Proverb. 1. 1
Pet. 5.
as their pevv-follovves do in their translation, and again, We shall
svvalovv them up, like Hell. The Devil (we read) goes about continually like
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, Who is called in the Apocalypse,
Abaddon, Apoc. 9, 11.
that is, destruction. and so very aptly Hell and destruction are joined
together, and are truly said never to be filled. What madness and impudency
is it then for Beza to write thus. Beza before alleged.
Who is ignorant that by the Hebrew word, rather is signified agraue, for that
it seems after a sort to crave alvvaies new carcasses?

23 And again, concerning our Savior Christ's descending into Hell, and
delivering the fathers from thence, it is marvel says Beza, Annot. in 2 Act.
v. 24.
that the most part of the ancient fathers were in this error, whereas
with the Hebrews the word SHEOL. signifies nothing else but GRAVS. Before, he
pleaded upon the etymology or nature of the word, now also he pleads upon
the authority of the Hebrews them selves. If he were not known to be very
impudent and obstinate, we would easily mistrust his skill in the Hebrew,
saying that among the Hebrews the word signifies nothing else but grave. nihil
aliud.


24 I would gladly know, what are those Hebrews? does not the Hebrew text of
the holy Scripture best tell us the use of this word? Do not them selves
translate it Hell very often? do not the Septuaginta alvvaies? If any Hebrew in
the world, were asked, how he would turn these words into Hebrew,
Similes estis sepulchris de albatis you are like to vvhited graves: And,
Sepulchrum eius apud vos est: His grave is among you: would any Hebrew I say
translate it by this Hebrew word which Beza says among the Hebrews
signifies nothing else but grave? Sheolim. Sheol.
Ask your Hebrew Readers in this case, and see what they will answer.

25 What are those Hebrews then, The Protestants in interpretation of
Scriptures, follow the late Jews, rather then the au^cie^t fathers, and
Apostolical church.
that Beza speaks of? forsooth certain Jews or later Rabbines, which, as
they do falsely interpret all the holy Scriptures against our Savior Christ in
other points of our belief, as against his Incarnation, Death, and
Resurrection: so do they also falsely interpret the holy Scriptures against
his descending into Hell, which those Jewish Rabbines deny, because they look
for an other Messiah that shall not die at all, and consequently shall not after
his death go down into Hell and deliver the fathers expecting his coming as
our Savior Christ did. and therefore those Jewish Rabbines hold as the
Heretics do, that the fathers of the old Testament were in heaven before our
Savior Christ's Incarnation: and these Rabbines are they which also pervert
the Hebrew word to the signification of grave, in such places of the holy
Scriptures as speak either of our Savior Christ's descending into Hell, or of
the fathers going down into Hell, even in like manner as they pervert other
Hebrew words, of the holy Scripture as namely, alma, to signify a young
woman, Esa. 7.
not a virgin, against our Saviors birth of the B. Virgin Marie.

26 And if these later Rabbines be the Hebrews that Beza means, and which
these gay English tra^slatours follow, we lament that they join them selves
with such companions, being the sworn enemies of our Savior Christ. Surely
the Christian Hebrews in Rome and else where, which of great Rabbines are
become zealous doctors of Christianity, and therefore honor every mystery and
article of our Christian faith concerning our Savior Christ, they dispute as
vehemently against those other Rabbines, as we do against the Heretics, and
among other things they tell them, that Soul said, 1 Reg. 28.
Raise me up Samuel, and that the woman said, I see gods ascending out of the
earth. and An old man is ascended or come up. and that Samuel said, Why have
thou disquieted me, that I should be raised up? and, To morovv thou and thy
sons shall be with me. And the book of Ecclesiasticus says, Eccl. 46.23.
that Samuel died, and afterward lifted up his voice out of the earth, etc. Al
which the holy Scripture would never have thus expressed (whether it were
Samuel in deed or not) if Saul and the Jews then had believed, that their
Prophets and Patriarchs had been in heaven above. And as for the Hebrew word,
they make it (as every boy among the Jews does well know) as proper a word
for Hell, as panis is for bread. and as improper for a grave (though so it may
be used by a figure of speech) as Cymba Charontis is Latin for death.

27 But what speak I of these? do not the greatest and most ancient Rabbines
(so to call them) the Septuaginta alvvaies translate the Hebrew word, by the
Greek (...), Geneb. li. 3. de Trin.
which is proprely hell? do not the Talmudistes, and Chaldee paraphrases, and
Rabbi Solomon Iarhi, handling these places of the Psalms, He vvil deliver my
soul from the hand of Sheol, interpret it by Gehinum, that is, Gehenna, hell?
and yet the Caluinistes bring this place for an example that it signifies
grave. likewise upon this place, Let al sinners be turned into SHEOL: the
foresaid Rabbines interpret it by Gehinum, hell. In so much that in the
Proverbs and in Job, it is joined with Abaddo^. Proverb. 15. Job. 26.
Where Rabbi Leui according to the opinion of the Hebrews, expounds Sheol,
to be the lowest region of the world, a deep place opposite to heaven,
whereof it is written, If I descended into Hell, thou art present: and so does
Rabbi Abraham expound the same word in chap. 2. Ionae.

28 This being the opinion and interpretation of the Hebrews, See the skill or
the honesty of Beza, saying that Sheol, with the Hebrews signifies nothing
but grave. Whereas in deed (to speak skilfully, uprightly, and not
contentiously) it may signify grave sometime secondarily, but Hell, principally
and proprely, as is manifest, for that there is no other word so often used
and so familiar in the Scriptures to signify Hell, as this, and for that the
Septuaginta do alvvaies interpret it by the Greek word (...).

29 The which Greek word is so notorious and peculiar for Hell, that the
Pagans use it also for Pluto, whom they feined to be god of hell, and not god
of graves: and if they would stand with us in this point, we might beat
them with their own kind of reasoning, out of Poeres and profane vvriters,
and out of all lexicons. Unless they will tell us (contrary to their custom)
that we Christians must attend the Ecclesiastical use of this word in the
Bible, and in Christian vvriters, Annot. in Act. 2, 27.
and that in them it signifies grave. For so Beza seems to say, that the
Greek Interpreters of the Bible translated the Hebrew word aforesaid by this
Greek word, as signifying a dark place: whereas the Greek Poets used it
for that which the Latins called Inferos, that is, Hell. Which ambiguitie
(says he) of the word, made many err, affirming Christ's descending into
Hell. So was LIMBVS builded, whereunto afterward Purgatory was laid.

30 I see Beza his vvylines very well in this point. for here the man has
uttered al his heart, and the whole mystery of his crafty meaning of this
corrupt translation: that to avoid these three things, Christ's descending into
Hell, Limbus patrum, and Purgatory, he and his companions wrest the foresaid
words of the holy Scriptures to the signification of grave. But let the
indifferent christian reader only consider Beza his own words in this
place, point by point.

31 First he says, that the Greek Poets were wont to use the Greek word
for Hell: secondly, that they which interpreted the Bible out of Hebrew into
Greek, used the very same word for that Hebrew word whereof we have now
disputed: thirdly, that the ancient fathers (for of them he speaks, ibid. v.
24.
as a little before he expresses) understood the said Greek word for Hell, and
thereby grevve to those errors (as he impudently affirms) of Christ's
descending into Hell, and of the place in Hell where the fathers rested,
expecting the coming of our Savior, etc. Whereby the Reader does easily see,
that both the profane and also the Ecclesiastical use of the word is for Hell,
and not for grave.

Infernus, inferi.
32 And for the Latin word, it is the like case for all the world: and if a man
will ask but his child that comes from the Grammar, what is Infernus, he
vvil say Hell, and not grave: what is Latin for grave? He vvil answer
Sepulchrum, or monumentum. but never Infernus, unless one of these
Caluinisticall Translatours taught him so, to deceive his father.

33 Now then, to dravv to a conclusion of this their corruption also in their
English translation: whereas the Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin words do most
properly and usually signify Hell: and both Greek, and Latin interpreters
precisely in every place use for the Hebrew word, that one Greek word, and
that one Latin word, which by all custom of speaking and vvriting, signify
Hell: If they object unto us some Catholics, that translate it, Sepulchrum, as
they do: it is a fault in them also, but so far less then in the Protestants,
as chance medley is in respect of willful mur*
it had been the part of sincere and true meaning translatours, to 07 have
translated it also in English alvvaies by the word Hell: and afterward to have
disputed of the meaning thereof, whether and when it is to be taken for Hell,
or grave, or lake, or death, or any such thing. as in one place they have done
it very exactly and indifferently, namely when Jonas says (c. 2. v. 2.) out
of the whales belly, Out of the belly of Hell, cried I, and thou beardest my
voice. so al translate it, and well, whatsoever it signify in this place.
They think that Hell, here signifies nothing else but the whales belly and the
affliction of Jonas, and so the word may signify by a Metaphorical speech, as
when we say in English, It is a Hell to live thus: and * See their marginal
annot. Ionae 2, 2. Bib. 1577.
therefore no doubt they did here translate it so, to insinuate that in other
places it might as well signify grave, as here the whales belly.

34 But then they should have translated it also Hell in other places, as they
did in this, and afterward have interpreted it grave in their commentaries,
and not presumptuously to straiten and limite the word of the holy Ghost to
their private sense and interpretation, and to prejudice the ancient and
learned holy fathers, which look far more deeply and spiritually into this
prophecy, then to Jonas or the vvhale, * Mat. 12.
our Savior him self also applying it to his own person, and to his being in
the heart of the earth three days and three nights. And therefore S. Hierom
says, Comment. in 2. Ionae.
This belly of Hell, according to the story is the whales belly, but it may
much better be referred to the person of Christ, which under the name of
David, Psalm. 15. In inferno. Psalm. 87.
sings in the Psalm, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell: Who was in Hell
alive, and free among the dead. And that which our Savior says, The Son of
man shall be in the heart of the earth, he does interpret of his soul in Hell.
for as the heart is in the mids of the body, so is Hell said to be in the
mids of the earth.

35 Thus then presupposing (as we must) that Jonas speaks in the person, of
our Savior Christ, the principal sense is not of the whales belly, but of
that hell vvhither our Savior Christ descended, and from vvhe^ce he delivered
the fathers of the old Testament, him self ascending into heaven, as their
king and general captain before them, and opening the way of heaven unto
them, Mich. 2.13.
as is signified in an other prophet: and was the first that entered heaven.

36 Against al which truths and every point thereof, these translatours are
so vvatcheful and wary, Heb. 10, 20. (...). initianit.
that where the Apostle says, Christ began, and dedicated unto us the way
into heaven, they say, in their English translations with full consent nothing
else but, He prepared. Why are they falser here then their Masters, Calvin,
Beza, Illyricus, who read, Dedicauit? Is there nothing in the Greek word,
but bare preparation? where be these etymologistes now, (...).
that can strain and wring other words to the uttermost advantage of their
heresy, and here are content for the like advantage, to dissemble the force of
this word, which by all use and propretie signifies, to make new, to begin
a thing, to be the first author, to dedicate: Aug. tract. 48. in Joan.
as S. Augustine might have taught them, and their lexico^s, and the Scriptures
in many places. This translation (no doubt) is not done sincerely and
indifferently of them, but for their own deceitful purpose, as is all the
rest. When S. Paul speaks of preparation only, they know right well that he
uses the usual word to prepare: as, Heb. 11, 16. (...)
He has prepared them a city: and wheresoever is signified preparation only,
let them bring us one example where it is expressed by the other Greek word,
which now we speak of.

37 But it is of more importance, which follows, and apparteining altogether
to this controversy. Hebr. Of the year 1577.
5. v. 7. your translation is thus, in the very English bible that now is
read in your Churches: Against Christ's descending into Hell.
Which in days of his flesh offered up prayers with strong crying, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that which he feared.
Is the Greek here, (...).
In that which he feared? You know that no grammar nor lexicon does allow
you this translation. but either thus, for reverence, or as one of your own
English Bibles has it, because of his reverence.

38 How is it then, that in your later English bibles you changed your former
translation from better to worse? Exmetn.
or who taught you so to translate it? forsooth the Heretic Beza, whose
translation you follow for the most part in your later bibles, though here, in
sense rather then in word. And who taught Beza? he says, Calvin was the
first that ever found out this interpretation. And why? surely for defense of
no less blasphemy then this, that our Savior JESUS Christ upon the Cross
was horribly afraid of damnation, Calu. Catech. and Institut. Fi. 2. c. 16.
that he was in the very sorrows and torments of the damned, and that this
was his descending into Hell, and that otherwise he descended not. let the
Reader note these new teachers upon this place, and judge to what wicked end
this translation tends.

39 A wonderful thing: when all antiquity with a general, and full consent
has in that place of the holy Scripture read thus, that Christ was heard (of
his father) for his reverence (according as our Savior him self also says in
the raising of Lazarus, Io. 11, 42.
and signifies in his long prayer Io. 17:) how a blasphemous and presumptuous
Heretic should be so malapert thus to alter it, that he was heard in that
which he feared. that is, that he was delivered from damnation and the
eternal pains of Hell, which he was sore afraid of. To the maintenance of
which blasphemy, Beza will seem to force the Greek thus. (...).
First (says he) (...) does not here signify reverence or piety, but fear,
and such a fear which he calls pauorem and consternationem animi, that is,
dreadfulnes and astonishment of mind, and other like words, to insinuate an
exceeding horror and fear in our Savior Christ. for confutation vvherof, we
might easily bring the common use of this Greek word in the holy Scriptures to
signify not every fear, but that religious fear which is in the best men,
joined with godliness, holiness, and devotion, as when in the Acts they that
buried S. Steven, Act 8. (...).
are called Viri timorati. devout men such as feared God.

40 But we need not go far, for Beza will help us him self, who tells us
in an other place the very same. his words be these: Annot. in Luc. 2. v. 25.
(...) significat non quemuis timorem, sed cum reuerentia potius quam cum animi
trepidatione coniunctum. latini religionem vocant. that is, (...) does not
signify every fear, but that which is joined with reverence rather then
with astonishment of mind. the Latins do call it, religion or religious
fear. If this be the true signification of (...), as Beza him self confesses,
why does he not so translate it in the foresaid place to the Hebrews? Why
forsakes he the old approved Latin translation and general consent of al
ancient interpreters, and translateth it, that fear or astonishement of
mind, which he says the word does not signify?

41 And mark that in his foresaid annotation upon S. Luke he tells not a
peculiar signification of the Greek word in that place, as though in some
other places it might have an other signification, but he tells generally
what the very nature of the Greek word is, that is, that it signifies not
every fear but a fear joined with reverence. and he said truly: and they
shall hardly give an instance where it signifies that fear of astonishment,
which both he and they translate in the foresaid place of S. Paul. Such a
force has heresy to lead a man even contrary to his own knowledge, to
falsify Gods holy word.

42 Yea Beza says further to this purpose (much more against his skill in the
Greek tongue, if he had any at all) that (...) the preposition cannot bear
this sense, For which or in respect whereof. and therefore he tra^slateth the
Greek into Latin thus. Exauditus est ex metu, he was heard from fear: not,
for fear, or, for his reverence. and because from fear, is a hard speech and
dark, that seems to be the cause why our English tra^slators say, In that
which he feared, far from Beza in word, but aggreably in sense.

Flac. Illyric.
43 But for this matter we send them to Flaccus Illyricus a captain Lutherane,
who disputes this very point against the Caluinistes: and teaches them that
nothing is more common, then that signification of (...). For proof whereof,
(...).
we also refer the^ to these places of the holy Scripture. Mat. 13. Luc. 22.
and 24. Act. 12. Psalm. 87. And Machab. 5, 21. where (...) with a genitive,
and (...) with an accusative, signify al one, which Beza denies. Gentle
Reader, bear with these tedious grammatications, fitter to be handled in
Latin, but necessary in this case also, good for them that understand, and for
the rest an occasion to ask of the^ that have skill in the Greek tongue,
whether we accuse our adversaries justly or no, of false translating the holy
Scriptures.

44 And we beseech them to give us a good reason why they professing to follow
precisely the Greek, do not observe trevvly the Greek points, in such place
as concerns this present controversy. for the place in the Apocalypse which
they allege of our Savior Christ's suffering from the beginning (thereby to
infer that the just men of the old Testament might enter heaven then, c. 13,
8.
as well as after his real and actual death) according to the Greek points
says thus, All that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him (the beast) whose
names have not been written in the book of life of the Lamb slame, from the
beginning of the world. Where it is evident, that the Greek text says not,
the lamb slain from the beginning, but that the names of those Antichristian
Idolaters were not written in Gods eternal book of predestination from the
beginning, as it is also most plain without al ambiguitie in the 17 Chapter
v. 8. If in a place of no controversy they had not been curious in points of
the Greek, they might have great reason sometime to alter the same.

45 But if in points of controversy between us, they vvil say, diverse
pointing is of no importance, they know the contrary by the example of
ancient heretics, which used this mean also to serve their false heretical
purpose. If they say, our vulgar latin text points it so, let them profess
before God and their conscience, that they do it of reverence to the said
ancient latin text, or because it is indifferent, and not for any other cause,
and for this one place we will admit their answer.

CHAP. VIII. Heretical translation concerning JUSTIFICATION.
ABOUT the article of justification, as it has many branches, and their
etrours therein be manifold, so are their English translations accordingly many
ways false and heretical. First against justification by good works and by
keeping the commandments, they suppress the very name of justification in all
such places where the word signifies the commandments or the Law of God,
which is both in the old and new Testament most common and usual, namely in
the books of Moses, in the Psalm 118. that begins thus, Beati immaculati:
in the Psalm 147. v. 19. 1 Mac. 1. v. 51. and c. 2. v. 21. Luc. 1. v. 6. To.
2. v. 26. In all which places and the like, where the Greek signifies
justices and iustifications most exactly, (...)
according as our vulgar Latin translateth, iustitias and iustificationes:
there the English translations say jointly and with one consent, ordinances,
or, statutes For example, To. 2. If the uncircumcision keep the ORDINANCES of
the Law, (...).
shall it not be counted for circumcision? And Luc. 1, 6. They were both,
righteous before God, (...).
vvalking in all the commandments and ORDINANCES of the Lord, (...).
blameless. Why translate you it ordinances, and avoid the term,
iustifications? is it because you would follow the Greek? I beseech you is
not (...), just, (...), to be justified, (...), iustifications or justices? In
the old Testament you might perhaps pretend, that you follow the Hebrew vvvord,
(...)
and therefore there you translate, statutes, or, ordinances. But even there
also, are not the Seventy Greek interpreters sufficient to teach you the
signification of the Hebrew word: who alvvaies interpret it, (...), in
English, iustifications?

2 But be it, that you may co^troule them in the Hebrew, which none but fools
vvil grant unto you: in the new Testament what pretense have you? do you
there also translate the Hebrew word, or rather the Greek? the Greek
undoubtedly you should translate. what reason then can you have why you do
not? none other surely then that which Beza gives for him self, saying, that
he rejected the word, iustificatio^s (notvvithstanding it expressed the
Greek, word for word, notvvithstanding the Seventy Greek interpreters used
it to signify the whole Law, and in Latin it be commonly translated,
iustificationes) notvvithstanding all this, Annot. in 1 Luc.
for this only cause (says he) did I reiecte it, to avoid the cauillatio^s
that might be made by this word, against justification by faith. As if he
should say, This word truly translated according to the Greek, might
minister great occasion to prove by so many places of Scripture, that man's
justification is not by faith only, but also by keeping the law, and observing
the commandments, which therefore are called according to the Greek and
Latin, iustifications, because they concur to justification, and make a man
just, as by S. Lukes words also is well signified, which have this allusion,
that they were both just, because they walked in all the iustifications of our
Lord. Which they of purpose suppress by other words.

3 And hereof also it rises, (...).
that when he cannot possibly avoid the word in his translation (as Apoc. 19,
8. Bissinum enim iustificationes sunt sanctorum, The silk is the
iustifications of Saints:) there he helps the matter with this commentary,
That iustifications, Beza Annot. in Apoc. 19.
are those good works which be the testimonies of a lively faith. But our
English translatours have an other way to avoid the word even in their
tra^slatio^. For they say here, the righteousness of Saints: because they could
not say, ordinances of Saints: and they would not say, iustificatio^s of
saints: knovving very well (by Bezaes own co^mentarie) that this word
includes the good works of saints: which works if they should in
translating call their iustifications, it would go sore against justification
by only faith. Therefore do they translate in steed thereof, ordinances, and,
statutes, where they can, which are terms furthest of from justification:
and where they can not, there they say, righteousness, making it also the
plural number, whereas the more proper Greek word for righteousness is (...)
(Dan. 6, 22.) which there some of the^ translate vngiltinesse: because they
vvil not translate exactly, if you would hire them.

4 And therefore as for, justice, and, iustifications, they say righteousness:
Bib. of the year 1577. most approved. Mat. 1, 19. Luc. 1, 6.
so for, just, they translate, righteous. and by this means, Joseph was a
righteous man, rather then a just man: and Zachary and Elisabeth were both
righteous before God, rather then just: because when a man is called just, it
sounds that he is so in deed, and not by imputation only: as a wise man, is
understood to be wise in deed, and not only so imputed. Therefore do they more
gladly and more often say, righteous men, rather then, just men, and when they
do say, just men, as sometime they do lest they might seem willful
inexcusably: there they understand, just by imputation, and not in deed, as is
to be seen in Bezaes Annotatio^s upon the Epistle to the Romans. Note also
that they put the word, just, when faith is joined vvithal. as To. 1. The
just shall live by faith. to signify that justification is by faith. But if
works be joined vvithal, and keeping the commaundeme^ts, as in the place
alleged Luc. 1. there they say, righteous, to suppress justification by
works.

5 And certain it is, if there were no sinister meaning, they would in no
place avoid to say, just, justice, justification, where both the Greek and
Latin are so, (...).
word for word. as for example 2 Timothy 4, 8. In all their bibles, (...) etc.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of RIGHTEOUSNESS, which the Lord
the RIGHTEOUS judge shall GIVE me at that day. And again 2 Thessalonians. 1. Rejoice in
tribulations which is a token of the RIGHTEOUS IVDGEMENT of God, (...).
that you may be counted vvorthie of the kingdom of God for which ye saffer.
For it is a RIGHTEOUS THING with God, (...) iustum est. (...).
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you that are
troubled, rest with us, in the revelation of the Lord JESUS from heaven. And
again Hebr. 6, 10. God is not VNRIGHTEOVS to forget your good work and
labor, etc. non enim iniustus est Deus.
These are very pregnant places to discover their false purpose in concealing
the word, justice, in all their bibles. For if they vvil say, that justice is
not an usual English word in this sense, and therefore they say, righteousness:
yet I trow, just, and unjust, are usual and well known. Why then would
they not say at the least, in the places alleged, God the JUST judge, A token
of the JUST IVDGEMENT of God, It is a JUST thing with God, God is not VNIVST
to forget, etc? Why is it not at the least in one of their English Bibles,
being so both in Greek and Latin?

6 Understand gentle Reader, and mark well, The scriptures most evident for
justification* by works, against only faith.
that if S. Paul's words were truly translated thus, A crown of JUSTICE
is laid up for me, which our Lord the JUST judge vvil RENDER unto me at that
day, and so in the other places: it would infer, that men are justly crowned
in heaven for their good works upon earth, and that it is Gods justice so to
do, and that he vvil do so because he is a iustiudge, and because he vvil
show his JUST IVDGEMENT, and he vvil not forget so to do, because he is not
unjust: as the ancient fathers (namely the Greek doctors S. Chrysostom, Psalm.
57. Si vtique est fructus iusto, vtique est Deus iudicans eos in terra.
Theodorete, and Oecumenius upon these places) do interpret and expound. in so
much that Oecumenius says thus upon the foresaid place to the Thessalonians,
(...) etc. See here, that to suffer for Christ procures the kingdom of heaven
according to JUST IVDGEMENT, (...).
and not according to grace. Which lest the Adversary might take in the
worse part, as though it were only Gods justice or just judgment, and not
his favor or grace also, S. Augustine excellently declares hovvv it is both
the one and the other: to wit, his grace and favor and mercy, in making us
by his grace to live and believe well, and so to be worthy of heaven: his
justice and just judgment, to render and repay for those works which him
self wrought in us, life everlasting. Which he expresses thus: Aug. de gra.
and lib. arb. ca. 6.
How should he render or repay as a just judge, unless he had given it as a
merciful father? Where S. Augustine urges the words of repaying as due, and
of being A JUST IVDGE therefore. both which the said translatours corrupt, not
only saying, righteous judge, for, just judge: but, that he vvil give a
crown, which is of a thing not due, for that which is in the Greek, (...).
He vvil render or repay: which is of a thing due and deserved, and has
relation to works going before, for the which the crown is repaied. He
said not (says Theophylacte upon this place) he vvil give, but, he vvil render
or repay, as a certain debt. for he being just, vvil define and limite the
revvard according to the labors. the crown therefore is due debt, because of
the judges justice. So says he.

7 Which speeches being most true as being the express words of holy
Scripture, yet we know how odiously the Adversaries may and do misconster
them to the ignorant, as though we challenged heaven by our own works, and
as though we made God bound to us. Which we do not, God forbid. but because
he has prepared good works for us (as the Apostle says) to walk in them,
Ephesians. 2, v. 10.
and does by his grace cause us to do them, and has promised life everlasting
for them, and tells us in all his holy Scriptures, that to do them is the
way to heaven: therefore not presuming upon our own works as our own or
as of our selves, but upon the good works wrought through Gods grace by us
his seely instruments, we have great confidence (as the Apostle speaks) and
are assured that these works proceeding of his grace, Hebr. 10.
be so acceptable to him, that they are esteemed and be vvorthie and
meritorious of the kingdom of heaven. Against which truth, let us see further,
their heretical corruptions.

CHAP. IX. Heretical translation against MERITS or MERITORIOVS WORKS and the
REWARD for the same.
WHEN they translate ( To. 8, 18) thus, Bib. 1577.
I am certainly persuaded, that the afflictions of this time, ARENOT WORTHY
OF THE GLORY which shall be shevved upon us: do they not mean to signify to
the reader, and must it not needs so sound in his ears, that the tribulations
of this life, be they never so great, though suffered for Christ, yet do not
merit nor deserve the heavenly glory? but in the Greek it is far otherwise.
I vvil not stand upon their first words, I am certainly persuaded, (...). I
suppose.
which is a far greater asseueration then the Apostle uses, and I marvel how
they could so translate that Greek word, but that they were disposed, not
only to translate the Apostles words falsely against meritorious works, but
also to avouch and affirm the same lustely, with much more vehemency of
words then the Apostle speaks. well, let us pardon them this fault, and
examine the words following. Where the Greek says not, (...). Non sunt
condignae ad futuram gloriam.
as they translate with full consent in all their English Bibles, The
afflictions are not vvorthie of the glory etc. but thus, The afflictions of
this time are not equal, correspondent, or co^parable to the glory to come. S.
Chrysostom. upon this place.
because the afflictions are short, the glory is eternal: the afflictions small
and fevv in comparison, the glory great and abundant above measure.

2 This is the Greek phrase and the Apostles meaning, which we need not
greatly to prove, because their own Doctors Calvin and Beza do so interpret
it, and therefore vvonder it were that the Geneua English bibles also should
forsake their Masters, and follow the error of the other English bibles, but
that they thought the more voices the better. In the mean time the people
sees no other translation, and thinks it is the Apostles very words. But
Beza him self tells them the contrary, translating thus: Statuo minime^ esse
paria quae presenti tempore perpetimur, futurae gloriae nobis reuelandae. that
is, I am of this opinion, that the things which we suffer in this present
time, are not equal to the glory that shall be reucaled to us. And in his
commentary, thus, S. Paul's discourse and matter handled in this place.
declare, that he speaks not of the valor or price of the afflictions which
we suffer for Christ, but rather by comparing their quality and quantity
with life everlasting, he gathers that we shall be infinitely more happy
with Christ, then we are miserable here. Therefore did he use the (...).
Greek word rightly and properly, which the Grammarians say is spoken of
such things, as being poised or weighed, are found of one weight. Thus far
Beza.

3 If then a comparison only be signified, why do they not so translate it in
English, that it may be taken for a comparison in our English phrase? For they
know. very well that if a man should say in English, according as they
translate, Good works are not vvorthie of heaven, this man is not vvorthie of
my favor, he is not vvorthie of such a living, of so great praises: every
English man understands it thus, that they deserve not heaven, and that such
a man deserves not this or that. Even so must the reader needs take it in
this place, and they must needs have intended that he should so take it. For
though he Greek phrase may signify a comparison, being so uttered, prou. 3.
(...)
yet not the English. and if it might, yet obscurely and ambiguously: and if it
might, yet here they do falsely translate so, because here the Greek phrase is
otherwise, and therefore should otherwise be Englished. For it is not, (...),
which is, as they translate, worthy of the glory: but, (...), which cannot
be so translated. For if it might, then these Greek phrases were al one, and
might be used indifferently. And then I must desire them to turn me this into
Greek, He is not vvorthie of thanks. and if they turn it by the Apostles
phrase in this place (...), to al Grecians they shall be ridiculous. And yet
this is as well turned out of English into Greek, as they have turned the
other out of Greek into English.

4 Marie, if they would exppresse a comparison of equality or inequality
between thing and thing, the^ this is the proper Greek phrase thereof, and
much more proper for this purpose, The Greek (...), signifies a comparison.
the^ by (...), and a genitive case. Which notvvithstanding is often so used in
the Scriptures, by way of comparison. as Proverb. 3. concerning the praise of
wisdoms. Where S. Augustine to express the comparison, (...).
reads thus, Omne pretiosum non est illi dignum: and S. Hierom according to
the Hebrew thus, (...)
omnia quae desiderantur no valent huic co^parari. or, adaequari. and Ecclci
26, we have the very like speech proceeding of the said Greek word (...)
Omnis ponderatio non est digna continentis animae. Which the English Bibles
translate thus, There is no weight to be compared unto a mind that can rule
it self. or, with a continent mind.

5 And if (...) with a genitive case signify a comparison, and them selves so
translate it in all their Bibles, (...)
should not (...) in the Apostles phrase much more be so translated? I appeal
to their own consciences. Again if here in Ecclicus they say not according
to the Greek words, (...).
There is no weight vvorthie of a continent mind, because they would by an
English phrase express the comparison: is it not more then evident, that when
they translate the Apostle by the very same words, Vvorthie of the glory
etc: they know it can not, and they mean it should not signify a comparison?
I can not sufficiently express, but only to the learned and skilful reader,
their partial and heretical dealing. Briefly I say, they translate, (...), Not
to be compared with a continent mind, being in Greek Word for word Not
vvorthie of a continent mind: and contrarievvise they translate in S. Paul,
(...), Not vvorthie of the glory to come, being in the Greek, Not to be
compared to the glory to come. according to the very like Latin phrase by
dignus Eccl. 6. Amico fideli nulla est comparatio, and non est DIGNA ponderatio
auri and argenti CONTRA BONITATEM FIDEI, that is, according to their own
translation, A faithful friend has no peer, weight of gold and silver is not
to be compared to the goodness of his faith.

6. Now if they vvil say, though their translation of S. Paul's words be not
so exact and commodious, How good works merit life everlasting, though one
incomparably exceed the other.
yet the sense and meaning is al one (for if these present afflictions be not
equal or comparable to the glory to come, then neither are they worthy of it,
nor can deserve or merit it) let the Christian reader mark the difference.
First their Beza and Calvin tells them that the Apostle speaks of the one,
and not of the other. Secondly, the passions and afflictions that Christ our
Savior suffered al his life, were not comparable to the eternal glory which
he obtained thereby: yet did he thereby deserve and merit eternal glory, not
only for him self, but for all the world: yea by the least affliction he
suffered, did he deserve all this. unless you vvil deny also that he merited and
deserved his glory, which your opinion a man might very well gather by * Heb.
2, 9. in the new Testament of the year 1580. and Bib. 1579.
some of your false translations, but that you would think us to suspicious,
which perhaps we vvil examine hereafter. Thirdly, the present pleasure of
aduoutrie during a man's life, is not comparable to the eternal torments of hell
fire: and yet it does merit and deserve the same. Fourthly, the Apostle by
making an incomparable difference of the glory to come with the afflictions
of this time, does (as S. Chrisostom says) exhort them the more vehemently and
move them to sustain al things the more vvilingly: (...).
but if he said as they translate, The afflictions are not vvorthie of heaven,
you are never the nearer heaven for them, only believe: this had not been to
exhort them, but to discourage them. 2 Cor. 4. v. 17.
Fifthly, the Apostle when he vvil else where encourage them to suffer, says
plainly, (...).
Our tribulation which presently is for a moment and light, WORKS above
measure excedingly, an eternal weight of glory in us.

7 See you not a comparison between short and eternal, light tribulation, and
exceeding weighty glory: and yet that one also works the other, that is,
causes, purchases, and deserves the other? for, like as the little seed
being not co^parable to the great tree, yet causes it and brings it forth:
so out tribulatio^s and good works otherwise incomparable to eternal glory,
by the virtue of Gods grace vvorking in us, works, purchases, and causes
the said glory. for so they know very well the Greek word imports: See
this Greek Word. 2 Cor. 7. thrice. Where the^ selves translate it, causes,
Works v. 10.11.
though here also they translate it most falsely, prepares. Bib. an. 1577.

8 Lastly, for most manifest evidence, that these present tribulations and
other good works are meritorious and vvorthie of the joys to come, though
not co^parable to the same: you shall hear the holy Doctors say both in one
passage or sentence. ep. 56. nu. 3.
S. Cyprian thus: O what manner of day shall come, my brethren, when our Lord
shall recount the MERITS of every one, and pay us the revvard or stipend of
faith and devotion? Singulorum merita.
Ep. 56. here are merits and the revvard for the same. It follows in the
said Doctor, What glory shall it be, and how great joy, to be admitted to see
God, so to be honored that thou receive the joy of eternal life with Christ
thy Lord God, to receive there that which neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor has ascended into the heart of man for, that we shall receive
greater things, then here either we do, or suffer, the Apostle pronounces,
saying, The passions of this time are not condign or co^parable to the glory
to come, Here we see that the stipend or revvard of the merits aforesaid, are
inco^parably greater then the said merits.

9 Likewise S. Augustine: Ser. 37. de Sanctis.
The exceeding goodness of God has provided this, that the labors should soon
be ended, praemia meritorum.
but the rewards of the MERITS should endure without end: the Apostle
testifying, THE PASSIONS OF THIS TIME ARE NOT COMPARABLE etc. For we shall
receive greater bliss, then are the afflictions of al passions whatsoever.
Thus we see plainly, that short tribulations are true merits of endless
glory, though not comparable to the same: which truth you impugn by your
false and heretical translation. But let us see further your dealing in the
self same controversy, to make it plainer that you bend your translations
against it, more then the text of the Scripture does permit you.

10 In the book of wisdoms, where there is honorable mention of the merits
of Saints and their rewards in heaven, the holy Scripture says thus: (...).
dignos se. (...).
God has proved them, and finds them MEET FOR HIM SELF. To omit here that
you use the present tense, whereas in the Greek they are preter tenses (God
knovveth why, only this we know, that it is no true nor sincere tra^lation)
but to vvincke at smaller faults, why say you here in all your Bibles, that
God finds his Saints and holy servants meet for himself, and not, vvorthie
of him self? See your partiality, and be ashamed.

11 In the Apostles places before examined, you said negatiuely, that the
afflictions of this time were NOT WORTHY OF the glory to come, the Greek
not bearing that translation: but here, when you should say affirmatively, and
that word for word after the Greek, that God found them WORTHY OF HIM SELF,
(...).
there you say, MEET FOR HIM SELF, avoiding the term, vvorthie, because
merit is included therein. So that when you vvil in your translation deny
merits, Condignae ad gloriam.
then condignae ad, signifies, vvorthie of: when you should in your
traslation affirm merits, dignos se.
then Dignus with an ablative case does not signify, vvorthie of. No matuel
if such vvilfulnes vvil not see the word merit, or that which is equivalent
thereto, in all the Scripture. for when you do see it, and should translate it,
you suppress it by an other word. But this is a case vvorthie of examination,
Merit of good works plainly proved by the Scriptures.
whether the Scripture have the word, merit, or the equiuale^t thereof. for
we vvil force them even by their own translations, to confess that it is
found there, and that they should translate it accordingly often when they do
not, yea, that if we did not see it in the vulgar Latin translation, yet they
must needs see it and find it in the Greek.

12 First when they translate the foresaid place thus, (...).
The afflictions of this time are not vvorthie of the glory to come: they
mean this, deserve not the glory to come, for to that purpose they do so
translate it, as has been declared. (...).
Again, when it is said, The vvorkeman is vvorthie of his hire or wages:
What is meant, but that he deserves his wages? And more plainly Tob. 9.
they translate thus: Brother Azarias, non ero condignus prouidentiae.
if I should give my self to be thy servant. I shall not DESERVE thy providence.
And such like. If then in these places, both the Greek and the Latin signify,
to be vvorthie of, or, not to be vvorthie of, to deserve, or, not to deserve:
then they must allow us the same signification and virtue of the same words
in other like places. Namely Apoc. 5. of our Saviors merits, thus: (...)
The lamb that was killed, IS VVORTHIE to receive power and riches, etc.
What is that to say, but, DESERVES to receive? For so I trust they vvil
allow us to say of our Savior, that he in deed deserved. Again, of the
damned, Apoc. 16. (...).
thus: Thou have given them blood to drink, for they ARE VVORTHIE. or, THEY
HAVE DESERVED. is it not al one? lastly of the elect, thus: They shall walk
with me in white, because they are vvorthie, Apoc. 3. that is, (...), Digni
sunt. (...), Dignos se.
because they deserve it. and so in the place before by them corrupted, God
found them vvorthie of him: that is, such as deserved to be with him in
eternal glory. Thus by their own translation of (...) and dignus, are
plainly deduced, worthiness, desert, and merit of saints, out of the
Scriptures.

13 But to proceed one step further, (...) and (...), signify deserte^
we prove it also to be in the Scriptures, thus. Them selves translate thus
Heb. 10, 29. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be vvorthie, which
treads under foot the son of God? though one of their Bibles of the year
1562, (...).
very falsely and corruptly leaves out the words, vvorthie of, saying thus,
How much sorer shall he be punished etc: Fearing no doubt by translating the
Greek word sincerely, this consequence that now I shall infer. to wit, If
the Greek word here, by their own translation, signify to be vvorthie of,
or, to deserve, being spoken of pains and punishment deserved: then must they
grant us the same word so to signify else where in the new Testament, when
it is spoken of deserving heaven and the kingdom of God. as in these places.
Luc. 21. Vvatch therefore, (...),
al times praying, that you MAY BE VVORTHIE to stand before the son of man.
and c. 20. THEY THAT ARE VVORTHIE to attain to that world and to the
resurrection from the dead, neither marie, (...).
nor are married. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. (...).
That you may BE VVORTHIE of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer.

14 Thus you should translate in all these places, according to your translation
of the former place to the Hebrews: or at the leastvvise you should have this
sense and meaning, as the old vvulgar Latin has, translating in all these
places, Qui digni babebuntur. Vt digni habeamini.
counted vvorthie, but meaning vvorthie in deed: as when it is said, Abraham
was reputed just, it is meant, he was just in deed. If you also have this
meaning in your translations, which here follow the vulgar Latin: then we
appeal to your selves, whether, to be counted vvorthie, and to be vvorthie,
and to deserve, and to merit, be not al one: and so here also Merit is
deduced. But if you mean according to your heresy, to signify by
tra^slating, counted vvorthie, that they are not in deed vvorthie: then your
purpose is heretical, and translation false and repugnant to your translating
the same word in other places, as is declared, and now further we vvil
declare.

15 (...) to make worthy, (...) to be made. or to be worthy.
They whom God does make vvorthie, they are truly and in deed vvorthie: are
they not? but by your own translation of the same word in the active voice,
God does make them vvorthie. therefore in the passive voice it must also
signify to be made or to be in deed vvorthie. For example, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 11.
You translate thus, (...).
we also pray for you, THAT OUR GOD MAY MAKE YOU VVORTHIE of this calling.
According to which translation, why did you not also in the self same chapter
a little before translate thus: (...).
That you MAY BE MADE VVORTHIE (and so be vvorthie) of the kingdom of God, for
which also you suffer? You know the case is like in both places. and in the
Greek doctors you specially should know (by your oste^tation of reading them
in Greek) that they according to this use of holy Scripture, very often use
also this word both actiuely and passiuely, to make vvorthie, (...).
and to be made, or, to be vvorthie. See the Greek Liturgies.

(...).
16 Which S. Chrysostom, to put al out of doubt, explicateth thus in other
words, That he make us vvorthie of the kingdom of heaven. Ser. 1. de orando
Deo. And upon the epistle to Titus c. 3. in the same sense passiuely, God
grant we may al BE MADE VVORTHIE (or be vvorthie) of the good things promised
to them that love him. And in an other place of the said doctor it must needs
signify, to be vvorthie. as when he says, In Colos. 1. (...).
No man lives such a trade of life, that he is vvorthie of the kingdom, but al
is his gift For to say thus, No man so lives that he can be counted vvorthie
of the kingdom of heaven: is against the Protestants own opinion, which say
they are counted vvorthie, that are not. Again, to say, No man so lives that
he can be made vvorthie: is false, because God can make the worst man worthy.
It remains then to say, No man so lives that he is vvorthie. Which a little
before he declares thus, No man by his own proper merits obtains the
kingdom of heaven. (...).
that is, as his own, and of him self without the grace of God. And yet we
must show further out of the Scriptures, that God makes us vvorthie, and so
we are in deed vvorthie, and here also we must convince you of false and
partial interpretation.

17 The Greek word (...) (I pray you) what does it signify? you must
answer that it signifies not only, meet, but also, vvorthie. (...).
for so Beza teaches you, and so you translate Mat. 3, 11. etc. 8, 8. and 1
Cor. 15, 9. I am not vvorthie, in all three places. And why (I pray you) did
you not likewise follow the old Latin interpreter one step further, saying,
(...). Col. 1. v. 12.
Giving thanks to God the father THAT HAS MADE US WORTHY, but translating
rather thus, Which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the saints in light. Here was the place where you should have shevved your
sincerity, and have said that God makes us vvorthie of heavenly bliss.
because you know if (...) be worthy, then (...) is to make vvorthie. But you
are like to Beza your Master, who (as though al interpretation of words
were at his commandment) says, here and here and so forth I have followed
the old Latin interpreter, translating it, vvorthie: Annot. in 3. Mat. No.
Test. 1556.
but in such and such a place (meaning this for one) I chose rather to say,
MEET. Idoneum dicere malui.
but that both he and you should here also have translated, vvorthie, the
Greek fathers shall teach you, if we be not vvorthie, or able to control so
mighty Grecians, as you pretend to be when you crovve upon your own
dunghill, otherwise in your translations shevving small skill, or great malice.

18 The Greek fathers (I say) interpret the Apostles word here, thus: Oecum.
in Caten.
(...). that is, has made us vvorthie, and given us the grace to be vvorthie.
and S. Basil in orat. Liturg. making both Greek words al one, says, (...).
THOU HAVE MADE US WORTHY to be ministers of thy holy altar. and anon after,
MAKE US WORTHY for this ministry. And S. Chrisost. upon the Apostles place,
God does not only give us society with the Saints, but makes us also
vvorthie to receive so great dignity. And here is a goodly consideration of
the goodness of God tovvard us, that does in deed by his grace make us vvorthie
of so great things, who otherwise are most unworthy, vile, and abject.
Which making of us vvorthie, is expressed by the said Greek words, more
then by the Latin, mereri, because it declares whence our merit and
worthiness proceeds. to wit, Ho. de Cruee and latrone.
of God. both which S. Chrysostom expresses excellently thus: When he
brought in Publicans to the kingdom of heaven, be defamed not the kingdom of
heaven, but magnified it also with great honors, shevving that there is such
a Lord of the kingdom of heaven, which has made even unworthy persons to be
so much better, Vt etiam illius dignitatis gloriam mererentur.
that they should deserve even the glory of that dignity. And Occumenius
says, that it is Gods glory, (...).
TO MAKE HIS SERVANTS WORTHY of such good things: and that it is their glory,
(...).
TO HAVE BEEN MADE WORTHY of such things. in 2, These. 1.

19 Thus we see how the holy Scripture uses equivalent words to signify,
merit, which you suppress as much as you can. So likewise we might tell you
of other words and phrases that do plainly import and signify merit. as
when it is said Ecclesiastici 16. Every man shall find according to his
works. (...).
Budee both your Master and ours in the Greek tongue, tells us that the
Greek word (...) (to find) is proprely to receive for that which a man has
given or labored. and to requite you with some profane authority, because
you delight much in that kind) the whole oration of Demosthenes (...), vvil
tell you the same. Now, to receive for that which a man has labored or
wrought, what does it else presuppose, but merit and desert? It is a common
phrase of the Scripture, that God vvil judge and revvard or repay according to
every man's works. Ecclici 16. Psalm. 61. Apoc. 22.
does not this include merit and demerite of works? but I vvot not how, nor
wherefore, in this case you translate sometime, deeds, for works, saying,
(...).
Who vvil revvard every man according to his deeds. and again, You see then
how that of deeds a man is justified, and not of faith only.

20 I know you vvil tell us that you use to say deeds or works
indifferently, as also you may say, that you put no difference between just
and righteous, meet and vvorthie, but use both indifferently. To the ignorant
this is a fair answer, and shall soon persuade them: but they that see
further, must needs suspect you, til you give a good reason of your doing.
For, the controversy being of faith and works, of justice and justification
by works, of the worthiness or valor of works: why do you not precisely
keep these terms pertaining to the controversy, the Greek words being
always pregnant in that signification? Why should you once translate the
Greek (...), deeds, rather then, works. You know it is proprely, works,
as (...), deeds. It were very good in matters of controversy to be precise.
Prefat. in no. Test. 1556.
Beza makes it a great fault in the old vulgar Latin translator, that he
expresses one Greek word in Latin diverse ways. You choppe and change
significations here and there as you list, and you think you satisfy the
reader marvelous well, if sometime you say idol, and not alvvaies, images:
sometime just, and not alvvaies righteous: and if in other places you say
works, or if one Bible has works, where an other has deeds, you think
this is very well, and vvil answer all the matter sufficiently. God and your
conscience be judge herein, and let the wise reader consider it deeply. The
least thing that we demand the reason of, rather then charge you vvithal, is,
why your Church bible says in the places before alleged, (...).
The righteous judgment of God, which vvil revvard every man according to his
deeds. and, man is justified by deeds, and not by faith only, Whereas you
know the Greek is more pregnant for us then so, and the matter of
controversy would better appear on our side, if you said thus: The JUST
judgment of God, which vvil revvard every man according to his WORKS. and,
Man is justified by works, and not by faith only.

21 But vvil you not yet see merit and meritorious works in the Scripture? I
marvel your skill in the Greek teaches you nothing in this point. S. John
says: 2. Epist. v. 8.
Look to your selves, that you lose not the things which you have wrought,
but that you may receive a full revvard. Me thinks, in these words the
equiuale^t of merit is easily seen of any man that is not wilfully blind. but
you should see further then the common sort. for you know that the Greek here
signifies, (...).
not only that which we work, but that which we work for. as in the Greek
phrase of vvorking for a ma^s living, and as you translate 10.6. v. 27. LABOUR
NOT FOR THE MEAT that perishes, but for that meat which endures unto life
everlasting. Such (...) Mat. 20.
laborers God hired to work in his vineyard, and (...) Luc. 10.
the vvorkeman is vvorthie of his hire. So that the Apostle in the former
words exhorts to perseuera^ce, that we lose not the revvard or pay, for
which we work, and which by vvorking we merit and deserve.

22 Again Beza tells us, Annot. in To c. 1. v. 27 (...).
that (...) signifies mercedem quae meritis respondet, that is, a revvard
answerable to the merits. and we find many words in the Scripture like
unto this, (...), Hebr. 10. and 11.
(...), Which are on Gods part, who is the revvarder and reco^penser. and on
our part we have (as the Apostle says, Hebr. 10. and 4) great confidence.
(...).
confidence (says Photius a notable Greek father) of our works, confidence
of our faith, (...), etc. Phot. apud Occu. in Hebr. 10. Ps. 18. and 118. (...).
of our tentations, of our patience. etc. Yea we have (...) and (...) in the
Scripture, which must needs signify as much as Bezaes (...). By the one, is
said, In keeping thy commandments is great revvard. Again, You shall receive
THE RETRIBVTION of inheritance. Col. 3. v. 24. And 2 Thessal. 1. v. 6. Gods
repaying just and retribution of Hell or Heaven for good and evil deserts, is
expressed by the same word. and by the other, is said, I have inclined my heart
to keep thy iustifications (or commandments) alvvaies FOR REWARD. (...).


23 But all this vvil not suffice you. for wheresoever you can possibly you
vvil have an evasion. and therefore in this later place you run to the
ambiguitie of the Hebrew word, and translate thus: I have applied my heart to
fulfill thy statutes alvvaies, EVEN UNTO THE END. (...).
Alas my masters, are not the Seventy Greek interpreters sufficient to
determine the ambiguitie of this word? is not S. Hierom, in his translation
according to the Hebrew? are not all the ancient fathers both Greek and Latin?
It is ambiguous (say you) and therefore you take your liberty. You do so in
deed, and that like Princes. for in an other place, where the Greek has
determined, (...).
you follow it with al your heart, saying, fall down before his footestoole,
because he is holy: whereas the ambiguitie of the Hebrew, (...)
would have borne you to say, as in the vulgar Latin, because it is holy. and
so it makes for holiness of places, which you can not abide.

24 But you use (you say) the ambiguitie of the Hebrew. Take heed that your
liberty in taking al advantages, against the common and approved
interpretation of the whole Church, be not very suspicious. for if it do
signify also revvard, as (you know) it does very commonly, and your self so
translate it (Psalm. 18, v. 11) when you can not choose: and if the Septuaginta
do here so translate it in Greek, and Propter aeternam retributione^. scz
vitae aeternae, vt eam merear percipere. in comment.
S. Hierom in his Latin translation according to the Hebrew, and the ancient
fathers in their commentaries: what vpstart new Masters are you that set al
these to school again, and teach the world a new translation? If you vvil
say, you follow our own great Hebrician, Sanctes Pagninus. why did you
follow him in his translation, rather then in his Lexicon called Thesaurus,
where he interprets it as the whole Church did before him? Why did you
follow him (or Benedictus Arias either) in this place, and do not follow them
in the self same case, a little before translating that very Hebrew word which
is in this place, Psalm. 118. v. 112.
propter retributionem, for revvard? So that you follow nothing, (...).
neither judgment nor, learning in Hebrew or Greek, but only your own
error and Heresy, which is, that we may not do well in respect of revvard,
or, for revvard. and therefore because the holy Prophet David said of him self
the contrary, that he did bend his whole heart to keep Gods commandments
for revvard, you make him say an other thing.

25 And to this purpose perhaps it is (for other cause I can not guess) that
you make such a marvelous transposition of words in your translation (Mat.
19.) saying thus: When the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his
majesty, ye that have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon
twelve seats. Whereas the order of these words both in Greek and Latin, is
this: You that have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in his majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve seats. To follow
Christ in the regeneration, is not easily understood what it should mean: but
to sit with Christ in the regeneration, that is, in the resurrection, upon 12
seats, this is familiar and every man's interpretation, and concerns the
great revvard that they shall then have, which here follow Christ as the
Apostles did.

26 The like transpostion of words is in some of your Bibles (Hebr. 2. v. 9.)
thus. no. Test. 1580.
We see JESUS crowned with glory and honor, which was a little inferior
to the Angels, through the suffering of death. Whereas both in Greek and
Latin, the order of the words is thus: Him that was made a little inferior to
Angels, we see JESUS, through the passion of death, crowned with honor and
glory. In this later, the Apostle says, that Christ was crowned for his
suffering death, and so by his death merited his glory. but by your
translation, he says that Christ was made inferior to Angels by his suffering
death, Vt mori posset.
that is (says Beza) For to suffer death: and taking it so, that he was made
inferior to Angels, that he might die, then the other sense is clean excluded,
that for suffering death he was crowned with glory: and this is one place
among other, whereby it may very well be gathered that * See Calvin in epist. ad
Philip.
some of you think that Christ him self did not merit his own glory and
exaltation. So obstinatly are you set against merits and meritorious works.
To the which purpose also you take away man's free vvil, as having no
ability to work tovvard his own salvation.

CHAP. X. Heretical translation against FREE VVIL.
AGAINST free vvil your corruptions be these. Io. 1, 12. where it is said,
(...).
As many as received him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God: no.
Test. 1580.
some of your translations say, he gave them prerogative to be the sons of
God. Beza, dignity. Who protests that whereas in other places often he
translated this Greek word, power and authority, here he refused both, in
deed against free vvil, which he says the Sophistes would prove out of this
place, reprehending Erasmus for following them in his translation. Vt liceret
filios Dei fieri
But whereas the Greek word is in different to signify dignity, or
liberty, he that vvil translate either of these, restrains the sense of the
holy Ghost and determines it to his own fancy. If you may translate,
dignity: may not we as well translate it, liberty? yes surely. For you know
it signifies the one as well as the other both in profane and Divine vvriters.
and you can well call to mind (...), and (...), whence they are derived, and
that the Apostle calls a man's liberty of his own will, 1 Cor. 7, 17.
(...). Now then if potestas in Latin, and power in English, be words also
indifferent to signify both dignity and liberty, translate so in the name of
God, and leave the text of the Scripture indifferent as we do: and for the
sense whether of the two it does here rather signify, or whether it does
not signify both (as no doubt it does, and the fathers so expound it) let that
be examined otherwise. It is a common fault with you and intolerable, by your
translation to abridge the sense of the holy Ghost to one particular
understanding, and to defeat the exposition of so many fathers, that expound
it in an other sense and signification. As is plain in this example also
following.

2 The Apostle (1 Cor. 15, 10.) says thus: (...).
I, labored more abundantly then al they: yet not I, but the grace of God
with me. Which may have this sense, not I, but the grace of God which is with
me, as S. Hierom sometime expounds it: or this, not I, but the grace of God
which labored with me. and by this later is most evidently signified, that
the grace of God and the Apostle, both labored together, and not only grace,
as though the Apostle had done nothing* like unto a block, forced only: but
that the grace of God did so concur as the principal agent with al his
labors, that his free vvil wrought vvithal. Against which truth and most
approved interpretation of this place, you translate according to the former
sense only, making it the very text, and so excludi^g al other senses and
commentaries, as your Masters Calvin and Beza taught you, who should not have
taught you if you were wise, to do that which neither they nor you can
justify. They reprehend first the vulgar Latin interpreter for neglecting the
Greek article, and secondly them that by occasion thereof, would by this place
prove free vvil. by which their co^mentarie they do plainly declare their
intent and purpose in their translation, to be directly against free vvil.

3 But concerning the Greek article omitted in translation, (...).
if they were but Grammarians in both tongues, they might know that the
Greek article many times can not be expressed in Latin, and that this is one
felicity and prerogative of the Greek phrase above the Latin, to speak more
briefly, commodiously, and significantly, by the article. What need we go
to Terence and Homer, as they are wont? Is not the Scripture full of such
speeches? Iacobus Zebedaei, Iacobus Alphaei, Judas Iacobi, Maria Cleophae, and
the like, Are not al these sincerely translated into Latin, though the Greek
article be not expressed? Can you express the article, but you must add more
then the article, and so add to the text, as you do very boldly in such
speeches through out the new Testament, yea you do it when there is no
article in the Greek: as Io. 5, 36. (witness) (sins.)
and 1 ep. Io. 2, 2. Yea sometime of an heretical purpose: Bib. 1562.
as Ephesians. 3. By whom we have boldness and entrance with the confidence
which is by the faith of him, or, in him, as it is in other your bibles. No.
Test. 1580.
You say, confidence which is by faith, as though there were no confidence by
works: you know the Greek bears not that translation, (...).
unless there were an article after, confidence, which is not, but you add it
to the text heretically. as also Beza does the like (To. 8, 2.) and your Geneua
English Testame^ts after him, for the heresy of imputative justice: as in his
Annotations he plainly deduceth, saying confidently, I doubt not but a Greek
article must be understood, (...).
and therefore (forsooth) put into the text also. He does the same in S. James 2,
v. 20: still debating the case in his Annotations why he does so, and when he
has concluded in his fancy, that this or that is the sense, he puts it so
in the text, and translateth accordingly. No marvel now, if they reprehend the
vulgar Latin interpreter for not translating the Greek article in the place
which we began to treat of, when they find articles lacking in the Greek
text it self, and boldly add them for their purpose in their translation.
Whereas the vulgar Latin interpretation is in all these places so sincere, that
it neither adds nor diminishes, nor goes one jot from the Greek.

Non ego, sed gratia Dei mecum.
4 But you vvil say in the place to the Corinthians, there is a Greek article,
and therefore there you do well to express it. I answer, first, the article
may then be expressed in translation, when there can be but one sense of the
same: secondly, that not only it may, but it must be expressed, when we can
not otherwise give the sense of the place. (...).
as Mat. 1, 6. Ex ea quae fuit Vriae. Where you see the vulgar interpreter
omitteth it not, but knovveth the force and signification thereof very well.
mary in the place of S. Paul which we now speak of, where the sense is
doubtful, and the Latin expresses the Greek sufficiently otherwise, he
leaves it also doubtful and indifferent, not abridging it as you do, saying,
the grace of God which is with me: nor as Calvin, gratia quae mihi aderat:
(...).
nor as Illyricus, gratia quae mihi adest. Which two later are more absurd
then yours, because they omit and neglect altogether the force of the
preposition, cum, (...).
which you express saying, with me. but because you say, which is with me:
you mean heretically as they do, to take away the Apostles cooperation and
laboring together with the grace of God, by his free vvil: which is by the
article and the preposition most evidently signified.

5 And here I appeal to all that have skill in Greek speeches and Phrases,
whether the Apostles words in Greek, (...) etc.) (...).
sound not thus: I labored more abundantly then al they: yet not I, but the
grace of God (that labored) with me. Understanding not the participle of Sum,
but of the verb going before. as in the like case when our Savior says, It
is not you that speak, but the holy Ghost that speaks in you. If he had
spoken short thus, but the holy Ghost in you, you perhaps would translate as
you do here, the holy Ghost WHICH IS IN YOU. but you see the verb going
before is rather repeated, Not you speak, but the holy Ghost THAT SPEAKS IN
YOU. Even so, Not I labored, but the grace of God laboring with me, or,
WHICH LABOVRED WITH ME. So prays the wise man Sap. 9, 10. Send wisdoms out
of thy holy heavens, that she may be with me, and labor with me as your
selves translate. Et mecum laboret.
Bib. 1577.

6 And so the Apostle calls him self and his fellow preachers, Gods
coadiutors, collabourers, or such as labor and work with God, which also
you falsely translate, (...), S. Augustine, Cooperarij, and 2 Cor. 6, 1. (...).
Gods laborers, to take away al cooperation, and in some of your Bibles most
folishly and peeuishly, as though you had sworn not to translate the Greek,
We together are Gods laborers. as well might you translate (To. 8, 17) that
we together be Christ's heirs: (...).
for that, which the Apostle says coheires, or joint heirs with him: the
phrase and speech (as you know) in Greek being al one. So does Beza most
falsely translate, Ephesians. 2. v. 5.
Vna viuificauit nos per Christum, for that which is plain in the Greek, He
has quickened us together with Christ, Where the English Bezites leave also
the Greek, The English translators are ashamed of their Master.
and follow our vulgar Latin translation rather then Beza, who goes so vvide
from the Greek, that for shame they dare not follow him. Fie upon such
hypocrisy and pretensed honor of God, that you vvil not speak in the same
terms that the holy Scripture speaks, but rather vvil teach the holy Ghost
how to speak, in not translating as he speaks. As though these phrases of
Scripture, men are Gods coadiutors, covvorkers with his grace, raised with
Christ, coheirs with him, compartakers of glory with him, were al spoken to
the dishonor of God and Christ, and as though these being the speeches of the
holy Ghost him self, needed your reformation in your English tra^slatio^s.
Otherwise if you mean well, and would say as we say, that whatsoever good
we do, we do it by Gods grace, and yet work the same by our free will
together with Gods grace as the mouer and helper and directer of our vvil:
why do you not translate in the foresaid place of S. Paul accordingly?

7 You say moreover in some of your Bibles thus: So lies it not then in a ma^s
will or running, Bib. 1562. (...).
but in the mercy of God. Whatsoever you mean, you know this translation is
very dissolute and vvide from the Apostles words, and not true in sense. for
salvation is in vvilling and running: Aug. Sermon. 15 de verb. Apostoli.
according to that famous saying of S. Augustine, He that made thee without
thee, vvil not justify thee without thee: that is, against thy vvil, or,
unless thou be vvilling. and the Apostle says, No man is crowned, 2 Timoth. 2.
1 Cor. 9. Romans 2. Mat. 19.
unless he fight lavvfully. and again, So run THAT YOU MAY obtain. and
again, The doers of the Law shall be justified. And our Savior, If thou vvilt
enter into life, keep the commandments. We see then that it is in vvilling,
and running, and doing: but to vvil, or run, or do, are not of man, but of
Gods mercy. and so the Apostle speaks, It is not of the vviller, nor runner,
but of God that has mercy. And it is much to be marueled, why you said not,
It lies not in the vviller, nor in the runner: which is near to the Apostles
words, but so far of, in a man's will and running.

8 Again, touching co^tinencie and the chaste single life, you translate thus:
(...).
Al men can not receive this saying. Mat. 19. v. 11. Now you vvot well,
Marvelous strange translation.
that our Savior says not, Al men can not, but, al men do not receive it:
and that therefore, De great and lib. arb. c. 4.
(as S. Augustine says) because al vvil not. But when our Savior afterward
says, He that CAN receive it, let him receive it: he adds an other Greek
word to express that sense. (...).
whereas by your fond translation he might have said, (...). and again by
your translation, you should translate these his later words thus: He that
can or is able to receive it, let him be able to receive it. For so you
translate (...) before, as though it were al one with (...). Do you not see
your folly, and falshod, and boldness, to make the reader believe that our
Savior should say, Every man can not live chaste, it is impossible for them,
and therefore no man should vovv chastirie, because he knovveth not whether he
can live so or no?

9 Again in some of your Bibles (Genesis 4. v. 7.) where God says plainly,
Bibl. 1579.
that Cain should receive according as he did well or evil, because sin was
subject unto him, and he had the rule and dominion thereof, evidently declaring
his free will: you translate it thus, If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: and also unto
thee HIS desire shall be subject, and thou shall rule over HIM. By which
relatiues falsely put in the masculine gender, you, exclude the true antecedent
sin, and refer them to Abel Cains brother. as though God had said, not that
sin should be in his dominion or subject unto him, but his brother Abel. But
that this is most false and absurd, we prove many ways. First S. Augustine
says directly the contrary: Li. 15. c. 7. de Ciuit. Dei.
Tu dominaberis illius: nunquid Fratris? absit. cuius igitur nisi peccati. Thou
shall rule (says he) over what? Over thy brother? Not so. over what then but
sin? Quaest. Heb. in Genes.
S. Hierom also explicateth this place thus: Because thou have free will, I
vvarne thee that sin have not dominion over thee, but thou over sin.
Moreover the text it self, if nothing else, is sufficient to convince this
absurdity. For where this word, sin, goes immediately before in the same
sentence, and not one word of Abel his brother in that speech of God to Cain,
how is it possible, or what coherence can there be in saying as you
translate, Sin lies at the door, and thou shall have dominion over him,
that is, thy brother. but if we say thus, Sin lies at the door, and thou
shall have dominion thereof: it has this direct and plain sense, If thou
do ill, sin lies at the door ready to condemn thee, because it is in
thee to ouerrule it.

10 Now if against the coherence of the text, and exposition of the holy
Doctors and of the whole Church of God, you pretend the Hebrew grammar
forsooth, as not bearing such construction: not to trouble the common reader
that can not judge of these things, and yet fully to satisfy every man even of
common understanding, we request here the Adversaries them selves to tell us
truly according to their knowledge and skill, (...)
whether the Hebrew construction or point of grammar be not al one in these
words, Sin LIES at the door: and in these, the desire THEREOF shall be
subject to thee, and thou shall rule over IT. If they say (as they must needs)
that the Hebrew construction or Syntaxis is al one, then vvil it follow that
the Hebrew bears the one as well as the other: and therefore when the self
same translation of theirs makes no scruple of Grammar in the former, but
translate as we do, Sin lies at the door: a blind man may see that in
the later words also, the Hebrew is but a foolish pretense, and that the true
cause of translating them otherwise, proceeds of an heretical humor, to
obscure and deface this so plain and evident Scripture for man's free will.

11 And as for the Hebrew grammar in this point, were it not for troubling the
reader, we could tell them that the word, sin, in Hebrew is not here of the
soeminine gender (as they suppose) but of the masculine. so says S. Hierom
expressly upon this place, q. Hebr. in Genes.
who had as much knowledge in the Hebrew tongue as al these new Doctors.
Aben Ezra also the great Rabbine, in his Hebrew comme^taries upon this text,
says, it is a mere forgerie and fiction to refer the masculine relative
otherwise then to the word, sin: which, though else where it be the
feminine gender, yet here it is a masculine, according to that rule of the
Grammarians, Quinquar-boreur.
that the doubtful gender must be discerned by the verb, adjective, pronovvne,
or participle joined with the same: as the said Hebrew doctor does in the
word, paradise, Genesis 2. which there by the pronovvnes he pronounces to be a
feminine, though else where a masculine. Lastly, if the word, sin, were
here and alvvaies only afeminine, and never a masculine: yet they have little
skill in the Hebrew tongue, that think it strange to match masculines and
feminines together in very good and grammatical constructio^. Vvherof they may
see a whole chapter in Sanctes Pagninus with this title, Foeminea masculeis
iuncta. that is, Feminines joined with masculines.

12 Now for the last refuge, if they vvil say all this needed not, because in
other their bibles it is as we would have it: we tell them, they must
justify and make good al their translations, because the people reads al,
and is abused by all, and al come forth with privilege, printed by the Q.
printer etc. If they vvil not, let them confess the faults, and call them in,
and tell us which translation or tra^slations they will stand unto. In the
mean time they must be content to hear of al indifferently, as there shall be
cause and occasion to touch them.

13 Again they translate in some of their Bibles against free will, no. Test.
1580.
thus, Christ, when we were yet OF NO STRENGTH, died for the ungodly To. 5.
v. 6. The Apostles word does not signify that we had no strength, (...).
but that we were vveake, feeble, infirm. Man was vvounded in free vvil by
the sin of Adam (as he that in the Gospel went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, Luc. 10.
which is a parable of this thing) he was not slain altogether. but I stand
not here, or in any place to dispute the controversy, that is done else where.
This only I say, because * Vvhitakers page 18.
they falsely hold that free will was altogether lost by Adams sin,
therefore they translate accordingly, When we had no strength. But the Greek
word is well known both in profane authors and Ecclesiastical, and specially
in the new Testament it self, through out, to signify nothing else, but,
vveake, feeble, sick, infirm. Multi inter vos infirmi su^t etc. 1 Cor. 11. v.
30. Cum infirmor, tum potens sum. 2 Cor. 12. v. 10. and alibi.
look me through the new Testament, wheresoever, infirmity, feeblenes,
languishing, and the like are spoken of, there is found this Greek word to
express it. What Grecian knovveth not (be he but simply acquainted with
phrases and nature of words) what (...), and (...), do signify. When the
Apostle says, Quis infirmatur, and ego non vror? 2 Cor. 11, 29
Who is vveake and infirm, and I am not much greiued? shall we translate,
who is of no strength, etc. or let them give us an instance, where it is
certain that this word must needs signify, of no strength. (...)
priuatiuu^. (...).
Vvil they pretend the etymology of the word? a ridiculous and absurd
evasion. we ask them of (...), a word of the very same signification, which
being compounded in like manner as the other, what does it signify? any thing
else but infirmity and feeblenes? Yea it is so far from signi^ying, no
strength, Lexicon magnum Basileae.
that the greatest Grecians say, it is not spoken proprely of him that for
weakness keeps his bed, (...).
which is (...), but of him that is il disposed and distempered in body. Yet
the etymology is al one with that word which these men vvil have to signify
him that has no strength. And if they vvil needs urge the etymology, we tell
them, that (...) signify, robur, that is, great strength such as is in the
strongest and stoutest champions. and so the etymology may take place, to
signify a man of no great strength, not, of no strength. page 209.
But M. Whitaker puts us in good hope, they will not stand upon
etymologies.

14 When they have bereaved and spoiled a man of his free will, and left him
without al strength, they go so far in this point, that * Beza in Annot. To.
2, 27.
they say, the regenerate them selves have not free vvil and ability, no not
by and with the grace of God, to keep the commandments. To this purpose
they translate (Io. 5, 3) thus: Man dara eius grauia non sunt, (...).
His commandments are not heavy. for in saying, they are not heavy, it
would follow, they might be kept and observed: but in saying, they are not
grievous, that may be true, were they never so heavy or impossible, through
patience. As when a man can not do as he would, yet it greeueth him not,
being patient and wise, because he is content to do as he can, and is able.
Therefore do they choose to translate, that the commandments are not grievous,
where the Apostle says rather, they are not heavy. much more agreably to our
Saviors words, My burden is light: and to the words of God by Moses, Deu.
30. This commandment which I command thee this day, (...).
is not above thee (that is, beyond thy reach) but the word is very near
thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, (...).
that thou may do it: and to the common signification of the Greek word,
which is, heavy. Beza would say somevvhat in his commentary, how the
commandments are heavy or light, but his conclusion is against free will,
and that there can be no perfection in this life, inueighing against them that
would prove it out of this place: which is as much to say (but he is ashamed
to speak plainly) that we can not keep the commandments: which the holy
Doctors have long since condemned and abhorred as most absurd, that God should
commau^d that, under pain of damnation, which is impossible to be done.

15 Thus having taken away free vvil to do good, and possibility to keep
the commandments, and al merit or valor and efficacy of good works,
their next conclusion is, that we have no true justice or righteousness in us,
but an imputative justice, that is, Christ's justice imputed to us, be we never
so foul and filthy in our souls, so that we believe only, and by faith
apprehend Christ's justice. For this purpose they corrupt the Scriptures in
their English bibles, thus.

CHAP XI. Heretical translation for IMPVTATIVE JUSTICE, against true inherent
justice.
1 ONE place might suffice, in steed of many, where Beza does protest, that
his adding or alteration of the text, is, specially against the execrable
error of inherent justice, Annot. in Romans 5, 18.
which (he says) is to be avoided as nothing more. His false translation,
thus our English Bezites and Caluinists follow in their Bibles. Likewise then
as by the offense of one, Romans 5.
the fault came on al men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the
benefit abounded, tovvard al men to the justification of life. Where there
are added to the text of the Apostle, six words: and the same so vvilfully
and voluntarily, that by the three first, they make the Apostle say, sin came
on al men by Adam, and they were made sinners in deed: by the three later,
they make him say, not that justice or righteousness came likewise on al men by
Christ, to make them just in deed, but that the benefit of Christ's justice
abounded toward them, as being imputed forsooth unto them. Whereas, if they
Would needs add to the text (which yet is intolerable, so much, and in so
doubtful a case) they should at the least have made the case equal, as the
Apostle him self teaches them to do, in the very next sentence, saying thus,
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many also be made righteous. so they translate, rather then, be made
just. For they are the lothest men in the world to say that we are made just,
for fear of justice inherent in us, though the Scripture be never so plain.
as here we see the Apostle makes the case like, that we are made just by
Christ, as we were made sinners by Adam.

2 And it is a world to see, how Beza shifteth from one signification of the
word justified, or, made just, to an other. (...). absolui. (...). absoluitur.
Sometime to be justified, is to be pronounced quitte from al sin, or
declared just before Gods judgment seat; and so he tra^slateth it in the text
Act. 13. v. 39. and as though his guilty conscience were afraid of a blovv, he
says he flees not the term of justifying or justification, because he uses
it in other places. He does so in deed, but then his commentary supplieth the
turn: as To. 2. v. 13. Not the hearers of the Law are RIGHTEOUS before God
(so they delight to translate, rather then, JUST before God) but the doers of
the Law shall be IVS TIFIED. Iusti pronu^ctabuntur.
that is (says Beza) shall be pronounced just. The Apostle must needs say by
the coherence and consequence of his words, not the hearers are just, but the
doers shall be just or justified. Beza vvil in no case have it so, but either in
text or commentary make the Apostle say as him self imagines. Annot. To. 3.
v. 20.
Yet in an other place he protests very solemnly, that to be justified, is
not, to be pronounced or accounted just, but rather to be just in deed: and
that, he proves out of S. Paul, To. 5. v. 19. who makes it al one, (...).
to be justified, and, to be made just. and again by this reason, that it
should be manifestly repugnant to Gods justice, to account him for just, that
is not just, and therefore that man in deed is made just. Thus Beza. Would you
not think, he were come to be of our opinion? but he reuolteth again, and
interprets al these goodly words in his old sense, non quasi nobis indatur
qualitas.
saying, Not that any quality is inwardly given unto us, of which we are
named just: but because the justice of Christ is imputed to us by faith freely.
By faith then at the least we are truly justified. Annot. in To. 4. v. 2.
Not so neither, but faith (says he) is an instrument vvherevvith we
apprehe^d Christ our justice. So that we have no more justice in us, then we
have glory: for glory also we apprehend by faith.

3 For this purpose both he and the English Bibles translate thus: Pro
iustitia. (...).
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him FOR JUSTICE To. 4. v. 3. and
9. Where he interprets, for justice, to be nothing else but, Vice and loco
in the steed and place of justice: so also taking away true inherent justice
even from Abraham him self. But to admit their translation (which
notvvithstanding in their sense is most false) must it needs signify, not
true inherent justice, because the Scripture says, it was reputed for
justice? Do such speeches import, that it is not so in deed, but is only
reputed so? Then if we say, This shall be reputed to thee for sin: for a
great benefit, and so forth: it should signify, it is no sin in deed, nor
great benefit. Reputabitur tibi in peccatum.
But let them call to mind, that the Scripture uses to speak of sin and of
justice alike. It shall be sin in thee, (...).
or, unto thee, as they translate Bibl. 1577: or as S. Hierom translateth, It
shall be reputed to thee for sin: Deuteronomy. c. 23 and 24. and (as them selves
translate) it shall be righteousness unto thee, before the Lord thy God. and
again Deuteronomy. c. 6. This shall be our righteousness before the Lord our God, if
we keep all the commandments, as he has commanded us. If then justice only
be reputed, sin also is only reputed: if sin be in us in deed, justice is
in us in deed.

4 Again the Greek fathers make it plain, that to be reputed unto justice,
Oecum. in caten. Photius.
is to be true justice in deed, (...).
interpreting S. Paul's words in Greek, thus: Abraham obtained justice,
Abraham was justified. (...).
for that is, say they, It was reputed him to justice. Does not S. James say
the like, (c. 2. v. 23) testifying, that in that Abraham was justified by
faith and works, the Scripture was fulfilled, that says, It was reputed
him to justice? Genesis 15. v. 6. In which words of Genesis, where these
words were first written by Moses, in the Hebrew there is not, for
justice, or, in steed of justice, (which Beza pleads upon, by the Hebrew
phrase) but thus, (...)
He (God) reputed it unto him, justice. though here also the English Bibles
add, for. which, precisely translating the Hebrew they should not do,
specially when they mean it was so counted or reputed for justice, that it
was not justice in deed.

5 But as for either the Hebrew or Greek word, that is here used, to repute
or account, they are then used, when it must needs signify, that the thing
is so in deed, and not only so reputed. as, Psalm. 118. octonatio SAMEC. I
have reputed or accounted all the sinners of the earth, preuaricators or
transgressors. praeuaricantes reputaui. (...). 1 Cor. 4.
So did the Septuaginta take the Hebrew word and read it. And S. Paul, So let
a man repute or account us as the Ministers of Christ. Let them go now and
say, that neither they, were sinners in deed, nor these, Christ's ministers in
deed, because they were reputed for such. let them say the children of the
promis were not the seed of Abraham, (...)
because the Apostle says, To. 9. v. 8. they are reputed for the seed. But
howsoever it be, the Protestants vvil have it so to be taken, at the least in
the matter of justification.

6 Again, where S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 5. That we might be made the justice
of God in him: they in their first translations, intolerably corrupt it thus.
That we by his means should be that righteousness, Bib. 1562. (...).
which BEFORE GOD IS ALLOWED. Who taught them to translate so dissolutely,
Iustitia Dei, the righteousness which before God is allowed? did not their
error and heresy, which is, that God reputeth and accounts us for just,
though we be in deed most foul sinners, and that our justice being none at
al in us, yet is allowed and accepted before him for justice and righteousness?

7 Again to this purpose: 1 Ephesians. v. 6.
they make S. Paul say that God has made us accepted, or freely accepted in
his beloved son as they make the Angel in S. Luke say to our Lady, Hail
freely beloved: (...).
to take away al grace inherent and reside^t in the B. Virgin, or in us:
whereas the Apostles word signifies, that we are truly made gracious or
grateful and acceptable, that is to say, that our soul is inwardly endued and
beautified with grace and the virtues proceeding thereof, and consequently is
holy in deed before the sight of God, and not only so accepted or reputed, as
they imagine. If they know not the true signification of the Greek word, and
if their heresy vvil suffer them to learn it, let them hear S. Chrysostom
not only a famous Greek Doctor, but an excellent interpreter of al S. Paul's
epistles: who in this place puts such force and significancie in the Greek
word, that he says thus by an allusion and distinction of words: (...).
He said not, Which HE FREELY GAVE US, but, WHEREIN HE MADE US GRATEFVL, that
is, not only delivered us from sins, but also made us beloved and amiable,
made our soul beautiful, grateful, such as the Angels and Archangels are
desirous to see, and such as himself is in love vvithal, according to that in
the Psalm, THE KING SHALL DESIRE, or BE IN LOVE WITH THY BEAVTIE. So S.
Chrysostom and after him Theophylacte, who with many mo words and
similitudes explicate this Greek word and this making of the soul gracious
and beautiful inwardly, truly, and inherently.

8 And I would gladly know of the Adversaries, if the like Greek words be
not of that form and nature, to signify so much as, (...).
to make worthy, to make meet: and whether he whom God makes vvorthie, or
meet, or grateful, just, and holy, be not so in very deed, but by acceptance
only. if not in deed, (...).
then God makes him no better then he was before, but only accepts him for
better: if he be so in deed, then the Apostles word signifies not, to make
accepted, but to make such an one as being by Gods grace sanctified and
justified, is vvorthie to be accepted, for such purity, virtue, and justice as
is in him.

9 Again, for this purpose (Dan. 6, 22.) they vvil not translate according to
Chaldee, (...).
Greek, and Latin, Justice was found in me. but they alter it thus, My
justice was found out. (...).
and other of them, My vnguiltinesse was found out. to dravv it from inherent
justice, which was in Daniel.

10 Again, it must needs be a spot of the same infection, that they translate
thus, As David DESCRIBES the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness. (...).
To. 4, 6. as though imputed righteousness were the description of blessedness.
They know the Greek does not signify, to describe. I would once see them
precise in following the Greek and the Hebrew. if not, we must look to their
fingers.

CHAP. XII. Heretical translation for SPECIAL FAITH, vain security, and ONLY
FAITH.
AL other means of salvation being thus taken away, their only and extreme
refuge is, Only faith, and the same, not the Christian faith of the articles of
the Creed and such like, but a special faith and confidence, whereby every man
must assuredly believe, that him self is the son of God, and one of the elect
and predestinate to salvation. If he be not by faith as sure of this as of
Christ's Incarnation, he shall never be saved.

2 For this heresy, they force the Greek to express the very word of
assurance and certainty, thus: Let us dravv nigh with a true heart, (...)
IN ASSVRANCE OF FAITH. Heb. 10. v. 22. and Beza, certa persuasione fidei, that
is, with a certain and assured persuasion of faith: interpreting him self
more at large in an other place, Annot. in 1 Luc. v. 1.
that he means thereby such a persuasion and so effectual, as by which we
know assuredly without al doubt, that nothing can separate us from God.
Which their heretical meaning makes their translation the less tolerable,
because they neither express the Greek precisely, nor intend the true sense
of the Apostle. they express not the Greek, which signifies properly the
fulness and complement of any thing, and therefore the Apostle joins it
sometime with faith, else where ( Hebr. 6. v. 11. (...).
) with hope, with knowledge, or ( (...).
Col. 2. v. 2.) understanding, to signify the fulness of al three, as the
vulgar Latin interpreter most sincerely ( (...).
To. 4. v. 21.) alvvaies translateth it: and to Timothee, ( (...) Ministerium
tuum imple. An. 1577. an. 1562.
2 Timothy 4.) he uses it to signify the full accomplishment and execution of his
ministry in every point. Where a man may vvonder that Beza to maintain his
conceived signification of this word, translateth here also accordingly, thus:
Ministry tui plenam fidem facito: but their more current church English Bibles
are content to say with the vulgar Latin interpreter, fulfill thy ministry:
or, fulfill thine office to the utmost. and the Greek fathers do find no other
interpretation. Thus, Ignat. Ep. Smyrn.
when the Greek signifies fulness of faith, (...). Chrysostom. Theodoret.
Theophyl. upon. To. 10
rather then assurance or certain persuasion, they translate not the Greek
precisely. Again in the sense they err much more, applying the foresaid
words to the certain and assured faith that every man ought to have (as they
say) of his own salvation. Whereas the Greek fathers expound it of the full
and assured faith that every faithful man must have of al such things in heaven
as he sees not, namely that Christ is ascended thither, etc. adding further
and proving out of the Apostles words next following, that the Protestants *
Chryso. ho. 19. in c. 10. ad Hebr.
only faith is not sufficient, be it never so special or assured.

3 Yet do these terms please them excedingly, (...), Fidei donum electum.
(...). Bib. 1577.
in so much that for the chosen gift of faith, Sap. 3, 14. they translate, THE
SPECIAL gift of faith: and To. 8, 38. I am sure, that nothing can separate us
from the love of God. as though the Apostle were certain and assured not only
of his own salvation, but of other men's. For to this sense they do so
translate here, whereas in * Luc. 20, 6. To. 15, 14. Hebr. 6, 9.
other places out of controversy, they translate the same word as they should
do, I am persuaded. they are persuaded etc. For who knovveth not that (...)
imports only a probable persuasion? They vvil say that, I am sure, and I am
persuaded, is al one. Being well meant, they may in deed signify alike, as
the vulgar Latin interpreter does commonly translate it, but in this place of
controversy, whether the Apostle were sure of his salvation or no, which
you say he was, yea without revelation, we say he was not: here why would
you translate, I am sure, and not as in other places, I am persuaded, but in
favor of your error, by insinuating the terms of sure, and assurance, and
such like: as elsvvhere you neglect the terms of just and justification. 2
Cor. 4.
In which your secret things of dishonesties and craftines (as the Apostle
calls it) we can not alvvaies use demo^strations to convince you: but yet
even in these things we talk with your conscience, and leave the
consideration thereof to the wise reader.

4 You hold also in this kind of controversy, that a man must assure him self
that his sins be forgiven. but in the book of Ecclicus c. 5. v. 5. we read
thus, Of thy sin forgiven, be not without fear. (...).
or (as it is in the Greek) Of forgiveness and propitiation be not without
fear, to heap sin upon sins. Which you translate falsely thus: Because
thy sin is forgiven thee, be not therefore without fear. Is that (...),
because thy sin is forgiven thee? You know it is not. but that we should be
afraid of the very forgiveness thereof, whether our sin be forgiven or no, or
rather, whether our sin shall be forgiven or no, if we heap one sin upon
an other. Which seems to be the truest sense of the place, by the words
following. as though he should say, Be not bold upon forgiveness to heap
sin upon sin, as though God vvil easily forgive etc.

5 I touched before upon an other occasion, how you add to the text, making
the Apostle say thus, Ephesians. 3. Bib. 1562.
By whom we have boldness and entrance with THE CONFIDENCE WHICH IS by the
faith of him or (as in an other Bible, Bib. 1577. (...).
which is al one) in the confidence by faith of him. The learned and skilful
among you in the Greek tongue, know that this translation is false for two
causes. the one is, because the Greek in that case should be thus, (...) an
other cause is, the point after (...). so that the very simple and sincere
translation is this, we have affiance and access with confidence, by the
faith of him even as else where it is said, we have confidence, 1 Io. 3.
if our heart reprehend us not: we have confidence by keeping the
commandments, by tribulations and afflictions and al good works. Hebr. 10.
2 Cor. 3.
hope also gives us great confidence. Against al which, your translation is
prejudicial, limiting and defining our confidence tovvard God, to be faith, as
though we had no confidence by works, or otherwise.

6 For this confidence by faith only, Beza translateth so vvilfully and
peruersely, that either you were ashamed to follow him, or you lacked a
commodious English word correspondent to his Latin, If I have al faith (says
the Apostle) and have not charity, I am nothing. toiam fidem, (...). 1 Cor.
13. Annot. in No. Test. 1556.
(says Beza) I had rather translate, then, omnem fidem, because the Apostle
means not al kind of faith, to wit, the faith that justifies: but he
means that if a man have the faith of Christ's omniporencie, or of any other
article of the Creed, or of al wholy and entierly and perfectly, that is
nothing without charity. This is Bezas tota fides, whole faith, thinking by
this translation to exempt from the Apostles words their special justifying
faith, and wrestling to that purpose in his annotations against Pighius and
other Catholic Doctors. Whereas every man of small skill may see, (...).
that the Apostle names al faith, as he does al knowledge and al mysteries:
comprehe^ding al sorts of the one and of the other: al kind of knowledge, al
kind of mysteries, al faith whatsoever, Christian, Catholic, historical, or
special, which two later, are Heretical terms newly devised.

7 And I would have any of the Bezites give me a sufficient reason, why he
translated, totam fidem, and not also, totam scientiam. undoubtedly there is no
cause, but the heresy of special and only faith. And again, why he
translateth Iaco. 2, 22. Thou see, that faith was (administra) a helper of
his works: and expounds it thus, faith was an efficient cause and
fruiteful of good works. Whereas the Apostles words be plain, that faith
wrought together with his works, yea and that his faith was by works
made perfect. (...).
This is impudent handling of Scripture, to make works the fruit only and
effect of faith, which is your heresy.

8 Which heresy also must needs be the cause, that, to suppress the
excellency of charity (which the Apostle gives it above faith or any other
gift whatsoever, in these words, And yet I show you a more excellent way 1
Cor. 12. v. 31.) he in one edition of the new Testament ( in the year 1556.)
translateth thus, Behold moreover also I show you a way most diligently.
(...).
What cold stuff is this, and how impertinent? In an other edition (an.
1565.) he mended it thus: And besides I show you a way to excellency. In
neither of both expressing the comparison of preeminence and excellency that
charity has in the Apostles words, and in all the chapter following.
Wherein you did well (for your credit) not to follow him (no not your Bezites
them selves) but to translate after our vulgar Latin interpreter, as it has
alvvaies been read and understood in the Church.

9 Luther was so impudent in this case, that, because the Apostle spoke not
plainly enough for only faith, he thrust (only) into the text of his
translation, * Luther. to. 2 fol. 405. edi. witte^b. an. 1551.
as him self witnesses. You durst not hitherto presume so far in this
question of only faith though * Act. 9, 22. Bib. 1577. 1 Pet. 1, 25. 2 Par. 36,
8. 2 Cor. 5, 21. 1 Pet 2, 13 in the Bib. 1562.
in other controversies you have done the like, as is shevved in their places.
But I vvil ask you a smaller matter, which in words and show you may
perhaps easily answer, but in your conscience there vvil remain a gnavving
worm. In so many places of the Gospel, where our Savior requires the
peoples faith, when he healed them of corporal diseases only, why do you so
gladly translate thus, Mar. 10, 52. Luc. 18, 42. etc. 8. v. 48.
Thy faith has saved thee: rather then thus, thy faith has healed thee, or,
made the whole? is it not, by joining these words together, to make it sound
in English ears, that faith saves or justifies a man? in so much that Beza
notes in the margent thus, fides saluat: that is, faith saves. and your
Geneua Bibles, in that place where it can not be taken for faith that
justifies, because it is not the parties faith, but her fathers that Christ
required, there also translate thus, Believe only, and she shall be saved. Luc.
8, 50.
Which translation, though very false and impertine^t for justifying faith, as
you seem to acknovvledge by translating it otherwise in your other Bibles:
See Goughs sermon and Tom sons answer to the L. Abbot of vvestmester.
yet in deed you must needs maintain and hold it for good, whiles you
allege this place for only faith, as is evident in your vvritings.

10 This then you see is a fallacy, when faith only is required to the health
of the body, as in many such places (though not in all) there by translation to
make it sound a justifying faith, as though faith only were required to the
health of the soul. Whereas that faith was of Christ's omnipote^cie only and
power, Annot. in 1 Cor. 13, 2.
which Beza confesses may be in the devils them selves, and is far from the
faith that justifies. If you say, the Greek signifies as you translate: it
does so in deed, but it signifies also very commonly to be healed corporally,
as (by your own translation) in these places. Bib. 1577.
Marc. 5. v. 28. Marc. 6. v. 36. Luc. 8. v. 36. and v. 51. Where you translate,
I shall be whole. They were healed. He was healed. She shall be made whole.
And why do you here translate so? because you know, to be saved, imports
rather an other thing, to wit, salvation of the soul: and therefore when
faith is joined withal, you translate rather, saved, then healed (though the
place be meant of bodily health only) to insinuate by all means your
justification by only faith.

CHAP. XIII. Heretical translation against PENANCE and SATISFACTION.
UPON the heresy of only faith justifying and saving a man, follows the
denial of al penance and satisfaction for sins. Which Beza so abhors, (
Annot, in Mat. 3. v. 2.) that he makes protestation, that he auoideth these
terms, (...).
Poenitentia, and, Poenitentiam agere, of purpose: and that he will alvvaies
use for them in translating the Greek words resipiscentia, and, resipiscere.
Which he does observe perhaps, but that sometimes he is worse then his
promis, Act. 26.20 in No. Testan. 1556. and in his later translation 1565. Mat
3. v. 8. Luc. 3. v. 8.
translating most falsely and heretically for resipiscentia, resipiscentes: so
that your English Bezites them selves are ashamed to translate after him. Who
otherwise follow his rule for the most part, translating resipiscentia,
amendment of life: and resipiscite, amend your lives. and the other English
bibles when they translat best, say, repentance, and repent: but none of them
all once have the words, penance, and, do penance. Which in most places is
the very true translation, according to the very circumstance of the text, and
use of the Greek word in the Greek Church, (...), Agere poenitentiam.
and the ancient Latin translation thereof and all the fathers reading thereof,
and their expositions of the same. Which four points I think not amiss,
briefly to prove, that the reader may see the use and signification of these
words, which they of purpose will not express, to avoid the terms of,
penance, and, doing penance.

That (...) is to do penance. (...) poenitentia^ egissent.
2 First, that the circumstance of the text does give it so to signify, we
read in Saint Matthew, c. 11, v. 21. If in Tire and Sidon had been wrought the
miracles that have been wrought in you, they had done penance in hearecloth or
sackecloth and ashes long ago. And in S. Luc. c. 10. v. 13. they had done
penance, sitting in sackecloth and ashes. I beseech you, these circunstances
of sackcloth and ashes adjoined, do they signify penance and affliction of
the body, or only ame^dement of life, as you would have the word to signify?
S. Basil says, in Ps. 29. Sackcloth makes for penance. (...).
For the fathers in old time sitting in sackcloth and ashes, did penance. Unless
you vvil translate S. Basil also after your fashion, whom you can not any way
translate, but the sense must needs be, penance, and doing penance. Again S.
Paul says, You were made sorry to penance, or, 2 Co. 7, 9.
to repentance, say which you will: and The sorrow which is according to
God, works penance, or, repentance unto salvation. Is not sorrow and bitter
mourning and affliction, parts of penance? Did the incestuous man whom S.
Paul excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5.
and afterward absolved him because of his exceeding sorrow and tears, 2 Cor.
2.
for fear lest he might be overwhelmed with sorrow, did he I say change his
mind only or amend his life, as you translate the Greek word, and interpret
repentance? did he not penance also for his fault, Mat. 3. Luc. 3. Act. 26.
enjoined of the Apostle? when S. John the Baptist says, and S. Paul
exhorts the like, Do fruits vvorthie of penance, or as you translate, meet
for repentance: Do they not plainly signify penitential works, or the
works of penance? which is the very cause why Beza rather translated in
those places, Fructus dignos ijs qui resipuerint. (...).
Do the fruits meet for them that amend their lives. or, give us some other
good cause o ye Bezites, why your master does so foully falsify his
translation.

3 Secondly, for the signification of this Greek word in all the Greek
Church, and Greek fathers, even from S. Denis the Aeropagite S. Paul's
scholar, who must needs deduce it from the Scriptures, and learn it of the
Apostles: it is most evident, that they use this word for that penance which
was done in the primitive Church according to the penite^tial canons, vvherof
al antiquity of Councels and fathers is full. Ec. Hier. c. 3. in principio.
in so much that S. Denis reckening up the three sorts of persons that were
excluded from seeing and participating of the divine mysteries of Christ's body
and blood, Paenitentes. (...).
to wit, Catechumens, Poenitents, and the possessed of il spirits: for,
Poenitents, he says in the Greek, (...). that is, such as were in their
course of penance, or had not yet done their full penance. Which penance S.
Augustine declares thus: (Ho. 27. inter 50 ho. and ep. 108.) Est poenitentia
grauior. etc. There is a more grievous and more mourneful penance, whereby
proprely they are called in the Church, that are Poenitentes: removed also from
partaking the sacrament of the altar. And the Greek Ecclesiastical history
thus: Sozom. li. 7. c. 16.
In the Church of Rome there is a manifest and known place for the
POENITENTS. and in it they stand sorovvful, and as it were mourning, (...).
See S. Hier. in epitaph. Fabiolae.
and when the sacrifice is ended, being not made partakers thereof, with
weeping and lamentation they cast them selves flat on the ground. then the
Bishop weeping also with compassion lifts them up, and after a certain
time enjoined, absolueth the^ from their penance. This, the Priests, or,
Bishops of Rome keep from the very beginning even until our time.

4 In these words and other in the same chapter, Li. 5. c. 19.
and in Socrates Greek history likewise when they speak of Poenitents, that
confessed and lamented their sins, that were enjoined penance for the same,
and did it: I would demand of our English Graecians, in what Greek words
they express all this. Do they it not in the words which we now speak of,
and which therefore are proved most evidently to signify penance and doing
penance? Again, when the most ancient Counsel of Laodicea can. 2. says,
(...).
That the time of penance should be given to offenders according to the
proportion of the fault: and again, can. 9. That such shall not communicate til
a certain time, but after they have done penance and confessed their fault,
then to be received: and again Can. 19. After the Catechumens are gone out,
that prayer be made of the Penitents, or them that are in doing penance: And
when the first Council of Nice says, can. 12. about shortening or prolonging
the days of penance, that they must well examine their purpose and manner of
doing penance. that is, with what alacrity of mind, tears, patience,
humility, good works, they accomplished the same, and accordingly to deal
more mercifully with them, as is there expressed in the council: when S.
Basil, Can. 1. ad Amphiloch. speaks after the same sort: when S. Chrysostom
calls the sackcloth and fasting of the Ninevites for certain days, tot
dierum poenitentiam, so many days penance: in all these places, I would gladly
know of our English Grecians, whether these speeches of penance and doing
penance, are not expressed by the said Greek words, which they vvil in no
case so to signify.

5 Or, I would also ask them, whether in these places they vvil translate,
repentance, and, amendment of life, where there is mentioned a prescript time
of satisfaction for their fault by such and such penal means: whether there
be any prescript times of repentance or amendment of life, to continue so
long, and no longer: if not, then must it needs be translated, Penance, and,
doing penance, which is longer or shorter according to the fault and the manner
of doing the same. I may repent in a moment, and amend my life at one instant,
and this repentance and amendment ought to continue for ever. but the holy
Councels and fathers speak of a thing to be done for certain years or days,
and to be released at the Bishops discretion: this therefore is penance, and not
repentance only or amendeme^t of life, and is expressed by the foresaid Greek
words, as also by * (...).
an other equivalent thereunto.

6 I omit that this very phrase, to do penance, is word for word expressed
thus in Greek, Litur. Chrysostom. in rubricis, page 69. 104.
(...). And Ausonius the Xp^ian Poet (whom I may as well allege once, and
use it not, Metanoea.
as they do Virgil, Terence, and the like very often) uses this Greek word
so evidently in this sense, Annot. in 3 Mat. v. 2.
that Beza says, he did it for his verse sake, because an other word would
not stand so well in the verse. But the reader (I trust) sees the use and
signification of these Greek words by the testimony of the Greek fathers
them selves, most ancient and approved.

7 Thirdly, that the ancient Latin Interpreter does commonly so translate
these words through out the new Testament, (...) Poenite^tiam agere.
that needs no proof, neither vvil I stand upon it (though it be greater
authority then they have any to the contrary) because the Adversaries know
it and mislike it, and for that and other like points it is belike, that one
of them says it is the vvorst translation of al, Discou. of Sand. Rock page
147. Prae fat. in No. Test. an. 1556.
whereas Beza his Master says it is the best of al. so well they agree in
judgment, the Master and the man.

8 I come to the fourth proof, which is, that all the Latin Church and the
glorious Doctors thereof have alvvaies read as the vulgar Latin interpreter
translateth these words, and expound the same of penance, and doing penance.
To name one or two for an example, Ep. 108.
S. Augustines place is very notable, which therefore I set down, and may be
translated thus: Agunt homines poenitentiam. Act. 2.
Men do penance before Baptism, of their former sins, yet so that they be
also baptized, Peter saying thus, DO YE PENANCE, AND LET EVERY ONE BE
BAPTIZED. Men also do penance, if after Baptism they do so sin, that they
deserve to be excommunicated and reconciled again, as in all Churches they do
which be called, Sicut agunt qui Poenite^tes appellantur.
POENITENTES. For of such penance spakes S* Paul, 2 Cor. 12, 21. saying, THAT I
LAMENT NOT MANY OF THEM WHICH BEFORE HAVE SINNED, AND HAVE NOT DONE PENANCE FOR
THEIR UNCLEANNESS. We have also in the Acts, Act. 8, 18.
that Simon Magus being baptized, was admonished by Peter TO DO PENANCE for
his grievous sin. Vt agerat poenitentia^.
There is also in manner a daily Penance of the good and humble believers, in
which we knock our breasts, saying, FORGIVE US OUR DETTES. For these
(venial and daily offenses) fastes and alms and prayers are vvatchfully used,
Quotidiana^ agere poenitontiam.
and humbling our souls we cease not after asort to do daily penance.

9 In these words of S. Augustine it is plain that he speaks of painful or
penitential works for satisfaction of sins, that is, penance: again, that
there are three kinds of the same, one before Baptism, an other after
Baptism for great offenses, greater and longer: the other daily for common and
little venial faults which the best men also commit in this frail nature.
again, that the two former are signified and spoken of in the three places of
Scripture by him alleged. Where we see, that he reads altogether as the
vulgar interpreter translateth, and expounds al three places of penance for
sin, and so approves that signification of the Greek word. Yea in saying
that for venial sins we knock our breast, fast, give alms, and pray, and
so cease not Quotidianam agere poenitentiam: what does he mean but daily
penance and satisfaction? Read also S. Cyprian (beside other places) epist.
52. number. 6. Where his citatio^s of Scripture are according to the old Latin
interpreter, and his exposition according, of doing penance, and making
satisfaction for sins committed. But I need not proceed further in alleging
either S. Cyprian or other ancient fathers for this purpose, because the
Adversaries grant it. Howbeit in what terms they grant it, and how
malapertly they accuse all the ancient fathers at once for the same, it shall
not be amiss here to put down their words.

10 Whereas the reverend, godly, and learned Father, Edmund Campion, had
objected in his book, the Protestants accusation of S. Cyprian for the matter
of penance the good man that answers for both universities, says thus to
that point: Whitaker. pa. 97. cont. ration. Edm. Camp.
But whereas Magdeburgenses (Lutheran vvriters of that city) complain that
he depraved the doctrine of repentance, they do not feine or forge this crime
against him, but utter or disclose it. Doctrinam poenitentiae.
For all men understand that it was to true. Neither was this Cyprians fault
alone, De poenitentia. Imprude^ter.
that he vvrote of repentance many things incommodiously and vnvvisely, but all the most holy fathers almost at that time were in the same error. For vvhiles
thy desired to restrain men's manners by severe laws, Poenitentiae.
they made the greatest part of repentance to consist in certain external
discipline of life, which them selves prescribed. In that they punished vice
severely, they were to be borne withal: but that by this means they thought to
pay the pains due for sins, and to satisfy Gods justice, and to procure to
them selves assured impunitie, remission, and justice, therein they derogated
not a little from Christ's death, attributed to much to their own inventions,
and finally depraved repentance. Thus far the Ansvverer.

11 Mark how he accuses the fathers in general of no less crime, then
taking away from Christ the merits of his Passion, attributing it to their
own penance and discipline. Which if they did, I marvel he should call them
in this very place where he begins to charge them with such a crime,
sanctissimos patres, most holy fathers. The truth is, he might as well charge
S. Paul with the same, when he says, Romans 2.
we shall Be the heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, yet so, if we
suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. S. Paul says, our
suffering also with Christ, is necessary to salvation: Master vvhitakers
says, it is a derogatio^ to Christ's suffering. Christ fasted for us, therefore
our fasting makes nothing to salvation. He prayed for us, was scourged, and
died for us: therefore our prayer, scourging, and emprisonment, yea and death it
self for his sake, make nothing to life everlasting, and if we should think
it does, we derogate from Christ's Passion. Alas, is this the divinity of
England now a days? to make the simple believe that the ancient fathers and
holy men of the primitive Church by their severe life and voluntary penance
for their sins and for the love of Christ, did therein derogate from Christ's
merits and Passions?

12 I may not stand upon this point, neither need I. the principal matter is
proved by the Adversaries confession, that the holy Doctors spoke, vvrote, and
thought of penance and doing penance as we do, in the same terms both Greek
and Latin: and with Catholics it is alvvaies a good argument, and we desire
no better proof, then this, The Protestants grant, all the ancient fathers
were of our opinion, and they say it was their error. For, the first part
being true, it is madness to dispute, whether all the ancient fathers erred,
or rather the new Protestants. as it is more then madness to think that
Luther alone might see the truth more then a thousand Augustines, a thousand
Cyprians, a thousand Churches. Which not vvithstanding the palpable absurdity
thereof, page 101.
yet M. Whitakers avouches it very solemnly.

13 And yet again (that the reader may see how they play fast and loose at
their pleasure) this is the man that when he has given us all the fathers on
our side not only in the matter of penance, page 109.
but also * page 101.
in invocation of Saints, and in diverse other errors, as he calls them:
the very same man (I say) in the very next leaves almost, page 114. 117.
renevveth M. Iuels old brag, that we have not one clear sentence for us of
any one father within six hundred years after Christ, and again, that the
same faith reigns now in England, which these fathers professed. What
faith, M. vvhitakers? not their faith concerning penance, or invocation of
Saints (as your self confess) or other such like errors of theirs as you
term them. Why are you so forgetful or rather so impudent to speak
contraries in so little a room? Such simple answering vvil not serve your
adversaries learned book, which you in vain go about by foolish Rhetorike
to disgrace, when the world sees you are driven to the wall, and either can
say nothing, or do say that, which confuteth it self with the evident
absurdity thereof.

14 But to leave M. Whitakers (who is a simple companion, to sit in judgment
upon all the ancient Doctors, and to condemn them of heinous error in the
matter of penance) I trust the reader sees by the former discourse, the usual
Ecclesiastical signification, and consequently both the true and false
translation of the foresaid Greek words. (...).
Not that they must or may alvvaies be translated, (...).
penance, or, doing penance. For in the Scriptures God is said Poenitentiam
agere, (...).
who can not be said to do penance, no more then he can be said to amend his
life, as the Protestants commonly translate this word. Therefore I conclude,
that this word being spoken of God in the Scriptures, is no more prejudice
against our translation of doing penance, then it is against theirs, of
amendment of life. Likewise when it is spoken of the reprobate and damned in
hell: (...) Sap. 5. Poenite^tiam agentes.
who as they can not do penance proprely, so much less amend their lives.

15 Moreover, it is purposely against penance, that they translate amiss both
in Daniel and Esdras, Esd. c 9. Dan. 10.
whose voluntary mourning, fasting, afflicting of them selves for their own
sins and the peoples, is notoriously set forth in their books. There they
make the Angel say thus to Daniel. v. 12. Bib. 1579.
From the first day that thou did set thine heart TO HVMBLE thy self. What is
this humbling him self? can we gather any penance thereby? none at al. but if
they had said according to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, (...) vt te
affligeres.
from the first day that thou did set thine heart TO AFFLICY thy self, (...)
we should easily conceive works of penance, and it would include Daniels
mourning, fasting from flesh, wine, and other meats, abstaining from
ointments, the space of the days, mentioned in the beginning of the same
chapter.

16 Again, in all their bibles of the years 1562. 1577. 1579. they make Esdras
c. 9, 5. after his exceeding great penance, (...).
say only this, About the evening sacrifice I arose up from my HEAVINESS.
neither translating the Hebrew, (...)
which is the same word that in Daniel, nor the Greek, which signifies
affliction and humiliation.

17 Again, in the prophet Malachie (c. 3, 14.) they translate thus: Ye have
said, It is but vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept
his commandments and vvalked HVMBLY before his face? What is this same,
humbly? when we say in English, he goes humbly: we imagine or conceive no
more but this, that he is an humble man and behaueth him self humbly. but they
know very well, the Prophet speaks of an other thing: and if it had pleased
them to have translated the Hebrew word fully and significantly in the sense
of the holy Ghost, (...)
they might have learned by conference of other places where the same Hebrew
word is used, that it signifies such heaviness, sadness, sorovvfulnes, and
affliction, as men express by black mourning garments, the nature of the
word importing blacknes, darkness, lovvring, and the like. Which is far more
then vvalking humbly, and which is wholy suppressed by so translating. See
the Psalm 34. v. 14. Ps. 37. v. 7. Ps. 41. v. 10. Where the Prophet uses
many words and speeches to express sorovvful penance: (...).
and for that which in Latin is alvvaies, contristatus, in Greek a word more
significant, (...)
in Hebrew it is the same kind of word that they translate, humbly. Whereas
in deed this word has no signification of humility proprely, no not of that
humility I mean which is rather to be called humiliation or affliction, as
the Greek words implie. But it signifies proprely the very manner, (...).
countenance, gesture, habit of a pensife or forlorn man: and if they vvil
say, that they so translate it in other places, the more is their fault, that
knovving the nature of the word, they vvil notvvithstanding suppress the
force and signification thereof in any one place, and so translate it, that the
reader must needs take it in an other sense, and can not possibly conceive
that which the word imports. for, to walk humbly, sounds in all English
ears, the virtue of humility, which this word does never signify, and not
humility or humiliation by affliction, which it may signify, though
secondarely and by deduction only.

18 Again, what is it else but against penance and satisfaction, that they
deface these usual and known words of Daniel to the King, Redime
eleemosynis peccatatua, Dan. 4, 24.
Redeem thy sins with alms: (...).
altering and translating it thus, Break of thy sins by righteousness. First,
the Greek is against them, which is word for word according to the vulgar
and common reading: Secondly, (...)
the Chaldee word which they translate, break of, by Munsters own judgment
in lexico Chald. signifies rather and more principally, to redeem. Thirdly,
the other word which they translate, righteousness, in the Scriptures
signifies also, eleemosynam, as the Greek interpreters translate it Deuteronomy. 6.
and 24. and it is most plain in S. Matthew, where our Savior says (Mat. 6.
v. 1) Bevvare you do not your justice before men. (...).
Which is in other Greek copies, your alms. And S. Augustine proves it by
the very text. in Ps. 49. v. 5
for (says he) as though a man might ask, what justice? he adds, WHEN THOU
DO AN ALMS DEED. He signified therefore that alms are the works of
justice. Psalm. 111.
And in the Psalm. they are made one, He distributed, he gave to the poor, his
justice remains for ever and ever. Which Beza translateth, his beneficence
or liberality remains etc. Again, S. Hierom a sufficient Doctor to tell the
signification of the Hebrew or Chaldee words, both translateth it so, and
expounds it so in his commentary. Moreover, the words that immediately
follow in Daniel, interpret it so unto us, And thy iniquities with mercies to
the poor. Annot. in Mat. 6. v. 1.
Lastly, Beza him self says, that by the name of justice with the Hebrews, is
also signified beneficence or beneficialnes to the poor, yea and that in this
place of Daniel it is specially taken for alms. 2 Cor. 9.
So that we see there is no impediment neither in the Chaldee nor Greek, why
they might not have said, as the Church of God alvvaies has said, Redeem thy
sins with alms, and thy iniquities with mercies to the poor, but their
Heresy will not suffer them to speak after the Catholic manner, that alms
and merciful deeds are a redemption, ransom, and satisfaction for sins.

19 And what a miserable humor is it in these cases, to fly as far as they
can from the ancient received speech of holy Scripture, that has so many
years sounded in all faithful ears, and to invent new terms and phrases, when
the original text both Greek and Hebrew favors the one as much, or more,
then the other. as, that they choose to say in the Epistle to Titus (where the
Apostle excedingly exhorts to good works) maintain good works, and,
show forth good works, rather then according to the ancient Latin
translation, bonis operibus praeesse, (...).
to be chief and principal in doing good works, which is the very true and
usual signification of the Greek word, and implies a virtuous emulation
among good men, who shall do most good works or excel in that kind. But
they that look to be saved by faith only, no marvel if neither their doings
nor translations tend to any such excellency.

CHAP. XIIII. Heretical translation against the holy SACRAMENTS, namely
BAPTISM and CONFESSION.
1 AN other sequel of their only faith is, that the Sacraments also help
nothing tovvard our salvation, and therefore they partly take them clean
away, partly deprive them of al grace, virtue, and efficacy, making them
poor and beggarly elements, either worse, or no better then those of the old
Law.

2 For this purpose Beza is not content to speak as the Apostle does, (...).
( To. 4. v. 11.) that circumcision was a seal of the justice of faith, but
because he thinks that, to small a term for the dignity of circumcision, as
him self confesses, libens refugiquod obsignaret, for, sigillum.
he gladly auoideth is (I use his own words) and for the Novvne puts the
Verb, so dissolutely and presumptuously, that the English Bezites them selves
here also dare not follow him in translation, though in opinion they agree. The
cause of his willful translation he declares in his Annotations upon the same
place, to wit, the dignity of circumcision, equal with any Sacrament of the
new Testament. His words be these. What (says he) could be spoken more
magnifical of any Sacrament? therefore they that put a real difference between
the Sacraments of the old Testament and ours, never seem to have known how
far Christ's office extends. Which he says, not to magnify the old, but to
disgrace the new.

3 Which is also the cause why not only he, but the English Bibles (for
commonly they join hands and agree together) to make no difference between
John's Baptism and Christ's, translate thus concerning certain that had not yet
received the holy Ghost: Unto what then were ye baptized? Act. 19.3.
And they said, unto John's Baptism. Which Beza in a long discourse proves to
be spoken of John's doctrine, and not of his baptism in water. As though it
were said, what doctrine then do ye profess? and they said, John's. Whereas
in deed the question is this, and ought thus to be translated, In what then
or wherein were you baptized? And they said, In John's Baptism. As who
should say, we have received John's Baptism, but not the holy Ghost as yet.
and therefore it follows immediately, then they were baptized in the name of
Jesus, and after imposition of hands the Holy Ghost came upon them. Whereby
is plainly gathered, that being baptized with John's baptism before, and yet
of necessity baptized afterward with Christ's baptism also, there must
needs be a great difference between the one baptism and the other, John's
being insufficient. And that this is the deduction which troubles these
Bezites, and makes them translate accordingly, Beza (as commonly still he
utters his grief) tells us in plain words thus. It is not necessary,
Annot. in Act. 19.
that wheresoever there is mention of John's Baptism, we should think it to
be the very ceremony of Baptism. therefore they that gather John's Baptism to
have been diverse from Christ's, because these a little after are said to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, have no sure foundation. Lo, how of
purpose he translateth and expounds it John's doctrine, not John's Baptism, to
take away the foundation of this Catholic conclusion, that his baptism
differs and is far inferior to Christ's.

4 But does the Greek lead him or force him to this translation, (...)
In quid? unto what? First him self confesses in the very same place the
contrary, that the Greek phrase is often used in the other sense, wherein,
or vvherevvith, as it is in the vulgar Latin and Erasmus: but that in his
judgment it does not so signify here, and therefore he refuses it. Yet in the
very next verse almost, where it is said by the same Greek phrase, that they
were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, (...)
there both he and his, so translate it as we do, and not, unto the name of
Christ. Is it not plain, that al is voluntary, and at their pleasure? For (I
beseech them) if it be a right translation, baptized in the name of Jesus:
why is it not right, baptized in the baptism of John? Is there any difference
in the Greek? none. Where then? in their commentaries and imaginations only,
against which we oppose and set both the text and the commentaries of all the
fathers.

5 But no marvel if they disgrace the baptism of Christ, when they are bold
also to take it away altogether: interpreting this Scripture, 10.3. v. 5.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God, which a man would think were plain enough to prove
that Baptism in water is necessary: interpreting (I say) this Scripture, Of
water and the Spirit, thus: of water, Beza in. 4.10. v. 10. and in Tit. 3. v.
5.
that is, the Spirit: making water to be nothing else in this place but the
Spirit allegorically, and not material water. As though our Savior had said
to Nicodemus, Unless a man be borne of water, I mean, of the spirit, he can
not enter, etc. According to this most impudent exposition of plain
Scriptures, Calvin translateth also as impudently for the same purpose in the
epistle to Titus, c. 3. v. 5. Per lauacru^ regenerationis Sp. sancti QVOD
offudit in nos abunde.
making the Apostle to say, that God povvred the water of regeneration upon us
abundantly, that is, the holy Ghost. And lest we should not understand his
meaning herein, he tells us in his commentary upon this place, that when
the Apostle says, Water povvred out abundantly, he speaks not of material
water, but of the holy Ghost. Now in deed the Apostle says not, that water
was povvred upon us, but the holy Ghost. neither does the Apostle make water
and the holy Ghost al one, but most plainly distinguishes them, saying, that
God of his mercy has saved us by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of
the Holy Ghost, Quem effudit as Beza him self translateth.
whom he has povvred upon us abundantly. See how plainly the Apostle
speaks both of the material water or washing of Baptism, and of the effect
thereof which is the holy Ghost povvred upon us. Calvin takes away water
clean and vvil have him speak only of the holy Ghost, Comment. in hunc locum.
which Flaccus Illyricus the Lutheran him self vvondereth at, that any man
should be so bold, and calls it plain sacrilege against the efficacy of the
Sacraments.

6 And if we should here accuse the English translatours also, that translate
it thus, by the fountain of the regeneration of the holy Ghost, WHICH he
shed on us, etc. making it indifferent, either which fountain, or, which
holy Ghost he shed, etc: they would answer by and by that the Greek also
is indifferent: but if a man should ask them further, whether the holy Ghost
may be said to be shed, or rather a fountain of water, they must needs
confess, not the holy Ghost, but water: and consequently that they
translating, which he shed, would have it meant of the fountain of water,
and so they agree just with Caluins translation, and leave Beza, Sp. sancti,
que effudit.
who in his translation refers it only to the holy Ghost, as we do: but
in his commentary plaieth the Heretic as Calvin does.

7 Of the Sacrament of penance I have spoken before, concerning that part
specially which is satisfaction: here I will only add of Confession, that to
avoid this term (namely in such a place where the reader might easily gather
Sacramental confession) they translate thus, (...), Whereof Confession is
called in S. Cyprian and other fathers, Exemologesis.
Acknovvledge your faults one to an other. Iac. 5. It is said a little before,
If any be diseased, let him bring in Priests, etc. And then it follows,
Confess your faults. etc. But they to make al sure, for, Confess, say,
Acknovvledge: and for Priests, Elders. What mean they by this? If this
acknovvledging of faults one to an other before death be indifferently to be
made to al men, why do they appoint in their Communion-booke (as it seems
out of this place) that the sick person shall make a special confession to the
Minister, In the order of visitation of the sick.
and he shall absolve him in the very same form of absolution that Catholic
Priests use in the Sacrament of Confession. again, if this acknovvledging of
faults be specially to be made to the Minister or Priest, why translate they
it not by the word Confessing and confession, as well as by, Acknovvledging,
and why is not this confession a Sacrament, where them selves acknovvledge
forgiveness of sins by the Minister? These contradictions and repugnance of
their practice and translation, if they can vvittely and vvisely reconcile,
they may perhaps in this point satisfy the reader. But whether the Apostle
speak here of Sacramental confession or no, sincere translators should not
have fled from the proper and most usual word of confession or confessing,
consonant both to the Greek and Latin, and indifferent to whatsoever the
holy Ghost might mean, as this word, acknovvledge, is not.

CHAP. XV. Heretical translation against the Sacrament of HOLY ORDERS, and for
the MARRIAGE OF PRIESTS and VOTARIES.
1 AGAINST the Sacrament of Orders what can they do more in translation, then
in all their Bibles to take away the name of Priest and Priesthod of the New
Testament altogether, and for it to say, Elder and Eldership? Whereof I treated
more at large Chap. 6.
in an other place of this book. Here I add these fevv observations, that
both for Priests and Deacons, which are two holy orders in the Catholic
Church, they translate, Ministers, to commend that new degree devised by them
selves. Ecclici. c. 7. v. 31.
As when they say in all their bibles, Fear the Lord with al thy soul, and
honor his ministers. in the Greek it is plain thus, (...).
and honor his Priests. as the word alvvaies signifies, and in the very next
sentence them selves so translate, (...).
Fear the Lord and honor the Priests. but they would needs borovv one of
these places for the honor of Ministers. As also in the epistle to Timothee,
1. Tim. 3.
where S. Paul talks of Deacons, and names them twice: they in the first
place translate thus, Bib. 1562. and 1577.
Likewise must the Ministers be honest etc. And a little after, Let the Deacons
be the husbads of one wife. Lo, the Greek word being one, (...).
and the Apostle speaking of one Ecclesiastical order of Deacons, and Beza so
interpreting it in both places, yet our English translatours have allowed the
first place to their Ministers, and the second to Deaco^s. and so (because
Bishops also went before) they have found us out their three orders, Bishops,
Ministers and Deacons. Alas poor souls, that can have no place in Scripture
for their Ministers, but by making the Apostle speak three things for two.

2 There are in the Scripture that are called ministers in infinite places, and
that by three Greek words commonly: but that is a large signification of
minister, (...).
attributed to all that minister, wait, serve, or attend to do any service
Ecclesiastical or temporal, sacred or profane. If the word be restrained to
any one peculiar service or function, as one of the Greek words is, then
does it signify Deaco^s only. Which if they know not, or vvil not believe
me, let them see Beza him self in his Annotations upon S. Matthew, Annot. e.
5. v. 25.
who protests that in his translation he uses alvvaies the word, Minister,
in the general signification: and, Diaconus, in the special and peculiar
Ecclesiastical function of Deacons. So that yet we can not understand, neither
can they tell us, whence their peculiar calling and function of Minister
comes, which is their second degree under a Bishop, and is placed in steed
of Priests.

3 Again, what can be more against the dignity of sacred orders and
Ecclesiastical degrees, then to make them profane and secular by their terms
and translations? For this purpose, as they translate, Elders and Eldership,
for, Priests and Priesthod, so do they most impudently term S. Peter and S.
John, (...), Act. 4. Bib. 1562. (...). For messenger and legate the Scripture
uses these words, (...).
lay men: they say for Apostle, Ambassador, and Messenger: Io. 13. v. 16. and
for Apostles of the Churches, Messengers of the same: 2 Cor. 8. for Bishops,
overseers Act. 20. Why my masters, does idiota signify a lay man? Suppose a
lay man be as wise and learned as any other, is he idiota? or that one of your
Ministers be as unlearned and ignorant as any shepherd, is he not idiota? so
then idiota is neither clerk nor lay man, but every simple and ignorant man.
They that spoke with miraculous tongues in the primitive Church, were they
not lay men many of them? 1 Cor. 14.25.24.
yet the Apostle plainly distinguishes them from idiota. So that this is more
ignorantly or vvilfully translated, then Neophytus, a young scholar, 1 Timothy 3.
in all your Bibles.

4 Now for changing the name Apostle into Messenger, though Beza do so also in
the foresaid places, yet in deed he controuleth both him self and you in other
places, saying of the same word, Apostles: Annot in c. 10. Mat. v. 2.
A man may say in Latin, legates, but we have gladly kept the Greek word
(Apostle) as many other words familiar to the Church of Christ. Annot. in To.
16. v. 7. and in 2 Cor. 8. v. 23.
And not only of the principal Apostles, but also of the other Disciples he
both translateth and interprets in his comentarie, that they are notable
Apostles. and he proves that al Ministers of the word (as he terms them)
are and may be so called. And for your Overseers, he says, Episcopos, and not,
Superintendentes. Which he might as well have said, as you, Overseers, But to
say the truth, though he be to to profane, yet he does much more keep and use
the Ecclesiastical received terms, then you do, often protesting it and as it
were glorying therein, In tit. Eua^g. Math. and in c. 3. v. 11. etc. 10. v. 2.
etc. 5. v. 25.
against Castaleon especially. As, when he says Presbyterum, where you say
Elder: Diaconu^, where you say, Minister, and so forth. Where if you tell me
that howsoever he translate, he means as profanely as you, I believe you,
and therefore you shall go together, like Master, like Scholars, al false and
profane translatours. for, this Beza (who sometime so gladly keeps the name
of Apostle) yet calls Epaphroditus legatum Philippensium, Philip. 2. v. 15.
Whereupon the English Bezites translate, your messenger, for, your Apostle. As
if S. Augustine who was our Apostle, should be called, our messenger.

5 As also, when you translate of S. Matthias the Apostle, no. Test. 1580.
that he was by a common consent counted with the eleven Apostles: Act. 1. v.
26. what is it else but to make only a popular election of Ecclesiastical
degrees, Annot. ibid. and Act. 14. v. 23.
as Beza in his Annotations would have us to understand, saying, that nothing
was done here peculiarly by Peter as one of more excellent dignity then the
rest, but in common by the voices of the whole Church. though in an other
place upon this election he notes Peter to be the chief or Corypheus. And as
for the Greek word in this place, (...).
if partiality of the cause would suffer him to consider of it, he should
find, that the proper signification thereof in this phrase of speech, is, as
the vulgar Latin interpreter, Erasmus, and Valla (al which he rejects)
translate it, to wit, He was numbered, or, Annumeratus est. cooptatus est.
counted with the eleven Apostles, without al respect of common consent or
not consent. as you also in your other bibles do translate.

6 Which diversity may proceed of the diversity of opinions among you. For
we understand by Master vvhitegiftes books against the Puritanes, His
defense, or 2 book page 157.
that he and his fellows deny this popular election, and give preeminence,
superiority, and difference in this case to Peter, and to Ecclesiastical
Prelates. and therefore he proves at large the use and Ecclesiastical
signification of the Greek word (...), not to be the giving of voices in
popular elections, but to be the Ecclesiastical imposing of hands upon persons
taken to the Churches ministry. Which he says very truly, and needs the
less here to be spoken of, specially being touched chap. 6. nu. 7
else where in this book.

7 One thing only we would know, why they that plead so earnestly against
their brethren the Puritanes, about the signification of this word, pretending
herein only the primitive custom of imposition of hands in making their
Ministers, why (I say) them selves translate not this word accordingly, Bib.
1577.
but altogether as the Puritanes, thus: When they had ordained them elders by
election in every Church. (...).
Act. 14. v. 23. For if the Greek word signify here the peoples giving of
voices (as Beza forces it only that way out of Tullie and the popular custom
of old Athens) then the other signification of imposing hands is gone, which
Master Whitgift defends, and the popular election is brought in, which he
refelleth: and so by their translation they have in my opinion ouershot them
selves, and given advantage to their brotherly Adversaries. Unless in deed they
translate as they think, because in deed they think as heretically as the
other, but yet because their state of Ecclesiastical regiment is otherwise,
they must maintain that also in their vvritings, how so ever they translate.
For an example, They al agree to translate Elder for Priest: and M. Whitakers
tells us a fresh in the name of them all, Page 200. ad rat. Camp.
that there are no Priests now in the Church of Christ, that is (as he
interprets him self) This name Priest is never in the New Testament
peculiarly applied to the Ministers of the Gospel, page 210.
this is their doctrine. But what is their practice in the regiment of their
Church? clean contrary. For in the order of the communion book, where it is
appointed what the Minister shall do, it is indifferently said, Then shall the
Priest do or say this and that: and, Then shall the Minister, etc. Whereby it
is evident that they make Priest a proper and peculiar calling applied to their
Ministers, and so their practice is contrary to their teaching and doctrine.

8 Now concerning imposition or laying on of hands in making their Ministers
(which the Puritanes also are forced to allow by other words of Scripture,
Beza Annot. Act. 6, v. 6.
howsoever they dispute and iangle against (...)) none of them all make more
of it, then of the like Iudaical ceremony in the old Law, not acknovvledging
that there is any grace given withal, though the Apostle say there is, in
express terms. but they will answer this text (as they are wont) with a
favorable translation, turning grace, 1 Timoth. 4. v. 14.
into gift. As, when the Apostle says thus, Neglect not THE GRACE that is in
thee, (...).
which is given thee by prophecy, with imposition of the hands of
Priesthod, they translate, Neglect not the GIFT. and Beza most impudently for,
by prophecy, (...).
translateth, to prophecy: making that only to be this gift, and vvithal
adding this goodly exposition, that he had the gift of prophecy or preaching
before, and now by imposition of hands was chosen only to execute that
function. But because it might be objected that the Apostle says, Which was
given thee with the imposition of hands, or (as he speaks in an other
place) by impositio^ of hands, making this imposition of hands an
instrumental cause of giving this grace, 2 Timothy 1.
he says that it did only confirm the grace or gift before given.

9 Thus it is evident that, though the Apostle speak never so plain for the
dignity of holy Orders, that it gives grace, and consequently is a Sacrament,
they pervert all to the contrary, making it a bare ceremony, suppressing the
word grace, which is much more significant to express the Greek word,
(...).
then gift is, because it is not every gift, but a gracious gift, or a gift
proceeding of marvelous and mere grace. as when it is said, Phil. cap. 1. v. 29.
To you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer for him. the Greek
word signifies this much, To you this grace is given, etc. So when God gave
unto S. Paul all that sailed with him, (...). Act. 27.
this Greek word is used, because it was a great grace or gracious gift
given unto him. When S. Paul pardoned the incestuous person before due time, 2
Cor. 2.
it is expressed by this word,. because it was a grace (as * (...).
Theodorete calls it) given unto him. and therefore also the alms of the
Corinthians, (...).
1 Cor. 16. v. 3. are called, their grace, which the Protestants translate,
liberality, neglecting altogether the true force and signification of the
Greek words.

10 But concerning the Sacrament of orders, as in the first to Timothee, 2.
Tim. ^^ v. 6.
so in the second also, they suppress the word grace, and call it barely and
coldly, gift, saying: I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift
of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. Where if they had
said, the grace of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands: then
were it plain that S. Paul by the ceremony of imposing hands upon Timothee
in making him Priest or Bishop, gave him grace: and so it should be a very
Sacrament of holy Orders. for avoiding whereof they translate otherwise, or
else let them give us an other reason thereof, specially the Greek word much
more signifying grace, then a bare gift, as is declared.

11 The more to profane this sacred order, whereunto continency and single
life has been alvvaies annexed in the new Testament for the honor and
reverence of the functions thereunto belonging, to profane the same (I say) and
to make it merc laical and popular, they vvil have all to be married men, yea
those that have vowed the contrary: and it is a great credit among them, for
our Priests Apostataes to take vviues. This they would deduce from the Apostles
custom, but by most false and impudent translation: making S. Paul say thus as
of his own wife and the other Apostles vviues, Have not we power to lead
about a wife being a sister, 1 Cor. 9. v. 5. No. Test. 1580.
as well as the rest of the Apostles? Whereas the Apostle says nothing else
but, (...). Mat. 27.
a woman a sister, that is, a Christian woman, meaning such holy women as
followed Christ, and the Apostles, to find and maintain them of their
substance. Li. 1. aduers. Iouin. De op. mon. cap. 4.
So does S. Hierom interpret it, and S. Augustine, both directly proving that
it can not be translated, wife, but, woman: and the Greek fathers most
expressly. And as for the Greek word, if they say it is ambiguous, in
Collecta^. Occu. super hu^c locum.
S. Augustine tells them that as the Apostle has put it down with all the
circumstances, there is no ambiguitie at all that might deceine any man. yea let
us set a part the circumstances, and consider the Greek word alone in it
self, and Beza vvil tell us in other places, Annot. Mat. 5. v. 28. and 1. Cor.
7. v. 1.
that it signifies a woman rather then a wife: reprehending Erasmus for
translating it, wife, because there is no Quia non additur (...), aut (...).
circumstance annexed why it should so signify: thereby declaring that of it
self it signifies woman, and therefore much more when the circumstance also
(as S. Augustine faith makes it certain, that so it does signify.

12 Wherefore great must the impudenc^ of Beza be (and of the English Bezites)
that knovving this and protesting it else where in his Annotations, yet here
translateth, sororem vxorem, a sister a wife, and saying after his lordly
manner, I doubted not so to translate it, disputing and reasoning against al
other interpreters both ancient and later, for the contrary, inepte faceret.
yea and affirming that S. Paul him self, did foolishly, if he spoke there of
other rich vvome^. Such a fancy he has to make the Apostles not only married
men, but that they carried about their vviues with them, and that they were
the Apostles vviues, (for so he translateth it Act. 1. v. 14.) that returned
with them after our Lords asce^sion to Jerusalem, Cum vxoribus.
and continued together in prayer til the Holy Ghost came upon them. Whereas S.
Luke there speaks so evidently of the other holy and faithful women which are
famous in the Gospel (as the Mary's and other) that the English Bezites them
selves dare not here follow his translation. For I beseech you Master Beza
(to turn my talk unto you a little) is there any circumsta^ce or particle here
added why it should be translated vviues? none. (...). Vxore^ non tangere.
(...).
then by your own reason before alleged it should rather be translated,
women. Again, did Erasmus translate well, saying, It is good for a man not to
touch a wife? 1 Cor. 7. v. 1. No, say you, reprehending this translation,
because it dehorteth from marriage. if not, show your commission why you may
translate it in the foresaid places, wife, and, vviues, at your pleasure: the
Greek being all one, both where you will not in any wise have it translated,
wife, and also where you will have it so translated in any wise.

13 Again, to this purpose they make S. Paul say as to his wife, (...).
I beseech thee also faithful yokefellovv Phil. 4. v. 3: for in English what
does it else sound but man and wife? but that S. Paul should here mean his
wife, most of the Greek fathers count it tidiculous and folish, S.
Chrysostom, Theodorete, Oecumenius, Sorry germane. Theophylacte says, if he
spoke to a vvoma^, it should be (...) in the Greek.
Theophylactus. Beza and Calvin both mislike it, translating also in the
masculine gender, S. Paul him self says the contrary that he had no wife, 1
Cor. 7. And as for Clemens Alexandrinus who alleges it for Paul's wife,
Eusebius plainly insinuates, Li. 2. c. 24.
and Nicephorus expressly says, that he did it (...), by the way of contention
and disputation, vvhiles he earnestly vvrote against them that oppugned
matrimony.

14 Again, for the marriage of Priests and of al sorts of men indifferently,
they translate the Apostle thus: Hebr. 13.
vvedlocke is honorable among al men. Where one falsification is, that they
say, among al men, and Beza, inter quosuis, and in the margent, * no. Test. an.
1565.
in omni hominu^, ordine, in every order or condition of men, and in his
Annotation he raileth, to make this translation good: whereas the Greek is as
indifferent to signify, that marriage is honorable by all means, (...).
in all respects, wholy, thoroughly, altogether. So does not only Erasmus, but
also the Greek fathers expound it, namely Theophylacte, See Occum. in catena.
whose words in the Greek be very significa^t, but to long here to trouble
the reader with them. Not in part says he, honorable, and in part not: but
wholy, throughout, by all means honorable and undefiled, in all ages, in all
times. Therefore to restrain it in translation to persons only (though it may
also very well be understood of al persons that have no impediment to the
contrary) that is to translate falsely.

15 An other and the like falsification in this same short sentence, is, that
they make it an affirmative speech, by adding, is: whereas the Apostles
words be these, (...).
Marriage honorable in all, and the bed undefiled. Which is rather an
exhortation, as if he should say, Let marriage he honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled. How honorable? that (as S. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. c. 3.) men
converse with their vviues according to knowledge, imparting honor, (...).
unto them as to the weaker vessels: that is (as S. Paul also explicateth it,
1 Thessalonians. c. 4.) possessing every man his vessel in sanctification and honor,
(...).
not in the passion or lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles, etc. Lo what
honorable marriage is, to wit, when the husband uses his wife honorably and
honestly in all respects, not beastly and filthily according to al kind of
lust and concupiscence. And that the Apostle here exhorts to this honorable
usage of vvedlocke, rather then affirms any thing, it is most probable both
by that which goes before and that which immediately follows, al which are
exhortations. and let the Protestants give us a reason out of the Greek text,
if they can, why they translate the words following by way of exhortation,
Let your conversation be without coucieousnes: (...).
and not these words also in like manner, let marriage be honorable in all.
Certain it is that the Greek in both is al one phrase and speech, (...).
and Beza, is much troubled to find a good reason against Erasmus who
thinks it is an exhortation. The sentence then being ambiguous and doubtful
at the least, what ioly fellows are these, that will so restrain it in
translation, that it can not be taken in the other sense, and not rather leave
it indifferently, as in the Greek and vulgar Latin it is, lest the sense of
the holy Ghost be not that, or not only that, which they translate.

16 Moreover it is against the profession of co^tinencie in Priests and others,
that they translate our Saviors words of single life and the unmarried state,
thus: Mat. 19. V. 11.
Al men can not receive this saying: as though it were impossible to live
continent. Where Christ said not so, that al men can not, but, Al men do not
receive this saying. But of this I have spoken more in the chapter of free
will. Here I add only concerning the words following, that they translate
them not exactly, nor perhaps with a sincere meaning. for if there be
chastity in marriage as well as in the single life, as Paphnutius the Confessor
most truly said, and they are wont much to allege it, then their translation
does nothing express our Saviors meaning, when they say, There are some
chaste, Bibl. 1562. 1577.
which have made them selves chaste for the kingdom of heavens sake. for a man
might say, al do so that live chastely in matrimony. but our Savior speaks
of them that are impotent and unable to generation, called * (...).
eunuchs or gelded men, and that in three diverse kinds: some that have that
infirmity or maime from their birth, othersome that are gelded afrervvard by
men, and other that geld them selves for the kingdom of heaven, not by cutting
of those parts which were an horrible mortal sin, but having those parts
as other men have, (...).
yet geld them selves (for so is the Greek) and make them selves unable to
generation. Which how it can be but by voluntary profession, promis, and
vovv of perpetual continency which they may never break, let the Protestants
tell us. Christ then as it is most evident speaks of gelded men, either
corporally, or spiritually (which are al such as profess perpetual
continency:) and they tell us of some that were borne chaste, and some that
were made chaste by men, and some that make them selves chaste: a most folish
and false translation of the Greek words, (...) and (...).

17 The Bezites here, are blameless, who translate it word for word,
eunuchs: but they are more to blame in an other place, where in derogation of
the privilege and dignity of Priests, Mal. 2. v. 7.
they translate thus: The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, (...).
and they should secke the Law at his mouth. where in the Hebrew and Greek
it is as plain as possibly can be spoken, (...) The infalsible judgment of
the Priests, in questions of religion.
The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth. Which is a marvelous privilege given to the Priests of of the old Law,
for true determination of matters in controversy, and right expounding of the
Law, as we read more fully Deutero. 17. Where they are commanded under
pain of death to stand to the Priests judgment, which in this place God by
the Prophet Malachie calls his covenant with Leui, and that he vvil have it
to stand, v. 4.
to wit, in the new Testament, where Peter has such privilege for him and
his successors, that his faith shall not fail, where the holy Ghost is
president in the Councels of Bishops and Priests. Al which these Heretics
would deface and defeat, by translating the words otherwise then the holy
Ghost has spoken them.

18 And when the Prophet adds immediately the cause of this singular
prerogative of the Priest, quia angelus Domini exercituum est, because he is
the Angel of the Lord of hosts, which is also a wonderful dignity, so to be
called: they after their cold manner of profane translation say, because he is
the messenger of the Lord of hosts. So do they in the next chapter call S.
John the Baptist, messenger: Malach. 3. v. 1.
where the Scripture no doubt speaks more honorably of him as being Christ's
precursor, then of a messenger, which is a term for posts also and lackies.
The Scripture I say speaks thus of S. John, (...). angelum meum.
Behold I send mine angel before thee: and our Savior in the Gospel, Mat. 11.
Luc. 7: telling the people the wonderful dignities of S. John, and that he
was more then a prophet, cites this place and gives this reason, For this is
he of whom it is written, Behold I send mine Angel before thee. Which S.
Hierom calls meritorum(...), Comment. in hunc locum.
the increase and augmenting of John's merits or privileges, that in Malachie
he is called an Angel: Hom. 6. in Euang.
and S. Gregory says, he which came to bring tidings of Christ him self,
was vvorthely called an Angel, that in his very name there might be a
dignity. and all the fathers, and al wit and reason conceive a great
excellency in this name: only our profane Protestants that think of al divine
things and persons most basely, translate accordingly, even in the foresaid
Gospel also, making our Savior to say, that John was more then a prophet,
because he was a messenger. Yea where our Savior him self is called, Malach.
3. v. 1.
Angelus Testamenti, the Angel of the Testament, there they translate, the
messenger of the covenant.

19 If S. Hierom in all these places had translated, nu^tium, then the English
were, messenger: but translating it, angelum, and the Church and al antiquity
so reading and expounding it as a term of more dignity and excellency, See
Apoc. c. 2. and 3. in the English Bibl. 1562. To the messenger of the
congregation, etc. Angelo Ecclesia.
what mean these base companions to disgrace the very eloquence of the
Scripture, which by such terms of amplification would speak more
significantly and emphatically? what mean they (I say) that so inueigh
against Castaleo for his profaneness, them selves to say, for Angel,
Messenger, for Apostle, Legate or Ambassador, and the like? Are they afraid,
lest by calling men Angels, it would be mistaken, as though they were Angels
in deed by nature? then S. Paul spoke dangerously, when he said to the
Galatians, Gal. 4. v. 14.
As Gods Angel you received me, as Christ Jesus. But to proceed.

20 It is much for the authority and dignity of Gods Priests, that they do
bind and loose, and execute al Ecclesiastical function as in the person and
power of Christ, whose ministers they are. So S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 2. v. 10.
that when he pardoned or released the penance of the incestuous Corinthian,
(...).
he did it in the person of Christ. that is (as S. Ambrose expounds it) in
the name of Christ, in his steed, as his Vicar and deputy. but they translate
it, In the sight of Christ. Where it is evident they can not pretend the
Greek, and if there be ambiguitie in the Greek, the Apostle him self takes
it away interpreting him self in the very same case, when he exco^municateth
the said incestuous person, saying, that he does it, 1 Cor. 5. v. 4.
in the name and with the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ: so expounding what
he means also in this place.

21 And it may be, that for some such purpose they change the ancient and
accustomed reading in these words of S. Matthew, Ex te enim exiet dux qui
regat populum meum Israel: Mat. 2.
translating thus, no. Test. 1580.
Out of thee shall come the Governor that shall feed my people Israel. for,
that shall rule my people Israel. This is certain that it is a false
translation, because the Prophets words Mich. 5. (cited by S. Matthew) both
in Hebrew and Greek, (...)
signify only a ruler or Governor, and not a Pastor or feeder. Therefore it is
either a great oversight, which is a small matter in comparison of the least
corruption: or rather because they do the like Act. 20. v. 28, it is done to
suppress the signification of Ecclesiastical power and government, that
concurreth with feeding, first in Christ, and from him in his Apostles and
Pastors of the Church, both which are here signified in this one Greek word,
to wit, (...).
that Christ our Savior shall rule and feed, ( Psalm. 2. Apoc. 2. v. 27) yea he
shall rule in a rod of iron: and from him, Peter and the rest, by his commission
given in the same word feed and rule my sheep: (...).
Io. 21: yea and that in a rod of iron, as when he struck Ananias and
Sapphira to corporal death, Act. 5. 1 Cor. 4. v. 21. etc. 5. v. 5. and 2 Cor.
10. v. 4. and 8.
as his successors do the like offenders to spiritual destruction (unless they
repent) by the terrible rod of excommunication. This is imported in the double
signification of the Greek word, which they to diminish Ecclesiastical
authority, they translate, feed, then, rule, or govern.

22 To the diminishing of this Ecclesiastical authority, in the later end of
the reign of king Henry the eight, and during the reign of king Edward the
sixth, the only translation of their English Bibles, was, Submit your selves
unto al manner ordinance of man: whether it be UNTO THE KING, (...).
AS TO THE CHIEF HEAD. 1 Pet. 2. Where in this Queens time, the later
translatours can not find those words now in the Greek, but do translate
thus, Bibl. 1577. 1579.
To the king as having preeminence: or, to the king as the Superior. Why so?
because then the King had first taken upon him this name of Supreme head of the
Church, and therefore they flattered both him and his son, til their heresy
was planted, making the holy Scripture to say that the king was, the Chief
head, which is al one with, supreme head: but now being better advised in
that point (by Calvin I suppose and the Lutherans of Magdeburge, Calu. in c. 7.
Amos. Magdeb. in praef. Cent. 7. fo. 9.10.11.
who do jointly inueigh against such title, and Calvin against that by name,
which was first given to king Henry the eight) and because they may be
bolder with a Queen then with a king, and because now they think their
kingdom is well established, therefore they suppress this title in their later
translations, and would take it from her altogether if they could, to advance
their own Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, without any dependence of the Queens
supreme government of their church, which in their conscience (if they be
true Caluinists, or Lutherans, or mixed of both) they do and must mislike.

23 But howsoever that be, let them justify their translation, or confess
their fault. and as for the kings supremacy over the Church, if they make any
doubt, let them read S. Ignatius words, Epist. 7. ad Smyrnenses.
who was in the Apostles time, even when S. Peter gave the foresaid
admonition of subjection to the king, and knevv very well how far his
preeminence extended, and therefore says plainly in notorious words, that,
we must first honor God, then the Bishop, and the^ the king. because in all
things nothing is comparable to God, and in the Church, nothing greater then
the Bishop, who is consecrated to God for the salvation of the whole world,
and (...).
among magistrates and temporal rulers, none is like the king. See his (...).
other words immediately following, where he prefers the Bishops office
before the kings and al other things of price among men.

24 But in the former sentence of S. Peter, though they have altered their
translation about the kings headship, yet there is one corruption remaining
still in these words, Submit your selves UNTO AL MANNER ORDINANCE OF MAN.
Whereas in the Greek it is word for word as in the old vulgar Latin
translation, omni humanae creaturae, (...).
and as we have translated, to every humane creature: meaning temporal Princes
and Magistrates, 1 Pet. 2. v. 13.14.
as is plain by the exemplification immediately following, of king, and dukes
and other sent or appointed by him. But they in favor of their temporal
statutes, acts of Parliament, Proclamations and Injunctions made against the
Catholic religion, do translate all with one consent, Submit your selves to
al manner ordinance of man. Does (...) signify ordinance? or is it al one to be
obedient to every one of our Princes, and to al manner ordinance of the said
Princes?

25 A strange case and much to be considered, how they wring and wrest the
holy Scriptures this way and that way and every way to serve their heretical
procedings. For when the question is of due obedience to Ecclesiastical
canons, and decrees of the Church and general Councels, where the holy Ghost
by Christ's promis is assistant, and whereof it is said, Mat. 18.
If he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an hethen and Publicant:
and, He that hears you, hears me: Luc. 10.
he that despises you, despises me: there they cry out aloud, and odiously
term al such ordinances, Men's traditions, and, commandments of men, and most
despitefully contemn and condemn them. but here, for obedience unto temporal
edictes and Patliament-statutes daily enacted in favor of their schism and
heresies, they once maliciously forged, and still wickedly retain without
alteration, a text of their own, making the Apostle to command submission
unto al manner ordinance of man, whereof has ensued the false crime of treason
and cruel death for the same, upon those innocent men and glorious martyrs,
that chose to obey God and his Churches holy ordinances, rather then man's
statutes and laws directly against the same.

CHAP. XVI. Heretical translation against the Sacrament of MATRIMONY.
1 BUT as they are injurious translatours to the sacred Order of Priesthod, so
a man would think they should be very friendly to the Sacrament of Matrimony.
for they would seem to make more of Matrimony then we do, making it equal
at the least with virginity. Yet the truth is, we make it, or rather the
Church of God esteems it as a holy Sacrament, they do not: as giving grace
to the married persons to live together in love, concord, and fidelity: they
acknovvledge no such thing. So that Matrimony with them is highly esteemed in
respect of the flesh, or (to say the best) only for a civil contract, as it is
among Jews and Pagans: but as it is peculiar to Christians, and (as S.
Augustine says) in the sanctification also and holiness of a Sacrament, they
make no account of it, but flatly deny it.

2 And to this purpose they translate in the epistle to the Ephesians, 5.
where the Apostle speaks of Matrimony, This is a great secret. Sacramentu^
hoc magnu^ est.
Whereas the Latin Church and all the Doctors thereof have ever read, This is a
great Sacrament: the Greek Church and all the fathers thereof, This is a great
mystery. because that which is in Greek, mystery: (...).
is in Latin, Sacrament: and contrarievvise, the words in both tongues being
equivalent. so that if one be taken in the large signification, the other also:
as, Apoc. 17. I vvil show thee the sacramet of the woman. Sacramentu^ (...).
and I vvil show thee the mystery of the woman. and so in sundry places.
again if one be restrained from the larger signification, and peculiarly
applied, signify the Sacraments of the Church, the other also. As, the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: or, the Mystery of the body and
blood of Christ: Duo Sacramenta. (...)
and the Caluinists in their Latin and Greek Catechism say, two Sacraments,
or, two Mysteries.

3 This being so, what is the fault of their translation in the place
aforesaid? this, that they translate neither, Sacrament, nor, Mystery. As for
the word Sacrament, they are excused, because they translate not the Latin:
but translating the Greek, why faid they not, Mystery, which is the Greek
word here in the Apostle? I mean, why said they not of Matrimony, This is a
great Mystery? No doubt there can be no other cause, but to avoid both those
words, which are used in the Latin and Greek Church, to signify the
Sacraments. For in the Greek Church the Sacrament of the body and blood it
self is called but a mystery or mysteries, which yet the Protestants them
selves call a true Sacrament. Therefore if they should have called Matrimony
also by that name, it might easily have sounded to be a Sacrament also. Were
it honest or lavvfull to translate, Baptis^, I vvash: or Baptismus. washing:
or Eua^geliu^. good nevves? yet the words profanely taken, signify no more.
But in saying it is a great secret, they put it out of doubt, that it shall
not be so taken.

4 They vvil say unto me, Is not every sacrament and mystery, in english a
secret? yes, as Angel, is a messenger: and Apostle, one that is sent. but
when the holy Scripture uses these words to signify more excellent and
divine things then those of the common sort, does it become translators to use
baser terms in steed thereof, and so to disgrace the vvriting and meaning of
the holy Ghost? I appeal to them selves, when they translate this word in
other places, whether they say not thus, And without doubt great was that
MYSTERY of godliness: 1 Timothy ^.
God was showed manifestly in the flesh etc. again, The MYSTERY which has
been hid since the world began, Col. 1. v. 26. Ephesians. 3. v. 9. 1 Cor. 15. v. 51.
but now is opened to his saints. again, I show you a MYSTERY, we shall
not al sleep, but we shall al be changed. and the like. Where if they should
translate, secret, in steed of, mystery, as the Bezites do in one of these
places, saying, I vvil show you a secret thing: what a disgracing and
debasing were it to those high mysteries there signified? And if it were so
in these, is it not so in Matrimony, which the Apostle makes such a
mystery, that it represents no less matter then Christ and his Church and
whatsoever is most excellent in that conjunction? Now then, if in all other
places of high mystery they translate it also mystery, as it is in the
Greek, and only in Matrimony do not so, but say rather, This is a great
secret, using so base a term in so high and excellent a mystery, must we
not needs think (as no doubt it is) that they do it because of their
Heretical opinion against the Sacrament of Matrimony, and for their base
estimation thereof?

5 But they vvil yet reply again, and ask us, what we gain by translating
it either Sacrament, or mystery? Does that make it one of the Sacraments
properly so called, to wit, such a Sacrament as Baptism is? no surely. but
howsoever we gain otherwise, at least we gain the commendation of true
translators, whether it make with us or against us. for otherwise it is not
the name that makes it such a peculiar Sacrament. for (as is said before)
Sacrament is a general name in Scripture to other things. neither do we
therefore so translate it, as though it were forthwith one of the 7
Sacraments, because of the name: but as in other places wheresoever we find
this word in the Latin, we translate it, Sacrament (as in the Apocalypse,
Apoc. 17.
the Sacrament of the woman) so finding it here, we do here also so translate
it. and as for the diverse taking of it here, and else where, that we examine
other wise, by circumstance of the text, and by the Churches and Doctors
interpretation: and we find that here it is taken for a Sacrament in that
sense as we say, seven Sacraments: not so in the other places.

6 As when we read this name Jesus in Scripture common to our Savior and to
other men, we transtate it alvvaies alike, Jesus: but when it is Jude. v. 5.
JESUS Christ, and when some other Jesus, Act. 7. v. 45. Colos. 4. v. 11.
we know by other circumstances. likewise presuppose Baptism in the
Scripture were called a sacrament: yet the Protestants them selves would not,
nor could thereby conclude, that it were one of their two Sacraments. yet I
trow they would not avoid to translate it by the word sacrament, if they
foud it so called: even so we finding Matrimony so called, do so translate
it, neither concluding thereby that it is one of the Seven, nor yet suppressing
the name, which no doubt gave some occasion to the Church and the holy doctors
to esteem it as one of the Seven. They co^trarievvise, as though it were
never so called, suppress the name altogether, calling it a secret, to put it
out of al question, that it is no Sacrament: which they would not have done,
if the Scripture had said of Baptism or the Eucharist, This is a great
Sacrament. So partial they are to their own opinions.

CHAP. XVII. Heretical translation against the B. S ACRAMENT, and SACRIFICE,
and ALTARS.
1 Now let us see concerning the Eucharist, which they allow for a
Sacrament, how they handle the matter to the disgracing and defacing of the
same also. They take away the operation and efficacy of Christ's blessing
pronounced upon the bread and wine, making it only a thanksgiving to God:
and to this purpose they translate more gladly, thanksgiving, then, blessing.
as Matthew. 26. the Greek words being two, (...). Bib. 1562. 1577.
the one signifying properly, to bless: the other, to give thanks: they
translate both thus, when he had given thanks. likewise Marc. 14. in the
Bible printed 1562. And when they translate it, blessing, they mean nothing
else but giving thanks, Great difference in the scriptures, between blessing,
and giving of thanks.
as Beza tells us in his Annotations Mat. 26. v. 26. We reply and by most
manifest Scripture prove unto them, that the former Greek word does not
signify thanksgiving properly, but blessing, and a blessing of creatures to
the operation of some great effect in them: as when Christ took the five
loaves and two fishes, to multiply them, Benedixit cis.(...). Anno. in 9.
Luc. v. 16.
he blessed them Luc. 9. What say they to this think you? Does not the Greek
word here plainly signify, blessing of creatures? No, (says Beza) no doubt
but here also it signifies giving thanks. How Beza? he adds, Not as though
Christ had given thanks to the bread, for that were to absurd: but we must
mollify this interpretation thus, that he gave thanks to God the father for
the loaves and the fishes. Is not this a notable exposition of these words,
benedixit cis?

2 We ask him in the like cases, when God blessed Adam and Eve, (...). Psalm.
106. (...).
Genesis 1. and 9. Noe and his children, saying, Increase and multiply: when he
blessed the children of Israel, and they multiplied excedingly, when he
blessed the later things of Job more then the first. Job. 42. Was this also a
giving of thanks, and not an effectual blessing upon these creatures? What
vvil they say, or what difference vvil they make? As God blessed here, so he
was God and man that blessed the loaves and fishes there. If they vvil say he
did it as man, and therefore it was a giving of thanks to God his father: to
omit that he blessed them as he multiplied them, that is, rather according to
his divine nature then humane: we ask them, when he blessed as man, was it
alvvaies giving of thanks? he blessed the little children, he blessed his
disciples, Luc. 24.
when he ascended: was this giving thanks for them, as Beza expounds his
blessing of the loaves and fishes? When Beza loco citato.
we bless the table or the meat upon the table, when S. Paul says, 1
Timoth. 4. al meat is lavvful that * (...), Which word ca^ never signify,
giving thanks.
is sanctified by the word and by prayer: is all this nothing but giving
thanks? So says Beza in express words.

3 We go forvvard, and prove the contrary yet more manifestly, in the very
matter of the B. Sacrament, for the which they multiply all the foresaid
absurdities. We tell them that S. Paul says thus, (...).
The chalice of blessing, which we bless, is it not etc. how could he
speak more plainly, that the chalice or cup (meaning that in the cup) is
blessed? Which S. Cyprian de Corn. Do. explicateth thus, Calix solenni
benedictione sacratus, The Chalice consecrated by solemn blessing. (...).
Oecumenius thus, The Chalice which blessing, we prepare. that is, which we
bless and so prepare. for so it must signify, and not as Beza would have it,
Annot. in 1 Cor. 10. v. 16.
which with thanks giving we prepare, and that I prove by his own words
immediately before, where he says that the Greek word being used of the
Apostle transitiuely, that is, with a case following, can not signify giving
thanks. How then can it so signify in Oecumenius words, who does
interpret the Apostles meaning by the Apostles own words and phrase? yea
(that you may note a notorious contradiction) how does Beza then in the place
of Luke before alleged (where the same Greek word is a plain transitiue as
in this (...).
place) expound it of giving thanks for the bread and fishes? A liar (they
say) must be mindeful, to make his tale agree in every point. He that before
forced the word in every sentence to be nothing else but thanks giving, even
when it was a plain transitiue, now confesses that he never read it in
that signification, when it is a transitiue. and so we have that the blessing
of the cup or of the bread, is not giving thanks as they either translate,
or interpret it.

4 And surely in the word (...) this is most evident, that it signifies in
this case the blessing and consecration of the creature or element: in so much
that S. Basil and S. Chrysostom in their Liturgies or Masses, say thus by the
same Greek word: (...).
Bless o Lord the sacred bread. and, Bless o Lord the sacred cup. and why
or to what effect? It follows, changing it by the holy Spirit. Where is
signified the transmutation and consecration thereof into the body and blood.
But in the other word (...) there may be some question, because it signifies
properly to give thanks, and therefore may seem to be referred to God only,
and not to the element and creature. But this also we find contrary in the
Greek fathers, who use this word also transitiuely, saying, (...).
panem and calicem eucharistisatos, or, panem in quo gratiae act ae sunt. that
is the bread and the cup made the Eucharist: the bread over which thanks
are given: that is, which by the word of prayer and thanksgiving is made a
consecrated meat, the flesh and blood of Christ, as S. Iustine in fine 2
Apolgo. and S. Irenaeus li. 4.34. in the same places expound it. Whereas it
may also signify that, for which thanks are given in that most solemn
sacrifice of the Eucharist, (...).
as S. Denis in one place seems to take it. Eccl. Hier. c. 3 in fine. Who in
the self same chapter speaks of the consecration thereof most evidently.

5 Whereby we have to note that the Heretics in urging the word, Eucharist,
as mere thanksgiving, thereby to take away blessing and consecration of the
elements of bread and wine, do unlearnedly and deceitfully. because all the
fathers make mention of both: S. Paul also calls it, blessing of the chalice,
which the Eua^gelists call, giving of thanks. Whose words Theophylacte
explicateth thus, THE CHALICE OF BLESSING, that is, of the Eucharist. For
holding it in our hands, we bless it, and give thanks to him that shed his
blood for us. See here both blessing, and Eucharist, blessing the chalice, and
thanksgiving to Christ. Liturg. S. Iac. Basil. Chrysostom.
S. James and the Greek fathers in their Liturgies, put both words in the
consecration of each element, saying thus, giving thanks, sanctifying,
breaking: and, giving thanks, blessing, sanctifying: (...).
and, taking the cup, giving thanks, sanctifying, blessing, filling it with
the boly Ghost, he gave it to us his Disciples. S. Chrysostom who in many
places of his works speaks much of thanksgiving in these holy mysteries,
Hom. 2. in Tim. 2. Hom. 83. in Mat. Ho. de Judah proditore.
does he not as often speak of the blessing, consecration, yea and the
transmutation thereof, and that with what words, and by what power it is
done? Does not S. Augustine say of the same, Aug. ep. 59.
benedicitur and sanctificatur, it is blessed and sanctified, who often
speaks of the solemn giving of thanks in the sacrifice of the Church? De
bone viduit. c. 16.
Does not the Church at this day use the very same terms, as in S. Augustines
time, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, Let us give thanks to the Lord our
God. and, Vere dignum and iustum est, semper and vbique tibigratias agere etc.
It is very meet and right, alvvaies and in all places to give thee thanks:
Which the Greek Church also in their Liturgies express most abundantly? yet
does there follow blessing and consecration, and whatsoever S. Ambrose
describes to be done in this holy sacrifice, touching this point, vvriting
thereof most excellently in his book de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs. c. 9.

6 Of al which, this is the conclusion, that the Eucharist is a solemn name,
taken of the word (...), so called, because this Sacrament and sacrifice is
blessed and consecrated with prayer and thanksgiving, as S. Iustine
speaks, and because in this sacrifice so blessed and consecrated into the
body and blood of Christ, him we offer up a most acceptable oblation of
thanksgiving, and a memory of al Gods marvelous benefits tovvard us. In
this sense the fathers and the holy Church speak of the Eucharist, including
all the rest, to wit Sacrament, sacrifice, blessing, and consecration, without
which this were no more to be called Eucharist, then any other common giving
of thakes, as S. Irenaeus does plainly signify, when he declares, hat being
before bread, Li. 4. c. 34.
and receiving the invocation of God over it, now is no more common bread, but
the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the earthly, and the heavenly. So
that it is made the Eucharist by circumstance of solemn words and
ceremonies, and therefore is not a mere giving of thanks: and further we
learn, that S. Iustines and S. Irenaeus words before alleged, (...).
Panis and calix Eucharistisatus, signify, the bread and chalice made the
Eucharist: and consequently we learn that the active thereof, is, by
thanksgiving to make the Eucharist. and because the other word of blessing
and this of thanksgiving are used indifferently one for an other in Christ's
action about this Sacrament, we learn undoubtedly, that when it is said,
(...), or, (...), the meaning is, blessing, and giving thanks, he made the
Eucharist of his body and blood, that is the Sacrament and Sacrifice of a
singular thanksgiving, which (as S. Augustine often is wont to say) the
faithful only do know and understand in the sacrifice of the Church: and
because the faithful only understand, therefore the Protestants and Caluinistes
are so ignorant in this mystery, that to take away all the dignity thereof
they bend both their expositions and translations.

7 After they have turned blessing or consecration into bare thanksgiving,
which is one step tovvard the denying of the real presence, they come
nearer, and so include Christ in heaven, that he can not be vvithal upon the
altar, translating thus, Whom heaven must contain, until the times that
althings be restored. Act. 3. v. 21. and yet Beza worse, (...). ad rat. camp.
page 43.
and he that alleges him, M. Vvhitakers: who must be contained in heaven.
Which is so far from the Greek, that not only Illyricus the Luthera, but
Calvin him self does not like it. Beza protests that he so tra^slateth of
purpose to keep Christ's presence from the altar: and we marvel the less,
because we are well acquainted with many the like his impudent Protestatio^s.
M. Whitaker. only we do marvel at, that he should be either so deceived by an
other man's translation, or him self be so ouerseen in the Greek word, (...).
that he knovveth not a mere deponent and only deponent, from a passive.

8 This does not become him that * Ibid. pa. 84.
obiecteth ignorance of the Greek to an other man, and that after he had well
tried by public conference, If he had not yet tried him, he presumed to belie
him, before he knevv him.
that he was not ignorant: and so obiecteth it as though he knevv not three
words in that tongue, whereas he had heard him read and interpret S. Basil,
not the easiest of the Greek Doctors. This is palpable impudency and a face
that can not blush, and full of malice against the saints of God, who if they
knevv not a word in the Greek tongue, were never the worse, nor the less
learned, but among fools and children, that esteem learning by such trifles,
which Grammarians know far better then great Divines. For were not he a
wise man that would prefer one Master Humfrey, Master Fulke, Master
Whitakers, or some of us poor me^, because we have a little smack in the three
tongues, before S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, or S. Thomas,
that understood well, none but one? Howbeit if they esteem learning by
knowledge of the tongues, they vvil not (I trow) compare with Catholics,
either of former time, or of these later age, specially since their new Gospel
began: and if they vvil compare with us herein for their simple credit, we
may perhaps give them occasion ere it be long, to muster their men al at once,
if they dare show their face before our camp of excellent Hebricians,
Grecians, Latinistes, of absolute linguistes in the Chaldoe, Syriake, Arabike
etc. whom they must needs confess to have been, and to be even at this day,
their Masters and teachers.

9 But to return to you M. Vvhitakers, greater is your fault in divinity,
then in the tongues, when you make your argument against the real presence out
of this place, as out of the Scripture and S. Peter, whereas they are Bezas
words, and not S. Peter's. Again, whether you take Bezas words, or S.
Peter's, your argument fails very much, when you conclude that Christ's natural
body is not in the Sacrament, because it is placed and contained in heaven. For
S. Chrysostom tells you, Ho. 2 ad po. Antioch.
that Christ ascending into heaven, both left us his flesh, and yet ascending
has the same. and again, O miracle, says he: Li. 3 de Sacerdotio.
He that sits above with the Father, in the same moment of time is handled
with the hands of al. This is the faith of the ancient fathers, M.
Whitakers, and this is the Catholic faith, and this is (I trow) an other
manner of faith and far greater, thus to believe the presence of Christ in both
places at once, because he is omnipotent and has said the word: then your
faith (whereof you boast so much) which believes no further then that he is
ascended, and that therefore he cannot be present upon the altar, nor dispose of
his body as he list.

10 Again it is a very famous place for the real presence of the blood (which
we have handled at large Chap. 1. numb. 38.
else where, but here also must be breifely touched) when our Savior says,
Luc. 22. This is the Chalice the new Testament in my blood, (...).
which (Chalice) is shed for you. For so (which) must needs be referred
according to the Greek. In which speech, Chalice must needs be taken for
that in the chalice, and that in the chalice must needs be the blood of
Christ, and not wine, because his blood only was shed for us. and so we do
plainly prove the real presence. according as S. Chrysostom also said, in 1
Cor. ca. 10. ho. 24.
Hoc quod est in calice, illud est quod fluxit de latere. That which is in the
Chalice, is the same that gushed out of his side. Al which most necessary
deduction Beza would defeat, by saying the Greek is corrupted in all the
copies that are extant in the world, and by tra^slating thus clean otherwise
then the Greek vvil bear, This cup is the new Testament in my blood, (...).
which (blood) is shed for you.

11 But what pertains this to the English Heretics, Who translate, Which is
shed, so indifferently that it may signify, Which cup or, which blood is
shed? Thus far it pertains, Ad rat. Ca^p. page 34.
because they do not only defend this translation by all means, but they tell us
plainly namely Fulke that they refer (which) to the word blood, and not to
the word cup, Against D. Sand. Rock page 309.
even as Beza does, asking us what Grammarian would refer it otherwise. in
which question he shows him self a very simple Gra^maria^ in the Greek, or
a mad heretic, that either knovveth not, or vvil not know, that in the
Greek it can not be so referred, and consequently neither in latin nor
English, which in true translation must follow the Greek. but of these and
other their foul and manifold shifts to avoid this place, * Chap. 1. nu.
37.38. etc.
I have spoken in an other place of this book.

12 Only M. Whitakers (to say truly) has brought somevvhat to the purpose,
Page 35.
to wit, that S. Basil reads the Greek as they translate. But he does well
to make light of it, because it is evident that S. Basil cited not the text of
the Evangelist, but the sense, which Beza notes to be the custom of the
ancient fathers, Praef. in no. Test. an. 1556.
telling us vvithal that therefore the reading of the fathers, is no certain
rule to reform or alter the words of Scripture according to the same: and it
is very like that if Beza or Fulke his advocate had thought S. Basils reading
of any importance, they would have used it long since, rather then so many
other shifts and so absurd, as they do: unless we may think they knevv it
not, and therefore could not use it. But for S Basil, according to the sense he
cites it very truly: for, whether we say, the Cup that is shed, or, the
blood that is shed, both signifies the blood of Christ shed for us, as S.
Basil cites it. the difference is, that referring it to the cup, as S. Luke
has it, it signifies the blood both present in the cup, and also then shed
in a Sacrament at the last supper: but referring it to the word blood, as S.
Basil does, and as they translate, it may signify the blood shed on the cross
also, yea (as these translatours mean and would have it) only that on the
Cross, not considering that the Greek word is the present tense, and
therefore rather signifies the present sheding of his blood then in mystical
sacrifice, then the other visible sheding thereof, which was to come in the
future tense. Lastly, they translate S. Lukes Gospel, and not S. Basil: and
therefore not following S. Luke, they are false translators, howsoever S. Basil
reads.

13 As this falshod is both against Sacrament and Sacrifice, so against the
Sacrifice also of the altar it is, that they control S. Hieroms translation
in the old Testament concerning the sacrifice of Melchisedec, The sacrifice of
Melchisedec.
Who brought forth bread and wine: Genesis 14. v. 18. that is, offered or
sacrificed bread and wine: which we prove to be the true sense and
interpretation (and that this bringing forth of bread and wine, was
sacrificing thereof) not only by all the fathers expositions that write of
Melchisedeks priesthod, ( Cypr. epist. 63. Epiph. har. 55. and 79. Hiero. in
Mat. 26. and in epist. ad Euagrium.) and by the Hebrew word which is a word
of sacrifice, Iud. 6. v. 18: and * (...) See Pet. Galat. li. 10 c. 4. et 5. et
Chro. Genebrardi page 13.
by the greatest Rabbines and Hebricians that write thereof, but we prove it
also by these words of the very text it self, He brought forth bread and
wine, for he was the Priest of God most high. Which reason immediately
following, Because he was Gods Priest, proves evidently that he brought it
not forth in common manner as any other man might have done, but as Gods Priest,
whose office is to offer sacrifice. This consequence is so plain, that for
avoiding thereof, the Adversaries vvil not have it translated in any wise,
(...).
For he was the Priest, as though the Scripture gave a reason why he brought
forth bread and wine: but, and he was a Priest, etc. (...)
Wrangling about the signification of the Hebrew conjunction.

14 Wherein the reader may see their exceeding partiality and wilfulnes. For,
besides infinite like places of Scripture, whereby we do easily show that
this Hebrew particle is used to give a reason or cause of a thing, them selves
also in an other place prove it for us, Beza annot. in 1 Luc. v. 42.
and that by the authority of Theophylacte, and allegation of examples out of
the Scripture, no. Test. an. 1580.
and translate accordingly thus: Blessed art thou among women, because the
fruit of thy womb is blessed. Benedicta tu etc. and benedictus. etc.
Let them give us a reason, why the said Conjunction is here by their
translation, quia, or, enim, where it was never so translated before, (...).
and it must not be in any case in the other place of Genesis, where it has
been so translated and generally received eue^ in the primitive Church. In
other places of Scripture also which Theophylacte alleges, and many more may
be alleged, they confess and like very well it should so signify: only in
the place of Genesis, Genesis 14. v. 18.
they can not abide any such sense or translation thereof: but, He brought
forth bread and wine, and he was the Priest, etc. not, because he was the
Priest: What is the cause of this their dealing? None other undoubtedly (and
in all these cases I knock at their consciences) but that here they would
avoid the necessary sequel of Melchisedecks sacrifice, upon such translation,
which typical sacrifice of bread and wine if it should be granted, then
would follow also a sacrifice of the new Testament, made of bread and wine
answering to the same, and so we should have the sacrifice of the altar, and
their bare communion should be excluded.

15 For which purpose also their partial translation about, altar, and, table,
is notorious. For, (...).
the name of altar (as they know very well) both in the Hebrew and Greek,
(...)
and by the custom of al peoples both Jews and Pagans, implying and
importing sacrifice, therefore we in respect of the sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood, say, altar, rather then, table, as all the ancient fathers ( Chrysostom.
ho. 53 ad po. Antioch. and ho. 20 in 2 Cor. and in Demo^st. que Christus sit
Deus, to. 5. Nazianz. de Gorgonia sorore. Basil. in Liturg. Socrat. li. 1.
Hist. c. 20 and 25. Theodoret. hist. li. 4. c. 20. Theophyl. in 23 Mat. Cypr.
epist. 63. Optat. cont. Parm. Aug. ep. 86. and li. 9. Confess. c. 11 and 13.
and alibi saepe) are wont to speak and write, (namely when S. Hierom calls
the bodies or bones of SS. Peter and Paul the altars of Christ, because of this
sacrifice offered over and upon the same) though in respect of eating and
drinking the body and blood, it is also called a table: so that with us it is
both an altar and a table, whether it be of vvood or of stone. but the
Protestants, because they make it only a communion of bread and wine, or a
supper, and no sacrifice, therefore they call it table only, and abhor from
the word, altar, as Papistical. For the which purpose, in their first
translation, ( Bible an. 1562.) when altars were then in digging down
through out England, they translated with no less malice, then they threvve
them down, putting the word, temple, in steed of altar: which is so gross
a corruption, that a man would have thought it had been done by oversight, and
not of purpose, if they had not done it thrice immediately within two
chapters, 1 Cor. 9. and 10. saying: Know you not that they which wait of
the TEMPLE, are partakers of the TEMPLE? and, Are not they which eat of the
sacrifice, partakers of the TEMPLE? in all which places the Apostles word in
Greek is, (...). c. 9. v. 13. (...).
altar, and not, temple. and see here their notorious peeuishnes. where the
Apostle says, temple, there the same translation says, sacrifice: where the
Apostle says, altar, there it says, temple.

16 Thus we see how they suppress the name of altar, where it should be:
now let us see how they put it in their translation, where it should not be
this also they do thrice in one chapter, and that for to save the honor of
their communion table. namely in the story of Bell, Dan. 14. v. 12.17.20.
where we have it thrice called the table of that idol, under which Bells
priests had made a privy entrance, and, (...).
that the king looked upon the table, and, that they did eat up such things as
were upon the table: these wicked tra^slators fearing lest the name of Bells
table might redound to the dishonor of their Communion table, translate it,
altar, See the Bib. 1562. and 1577.
in all these places. Wherein I cannot but pity their folly, and vvonder
excedingly how they could imagine it any disgrace either for table or altar, if
the I dols also had their tables and altars, whereas S. Paul so plainly
names both together, The table of our Lord, 1 Cor. 10. v. 21.
and the table of Devils. If the table of Devils, why not the table of Bell? if
that be no disgrace to the table of our Lord, why are you afraid of Bells
table, lest it should disgrace yours? Or if you had no such fear, then you
must tell us some other good reason of your unreasonable translation in this
place, why you translate, altar, for, table, that is, chaulke for cheese.

17 And here by the way the Reader may note an other exceeding folly in them,
that think the name of table, makes against altar and sacrifice, their own
translation here condemning them, where they call Bells table, an altar and S.
Paul, having said to the Corinthians, the table of our Lord, says to the
Hebrews Haimo. Oecumen.
of the self same, we have an altar. and again he says, the table of Devils,
which I am sure they will not deny to have been a true altar of I dololatrical
sacrifice. and Malach. 1. v. 7. in one sentence it is called. both altar and
table, whereupon the Jews offered their external and true sacrifices. and all the fathers both Greek and Latin speaking of the sacrifice of the new
Testament, call that where upon it is offered, both altar and table: but the
Greeks more often table, the Latin fathers more often altar: and why or in
what respects it is called both this and that, we have before declared, and
here might add the very same out of S. Germanus Arch. B. of Constantinople, in
his Greek commentaries (called mystica theoria) upon the Liturgies or Masses
of the Greek fathers. but to proceed.

18 There are also some places less evident, yet such as smatche of the like
heretical humor against the B. Sacrament. In the prophet Hieremie c. 11. v. 19.
we read thus according to the Latin and the Greek, Let us cast Lignum in
panem eius. (...).
vvood upon his bread, that is, says S. Hierom in comment. huius loci, the
cross upon the body of our Savior. For it is he that said, I am the bread
that descended from heaven. Where the Prophet so long before saying, bread,
and meaning his body, alludeth prophetically to his body in the B. Sacrament
made of bread and under the form of bread, and therefore also called bread of
the Apostle. So that both in the Prophet and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.
his bread and his body is al one. and lest we should think that the bread
only signifies his body, he says, let us put the Cross upon his bread, that
is, upon his very natural body which hung on the cross. Now for these
words of the Prophet so usual and well known in the Church and al
antiquity, how think you do these new Masters translate? in one bible
thus, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof. An other, we vvil
destroy his meat with vvood. or as they should have said rather, the vvood
with his meat Do you see how properly they agree, vvhiles they seek
novelties, and forsake the ancient usual translation?

19 They vvil say, the first Hebrew word can not be as S. Hierom translateth,
and as it is in the Greek, and as al antiquity reads: but it must signify,
Let us destroy. They say truly, according to the Hebrew word which now is.
But is it not evident thereby, that the Hebrew word now is not the same
which the Septuaginta translated into Greek, (...). mittamus.
and S. Hierom into Latin? (...)
and consequently the Hebrew is altered and corrupted from the original copy
which they had: perhaps by the Jews (as * Ps.
some other places) to obscure this prophecy also of Christ's Passion, and
their crucifying of him upon the Cross. Such Jewish Rabbines and new Hebrew
words do our new masters gladly follow in the translation of the old
Testament, whereas they might easily conceive the old Hebrew word in this
place, if they would employ their skill that way, and not only to novelties.
For who sees not that the Greek Interpreters in number 70, and al Hebrews of
best skill in their own tongue, S. Hierom also a great Hebrician did not
read as now we have in the Hebrew, Destruamus. ponamus. mittamus.
Nashchitha, but, Nashitha, or, Nashlicha? Again the Hebrew word that now
is, does so little agree with the words following, that they cannot tell how
to translate it, as appears by the diversity and difference of their
translations thereof before mentioned, and transposing the words in English
otherwise then in the Hebrew, neither of both their translations having any
commodious sense or understanding.

20 But yet they vvil pretend that for the first word at the least, they are
not to be blamed, because they follow the Hebrew that now is. not considering
that if this were a good excuse, then might they as well follow the Hebrew
that now is Psalm. 21. v. 18: and so utterly suppress and take out of the
Scripture this notable prophecy, They pierced my hands and my feet: Which
yet they do not, neither can they do it for shame, if they vvil be counted
Christians. So that in deed, to follow the Hebrew sometime where it is
corrupt, is no sufficient excuse for them, though it may have a pretense of
true translation, and we promised in the preface, in such cases not to call it
heretical translation.

That water and wine ought to be mingled in the chalice. Pro. 9.
21 But concerning the B. Sacrament, let us see once more how truly they
follow the Hebrew. The holy Ghost (says S. Cyprian ep. 63 nu. 2.) by Solomon
foresheweth a type of our Lords sacrifice, of the immolated host of bread and
wine, saying, Wisdom has killed her hosts, SHE HAS MINGLED HER WINE
INTO the cup. Come ye, eat of my bread, and drink the wine that I HAVE
MINGLED for you. Speaking of WINE MINGLED (says this holy doctor) he
foreshevveth prophetically the cup of our Lord, MINGLED WITH WATER AND
WINE. So does S. Hierom interpret this mixture or mingling of the wine in
the chalice, so does the author of the commentaries upon this place among S.
Hieroms works, See S. Augustine de Ciuit. Dei li. 17 c. 20.
so do the other fathers. So that there is great importance in these
prophetical words of Solomon. She has mingled her wine into the cup, and,
the wine which I have mingled, as being a manifest prophecy of Christ's
mingling water and wine in the Chalice at his last supper, which the
Catholic Church observes at this day, and whereof S. Cyprian vvriteth the
foresaid long epistle.

22 But the Protestants counting it an idle superstitious ceremony, here also
frame their translation accordingly, suppressing altogether this mixture or
mingling, and in steed thereof saying, She has drawn her wine, Bibl. 1579.
and, drink the wine that I have drawn: or (as in other of their bibles)
She has povvred out her wine, an. 1577.
and the wine which I have povvred out: neither translation agreing either
with Greek or Hebrew. (...), miscuit. (...), miscui.
not with the Greek, which does evidently signify, mingling and mixture, as
it is in the Latin, and as all the Greek Church from the Apostles time has
used this word in this very case whereof we now speak, of mingling water
and wine in the chalice S. James and S. Basil in their Liturgies expressly
testifying that Christ did so, (...).
as also S. Cyprian in the place alleged. S. Iustine in the end of his second
apology, calling it of the same Greek word, (...), that is (according to
Plutarche) wine mingled with water: mixtus calix.
likewise S. Ireneus in his fifth book near the beginning. Conc.
Constantinop. 6. can. 32.
See the 6 general Council most fully treating hereof and deducing it from the
Apostles and ancient fathers, CHAP. 18.
and interpreting this Greek word by an other equivalent, (...).
and more plain to signify this mixture

23 Thus the^ the Greek is neither drawing of wine, nor povvring out thereof,
as they translate, but mingling. but the Hebrew perhaps signifies both, or at
the least one of the two, either to dravv, or to power out. Gentle reader, if
thou have skill, look the Hebrew Lexicon of Pagnine esteemed the best: if thou
have not skill, ask, (...)
and thou shall understand that there is no such signification of this word in all the bible, but that it signifies only mixture and mingling. A strange case,
that to avoid this mingling of the cup, being a most certain tradition of
the Apostles, they have invented two other significations of this Hebrew
word, which it never had before.

CHAP. XVIII. Heretical translation against the honor of SAINTS, namely of
our B. LADY.
1 LET us pass from Gods holy Sacraments to his honorable Saints in heaven,
and we shall find that these translations pluck from them also as much honor
as they may. In the Psalm 138 where the Catholic Church and al antiquity
reads thus, Psalm. 138.
Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus etc. Thy friends o God are become exceeding
honorable, their princedom is excedingly strengthened: which verse is sung and
said in the honor of the holy Apostles, agreably to that in an other Psalm,
Ps 44.
Constitues eos principes super omnem terram, Thou shall appoint them Princes
over all the earth: what mean they in all their English Bibles to alter it
thus: How dear are thy counsels (or thoughts) to me o God: o how great is
the sum of them? Does not the Hebrew make more for the old received Latin
translation, (...)
then for theirs, because the Hebrew word is used more commonly for to
signify friends then cogitations? does not S. Hierom so translate in his
translation of the Psalms according to the Hebrew? does not the great Rabbine
R. Solomon? Does not the Greek put it out of doubt, (...)
which is altogether according to the said ancient Latin translation?

2 And you my Masters that translate otherwise, (...)
I beseech you, is it in Hebrew, How great is the sum of them and not
rather word for word most plainly, how are the heads of them strengthened,
or their princedoms, as in the Greek also it is most manifest? (...).
Why do you then hunt after novelties, and forsake the trodden pathe of the
ancient, and pass the bounds which our holy forefathers have set and
appointed, preferring your own singularities and new devises even there
where you can not justly pretend either the Hebrew or Greek? Epito. Thesau.
Pagn. an. 1570. in radice.
When the Hebrew Lexicon has given the common interpretation of this place,
and then says, Quidam exponunt, Some expound it otherwise: why had you rather
be of that lesser, some that expound otherwise, then of the great society of
al ancient interpreters?

3 But this new fangled singulatitie of teaching and translating otherwise
then al antiquity has done, shall better appear in their dealing about our B.
Lady, whose honor they have sought so many ways to diminish and deface,
that the defense and maintenance thereof against the Heretics of our time is
grown to a great book learnedly written by the great Clerk and Jesuit,
father Canisius, entitled, Mariana.

4 Concerning our purpose, what was ever more common, and is now more
general and usual in all Christian Countries, then in the Aue Marie to say.
Gratia plena, full of grace, in so much that in the first English Bible it has
continued so still, and every child in our Country was taught so to say,
till the Aue Marie was banished altogether and not suffered to be said neither
in Latin nor English? What ancient father of the Latin Church has not
alvvaies so read and expounded? What Church in all the west has not ever so
sung and said? Only our new Translators have found a new kind of speech,
translating thus: Hail thou that art freely beloved. Bib. 1579. and 1577.
and, Hail thou that art in high favor. Why this, and that, or any other
thing, rather then, Hail full of grace? S. John Baptist was full of the holy
Ghost even from his birth, Luc. 1. v. 15.
S. Steven was full of grace, Act. 7. v. 8.
as the Scripture records of them both: why may not then our Lady much more
be called full of grace, Ambr. li. 2 in 1 Luc.
who (as S. Ambrose says) only obtained the grace, which no other women
deserved, to be replenished with the author of grace?

5 They vvil say, the Greek word does not so signify. does it not? I make
them selves vvitnesses of the contrary, and their own translation in other
places shall confute them, where they translate an other word of the self same
nature and form and in all respects like to this, Luc. 16. v. 20
full of sores. If (...) be full of sores, why is not (...) full of grace? Let
any Grecian of them al make me a difference in the nature and significancie of
these two words. Again if vlcerosus (as Beza translateth) be full of sores,
why is not gratiosa (as Erasmus translateth) full of grace? or why does Beza
marvel that Erasmus translated, gratiosa, when him self tra^slateth the like
word, vlcerosus. Al which adjectives in osus (you know) signify fulness, as,
periculosus, aerumnosus. Yet what a stir does Beza keep here in his
Annotatio^s to make the Greek word signify, freely beloved?

6 But has it in deed any such signification? tell us you that profess this
great skill of the tongues, (...)
what syllable is there in this word that sounds to that signification?
Comment. in Ephesians. 1.
S. Chrysostom and the Greek Doctors that should best know the nature of this
Greek word, say that it signifies, to make gracious, and acceptable, and
beloved, and beautiful, and amiable, and so to be desired as when the Psalm
says, Psalm. 44.
The king shall desire thy beauty. Beza him self says, that it is word for
word, gratificata, made grateful, and yet he expounds it, accepted before
God, and translateth it, freely beloved, because he will have no singular
grace or goodness or virtue resident in our B. Lady, but al by imputation and
acceptance, whereof I have spoken before. S. Athan. de S. Deip.
S. Athanasius a Greek Doctor says that she had this title (...), because the
Holy Ghost descended into the Virgin, filling her with al graces and virtues.
and I beseech the reader to see his words, which are many more concerning
this fulness of grace and al spiritual gifts. S. Hierom that knevv the Greek
word as well as the Protestants, Ep. 140 in expos. Psalm. 44.
reads, Gratia plena, and finds no fault with this interpretation. but
says plainly she was so saluted, full of grace, because she conceived him in
whom al fulness of the deity dwelled corporally.

7 Now let the English Bezites come with their new term, freely beloved,
and control these and al other ancient fathers both Greek and Latin, and
teach them a new signification of the Greek word, which they knevv not
before. John Keltridge preacher of the word in London. in his sermons within
the toure, printed. fo. 14.
Let John Keltridge one of their great preachers in London, come and tell us,
that the Septuaginta and the best translations in Greek have no such words
as we use in the Aue Marie, but that the word which the Septuaginta use, is
(...) etc. Gross ignorance and singular pride in many of the new clergy.
Who ever heard such a jest, that the preacher of the word of God in London
(so he is called in the title of his book) and preacher before the Jesuits
and Seminaries in the tovver, So he called the Priests of the Seminary, as if
one would call a monk a Monastery or a nonne a nonry.
which is next degree to the disputers there, whose sermons be solemnly
printed, and dedicated to one of the Queens Council, who seems to be such a
Grecian that he confuteth the vulgar Latin translation by the signification of
the Greek word, and in other places of his book alleges the Greek text:
Page 37. of the 2 part.
that this man for all this, refers us to the Septuaginta either as authors
of S. Lukes Gospel which is to ridiculous: or as translators thereof, as
though S. Luke had written in Hebrew, yea as though the whole new Testament
had been written in Hebrew (for so no doubt he presupposed) and that the
Septuaginta had translated it into Greek as they did the old, who were dead
three hundred years before S. Lukes Gospel and the new Testament was written.

8 All this is such a pitiful jest, as were incredible, if his printed book
did not give testimony. Pitiful I say, because the simple people count such
their preachers ioly fellows and great Clerks, because they can talk of the
Greek and of the Hebrew text, as this man does also concerning the Hebrew
letter Tau, Fol. 11. part. 2.
whether it had in old time the form of a cross or no, even as vvisely and
as skilfully, as he did before of the Septuaginta and the Greek word in S.
Lukes Gospel. Whose incredible folly and ignorance in the tongues perhaps I
would never have mentioned (because I think the rest are sorry and ashamed of
him) but that he boasts of that whereof he has no skill, and that the people
may take him for a very pattern and example of many other like boasters and
braggers among them, and that when they hear one talk lustely of the Hebrew
and Greek, and cite the text in the said tongues, they may alvvaies remember
John keltridge their preacher, and say to them selves, what if this fellovv
also be like John keltridge?

9 But to proceed: these great Grecians and Hebricians that control al
antiquity and the approved ancient Latin translation by sca^ning the Greek
and Hebrew words, that think it a great corruption Genesis 3. to read, Ipsa
conteret caput tuum, she shall bruise thy head, because it pertains to our
Ladies honor, calling it * Sand. Rock discou. page 145.
a corruption of the Popish Church, whereas S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, S. Bernard, and the rest read so, as being the common received text
in their time (though there has been also alvvaies the other reading even in
the vulgar Latin tra^slatio^, and therefore it is not any late reformation of
these new correctors, as though the Hebrew and Greek text before had been
unknown) these controulers I say of the Latin text by the Hebrew, against our
Ladies honor, are in an other place content to dissemble the Hebrew word, and
that also for small devotion to the B. Virgin: namely Hierem 7 and 44. Where
the Prophet inueigheth against them that offer sacrifice to the Queen of
heaven. this they think is very well, because it may sound in the peoples
ears against the use of the Catholic Church, which calls our Lady, Queen
of heaven. but they know very well that the Hebrew word does not signify,
Queen in any other place of the Scripture, and that the Rabbines and later
Hebricians (whom they gladly follow) deduce it otherwise, to signify rather
the whole corpse and frame of heaven, consisting of all the beautiful stars
and planets, and the Septuaginta call it not only (...), See Pagn. in radice.
Queen, but (...), the host of heaven, (...) and (...)
c. 7. Hierem: and S. Hierom not only, reginam, but rather, militiam coeli: and
when he names it reginam, Queen, he says we must understand it of the
moon, to which and to the other stars they did sacrifice and commit
idolatry. but the Protestants (against their custom of scanning the Hebrew and
the Greek) translate here, Queen of heaven, for no other cause in the world,
but to make it sound against her, whom Catholics truly call and vvorthily
honor as Queen of heaven, because her son is king, and she exalted above
Angels and al other creatures. See the New Test. Annot. Act. 1. v. 14.

10 Again, An. 1580.
why does the Geneua new Testament make S. Matthew to say, Cap. 1. v. 25.
that He (to wit, Joseph) called his name Jesus? Why not she, Cap. 1. v. 32.
as well as he? For in S. Luke the Angel says to our Lady also, Thou shall
call his name Jesus. S. Matthew then speaking indifferently, and not limiting
it to him or her, why do they give this preeminence to Joseph rather then to
the B. Virgin? did not both Zachary and also Elisabeth his wife by revelation
give the name of John to John the Baptist? Luc. 1. v. 60 and 63.
yea did not Elisabeth the mother first so name him, before Zachary her
husband? much more may we think that the B. Virgin the natural mother of our
Savior, gave him the name of Jesus, then Joseph his putatiue father, specially
if we consider that the Angel revealed the name first unto her, saying, that
she should so call him: and the Hebrew word Esa. 7. whereunto the Angel
alludeth, is the foeminine gender, and referred by the great Rabbines, Rabbi
Abraham and Rabbi David, unto her, saying expressly in their commentaries, Et
vocabit ipsa puella: and the maid her self shall call. and surely the usual
pointing of the Greek text (for Beza makes other points of his own) is much
more for that purpose. Now if they vvil say that Theophylacte understands it
of Joseph, true it is, and so it may be understood very well: but if it may be
understood of our Lady also, and rather of her then of him, why does your
translation exclude this other interpretation?

11 Where, by the way I must tell you (and else where perhaps more at large)
that it is your common fault to make some one doctors interpretation, the text
of your translation, and so to exclude all the rest that expound it otherwise,
which you know is such a fault in a translator as can by no means be
excused. Secondly the reader may here observe and learn, that if they shall
hereafter defend their translation of any place, by some doctors exposition
agreeable thereunto, that vvil not serve nor suffice them, because every Doctor
may say his opinion in his commentaries, * See chap. 1. nu. 3.43. Cha. 10. nu.
1.2. chap. 19. nu. 1.
but that must not be made the text of Scripture, because other doctors expound
it otherwise: and being in it self and in the original tongue ambiguous and
indifferent to diverse senses, it may not be restrained or limited by
translation, unless there be a mere necessity, when the translation can not
possibly or hardly express the ambiguitie and indifferency of the original
text.

12 As (for example) in this controversy concerning Saints, 2 Pet. 1. v. 15.
S. Peter speaks so ambiguously, either that he will remember the^ after his
death, or they shall remember him, that some of the Greek fathers gathered and
concluded thereupon (Oecum. in Caten. Gagneius in hunc locu^) that the Saints
in heaven remember us on earth, (...).
and make intercession for us. Which am biguitie both in the Greek and the
Latin, should be also kept and expressed in the English translation, and we
have endeavored as near as we could possibly so to make it, because of the
diverse interpretations of the ancient fathers. But it may seem perhaps to the
reader that the said ambiguitie can not be kept in our English tongue, and that
our own translation also can have but one sense. If it be so, and if there be
a necessity of one sense, then (as I said) the translator in that respect is
excused. But let the good reader consider also, that the Caluinists in
restraining the sense of this place, follow not necessity, but their heresy,
That Saints pray not for us. Beza.
Which is evident by this, that they restrain it in their Latin translations
also, where there is no necessity at al, but it might be as ambiguous and
indifferent, as in Greek, no. Test. Gr. Henr. Steph. an. 1576.
if it pleased them: yea when they print the Greek Testament only without any
translation, yet here they put the Latin in the margent, according as they vvil
have it read, and as though it might be read no otherwise then they prescribe.

CHAP. XIX. Heretical translation against the distinction of LATRIA and DVLIA.
1 IN this restraining of the Scripture to the sense of some one Doctor, there
is a famous example in the epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. v. 21
where the Apostle says either Jacob adored the top of Joseph's scepter, as
many read and expound: or else, that he adored tovvard the top of his scepter,
as other read and interpret: and beside these there is no other interpretation
of this place in all antiquity, but in S. Augustine only, as Beza confesses:
Quaest. in Genesis Bib. 1579.
yet are they so bold to make his exposition only, and his commentary peculiar
to him alone, the text of the Scripture in their translation, saying, Jacob
leaning on the end of his staff, worshipped God, and so excluding al other
senses and expositions of all the other fathers, excluding and condemning their
own former translations, Bib. 1562. 1577.
adding two words more then are in the Greek text, leaning, God: forcing
(...) to signify (...), which may be, but is as rare, as virgae eius, for
virgae suae: turning the other words clean out of their order and place and
form of construction which they must needs have correspondent and
answerable to the Hebrew text from whence they were translated: Genesis 47. v.
3. (...).
which Hebrew words them selves translate in this order, He worshipped
tovvard the beds head. If he worshipped tovvard the beds head, according
to the Hebrew: then did he worship tovvard the top of his scepter, according
to the Greek: the difference of both being only in these words, scepter,
and, bed (because the Hebrew is ambiguous to both) and not in the order or
construction of the sentence.

2 To make it more plain, when the Prophet David says, Adorabo ad templum
sanctum tuum Psalm. 5. and 137. is not the true translation, (...).
and gra^matical sequel of the words thus: I vvil adore tovvard thy holy
temple? Is it not a common phrase in the Scripture, that the people of God
adored tovvard Jerusalem, (...). Dan. 6. 3 Reg. 8. Psalm. 98. Ios. 7. (...).
Ps. 131.
tovvard his holy mount, before the arc, tovvard the place where his feet
stood? May any man be so bold, by adding and transposing to alter and obscure
al such places of holy Scripture, that there may appear no manner of adoration
tovvard or before a creature? and for worshipping or adoring tovvard the
things aforesaid and the like, may we say, leaning upon those things to
worship or adore God? Were they afraid lest those speeches of holy Scripture
might vvarrant and confirm the Catholic and Christian manner of adoring our
Savior Christ toward the holy Roode, at, or before his image and the Crucifixe
before the altar, and so forth? For had they not feated this, why should they
translate (...), caning upon, rather then, toward, yea, why in Genesis,
toward his beds head, and here not, toward?

3 And (which is more) when the ancient Greek fa^hers, Chrysostom. Oecum. in
Collectan. Damesc. li. 1. pro imaginibus, Leont. apud Damasc. put so little
force either in this preposition (...) (or the other alleged) that they
expound al those speeches as if the prepositions were of phrase only and not
of signification, (...).
saying, Jacob adored Joseph's scepter, (...).
the people of Israel adored the temple, the Arc, the holy mount, the place
where his feet stood, and the like, whereby S. Damascene proves the
adoration of creatures named Dulia, (...).
namely of the cross and of sacred images: if I say they make so little force
of the prepositions, that they infer not only adoration toward the thing,
but adoration of the thing: how do these goodly translatours, of al other
words so strain and rack the little particle (...) to signify, leaning
upon, that it shall in no wise signify any thing tending toward adoration?

4 And if the Greek Doctors suffice not to satisfy these great Grecians
herein, telme you that have skill in the Hebrew, whether in the foresaid
speeches cited out of the Psalms, there be any force in the Hebrew
prepositions? (...) Psalm. 98.131.
surely no more then if we should say in English without prepositions, Adore
ye his holy hill: we vvil adore the place where his feet stood: (...) Psalm.
95. or 96.
Adore ye his footestoole: For you know that there is the same preposition
also when it is said, Adore ye our Lord: or as your selves translate, worship
the Lord: where there can be no force nor signification of the prepositio^.
(...)
And therefore in these places also your translation is corrupt and willful,
when you say thus: We vvil fall down before his footestoole. fall ye down
before his footestoole, before his holy mount, or vvouship him upon his holy
hill: Where you shun and avoid first the term of adoration, which the
Hebrew and Greek duly express by terms correspondent in both languages,
(...).
through out the Bible, and are applied for the most part to signify adoring
of creatures. Secondly you avoid the Greek phrase, which is at the least, to
adore toward these holy things and places: and much more the Hebrew phrase,
which is, to adore the very things rehearsed: to adore Gods footestoole (as
the Psalm says) because it is holy, Psalm. 98.
or, because he is holy, whose footestoole it is, as the Greek reads.

5 This being most manifest to all that have skill in these tongues, it is
evident that you regard neither Hebrew nor Greek, but only your heresy: and
that in S. Paul's place aforesaid of adoring Joseph's scepter, you alter it by
your own fancy, and not by S. Augustines authority, whom I am sure you
vvil not admit reading in the Psalm, Adore ye his footestoole: and so
precisely and religiously reading thus, that he examineth the case, and finds
thereby that the B. Sacrament must be adored, and that no good Christian does
take it, before he adore it. Neither vvil you admit him when he reads thus
of David, Praef. in Ps. 33.
He was carried i^ his own hands, and interprets it mystically of Christ,
that he was carried in his own hands, when he gave his body and blood to
his disciples. Yet are S. Augustines interpretations (howsoever you like or
mislike them) very good, as also that above named of Jacobs leaning upon his
staff, and adoring, may be one good sense or commentary of that place, but
yet a commentary, and one Doctors opinion, not the sacred text of Scripture,
as you would make it by so translating.

6 And if S. Hierom like not the Greek Doctors interpretation in this place of
adoring Joseph and his scepter, yet he also says that Jacob adored tovvard
Joseph's rod, or tovvard the beds head, and not leaning upon his staff he
adored, which you make the text of Scripture. And though he think that in
this place is not meant any adoration of Joseph, yet I am sure, for adoration
of holy things, namely Relikes, the holy land, and all the holy places and
monuments of Christ's being and doing upon the earth, you vvil not be tried by
S. Hierom. And again, why S. Paul should say, that by faith he adored, and in
respect of things to come, it is not otherwise easy to understand, but that
he partly foresaw the kingdom of Ephraim, in the posterity of Joseph: partly
the kingdom of Christ prefigured in Joseph then Prince of Egypt, and so by
faith adored his scepter or tovvard his scepter (which is al one) as the
Greek fathers for the most part expound it. But let us hasten tovvard an end.

CHAP. XX. Heretical translation by ADDING TO THE TEXT.
1 BECAUSE in the last corruption I spoke of adding to the text, though it be
their common and universal fault in every controversy, as is to be seen in
every chapter of this book: yet here I vvil add certain places not yet
mentioned. As, 2 Paral. 36. v. 8. in Bib. 1562.
The rest of the acts of Iehoakim, and his abominations which he did, and
CARVED IMAGES THAT WERE LAID TO HIS CHARGE, BEHOLD THEY ARE WRITTEN etc. these
words, Against images.
carved images laid to his charge, are more then is either in the Greek or the
Hebrew.

2 Again, Act. 9. v. 22. Bib. 1577.
Saul confounded the Jews proving (by conferring one Scripture with an
other) that this is very Christ. These words, For Conference of Scriptures,
against fathers, Councels etc.
by conferring one scripture with another, are added more then is in the
Greek text: in favor of their presumptuous opinion, that conference of
Scriptures is enough for any man to understand them, and so to reject both the
commentaries of the Doctors, and exposition of holy Councels and Catholic
Church. it is so much more I say then is in the Greek text, and a notorious
corruption in their Bible read daily in their churches as most authentical. See
the rest of their Bibles, and thou shall find no more for all those words,
but, affirming, or, confirming. (...). c. 2. v. 16.
and the self same Bible in the first epistle to the Corinthians translateth
the same Greek word thus, Who shall instruct? (...).
And in deed that is the true and usual signification of the word, both in
the old Testament, and in the new. as Deuteronomy. 4. Thou shall teach them thy
children. And Esa. 40. Who shall instruct our Lord? the Hebrew word also in
both places signifying no more but instructing and teaching. (...)
And so does the Apostle cite it to the Corinthians out of Esaias, and he uses
it to the Colos. (c. 2. v. 2) in the same signification, as the Church reads
and expounds it, and so consequently S. Luke in the place whereof we now
treat, says nothing else, but that S. Paul earnestly taught or instructed them
that Jesus is Christ. And yet our new Translators without respect of Hebrew
or Greek, have coined a new signification, of conferring one Scripture with
an other. So ignorant they are in the signification of Greek words, or
rather so vvilfully malicious.

3 Again, 1 Pet. 1. v. 25. Bib. 1562. 1577. Against traditions.
in the first epistle of S. Peter they translate thus: The word of the Lord
endures ever: and this is the word which by the Gospel was preached unto
you. where these words, by the Gospel, are added deceitfully and of il
intent, to make the reader think that there is no other word of God but the
written word, for the common reader hearing this word, Gospel, conceiueth
nothing else. But in deed al is the Gospel whatsoever the Apostles taught
either by vvriting, or by tradition and word of mouth, as S. Paul speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2. and S. Peter says nothing else in the place alleged, but, (...).
This is the word which is preached among you, as the Geneua bibles
translate, or more significantly, which is euangelized among you, as we
translate. for though there be greater significancie in the Greek word, then
is expressed by bare preaching or telling a thing, as having a goodly relation
and allusion to the word, Euangelium, Gospel: Euangelizo.
yet neither do they in any other place, neither can they translate it, to
preach by the Gospel: but simply, to preach, to tell, to show. as, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ, (...).
Act. 10. v. 36. so them selves translate it. and Ps. 95 (or 96. v. 2) Be
telling of his salvation from day to day. Which in other places is spoken by
other Greek words, that have no signification at al of Gospel. as immediately
in the said Ps. 95 (or 96. v. 3) and Ps. 104. (or 105. v. 1.) and Act. 13. v.
5. and c. 17. v. 23. and Io. 1. verse. 3.

4 Al which words signify only to tell, to show, to declare, and are used
indifferently for and with the other word which they here only translate, to
preach by the Gospel. Whereas in all others places when they vvil translate
it most significantly, Luc. 2. v. 10. Act. 13. v. 32. Gal. 3, 8.
they express it by bringing glad tidings: and in some places where it should
be expressed most significantly in respect of euangelizing or preaching the
Gospel, Dominus dabit verbu^ euangelizantibus. Qui Euangelizas Jerusalem. Ps.
67. Isa. 40.
there they translate it barely, preachers, and preaching. Only S. Peter's place
aforesaid, must be stretched to signify, The word preached by the Gospel, to
insinuate and uphold their heresy of the written Gospel only, or only
written word, against Apostolical traditions not written. If this be not
their meaning, let them give us a good reason why they translate it so in this
one place only.

5 It is written of Luther that he for the self same heresy, Lind. Dubit.
page 88.
in his first translation into the Germane tongue, left out these words of S.
Peter altogether, This is the word which is euangelized or preached to you.
Why so? because S. Peter does here define what is the word of God: saying,
that which is preached to you, and not that only which is written. Which
false dealing of Luther is no small presumption against the like heretical
meaning of our English Protestants, who (I am sure) in this point of
controversy of the word written and unwritten, vvil not deny that they
agree with the Lutherans.

6 Again in the epistle of S. James, Ia. 4. v. 6.
they add the word, Scripture, into the text, saying, But the Scripture
offers more grace. Where the Apostle may say as well, and indifferently, The
Spirit or holy Ghost gives more grace, and it is much more probable, and is so
expounded of many. Let the good reader see the circumstance of the place, and
abhor their saucines in the text of holy scripture.

7 One addition of theirs I would not speak of, but only to know the reason
why they do it, because it is very strange, and I know not what they should
mean by it. this I am sure, if they do it for no purpose, they do it very
folishly and forgetfully and contrary to them selves. In the Gospel of S.
Mark, Marc 3. v 16
in the reckening of the Apostles, they add these words, And the first was
Simon, Bibl. 1579.
more then is in their Greek text. Which addition they learned of Beza,
whose contradictions in this point are worthy noting. Mat. 10. v. 2.
In S. Matthew where these words are, he suspecteth that, first, was added
by some Papist, for Peter's primacie: here, where the word is not, he
avouches it to be the true text of the Gospel, and that because Matthew
reads so. there he alleged this reason, why it could not be said the first,
Simon, because there is no consequence nor coherence of second, third, fourth,
etc: here he says, that is no impediment, because there be many examples of
such speech, and namely in the said place of S. Matthew. there he says it is
not so, though al Greek copies have it so: here it must needs be so, though
it be only found in certain odd Greek copies of Erasmus, which Erasmus him
self (as Beza confesses) allowed not, but thought that these words were
added in them out of S. Matthew. What these contradictions mean I know not,
and I would learn the reason thereof, of his scholars our English
translators, vvho' by their Masters authority have made the self same
addition in their English translation also.

8 There is also an other addition of theirs, either proceeding of ignorance, or
of the accustomed humor, when they translate thus: Col. 1. v. 23.
if ye continue stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from the hope
of the Gospel, which ye have heard how it was preached to every creature:
or, whereof ye have heard how that it is preached: or, whereof ye have
heard, and which has been preached to every creature, etc. For, al these
varieties they have, and none according to the Greek text, which is word for
word, as the vulgar Latin interpreter has most sincerely translated it,
Immovable from the hope of the Gospel which you have heard, (...).
which is or has been preached among al creatures, etc. So that the Apostles
exhortation is unto the Colossians, that they continue grounded and stable in
the faith and Gospel which they had heard and received of their first
Apostles: To. 16. Ga. c. 1. and 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Heb. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 2 Timothy 1. and
2.
as in the epistle to the Romans, and to the Galatians, and to the
Thessalonians, and to the Hebrews, and to Timothee, and S. John in his first
epistle c. 2. v. 24: and S. Jude v. 3. and 20: al use the like exhortations.

9 But this does not so well like the Protestants which * 1 Timothy 1. and 6.
with Hymenaeus and Alexander and other o! Heretics have fallen from their
first faith, and therefore they alter the Apostles plain speech with certain
words of their own, and they vvil not have him say, Be immovable in the
faith and Gospel which you have heard and received: but, whereof you have
heard how that it is preached: as though he spoke not of the Gospel preached
to them, but of a Gospel which they had only heard of, that was preached in
the world. Certain it is, these words, whereof you have heard how it was
preached, are not so in the Greek: but, which you have heard, which has
been preached. Which is as much to say, as that they should continue constant
in the faith and Gospel which them selves had received, and which was then
preached and received in the whole world. So say we to our dear
countriemen, Stand fast in the faith and be immovable from the hope of the
Gospel which you heard of your first Apostles, CHAP. 21.
which was and is preached in all the world. If the Protestants like not this
exhortation, they do according to their translation.

CHAP. XXI. Certain other heretical TREACHERIES and CORRVPTIONS, vvorthie of
observation.
1 THEY hold this position, that the Scriptures are not hard to be understood,
that so every one of them may presume to interpret and expound them. And
because S. Peter says plainly, 2 Pet. 3. Corruption concerning the easines of
the scriptures.
that S. Paul's Epistles are hard, and other Scriptures also, which the
unlearned (says he) pervert to their own destruction, therefore they labor
tooth and nail to make this subtle difference, Beza in Annot.
that S. Peter says not, Paul's epistles are hard but some things in S.
Paul's epist: are hard (as though that were not al one) and therefore they
translate so, that it must needs be understood of the things, and not of the
Epistles, pretending the Greek, (...).
which yet they know in some copies can not be referred to the things, (...).
Test. Gr. Crisp.
but must needs be understood of the Epistles. Wherefore, the Greek copies
being indifferent to both, and the thing also in very deed being al one,
whether the hardness be in the Epistles or in the matter (for when we say the
Scripture is hard, we mean specially the matter) it is not only an Heretical
but a foolish and peevish spirit that makes them so curious and precise in
their translations, as here to limite and abridge the sense to the things only,
Beza translating, (...).
inter quae sunt multa difficilia, and not, in quibus, as it is in the old
vulgar translation, most sincere, and indifferent both to epistles and things.

Corruption to make God the author of sin.
An other fashion they have, which can not proceed of good meaning, that is,
when the Greek text is indifferent to two senses, and one is received, read,
and expounded of the greater part of the ancient fathers, and of all the Latin
Church, there to follow the other sense not so generally received and approved.
as in S. James epistle where the common reading is, Deus intentator malorum
est, God is no tempter to evil, they translate, God can not be tempted with
evil, which is so impertinent to the Apostles speech there, as nothing more.
But why vvil they not say, God is no tempter to evil, as well as the other? is
it because of the Greek word which is a passive? (...).
Let them see their Lexicon, and it vvil tell them that it is both an active and
passive. so say other learned Grecians, Gagneius.
interpreters of this place. so says the very circumstance of the words next
going before, Let no man say that he is tempted of God. Why so? Because God is
not tempted with evil, say they. is this a good reason? nothing less. how
then? Because God is no tempter to evil, therefore let no man say that he is
tempted of God.

3 This reason is so coherent and so necessary in this place, that if the
Greek word were only a passive (as it is not) yet it might beseem Beza to
translate it actiuely, who has turned the active into a passive without
scrupulositie, as him self confesses, and is before noted, against the real
presence. Much more in this place might he be bold to translate that actiuely,
which is both an active and a passive, specially having such an example and so
great authority as is all the ancient Latin Church until this day. But why
would he not? surely because he would favor his and their heresy, which
says clean contrary to these words of the Apostle, Annot. No. Test. an.
1556. Mat. 6. v. 13.
to wit, that God is a tempter to evil. Is that possible to be proved? yea it
is possible and plain. Bezas words be these, Inducit Dominus in tentationem
eos quos Satanae arbitrio permittit, autin quos potius Satanam ipsum inducit,
vt cor eorum impleat, vt loquitur Petrus Act. 5. v. 3. that is, The Lord
leads into tentation those whom he permits to Satan's arbitrament, or into
whom rather he leads or brings in Satan him self to fill their heart, as
Peter speaks. Mark that he says God brings Satan into a man, to fill his
heart, as Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie unto
the Holy Ghost? So then by this man's opinion God brought Satan into Ananias
heart, to make him lie unto the holy Ghost, and so led him into tentation,
being author and causer of that heinous sin.

4 Is not this to say, God is a tempter to evil: clean contrary to S. James
the Apostle? or could he that is of this opinion, translate the contrary, that
God is no tempter to evil? Is not this as much to say as that God also brought
Satan into Judas to fill his heart, and so was author of Judas treason, even as
he was of Paul's conversion? See Beza Annot. in To. c. 1. v. 24 Act, 2. v. 23.
Whit. ad ra. Camp. page 139. 145.
Let Beza now and Master Whitakers or any other Heretic of them al, wrest
and wring them selves from the absurdity of this opinion, as they endeavor
and labor to do excedingly, because it is most blasphemous: yet shall they
never be able to clear and discharge them selves from it, if they vvil allow
and maintain their foresaid exposition of Gods leading into tentation. (...)
Act. 2. v. 23.
Does not Beza for the same purpose translate, Gods providence, for, Gods
prescience? Which is so false, that the English Bezites in their translation
are ashamed to follow him.

5 An other exceeding treachery to deceive the reader, is this: that they use
Catholic terms and speeches in such places where they may make them odious,
Corruption in abusing Catholic words.
and where they must needs sound odiously in the peoples ears. As for
example, this term, procession, they put very maliciously and falsely thus: 2
Match. 6. v. 7.
When the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were constrained to go in the
procession of Bacchus. Let the good reader see the Greek Lexico^, Bib. 1570.
(...) procession.
if there be any thing in this word like to the Catholic Churches
processions: or whether it signify so much as, to go about, as their other
bibles are translated, Bib. 1562.1577.
which meant also heretically, but yet durst not name, procession.

6 Again, He put down the Priests (of Baal) whom the kings of Judah had
founded to burn incense. Founded.
4 Reg. 23. v. 5. (...)
So they translate (the Hebrew being simply to give, make, appoint) because in
the Catholic Church there are foundations of chaunterie Priests, Chapples,
ditiges, etc. Neither is it sincerely and without il meaning that they say
here the Priests of Baal whom, etc. Because the Hebrew word signifies al
those that ministered in the temples of false gods.

7 Again, Shrines, (...).
Silver shrines for Diana. Act. 19. v. 24. Because of the shrines and
tabernacles made to the image of our B. Lady: the Greek word signifying,
temples, and Beza says, he can not see how it may signify shrines.

8 Again, Devotions (...)
As I passed by, and beheld your deuotio^s, I found an altar, Act. 17. v. 23.
So they call the superstition of the Athenians toward their false gods, because
of Catholic peoples deuotio^s toward the true God, his Church, altars,
Saints, etc, the Greek word signifying the things that are worshipped (as 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4. and Sap. 15. v. 17.) not the manner of worshipping. (...).


9 Again, (...).
The Jews had agreed, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he
should be excommunicate, Ioh. 9. v. 22. And Jesus heard that they had
excommunicated him, v. 35. to make the Jews doing against them that confessed
Christ, sound like to the Catholic Churches doing against Heretics in
exco^municating them, Excommunication.
and so to disgrace the Priests power of excommunication: whereas the Jews
had no such spiritual excommunication, but (as the Greek must needs only
signify) they did, put them out of the Synagogue, Aposynagogum facere.
and so they should have translated, the Greek word including the very name
of Synagogue. But they, as though the Church of Christ and the Synagogue of the
Jews were al one, so translate, excommunicating, and putting out of the
Synagogue, as al one.

10 I omit here as spoken before, that they call an Idol, the Queen of heaven,
because we call our Lady by that title: so to make both seem like. Also,
Altars.
that they say Bells altar thrice, Images.
for Bells table, to disgrace altars: and that for idols, they say images, in
despite of the Churches images: that they say tradition duly in the il part,
Traditions.
yea sometime when it is not in the Greek, to make traditions odious, and such
like. Thus by similitude and like sound of words they beguile the poor
people, not only in their false expositions concerning Iudaical fastes, meats,
observation of days (as is else where shevved) but also in their translations.
So does Caluins new Testament in french, Mat. 23.
for, Nolite vocari Rabbi, translate, Be not called, nostre maistre or,
Magister noster: in derision and disgrace of this title and calling, which is
peculiar to Doctors of Divinity in the Catholic Universities beyond the seas:
even as Wicleffe their grandfather did upon the same words condemn such
degrees in Universities. But their Rabbines can tell them that Rabbi signifies,
Magister, and not, Magister noster. and S. John tells them so chap. 1. v. 38.
and chap. 3. v. 2. and chap. 20. v. 16. and yet it pleases them to translate
otherwise and to abuse Christ's own sacred words against Catholic Doctors
and schools: not considering that as Christ forbadde them to be called Rabbi,
so he forbadde them the name of father and fathers, and yet I trow they vvil
not scoff at this name either in their own fathers, or in them selves so
called of their children: though in Religious men, according to their heretical
humor, they scoff also at this name, as they do at the other in Doctors.

A heap of corruptions.
11 Contrarievvise as they are diligent to put some words odiously where they
should not, so they are as circumspect not to put other words and terms,
where they should. In their first bible (printed again an. 1562.) not once
the name of Church: in the same, for charity, love: for altar, temple: for
heretic, an author of sects: and for heresy, sect: because in those
beginnings, al these words sounded excedingly against them. The Church they
had then forsaken, Christian charity they had broken by schism, altars they
dug down, heresy and heretic they knevv in their conscience were like in
the peoples ears to agree unto them, rather then to the old Catholic faith
and professors of the same. Again in all their bibles indifferently, both
former and later, they had rather say, righteous, then, just: righteousness,
then, justice: gift, then, grace, specially in the sacrament of holy orders:
secret, rather then mystery, specially in matrimony: dissension, then,
schism: and these words not at al, Priest, (to wit, of the new Testament)
Sacrament, Catholic, hymns, confession, penance, iustifications, and
traditions in the good part: but in steed thereof, Elders, secret, general,
praises, acknovvledging, amendment of life, ordinances, instructions. and
which is, somevvhat worse, carcas, for soul, and grave for hell. we may say
unto you as Demosthenes said to Aeschines. Demosth. (...).
(...) what are these? words or wonders? certainly they are wonders, and
very wonderful in Catholic men's ears. and whether it be sincere and not
heretical dealing, I appeal to the wise and indifferent reader of any sort.

CHAP. XXII. Other faults Iudaical, profane, mere vanities, follies and
novelties.
1 Now leaving matters of controversy, let us talk a little with you
familiarly, and learn of you the reason of other points in your translation,
which to us seem faults, and savor not of that spirit which should be in
Christian Catholic translators.

2 First, you are so profane, that you say, The ballet of ballets of Solomon,
so terming that divine book Canticum Canticorum, containing the high mystery
of Christ and his Church, as if it were a ballet of love between Solomon and
his co^cubine, as Castaleo vvantonly translateth it. But you say more profanely
thus, we have conceived, we have borne in pain, as though we should have
brought forth vvinde. I am ashamed to tell the literal commentary of this your
translation. Esa. 26. v. 18.
Why might you not have said, We have conceived and as it were travailed to
bring forth, and have brought forth the spirit? is there any thing in the
Hebrew to hinder you thus far? Why would you say, vvinde, rather then,
spirit: knovving that the Septuaginta in Greek, and the ancient fathers, and
S. Hierom him self who tra^slateth according to the Hebrew, Ambr. li. 2. de
Interpel. c. 4. Chrysostom. in Ps. 7. prope finem. See S. Hier. upon this place.
yet for sense of the place, al expound it both according to Hebrew and Greek,
of the spirit of God, which is first conceived in us and begins by feate,
which the Scripture calls the beginning of wisdoms. in so much that in the
Greek there are these goodly words, famous in all antiquity: Through the
fear of the o Lord we conceived and have trauailea with pain, and have
brought forth the spirit of thy salvation, which thou have made upon the
earth. Which does excellently set before our eyes the degrees of a faithful
man's increase and proceeding in the spirit of God, which begins by the fear
of his judgments, and is a good fear, though servile, and not sufficient. and
it may be that you condemning with Luther this servile fear as evil and
hurtful, mean also some such thing by your translation. But in deed the place
may be understood of the other fear also, which has his degrees more or less.

3 But to say, we have brought forth vvinde, can admit no such interpretation.
but even as if a mere Jew should translate or understand it, who has no
sense of Gods spirit, so have you excluded the true sense which concerns the
Holy Ghost, and not the cold term of vvinde, and whatsoever naked
interpretation thereof. And it is your fashion in all such cases, where the
richer sense is of Gods holy spirit, there to translate vvinde, as Ps. 147. v.
18. as you number the psalms.

4 And it is not unlike to this, that you vvil not translate for the Angels
honor that carried Abacuc, He set him into Babylon, over the lake by the
force of his spirit: (...).
but thus, through a mighty vvinde: so attributing it to the vvinde, not to
the Angels power, and omitting clean the Greek pronovvne (...), his, which
shows evidently that it was the Angels spirit, force, and power.

5 Again, where the Prophets speak most manifestly of Christ, there you
translate clean an other thing: as Esa. 30. v. 20. When S. Hierom translateth
thus, Bib. 1579.
and the Church has alvvaies read accordingly, Non faciet auolare ate vltra
Doctorem tuum: and erunt oculi tui videntes praeceptorem tuum. that is, (...)
And (our Lord) shall not cause thy Doctor to fly from thee any more: and thine
eyes shall see thy Master. Which is al one in effect with that which Christ
says, I vvil be with you unto the end of the world: there you translate
thus, Thy rain shall be no more kept back: but thine eyes shall see thy rain.
So likewise Joel 2. v. 23. where the holy church reads, Rejoice ye children
of Sion in the Lord your God: because he has given you the Doctor of justice:
there you translate, the rain of righteousness. See (...)
Does the Hebrew word force you to this? you know that it signifies a
teacher or Master. and therefore the Jews them selves, Lyra in 30 Esa.
partly understand it of Esdras, partly of Christ's Divinity. Why are you more
profane (I vvil not say more Iudaical) then the Jews them selves? why might
not S. Hierom a Christian Doctor and lacking no skill in the Hebrew (as you well
know) satisfy you, who makes no doubt but the Hebrew in these places is,
Doctor, Master, teacher? Who also (in Psalm. 84, 7:) translateth thus, With
blessings shall the Doctor be araied: meaning Christ. Where you with the later
Rabbines the enemies of Christ translate, The rain covers the pooles. What
cold stuff is this in respect of that other translation so clearly pointing to
Christ our Master and Doctor?

6 And again, where S. Hierom translateth, and the Church reads, and all the
fathers interpret and expound accordingly, Es 33.
There shall be faith in thy times: to express the marvelous faith that shall be
then, in the first Christians specially, even unto death, and in all the rest
concerning the hidden mysteries of the new Testament: there you translate,
There shall be stabilitie of thy times. The Prophet joins together there,
judgment, justice, faith, wisdoms, knowledge, the fear of our Lord: you for
a little ambiguitie of the Hebrew word, turn faith into stabilitie.

7 If I should burden you with translating thus also concerning Christ, Esa. 2.
Cease from the man whose breath in his nostrels: for wherein is he to be
esteemed? You would say I did you wrong, because it is so pointed now in the
Hebrew. Whereas you know very well by S. Hieroms commentary upon that
place, (...)
that this is the Jews pointing or reading of the word, against the honor of
Christ: the true reading and translation being as he interprets it, for he is
reputed high: and therefore bevvare of him. Otherwise (as S. Hierom says)
what a consequence were this, or who would commend any man thus, Take heed
ye offend not him, who is nothing esteemed? yet that is your translation.
Neither does the Greek help you which (if the accent be truly put) is thus,
(...) Gal. 2. v. 6.
because he is reputed for some body or some thing: as S. Paul speaks of the
chief Apostles, and it is our phrase in the commendation of a man.

8 The like excuse you would have by alleging the Hebrew vovvels, if you
were told that you much obscure a notable saying of the prophet concerning
Christ, or rather the speech of Christ him self by his prophet, saying: I have
spoken by the Prophets, Osee 12, 10.
and I have multiplied vision, and in the hand of the Prophets (that is, by the
Prophets) have I been resembled. Which later words do excedingly express,
that all the Prophets spoke of Christ: as our Savior him self declares, Luc.
24. v. 27. Act. 3.
beginning from Moses and all the Prophets to interpret unto the two
disciples, the things that concerned him. and as S. Peter says in these
words, All the Prophets from Samuel and that spoke after him, did tell of these
days. This prophecy then being so consonant to these speeches of the new
Testament, the Greek also being word for word so, (...)
the Hebrew by cha^ging one little prick (which the later Jews have added at
their own pleasure) being fully so as we read with the Catholic Church:
why pretend you the Jews authority to maintain an other less Christian
translation, which is thus: I use similitudes by the ministry of the
Prophets. as though there were nothing there concerning Christ or the second
person peculiarly?

9 You vvil also perhaps allege not only the later jews, but also some later
Catholic men that so translate the Hebrew. The Hebrew text, is no certain
rule to interpret by.
But the difference between them and you, is, that they, with reverence and
preferment alvvaies of S. Hieroms and the Churches ancient translation, tell us
how it is now in the Hebrew: you, with derogation and disanulling the same
altogether, set down your own as the only true interpretation according to
the Hebrew: auouching the Hebrew that now is, and as now it is printed, to be
the only authentical truth of the old Testament. Where you can never answer
us, how that in the Psalm 22, As a lion my hand and my feet (as now it is
in the Hebrew) can be the true and old authentical Hebrew, (...)
which none of the fathers knevv, the ancient Rabbines condemn as a
corruption, your selves translate it not, but after the old accustomed reading,
They have pierced my hands and my feet Which is a notable prophecy of our
Saviors kind and manner of Passion, being crucified on the Cross. Only the
later Jews, and such Heretics as think he died upon a gallous or gibbet,
and not upon the Cross, they like this Hebrew text well, and stand upon it, as
you do upon al without exception, and yet when it comes to certain
particulars, you are compelled to forsake it. as in certain other places, for
example.

Faults in the Hebrew text.
10 Where the Hebrew says, Achaz king of Israel, 2 Paralip. 28. v. 19. which
is not true, you are compelled to translate, Achaz king of Judah, as the truth
is, and as it is in the Greek and the vulgar Latin. yet * Bib. 1579.
some of your Bibles follow the false hod of the Hebrew.

11 Likewise, where the Hebrew says, Zedecias his brother, meaning the
brother of Ioachin, you translate, Zedecias his fathers brother, Bib. 1579.
as in deed the truth is, according to the Greek, and to the Scripture 4 Reg.
24. v. 19. and therefore your Bible which follows the Hebrew here also,
translating, his brother, yet in the margent puts down as more true, uncle.

12 Likewise in an other place, the Hebrew is so out of frame, that some of
your Bibles say, he begat Azuba of his wife Azuba. and othersome translate, he
begat Ierioth of his wife Azuba: the Hebrew being thus, he begat Azuba his
wife and Ierioth, which neither you nor any man else can easily tell what to
make of. Thus you see how easy it were (if a man would multiply such
examples) to show by your own testimonies the corruption of the Hebrew, In
the preface of the new Test.
and that your selves do not, nor dare not exactly follow it, as of the Greek
text of the new Testament also is declared else where.

13 But it is greater marvel, why you follow not the Hebrew in other places
also, where is no corruption. You protest to translate it according to the
points or vovvels that now it has, and that you call the Hebrew verity. Tell
me then I beseech you, why do you in all your Bibles translate thus, O Virgin
daughter of Sion, he has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn: Esa. 37.
v. 22
o daughter of Jerusalem he has shaken his head at thee. In the Hebrew,
Greek, (...).
S. Hieroms translation and commentary, it is clean contrary, The Virgin
daughter of Sion has despised thee (o Assure:) the daughter of Jerusalem has
shaken her head at thee. Al are the foeminine gender, and spoken of Sion
literally, and of the Church spiritually triumphing over Assure and al her
enemies: (...).
you translate al as of the masculine ge^der, and apply it to Assure insulting
against Jerusalem. etc. I can not conceive what this translation means, and
I would gladly know the reason, and I would have thought it some gross
oversight, but that I find it so in all your English Bibles, and not only in
this place of Esaias, but also in the books of the kings, 4 Reg. 19. where the
same words are repeated. And it is no less marvel unto us that know not the
reason of your doings, why you have Bib 1577. (...)
left out Alleluia nine times in the six last Psalms, Alleluia.
being in the Hebrew nine times more then in your translation: specially when
you know that it is the ancient and joyful song of the primitive Church. See
the new English Testament, Annot. Apoc. 19.

14 Again, you translate thus: Many which had seen the first house, when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept etc. Look well to
your Hebrew, and you shall find it according both to the Greek and the Latin,
thus: Many which had seen the first house in the foundation thereof (that is,
yet standing upon the foundation, not destroyed) and this temple before their
eyes, wept. You imagined that it should be meant, they savv Salomons temple,
when it was first founded, which because it was impossible, therefore you
translated otherwise then is in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. But yet in some
of your Bibles you should have considered the matter better, (...)
and translated accordingly.

15 And surely why you should translate (4 Reg. 23. v. 13.) On the right hand
of mount Oliuete, rather then as it is in the vulgar Latin: and why, Ye abject
of the Gentiles, Esa. 45. v. 20. rather then, ye that are saved of the
Gentiles: you belike know some reason, we do not, neither by the Hebrew nor
the Greek.

16 Howbeit in these lesser things (though nothing in the Scripture is to be
counted little) you might perhaps more freely have taken your pleasure, in
following neither Hebrew nor Greek: but when it concerns a matter no less
then usury, there by your false translation to give occasion unto the reader,
to be an usurer, is no small fault either against true religion or against good
manners. Bib. 1562. 1577. Deuteronomy. 23. v. 19.
This you do most evidently in your most authentical translations, saying
thus: Thou shall not hurt thy brother by usury of money, nor by usury of
corn, nor by usury of any thing that he may be hurt vvithal. What is this to
say, but that usury is not here forbidden, unless it hurt the party that
borovveth, which is so rooted in most men's hearts, (...), etc.
that they think such usury very lavvful, and daily offend mortally that
way. Where almighty God in this place of holy Scripture has not a word of
hurting or not hurting (as may be seen by the Geneua bibles) but says simply
thus: Thou shall not lend to thy brother to usury, usury of money, usury of
meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury.

17 Mark the Hebrew and the Greek, and see, and be ashamed, that you strain
and pervert it, to say for, Non foenerabis fratri tuo, which is word for
word in the Greek and Hebrew, Thou shall not hurt thy brother by usury. If
the Hebrew word in the use of holy Scripture do signify, to hurt by usury,
why do you in the very next words following, in the self same Bibles translate
it thus, ibid. v. 20.
unto astranger thou may lend upon usury, but not unto thy brother? Why
said you not, A stranger thou may hurt with usury, but not thy brother? Is
it not al one word and phrase here and before? And if you had so translated it
here also, the Jews would have thanked you, who by forcing the Hebrew word
as you do, think it very good to hurt any stranger, that is, any Christian by
any usury be it never so great.

18 What shall I tell you of other faults, which I would gladly account
ouersightes or ignorances, such as we also desire pardon of, but al are not
such, though some be. As, Two thousand, Cant. Ca^tic. c. 8. v. 12 Bib. 1579.
(written at length) to them that keep the fruit thereof. In the Hebrew and
Greek, two hundred. Again in the same book c. 1. v. 4. As the fruits of
Cedar. in the Hebr. and Greek. tabernacles. And, Isa. 7. v. 11.
Ask a sign either in the depth or in the height above, for, in the depth of
Hell. And, Great works are wrought by him. Mat. 14. v. 2.
for, do work in him, as S. Paul uses the same word 2 Cor. 4. v. 12. And,
(...).
To make ready an horse. Act. 23. v. 24. in the Greek, beasts, And, Bib. 1577.
If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision without breaking of the law
of Moses. Io. 7. v. 23. For, (...).
to the end that the law of Moses be not broken. And, The son of man must
suffer many things, (...).
and be reproved of the elders. Mar. 8. v. 31. For, be rejected, as in the
psalm, The stone which the builders rejected, we say not, reproving of the
said stone, which is Christ. 1 Timothy 3.
And, (...) a young scholar, in all your tra^slatio^s, falsely. And, Simo of
Chanaan or Simon the Cananite, Mar. 3.
who is called otherwise, Zelotes, that is Zealous, as an interpretation of the
Hebrew word, Cananaeus: which I marvel you considered not, specially
considering that the Hebrew word for Zealous, (...)
and the other for a Cananite, begin with diverse letters. and, Heb. 2. v. 1.
lest at any time we should let them slip. for, lest we slip or run by,
and so be lost.

19 And as for the first bible, An. 1562.
which was done in have, and not yet corrected, but is printed still a fresh:
Mat. 22.
that says, With Herod's servants, as though that were the only sense: that
calls idiotas lay men: Mat. 24.
(...), a ship: Mar. 5.
(...), vvondering: Mat. 25.
(...), are gone out: Ephesians. 3.
(...), his substance: and, To know the excellent love of the knowledge of
Christ. For, the love of Christ that excels knowledge. And, of men that
turn away the truth. Tit. 1.
For, that shun the truth and turn away from it. And, Mount Sina is Agar in
Arabia. For, Agar is Mount Sina. etc.

20 Let these and the like be small negligences or ignorances, such as you vvil
pardon us also, if you find the like. Neither do we greatly mislike, that you
leave these words, Deuteronomy. 33.
Vrim and Thummim and 4 Reg 23.
Chemarim and c Ziims, and Iims, untranslated, Ierem. 50.
because it is not easy to express them in English: and we would have liked
it as well in certain other words, which you have translated, images,
images, and still, images, Hamanim. Esa. 17. Gillulim. Ier. 50. Miphletseth. 3
To. 15.
being as hard to express the true signification of them, as the former. And
we hope you vvil the rather bear with the late Catholic translation of the
English Testament, that leaves also certain words vntra^slated, not only
because they can not be expressed, but also for reverence and religion (as S.
Augustine says) and greater majesty of the same.

21 Of one thing we can by no means excuse you, but it must savor vanity,
or novelty, or both. As when you affectate new strange words which the
people are not acquainted vvithal, but it is rather Hebrew to them then
English: Bib. 1579.
(...), as Demosthenes speaks, Demosth.
uttering with great countenance and majesty, Against him came up
Nabucadnezzar king of Babel, 2 Par. 36. v. 6.
2 Par. 36. v. 6. for, Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon: Saneherib, c. 32. Fo.
172.173. Io. 160. Epistle to the Queen.
for Sennacherib: Michaiahs prophecy, for Michaeas: Ichoshaphats prayer, for
Iosaphats: Vzza slain, for Oza. When Zerubbabel went about to build the
Temple, for Zorobabel: Remember what the Lord did to Miria^, for Marie, Deuteronomy.
34. Bib. 1562.
And in your first tra^slatio^, Elisa for Elisaeus, Pekahia and Pekah for
Phaceia and Phacee, Vziahu for Ozias, 4 Reg. c. 15.16.
Thiglath-peleser for Teglath phalasar, Ahaziahu for Ochozias: Peka the son
of Remaliabu, for, Phacee the son of Romelia. And why say you not as well
Shelomoh for Solomon, and Coresh for Cyrus, and so alter every word from the
known sound and pronunciation thereof? Is this to teach the people, when you
speak Hebrew rather then English? Were it a goodly hearing (think you) to
say for JESUS, Ieshuah, and for MARIE his mother, Miriam: and for Messiah
Meshiach, and for John, Iachannan, and such like monstrous novelties? which
you might as well do, and the people would understand you as well, as when
your preachers say, Calfil.
Nabucadnezer king of Babel.

22 When Zuinglius your great Patriarch did read in Munsters translation of
the old Testament, Praefat. in Esa.
Iehizkiahu, Iehezchel, Choresh, Darianesch, Beltzezzer, and the like. for,
Ezechias, Ezechiel, Cyrus, Darius, Baltasar: he called them barbarous voices,
and uncivil speeches, and said the word of God was soiled and depraved by
them. Know you not that proper names alter and change, and are written and
sounded in every language diuersely? Might not al antiquity and the general
custom both of reading and hearing the known names of Nabuchodonosor, and
Michaeas, and Ozias, suffice you, but you must needs invent other which the
people never heard, rather for vain ostentation to amase and astonish them,
then to edification and instruction. Which is an old Heretical fashion, noted
by Eusebius lib. 4. c. 10: and by the author of the imperfect commentaries upon
S. Matthew, ho. 44: and by S. Augustine lib. 3. c. 26. contra Cresconium.

23 What shall I speak of your affectation of the word Iehoua (for so it
pleases you to accent it) in steed of Dominus, Jehovah. (...)
The Lord: whereas the ancient fathers in the very Hebrew text did read and
sound it rather, Adonai, as appears both by S. Hieroms translation and also
his comme^taries, and I would know of them the reason, why in the Hebrew
Bible, when so ever this word is joined with Adonai, it is to be read
Elohim, but only for avoiding Adonai, twice together. This I say we might
justly demand of these that take a pride in using this word Iehoua so often
both in English and Latin: though otherwise we are not superstitious, but as
occasion serves, only in the Hebrew text we pronounce it and read it. Again
we might ask them, why they use not as well Elohim in steed of Deus, God:
and so of the rest, changing al into Hebrew, that they may seem gay fellows,
and the people may vvonder at their wonderful and mystical divinity.

24 To conclude, are not your scholars (think you) much bound unto you, for
giving them in steed of Gods blessed word and his holy Scriptures, such
translations, heretical, Iudaical, profane, false, negligent, fantastical,
new, naught, monstrous? God open their eyes to see, and mollify your hearts
to repent of al your falshod and treachery, both that which is manifestly
convinced against you and can not be denied, as also that which may by some
show of answer be shifted of in the sight of the ignorant, but in your
consciences is as manifest as the other.

FINIS.
The faults correct thus.
Page 46. fecit honem fecit hominem. 53 Abac. 2. v. 13. Abac 2. v. 18. 80
(...), (...). 117 Prou. 3, 15. marg. Prou. 30, 15. ibid. Prou. 27, 30. marg.
Prou. 27, 20. 124 mur-in marg. murder. 186 178.

For 187 Read 179. 178 Io. 5, 3. 1 Io. 5, 3. 194 186. 195 187. 241 (line 2)
then, rather then. 256 hat being, that being. 255 (...) in marg. (...).

210 and 316 in the Hebrew of necessity, because the printer could not supply
them there wants the vovvel Holem. and for like reason pa. 211. and 134.
there wants Kibuts. Which also caused us to leave some words without
vovvels, as once in the Preface and alibi.

49 in some fevve copies there wants Segol.

A BRIEF TABLE TO DIRECT THE READER TO SVCH PLACES as this book proves to be
corrupted in diverse translations of the English Bibles: by order of the books,
chapters, and verses of the same. With some other corrupted by Beza and
others, in their Latin translations.
Genesis.
CHap. 4. verse. 7. page 11. number 28. and p. 172. nu. 9. chap. 14. ver. 18. p.
18. nu. 42. and page 263. chap. 34. v. 35. p. 106. numb. 7. chap. 42. v. 38. p.
111 nu. 12.
4 of the Kings.
Chap. 29. v. 5. p. 302. nu. 6.
2 Paralipomenon.
Chap. 28. v. 19. p. 313. nu. 10. chap. 38. v. 8. p. 49. nu. 19. and p. 291.
nu. 1.
1 Esdras.
Chap. 9. v. 5. p. 209. nu. 16.
Psalms.
Psalm. 48. v. 16. p. 133. Psalm. 84. v. 7. p. 309. Psalm. 85. v. 13. p. 112. nu.
13. and p. 20. nu. 46. Psalm. 89. v. 48. p. 113. nu. 14. Psalm. 95. v. 6. p. 288.
Psalm. 98. v. 5. ibidem. Psalm. 131. v. 7. ib. Psalm. 138. v. 17. p. 274. Psalm:
147 v. 19. p. 133. and v. 18. p 308. nu. 3.
Proverbs.
Chap. 1. v. 12. p. 117 number. 22. cha. 9. v. 2. p. 271. nu. 21. cu^ seq. chap.
27. v. 20. p. 117. chap. 30. v. 16. ibid.
Cantica Canticorum.
Chap. 6. v. 8. p. 70. number. 10. chap. 8. v. 6. p. 20. number. 46. See page 306.
number. 2.
Of wisdom.
Chap. 3. v. 14. p. 190 number 3. chap. 15. v. 13. p. 55. number. 27.
Ecclesiasticus.
Chap. 5. v. 5.191. number. 4. chap. 7. v. 31. p. 221. in princip.
Esai.
Chap. 2. p. 310. number. 7. chap. 26. v. 18. p. 307. chap. 30. v. 22. p. 52. number.
23. and v. 20. p. 308. number. 5. chap. 33. p. 310. number. 6.
Hieremie.
Chap. 7. v. 18. p. 208. number. 9. chap. 11. v. 19. p. 268. number. 18. chap. 44. v.
19. p. 280. number. 9.
Daniel.
Chap. 4. v. 24. p. 211. number. 18. chap. 6. v. 22. p. 136. number. 3. chap. 10. v.
12. p. 209. number. 15. chap. 14. v. 4. p. 54. number. 26. and v. 12.17.20. p. 267.
nu. 16.
Osee.
Chap. 12. v. 10. p. 311. number. 8. chap. 13. v. 14. p. 20. number. 46. and p. 114.
number. 16.
Joel.
Chap. 2. v. 23. p. 309.
Habacuc.
Chap. 2. v. 18. p. 53. number. 23. See p. 308. number. 4.
Malachie.
Chap. 2. v. 7. p. 236. number. 17. chap. 3. v. 1. p. 237. number. 18. and v. 14. p.
209. number. 17.
1 Machabees.
Chap. 1. v. 51. p. 133. chap. 2. v. 21. ibid.
2 Machabees.
Chap. 6. v. 7. p. 302. number. 5.
S. Matthew.
Chap 1 v. 19. p. 136. number. 4. and v. 25. p. 282. in princ. chap. 2. v. 6. p.
240. chap. 3. v. 8. p. 197. chap. 16. v. 18. p. 63. number. 2. and p. 67. number. 5.
chap. 18. v. 17. p. 63. chap. 19. v. 11.12. p. 171. number. 8. and p. 235. number.
16. chap. 26. p. 250.
S. Mark.
Chap. 10. v. 52. p. 195. number. 9. chap. 14. p. 250.
S. Luke.
Chap. 1. v. 28. p. 19 number, 43. and p. 276. number. 4. and v. 6. p. 133. p. 136.
number 4. chap. 3. v. 8. p. 197. chap. 8. v. 48.50. p. 195. number. 9. chap. 18. v.
42. p. 195. number. 9. chap. 22. v. 20. p. 260. number. 10. and p. 261. number. 11.
S. John.
Chap. 1. v. 12. p. 164. in princ. chap. 9. v. 22.23. p. 303. number. 9. chap. 13.
v. 16. p. 222. number. 3.
Acts.
Chap. 1. v. 26. p. 224. number. 5. chap. 2. v. 27. p. 101. nu. 3.4.5. chap. 3. v.
21. p. 257. number. 7. chap. 4. v. 13. p. 222. nu. 3. chap. 9. v. 22. p. 291. number.
2. chap. 14 v. 22. page 76. and v. 23. p. 226. chapter 15. v. 2.4.6.22.23. p. 75.
n. 4. chap. 16. v. 4. ibid. chap. 17. v. 23. p. 302. number. 8. chap. 19. v. 24.
p. 302. number. 7. and v. 3. p. 215. chap. 20. ibid. and v. 28. p. 240. and v. 17.
p. 78. number. 8.
Romans.
Chap. 2. v. 26. page 133. chap. 5. v. 6. page 176. number. 13. and v. 18. p. 180.
chap. 8. v. 18. p. 141. in princ. and v. 38. p. 190. number. 3. chap. 9. v. 16. p.
171. number. 7. chap. 11. v. 4. p. 49. number, 19.
1 Corinthians.
Chap. 1. v. 10. p. 60. number. 3. chap. 5. v. 11. p. 3. number. 6. chap. 9. v. 5. p.
266. chap. 10. v. 7. p. 266. nu. 4. chap. 11. v. 2. p. 27 number. 2.3. chap. 15.
v. 5. p. 247. and v. 10. page 165. number. 2. and v. 55. p. 114. number. 16.
2 Corinthians.
Chap. 2. v. 10. p. 239. number. 20. chap. 4. v. 17 p. 147. number. 7. chap. 5. p.
185. number. 6. chap. 6. v. 16. p. 33. number. 3. and v. 1. p. 169. number. 6. chap. 8.
p. 222. number. 3.
Galatians.
Chap. 5. v. 20. p. 60. number. 3.
Ephesians.
Chap. 1. v 6. p. 185. number. 7. and v. 22. p. 64. number. 2. and. v. 22.23, p. 67.
number. 6. chap. 3. v. 12. p. 167. p. 191. nu. 5. chap. 5. p. 245. number. 2. and v.
5. p. 3. number 5. p. 32. nu. 1. and v. 32. p. 60. number. 2. and v. 25.32. p. 64.
number. 2.
Philippians.
Chap. 2. v. 15. p. 224. number. 4. (...) 4. v. 5. p. 232. number. 13. Chap. 1. v.
23. p. 296. number. 8. and v. 12. p. 154. number. 17. chap. 2. v. 20. p. 4. number. 8.
chap. 3. v. 5. p. 3. number 5. page 32. number. 1. p. 41. number. 12.
2 Thessalonians.
Chap. 1. v. 5. p. 137. number. 5. and v. 11. p. 152. 153. chap. 2. v. 15. p. 27.
number. 2. chap. 3. v. 6. ibid.
1 Timothee.
Chap. 3. v. 6. p. 223. number. 3. and v. 8. p. 221. and. v. 15. p. 64. number. 2.
chap. 4. v. 14. p. 79. number. 8. page 227. number. 8. chap. 5. v. 17.18. p. 79. number.
8. page 80.
2 Timothee.
Chap. 1. v. 6. p. 229. number. 10. chap. 4. v. 8. p. 137. number. 5.
Titus.
Chap. 3. v. 8. p. 213. and v. 10. p. 6. number. 13. p. 60. number. 3.
Hebrews.
Chap. 2. v. 9. p. 146. chap. 5. v. 7. p. 19. number. 4.5. p. 127. nu. 37. chap.
6. v. 10. p. 137. number. 5. chap. 10. v. 29. p. 151. number. 13. and v. 22. p. 188
number. 2. and v. 20. p. 126. number. 36. chap. 11. v, 21. p. 285. chap. 12, v. 23.
p. 64. number. 2. chap. 13. p. 232. number. 14. and v. 5. page 19. number. 44.
S. James.
Chap. 1. v. 13. p. 299. number. 2. chap. 4. v. 6. p. 294. number. 6.
1 Peter.
Chap. 1. v. 18. p. 29. number. 6. and v. 25. p. 292. number. 3. chap. 2. v. 3. p.
241. number. 22. pa. 243. number. 24. chap. 5. v. 1 p. 80 number. 9.
2 Peter.
Chap. 3. v. 16. page 298.
1 John.
Chap. 5. v. 3. p. 178. number. 14. and. v. 21. p. 42. number. 13.
Apocalypse.
Chap. 19. v. 8. p 135. number. 3.
BEZAS CORRVPTIONS.
Psalms.
Psalm. 51. v. 6. p. 10. number. 26.
S. Matthew.
Chap. 23. page 304.
Acts.
Chap. 1. v. 14. p. 231. chap. 2. v. 23. p. 11. nu. 31. p. 301. and v. 24. p.
12. number. 32.34. and v. 27. p. 11. nu. 31. p. 101. nu. 2. chap. 3. v. 21. p. 13.
number. 36. chap. 13. v. 39 p. 181. number. 2. chap. 26. v. 20. p. 19. nu. 45. p.
197. number. 1.
Romans.
Chap. 4. v. 11. p. 214. number. 2.
1 Corinthians.
Chap. 12. v. 31. p. 194. number. 8. chap. 13. v. 2. p. 192. number. 6. chap. 15. v.
10. number. 27.
2 Thessalonians.
Chap. 2 v. 3. p. 27. number. 3.
Titus.
Chap. 3. v. 5. page 217. and v. 6. p. 20. number. 46,
Hebrews.
Chap. 5. p. 11. number. 29.

