THE AVTHORITIE OF THE CHVRCH in making Canons and Constitutions concerning
things indifferent, And the obedience thereto required: with particular
application to the present estate of the Church of England. Delivered in a
Sermon preached in the Green yard NORWICH the third Sunday after Trinity.
1605.

By FRAN. MASON, Bacheler of Divinity, and sometime fellovv of Merton College
in Oxford.

And now in sundry points by him enlarged.

EPHESIANS. 4. 3. Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

LONDON Printed for JOHN NORTON, 1607.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, RICHARD, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
THe love and duty which I owe to this Church of England (most reverend
Father) have put into my hand this Olive branch, that is an exhortation to holy
obedience, and peaceable resolutions, which always have been the crown and
glory of a Christian. For when I pondered with my self how some of the
Ministry stand unresolved, and that (as I take it) because they do not duly
consider the nature of things indifferent, and the duty of a subject to his
Sovereign; I must confess that my bowels of compassion were moved, and the
fire of affection was kindled within me. And therefore although many learned
and judicious men have richly and plentifully handled this argument, yet in
commiseration of those my brethren, I also have adventured to cast my poor
mite into the treasury, hoping that as they walk amongst the fruitful trees,
they will not disdain to pull a little berrie from the lowest shrub. The
principal mark I shoot at, is to do my endeavor to settle the tender and
trembling consciences of those which are not wedded to their own conceits, but
have been carried away rather of weakness then of wilfulness, that such of
them as it shall please the Lord, may be reduced to the Tabernacles of peace,
and follow the truth in love. For alas who can but lament to see so many spend
their short and precious time, in such scandalous prosecution of civil
contentions, and some of them not altogether unlike to Platoes Euthyphro, who
in his inconsiderate Plato in Euthyphr.
course went in all haste to accuse his own father? But this Church (God be
thanked) never wanted a Socrates to encounter and convince them, and make
manifest to the world that they erred by misconstruction and unadvised zeal. O
how much better had it been to have continued their labors in the Lords
vineyard, and by bending their united forces against Babylon, to have fought
the Lords battails, to the comfort of the godly, who then might have celebrated
their triumph, erected their trophae, and decked their victorious heads with
lawreall garlands? O what a grief ought this to be to their souls; so to
oppose themselves against such a learned and religious Church, and so
irreverently to traduce that holy Book of Common Prayer, a work of so great
and admirable excellency? concerning which, I may truly affirm, that it has
been cut up like an anatomy, every vain of it has been opened, every
corner searched, every rubricke ransacked, not a word but has been weighed in
the balance, not a syllable but has been sifted to the uttermost: and yet for
all this like to the bridge of Caesar, the more it is oppugned Caes. de bello
Gall. lib. 4.
the stronger it stands. The ceremonies whereof may aptly be resembled to the
altar erected by the tribe of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses,
Joshua 22.
upon the passages of Jordan, at which the rest of the tribes were grievously
offended, imagining that it had been for sacrifice: But when they were truly
informed that it was only for a memorial that they had a part in the God of
Israel, they were well content, they blessed God, and Phinehas said: This day
we perceive the Lord is among us, Verse. 31.
because you have not done this trespass. In like manner, some of our brethren
have been offended at our ceremonies, upon an erroneous imagination of Popery
and superstition; but the Church of England has often manifested her
innocence, and cleared herself of those imputations. And therefore we hope
that one day their eyes being opened, and their souls satisfied, they will
with the Princes of Israel bless God, and say with Phinehas, This day we
perceive that the Lord is among us, because you have not done this trespass.
For the furtherance whereof, I do in all humility present this Olive branch
unto your Grace, whose eminent wisdom, and godly care in suppressing
innouations, and preserving the well settled state of this flourishing Church,
is most apparent. And therefore as God has directed the heart of our religious
Sovereign, to establish you the chief Pastor and Father of our Church, so I
beseech the Almighty to vouchsafe this fruit to your labors, that your Grace
may see the weak resolved, the wilful relented, the wandering reduced, and all
of them returned to the bosom of the Church, like the Dove to the Arc, with
leaves of Olive in their mouths, in token that all gall and bitterness being
laid aside, the swelling floods of discord are assuaged.

Your Graces in all humble duty FRANCIS MASON.

THE AVTHORITY of the Church in making Canons and Constitutions concerning
things indifferent, and the obedience thereto required, etc.
1. Corinthians. 14. 40. Let all things be done honestly and by order.
1 MY hearty desire and prayer is to The intended scope of this Sermon.
Almighty God the Father of mercy, that he would so bless the Ministry of
the Church of England, that we all being linked in love as it were with chains
of adamant, might with one heart and one hand, religiously build the Temple of
the Lord, reverently perform holy obedience to God and the Prince, carefully
keep our selves unspotted and unstained of this present world, and faithfully
feed the flock of Jesus Christ, that depends upon us. The comfortable
accomplishment whereof, whosoever shall maliciously hinder, let him take heed
lest a fearful curse from the God of Jacob, come like water into his bowels,
and like oil into his bones; but whosoever shall pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, peace be upon him, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. The
furtherance of which blessings to the glory of Christ and the good of the
Church (men and brethren beloved in the Lord) is the mark I aim at, and the
scope I intend, that we all like obedient children, may keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace.

2 Now this present Sermon by Gods gracious assistance The division.
shall be divided into two general parts: The first an explication; The second
an application; a brief application of the text, and a more ample application
of the text to the present estate of the Church of England, of which two points
in order, beseeching the God of all grace and peace to grant us a blessing.

3 And first who spoke these words? It is plain that Who spoke these words. To
whom, and upon what occasion. 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Romans 15. 4.
the holy Apostle S. Paul. And seeing the holy men of God (as in the old
Testament so doubtless in the new) spoke not by private motion but as they
were moved by the holy Ghost: Therefore we may truly say that the spirit
uttered these words by the mouth of Paul. But to whom were they spoken? unto
the Church of God which is at Corinth, and to them that are sanctified, in
Christ Jesus. Now what things soever were written before time, were written for
our learning. Therefore these things concern not the Church of Corinth only,
but the Church of England, the Church of Geneua, and all the Churches of the
Saints. Wherefore he that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto
the Churches. Let all things be done honestly and by order. For the plainer
access whereunto, let us first consider the coherence with that which went
before. The holy Ghost in this Chapter entreats of certain spiritual gifts
and graces, by many reasons advancing the gift of Prophecy above the gift of
tongues: where by the way, it must be observed, that by Prophesying is not
meant foretelling things to come, but the word of edification, exhortation, and
1. Cor. 14. 3.
consolation, that is, the Preaching of the Gospel. In handling of which
argument, it pleased the spirit to interlace certain points of Church
government concerning the public performance of Prayer, thanksgiving, and
prophesying, 1. Cor. 14. passim.
unfolded in these three branches. First, they which speak publicly in the
Church, must speak in a known v. 27. v. 29.
tongue, or if they speak with strange tongues there must be an interpreter:
Secondly, those which Prophecy, must v. 30 32.
speak two or three, and let the other judge: If one sitting by have a
revelation, let the former hold his peace, and the spirit of the Prophets must
be subject to the Prophets. Thirdly, those which publicly perform these
duties must be men, and not women, for women must keep silence in the Church.
Now the spirit having thus as it were Sparsim disseruerat de ritibus. Caluinus
in hunc locum. See Calvin and Gualter upon this place. vz. verse 36. The
explication of the words.
sprinkled this discourse v. 34.
with Ecclesiastical orders, proceeds covertly to a short but sharp
reprehension of the Corinthians, who as it is probably collected, were so far
in love with themselves, that they would not suffer their own customs to be
called in question, but rather went about with singular arrogance, to impose
them upon others, as though other Churches were bound to follow their pattern.
Finally there follows a general direction concerning all Church orders,
folded up in these words, Let all things be done honestly and by order.

4 The words in the original are (...). When it is said (...) (Let all things
be done) it is clear that the doing here spoken of, is the solemn
performance of religious offices in the face of the Church. And when it is said
(...) (all things) without any restraint, it is evident that the spirit rises
from the former pariculars, to a general conclusion comprehending not only
prayer, thanksgiving, and prophesying, but moreover the ministration of the
holy Sacraments, consecration to holy orders, and universally the public
discharge of such sacred and reverent duties: Concerning all which, the spirit
requires that they be done, first (...), that is* as you would say, after a
good fashion, consisting in time place, apparel, and other things externally
required for the due and decent administration. They must have an honest
decency, and a decent honesty; they must be comely to the eye, and referred
to a godly end, that is, the advancement of 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Gods glory and the 1. Cor. 14. 16.
edification of the Church, not giving (just occasion of) 1. Cor. 10. 32.
scandal to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God. For if these ends must be
duly respected in matters of common life, how much more reverently and
religiously should they be regarded in the solemn service of Almighty God?
And as all things must be decent and honest before God and men, so it is
required in the second place, that all things be done according to order. Which
order, requires authority with godly wisdom in the public disposer, and
cheerful, obedience with gracious humility in such as are subject to those
public constitutions.

5 So this text is a Canon of Canons for all such Church The general use of
this text.
government, and all Ecclesiastical Canons must be cast in this moulde: Indeed
it is a golden Canon or Regula est ad quam omnia quae ad externam (...) ibid.
rule whereby all Christian Church must be ruled. an exquisite touchstone
whereat all ceremonies must be tried: the beam of the Sanctuary whereupon all
Church orders and constitutions must be weighed and balanced: And therefore
let us search a little deeper, into this golden mine: For the better
understanding whereof, it must be observed, that some things are necessary,
and some things indifferent.

6 Necessary I call that which the eternal God has in his word precisely and
determinately commanded or forbidden, The first observation,
either expressly or by infallible consequence. Indifferent, which the Lord has
not so commanded nor forbidden, but is contained in the holy Scripture, rather
potentially then actually, comprehended in general directions, not precisely
defined by particular determinations. Whatsoever God has in his Word precisely
commanded, so far as it is commanded is necessary to be done, for the not
doing of it is a sin. Whatsoever God has forbidden, so long as it is
forbidden, is necessary to be left undone, for the very doing of it is a
sin. Whatsoever is neither commanded nor forbidden, that (whether it concern
Church or commonwealth) is left to the Lords vicegerents upon earth, who
according to the exigence of the state, may by their discretion command it to
be done, or to be left undone, and both without sin. In the holy Scripture
some things were commanded for a season, as the sacrifices of the Heb. 9. 10.
Law: forbidden for a season, as the meats mentioned in the xj. of Leuiticus:
Indifferent for a season, as the place of erecting altars before the fabric
of the Tabernacle. Some things were everlastingly commanded, as to fear God,
and to keep his commandments: everlastingly forbidden, as all sin and
wickedness: everlastingly left indifferent, whereof many examples might be
given, in meat, drink, apparel, and matters of such outward condition and
quality. For some things are correspondent to the Law written in our heart,
that is, the Law of humane nature, which considered in the original beauty
and brightness is the same in substance with the Law Moral, and these are in
their own nature good and everlastingly to be embraced: some things are
repugnant to it, and these are in their own nature evil and everlastingly to
be abhorred. Some things the sacred Law of our nature has left arbitrary, and
these are in themselves and of their own nature indifferent. But it must be
noted that such things as the Law of nature has left indifferent, may
notwithstanding become necessary by the force and virtue of some other
commandment divine, as for example: The eating of Swines flesh Leuit. 11. 7.
is a thing in the own nature indifferent: yet there was a necessity laid
upon the Jews to forbear it, because it was forbidden by the Law ceremonial,
which Law ceasing, that necessity ceased, and so it returned to the original
estate, and became indifferent, as in nature so in use. Likewise, to drink
wine, or to abstain from it, is a thing in nature indifferent, but being
sanctified by the Lord Jesus to a sacramental use, it is not in the power of
man to cancel or disanull the holy institution of that heavenly Lawgiuer. And
here it must be considered, that there are some comely rites and decent orders
whereof we find not precise commandment in the holy Scripture, which
notwithstanding the Scripture testifies to have been very precisely observed
by the Apostles and apostolical men; and are of such nature, that they agree
to all places and ages: in which respect, they may aptly be reduced to things
necessary: because the holy Ghost so exquisitely recording the exact
observation of them by the blessed Apostles, may seem to have pointed them out
to all posterity, as a pattern to be unchangeably followed. This is the
judgment of M. Call. inst. lib. 4. 3. 16.
Calvin concerning imposition of hands in the consecrating to holy orders.
Although (says he) there be extant no certain precept of imposition of hands
yet because we see that it was continunually used of the Apostles, that their
so exact observation should be to us in place of a precept. So concerning the
translation of the Sabbath, from the Saturday to the Lords day, it is certain
that there is no special commandment in holy Scripture; yet because God has
commanded that the seventh day shall be kept Exodus 20. 8 Esaias 58. 13.
holy and glorius to himself, and because the Jewish Sabbath was a Colos. 2.
16. 17.
shadow and in that respect abrogated; and sorasmuch as it was translated in
the Apostles time, and that without all doubt by appostolicall authority,
seeing the Scripture does witness that the Reu. 1. 10.
Lords day was not only renowned with divine revelations, but also observed by
the Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2.
Apostles themselves: And forasmuch as it stands upon such excellent reasons,
as are universal for all places, and perpetual for all times, being (as it
were) consecrated by the reverent consent of the Christian world; therefore
this practice may be unto us in stead of a precept: It may be reputed a thing
necessary, and never to be changed. Now to apply these distinctions to our
present purpose, the religious duties of which we speak, are the precise and
everlasting commandments of Jesus Christ, in regard of their substance, as may
appear, first in preaching and baptising: Matthew. 28. 19. 20.
Go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, (and) behold I am with you always until the end of the
World. I am with you my Disciples and Apostles in teaching and Baptising, I am
with you until the end of the world. But it is a clear case, that the
Apostles did not live until the end of the the world, therefore the meaning of
it is, I am with you, and your successors the lawful Ministers of the
Gospel, until the end of the world. Wherefore the promise is petpetuall, and
consequently the duty of teaching and baptising. So in the other Sacrament,
Luke 22. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me: there is a commandment for the celebration of
the Lords supper: and when Paul speaks of showing forth the Lords death
until his 1. Cor. 11. 26.
coming; he declares that the former commandment is perpetual. Wherefore
that there shall be a Ministry in the Church visible to teach the word, and
to Minister the holy Sacraments, is the everlasting ordinance of Jesus Christ.
Notwithstanding in every one of these branches, there is somewhat indifferent.
That there shall be a Ministry is a thing necessary, and it is 1. Cor. 9. 16.
necessary that they feed the flock of Jesus Christ: But whether they shall
execute their public function in a white garment, or a black, God has
neither commanded nor forbidden, he has left it as a thing indifferent.
Likewise, to Baptize, is the perpetual commandment of Jesus Christ: but
whether the water shall be in a font, or a basin, whether to be applied by
dipping or sprinkling once or thrice, God has neither commanded, nor
forbidden, he has left it as a thing indifferent. In like manner the
celebration of the Lords supper is a thing commanded: but whether the bread
shall be leauened or unleavened, whether it shall be baked in a loaf, or in a
^ake, round or square, God has neither commanded nor forbidden, he has left
it as a thing indifferent. So in the second course of this celestial banquet
Matthew. 26. 27. 29.
the cup is necessary, the Popish withholding whereof is the violating of Gods
holy ordinance, But as M. Calvin says, Call. Inst. 4. 17. 43.
Rubrum in album nihil refert, that is the kind or color of the wine, be it
red or white is not material to the being of the Sacrament. Again, wine being
liquid, must needs be in a cup, or vessel: but whether this cup shall be gold
or silver, wood or stone, God has neither commanded nor forbidden, he has
left it as a thing indifferent. Wherefore it is a clear case, that some things
are necessary, some things indifferent. Things necessary, are the weightier
matters of the Law: Things indifferent may be well compared to Mint and Commin.
Things necessary are registered in the Tables of the Almighty, that is, in the
volumes of holy Scripture, (for whatsoever is necessary for me either to
believe, or to do, or to leave undone, that I may please God in this life, and
inherit glory in the life to come. All that is richly contained in holy
Scripture, either directly, or by invincible consequence:) but things
indifferent are there rather in an unlimited generality then in any distinct
and particular manner. Finally things necessary God has reserved to himself,
no men, no Gal. 1. 8.
Angels have authority to alter them: But things indifferent being of a
Calvin. In. 4. 10. 30. T. C. vide D. White Archb. tract. 2. page 86.
variable Haec indifferentia sunt and ecclesiae liberate posita. Call. Inst. 4.
17. 43.
nature, are referred to the* discretion of the Church, as may appear by the
words of my text. Wherein the spirit speaking to the Churches, wills all
things to be done after a good manner: not defining what manner, but referring
all to the discretion of the Church, so things be ordered in an honest and
decent manner.

7 Secondly, when the spirit says unto the Churches, The second observation.
Let all things be done decently. It may be demanded, who shall be the judge
of dec^ncy? To me it seems an honest and decent ceremony, to kneell at the
holy Communion: some others do rather delight to receive Admon. and T. C. vide
Arch. Whit. page 596. and deinceps.
sitting: and some peradventure will prefer standing or walking. To me a
white garment seems comely in public administration: some others do rather
allow of the Eccles. dis. fol. 100. Si de color agitur, mibi quidem magis
decorus niger color videtur.
black. Now in this variety of opinions, who shall be the judge? who shall
govern and swaie the matter? Surely, they whom the Lord has made Church
governors. If private men will make public orders, and require us to accept
of them, they must show their commission: Otherwise we must take that for
decent in things indifferent, which seems decent in the eye of public
authority. And verily for private men to range without the compass of their
calling, and upon their private opinions, to control the public judgment of
the Church, in a matter of decency, is in mine opinion a matter very indecent.
Likewise, seeing the spirit has said, Let all things be done by order;
therefore doubtless in the Church of God there must be an order. But who shall
appoint this order? shall every man do what he list? that were disorder. Shall
private men make public constitutions? that were against good order. Therefore
it remains that they only have authority to make Church orders, whom the
Lord has made Church governors. Now in an absolute kingdom, as this of S.
Edw. Cook. de iure Regis eccl.
England, the King by the law of God, is the only supreme governor of all Romans
13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
persons and causes The third observation. Romans 13. 4. compared with Exodus 22.
20. Leuit. 24. 16. Number. 15. 35. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 18. 20.
Ecclesiastical and Civil within his own kingdom: Therefore the King and
those which under the King have the regiment of the Church, lawfully committed
unto them, have lawful authority to make Churchorders.

8 Thirdly, though Church governors may make Church laws, yet they may not
establish what they list. God has Non permisit nobis vagam effrenemque
licentiam, sed cancello^ (vt ita, loquar) circundedit, Call. in hunc locum.
inrailed their authority with certain bounds and limits which they may not
pass. All their Canons must be framed according to the general Canons of the
holy Scripture, which may aptly be reduced to these two expressed in my text.
Let all things be done honestly and by order: First, honestly, that is (as was
before declared) in decent sort, with relation to the glory of God, and the
edification of the Church, without scandal. Secondly, according to order, for
God is the God of order, and not of eonfusion. Now if all things in the Church
must be done decently, then nothing may be established which is base or
beggarly: The ceremonies of the Church though they cannot always be costly,
yet they must always be comely. Again, if all things be decent, then
religious solemnities must be performed with gravity: magnificent they may be
and sumptuous, according to circumstance of time, person, and place: but
always without vanity, without luxurious pomp, or meretricious bravery. If
all things must be done to the glory of God, then nothing may be established in
superstitious or idolatrous manner, for that were repugnant to the glory of his
majesty: then nothing must be established contrary to the Scripture, for that
were repugnant to the glory of his wisdom: then things indifferent must be
established as indifferent, not as meritorious or satisfactorie, not as
necessary to divine worship, to justification or Gal. 5. 2. See Calvin upon
that place.
salvation: for this were repugnant to the glory of his grace. If all things
must be done to edification, then the ceremonies of the Church must not be
dark and dumb, but so clearly set forth, that every man may know what they
mean, and to what use they serve. If all things must be done to edification,
then Church governors must duly intend the souls health of Gods people,
framing all their Canons for the common good. To which purpose the Church of
Jesus Christ uses her ceremonies, either to imprint in men's minds some
reverend mystery of religion, as when she appointed thrice Tertul. de coron.
militis cap. 3.
pouring on of water in Baptism, signifying the trinity of the persons, or
once to Greg. epist. lib. primo 41. In tribus merfionibus personarum trinitas,
and in vna potes. diuinitatis singularitas demonstrari.
signify the unity of the Godhead, or else some sanctified affection, as when
we pray kneeling by the bending of the knee signifyng the bending of the heart,
or confess our faith standing, to betoken our boldness: or else she desires
to kindle devotion, as when she praises the Lord with the melody of music:
or to put men in mind of their duty, and so the black garment may admonish
the Minister of gravity, the Insignum honestatis vitae Zipp. poli. eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 12. Symbolum innocentiae and sanctitatis Zanch. de op. redemp.
cap. 16.
white of purity. The ornaments of the University may admonish the people to
honor him whom the Church has honored, and may put the Minister in mind of
his duty, seeing he has received the ensigns of learning and virtue.
Finally, even things of inferior regard, must in their kind tend to
edification. The very belles must give a certain sound, that it may appear
when they call us to the Church, when they warn us to pray for the sick,
when they signify that a brother or sister is departed. Yea the very Pulpets
and seats must beso placed, as every man may conveniently hear: so every thing
according to his nature and degree must be referred to edification. If all
things must be done without scandal, then nothing which is sinful may be
established: for all sin is of scandalizing nature; yea even things
indifferent, wherein is apparent danger of superstition or idolatry, are to be
removed: for we must abstain from all appearance of evil. 1. These. 5. 22.
If all things must be done in order, then confusion by all means must be
avoided, and consequently the Church must not exceed in superfluity of
ceremonies, lest religion it self be ouershadowed (as it were a grape) with
much abundance of leaves. If all things must be done in order, then the
Layman must not be suffered to intrude himself into the office of a
Minister, in ministering the Word and Sacraments: nor the inferior Minister to
usurp that which belongs to the Bishop, but every man must keep his own
rank, and therein proceed according to order. And that no marvel, seeing the
whole fabric of the World, both the celestial orbs and the globe of
elements are framed and vpholden by order. The fixed stars in their motions
and reuolutions, keep a most firm and fixed order. The Planets, though
compared with the fixed, they may seem to wander, yet in truth they observe a
most certain and never wandering order. The day in opening and closing, the
Moon in waxing and waining, the sea in ebbing and flowing, have their
interchangeable course, wherein they continue an unchangeable order. The
Storke, Swallow, Turtle, and Ier. 8. 7.
Crane, know their appointed time, Cicero de natura deor. lib. secundo.
and the Cranes do also fly in order. The Pro. 30. 27.
Grasshoppers have no King, yet go they forth all by bands. The Bees are
little creatures, yet are they great obseruers of order. Amongst men in peace
nothing can flourish, in wars nothing can prosper without order. Order
proceeds from the throne of the Almighty, it is the beauty of nature, the
ornament of Art, the harmony of the world. Now shall all things be in order,
and the Church of God only without order? God forbid. The Church is a Cant. 4.
12.
Garden enclosed, and a garden must be in order. The 1. Tim. 3. 15.
house of God, and Gods house should be in order; an Cant. 6. 9.
army with banners, and an army should be marshalled in order. Therefore in
the Church of God, Let all things be done honestly and by order.

9 Fourthly, we may observe, that as Church governors The fourth observation.
may make Church laws, so all that live in the bosom of that Church, must
respectively observe the same: For otherwise how can all things be done
honestly and according to order? Therefore as the enacting of good laws, so
the observation of them is Tametsi sint obseruatu necessariae, de probis and
iust^s loquor etc. Ca^^ just. 4. cap. 10. s. 5.
necessary. But some will demand, what degree of necessity is required,
whether humane laws do so bind the conscience, that the not observing of
them be a sin? whereto it may be answered, that (to speak properly) God
only reigns in the consciences of men, and 1. Iohh 3. 5.
sin is the transgression of the law, that is, of law Divine:
Notwithstanding, when Gods law is so intwined with man's law, that man's law
cannot be broken without the violation of Gods law, then the breach of man's law
is not without sin. Therefore if an Ecclesiastical Canon be made of a matter
lawful, in a lawful manner, to a lawful end, by lawful authority, according
to the general rules of Scripture, containing in it nothing repugnant to
Scripture, nothing contrary to faith or good manners, then that law is
approved in the sight of the Almighty: and seems to Colligere promptum est
has posteriores (ecclesiasticas) non esse habendas pro humanis traditionibus
quandoquidem fundaetae sint in hoc generali mandat^, and liquidam approbationem
babent quasi ex ore Christi. Call. in 1. Cor. 14. and inst. 4. 10. 30. Zanch. in
compendio loco 16. Bez ep. 24.
Calvin and other learned Divines, not merely humane, but in some sort Divine.
And in the judgment of Beza does so far bind the conscience, that no man
can wilfully transgress it without sin. And although the things we speak of
be indifferent, yet being lawfully commanded, the observation of them is not a
thing indifferent, but necessary, because the Lord has said, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher power. And though the omission of a
ceremony, be in it self a small matter, yet to do it with resistance of
authority, is no small matter, for Whosoever resists power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
condemnation: and therefore we must be subject for conscience sake. But here
peradventure it will be demanded, how this does stand with Christian liberty?
for answer whereof, may it please them to know that Christian liberty
consists not in breaking of wholesome laws, (God forbid) that were
fantastical and Anabaptisticall: But (to touch it so far as concerns our
present purpose) in these branches following. First we are not tied to this or
that pattern, but being within our selves a Church, not depending upon any
other: our Church governors have liberty to establish whatsoever (being in it
self indifferent) shall to their wisdom seem most expedient; always
provided, that all things be done honestly and in order. Secondly, this is our
liberty, that things indifferent being established, we retain them not as a
part of divine worship, not as meritorious or satisfactorie, not as necessary
to justification or salvation, but only Treatise of ceremonies.
for discipline and orders sake. Thirdly, if there shall happen any contempt or
irreuerence, they may be altered and changed, by lawful authority, which may
likewise Act for uniformity.
ordain and publish such further ceremonies or rites as may be most for the
advancement of Gods glory, and therefore they are not established as
perpetual, but so long as in the eye of public judgment they shall seem
convenient and profitable for the Church of Christ. But some peradventure will
reply and say: If things indifferent be such, as God has not commanded, why
then should the Church Where it is destitute of a commandment it may not
presume by any decree to restrain that liberty which the Lord has given. T.
C. lib. 1. page 152.
presume to impose them upon us, and so abridge our liberty which God has not
abridged? I answer, that it is no presumption at all, but the lawful use of
lawful authority. For things are either commanded of the Lord, or forbidden,
or left indifferent. That which God has certainly commanded, man may not
forbid: that which God has certainly forbidden, man may not command or impose
by any law. For that in the judgment of S. Austin deserves not the name of a
Non enim iura dicenda sunt aut putanda iniqua hominum constituta. August. de
Ciu. D. l. 19. cap. 21. Iustum dictum est quod iustum est, Great. did. 1. cap.
2.
law which inioines things unlawful. Again, if authority command the same
thing which God commands, or forbid that which he has forbidden, this is not
the enacting of a new law, but a dutiful declaration and due execution of Gods
law. But those things which God has neither commanded nor forbidden, he has
left to be disposed by the law of man. In which case the Sovereign may command
his subject, and the Church her children; and it is the duty of the inferior
therein to be obedient. He that denies this, takes away the Sun out of the
world, dissolueth universally the fabric of government, overthrows
families, corporations, Churches, and kingdoms, and wrappeth all things in the
dismal darkness of Anarchie and confusion. And though this be in some sort
the abridging of thy liberty, yet it is for the common good, and according to
the rules of equity, and the Prince or Church in so commanding thee, does no
further abridge thy liberty then God does allow them to abridge it.

10 Lastly, when it is said unto the Churches, Let all things be done, it is
plain that this duty is laid upon the The fifth observation.
Church to provide that these things be effectually done; and consequently,
that God which gave her this charge, has armed her with authority. She may
censure disobedient children: God has given to his Church in all ages, not
only a rule for direction, but a rod of correction: this is the judgment of
all learned men, as appeeres by the practice of the whole Christian world. And
thus much of the explication, and so I come to the application.

11 Hitherto you have seen the balance of the Sanctuary: Now it remains
that the Canons and Constitutions The application.
of our own Church be weighed and examined in this balance. Wherein, although
I acknowledge that laws solemnly established do rather require obedience then
disputation: yet because the laws under which we live, are such (God be
thanked) as need not to shun the light: and forasmuch as many (otherwise
virtuous and well disposed minds, and some of them very learned and laborious
in the Church of Christ) while they have traveled in waightier matters, have
mistaken somethings of lesser moment: Therefore give me leave in the spirit of
meekness to instruct them that are contrary minded: which I do not to call
the present laws in question, I have no such meaning, but to quiet and settle
the unresolved conscience, that that we may all perform cheerful obedience
to God and the Prince. And if any man think that this discourse were more
seasonable in an assembly of Ministers, let them consider; First, that this
famous auditorie is furnished with a great number of the Ministry: Secondly,
that this is the place of jurisdiction: Thirdly, that the handling of these
points is very profitable for the people; for the true knowledge of the
authority of the Prince in things indifferent, is the very foundation of
Christian obedience. And though I know that the handling of these points is
very subject to censure, yet for my brethrens sake of the Ministry, my heart is
turned within me, and my bowels of compassion are rolled together, and
therefore I am resolved to wade through honor and dishonor, good report and
bad report, for the works sake which I covet to perform. Now this application
by Gods grace shall be divided into three general parts. First, a
declaration, that in the Church of England the principal points (for the time
will not suffer me to speak of all) are established, honestly and in order.
Secondly, a confutation of certain general exceptions to the contrary.
Thirdly, an exhortation to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
And to begin with the declaration; let us first declare the order which our
church uses in making of Church orders.

12 By the ancient laws of this realm, this kingdom of ENGLAND is an
absolute Empire and Sir Edw. Cook de iure Reg. eccles. folio 8. b.
Monarchy, consisting of one head, which is the King, and of a body politic,
which body politic the law divides into two general parts, the Clergy and
the Laity. Now the King of England being an absolute Sovereign, and
consequently by the law of God supreme governor over all persons and causes
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, within his own dominions, may by the ancient
prerogative and laws of England, make an Ecclesiastical Ibid.
commission, by advise whereof, or of the Act for uniformity.
Metropolitan, he may according to his Princely wisdom, ordain and publish
such ceremonies, or rites, as shall be most for the advancement of Gods glory,
the edification of his Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy mysteries
and Sacraments. And it is further enacted by authority of Anno 25. H. 8.
Parliament, that the Convocation shall be assembled always by virtue of the
Kings Writ, and that their Canons shall not be put in execution, unless they
be approved by Royal assent. According to which statute or act of Parliament,
it pleased our gracious In the ratification of the Canons.
Sovereign to direct his Writ to the most reverend Father in God, the late L.
Archbishop of Canterbury his grace, by virtue whereof the Bishops and others of
his Province were summoned: and because particular Churches should not be left
destitute, the Ministers of every Diocese had liberty to choose two Clerks
out of their own body by common consent to represent the rest. These
assembling at the place and time appointed, by virtue of other his Majesty's
Writtes directed to the rig^^ reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of London
then being; duly authorized President of the Convocation, proceeded to
consultation, and after long deliberation, set down their conclusions, which
being the constitutions of the sacred synod, and the same presented to the
King, ratified by his royal assent, confirmed by his Highness letters
Patents, under the great Seal of England, and by his sovereign authority
published, commanded and enioined to be diligently observed, executed, and
equally kept by all the subjects of this kingdom, have a binding force, and
are in the nature of a law, and therefore may be justly called the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws, in making whereof the Church of England without all
controversy proceeds honestly and in order.

13 But to come to particulars, let us first consider our Ministry, and then
our ministration. The Ministers of England are not in popular paritie, but our
Bishops are advanced above the rest, being endued with power of giving orders,
and the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and that according to the
purest and Apostolical times. 1. Timot. 5. 22.
Timothy and Titus 1. 5.
Titus ordained Presbyters, that is, Ministers of the Gospel town by town,
and these answer to our Pastors of particular Churches, whose duty is to
minister the Word and Sacraments. Timothy himself had the oversight of 1 Timothy
1. 3.
Ephesus; Titus 15 (...).
Titus of Creete, not only of the flocks, but of the Ministers also: and had
authority both to minister the Word and Sacraments, which was common to them
with all other inferior Presbyters, and likewise to exercise ecclesiastical 1.
Tim. 5. 19.
jurisdiction, and by 1. Tim. 5. 22.
imposition of hands to consecrate to holy orders. For the better execution of
which duties, it has pleased Christian Kings in all ages, out of their
Princely favors, to grace and countenance Bishops, and by their laws,
examples, and bounties, to make them acceptable unto the people, well
considering that the decay of the authority of Ecclesiastical Rulers, and the
want of yielding to them reverence, honor and fear, is the cause of all evil,
as Homil. 2. in ep. 2. ad Timoth.
Chrysostom well noted, saying; He that honors the Priest does also honor
God: and he that despises the Priest, comes by degrees to this at last, that
he waxes contumelious against God himself. And as these glorious stars and
angels are to be honored, so again they must remember the saying of Ambrose;
Amb. de dignitate sacerdot. cap. 3.
Magna sublimit as magnam debet habere cautelam. Honor grandes grandiori debet
sollicitudine circumuallari.

14 Concerning inferior Ministers, the first point to be pondered, is their
ordination: For which purpose the place is famously known, being either Can. 31.
the cathedral church or the parish Church, where the Bishop resideth. The
time, Ibidem.
Ieiunia quatuor temporum, commonly called Ember weeks, which by the wisdom
of our Church, are consecrated to a most excellent use, that all the people of
the land should fast and pray, that the Lord would bless his Church with
learned Ministers, and send forth worthy laborers into his harvest. This is
apparent by our Canons and Constitutions, and surely it is an honest, a decent,
a holy and heavenly preparation.

15 After the preparation, follows the Examination both of manners and
learning; for the first, the person desirous to enter this holy calling, must
exhibit letters Can. 34.
testimonial under the seal of some College, where he before remained, onof
three or four grave Ministers, with the subscription of other credible
persons, who have known his life and behavior, by the space of three years
next (...) careful is our Church that this should be performed honestly and
in order.

16 Concerning their learning, our desire is, that in every parish the Word of
God might abound like Euphrates, and as Jordan, in the time of harvest; that
the doctrine of the Gospel might shine as the light, and ouerflow as Geon in
time of vintage: plant (O Lord) we beseech thee, if it be thy pleasure, in
every parish a learned Minister: O Lord let thy Vrim and Thummin be with thy
holy ones, that they may teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law. But
(beloved in the Lord) it is one thing to speak of these things in speculation,
and another when we come to practice: A Carpenter may contriue in his head a
most exact and curious building; but when he comes to the point he can make it
no better then his timber will suffer. The Defendour of the Admonition about
thirty three years ago, avouched that T. C. lib. 1. page 40. vide Arch. page
140.
2000. sufficient Preachers which preach and feed diligently, were hard to be
found in this Church. Admit this were true, and seeing there be in England
about 10000. parishes, suppose that liberty had been granted to this great
Reformer, to have reduced the Church of England to his imagined platform, what
would he have done? should 2000. Parishes have been furnished every one with
a sufficient Preacher, and 8000. been left forlorn, without public Praying,
or Preaching, or reading divine Service? Should they have had none, none at
all, either to minister the Communion, or to Baptize their children? This had
been rude, and barbarous, and the high way either to Atheism, or to
Paganism. Should one man have had five benefices? That were contrary to his
own principles, for so each parish should have had but the fifth part of a
Preacher. Should there have been a general dissolution of parishes, and five
reduced to one? Alas that had been a woeful and lamentable reformation. What
then remains but only that which the Church of England approoueth, that is,
to be sparing in the former points, and to admit some into the Ministry of
meaner, though tolerable sufficiency, till it please God that our famous
Universities, which have already furnished many, may by Gods grace send out
their crystal streams to water the rest of the land. And surely it were to
be wished, that some greater encouragement were given to learned men, by
increasing their maintenance: For alas, it is notoriously known, that many
Church livings have been so pared to the quick, that now they are hardly able
to yield vital nourishment, so sharply have they been launced and lost their
best blood. But God be blessed, who has put into the heart of his Majesty, a
holy endeavor to cure the Church of this consumption: the father of mercy give
a blessing unto it, and the Lord grant that the Nobility and Gentry of this
land may follow his royal example, and that every one in his degree may set
his heart and hand to the further building of the Lords Temple. In the mean
time I must needs say, that there are not a few in the Universities, grave,
learned, and virtuous, which might be employed abroad, but only that sundry
Patrons prefer a golden purse before a golden wit. Wherein I would to God
that such as are endued with right of presenting to spiritual promotions would
consider what an honorable office is committed unto them, and what excellent
service they may perform to the Church of God; and let them withal call to
mind, what a fearful account such shall one day make, as cease not to
prefer their private gain before the public good, but suffer souls to
perish through their negligent default, or symoniacall sin. Two reasons may
be rendered for Patronages, building the Church and mainteining the Minister:
in regard whereof, this honor was granted to the lord of the soil in ancient
time, that he alone should present the Clerk, because he alone provided for
him. In remembrance whereof, the honor descended to posterity: and therefore
you which enjoy this right from your Noble progenitors, as you succeed them in
honor, so succeed them in virtue, and as they have been honorable founders,
so discharge you a good conscience, and be faithful disposers. And you which
possess the same dignity, though not by lineall descent, yet by other lawful
interest, it is your part to be good stewards, and warily to discharge this
Christian duty, according to that trust which the Church of Christ has
reposed in you: So learning shall be nourished, virtue advanced, religion
flourish, and out two famous Universities shall be exalted like the cedars in
Libanus, and as the Cypres trees upon the mountains of Hermon: They shall be
fair as the Olive tree, and sweet as the Rose: They shall be fruitful as
the Vine, and like the Terebinth shall stretch forth their branches to the
glory of God, and consolation of his children. But to return to the present
state of our Church, it cannot be denied, but that God has blessed this land
with a great number of learned men above other nations; yet seeing the number
of parishes is exceeding great, we are constrained to tolerate some of meaner
sufficiency. And yet the Can. 34.
law requires that every one to be admitted into the Ministry, should
understand the articles of religion, not only as they be compendiously set
down in the Creed, but as they are at large in our Book of Articles; neither
understand them only, but be able to prove them sufficiently out of the
Scripture: And that not in English only, but in Latin also. If it be objected,
that there have been sundry consecrated which are not thus qualified: I
confess it may be true, and it is a just cause of lamentation: but yet
(beloved) this is not the fault of the law, but of such as transgress the law.
Now I speak in defense of the Laws under which I live: If any whosoever shall
transgress the laws, let him answer for himself, or bear his own burden:
that which is of God I would willingly defend, but I am no patron of any man's
iniquity: I will conclude this point with the charge S. Paul gives to
Timothy, and in him to all other Bishops: 1. Tim. 5. 21.
I testify before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect Angels that thou
observe these things without hastiness of judgment, and do nothing after
partiality. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins.

17 And here let me advise those Ministers which are no Preachers, that they
spend not their time idly, but endeavor by all means to grow in wisdom and
grace, lest they be a disgrace to that holy calling. For there is no doubt but
being at their entrance qualified, as the law requires, if they shall mark
what they read publicly, if they shall delight to read the Bible privately,
if they shall join some short and easy Commentary, if they shall inform
their judgments by introductions and institutions of Christian religion: if
they shall be willing to learn of such as can teach them, and to teach such as
ought to learn of them, if they shall be diligent in Catechizing, if they
shall delight in conference, and meditate upon the law of God day and night,
and withal be devout and fervent in prayer; there is no doubt I say, but that
God may so bless their grain of mustard seed, that it may grow into a goodly
tree, their sparkle that it may become a flame, their drop that it may rise
into a river, and ouerflow like Nilus with her silver streams. Bless O Lord,
these gracious beginnings and holy endeavors, let them not be like the morning
dew that dries away, but let them grow in grace, and flourish more and more,
like the tree that is planted by the river side.

18 After the examination is tendered Can. 36.
Subscription: and surely to the end that they which should teach other men
obedience, may be good subjects themselves, it is expedient that they subscribe
to the first article, that is, to the Princes Supremacy. The second article
consists of two branches, the book of Common Prayer, and the book of
Consecration. Concerning the first, though the admonition to the Parliament did
formerly fancy a voluntary and extemporall form of Prayer, as the spirit
should move a man, yet the defender of the admonition agrees with us, that
there should be a We agree of a prescript form of prayer to be used in the
Church. T. C. See Whitg. t. 9. page 489.
prescript and We also desire an uniform order, but such and in such sort as
we have before declared. T. C. See Whitg. page 709.
uniform order, the observation of which uniformity both in prayer and
ceremony was long ago commended by Quod ad formulam precum and rituum
ecclesiast. valde probo vt certa illa extet a qua pastoribus discedere in
functione sua non liceat. Call. ad protect. Angl. ep. 87.
Calvin to the Duke of Sommerset, and therefore we are agreed upon this
generality. But to come to particulars, there was set out a book of Common
Prayer, in the beginning of King Edwards reign, which Alexander Alesius a
learned man of Scotland translated into Latin, as a singular comfort for the
whole Christian world in those dangerous days, and this seems to be the same
upon which Martin Bucer gave his learned censure. In the fifth and sixth year of
K. Edward, the former book was reformed and brought to such singular
perfection, that Archbishop Cranmer offered in Q. Mary's time so he might be
assisted by a few more learned men, to defend it against all comers. And
profound Ridley affirmed that the whole Divine service was formed and fashioned
to the true vein of Scripture: and D. Tailour avouched, that there was set out
by K. Edward the whole Church service with great deliberation and advice of the
best learned of the Realm, authorized by the whole Parliament, fully perfected
according to the rules of Christian Religion in every behalf, that no
Christian conscience can be any way offended with any thing therein contained.
Yea Calvin himself, though he misliked some things in our Liturgy yet termed
them tolerable: but I persuade my self, that Call. ep. 200. In Anglicana
liturgia qualem describitis multas esse video tolerabiles ineptias.
Calvin would not call any thing tolerable which he judged impious, and
therefore I suppose that in hi^ judgment there was no impiety at all: and yet
some in our Church have refused subscription even in regard of those things
which Calvin thought tolerable. But to come to the form of Common prayer, as
it was established by Q. Elizabeth: o what blessings has the Lord vouchsafed
the people of this land, by means of that book? how many millions of souls
have received comfort by it? how many thousands of learned men have commended
and defended it? you shall hear one for all, even that judicious Jewel, in
whose opinion it contains nothing either disagreeing from holy Scripture, or
misbeseeming sober men. And yet it has Iul. Apol. Land. 1591. page 46. and
170. Procl. Regis pro vniformitate 4. Iac. 5. Mart.
pleased our gracious souerainge, that some things should be explaned that the
public form of prayer might be free not only from blame but from suspicion.
wherefore our venerable Convocation, considering how this book has been
allowed by such a world of witnesses, and published by the Sovereign
authority of most learned and religious princes, and being persuaded that it
contains nothing but that which may be tolerated with a good conscience: and
pondering how this Church has been troubled with turbulent spirits, and
withal hoping that Subscription might be a means to preserve the peace of the
Church, how could they do less, than commend the use of this book, and bind
all that hereafter shall be admitted either to the ministry, or to any
Ecclesiastical promotion by their several Subscriptions to approve the same?
Moreover, because it were intolerable that they which have desired
consecration, and obtained it at the hands of our reverend Bishops, and that
(as we are constantly persuaded) in such form as is agreeable to the blessed
word of God, should speak against their own orders, or against that hand
wherewith they were consecrated, therefore it is requisite that they should
subscribe to the second branch, that is, the book of Consecration. And to the
end that they which publicly instruct others, should be seasoned themselves
with true religion; and no gappe left open to false or curious doctrines: it is
most fit that they subscribe to the third and last, that is, the book of the
articles of religion, and this also (though in more severe manner) was Calvin.
ad protect. Ang. anno 1548. Octobr. 22. Claudenda est etiam Ianua curiosis
doctrinis. Ratio autem expedita ad eam rem vna est si extet nen pe summa
quaedam doctrinae ab omnibus recepta, qua^inter pradicandum sequantur omnes: ad
quam etiam obseruandam, omnes episcopi and parochi iureiurando adstririgantur,
vt nemo ad munus ecclesiasticum admittatur nisi spondeat illum doctrinae
consensum sibi inuiclatum futurum.
Caluins advice to the duke of Sommerset. In all these points the Church of
England requires subscription, and is therefore sharply censured by her own
children. But they which are such admirers of foreign Churches abroad, let
them a little in this very point compare the Church of England with that famous
Church of Geneua. First, the Church of England requires subscription of the
Ministers, and not of the common people: but the Church of Geneua urges not
the Ministers only, but the A ciuibus primum omnium contendit Calvin. vt
coactus populus vniuersus ^i^^rato palam papatu in Christianam religionem ac
disiplin. am paucis Capitibus comprehensam iuraret. Beza in vita Caluini a
quibus postea dicedere nequi ministris neque ciuibus liceret ibidem.
people also. Secondly, the Church of England requires this approbation, that
her rites are not contrary to the word of God: but the Church of Geneua will
have her discipline received in a more high and glorious manner. Thirdly, the
Church of England contenteth her-selfe only with subscription, but the Church
of Geneua is more peremptory requiring a solemn Dedit tamen Dominus 20. Iulij
an. 1537. vt palam praeeunte publico scriba a senatu populoque Geneuensi in
Christianae religionis ac disciplinae simul capita iuraretur. ibidem.
oath.

19 After Subscription follows Consecration, or Imposition of hands, which in
the Church of England is performed with such words of wisdom and in such
manner, as flesh and blood should not take upon them to control

20 And as our Church is careful to make good Ministers, so she has a
singular regard in placing them. And because many Patrons in placing their
Clerks have golden gifts in more precious account then gifts of grace,
therefore the Chuch of England has prouidently appointed an oath against Canon
40.
Symonie. And here I beseech all my brethren of the Ministry in the bowels
of Christ Jesus, to make a conscience of this oath, when they enter their
livings: For how can they expect that God will bless their proceedings, if
they shall make their beginnings with Symonie, and color it over with perjury?

21 And as our Church is desirous that men may enter their livings with a good
conscience, so she is graciously provident that they may discharge their duty
when they are entered: Wherefore the law provides for their personal Canon 41.
42. 43. 44. 45.
residence, and in case of absence for a learned supply.

21 And forasmuch as the Church of God in all ages has had some which after
good and plausible beginnings, have notwithstanding proved firebrands of
schism, and sounded the trumpet of sedition, therefore the oath of canonical
obedience is a touchstone to try their present affections, a bridle to curb
their future passions, and a gracious means to preserve the precious peace and
unity of the Church.

23 Moreover, the messengers of peace should not only be peaceable, but also
painful in feeding the flock of Christ, and yet Sermons heretofore in some
places have been very rare and dainty, insomuch that father Latymer in his
time compared them to strawberies, which came but once a year. Wherefore that
in stead of strawberie Sermons there might be a more plentiful provision in
the house of God, our Church has decreed, that if the Ministers residing upon
their benefices be Preachers not lawfully hindered, they shall preach every
Canon 45.
Sabbath, and if they be no Preachers, they shall procure Canon 46.
monthly Sermons.

24 Furthermore because (such is our self pleasing vanity) we think our
selves fit to fly before our feathers be grown, and sundry to avoid the
odious brand of dumb dogs and idol shepherds, are ready to stretch and
strain themselves above their strength being forward to speak when silence
would better become them; therefore it is wisely enacted, that none shall
preach but such as are allowed by the Canon 49.
Bishop of the Diocese. In the mean time they must read Homilies, that is,
holy and learned Sermons, publicly set out by authority. Surely (dearly
beloved) quirking brains may have their conceits, and wanton wits may be more
merry then wise: but when these things are iudiciously weighed in an equal
balance, it will be found that the wisdom of the Church has disposed them
honestly and in order.

25 And as our Church desires that doctrine may shine like the light of the
Lord upon the holy candlestick, so she is careful that the Canon 75.
conversation of her Ministers be such as may adorn the Gospel of Christ. In
making of which Canon, the church of England may seem to have set before her
eyes that golden sentence, Psalm. 132. 9.
Let thy Priests o Lord be clothed with holiness, and let thy Saints rejoice
and sing.

26 And as they should be inwardly decked with godliness and grace, so it is
inioined, that their outward Canon 74.
apparel shall be sober and grave, every way correspondent to their calling,
that all things may be done honestly and by order. And thus much of the
Ministry, and so I come to our ministration.

27 The beginning of our Church Service, is with some memorable sentence of
holy Scripture appointed for that purpose, moving to repentance and prayer, or
magnifying the mercy of God in Christ: then after a holy exhortation, all of us
both Minister and people fall down before the throne of grace confessing our
sins, with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart, meekely kneeling
upon our knees: without question (beloved) here is a holy and a blessed
beginning. Now because that God which dwells in Esaias 57. 15.
eternity, has respect to an humble and contrite spirit, and has appointed
the Minister to comfort them which mourn in Sion, therefore in the next place,
the Minister in the name of Jesus Christ, pronounces forgiveness of sins to
all that truly repent and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. This is the
oil of gladness, the balm of Gilead, the fountain of grace for the washing
away of sins,: Cant. 4. 15.
O the fountain of the gardens, the Well of living water, and the springs of
Lebanon. And lest any man having the pardon of his sins pronounced, should
take occasion of carnal liberty, therefore our Church does presently apply a
preservative against presumption, and a conseruatiue of all grace and
godliness, even that zealous and piercing prayer, which the Lord Jesus
himself has taught us. And because when we have done all that we can, we are
Luk 17. 10.
vnprositable servants, and must Phil. 3. 13.
forget that which is behind, and endeavor our selves unto that which is
before, therefore as though we had yet done nothing, we beseech him to open our
lips, that our mouth may show forth his praise. And so with prayer to him
which is best able to help us, we give glory to the blessed Trinity, in all
which what is there, which can be bettered by the wit of man? Now forasmuch as
the mind of man in prayer mounteth aloft with Eagles wings, piercing the
clouds with ardent affection, and pouring out her plaintes in the bosom of the
Almighty, therefore lest the vehement attention which is required in prayer,
should be dulled by long continuance, our Church uses a profitable variety,
intermingling the reading of heavenly wisdom: wherein the soul tasting and
seeing how good and gracious the Lord is, feeds upon him by divine
contemplation; and so returns to prayer with a greater inflammation. The
Psalms being a storehouse of all godliness, wisdom, and grace, so plain to
the simple, so profound to the wise, so profitable to all sorts, in all ages,
in all estates, joy or grief, prosperity or adversity, our Church desires
to make familiar to all men, and therefore we read them over every month,
still interlacing the Hymn of glory to the blessed Trinity. Then follow
Chapters of the old and new Testament, intermingled with sacred Hymns, all in
a known language, so God is glorified and the people edified. It is true that
to some parts of the Apocrypha we give public audience in our church, yet we
omit some As the books of Maccabes, and 3. and 4. of Esdras.
books thereof, and read them not at all; and those books we read, we read
not altogether entirely, but omit some Tob. 5. 6. and 8. in the calendar of the
book of common prayer explaned etc.
Chapters and pieces Eccles. 46. verse 20. and in other places.
of Chapters, which some have thought capable of hard construction. And if any
thing we read be such as may seem to found suspiciously or doubtfully, we
hold it our duty to make the most charitable and christian construction: and
if we cannot of our selves satisfy our selves, we are referred for
resolution of our doubts to the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer.
Bishop of the Diocese, of whom what interpretation is to be expected, the
Church does teach us, binding him to do nothing contrary to the book, and
proclaiming withal in the book, that nothing is ordained which is not the
very pure word of God, or evidently grounded upon the same: and therefore his
interpretation being accordingly performed, should in reason satisfy and
content us. Furthermore we receive them for humane co^positions and not for
divine, and therefore we read them not Articles Anno 1562. artic. 6.
for confirmation of Faith, but for information of manners, and yet have I said
nothing of the liberty granted by the Preface of the second book of Homilies
concerning the changing of Chapters. Moreover, though some portions of the
Canonical, concerning Genesis 36. and alibi.
Genealogies, and some other As in Leuiticus, Canticles, etc.
intricate and mystical points be not appointed to be solemnly read in our
Church service, yet we usually allege and expound them in Sermons. Neither is
it our meaning to advance the Apocryphal which we read, above the Canonical
which we read not: for all Canonical being the sacred Oracles of God, have
incomparable pre-eminence of excellency; yet nothing does hinder, but that
some thing in it self of far lesser excellency, may be more familiar for
popular capacity. After the Chapter of the new Testament, accompanied with a
holy Psalm or Hymn, we all stand up boldly professing our faith before God
and men, in that form which is most anciently received in the Church of
Christ: for which purpose we use sometimes the Creed of Athanasius, and
elsewhere the Creed of the Council of Nice. Having thus fed our minds with
heavenly meditation of the blessed Word, and confessed our faith in the holy
Trinity, we fall a fresh to Prayer: we pray for our Prince, for all the
States of the land, for all Gods children, and that for all blessings
spiritual and temporal: and we pray only to God, and only in the merits of
Jesus Christ. And because the life of man is subject to a seaof miseries, and
little do we know what storm may hang over our heads, and suddenly surprise
either us or any of our brethren; therefore that Gods present wrath may be
appeased, and future dangers graciously prevented, we humble our souls in the
presence of God with a most devout Letanie, which is so pathetically penned,
that it may seem to soar aloft with wings of sanctified affections, and to
pierce the skies as it were with darts of devotion. And after some time spent
in Prayer, we intermingle again the reading of Gods holy word: to beat
down sin, we read Gods fiery law, and fearful commandments, religiously
beseeching him to incline our hearts to keep his law. And to kindle and
increase our spiritual joy, we read those comfortable and selected portions
of Scripture called Epistles and Gospels. Now for the holy Communion, it is so
religiously penned, and so reverently performed in our Church, as is most apt
to kindle devotion, to inflame faith, to raise up the mind from earthly
cogitations, and to ravish the spirit with heavenly joy: for it is replenished
with most zealous exhortations, lowly confessions, piercing prayers, celestial
comforts, angelical lauding and praising of God: and not presuming to come to
the Lords table, trusting in our own righteousness, but in his manifold and
great mercies, we beseech him to grant that we may so eat the flesh of his
dear son, and drink his blood, that our bodies being cleansed and our souls
washed, we may ever dwell in him, and he in us. And though we are not worthy
of our selves, so much as to gather up the crumbs under his table, yet after the
reheatsall of Christ's holy institution (such is the mercy of God, in the merits
of Christ) we are made partakers of this heavenly banquet, even of the precious
body and blood of Christ, for the forgiveness of our sins, and all other
benefits of his passion. So again pouring out prayers, and rendering thanks and
glory to God on high, we conclude the celebration of these reverend mysteries,
pronouncing a blessing to the people departing. Thus we repent and pray; we
rejoice and pray: we thank God and pray: we confess our faith and pray:
we read and pray: we hear and pray: we preach and pray: we receive the
Sacraments and pray. This is the order of our Church, which may well be called
the house of Prayer. Jacob when he awaked from the dream of the ladder, he
said, Genesis 28. 17.
How reverend is this place, it is none other then the house of God, and the
gate of heaven. So I say unto you, oh how reverend is this Church of England,
where God is thus served? surely it is the house of God, and this gracious
serving of him is the gate of heaven. And thus much of the declaration, and now
I come to the confutation.

28 As Jacob loved Joseph above the rest of his children, and in token thereof
made him a party colored coat: so God has loved the Church of England above
many other Churches: he has decked and adorned her with The confutation.
sundry gifts and graces: so that she is like to a kings daughter in a
beautiful garment of changeable colors. Of Joseph it is said, that The Genesis
49. 23.
archers shot at him, and those archers were his brethren: so of the Church of
England it may be said, that the archers shot at her, and some of them were
her own children. O merciful God, who would imagine that men borne and bred
in so holy a Church should shoot so many venomous arrows at their own
mother? Some in their fiery zeal, have called our Church music See the
answer of Oxford to the petition.
meretricious: our reading of the Psalms, the Admonition vide Arch. Whit. page
739.
tossing of tennis bals: our brief and piercing prayers, T. C. apud Arch.
Whit. page ^94.
cuts and shreds: our choice of the Epistles and Gospels, the cutting and T. C.
apud Arch. Whit. page 474.
mangling of the Scripture: the reading of Service and Homilies, worse then a
stage A view of popish abuses remaining. Vide Arch. Whit. page 798.
play: yea our using of the Admonit. and T. C. vide Arch. Whit. page 494.
Letanie, the Admon. and T. C. vide Arch. Whit. page 589.
Nicene Creed, the T. C. vide Arch. Whit. 496.
Hymn of glory, the Creed of Ibidem.
Athanasius, the Admon. vide Arch. Whitg. page 494.
Evangelical Hymns, and the Oxfords answer to the humble petit on and Arch
Whitg. page 803.
Lords prayer it self has not escaped their censure. What a world are we
grown unto, when Admon. and T. C. vide Archiepiscop. Whitg. tr. 9. c. 7.
thanksgiving after childe-birth, Admon. and T C. vide Archiep. Whitg. p. 598.
kneeling at the Communion, Admon. vide Arch. Whitg. page 568.
reading the holy Scripture and Admon. vide Archiepiscopum Whitg. page 727.
funeral Sermons are made matters of reproach? yea the whole Communion Book,
some are said to call an idol, a Portuis, a piece of Swines flesh: yea the
very Temples of God they are said to term temples of Baal, idol synagogues,
abominable sties. But I hope my brethren of the Ministry, for whose love I
have undertaken this labor, are for the most part more judicious, and of a
milder temper: yet because diverse of them stand as yet unresolved, imagining
that we come nearer to the chuch of Rome, then in duty we should, and
therefore in the tenderness of their conscience, make scruple, whether they
may safely join with us or no; therefore I will bend my self to answer those
arguments, which in mine opinion do most commonly entangle them: that is
certain general exceptions which are universally opposed against the orders
and ceremonies of our Church. These fiery darts fly far and wide, the people
men and women have learned disdainfully to dash them in our faces: these I hold
it my duty to quench, or at least to do mine endeavor; I will therefore bring
my bucket of water, and commit the event to the gracious goodness of Almighty
God. And for breuities sake I will reduce all these arguments into one, the
branches whereof shall be handled in order. Those orders and ceremonies which
were neither commanded of God in holy Scripture, nor practiced in the Apostles
times, but are heretical, popish, and antichristian, being scandalous where
they remain, and therefore cast out of other reformed Churches, are in no wise
to be embraced or assented unto by subscription: but such say they are sundry
of the orders and ceremonies of the Church of England, therefore not to be
embraced nor yielded unto by Subscription.

29 And first they Admon. in principio. The first objection.
require that nothing should be placed in Gods Church, but those things only
which the Lord himself in his word commands. Now it is supposed that we have
many rites, which are not commanded, as for example, where is the Surplesse
commanded? where is the Ring in marriage commanded? where is the Cross in
baptism commanded? where is kneeling at the Communion commanded? These and a
number of other things are used in our Church, which (as it is objected) God in
his holy Word has no where commanded. To which objection I answer: First,
that if under this word (commanded) they comprehend things commanded in
general, then these and the like orders of our Church are commanded. If they
demand where? I answer, in every place where God commands us to obey our
Prince. For the meaning of Gods commandment is, that we should obey the Prince
in all things lawful: but things 1. Cor. 10. 23.
indifferent, are things lawful: therefore God commands us to obey our Prince
in things indifferent: But all these things are indifferent: and therefore in
all these God commands us to obey our Prince: yea even in this my text it is
commanded, when it is said; Let all things be done honestly and by order.
Secondly, if by (commanded) they understand a particular command: then I grant
that these things are not so commanded: but neither are their own rites, they
so much desire, any where thus commanded. A white Surplesse (I confess) is no
where commanded: neither is a black gown, or cloak any where commanded.
Kneeling at the Communion is no where commanded: but neither is sitting or any
other gesture which they allow, any where commanded. If our orders may not be
received, because they are not commanded, then neither can theirs be embraced,
for they are no where commanded. If theirs be not commanded, and yet be
lawful: then ours also may be lawful though they be not commanded. Let
themselves be judges, let them acquit us or condemn us, choose them whether.
Thirdly, as they are not commanded, so are they no where in holy Scripture
forbidden, either directly or by consequence: if they be, let the places be
produced; if they be not, then seeing they are neither commanded nor forbidden,
the Lord has left them as things indifferent: and therefore authority may
command them, and we may with a good conscience observe them without sin.
Fourthly, it shall be convinced by example; and first, what special
commandment of God was there for Hester 9. 21.
Purim, which Mardocheus inioined, 29.
Hester set forward, and the 23. 27.
Jews established for all generations? Was the institution divine or
Ecclesiastical? If merely divine, let it so appear by divine authority: if
Eccclesiasticall, then I inquire, whether it was lawful, or unlawful? If
lawful for the Jewish Church, why not for the Christian? If it be said that
the Jewish Church was directed by the spirit, it is true: And unless the
contrary could be proved, why should we not judge the like of the Christian
Church, which has more ample promises? If it be said that Hes^^^ and
Mardocheus did it by special and extraordinary directions; they must consider,
that we must not fly to extraordinary motions without sufficient warrant of
holy Scripture. And this seems to be done by the ordinary power of the
Church: for the Jews in Shushan kept the 9. 18.
fifteenth day of the month Adar with feasting and joy: the Jews of the
villages kept the 19.
fourteenth, and Mardocheus brought them to an uniformity by inioining of 21.
both days. Afterward the Jews by reason of an other deliverance added the
Maccab. 15. 36. 37.
thirteenth day, changing it from fasting and mourning, to feasting and joy:
and the like they did commonly, upon the like occasion. If any imagine it to be
unlawful (though that imagination were very strange) let him cast his eye upon
another example, I mean the feast of the Dedication, which was no where
commanded in the law: yet was solemnly 1. Maccab. 4. 59.
observed, and John 10. 22. 23.
Christ himself may seem to have approved it by his presence. But to leave
these Jewish festiuals, and to come to the Christian. Are there not many which
were instituted in the primitive Church, and ever since continued in the Church
of Christ? The feast of the Nativity is no where commanded in scripture, yet
has bin allowed by the general consent of al Christian nations. Some Bullinger
ep. 129. inter epist. Calu.
reformed churches have laid away those festiuals, which bear the name of
Saints: yet The Churches of France and Flanders in their observation upon the
Har. s. 16. ad Boh. obseru. 1.
they which use them not themselves, excuse the use of them in the Church of
England. The Church of Priusquam vrbem vnquam ingrederer, nulla prorsus erant
feria praeter diem Dominicum. Calvin. epist. 118.
Geneua at the coming of Calvin, observed no holidaies, but the Sabbath only,
for so it pleased Farello and Vireto hoc vtil^ visum fuerat, ibidem.
Farellus and Viretus to appoint. The same decree, which banished Quae apud vos
celebrantur eodem plebiscito acceptae sunt, quo ego and Farellus fuim^^
expuls^. Calvin. epist. 118.
Farellus and Calvin, brought in other holidaies: and Calvin at his return
from banishment sought a Ibidem.
middle course, which was, that the feast of the Nativity should be
celebrated, and as for other holidaies, there should be solemn prayers in the
forenoone, and the people should return to their labor in the afternoon.
This proouing inconvenient, they were all again abrogated, except the Sabbath
only: Calvin Ego sancte testari possum me inscio ac ne optante quidem hanc rem
suisse transactam. ibid.
protesting that he was not the cause thereof, yet not Ego tametsi neque suasor
neque impulsor sui, sic tamen accidisse non moles^efero. ibid.
misliking it being done. Bullinger ep. 129. inter epist. Call.
Other reformed Churches used some more, some fewer, according to their
Christian liberty. Wherefore it is clear, that the Church in all ages has
used authority in things indifferent: and the customs and constitutions of
the Church which are not repugnant to the word of God, have been generally
approved although no where commanded. Lastly, though the admonition would have
nothing placed in the Church, but that which is commanded in the sacred Word,
and grounded upon this assertion, as upon an oracle: yet the T. C. lib. 1. pa.
27. and 31
Defendour of the Admonition was forced (such is the light of truth) to
forsake his friends the admonitioners, and to confess the plain
contradictorie of their position to be apparently true.

30 Secondly, our opposites do glance at us as though the orders and
ceremonies of our Church were not T. C. lib. 3. page 97. A very dangerous thing
to ground any order, or policy of the Church upon men at al, which indeed
ought to have their standing upon the Doctrine and orders of the Apostles. etc.
Apostolic. To which I answer, that those Apostolic times we honor and
reverence, not only for doctrine, which then did run most clear, as being
nearest to the crystalline fountain, but also for discipline, so far as the
state of those days could possibly suffer. But though the doctrine of the
Apostles be fully set down in the Apostles writings, yet the discipline is not
so. The reason whereof is because the doctrine is one and the same, eternal
and unchangeable, and therefore it is called an Reu. 14 6.
everlasting Gospel: but the discipline (especially the ceremonies) is for the
most part variable, according to circumstance of time and place. Therefore the
whole doctrine is purposely and plentifully; the discipline only in part by
occasion and sparingly delivered in holy Scripture: and consequently what the
orders Apostolic were, can not be fully known by the Apostolic writings:
and yet of those which are known, the grand and maine points are observed
Accessimus quantum makime potuimus ad ecclesiam Apostolorum etc. Nec tantum
doctrinam nostram sed etiam sacramenta precumque publicarum formam ad illorum
ritus and instituta direximus. Iuel. Apol. L^nd. 1591. page 170.
in the Church of England: as namely among other the government by Bishops, and
the ceremony of laying on of hands in the making of Ministers. Moreover, those
that call for reformation, do not 16 themselves absolutely and altogether
embrace the Apostolic orders, as for example, to salute with a holy kiss was
an To. 16. 16. 2. Cor. 1^. 12. 1. These. 5. 26.
apostolic order, which now is not thought fit to be restored in reformed
Churches. So Jude verse 12. 1. Pet. 5. 14.
Loue-feasts were used in the Apostles time, but are not received in Quid quod
quadam illorum instituta veluii communes illa^ (...) ipsa necessitas aboleuit.
Beza epist. 8.
reformed Churches. Furthermore the Church of England alters nothing from the
Apostolic institution, but such things only as may be altered. One kind of
Physic agrees not to all bodies, neither one kind of ceremony to all
Churches: the same Physic which is good for the body when it is young, may
be dangerous in the same disease when it is old. One manner of discipline may
beseem a city, and an other a kingdom. One may be good for a Church newly
planted, and an other when it is in the flourish. One ceremony may be seemly
for the time of peace, and an other for the time of persecution. Now to require
like where the case is unlike agrees not with reason. Our Savior did celebrate
the Communion 1. Cor. 11. 25
after Supper, and it was fit he should so, for the Passover by the law was
to be eaten between the Exodus 12. 6.
two euenings: and the Communion was to succeed the Passover, therefore it was
fit that the Communion should be instituted in the evening. But for us to
celebrate it in the morning is far more convenient. For I make no doubt but
our learned and godly brethren, which seek reformation, will in this point
rather join with the Church of England, and with all other Christian Churches
which make choice of the morning, then with the Anabaptists, which celebrate it
in the evening after supper. And to proceed, in the Apostles time they did
baptize in Act. 8. 36.
rivers and fountains; shall we therefore leave our Churches, and baptize our
children in rivers to the imitation of the Apostles? that imitation were
indiscreet, for they lived in time of persecution, and therefore were glad to
take the opportunity of time and place. We live in time of peace, wherein the
Churches (God be thanked) are open unto us. If God for our sins should lay
persecution upon us, we must be content to do as they did. And there is no
doubt, but if God had given them that liberty, which he has granted us, they
would have done in this point as we do, and have thanked him for the blessing
of peace. In the Apostles time the Ministers lived by voluntary Act. 4. 37.
contributions, or by their own Act. 20. 34. 1. Cor. 4. 12.
handie labors, for how could they do otherwise? They lived not only in
persecution, but their enemies the Leuiticall Priests had the tithes during the
standing of the Temple. But now when tithes are appointed for the Ministers of
the Gospel by Christian Princes, shall we return to handie labor, or
voluntary contributions? In the Apostles time, the people sold their
possessions, and laid the money Act. 4. 37.
at the Apostles feet; but shall our people be tied of necessity to do the
like? In the Apostles time there were no Christian Colleges, nor Universities
founded; shall we therefore dissolve our famous Universities, and damme up the
welsprings of learning? In the Apostles time it was hard to find any Christian
Hospitals for the poor; but is this a reason that now we should have none? In
the Apostles time the Sixtus Senensis biblio^^. sanct. l. 3. de part. meth. 4.
Bible was not divided into Chapters and Verses as now it is; shall we therefore
relect an invention so commodious? In the Apostles time, the bounds of Parishes
were not so distinguished as now Honorius Arch Cant. did first divide his
province into parishes. vide D. Godwine in Cat. The third objection.
they are; does it therefore follow that this distinction must be taken awa^?
not so (beloved:) for when the state and condition is unlike, an absolute
conformity is not to be urged.

31 Thirdly, it is commonly objected, that our ceremonies are Now they must be
discerned from others by Popish and Antichristian apparel, as Cap, Gown,
Tippet. And again: Now we must have Surplesses devised by Pope Adr. Adm.
popish and Antichristian, yea and some of them not only popish but Jewish
also: to which it may be answered that if their meaning be, that they are the
invention of Antichristian Popes, this consure (as they apply it) will
undoubtedly prove more sharp then sound, because many of our rites which they
so brand, and amongst the rest the They confess that the cross in Baptism
was mentioned by Cyprian: Treatise of cross printed at Amsterdam 1604.
Cross, were in the Church before the Popedom was hatched. And although it
may be that some of our ceremonies were devised by the Bishop of Rome: yet it
follows not that they were the invention either of heretics or of
Antichrist. For though now the Church of Rome be heretical, and seems to
be the very cage of Antichrist, yet in ancient time it was not so. A great
number of Bishops there before Syluester were holy men and Martyrs: But suppose
some of our orders were devised by papists and heretics, what then? If among
the filth of their heresies says a great T. C. in cp. before his 2. book.
controler of our Church, there be found any good thing, as it were a grain of
good corn in a great deal of darnell, that we willingly receive, not as
theirs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the Philistines, whereof they
were unjust owners. And again he says, it may come to pass that the
synagogue of Satan may have some one thing at some time with more conueniencie
then the true and catholic Church of Christ: as for example; The Church did
use in ancient time to power water thrice in Baptism in token of the Trinity:
The Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 26.
Eunomian heretics devised the pouring of water once, to cross the doctrine
of the Trinity. But what? shall once applying of water be for ever unlawful,
because it was brought in by heretics? our controuler confesses the
contrary, and affirms that it is used in most reformed churches. And surely
it is not only lawful, but in some cases more convenient: for where thrice
has been abused to signify three Gods, there once may be expedient to
betoken one God: likewise in cold countries, especially in winter time, and the
rather when the child is weak. Some flowers may grow in the wilderness, and
some things may proceed from heretics, and yet not unseemly to be used in the
Church of Christ. Many of our Colleges were builded by papists, yea and our
Churches partly by papists, partly by Greg. lib. 10. ep. 71.
Painims, and must they needs be pulled down, only because they had
heathenish or heretical founders? Furthermore if they term all ceremonies
popish and heretical which were used by Papists and heretics, then sundry
absurdities will follow. For so, many innocent orders primative and
peradventure Apostolic shall be branded with the name of popish or
heretical: for there is no doubt but sundry such have been used in the Church
of Rome. Moreover, this will breed a scrupulositie in the minds of men: for
seeing there have been so many swarms of heretics, how can we assure our
selves of any ceremony, that it has not been used by heretics at one time
or other? A true opinion if it be holden by an heretic or idolater, by
Antichrist, or the devil himself, it must not be forsaken: for all truth is
the truth of God wheresoever it be found, though it be in the mouth of the
devil: and shall we abhor a ceremony which the primitive Church devised, and
our national Church has judged comely and convenient, only because it had
the hap to be handled of papists? Not whatsoever heretics, idolaters, or
any wicked persons have done or said, but what they have done or said
heretically, idolatroussie, wickedly, is to be abandoned, so far as it is
evil: but whatsoever in their actions is fit or requisite to be done, is from
God, and therefore in that respect not to be abhorred. Lastly, if they call
them popish, because they were abused in popery, we confess it to be true,
they were abused to idolatry, and that most shamefully: The belles were rung
to Mass, the Surples was worn at Mass: In the Church they said their Mass:
in the Pulpit they maintained their Mass: But what can be concluded of all
this? Inconueniencie only, or unlawfulness also? If inconueniencie only, let
it be granted for disputation sake. But do they think, that they shall ever
so long as they live, find a Church upon the face of the earth so angelical,
that it shall be void of all inconvenience? or must a man for a bare
inconvenience, break out of the common pale, transgress the law of his
Prince, leave his pastoral charge, and make a rent in the Church of Christ? At
Geneua the use of the Wafer-cake being brought in, in the Calui^^^ bon^s
nonnullos ista mutatione vs^ adeo essenses ^t etiam (...) (...) (...) sibi
abstinendum pataren, serio m^^^^t (...) ob istud (...) lite^ m^uerent, sic
(...) (...) (...) ^^us. Bez^ in vita Ca^^^^ anno 1558.
absence of Calvin, did seem to sundry godly men a thing so offensive, that
they were of mind to have refrained from the Lords supper: But Calvin being
demanded his judgment, wished them rather quietly to use it, then to make any
tumult in the Church of God. How abhominably the Wafer-cake was abused in
popery every man may know: It was made an idol, and palpablie adored with the
highest kind of divine worship. Yet Calvin though thinking it inconvenient,
did earnestly admonish them, not to be contentious about a thing indifferent.
The Ministers and people of Geneua, virtuous and godly men, did follow this
counsel of Calvin, and quietly yielded their consent, and I hope you will not
accuse them that they wounded their conscience. But if you think still, that a
thing abused to Idolatry, is ipso facto, made unlawful, it is fit that the
grounds of your opinion be examined.

32 The example of 2. Reg. 18. 4.
Hezechias breaking in pieces the brazen serpent, will not prove that King
James ought of necessity to abolish the cross, the Surplesse, and other
things you mislike. For the brazen serpent was plainly made an idol, and so it
continued at that very day: but when our gracious Sovereign came unto the
crown, neither the cross nor any thing else was used idolatrously by the
Church of England. If it be replied, that Queen Elizabeth at her entrance to
the crown, did find many things polluted with superstition and idolatry,
which as you suppose, ought to have been removed by the example of Hezechias;
then you must consider, that abuses may be reformed two ways: either by
destroying the thing abused, as Hezechias did the brazen serpent; or by taking
away the abuse, the thing remaining, as in the planting of Christianity, when
the temples of Greg. prim. epist lib. 10. epist. 71.
heathen idols were changed into the churches of the living God. And the
example of Hezechias in using the one, does not abridge the liberty of
Christian Princes in using the other. Witness the same Hezechias, who though
he took away the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the gro^es,
and brake in pieces the brazen serpent; yet spared he the chapels which
Solomon had built for Ashtoreth the idol of the Zidonians, and for 1. Reg. 11.
7.
Chemosh the idol of the Moabites, and for Milcom the abomination of the
children of Ammon. For it is evident, that those high places remained till the
days of 2. King. 23. 13.
Josias. Hezechias destroyed the serpent, because he found it at that present
adored, and doing much harm: he spared the other because he found them
standing only as forlorn things, at that present without any harm. Yet God
gave him this testimony that he 1. King. 18. 6.
claue to the Lord and departed not from him, but kept his commandments which
the Lord had commanded Moses. And as Hezechias in breaking down the serpent,
did not pre^^dice his own liberty, of sparing the other: so his sparing the
other did not restrain Josias from using his liberty in pulling them down.
Indeed wisdom requires that a safe course be taken for prevention of evil
where danger appears, which our late Queen of famous memory most
religiously performed, whose zeal in planting and establishing Gods true
religion and abolishing of superstition, was nothing inferior to the zeal of
Hezechias. She found the fiery flames burning the bodies of the living, and the
bones of the dead: she graciously quenched them. She found the Scriptures
locked from the people in a strange language: she unclasped the book, and gave
it to her people to meditate thereupon day and night. She found the candle of
the Gospel quite extinguished: she did light it again (as it were) as the
beams of the Sun. She found the people worshipping of images, creeping to
crosses, committing idolatry in every thicket, and under every green tree:
Will you see her with Hezechias breaking in pieces the brazen serpent? then
behold and look back to her royal The Queens Injunctions 23.
Injunctions, commanding to Take away, utterly extinct and destroy all shrines,
covering of shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals, and rolls of Wax,
Pictures, Paintings, and all other monuments of fained miracles, Pilgrimages,
idolatry and superstitions, so that there remain no memory of the same in
walls, glasses, windows, or else where within their Churches, etc. And again,
That Iniunct. 35.
no persons keep in their houses any abused images, tables, pictures,
paintings and other monuments of fained miracles, pilgrimages, idolatry or
superstition. Yea she banished the cross so far as it was an idol, or in
any danger of idolatry. For whereas the cross was either permanent or
transient: the permanent being solemnly adored in the Church of Rome, she
altogether abolished, and the transient also for the most part. For whereas in
common life the crossing of the forehead was superstiously used, and the like
were still to be feared, if it were permitted to popular practice: therefore
that was discreetly removed. In the Sacrament of the Supper the use of
crossing was of shorter continuance, and the papists do use it rather like
coniurers then Christians: and therefore there was no cause why there it should
be continued. In Baptism it was more ancient and more free from superstition
and actual adoration; therefore Q. Elizabeth retained the cross in Baptism
as her godly brother did before her, being desirous, so far as she might
conveniently, to frame a conformity to those primitive times. What rust this
ceremony had gathered, the wisdom of our Church has wiped away; Fot the
cross is not appointed to be made by the Lay people, but only by the
Minister; and by him in Baptism only; and then not as a dark or dumb
ceremony which might be mistaken, but with an express declaration of the
meaning and signification thereof, to the end that the same might be freed from
all superstitious construction. And to the inten^ that all superstition and
idolatry might be rooted out of all men's hearts, and all future dangers thereof
prevented, the Ministers were Iniunct. 2.
enjoined to teach that all goodness, health and grace ought to be asked and
looked for of God only, as the very author and giver of the same, and of none
other. So the cross continued all the reign of Queen Elizabeth as it does at
this day, not blemished with the least spot or stain of superstition. Neither
is it to be doubted, but if time had discovered any such abuse, that religious
Prince would soon have reformed it. But these eight and forty years
experience may witness to the world, that there was no such danger as some did
imagine. For the Almighty who loved us, gave her an excellent spirit, and
tempered her zeal with wife moderation. Those things which seemed most
superfluous, she lopped away like riotous branches: In matters of greatest
moment, she followed the example of God himself in clensing the Leuit. 14.
leprosy: for first she had a Princely care, rather to purge the house, then
to pull it down; and if somewhat must be pulled down, yet rather a few
stones, than the whole house; yet where the leprosy was grown incurable,
there was no remedy but that part must down and be thrown into an unclean
place without the city. Hitherto of the example of Hezechias.

33 Moreover they pretend not example only, but the express commandment of
Almighty God, and stand upon a place of Esaias, which they urge against the
surples, Ye Esaias 30. 22. urged by the ^dm. 2.
shall pollute the covering of the images of silver, and the rich ornament of
thine images of gold, and cast them away as a stained ragge, and thou shall say
unto it, get thee hence. In which place the Prophet speaks against the
couerings of idols; but what is this against the Church of England, which has
long ago extirpated all such abominations? neither is the surplesse the
covering of an idol, but an ancient ornament of the Ministers of the Gospel.
If it be said that it was used by Idolaters, I answer, that in all likelihood
all those surplesses are consumed and worn away, and not now used in the
Church of England: and those which be used, were not received as popish by Q.
Elizabeth, but in such sort as they were in use by authority of Act for
uniformity.
Parliament, in the days of King Edward, and are now continued according to
the Practice of the Primitive Church. Furthermore, those couerings in the
Prophet were rich and gorgeous with gold, to make the idol more beautiful,
and so were a snare to idolatry: whereas no such thing can be justified of
our surplesses. This point will be the cleerer, if we consider a place in Deuteronomy.
The Deuteronomy 7. 25.
graven images of their gods shall you burn with fire, and covet not the
silver and gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee lest thou be snared
therewith, for it is an abomination, etc. In which place what is that which
the Prophet calls an abomination? is the thing polluted, or is the very
taking of such a thing abominable? our T. C. vide Arch. Whit. page 273.
accusers are of a contrary mind, for they grant that the gold of the cope
and the cloth of the surplesse may lawfully be taken for private purposes. Yet
let them take heed l^st they open a gap to sacrilegious proceedings. How much
more warily affirms Augustine: that August. cp. 154. ad public.
either private uses in such things are forbidden, or lest any thing be so
brought into the house that it be honored: which interpretation as Zanchius de
operibus redemptionis cap. 19. page 647.
Zanchius declares, is agreeable to the text, for the prophet saying, covet
not the silver, etc. condemns that covetous humor wherewith some gape after
the spoils of idolatry, only to enrich Psalm. 241.
themselves. Again, in saying (lest thou be snared) he renders a reason why
we should not take them, lest the beauty of those golden monuments entangle
us with the love of the idol. Wherefore such things must be polluted, that is,
defaced and abhorred, so far till there remain no danger of being snared
with idolatry, which caution observed they may be used as the creatures of
God, for the 7 earth is the Lords and all that therein is: which is the reason
of the Apostle S. Cor. 10. 26.
Paul speaking of meat oftred to idols. Wherein we must consider, that as in
the Lords offerings a portion belonged to the priest, so likewise in the
offerings of heathen idols. Whereupon it came to pass, that at solemn times
when there was abundance of sacrifices, the Priests did send some of their
portion to be sold in the sha^bles: and Beza ma^or. annotat. in 1. Cor. 10.
Beza shows learnedly out of the interpretor of Aristophanes, that those
which returned from the sacrifices did use to carry a portion home with them:
and out of Herodoius, that the Egyptians used to sell in the market the heads
of sacrificed beasts. Now hereupon arose a question, whether a Christian might
with a good conscience buie such meat in the shambles, and eat it; and again
if he were invited to a feast where such meats were, whether he might eat
them? To the former S. Paul answers: 1. Cor. 10. 25.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, making no question for conscience
sake, for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. To the latter part
he answers: verse 27.
But if any of the unbelieving inuit you, and you be willing to go,
whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
Whereby it is clear, that the idolatrous abuse of a thing, does not take away
the lawful use of it: It may still be used, as it is the good creature of
God. It will be replied, that things polluted may be used again for
Surplices, copes, tippers and caps may be applied to a good use, either common
or private, as they will best serve. T. C. see Arch. Whit. p. 273.
civil use, public or private, but not for We think it an attire unfit for a
minister, the surplice especially more than the other two (the cap, and the
tippet) because such hurtful Ceremonies are so much more dangerous, as they
do approach nearer the service and worship of God. T. C. vide Ar. Whitg. page
256.
sacred. But how can this be? because wicked men have kneeled to their idols,
may not I therefore pray kneeling to the living God? for kneeling though it
be a most seemly order, yet it is in it self indifferent. Or because such a
fountain, or such a stream has been dedicated to an idol, may not I
therefore baptize a child in the water proceeding from the same fountain or
stream? for to take of this water or that water, is neither forbidden nor
commanded, and therefore indifferent. But to handle the point a little more
distinctly, If things indifferent once polluted, in respect of all sacred use
become stained rags and abomination; then I would know whether this be for a
time or everlasting? if for a time only, for what time, and whether eight and
forty years be not sufficient to wash it away? Or if it be an everlasting
stain, then I demand whether those particular things only, which were
actually dedicated to idols, be so stained; or whether this stain shall
everlastingly be imputed to the whole kind? To affirm the latter, were a hard
and unadvised censure, and contrary to their own practice. For what though
some belles have been rung to the sacrifice of idols, may no bell therefore
be rung to the service of the living God? and shall not only the particular
abused be counted abominable, but shall those innocent things which never were
so abused, be eternally blemished? undoubtedly this is but a fancy, which
has no warrant from the words of Esaias: for he speaks plainly of the
couerings of idols, which without doubt were particularly abused to idolatry.
But if the stain stick only to the particular thing actually polluted, then
this argument cannot greatly be urged against the surplesse: for not many of
Queen Mary's surplesses do now remain, and if they did, the matter were
soon remedied, and time it self in short time would wear them away. Neither
can it be at all urged against the cross in baptism: for a popish Priest
makes one cross, and the Minister of the Gospel makes an other; here are
diverse individual actions, and consequently diverse particular crosses:
therefore in this case the pollution of the one, cannot spot and defile the
other. Yet what if that very particular polluted (the pollution being taken
away) may be employed in the service of Almighty God? Did not Judge. 6. 25.
Gideon sacrifice to the Lord the ox that was dedicate to Baal, and burn it
with the wood that grew in the grove of Baal? If it be replied that he had a
commandment, it is true; but profound Epist. 154.
Augustine thinks that this commandment extends to us also, and thereupon
gathers this general doctrine, that things dedicated to idols, may be
employed to the honor of the true God. And this seems to be the judgment of
the Christian world. For when Christianity was first preached, the Temples of
idols in England, France, and so through the world, were turned into the
Churches of the living God. Again, when popery was banished, yet all Vbique
locor^m in ^^nibus sere regnis and prouincijs quae Euangelium amplexa sunt,
templa ipsa in quibus idololatria admissa fuit tot annos retent a sunt, euersis
tantum altaribus. Zanch. de op. redemp. lib. 1. cap. 12.
popish churches were not pulled down, but many remain and some at Geneua
still employed for the service of Almighty God. Ex. 23. 24.
And Calvin says, that it may be done without scruple of conscience. Some Non
desunt (...) doctique viri qui sentiunt and scribunt omnin^ talia templa esse
diruenda. Za^. ib.
learned men I grant (beyond the seas) have thought otherwise; but they are
confuted by Zanchius; and the Ministers of England which seek reformation, I
hope, are more considerate then to pull down Churches. But concerning
Churches, they return us this answer, that they are As for Churches it has
been answered that they have a profitable use, and therefore they are evil
compared with the surplice which beside that it brings no profit, hurts
also. T. C. vide Ar. Wh^t. p. 284.
profitable: wherein they confess that even these particulars, which have
been abused to idolatry, may be used in the service of God, so they be
profitable. Therefore the question is come to this issue, whether the things
questioned be profitable? wherein who shall be the judge? those that sit at the
stern of the Church, are persuaded that they are K. Iam. in ratification of
the Can.
profitable, from whose judgment if they will depart, it behooves them to
bring more sound and demonstratiue reasons, then hitherto they have produced.
But I will conclude this point with the consent of their own standerd bearer,
who having in his first book called the surplesse a mark and sacrament of
popish abomination, and having pronounced that it brings no profit but hurt:
yet in his third book, dares not hence conclude any unlawfulness, but only
inconueniencie: and would not have any man to forsake his pastoral charge in
regard of a surplesse. And thus much for clearing our ceremonies from
imputation of popery.

34 Now fourthly let us consider whether they be Jewish, wherein we affirm
that the Church of England does approach no nearer to the Jews, then the law of
God and the state of Christianity does permit. For what is it that they
control under the name of Jewish? is it their meaning that we should use
nothing in the Christian Church, which was used by the Jews? Nehem. 8. 4.
Esdras a Jew preached in a Pulpit of wood; shall wooden Pulpits therefore be
unlawful? The Jews buried their dead John 19. 40.
in linen clothes, shall this likewise be rejected as Jewish? But both these
things our reproouers approve, by their own practice. Wherefore it is agreed
that some things used by the Jews, may be retained: and yet they are retained,
not because they are Jewish, but because they are decent. Beside these
ceremonies of decency and order, the Jews had other, which by the ordinance
of God were Colloss. 2. 17.
types of Christ, and these as we all confess are solemnly Heb. 9.
abrogated, and never to be resumed, as circumcision, sacrifices and such like.
But can it be proved, that we use any such thing in the Church of England? let
it be granted that Leuiticall garments in regard of their mystical
representation are abolished: yet how can it appear that any of our garments
are Leuiticall? Suppose there be some resemblance in matter of form, what
then? is the Church of Christ bound so far to avoid all conformity with the
Jews, that she may not at all resemble them in a matter of decency? Our
musical harmony they would likewise abolish as Jewish, but they have not yet
proved, that church music vocal or isntrumental, is such a Jewish ceremony
as ought to be abrogated. The princely Prophet 1. Chro. 25. 1.
David brought into the Church the melody of music, for the better praising
and lauding of God. For the sweetness of harmonicall sounds does insinuate it
self into the soul of man, preparing the affections for the service of God,
lifting up the heart toward heaven, delighting the mind, kindling devotion,
and rauishing the spirit with celestial joy. If it be said, that some come to
the Church rather to be delighted with music, then to be instructed with
religion, what then? yet in that they come to the Church I rejoice, yea and I
will rejoice. So some come to the Church with purpose to entangle and catch the
Preacher, and yet it pleases God sometimes that they are catched themselves.
As Seductus ex lectione inst^t. (...). Call. Ruardus ^apper explic. Tom. sec.
Art. 8.
Pighius did read Caluins Institutions, of set purpose to confute them, yet it
was Gods will that thereby he should be reduced to the right way in the
Article of Justification. And father Father Lat. page 70 1596.
Latimer can tell you, that some came to church of purpose to take a nappe, and
yet he had rather that they Bellar. de instif. l. 2. cap. 1. in eandem
sententiam sieve potius errorem (um Eu.) de caussa formali iustific. incidit
Alb. Pig. Cont. 2.
should go a napping, then not go at all. Even so it may be, some come to the
Church only to hear the melody; yet who can tell, but it may please the
wisdom of that heavenly teacher to find out a way, that hearing those things
wherein their ears delight, they may also learn that where by their souls
may profit? The form of our Church they brand likewise with Iudaisme, as being
framed after the fashion of the Jewish temple: but the temple had rooms for
sacrifices, to which there is no resemblance in our churches: and for the
rooms of receipt, they had Ad^icom. in descrip. vrbis Hierosolyma.
Atrium Gentium, proper to the Gentiles, and Atrium Iudeorum, proper to the
Jews. And again, for the Jews, they had one partition for men, and an other
for women: And again for men, they had a several for the people, a several
for Priests, and a several where the high Priest entered once a year.
Peradventure they will say that our chancels are like the Jewish sanctuary:
But if we respect the form, the sanctuary was 1. Reg. 6. 20.
square; if the magnificence, it was ouerlaied with Ibidem.
gold; if the ornaments, there was the Ibid. verse 19. and 23.
Arc and the glorious Cherubins; if the separation, it was divided from the
Holy by a 2. Chron. 3. 14.
veil; if the situation, it was at the Sea Adric.
West end of the Holy; if the adjuncts, it had cloisters, 1. Kings 6. 10.
galleries, and chambers adioining; if the use, it was only for the high Heb.
9. 7.
Priest, whither he entered once a year not without blood, which he offered for
himself and the sins of the people: all which things are otherwise in our
Churches. Lastly, they compare our churching of Women to Jewish Admon. T. C.
vide Arob. Whi^. page 534.
purification, but most unjustly, for our Women do not offer lambs,
sparrowes, and pigeons, which was Leuiticall, they only resemble them in
matters moral. Their abstaining from public assemblies for a season, is not
only for health, but a matter of modesty; their giving thanks to God, when
they come to the Church, is a Christian duty, neither do I see how this can
be called a Jewish ceremony, unless to praise God be a Jewish ceremony.

35 Fifthly, it is objected that our ceremonies are scandalous: The fifth
objection.
let us therefore consider what a scandal is, and how many kinds of scandal.
The word (...) coming from (...), which signifies to halt, is properly that
part of the trap, whereto the bait is tied, which being overthrown, the beast
pulles the trap upon his own head. Metaphorically it is taken for that which
is an occasion to hurt or grieve an other: it is often joined with (...), a
stumbling-blocke, and may be expounded by it. For whereas a Christian should go
forward in the way of godliness, a scandal may be called a word or a deed,
which is laid as a block in his way, whereby he may fall or stumble, or any
way be hindered in his virtuous course. Scandal is of two sorts, given or
taken; to give scandal, or to scandalize, is to do or say any thing which is
apt to provoke unto sin, by greeuing the godly, wounding the weak, reioicing
the wicked. Some things do scandalize, because they have a scandalizing
nature, as all sin and wickedness. Some things do scandalize accidentally,
because they are scandalously used: and so things indifferent may become
scandalous. First, when they are devised for an evil purpose, as Sozomen lib.
6. Hist. eccl. cap. 26.
the Eunomian heretics devised to power water but once in Baptism, and not
thrice, to cross the doctrine of the Trinity: In which age, if any should
have left the custom of the Church, in applying it thrice, and have followed
the Eunomians in doing it but once, he should have given a very scandalous
example: for he might have been probably thought to have favored their
heresy whose example he followed. Secondly, when things originally devised for
good, are abused to evil: As in Spain certain hereukes abused the thrice
applying of water in Baptism, to signify three gods, which gave an occasion
to Ep. l. 1. c. 41.
Gregory, as also to the Council of Council. 2. Tol. 4. c. 5.
Toledo, to take order that in Spain it should be applied but once. Thirdly, a
thing indifferent may become scandalous in regard of the circumstance of time,
person or place: as for example, if one in Spain after the constitution of
Toledo should have applied water thrice; this (though done in simplicity) had
been scandalous in regard of the time, because heretics did then use it to
strengthen their heresy of three gods. Moreover, although meats forbidden by
the ceremonial law, after the death of Christ became indifferent; yet if a
weak brother not persuaded of the indifferency, should profess himself To. 14.
15.
offended, the^ thy eating in his presence should be scandalous in respect of
the person. Again, though meat offered to Idols might lawfully be eaten, yet
to eat in the 1. Cor. 8. 10.
temple of the Idol were evil in app^arance, and scandalous in respect of the
place, because it might seem to be done in honor of the idol, so it might
grieve the godly and be an occasion of falling to thy weak brother, and harden
the idolaters in their impiety. A scandal taken not given, is when that which
is not scandalously done, is traduced as scandalous either by error or
calumniation. By error, as when therest of the Ios. 22. 16.
Tribes were offended with the tribe of Ruben, Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasses, for erecting an altar upon the borders of Jordan, which they supposed
to be erected for sacrifice, but was indeed only a memorial that they had a
part in the God of Israel; of which when they were truly informed, they
corrected their error, they rested satisfied, and all imagination of scandal
was taken away. By calumniation, a good thing may be blamed for scandalous, as
when Christ himself to the disobedient was made a 1. Pet. 2. (...).
stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense. Hitherto what scandal is, and of
the kinds of scandal, now let us apply all this to the Church of England. We
are accused for retaining many scandalous ceremonies: but is the scandal
given, or is it only taken? If we give any scandal, let it appear wherein,
and to whom. And first, is there any ceremony in our Church, which is of a
scandalizing nature? And to begin with the Surples, is it a thing in the own
nature simply unlawful? not so; for those which most spurn at it both in T.
C. l. 3. page 262.
England and Beza cp. 8.
Geneua, confess it to be a thing in the own nature indifferent: and that
very man who called it T. C. l. 1. page 75.
a mark and sacrament of abomination, uses these very words, T. C. lib. 3.
page 262.
The truth is, that I dare not be author to any to forsake his pastoral
charge for the inconvenience thereof; and gives this reason, because preaching
is the absolute commandment of God, and therefore ought not to be laid aside
for a simple inconvenience or uncomeliness of a thing which in the own nature
is indifferent. And of the same judgment is Respondeo minime mihi videri
deserenda ecclesi^^ propter vest^^ aut (...). lco^, aut e^^smodi vere medium
aut indifferens. Beza epist. 8.
Beza. But of all other things the cross in Baptism does most stick in men's
minds, let us therefore consider whether that be of a scandalizing nature. Now
if the cross be simply unlawful, wherein consists this unlawfulness? is
the very making of a cross a thing so repugnant to godliness, that whosoever
shall make it though it be but with his finger, shall presently sin? but this
to my knowledge no man objects: for they allow it in Treatise of the cross.
fol. 3.
banners and coins, and such civil respects. Is there any thing blameable in
the thing signified? but that without all controversy is a most religious
duty. What is it then which is so offensive in the cross? They tell us
plainly, that T. C. lib. 1. 171.
though it be the word of God that we should not be ashamed of the cross of
Christ, yet it is not the word of God that we should be put in remembrance and
observation, of it by two lines drawn a cross; and a little before, this
brings in a new word into the church. But I hope my brethren will consider
that we use it not as a thing necessary, but only as a thing indifferent:
and it has been declared that the Church may appoint things indifferent,
which are not commanded in the word, and yet this is not to bring in a new
word; or if it be, then all Christan Churches are bringers in of a new word. T.
C. 16.
But they think that this is to mingle the inventions of men with the
Sacraments of God. And why so? we teach that a child is perfectly baptized
before he be crossed, and we confess that such as are baptized without
crossing have the full perfection of baptism. And though we make a sign at
the time of baptism, yet we do it not as a part of baptism. In the old law
they named the Luke 1 59. 6.
child at circumcision, as we do at baptism. Was this to mingle the
invention of man with the sacraments of God? the Church of Calu. ep. ^02.
Geneua uses Godfathers, shall this also be in the same condemnation? but this
crossing (they say) is superstitiously and wickedly to make a new sacrament.
For answer whereunto Adam. and T. C. vide Arch. Whit. page 617.
may it please them to remember that every significant sign is not a
sacrament. For a sacrament properly is a 21 sign and a seal of the
righteousness of faith, that is, of the Rom 4. 11.
righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, and apprehended by a true and a
lively faith. And therefore a sacrament is not only a sign to signify, but
also a seal of the living God, establishing our hearts in the covenant of
grace. Whereby it is apparent that the cross is far different from a
sacrament; for it is not a seal, but only a sign; not commanded of the Lord,
but appointed by the Church; not as a confirmation of his covenant, but as a
memorial of our duty. Wherefore it does not appear to be of a scandalizing
nature, and therefore a wise and Goul. annot. in Cyp. epist. 56.
judicious man living in reformed churches where the cross is not used, does
call it plainly a thing indifferent. Let us now consider whether it be
scandalous in respect of the use. And first dare any man affirm that it was
devised to a scandalous end? that does not appear, but rather the contrary.
For among the Jews to die upon Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
a tree was a cursed death, and among the Romans the death of the cross was
full of reproach. Wherefore the Jews seeing the poor estate of Christ and his
shameful death, did think him unworthy the title of their glorious Messiah,
and many of the Gentiles did scorn to believe in a crucified God. But the true
Christians reioiced Gal. 3. 13.
in the cross of Christ, that is, in Christ crucified, not only in Christ
rising, ascending and sitting in glory, but they reioiced in his cross, that
is, in his death and passion which he suffered upon the cross, for his
humiliation is our exaltation, his death our life, his cross our crown, his
reproach our glory. And whereas the heathen did reproach the children of God
with it, the Christians set the sign of it in their foreheads, T. C. lib 1.
page 170.
to testify that they were not therefore ashamed of the same God. And this the
great controller of our Church confesses to be done of a ibidem.
good mind to keep amongst them an open profession of Christ crucified, and so
though he dis^^ke the means, he commends the end. Yet I confess though it
were devised to a good end, it was afterward abused and perverted to evil. For
ceremonies depend upon the doctrine, especially of the free grace of God and
merits of Christ. So long as this doctrine is preserved pure, the ceremonic is
pure, when the doctrine declineth, the ceremony is perverted* and therefore
Goul. annot. i^ Cyp. l. ad Demet. cap. 19.
Goulartius affirms, that the old Christians did use the sign of the cross
without superstition, because the doctrine of the merits of Christ preserved
them from error which afterward crept in. When the doctrine was corrupted, no
marvel if the ceremony were defiled, as it came to pass in popery, where it
was very scandalously abused. But if it were scandalous only in respect of the
abuse, then the abuse being removed, the scandal it self is likewise
removed. Now can any man say, that it is abused in the Church of England? for
do we adore it with divine worship? all the world may know that we detest and
abhor all such abomination. Do we superstitiously ascribe any grace or
virtue unto it? let our very enemies be our judges. And surely if the purity
of doctrine preserve from superstition, then who can accuse the Church of
England, wherein the doctrine of Christ is so purely taught as ever it was in
any Church upon the face of the earth since the Apostles time? But
peradventure they will say, that our Church does use it scandalously in respect
of some circumstances of time, person or place. Indeed we use it in the Church
at the time of Baptism, as our forefathers have done before us, which lived
either in or near the Apostolic age: But that we use it scandalously, we
utterly deny. For who are they which are scandalized? They In the unfolding of
the Popes attire made by certain ministers of London, as also T. C. vide
Archb. Whit. p. 252.
answer, that the papists are some weak aad some obstinate: weak, which have
made some step to the Gospel, and yet are not fully scowred from their
former rust: and these (as is imagined) think that the sacraments get
reverence by the ceremonies, as namely by the cross and surples: and that they
want some thing they should have, where these are not used. In which error
they are said to be strengthened by our using of them. And the stubborn and
obstinate do hereby take occasion (as is supposed) to blaspheme the Gospel,
and to hope that the rest of their trumperie shall likewise in time be
received. And by this means they grow hardened and frozen in their dregs. But
if the Papists be weak and not wilful, Beza ep. 8.
there is great hope that as they have already made some step from popish
opinions by means of good instruction: so these silly imaginations may
likewise by the like means in time be removed. For this does not enforce any
abolishing of ceremonies, but it requires more diligence in instruction. And
for the stubborn papists which stop their ears against all instruction, we
need not regard them. When the Pharisees were displeased with the Disciples of
Christ for eating with unwashed hands, Christ rendered a sufficient reason in
defense of their fact; but the Pharisees notwithstanding were offended; then
Christ answered: Matthew. 15. 14.
Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. This may be applied to our papists
which being blind themselves, go about to corrupt others with their blind
opinions, but we will let the^ alone, and return to our weak brethren To whom
Beza answers: that it is a vain thing to pretend weakness in that kingdom
where the Gospel has been already so many years both preached and
received, and confirmed by the blood of so many most excellent Martyrs. But the
godly are much grieved at our ceremonies: surely it is great pity that the
godly should be grieved at that which is lawful: our intent is not to grieve
them, but rather that we may go with them hand in hand, and do our duty with
all joy and comfort: At Beza in vita Caluini.
Geneua some godly brethren were grecued at the wafer cake, yet they did not
therefore cancel the public constitutions of their Church, but Calvin did
instruct the weak, in the nature of things indifferent, and so they learned to
comfort and content themselves. If they urge us with the saying of our Savior:
Mat. 18. 6.
Whosocuer shall offend one of these little ones, which believes in me; It
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea. It may be answered, that Christ speaks of
such offenders as by their own default give offense unto others, and therefore
Calvin upon this place does excellently define Scandal (given) Mat. 18.
Siquis nostra culpa vel impingit, velabaucitur arecto cursu, velt^rdatur, eum
dicimur offendere: Now if any be offended with our ceremonies, it is their own
fault, and not to be imputed to the Church of England. Neither is a Church
bound upon every pretended offense, presently to alter her public decrees: for
that were nothing else but ridiculous leuitie. Indeed it is the duty of every
Church, carefully to provide that nothing be decreed which may minister just
occasion of offense: and likewise to establish her ceremonies with such
sufficient cautions and cleerenesse of doctrine, as may prevent so far as is
possible all sinister constructions and taking of offense: which points are
already in ample manner performed by the church of England. But it will be
replied that many things are lawful which are not expedient; meats offered to
idols were lawful, yet evil to him that eats offensiuely. So our garments
may be lawful, yet evil to him that wears them offensiuely. So the cross
may be lawful, yet evil to them that use it offensiuely. And thought the
offense comes by the weakness of our brother, yet charity binds us to
refrain from that which offends our brother. And they stand much upon 1.
Cor. 8. 13.
Paul's protestation: that he would eat no flesh so long as the world stands,
rather then he would offend his brother. The answer whereunto may be this,
that the case is unlike: for first those meats whereof S. Paul does speak,
were matters of private action of common life: But we speak of the public
ceremonies of our Church. Secondly, S. Paul was at his own choice, no law
restraining his liberty, but our ceremonies are commanded by lawful
authority Thirdly, S. Paul by forbearing flesh did prejudice none but
himself: But we in forbearing the ceremonies should prejudice the authority
of the Prince. Fourthly, S. Paul's practice did further and not hinder the
course of his Ministry, but as the case now stands, our refusal of
ceremonies might be a means to silence our selves, and to stop the course of
our preaching, which is a duty so necessary, that it may not be omitted, no
not for fear of a scandal. Fifthly, though eating of those meats were
offensive to some, yet the not eating we do not find to have been offensive
to any: But in our ceremonies some are offended because they are used, and some
are offended because they are not used, and that more justly, because the not
using of a thing so commanded is disobedience to the Prince, and may prove a
very scandalous and pernicious example. If they say that charity binds me to
respect the one; I answer, that the same charity binds me to regard the
other: and duty binds me to honor and obey my Prince. Wherefore in a mixed
congregation what shall I do? for both will be offended: the one if I use
them, the other if I use them not. Surely in such a case I think it my part,
after fervent prayer, diligent study, and Christian conference, to consult
with mine own conscience; and finding the thing commanded, to be no way
contrary to the word of God: I will hold it my duty to obey my Prince. And as
for those which shall be offended with my fact, I will in the spirit of
meekness, both publicly and privately, render them a reason of my doing,
instructing them from time to time in the doctrine of things indifferent, and
the duty of a subject to his Prince. But if they will not be thus satisfied,
if they refuse to hearken and still continue stiff in their own opinions: let
them take heed lest the saying of Aquinas may be applied unto them: Concerning
the Aquin, in ep. ad Romans c. 14. lect. 2.
scandal of little ones, (says he) we must observe that for the avoiding
thereof, a man is bound to defer the use of lawful things so long, till the
scandal may be removed by a reason rendered: But if the reason being rendered,
the scandal do still remain, now it seems not to proceed of ignorance or
infirmity, but of malice: and so shall belong to the scandal of Pharisees.

36 Moreover some are so tender that they are offended not only at things
formerly abused, but even at the names of vanished abuses. The Isid or. l. 5.
cap. 33.
months of the year were sometimes dedicated to heathen Idols, this very
month wherein I speak to Censorin. de die not. c. 22.
Juno; the Isid or. l. 5. cap. 30.
days to the planets, this very day to the Sun. Our Chronicles testify that
Wednesday and Friday were so called of Woden and Frea, the Idols of the Saxons.
All those names were imposed and abused Malmesh. de gestis Regum Angliae lib. 1.
to Idolatry: but shall we therefore think that all which use these names
speak scandalously by countenancing Idolatry? It may be that some of our
Churches called by the names of Saints, had their names not only as memorials,
but were also superstitiously dedicated to the honor of Saints, and shall it
therefore now be imagined that the very use of these names is a scandalous
point? God for bid. The superstition and Idolatry are worn away, the names
remain only as civil names, and may be so used for distinction sake, as may
be justified by Scripture. For the Prophet Daniell was called Dan. 4. 5.
Belteshazzar according to the name of the God of Nabuchodonosor, yet the
Prophet inspired by the Spirit of God speaking of himself, calls himsel^e
Dan. 4. 16.
Belteshazzar. The City of Athens was so named of Pallas, and therein was a
street called the street of Act. 17. 19.
Mars. both which names proceeded from Idolatry: yet who can accuse Saint Luke
of speaking scandalously in calling the City Athens, and the street the
street of Mars? Saint Paul sailed in a ship of Alexandria whose badge was Act.
28. 11.
Castor and Pollux, which (as Saint Chrisost. in Act.
Crisostome truly observes) were Idols. Yet S. Lukes pen did not write
scandalously in describing the ship by the names of Castor and Pollux. Neither
was it a scandalous point in S. Paul to sail in the ship, for S. Luke used the
name only historically as a civil name of distinction, and S. Paul knew that
the earth is the Lords and all that therein is. And therefore in the tempest he
did not invoke Castor and Pollux, but the true God. Wherefore the names of
times, places, and persons scandalously imposed, may be used for distinction
sake without scandal. Many take offense at their brethren for using the names
of Christmas, Candlemas, and the like: as though it were a scandalous piece of
Popery, but admit that these feastiuities had their names of the mass, (though
some learned men are of an other opinion) yet suppose it were so: those that
are offended with this word Christmas, as favoring Popery, might be offended
with Bolteshazzar as favoring Paganism But they will say it renueth the
memory of the abominable mass, be it so, and withal it may renew the
memory of our delivery from the mass. So the names of the days of the week
may put us in mind how this land was sometimes drowned in Paganism: and the
same may put us in mind how it has pleased God to deliver us from Paganism.
Wherefore though men in such points may use their liberty, yet in such
peremptory manner to condemn their brethren is against charity. And thus much
of scandal.

37 Lastly, they propose us the pattern of reformed The sixth objection.
Churches, which have rejected these ceremonies, as though it were our duty
therein to follow them. The words of the admonition are these. Is a
reformation good for France? and can it be evil for England? Is discipline
meet for Scotland, and is it unprofitable for this Realm? Surely God has set
these examples before your eyes, to encourage you, etc. Concerning the reformed
Churches, I beseech God to pour his blessings and spirit upon them, and make
them like the thousands of Manasses and the ten thousands of Ephraim. It is
true, they have rejected some ceremonies which we retain: the things were
indifferent, and they have used their Christian liberty in refusing them: and
we the like liberty in using them. But why should we be bound to their
example? Indeed in the same nation, and under the same government it is fit
there should be an uniformity, and therefore whereas the Jews in the Provinces
kept the feast of Purim upon the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the
Jews in Shusan upon the fifteenth: Mordocheus authorized Hest. 9. 21.
by the King reduced them to an uniformity by inioining them both days. But
diversity of rites in diverse Churches independent does noe harm, where there
is an unity of faith: It only shows that the Kings daughter so that she be
glorious within, may be clothed with garments of changable colors. Yet we
cannot but marvel that men will urge us to conformity with foreign Churches
to which we owe no subjection, and will not conform themselves to their own
mother the Church of England in whose bosom they live, and whereof they are
members. But to whom shall we conform our selves, and whose pattern shall we
follow? for the reformed churches differ one from another, as has been in
part declared in their celebration of holidaies. Peradventure they will say
that we must follow the best. But how shall we know which are best, unless
the reformed Churches would have a general meeting in a public Council, and
make us a final determination? and yet peradventure that would not be void of
inconvenience: for that might be best for one, which is not best for another.
If in this case we should be tied to follow the most ancient, then Geneua it
self must be cast in an other mould, which our reproouers will not allow to
be of equal perfection. But whatsoever our reformers say, it is clear that
they have always one eye fixed upon the face of Geneua, yet Geneua has some
popish orders (if you call all orders popish which have been used in popery)
as well as we: as has been declared in their custom of godfathers and
godmothers; and some popish orders they keep, which are not imposed upon us in
the Church of England as the wafer cake: which was more scandalously abused in
popery, than any thing that we inioin, yea then the cross it self. For the
wafer cake was not only made an idol, but such an idol as did abolish the
very substance of the Lords supper: It shall suffice that the bread be such as
is usually to be eaten at the table etc. Book of common prayer.
But the cross howsoever it was abused, yet it did not diminish the Sacrament
of Baptism: but the substance remained wholly, even in the darkness of
popery. Moreover, Calvin himself does not require, that other Churches should
follow their pattern, but professes that it is against equity Call. ep. 118.
that the Church of Geneua should prejudice others. And again, such a kind of
Call. in arg. in ep. ad Gall.
frowardness (says he) is a most mischievous plague, when we would have the
manner of one church to prevail in place of an universal law. In which point,
singular is the wisdom and modesty of the Church of England: which
entreating of ceremonies says: Treatise of ceremonies.
In these our doings, we condemn no other nations, nor prescribe any thing but
to our own people only: for we think it convenient, that every country
should use such ceremonies, as they shall think best to the setting forth of
Gods honor and glory, etc. And although Heluetian and French Cities follow
the fabric of Geneua, and should find it commodious, yet that will not
prove that it is either necessary or convenient for the Church of England.
For there is great difference between a popular state and an absolute
kingdom: between small territories and ample dominions: between the school
of Geneua, and the renowned Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Neither is
any man to be offended with the diversity of ceremonies in diverse countries:
for as Eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Socrates declares, those ancient Churches which embraced the same religion,
had notwithstanding variety of ceremonies. And it is well said of Greg. epist.
lib. 1. cap. 41.
Gregory, In vna fide nihil officit sancta ecclesia consuetudo diuersa.
Moreover Saint Augustines mother, having used when she was in Afric to fast
upon the Saturday, and Aug. ep. 86. ad Casutan.
coming to Millan where that was not observed, was doubtful what to do:
whereupon her son Austin asked Saint Ambrose, who answered: When I am here
at Millan, I do not fast upon the Saturday: and when I am at Rome I fast
upon the Saturday: and unto what Church soever you shall come, keep the
custom of it, if you be willing neither to take nor give scandal. And S.
Augustine advised Casulanus when there are diverse customs in the same
country, to follow them to whom the regiment of the people is committed, and
to Episcopo tuo in hac re no^^ resistere and quod facit ipse sine vllo scrupul^
vel disc^ptatione sectare Aug. ibid.
conform himself to his own Bishop. Wherefore it appears first, that
diverse countries professing the same religion, may have diverse ceremonies.
Secondly, that in Churches independent, one is not bound of necessity to
follow an other. Thirdly, that it is the duty of every private man to
conform himself to the, lawdable customs of the Church wherein he lives.
Hitherto we have seen the Archers shooting at the Church of England, but God
is her buckler, and the Almighty is her protection. Gen 49.
So her how abides strong and the hands of her arms are strengthened by the
hands of the Almighty God of Jacob. And thus far of the confutation.

38 And now my dear brethren, let me exhort you in The exhortation.
the name of the Lord Jesus, to perform all holy obedience to God and the
Prince. For what is it which withholdeth you from the cheerful discharge of
so gracious a duty? if the supposed blemishes of our church be inconveniences
only, how dare you disturb the peace of the Church for bare inconveniences?
The Communion bread of Bez. in vita Calvin.
Geneua seemed inconvenient to Calvin: yet he advised his friends not to make
any tumult for a thing indifferent: and the same counsel which he gave to
other, he followed himself. In another place the Calu. epist.
belles at burial did seem inconvenient, yet Calvin wished them if it could
not be obtained that the Prince would remit it, yet not to be clamerous or
contentious for such a matter. In an other place, the holidaies and other
ceremonies did seem inconvenient, and Calvin being asked, returned this
answer, that Call. ep. 379 Malam cau dam trabat quia tamen per se verbo dei non
repugnat concedi potest.
Though a thing imposed should bring offense and draw matters of foul
consequence after it, yet if in it self it be not repugnant to Gods word, it
may be yielded unto, especially where the greater part prevails, in which
case he that is only a member of that body can proceed no further. In England
that learned and blessed Martyr M. Hooper, being elected Bishop in King Edwards
time, did vehemently deny the Act. and monument.
wearing of his episcopal ornaments, but Calu. epist. 120. de piles and vest
linea malu^ssem (vt illa etiam non probem) non vsque adeo ipsum pugnare, idque
nuper suadebam.
Calvin did counsel him not to stand so stiffely against the cap and the
rocher. And Calvin answering to certain questions of discipline, Call. ep. 370.
professes that he misliketh the frowardness of those men which for light
scruples depart from the public consent: and he protested to the English
Church at Call. ep. 200.
Franckford, that in external rites he did show himself easy and flexible.
Wherefore I wish that you which in other things so magnify and admire the
person of Calvin, would in this point follow the sound judgment, grave
counsel, and tractable disposition of Calvin. But if you suppose those things
which are imposed upon you to be impieties: then you dissent from M. Calvin,
who though he censured many things in our Church somewhat Ibidem.
sharply, yet he confessed that there was no manifest impiety, and therefore
the supposed blemishes of our Church he accounted and termed tolerable: but
if you esteem them intolerable; remember you are men, consider that you may be
deceived, and therefore examine your grounds again and again without
partiality, and carry this Christian mind, to forsake your selves to follow
the truth. If you be led by example, and pin your judgment upon other men's
fleeues, you must be content to be told, what an injury you do to the
Church of England, in suffering the opinions of private men to ouer-ballance
with you the public determination of such a national Church. But if you will
needs look upon examples, then behold the former examples of Calvin, and of
that glorious martyr master Hooper, who though he did long withstand, yet was
not so wedded to his own opinion, but that at last after long conference, he
reformed himself, and yielded to the public judgment of the Chuch of England.

32 If you rely upon reasons artificially deduced, are they probable or
demonstratiue? if probabilities only, what truth is there in the world so
sound, but a carping wit may find some probabilities against it? The holy
Scripture has been oppugned, though without all truth, yet with some
probability. And reason it self can borrow a reason from nature, to reason
against faith. But how shall the conscience of a subject be discharged in
disobeying the commandment of his Prince upon deceivable probabilities?
Indeed, if you can produce any one necessary and demonstratiue reason, to
prove that the things imposed upon you are contrary to Gods word, then it
must needs be confessed, that you are bound in conscience to refrain: for we
must rather obey God then man. But what if you think a reason to be necessary
when it is not? may not you be taken for such as have vnnecessarilie troubled
the Church of God? your reasons out of Scripture against our orders, when they
come to the scanning, prove no such matters of necessity as you pretend. As
for example, those places which you urge in such peremptory manner for the lay
See perpetual government.
presbiterie, wherein consists the life and soul of your desired discipline.
And whosoever shall examine the quotations of your admonitions to the
Parliament, shall find them in some part violations, of Gods holy word. What
is it to abuse the majesty of Scripture, if this benot?

40 But peradventure you will reply, that howsoever your arguments be in
themselves, yet to you they seem inuinciblie to conclude our orders to be
unlawful: according to the saying of S. Paul. I Romans 14. 14.
know and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean
of it self, but unto him that judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean. In regard whereof, many of you pretend that the conformity required
is against your conscience: but beware lest this conscience prove an erroneous
conscience. If you say that an erroneous conscience binds so far, that
whatsoever is done against it is sin in the doer, and therefore though
conformity in it self were lawful, yet because you judge it unlawful, in
you it were sin: If this be your reply, then tell me I pray you, whether
the error of the conscience take away the sin of the soul in disobeying
the lawful commandment of lawful authority? If it be clear that it do
not, because transgression is transgression, and sin is sin, though an
erroneous conscience cry a thousand times to the contrary. Then see I beseech
you into what perplexities you cast your selves. If you should conform, you
tell us that you should sin, because it is against your conscience; and if
you do not conform, we must tell you that you sin, because it is
unjustifiable disobedience. Thus if your conscience upon just trial shall prove
erroneous, you are every way ensnared and entangled: but if you stand upon the
clearing of your conscience, as though it were void of all error, then let it
so appear by the holy Scripture, and let not such vehement affirmations be
supported by such weak and feeble inducements. It behooves you which withstand
the ceremonies established by the sacred authority of such a religious Prince,
and such a national Church, to stand upon such pregnant and infallible
proofs, as may undoubtedly persuade the conscience that the things commanded
are unlawful: or if you cannot, then (without all question) you are bound in
conscience to reform your conscience, or at lest to suspend your judgment.
But how shall this be done? If heretofore you have fixed both eyes upon the
one side, vouchsafe now to cast one eye upon the learning, wisdom, and
gravity of the other. If heretofore you have greedily devoured the books of
the one, vouchsafe now without prejudice to read and consider what is said by
the other. If heretofore you have looked upon your own reasons through the
vapor of affection, and therefore have conceived them to be greater and
goodlier then in truth they were: dispell now all mists and clouds of
partiallitie, and pray to God in humility, that his precious truth may shine
unto you. If you do thus, then peradventure those reasons which heretofore
seemed giants in your eyes, may prove like little dwarfes, and those which
heretofore obtruded themselves, to a mind sophisticate with partiality as
demonstrations, may perhaps appear to a pure and single eye nothing else but
slender and silly collections. And for the better performance, let me entreat
you to have always one eye fixed upon the nature of things indifferent, and
the other upon the duty of a subject to his Sovereign.

41 Some men will say that they could be content to yield, but only because
they have so long withstood by preaching and practicing the contrary. Those
men in so saying, approve the orders of the Church of England for lawful, and
condemn their own former and present resistance for unlawful: and therefore
if they carry so tender a conscience as they pretend, why then do they not
leave that disobedience which their conscience judges unlawful, and embrace
that obedience which they know to be lawful? But they imagine that in so doing
their credit should be blemished with a note of inconstancy. As though it were
any credit to be constant in evil things, or any discredit to change for the
better. Indeed a good name is a precious ointment, and a good reportis much to
be regarded: but if the question come between you and the Prince, the church,
and the laws under which you live, I hope it is no disparagement for you, to
bow, to bend, and to learn obedience. And I would wish that such men which set
so high a price upon their own reputation would propose unto themselves the
example of S. Cor. 10. 33.
Paul, who sought not his own profit, but the profit of many, that they might
be saved. To seek the good of an other is charity. To seek the glory of
Christ is piety. To prefer our own credit before our obedience to the
Prince in a matter of this nature is pride and arrogancy. Behold the gracious
humility of Job, Job 39. 38.
Lo I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I have spoken once yet will I answer no
more, yea twice, yet will I proceed no further. Of all the famous works of
Saint Austin not one of them has purchased him greater glory, then his
retractations, wherein he diligently collecteth his former errors, and
ingenuously reformeth them. Yea Saint Austin Aug. retrac. lib. 2. cap. 18.
having followed Saint Cyprian in expounding a place of Scripture, and
afterward finding a better exposition in Tyconius the Donatist, did forsake
both Cyprian and himself, and thought it no discredit to revoke his former
opinion. If you have the humility of Saint Austin, you would rather seek
Jesus Christ then your own credit. And such ingenuous dealing would be
honorable in the eyes of true judgment. If Saint Austin forsook his own
errors to follow a truth discovered by a Donatist, how much more should you
embrace the truth, being discovered unto you by the reverend Fathers of our
Church?

42 Some perhaps will say, they could be content in respect of themselves, but
they refrain in regard of the people. But who are they which have so
misperswaded the people? have not sundry of you in open audience disgraced the
government of our Church as Antichristian, and advanced your own desired
discipline, as the ordinance of God? have you not framed the conceits of the
people to imagine that they verily behold and see the whole current of the
Scripture running that way? have not your inuectiues against the Church of
England been as a burning fire in their bosom? Therefore it behooves you
which heretofore have been ringleaders to disobedience, hereafter to show
your selves perswaders and patterns of obedience: and as heretofore being
missed your selves, you have missed others, so being resolved your selves, it
is your duty to resolve others. And our hope is, that those which are
otherwise minded, the Lord will in time reveal it unto them. For the
furtherance whereof, I wish my brethren of the Ministry would consider these
inducements following.

43 First, the charge which Christ gave to Peter, Ioh. 21. 15.
Peter do thou love me, feed my lambs, etc. If the love of the Lord Jesus
be in you, forsake not the lambs which he has bought with his precious blood.
Will you leave a matter of substance, for a matter of ceremony? a matter of
necessity for a matter of indifferency? Alas dearly beloved, 1. Cor. 9. 16.
there is a necessity laid upon us, and woe be to me if I preach not the
Gospel. A grave and learned Divine and one that favored your reformation,
would sometimes demand (as I have been informed by a Minister of his
acquaintance) whether a gold ring were to be refused for a straw cleaving unto
it? so his judgment was that as the gold ring is rather better without the
straw, so the Gospel were better without the ceremonies; yet he did not
compare our ceremonies to venom or poison which might make the gold ring to
be refused, but only to a straw: so he thought them matters of some
inconvenience, but not of any infectious or dangerous consequence. If you my
brethren will but observe this moderation, then I trust you will not forsake
the preaching of the Gospel which is a ring of gold; although there were
cleaving unto it a ceremony (as it were) of straw.

44 Secondly, remember the commandment of God. Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: behold the face of our
gracious Sovereign, and consider what a grief it must needs be unto him, to
see those which are endued with learning and virtue, not to have learned the
virtue of obedience. We all acknowledge him to be supreme governor over all
persons, and causes ecclesiastical and temporal: is he governor of all
persons, and shall he not govern you? Do you acknowledge him governor over
all causes, and shall be not appoint you whether your garments shall be black
or white, round or square? shall we reach the people obedience, and be our
selves examples of disobedience? I pray you be advised in your courses, and
wisely weigh with your selves that solemn oath which you have taken to the
Princes supremacy when you received degrees academicall, or holy orders
Ministerial, or any institution to spiritual promotion in the Church of
England, and consider without partiality, whether these your proceedings be
correspondent to your oath or no.

45 Thirdly, regard your mother the Church of England so wailing and wringing
her hands to see such distraction in her own bowels, such glorious stars to
lose their light, such links to be broken off from her golden chain. o what a
rent, what a grievous rent is made in the unseamed coat of Jesus Christ? you
refuse the cross and surples for fear of a scandal, but this renting of the
Church is indeed a scandal, a most heavy and Iam entable scandal. And this
is told in 2. Sam. 1. 20
Gath, and published in the streets of Ashkelon, it makes the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. For the
Papists sport themselves and clap their hands, while the godly grieve and
mourn in Sion. The Scripture speaking of the debate between the servants of
Abraham and Lot, does add that the Genesis 13. 7.
Cananites and the Perizzites dwelt then in the land, to signify that though
their contention in it self was evil, yet it was worse because the enemies of
God which would rejoice at it, were then in the land. So beloved, I say unto
you, these contentions are evil in themselves, but the worse, because the
papist is now in the land. He delights himself and through your strif^s
takes ocsion to blaspheme our religion. He deuiseth and plotteth to undermine
both Church and commonwealth, while we are contending one with another. And as
you rejoice the Papists, so you encourage the Brownists, who build their
conclusions upon your premises, and put your speculations in practice. For have
not your ringleaders proclaimed that our government by Bishops is popish, our
liturgy popish, our ministering of baptism with the cross popish, our
kneeling at the Communion popish; our garments for public administration,
popish; our holidaies, popish; and almost every thing popish? Wherefore the
Brownists having learned that the Pope is Antichrist, and the present Church of
Rome Babylon; and hearing a voice from heaven crying, go out of her my people
that you Reu 18. 4.
be not partakers in her sins, and that ye taste not of her plagues: have
upon your former premises, gathered a practical conclusion, and made an
actual separation and rent from the Church of England. And surely my brethren,
as they had their original from your positions, so now they are strengthened by
your practices: for they may well think that such learned and virtuous men, so
famous and renowned Preachers, knowing a We pronounced against them if they
preach not the Gospel, would never suffer themselves to be silenced for
matters which they judged indifferent, and therefore they will take it as
granted, that the things you stick at, are in your opinion simply unlawful.
Upon this dangerous position they will build an other, for if the Liturgy of
the Church of England as it is inioined at this day to be performed, be such as
a Minister cannot execute his function with a good conscience: then they
conclude, that neither may the people hear it with a good conscience, because
their presence were an approbation of it: thus the unquiet wit of man, will
still be working, even till it run it self upon the rock of his own
destruction. Wherefore (my dear brethren) I beseech you, as you tender the
good of the Church to lay aside all contentious humors. Let there not be found
in you a spirit of contradiction and singularity: but follow those things
which concern peace, and wherewith one may edify an other. Let us consider
one an other to provoke one an other to love and good works. Bend your selves
to settle the quiet of the Church, and keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace: Which is rather to be expected at your hands, because the points
in question are the public constitutions of the venerable convocation, which
is the Church of England representative, in whose voice your own voice is
included. Some peradventure will reply that if this reason be sound, then the
reverend Martyrs in Queen Mary's time should have subscribed to popery,
because it was then decreed by the Convocation. But I answer, that there is not
the like reason. For against their popish conclusions the blessed Martyrs had
evident and necessary demonstration of holy Scripture, to which all dec^^es of
man must undoubtedly give place: but against the orders of our Church, no such
demonstrations can be produced. Again, the matters they stood upon, were
substantial points of religion, whereas our controversies are of a lower
nature. And surely as probable inducements must yield to necessary, so amongst
probable (of which sort are all reasons deduced from the authority of man) the
private must give place to the public. Will you have the judgment of master
Calvin, in this point also? Then attend and hear a notable place which was
touched before, but deserves to be pondered again and again, his words are
these: Quamuis enim quod obtruditur, Bp^^st. 379.
and scandalum afferat, and malam caudam trahat: quia tamen per se Dei verbo
non repugnat, concedi potest maxim vbi mayor numerus peruincit, quando ei qui
membrum est tantum illius corports nulla ratio suppetit vlterius pergendi: Let
it therefore be imagined that our orders bring scandal, and draw after them a
long and foul train of inconveniences; yet seeing that in themselves
considered, they are not repugnant to Gods word (for this still we must
presume, till the contrary be proved) and are agreed upon by the greater
part, yea by the sacred Synod which is the Church of England representative,
and that with the royal assent of our Sovereign: surely in the judgment of
Calvin they may be yielded unto, by such as are members of the same Church,
neither in this case can they proceed any further. Wherefore my brethren I cast
my self down at your feet, and with tender tears beseech you even in the
bowels of Christ Jesus that you will seek peace and follow after it, and be
not like to them of whom it is said; The Romans 3. 17.
way of peace they have not known.

46 Fourthly, look upon those reverend Fathers and Bishops of our Church, by
whose hands and voices that blessing was powered upon you, which made you
ministers of holy things. Have you not at your ordination made a promise, and
at your institution taken a reverent oath of canonical obedience? Wherefore let
me exhort you which have taken this oath, and being admonished by your Bishop,
oppose your selves notwithstanding against the laudable discipline of our
Church, to enter into your own souls and uprightly to consider, whether while
you pretend conscience, you do not that which is uncomely for conscieence? And
for our Bishops, o what an anguish will it be to their souls, if those voices
which ordained you, be constrained to deprive you? And what a comfort would it
be both to them, and to all your brethren of the Ministry, if we might join
together against the common enemy, and be linked in everlasting chains of
love one with another? And here most reverend Fathers, though in your wisdom
you find it fit that authorized laws be put in execution, yet remember that
the offenders are your own children in the Lord, and by Gods mercy your
assistants in dispensing the precious truth of Jesus Christ, and many of them
very learned and laborious in the Church of God, adorned with manifold virtues
and graces of the spirit, and therefore let all your proceedings toward them
be with a tender heart and a tender hand. Consider the multitude of papists,
and the insulting of vainglorious Jesuits; behold how sin and iniquity
every where abound; and what need the Church has of their learned labors:
and therefore in the name of God try all means in Fatherly manner to reduce
them, endeavor according to your godly wisdom to give them full satisfaction
of their doubts, and to make the equity of the required subscription plain
and manifest unto them, that their consciences being resolved, they may proceed
as before, in the work of the Lord, for this will tend much to the glory of
God, the good of the Church, your own comfort, and the saving of many thousand
souls. This in all duty I have adventured call to your remembrance most
reverend Fathers, in behalf of my brethren, wherein if I seem too bold, that
love which caused me, must excuseme.

47 Finally, beloved, call to mind the flock of Christ, that depends upon you:
their profiting in religion was the comfort of your hearts, your joy and your
crown, the seal of your Ministry; they heard you as the Angels of God, yea
as Jesus Christ, and could have been content to have plucked out their own
eyes and have given them to you. And therefore if there be any love, any bowels
of compassion, forsake not the lambs of Jesus Christ, whereof the holy Ghost
has made you overseers. For let me tell you, that your love to the flock
ought rather like a golden chain to draw you, then the pleasing of any
particular man to withdraw you. Which I speak lest peradventure any of my
brethren having tasted the sweet liberality of the Laity, should seek rather
to fit their humors then to do their own duty. And here I would exhort the
common people to employ their wits rather about matters of faith and
repentance, then to intermeddle with the rites of the Church: for the kingdom
of God consists not in these external ceremonies, but in righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. They shall find more comfort in prayer to
God, in the works of charity, and mortifying the deeds of the flesh, then in
troubling themselves with such fruitless disputes. And yet in some the mind
transported with zeal grows very violent, like a fire in their bones. And
therefore having once this settled persuasion, that our rites are unlawful,
they bend themselves with might and maine against them, kindling and cherishing
their own opinions in others; yea they will not spare their purses but
encourage and inflame men with golden eloquence, a very potent kind of
persuasion: but it is the shepherds duty not to wander after the sheep, but
to go before them like stars, instructing them in the right way: so their
zeal which now is misguided, shall be^ directed with knowledge, and both
pastor and flock shall be precious in the eyes of the Lord To conclude, let us
all proceed by one rule, that we may mind one thing. And the Lord of heaven
bless this land, both Prince and people. The Lord bless this Church and the
Ministers thereof. O Lord in thy mercy make up the rents and breaches of Sion.
O gracious father knit our hearts to thee, and one to an other, that we may
love and fear thy name, and keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. Grant this O God of all grace and peace, for thy Son our blessed
Savior his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be rendered all praise,
glory and majesty in the Church, from generation to generation. Amen.


