The lamentacyon of our lady.

pieta

When that I Mary Ihesus mother sat in Iherusalem at the holy feast of cester
alone in my house for much multitude of people that came to the cite I closed
my doors and sat alone as I was wont to do and thought pryuely on my sweet
sone Ihesu where he were and what that he did. For on him was all my love and
my desire set willing him to se. And hoping that the even before eester he
would come to me / and besyly I sat prayenge my prayers and abode him. And
than suddenly after the son going to rest I herd a great noise of people in
the cite cryenge as wood people / and when I Mary Ihesus mother sitting my
self alone knew not the cause of the great cryenge and rennynge of the people
together / than said I these words to my self / would to god I were with my
sone Ihesus. A who shall tell me any tidings of my sweet sone Ihesu / for I
dread me sore that any thing of hardness befall unto him / for I have herd not
long here before that the Jews have co^spired and cast among them his death.
And than I Mary sorry and full sore aferde in this manner sat. And looked if any
of his apostles would bring to me any tidings of my sweet sone Ihesu. I herd
anon tidings of my sweet sone. I herd anon suddenly one smite at my door /
and I rose anon and ran to the fenester of my chaumbre and looked out. And
when I saw Mary maudeleyn clothed in black all bewepte and her here adowne
about her eyes and said to me these words. Come down to me most devout of
all women maid yt lie there hid and mother berauysshed of thy sone. And
than I Mary smyten with the sword of sorrow went down and did open my door
and anon the devout maudeleyne cried to me and said. A reverend mother and
most reverend of all women know ye any tidings of Ihesu your sweet sone and
my reverend master. And than I mary mother of Jesus full sorry saying to her /
know thou any tidings maudelayn of my sweet sone Ihesu. And than maudelayn
all be wept cried to me and said these words. Your sone and your love and my
master is now taken and with cords bounden and wyckedly and cruelly of the
Jews beten and drawn. And when I mary herd this I was anon smyten with the
sword of sorrow through the heart / and I fell down anon to the earth as a
deed woman. And when these tidings were brought to me it was the beginning of
the night / and the derkenesse came about me that I wist never wheder I went /
and man's help had I none but as I lay all that night on the earth wepy^ge and
cryenge that heaven might be filled therewith / and all my house I wette with my
weeping of mine eyes. And than I said a holy fader where are thy behestes / why
would you ordeyne me to be a mother and make me rich with a child / now am I
bereued of my child and am left alone most vnworthyest of all women. A
angel Gabryell where is now yt ylke bliss that you behete me / where is now
ye somnes of grace thou behote. A gabryell why would thou scorn me most
vnworthyest of all moders. Behold now Gabryell for the Joy that you behete me
/ now have I pain and for the gladness now have I sorrow / and the moderhede I
am bereued of my child / and for the grace I have shame / and for the life I
have death / and for the blessing that you behete me now is come curse upon me /
than said I to my self. A vnblessyd mother and sorrowful mother why would you
coueyte a child and bear a child and nourysshe a child / and suddenly and
wyckedly art bereued of thy child with these words and weeping and sorrows
and lamentacyons and weeping of teres I spente ye night when time the day
began to spring and the derknes parted away than spronge a derknes for me /
and than I rose up fro the earth as I had been almoost deed and faylynge all
man's help / and than came to me holy women of galyle that devoutly had been
in the temple ye night in their prayers / And when they herd that my sone was
take and cruelly bound with the servants of ye bishop / and to me vnblessyd
mother the holy women came with haste me to comfort And than I said to Mary
maudelayne and to my systers and to the holy women of Galyle. Goo we now anon
that we may se my sone Ihesu that is only the comfort of my life and than
might I not go for feebleness of my body so sore I had beten it on the night
before of my sweet sone Ihesu / but as the holy women and my systers sustained
me up in their arms / and than I met with some of my sons dyscyples weeping to
whom I said thus Se ye not my sweet sone Ihesu. I pray you tell me where ye
left him. And they sore weeping said to me these words. We saw him bound
with cords and beten with scourges and his face defouled with spyttynge and
led forth with wicked servants of Cayphas to be denied under Pylate / and
his lokynge was pale and his chere was ghostly / and all his body changed that
uneaths we might know him. And than I Mary Ihesus mother most soryest of all
moders and fulfilled with sorrow said these words. A Ihesu my sweet sone what
here I of the / what bitter and hard tydynge be told to me of the. And than
said I to some of his dyscyples. May I se my sweet sone Ihesu in any manner that
I might have him out of their hands. And they that saw me make this sorrow
said to me. Goo lady and tarry not if ye will speak with your sone on live / for
now he is lad with armed knights in to Pilates palace for ye Jews think to
dampne him to the most dyspyteous death. And when I Mary herd these words I
was smyten even through ye heart with sorrow and as a deed woman I went forth
and was borne up with my systers and uneaths might I come to Pylates palace
for faint. And when I came and would have gone in to the palace I might not
come nigh the gates for the multitude of people but as nygh as I might I put me
there and stood as a stone stycked in the ground / than I cast up mine eyes to
the fonester of the palace if I might have seen my sweet sone Ihesu / and than
to the fenestre of the palace came Pylate and said to all the people. I find
no cause in Ihesu why that he should be put to death wheder ye will that Ihesu go
or barabam that is a mansleer. And when I herd this I lift up mine heart as
though I had be rered fro death to life and hoped yt barabam mansleer should
have be put to death and my sone Ihesu let go on live. But than I herd an
horrible voice of all the people cryenge and said. Do Ihesu on the cross / do
Ihesu on ye cross. And when I herd this cryenge of the people. I was smyten
with the sword of sorrow / and as a deed woman I fell upon the earth semynge to
the people yt I had been deed and so I lay long till my systers took me up and
comforted me / and so I stood long there and abode if that I might have my
sweet sone Jesus or that I might have spoken to Pylate that he would have
delivered my sweet sone Ihesu that lothles lamb and the wicked Jews when they
herd me cry and saw me weep sore they blamed me sore and badde me hold my
peace thou thieves mother and nouryce to this traitor: for thy sone is worthy to
be deed for he deceyueth the people / and therefore you shall se him soon done
on the cross before thyn own eyes. And than anon I fell down as a woman
fallen in dyspayre thus despised of the people. And anon I herd a voice of ye
people cryenge as they had be^ wood and said. Bring out to us Ihesus of
nazareth that he were done on the cross. And anon pylate assented to them and
first they bette him with scourges and tha^ clothed hy^ in purpure and afterward
took him to the Jews to spyll on ye cross And than they brought forth before
the eyes of ye wretched mother Ihesu my sweet sone crowned with a crown of thorn
upon his heed / and his eyes all pale and his face all read of blood and his
here of his heed hanging over his eyes all bebledde and berynge a cross upon
his back that he should dye on / and a rope about his neck as a common thief
put between two thieves. And when I saw this cruel sight than failed I of my
strength and than wexed my sorrow new when I saw him / and for much people I
might not come nere him I cried to hy^ and he might not here me for the people
that followed him. And than said my systers to me / go we mary by this way for
this is the nere way / and than we shall mete with your sone and speak with
him or he dye / and than I rose up as a woman strengthed with a new spyryte
and went fast on that (...) / and suddenly I met with my sone Ihesu in the
(...) way beringe the cross upon his back / and than said (...) ^hese words
to my sweet sone Ihesu. A my sweet sone Ihesu wheder ghost thou so fast so
heuyly charged with that cross / what thynkest thou to do with thy mother to let
me thus alone and in dyspayre / thy^kest thou to forsake thy mother. A my dear
sone Ihesu take me to thy mother that cross and I shall bear it upon mine own
back / and sone dye thou not without thy mother ne go you not without thy mother
/ but sweet sone Jesus let us live together and dye together / and than my sweet
sone Ihesu having more ruthe on his own mother than on his own pain that he
suffered / anon for sorrow he fell down under his cross that he bare / and
anon for sorrow of my sweet sone Ihesu I fell down as a woman that had given
up her last spyryte / and there were we both all to trodden of the people / and
my sone Ihesu constrained to arise and go forth with his cross / and the
wicked Jews and cruel me the mother of Ihesu vyolently departed fro my sone /
and euerlaye my sone under ye cross. And ye wicked Jews constrained a man we
called him Symeon to bear the cross to a place was called Caluarye / and than
the cruel Jews smote my sone Ihesu with their fete and beat him with scourges
and made himself bear it upon his back / up at the mount of caluarye. And
thus hyed the wicked Jews to offer up that lothles lamb. And without all
other that was my sweet sone Ihesu / and than I Mary most sorrowful of all
moders pursued after my sweet sone Ihesu as fast as I might to se what death ye
lamb should suffer that was my solace and my Joy and uneaths might I come to
the mount of caluarye / but as I was sustained by my systers so weary and full of
woo was in my body / and by the time that I came to the mount of caluary the
wicked Jews had done my sone upon the cross / and arered up the cross and
put it in the earth / and than looked I upon my sweet sone Ihesu with my weeping
eyes bytterly weeping and cryenge / and said to him these words. A my sweet
sone Ihesu / a my most love Ihesu why lokest thou not upon thy sorrowful mother
/ why spekest you not to thy sorrowful mother / why will you leave me thus alone /
wheder shall I go my sweet sone Ihesu / in what house shall I rest my sweet sone
Ihesu. A my sweet sone though thou have no ruthe on thy self have ruthe on
thy sorrowful mother. And when my sweet sone Ihesu herd me thus cry and weep
he cast his eyes upon me and uneaths he said to me these words. Woman be of
good comfort for herefore I came in to this world and herefore I took this
body of the yt here hangs on the cross to day for to help man's soul and
to bye the souls out of pain that were lost for sin / and therefore I suffer
this cruel and hard passion that thou see / and therefore mother rest now of
thy weeping and of thy cryeng / for this is my faders will / and also mother let
it be thy will so in dyenge I shall slay the death / and with the vyctorye of my
passion I shall rise the third day. And herefore mother take here that mean
time Johan my dyscyple that I love well let him be thy sone and be thou his
mother / and to him I take the to ward / for now I shall dye on the cross. And
when my sone Ihesu had said these words he cast up his eyes to heaven and
betoke to his fader his soul / and so with a great cry yielded up his ghost /
and than I Marye fell down upon the earth / and all the people wend I had been
deed. And about ye hour of none there came cruel knights and stood before
my sone / and one of them with a spear opened his side and claue his heart in
two / and that sorrow clefte my heart in two. And when my sons side was opened
and his heart cloven a two / than went the knights their way. And than came
Joseph of arinathye a noble man and a ryghtfull and would have taken down my
sweet sone Ihesus of the cross / and when I saw him I wexed quycke again in
my spyryte and took strength to me and said. A my sweet Joseph will thou take
down the body of my sweet sone Ihesu. Now I pray the sweet Joseph take hy^
down and deliver him to his wretched mother that deed body of my sone. And than
Joseph said full curteysly to me. A mary and mother of Jesus gods sone of
heaven. A holy lady and above all other blessed and ever holy. A mother and maid
and mother without wemme abide a little while and leave thy weeping and thy
sorrow. For I understand you art blessed among all women. And I believe that
thy sone will arise from death to life within a short time. And therefore worthy
lady let us now in ye mean time worthily burye this holy body / for to morrow
is holy day and we may not work. And when Joseph had said these words to me
I was somewhat comforted therewith and helped to wasshe my sons body that was
defouled with spyttynge betynge and bledynge. And when we had washed it we
wyped it and anoyntes it / and so at the last I was smyten with a new sorrow /
and than I said these words to my sweet sone there he lay deed. A clean
flesh and vnwe^med that lie here that were of my flesh / why would thou
thus dye on the cross and be offered for sin for thou art holy flesh and
clean from all manner of sin / and thou have sore bought the sin of all men.
And when I had said these words I fell down upon the body of my sweet sone
Ihesu weeping bytterly and cryenge sore. And than I kyssed the wounds of his
heed / and than his hands / and than his fete. And than the wound in the side
/ and than I cleped all the body in mine arms and kyssed it and said these
words. A my sweet sone Ihesu I the wretched mother wend never to have seen
this sorrow of the nor these sorrows have suffered for the / but I wend for to
have had many Joys and never to have departed fro the. And while I said these
words Joseph and his felawes hyed the^ lightly to wind and bind my sone in a
cloth. And when they had bound that one party of his body and would bind
that other I fell down to the wou^des that were bound and unbound them
again and efte again / and than was I smyten with a new sorrow that I might
not suffer him to by^de him of a long time / and for my sorrow and for the
lamentacyon that I made uneath might they all yt stood there take ye deed body
fro me / and so at the last they would bear him to the sepulture. I followed
hy^ wepy^ge and cryenge wonderly sore / and when they came to his sepulcre they
would have buried him anon and I might not suffer that in no wise but mekely I
prayed them in this manner and said. A ye noble men and ye holy women burye not
my sweet sone Ihesu but suffer me to have my sone a little while in mine arms
that I may kiss him / and when they saw the great sorrow that I was in / they
made great lamentacyon and abode a little while so that at the last they would
needs burye him / than cried I and said / burye me with him. I may not live
without him And than Joseph and his felawes departed me worshypfully fro the
sepulcre and honestly and worshypfully buried my sone Ihesu / and when he was
buried I stood without the tomb weeping and cryenge and fulfilled all with
sorrow said these words. A angel Gabryell you saydest to me hayle Mary full
of grace and behold. I am now full of sorrow / thou saydest to me our lord is
with the and behold now my lord and my sweet sone is put away fro me that I
may not se him. And also you saydest to me blessed be you among all women I am
turmented and cursed. And at the last thou saydest to me / blessed to the
fruit of thy womb / and behold now my sone that is the fruit of my womb is
here wyckedly stayne / and now lies here in tomb full of wou^des. And when I
had said these words I fell down for sorrow upon the earth / and than John^
that was charged of my sone on the cross to be my sone saw me thus sorrow he
took me up in his arms / and for feblenesse of my body I might not stand but
as John^ and other women ladde me in to Iherusalem and as I went I turned my
head often again for sorrow that I was departed fro ye sepulcre of my sweet sone
Ihesu / and all that saw me in the way were tempted to weep for ye sorrow and
lamentacion that I made / and than John^ led me home in to my chamber and said
to me these words. Now rest here the mother of my lord upon ye arysynge of the
sweet sone Ihesu and my lord and seal of thy sorrow. And lady I am given to
be thy sone that am not worthy to be thy servant. For Johan may not be lykened
to Ihesu the sone of Zebede to the sone of god ne the servant to his lord /
ne the dyscyple of his master / ne no creature may be lykened to him that made
hy^. But nevertheless my reuere^de lady I shall worship you in all that I can
with all my strength serve you with these words and many other words John^
comforted me oftentimes and ever was ready me to please unto the resurreccyon of
my sweet sone Ihesu. And when we saw him arise from death to life / than were
we fulfilled with more Joy than they were before with sorrow. I blessed my sweet
sone Ihesu. And thus ends our ladies lamentacyon with great Joy of gods
resurreccyon / he grant us al his benedyccyon. AMEN.

Here ends the lamentacyon of our lady. Enprinted at London in Fletestrete at
the sign of the son / by Wynkyn de Word.

printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


